THE LADY OF PLEASVRE.

A COMEDY, As it was Acted by her Majesty's Servants, at the private House in
Drury Lane.

Written by James Shirly.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Cotes, for Andrew Crook, and William Cook. 1637.

Persons of the Comedy.
LOrd, Sir Thomas Bornewell. Sir William Sentlove. Mr. Alex. Kickshaw. Mr. John
Littleworth. Mr. Hairecut. Mr. Frederick. Steward to the Lady Aretina. Steward
to the Lady Celestina. Secretary. Servants, etc.
Aretina, Sir Thomas Bornwells Lady. Celestina, a young Widow. Isabella.
Mariana. Madam Decoy.
Scene the Strand.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE RICHARD LORD LOVELACE of Hurley.
My Lord,
I Cannot want encouragement to present a Poem to your Lordship, while you
possess so noble a breast, in which so many seeds of honor, to the example
and glory of your Name obtained, before your years a happy maturity. This
Comedy fortunate in the Scene, and one that may challenge a place in the first
form of the Authors compositions, most humbly addresseth it self to your
honor, if it meet your gracious acceptance, and that you repent not to be a
Patron, your Lordshipps will only crowns the imagination, and for ever by
this favor oblige,

My Lord The most humble Services of your Honourer, JAMES SHIRLY.

The Lady of Pleasure.
The first Act.
Enter Aretina and her Steward. STew. Be patient Madam, you may have your
pleasure.

Are. It Is that I came to town for, I would not
Endure again the country conversation,
To be the Lady of six shires! the men
So near the Primitive making, they retain
A sense of nothing but the earth, their brains
And barren heads standing as much in want
Of plowing as their ground, to hear a fellow
Make himself merry and his horse with whisteling
Sellingers round, to observe with what solemnity
They keep their Wakes, and throw for pewter Candlestickes,
How they become the Morris, whi^^ whose bells
They ring all into Whitson Ales, and sweat,
Through twenty Scarffes and Napkins, till the Hobbyhorse
Tire, and the maid Marrian dissolved to a gelly,
Be kept for spoone meat.

Ste. These with your pardon are no Argument
To make the country life appear so hateful,
At least to your particular, who enjoyed
A blessing in that calm; would you be pleased
To think so, and the pleasure of a kingdom,
While your own will commanded what should move
Delights, your husbands love and power joined
To give your life more harmony* you lived there,
Secure, and innocent, beloved of all,
Praisd for your hospitality, and praid for*
You might be envied, but malice knew
Not where you dwelt, I would not prophecy
But leave to your own apprehension
What may succeed your change.

Are. You do imagine,
No doubt, you have talked wisely, and confuted,
London past all defense, your Master should
Do well to send you back into the country,
With title of Supernitendent Baylie.

Ste. How Madam.

Are. Even so sir.

Ste. I am a Gentleman though now your servant.

Are. A country gentleman,
By your affection to converse with stable,
His tenants will advance you wit, and plumpe it so
With beef and bag-pudding.

Ste. You may say your pleasure,
It becomes not me dispute.

Are. Complain to the Lord of the soil your master.

Ste. You Are a woman of an ungoverned passion, and I pity you.

Enter Sir Thomas Bornwell. Bor. How how? What Is the matter?

Ste. Nothing Sir.

Bor. Angry sweet heart?

Are. I am angry with my self,
To be so miserably restrained in things,
Wherein it does concern your love and honor
To see me satisfied.

Bor. In what Aretina?
Do thou accuse me? have I not obeyed
All thy desires, against mine own opinion,
Quitted the country, and removed the hope
Of our return, by sale of that fair Lordship
We lived in, changed a calm and retire life
For this wild town, composd of noise and charge.

Are. What charge more than is necessary,
For a Lady of my birth and education*

Bor. I am not ignorant, how much Nobility
Flows in your blood, your kinsmen great and powerful,
It*h State, but with this lose not your memory
Of being my wife, I shall be studious
Madam to give the dignity of your birth
All the best ornaments which become my fortune
But would not flatter it, to ruin both,
And be the fable of the town, to teach
Other men loss of wit by mine, emploid
To serve your vaste expenses.

Are. Am I then
Brought in the balance? so Sir.

Bo. Though you weigh
Me in a partial scale my heart is honest,
And must take liberty to think you have
Obeyed no modest counsel to effect,
Nay study ways of pride and costly ceremony,
Your change of gaudy furniture and pictures
Of this Italian Master, and that Dutchmnas,
Your mighty looking-glasses like Artillery;
Brought whom on Engines, the superfluous plate,
Anticke and novell, vanities of tires,
Fourscore pound suppers for my Lord your kinsman,
Banquets for the other Lady, aunt, and cozens,
And perfumes that exceed all train of servants,
To stifle us at home and show abroad
More motley than the French, or the Venetian*
About your Coach whose rude Postillion
Must pester every narrow lane, till passengers
And tradsmen curse your choking up their stalls;
And common cries pursue your Ladyship,
For hindering o'their market.

Are. Have you done sir.

Bor. I could accuse the gayetie of your wardrobe,
And prodigal embroderies under which
Rich Sattens, Plushes, cloth of Silver, dare
Not show their own complexions, your jewels
Able to burn out the Spectators eyes,
And show like Bonefires on you by the tapers,
Something might here be spared, which safely of
Your birth and honor, since the truest wealth,
Shines from the soul, and draws up just admirers,
I could urge something more:

Are. Pray do I like
Your homily of thrifte.

Bo. I could wish Madam
You would not game so much.

Are. A gamster too?

Bor. But are not come to that repentance yet,
Should teach you skill enough to raise your profit,
You look not through the subtlety of Cards,
And mysteries of Dice, nor can you save
Charge with the box, buy petticotes and purles,
And keep your family by the precious income,
Nor do I wish you should, my poorest servant
Shall not upbraid my tables, nor his hire
Purchasd beneath my honor, you make play
Not a Pastime but a tyranny, and vex
Your self and my estate by it.

Are. Good, proceed.

Bor. Another game you have, which consumes more
Your fame than purse, you revells in the night,
Your meetings called the Ball, to which appear,
As to the Court of Pleasure, all your gallants,
And Ladies thither bound by a Subpena
Of Venus, and small Cupids high displeasure,
It Is but the family of love translated
Into more costly sin, there was a play on it,
And had the Poet not been bribed to a modest
Expression of your Anticke gambolls, in it,
Some darkes had been discovered, and the deeds too,
In time he may repent and make some blush.
To see the second part danced on the Stage;
My thoughts acquit you for dishonouring me
By any foul act, but the virtuous know,
It Is not enough to clear our selves, but the
Suspicions of our shame.

Are. Have you concluded
Your lecture?

Bor. I ha done, and howsoever
My language my appear to you, it carries
No other than my fair and just intent
To your delights without curb to their modest,
And noble freedom.

Are. I Will not be so tedious,
In my reply, but without art or elegance,
Assure you I keep still my first opinion,
And though you vay'le, your avatitious meaning
With hansome names of modesty, and thrift,
I find you would entrench and wound the liberty
I was borne with, were my desires unpriviledged
By example, while my judgment thought 'em fit,
You ought not to oppose, but when the practice
And tract of every honorable Lady,
Authorize me, I take it great injustice,
To have my pleasures circumscribed, and taught me,
A narrow minded husband is a thief
To his own fame, and his preferment too,
He shuts his parts and fortunes from the world,
While from the popular vote and knowledge men
Rise to employment in the state.

Bor. I have
No great ambition to buy preferment
At so dear rate.

Are. Nor I to sell my honor,
By living poor and sparingly, I was not
Bred in that ebb of fortune, and my fate
Shall not compel me to it.

Bor. I know not Madam,
But you pursue these ways.

Are. What ways?

Bor. In the strict sense of honesty I dare
Make oath, they are Innocent.

Are. Do not divert,
By busy troubling of your brain, those thoughts
That should preserve em.

Bor. How was that?

Are. It Is English.

Bor. But carries some unkind sense.

Enter Madam Decoy. De. Good morrow my sweet Madam.

Are. Decoy welcome, this visit is a favor.

De. Alas sweet Madam, I cannot stay, I came
But to present my service to your Ladyship;
I could not pass by your door, but I must take
The boldness to tender my respects.

Are. You oblige me Madam, but I must
Not dispense so with your absence.

De. Alas, the Coach Madam stays for me at the door.

Are. Thou shall command mine, prithee sweet Decoy.

De. I would wait on you Madam, but I have many
Visits to make this morning I beseech.

Are. So you will promise to dine with me.

De. I shall
Present a guest.

Are. Why then good morrow Madam.

De. A happy day shine on your Ladyship. Exit.

Enter Steward. Are. What Is your news sir?

St. Madam two gentlemen.

Are. What gentlemen? Have they no names.

St. They are
The gentleman with his own head of hair,
Whom you commended for his horsemanship
In Hide Park, and becoming the saddle
The the other day.

Are. What circumstance is this,
To know him by.

St. His names at my tongues end,
He liked the fashion of your pearl chain Madam,
And borrowed it for his Jeweller to take
A coppie by it.

Bor. What cheating gallants this?

St. That never walks without a Ladies buske,
And plays with fannes Mr. Alexander Kickshaw,
I thought I should remember him.

Are. What Is the other?

St. What an unluckie memory I have?
The gallant that still danceth in the street,
And wears a gross of Ribbon in his hat,
That carries Oringado in his pocket,
And Suger-plumbs to sweeten his discourse,
That studies complement, defies all wit
On black, and censures plays that are not bawdy,
Mr. John littleworth.

Are. They are welcome, but
Pray entertain them a small time, lest I
Be unprovided.

Bor. Did they ask for me?

Ste. No sir.

Bor. It matters not, they must be welcome.

Are. Fie, how is this hair disordered? here is a curle,
Straddle most impiously, I must to my closet. Exit.

Bor. Wait on em: my Lady will return again,
I have to such a height fulfill d her humor,
All applications dangerous, these gallants
Must be received or she will fall into
A tempest, and the house be shook with names
Of all her kindred, it is a servitude,
I may in time shake off.

Enter Alexander and Littleworth. Al. Lit. Save you Sir Thomas.

Bor. Save you gentlemen.

Al. I kiss your hand.

Bor. What day is it abroad?

Lit. The morning rises from your Ladies eye,
If she look clear, we take the happy omen
Of a fair day.

Bo. She Will instantly appear,
To the discredit of your complement,
But you express your wit thus.

Al. And you modesty,
Not to affect the praises of your own.

Bor. Leaving this subject, what games now on foot*
What exercise carries the general vote?
Oath town now nothing moves without your knowledge,

Al. The cocking now has all the noise, I Will have
A hundred pieces of one battle, Oh,
These birds of Mars!

Lit. Venus is Mars his bird too.

Al. Why and the pretty Doves are Venusses,
To show that kisses draw the Chariot.

Lit. I am for that skirmish.

Bor. When shall we have
More Booths and Bag-pipes upon Bansted downs,
No mighty race is expected, but my Lady returns.

Enter Aretina. Are. Fair morning to you gentlemen,
You went not late to bed by your early visit,
You do me honor.

Al. It becomes our service.

Are. What news abroad? you hold precious intelligence.

Lit. All tongues are so much busy with your praise,
They have not time to frame other discourse,
Will please you Madam? taste a Sugerplum.

Bor. What does the Goldsmith think the Pearl is worth.
You borrowed of my Lady?

Al. It Is a rich one.

Bor. She has many other toys whose fashion you,
Will like extremely, you have no intention
To buy any of her Jewels.

Al. Understand me.

Bor. You had rather sell perhaps, but leaving this,
I hope you will dine with us.

Al. I came a purpose.

Are. And where were you last night?

Al. I Madam? where
I slept not, it had been sin where so much
Delight and beauty was to keep me waking,
There is a Lady Madam will be worth
Your free society, my conversation
Nere knew so elegant and brave a soul,
With most incomparable flesh and blood,
So spirited, so Courtly speaks the Languages,
Sings, Dances, plays o'th Lute to admiration,
Is fair and paints not, games too, keeps a table,
And talks most witty Satyr, has a wit
Of a clean Mercury.

Lit. Is she married?

Al. No.

Are. A Virgin?

Al. Neither.

Lit. What a widow? something.
Of this wide commendation might have been
Excusd, this such a prodigy?

Al. Repent
Before I name her, she did never see
Yet full sixteen, an age in the opinion
Of wise men not contemptible, she has
Mourned out her year too for the honest Knight
That had compassion of her youth, and died
So timely, such a widow is not common,
And now she shines more fresh and tempting
Then any natural Virgin.

Are. What Is her name?

Al. She was Christened Celestina, by her husband
The Lady Bellamour, this Ring was hers.

Bor. You borrowed it to coppie out the Posie.

Al. Are they not pretty Rubies? it was a grace
She was pleased to show me, that I might have one
Made of the same fashion, for I love
All pretty forms.

Are. And is she glorious?

Al. She is full of Jewels Madam, but I am
Most taken with the bravery of her mind,
Although her garments have all grace and ornament.

Are. You have been high in praises.

Al. I come short,
No flattery can reach her.

Bor. Now my Lady
Is troubled as she feared to be eclipsd,
This news will cost me somewhat.

Are. You deserve
Her favor for this noble character.

Al. And I possess it by my stars benevolence.

Are. You must bring us acquainted.

Bo. I pray do sir.
I long to see her too, Madam I have
Thought upon it and corrected my opinion,
Pursue what ways of pleasure your desires
Incline you too, not only with my state,
But with my person I will follow you,
I see the folly of my thrift, and will
Repent in Sack and prodigality
To your own hearts content.

Are. But do not mock.

Bor. Take me to your embraces gentlemen
And tutor me.

Lit. And will you kiss the Ladies?

Bor. And sing and dance, I long to see this beauty,
I wood feign lose a hundred pounds at dice now,
Thou shall have another gown and petticote,
To morrow will you sell my running horses?
We have no Greek wine in the house I think,
Pray send one of our footmen to the Merchant,
And throw the hogsheads of March-beare into
The kenell, to make room for Sackes and Clarret,
What think you to be drunk yet before dinner?
We will have constant music and maintain
Them and their Fidles in phantasticke liveries,
I Will tune my voice to catches, I must have
My dyning room enlarged to invite Ambassadors,
We Will feast the parish in the fields, and teach
The Military men new discipline,
Who shall charge all their new Artillery
With Oringes and Lemonds, boy to play
All dinner upon our capons.

Al. He Is exalted.

Bor. I will do any thing to please my Lady,
Let that suffice and kiss oath same condition,
I am converted, do not you dispute
But patiently allow the miracle. Enter Servant.

Are. I am glad to hear you sir in so good tune.

Ser. Madam the Painter.

Are. I am to sit this morning.

Bor. Do, while I give new directions to my Steward.

Al. With your favor we will wait on you, sitting's but
A melancholy exercise without
Some company to discourse*

Are. It does conclude
A Ladies morning work, we rise, make fine,
Sit for our Picture, and it is time to dine.

Lit. Praying's forgot.

Al. It Is out of fashion. Exeunt.

Enter Celestina and her Steward. Cel. Fie, what an air this room has.

St. It Is persum'd.

Cel. With some cheap sluffe is it your wisdoms thrift
To infect my nostrils thus? Or is it to favor
The Gout in your worships hand? You are afraid
To exercise your pen in your account Book?
Or do you doubt my credit to discharge
Your bills.

St. Madam, I hope you have not found
My duty with the guilt of sloth or jealousy,
Unapt to your command.

Cel. You can extenuate
Your faults with language sir, but I expect
To be obeyed; What hangings have we here?

St. They are Arras Madam.

Cel. Impudence I know it,
I will have fresher and more rich, not wrought
With faces that may scandalize a Christian
With Jewish stories stufft with Corn and Camells,
You had best wrap all my chambers in wild Irish,
And make a nursery of Monsters here,
To fright the Ladies comes to visit me.

St. Madam I hope.

Cel. I say I will have other,
Good Master Steward of a finer loome,
Some silk and silver if your worship please,
To let me be at so much cost I Will have
Stories to sit the seasons of the year,
And change as often as I please.

St. You shall Madam.

Cel. I am bound to your consent forsooth, and is
My coach brought home?

St. This morning I expect it.

Cel. The inside as I gave direction,
Of crimson plush.

St. Of crimson Camel plush.

Cel. Ten thousand mothes consum't, shall I ride through
The streets in penance wrapped up round in hair cloth,
Sel't to an Alderman, twill serve his wife
To go a feasting to their country house,
Or fetch a Merchants Nurse child, and come home
Laden with fruit and Cheese cakes; I despise it.

St. The nails adorn it Madam, set in method
And pretty forms.

Cel. But single guilt I warrant.

St. No Madam:

Cel. Another Solecisme, oh fie,
This fellow will bring me to a Consumption
With fretting at his ignorance, some Lady
Had rather never pray, than go to Church in it;
The nails not double guilt? to market wo't,
Twill hackny out to Mile-end, or convey
Your city tumblers to be drunk with Cream
And Prunes at Islington.

St. Good Madam hear me.

Cel. I Will rather be beholding to my Aunt
The Countess for her mourning coach, then be
Disparaged so, shall any juggling tradsman
Be at charge to shoe his running horse with gold,
And shall my coach nails be but single guilt?
How dare these knaves abuse me so?

St. Vouchsafe
To hear me speak.

Cel. Is my Sedan yet finished?
And liveries for my men-Mules according
As I gave charge.

St. Yes Madam it is finished,
But without tilting plumes at the four corners,
The scarlet's pure, but not embroidered.

Cel. What mischief were it to your conscience
Were my coach lined with tissue, and my harness
Covered with needleworke? if my Sedan
Had all the story of the Prodigal,
Embrodered with pearl.

St. Alas good Madam,
I know it is your own cost, I am but your Steward,
And wod discharge my duty the best way,
You have been pleased to hear me, it is not for
My profit, that I manage your estate,
And save expense, but for your honor Madam.

Cel. How sir, my honor?

St. Though you hear it not
Men's tongues are liberal in your character,
Since you began to live thus high, I know
Your fame is precious to you.

Cel. I were best
Make you my governor; audacious Varlet,
How dare you interpose your doting counsel?
Mind your affairs with more obedience,
Or I shall ease you of an office sir,
Must I be limited to please your honor?
Or for the vulgar breath confine my pleasures,
I will pursue'em in what shapes I fancy,
Here, and abroad, my entertainements shall
Be oftener, and more rich, who shall control me?
I live in the strand, whether few Ladies come
To live, and purchase, more than fame, I will
Be hospitable then, and spare no cost
That may engage all generous report
To trumpet forth my bounty and my braverie,
Till the Court envy, and remove, I Will have
My house the Academy of wits, who shall
Exalt with rich Sack, and Sturgeon,
Write Panegyricks of my feasts, and praise
The method of my witty superfluities,
The horses shall be taught with frequent waiting
Upon my gates, to stop in their careere
Toward Charing-crosse, spite of the Coachmans fury.
And not a tilter, but shall strike his plume,
When he fails by my window, my Balconie
Shall be the Courtiers Idol, and more gazed at,
Than all the Pageantry at Temple bar,
By country Clients.

St. Sure my Lady's mad.

Cel. Take that for your ill manners.

St. Thank you Madam,
I would there were less quicksilver in your fingers. Exit.

Cel. There Is more than simple honesty in a servant
Requi^d to his full duty, none should dare,
But with a look, much less a saucy language
Check at their Mistress pleasure, I Am resolved
To pay for some delight, my estate will bear it,
I Will reine it shorter when I please.

Enter Steward. St. A gentleman
Desires to speak with your Ladyship.

Cel. His name?

St. He says you know him not, he seems to be
Of quality.

Cel. Admit him. Sir with me.

Enter Hairecut. Ha. Madam I know not, how you may receive
This boldness from me, but my fair intents
Known, will incline you to be charitable.

Cel. No doubt sir.

Ha. He must live obscurely Madam,
That has not heard what virtues you possess,
And I a poor admirer of your fame,
Am come to kiss your hand.

Cel. That all your business?

Ha. Though it were worth much travel, I have more
In my ambition.

Cel. Speak it freely sir.

Ha. You are a widow.

Cel. So.

Ha. And I a Bachelor.

Cel. You come a wooing sir, and would perhaps
Show me a way to reconcile these two.

Ha. And bless my stars for such a happiness.

Cel. I like you sir the better, that you do not
Wander about, but shoot home to the meaning,
It Is a confidence will make a man
Know sooner what to trust to, but I never
Saw you before, and I believe you come not
With hope to find me desperate upon marriage,
If maids out of their ignorance of what
Men, are refuse these offers, widows may
Out of their knowledge be allowed some coyness,
And yet I know not how much happiness
A peremptory answer may deprive me of,
You may be some young Lord, and though I see not
Your footmen and your groom, they may not be
Far off in conference with your horse, please you
To instruct me with your title, against which
I would not willingly offend.

Ha. I am
A gentleman, my name is Hairecut madam.

Cel. Sweet Mr. Hairecut, are you a Courtier?

Ha. Yes

Cel. J did think so by your confidence,
Not to detain you sir with circumstance,
J was not so unhappy in my husband
But that it is possible J may be a wife
Again, but J must tell you, he that winnes
My affection shall deserve me.

Ha. J will hope
If you can love, J shanot present Madam
An object to displease you in my person,
And when time, and your patience shall possess you
With further knowledge of me, and the truth
Of my devotion, you will not repent
The offer of my service.

Cel. You say well.
How long do you imagine you can love sir?
Is it a Quotidian, or will it hold
But every other day?

Ha. You are pleasant Madam.

Cel. Do take you with a burning at the first,
Or with a cold fit, for you gentlemen
Have both your Summer, and your Winter service.

Ha. J am ignorant what you mean, but J shall never
Be cold in my affection to such beauty.

Cel. And twill be somewhat long ere J be warm in it.

Ha. If you vouchsafe me so much honor Madam,
That J may wait on you sometimes, J shanot
Despair to see a change.

Cel. But now J know
Your mind, you shall not need to tell it, when
You come again, J shall remember it.

Ha. You make me fortunate. Enter Steward.

St. Madam your kinswomen
The Lady Novice and her sister are
New lighted from their coach.

Cel. I did expect them,
They partly are my pupills, i'e attend them.

Ha. Madam I have been too great a trespasser
Upon your patience, i will take my leave,
You have affairs, and I have some employment
Calls me to Court, I shall present again
A servant to you.

Cel. Sir you may present, Exit. Ha.
But not give fire I hope, now to the Ladies
This recreation's past, the next must be
To read to them some Court Philosophy. Exeunt.

The second Act.
Enter sir Thomas Bornewell. It Is a strange humor I have undertaken
To dance, and play, and spend as fast as she does,
But I am resolved, it may do good upon her,
And fright her into thrift, nay i will endeavor
To make her jealous too, if this do not
Allay her gamboling, shees's past a woman
And only a miracle must tame her.
Enter Steward. St. It Is Mr. Frederick my Ladies nephew.

Bo. What of him?

St. Is come from the University.

Bo. By whose directions?

St. It seems my Ladies.

Bo. Let me speak with him
Before he see his Aunt, I do not like it.
Enter Mr. Frederick. Mr. Frederick welcome I expected not
So soon your presence, what is the hasty cause?

Fr. These letters from my Tutor will acquaint you.

St. Welcome home sweet Mr. Frederick.

Fr. Where Is my Aunt?

St. She Is busy about her painting, in her closet,
The Outlandish man of Art, is copying out
Her countenance.

Fr. She is sitting for her picture.

St. Yes siir, and when it is drawn, she will be hanged
Next the French Cardinal in the dining room,
But when she hears you are come, she will dismiss
The Belgicke gentleman to entertain
Your worship.

Fr. Change of air has made you witty.

Bo. Your Tutor gives you a hansome character
Frederick, and is sorry your Aunts pleasure
Commands you from your studies, but I hope
You have no quarrel to the liberal arts,
Learning is an addition beyond
Nobility of birth, honor of blood
Without the ornament of knowledge is
A glorious ignorance.

Fr. I never knew more sweet and happy hours
Than I emploid upon my books, I heard
A part of my Philosophy, and was so
Delighted with the harmony of nature,
I could have wasted my whole life upon it.

Bo. It Is pity a rash indulgence should corrupt
So fair a Genius, she is here, i will observe.

Enter Aretina, Alexander. Littleworth. Steward. Fr. My most loved Aunt.

Are. Support me, J shall faint.

Lit. What ailes your Ladyship?

Are. Is that Frederick,
In black.

Alex. Yes Madam, but the doublets Satin.

Are. The boy's undone.

Fre. Madam you appear troubled.

Are. Have J not cause? Was not J trusted with
Thy education boy, and have they sent thee
Home like a very scholar.

Alex. It Was ill done
How ere they usd him in the University,
To send him to his friends thus.

Fre. Why sir, black
(I or it is the color that offends your eyesight)
Is not within my reading any blemish,
Sables are no disgrace in Heraldry.

Alex. It Is coming from the College thus, that makes it
Dishonorable, while you ware it for
Your father, it was commendable, or were
Your Aunt dead, you might mourn and justify.

Are. What luck J did not send him into France,
They would have given him generous education,
Taught him another garb to wear his lock,
And shape, as gawdie as the Summer, how
To dance, and wagge his feather ala mode,
To complement, and cringe, to talk not modestly
Like J forsooth, and no forsooth, to blush
And look so like a Chaplain, there he might
Have learned a brazen confidence, and observed
So well the custom of the country, that
He might by this time have invented fashions
For us, and been a benefit to the Kingdom
Preserved our Tailors in their wits, and fav'd
The charge of sending into foreign Courts
For pride and anticke fashions, observe,
In what a posture he does hold his hat now.

Fr. Madam with your pardon, you have practisd
Another dialect then was taught me when
I was commended to your care and breeding,
I understand not this, Latin or Greek
Are more familiar to my apprehension,
Logic was not so hard in my first lectures
As your strange language.

Are. Some strong waters, oh!

Lit. Comfits will be as comfortable to your stomach Madam.

Are. I fear he is spoild forever, he did name
Logic, and may for ought I know be gone
So far to understand it, I did always
Suspect they would corrupt him in the College,
Will your Greek sawes and sentences discharge
The Mercer, or is Latin a fit language
To court a mistress in? Mr. Alexander
If you have any charity, let me
Commend him to your breeding, I suspect
I must employ my Doctor first, to purge.
The University that lies in's head
It alters his complexion.

Alex. If you dare
Trust me to serve him.

Are. Mr. Littleworth
Be you joynd in commission.

Lit. I will teach him
Postures and rudiments.

Are. I have no patience
To see him in this shape, it turns my stomach,
When he has cast his Academicke skin
He shall be yours, I am bound in conscience
To see him bred, his own state shall maintain
The charge, while he is my Ward, come hither sir.

Fr. What does my Aunt mean to do with me?

St. To make you a fine gentleman, and translate you
Out of your learned language sir, into
The present Goth and Vandall, which is French.

Bo. Into what mischief will this humor ebb?
She will undo the boy, I see him ruind,
My patience is not manly, but I must
Use stratagem to reduce her, open ways
Give me no hope. Exit.

St. You shall be obeyed Madam. Exeunt.

Fr. Mr. Steward, are you sure we do not dream?
Was It not my Aunt you talked to.

St. One that loves you
Dear as her life, these clothes do not become you,
You must have better sir.

Fr. These are not old.

St. More suitable to the town and time, we keep
No Lent here, nor is it my Ladies pleasure you
Should fast from any thing you have a mind to,
Unless it be your learning* which she would have you
Forget with all convenient speed that may be,
For the credit of your noble family,
The case is altered since we lived in the country,
We do not invite the poor o'th parish
To dinner, keep a table for the tenants,
Our kitchen does not smell of beef, the sellar
Defies the price of malt and hops, the footmen
And coachdrivers may be drunk like gentlemen
With wine, nor will three Fiddlers upon holidayes
With aid of Bag pipes, that called in the country
To dance, and plough the hall up with their hobnailes,
Now make my Lady merry, we do feed
Like princes, and feast nothing but princes,
And are these robes fit to be seen amongst them.

Fr. My Lady keeps a court then, is Sir Thomas
Affected with this state and cost.

Ste. He was not,
But is converted, and I hope you wo'not
Persist in heresy, but take a course
Of riot to content your friends, you shall
Want nothing, if you can be proud and spend it
For my Ladies honor, here are a hundred
Pieces, will serve you till you have new clothes,
I will present you with a nag of mine
Poor tender of my service, please you accept,
My Ladies smile more than rewards me for it,
I must provide fit servants to attend you,
Monsieures for horse and foot.

Fr. I shall submit
If this be my Aunts pleasure and be ruled
My eyes are opened with this purse already,
And Sack will help to inspire me, I must spend it,

St, What else sir?

Fr. I Will begin with you, to encourage
You, to have still a special care of me,
There is five pieces, not for your nag.

St. No sir, I hope it is not.

Fr. Buy a Beaver
For thy own block, I shall be ruld, who does
Command the wineseller?

St. Who command but you sir?

Fr. I Will try to drink a health or two, my Aunts
Or any bodies, and if that foundation
Stagger me not too much, I will commence
In all the arts of London.

St. If you find sir
The operation of the wine, exalt
Your blood to the desire of any femall
Delight, I know your Aunt wonot deny
Any of her chambermaides to practice on,
She loves you but too well.

Fr. I know not how
I may be for that exercise, farewell Aristotle,
Prithee commend me to the Library
At Westminster, my bones I bequeath thither,
And to the learned worms that mean to visit 'em,
I will compose my self, I begin to think
I have lost time indeed, come to the wineseller. Exit.

Enter Celestina, Mardana, Isabella, Ma. But shall we not Madam expose our
selves
To censure for this freedom.

Cel. Let them answer
That dare mistake us, shall we be so much
Cowards to be frighted from our pleasure,
Because men have malicious tongues, and show
What miserable souls they have, no cozen,
We hold our life and fortunes, upon no
Man's charity, if they dare show so little
Discretion to traduce our fames, we will
Be guilty of so much wit to laugh at em.

Is. It Is a becoming fortitude.

Cel. My stars
Are yet kind to me, for in a happy minute
Be It spoke, I Am not in love, and men shall never.
Make my heart lean with sighing, nor with tears
Draw on my eyes the infamy of spectacles,
It Is the chief principle to keep your heart
Under your own obedience, jest, but love not,
I say my prayers yet, can wear good clothes,
And only satisfy my tailor for em.
I wonot lose my privilege.

Ma. And yet they say your entertainments are,
Give me your pardon Madam* to proclaim
Your self a widow, and to get a husband.

Cel. As if a Lady of my years, some beauty
Left by her husband rich, that had mourned for him
A twelve month too, could live so obscure in the town
That gallants would not know her, and invite
Themselves without her chargeable proclamations,
Then we are worse than Citizens, no widow
Left wealthy can be thoroughly warm in mourning,
But some one noble blood or lusty kindred
Claps in, with his gilt coach, and Flandrian trotters,
And hurries (...) away to be a Countess.
Courtiers have ^^ies, and great ones with lharge titles,
Cold in their ^^ne estates, would warm themselves
At a rich city ^^nefire.

Is. Most true Madam.

Cel. No matter for corruption of the blood,
Some undone Courtier made her husband rich,
And this new Lord receives it back again.
Admit it were my policy, and that
My entertainements pointed to acquaint me
With many suitors, that I might be safe,
And make the best election, could you blame me?

Ma. Madam it is wisdom.

Cel. But I should be
In my thoughts miserable to be fond
Of leaving the sweet freedom I possess,
And court my self into new marriage fetters,
I now observe men's several wits, and windings,
And can laugh at their follies.

Ma. You have given
A most ingenious satisfaction.

Cel. One thing i will tell you more, and this I give you
Worthy your imitation from my practice,
You see me merry, full of song and dancing,
Pleasant in language, apt to all delights
That crown a public meeting, but you cannot
Accuse me of being prodigal of my favors
To any of my guests, I do not summon
By any wink, a gentleman to follow me,
To my withdrawing chamber, I hear all
Their pleaes in Court, nor can they boast abroad
And do me justice, after a salute
They have much conversation with my lip,
I hold the kissing of my hand a courtesy,
And he that loves me, must upon the strength
Of that, expect till I renew his favor.
Some Ladies are so expensive in their graces,
To those that honor 'em, and so prodigal
That in a little time, they have nothing but
The naked sin left to reward their servants,
Whereas a thrift in our rewards, will keep
Men long in their devotion, and preserve
Our selves in stock, to encourage those that honor us.

Is. This is an art worthy a Ladies practice.

Cel. It takes not from the freedom of our mirth,
But seems to advance it, when we can possess
Our pleasures with security of our honor,
And that preservd, I welcome all the joys
My fancy can let in. In this I have given
The copy of my mind, nor do I blush,
You understand it. Enter Celestinaes gentlewoman.

Is. You have honored us.

Genesis Madam, Sir William Sentlove's come to wait on you.

Cel. There Is one would be a client, make excuse
For a few minutes.

Mar. One that comes a woing?

Cel. Such a thing he would seem, but in his guiltiness
Of little land, his expectation is not
So valiant as it might be, he wears clothes,
And feeds with noblemen, to some I hear
No better than a wanton emissarie,
Or scout for Venus wild foul, which made tame,
He thinks no shame to stand court centinell,
In hope of the reversion.

Mar. I have heard
That some of them are often my Lords tasters,
The first fruits they condition for, and will
Exact as fees for the promotion.

Cel. Let them agree, there is no account shall lie
For me among their traffic.

Enter Gentlewo. Genesis Mr. Hairecut Madam
Is new come in, to tender you his service.

Cel. Let him discourse a little with sir William. Exit.

Ma. What is this gentleman Mr. Hairecut Madam?
I note him very gallant, and much courted
By gentlemen of quality.

Cel. I know not
More than a trim gay man, he has some great office
Sure by his confident behavior,
He would be entertaind under the title
Of servant to me, and I must confess,
He is the sweetest of all men that visit me.

Is. How mean you Madam?

Cel. He is full of powder,
He will save much in perfume for my chamber,
Were he but constant here; give them access.

Enter Sir Will. Sentlove, Mr. Hairecut. Sent. Madam the humblest of your
servants is
Exalted to a happiness, if you smile
Upon my visit.

Ha. I must beg your charity
Upon my rudeness Madam, I shall give
That day up lost to any happiness,
When I forget to tender you my service.

Cel. You practice Courtship gentlemen.

Sent. But cannot
Find where with more desert to exercise it,
What Lady's this I pray?

Cel. A kinswoman
Of mine sir William.

Sent. I am more her servant,

Cel. You came from Court, now I presume.

Ha. It Is Madam
The sphere I move in, and my destiny
Was kind to place me there, where J enjoy
All blessings that a mortal can possess,
That lives not in your presence, and J should
Fix my ambition, when you would vouchsafe
Me so much honor, to accept from me
An humble entertainment there.

Cel. But by
What name shall I be known, in what degree
Shall J be of kindred to you.

Hair. How mean you Madam?

Cel. Perhaps you will call me sister, I shall take it
A special preferment, or it may be
J may pass under title of your Mistress,
If I seem rich, and fair enough, to engage
Your confidence to own me.

Ha. J would hope.

Cel. But it is not come to that yet, you will sir
Excuse my mirth.

Ha. Sweet Madam.

Cel. Shall J take
Boldness to ask what place you hold in Court?
It Is an uncivil curiosity,
But you will have mercy to a woman's question.

Ha. My present condition Madam, carries
Honor and profit, though not to be named
With that employment J expect ith state
Which shall discharge the first maturitie
Upon your knowledge, until then I beg
You allow a modest silence.

Cel. I am charmd sir,
And if you escape ambassador, you cannot
Reach a preferment, wherein I Am against you,
But where is sir William Sentlove?

Ha. Give him leave
To follow his nose Madam, while he hunts
In view, he will soon be at a fault.

Cel. You know him.

Ha. Know Sentlove? not a page but can decipher him,
The waiting women know him to a scruple,
He Is called the Blistermaker of the town.

Cel. What Is that?

Is. The laundry Ladies can resolve you,
And you may guess, an arrant Epicure
As this day lives, borne to a pretty wit,
A Knight but no gentleman, J must
Be plain to you, your Ladyship may have
Use of this knowledge, but conceal the author.

Sen. J kiss your fairest hand.

Mar. You make a difference,
Pray reconcile them to an equal whiteness.

Sent. You wound my meaning Lady.

Cel. Nay sir William
Has the art of complement.

Sent. Madam, you honor me
'Bove my desert of language.

Cel. Will you please
To enrich me with your knowledge of that gentleman.

Sent. Do you not know him Madam.

Cel. What is he?

Sen. A Camphire ball, you shall know more hereafter
He shall tell you himself, and save my character,
Till then, you see he is proud.

Cel. One thing gentlemen
I observe in your behavior, which is rare
In two that court one mistress, you preserve
A noble friendship, there is no gum within
Your hearts, you cannot fret, or show an envy
Of one another hope, some would not govern
Their passions with that temper.

Sent. The whole world
Shanot divorce our friendship. Mr Hairecut
Would I had lives to serve him, he is lost
To goodness does not honor him.

Ha. My knight I

Cel. This is right playing at Court Shuttlecocke.

Enter Gentlew. Genesis Madam, there is a gentleman desires
To speak w'ee, one sir Thomas Bornwell.

Cel. Bornewell?

Genesis He says he is a stranger to your Ladyship.

Sen. I know him.

Hair* Your neighbor Madam.

Sen. Husband to the Lady, that so revells in the strand.

Ha. He has good parts they say, but cannot help
His Ladies bias.

Cel. They have both much fame
'Ith town for several merits, pray admit him.

Ha. What comes he for? Enter sir Thomas*

Bo. Your pardon noble Lady, that I have
Presumed a stranger to your knowledge.

Cel. Sir,
Your worth was here before you, and your person
Cannot be here ungrateful.

Bor. It Is the bounty
Of your sweet disposition Madam, make me
Your servant Lady by her fair example,
To favor me -- I never knew one turn
Her cheek to a gentleman that came to kiss her
But sha'd a stinking breath; your servant gentlemen,
Will Sent love how is it?

Cel. I am sorry Coze
To accuse you, we in nothing more betray
Our selves to censure of ridiculous pride,
Then answering a fair salute too rudely,
Oh it shows ill upon a gentlewoman
Not to return the modest lip, if she
Would have the world believe, her breath is not
Offensive.

Bor. Madam, I have business
With you.

Sent. His looks are pleasant.

Cel. With me sir?

Bor. I hear you have an ex'lent wit Madam,
I see your fair

Cel. The first is but report,
And do not trust your eyesight for the last,
Cause I presume you are mortal and may err.

Ha. He is very gamesome.

Bor. You Have an ex'lent voice;
They say you catch it from a dying Swan,
Which joined to the sweet harmony of your lute,
You ravish all mankind.

Cel. Ravish mankind?

Bo. With their consent.

Cel. It were the stranger rape,
But there is the less indictment lies against it,
And there is hope; your little honesties
Cannot be much the worse, for men do rather
Believe they had a maiden head, then put
Themselves to the rack of memory, how long
It Is since they left the burden of their innocence.

Bo. Why you are bitter Madam.

Cel. So is physic,
I do not know your constitution.

Bo. You shall if please you Madam.

Cel. You Are too hasty,
I must examine what certificate
You have, first to prefer you.

Bo. Fine! certificate?

Cel. Under your Ladies hand, and seal.

Bor. Go to,
I see you are a wag.

Cel. But take heed, how
You trust to it.

Bor. I can love you in my wedlock,
As well as that young gallant, oath first hair,
Or the knight Bachelor, and can return
As amorous delight to thy soft bosom.

Cel. Your person and your language are both strangers.

Bo. But may be more familiar, I have those
That dare make affidavit for my body.

Cel. Do You mean your Surgeon?

Bor. My Surgeon Madam*
I know not how you value my abilities,
But I dare undertake, as much, to express
My service to your Ladyship, and with
As fierce ambition, fly to your commands,
As the most valiant of these, 'lay siege to you.

Cel. You dare not sir.

Bor. How Madam?

Cel. I will instifi't.
You dare not marry me, and I imagine
Some here should I consent, would fetch a priest
Out of the fire.

Bor. I have a wife indeed,

Cel. And there is a statute not repeald I take it.

Bor. Yare in the right I must confess you have hit,
And bled me in a master vein.

Cel. You think
I took you on the advantage, use your best
Skill at defense, I Will come up to your valor
And show another work you dare not do,
You dare not sir be virtuous.

Bor. I dare,
By this fair hand, I dare, and ask a pardon
If my rude words offend thy innocence,
Which in a form so beautiful, would shine
To force a blush in them suspected it,
And from the rest draw wonder.

Ha. I like not
Their secret parley, shall I interrupt em?

Is. By no means sir.

Sent. Sir Thomas was not wont
To show so much a Courtier.

Mar. He cannot
Be prejudicial to you, suspect not
Your own deserts so much, he is married.

Bo. I have other business Madam, you keep music,
I came to try how you can dance.

Cel. You did? I Will try his humor out of breath*
Although boast no cunning sir in revells,
If you desire to show your art that way,
I can wait on you.

Bor. You much honor me,
Nay all must join to make a harmony.

They dance. Bor. I have nothing now, Madam, but to beseech
After a pardon for my boldness, you
Would give occasion to pay my gratitude,
I have a house will be much honored
If you vouchsafe your presence, and a wife
Desires to present her self your servant,
I Came with the ambition to invite you,
Deny me not, your person you shall trust
On fair security.

Cel. Sir, although I use not
This freedom with a stranger, you shall have
No cause to hold me obstinate.

Bor. You grace me
Sir William Sentlove --

Ha. I must take my leave,
You will excuse me Madam, Court attendances --

Cel. By any means.

Bor. Ladies you will vouchsafe
Your company.

Is. M. We wait upon you sir. Exunt.

The third Act.
Enter Lord unready. Hairecut preparing his Periwigge, Table, and
Lookingglasse. Lor. What hour is it?

Ha. Bout three'a clock my Lord.

Bor. It Is time to rise.

Ha. Your Lordship went but late
To bed last night.

Lor. It Was early in the morning. Enter Secre.

Sec. Expect a while, my Lord is busy?

Lor. What Is the matter?

Sec. Here is a Lady
Desires access to you upon some affairs
She says may specially concern your Lordship.

Lor. A Lady? What her name?

Sec. Madam Decoy.

Lor. Decoy? prithee admit her. Enter Decoy.
Have you business Madam
With me?

Decoy. And such I hope as will not be
Offensive to your Lordship.

Lor. I pray speak it.

De. I would desire your Lordships ear more private.

Lor. Wait in the next chamber till I call, now Madam. Exeunt.

De. Although I am a stranger to your Lordship
I would not lose a fair occasion offered.
To show how much I honor, and would serve you.

Lor. Please you to give me the particular
That I may know the extent of my engagement,
I am ignorant by what desert you should
Be encouragd to have care of me.

De. My Lord,
I will take boldness to be plain, beside
Your other excellent parts, you have much fame
For your sweet inclination to our sex.

Lor. How dee mean Madam?

Dec. I that way your Lordship
Has honorably practisd upon some
Not to be named, your noble constancy
To a mistress has deserved our general vote,
And I a part of woman kind have thought
How to express my duty.

Lor. In what Madam?

Dec. Be not so strange my Lord, I know the beauty
And pleasures of your eyes, that hansome creature
With whose fair life all your delight took leave,
And to whose memory you have paid too much*
Sad tribute.

Lor. What Is all this?

Dec. This, if your Lordship
Accept my service, in pure zeal to cure
Your melancholy, I could point where you might
Repair your loss.

Lor. Your Ladyship I conceive
Does traffic in flesh merchandise.

De. To men.
Of honor like your self, I am well known
To some in court and come not with ambition
Now to supplant your officer.

Lor. What is
The Lady of pleasure you prefer.

De. A Lady
Of birth and fortune, one upon whose virtue
I may presume, the Lady Aretina*

Lor. Wife to sir Thomas Bornwell?

Dec. The same sir*

Lor. Have you prepared her?

(...) Not for your Lordship, till I have found your pulse,
I am acquainted with her disposition
She has a very appliable nature.

Lor. And Madam when expect you to be whipped
For doing these fine favors.

De. How my Lord?
Your Lordship does but jest I hope; you make
A difference between a Lady that
Does honorable offices, and one
They call a bawd, your Lordship was not wont
To have such course opinion of our practice.

Lor. The Lady Aretina is my kinswoman.

De. What if she be my Lord? the nearer blood
The dearer sympathy.

Lor. I Will have thee carted.

De. Your Lordship wonot so much stain your honor
And education, to use a woman
Of my quality. -- Lord. -- It Is possible you may
Be sent off with an honorable convoy
Of Halberdeers.

De. Oh my good Lord!

Lor. Your Ladyship shall be no protection
If thou but stai'st three minutes.

De. I am gone,
When next you find rebellion in your blood,
May all within ten mile o'th court turn honest. Exit.

Lor. I do not find that pronenesse since the fair
Bella Maria died, my blood is cold,
Nor is there beauty enough surviving
To highten me to wantonness, who waits?
And what said my Lady? Enter Hairecut.

Ha. The silent language of her face my Lord
Was not so pleasant, as it showed upon
Her entrance.

Lor. Would any man that meets
This Lady take her for a bawd.

Ha. She does
The trade an honor, credit to the profession,
We may in time see baldness, quarter noses,
And rotten legs to take the wall of footclothes.

Lor. I ha thought better, call the Lady back,
I wonot lose this opportunity,
Bid her not fear, the favor is not common,
And i will reward it. I do wonder much
Will Sentlove was not here to day.

Ha. I heard him say this morning, he would wait
Upon your Lordship.
She is returned sir. Enter Secre. and Decoy.

Sec. Madam be confident my Lords not angry.

Bor. You return welcome Madam, you are better
Read in your art I hope then to be frighted
With any shape of anger, when you bring
Such news to gentlemen, Madam you shall
Soon understand how I accept the office.

De. You are the first Lord, since J studied carriage,
That showed such infidelity and fury
Upon so kind a message, every gentleman
Will show some breeding, but if one right honorable
Should not have noble blood.

Lor. You shall return
My complement in a letter to my Lady
Aretina, favor me with a little patience,
Show her that chamber.

De. I Will attend your Lordship. Ex.

Lor. Write. Madam where your honor is in danger,
My love must not be silent. Enter Sentlove and Kickshaw.
Sentlove and Kickshaw!

Kic. Your Lordship's busy.

Lor. Writing a letter, nay it shanot bar
Any discourse.

Sec. -- Silent.

Lo. Though I be no Physician, I may prevent a fever in your blood.
And where have you spent the mornings conversation?

Sent. Where you would have given the best Barbary
In your stable to have met on honorable terms.

Lor. What new beauty? You acquaint your selves
With none but wonders.

Sent. It Is too low a miracle*

Lor. Twill require a strong faith.

Secr. Your blood.

Lor. If you be innocent preserve your fame least this Decoy
Madam betray it to your repentance.
By what name is she known?

Sent. Ask Alexander, he knows her?

Alex. Whom?

Sent. The Lady Celestina.

Lor. He has a vast knowledge of Ladies, las poor Alexander!
When do thou mean thy body shall lie fallow?

Al When there is mercy in a petticote,
I must turn pilgrim for some breath.

Lor. I think
Twere cooler travel if you examine it
Upon the hoof through Spain.

Sent. Through Ethiopia*

Lor. Nay less laborious to serve a prentiship
In Peru, and dig gold out of the mine,
Though all the year were dogdayes.

Sec. To repentance,

Lor. In brief, this Lady, could you fall from virtue,
Within my knowledge will not blush to be a Bawd.

Sent. But hanged it is honorable journey work,
Thou art famous by it, and thy name's up.

Alex. So sir*
Let me ask you a question my dear knight,
Which is less servile to bring up the Pheasant,
And wait, or sit at table uncontrould
And carve to my own appetite?

Sent. No more,
Thou Art witty, as I am --

Sec. A bawd.

Sent. How Is that?

Al. Oh you are famous by it, and your names up sir.

Lor. Be wise, and reward my caution, with
Timely care of your self, so I shall not repent
To be known your lovings kinsman and servant.
Gentlemen, the Lady Celestina.
Is she so rare a thing?

Alex. If you will have my
Opinion my Lord, I never saw
So sweet, so fair, so rich a piece of nature.

Lor. I Will show thee a fairer presently, to shame
Thy eyes and judgment, look o'that. -- So I Will subscribe
Seal it, i will excuse your pen for the direction.

Al. Bella Marias picture; she was hansome.

Sent. But not to be compared.

Lor. Your patience gentlemen i will return instantly. Exit.

Al. Whither is my Lord gone?

Sec. To a Lady in the next Chamber.

Sen. What is she?

Sec. You shall pardon me, I am his Secretary.

Sen. I was wont to be of his counsel, a new officer
And I'not know it? I am resolvd to 'batter
All other with the praise of Celestina
I must retain him. Enter Lord.

Lor. Has not that object
Convinced your erring judgments.

Al. What this picture?

Lor. Were but your thoughts as capable as mine
Of her Idea, you would wish no thought
That were not active in her praise, above
All worth and memory of her sex.

Sent. She was fair
I must confess, but had your Lordship looked
With eyes more narrow and some less affection
Upon her face.

Alex. I do not love the copies
Of any dead, they make me dream of goblins,
Give me a living mistress, with but half
The beauty of Celestina, come my Lord,
It Is pity that a Lord of so much flesh
Should waste upon a ghost, when they are living
Can give you a more honorable consumption.

Sen. Why do you mean my Lord to live an Infidel?
Do, and see what will come ont, observe still
And dote upon your vigills, build a chamber
Within a rock, a tomb, among the worms,
Not far off, where you may in proof apocryphal
Court em not devour the pretty pile.
Of flesh your mistress carried to the grave,
There are no women in the world, all eyes
And tongue and lips are buried in her coffin.

Lor. Why do you think your selves competent Judges.
Of beauty gentlemen?

Both. What should hinder us?

Al. I have seen and tried as many as another
With a mortal bac^e.

Lord* Your eyes are bribd,
And your hearts chained to some desires, you cannot
Enjoy the freedom of a sense.

Alex. Your Lordship
Has a clear eyesight, and can judge and penetrate.

Lor. I can, and give a perfect censure of
Each line and point, distinguish beauty from
A thousand forms, which your corrupted optiks
Would pass for natural.

Sent. I desire no other
Judge should determine us, and if your Lordship
Dare venture but your eyes upon this Lady,
I Will stand their justice, and be confident
You shall give Celestin^ victory,
And triumph ors all beauties past and living.

Al. J date my Lord venture a suit of clothes,
You will be overcome.

Lor. You do not know my fortitude

Sent. Nor frailty, you dare not trust you self to see her.

Lor. Think you so gentlemen, I dare see this creature
To make you know your errors* and the difference
Of her, whose memory is my Saint, not trust
My senses? J dare see and speak with her,
Which holds the best acquaintance to prepare
My visit to her.

Sent. I will do it my Lord.

Al. She is a Lady free in entertainements.

Lor. I would give this advantage to your cause,
Bid him appear in all the ornaments
Did ever wait on beauty, all the riches
Pride can put on, and teach her face more charm
Then ever Poet dressed up Venus in,
Bid her be all the graces, and the queen
Of love in one, I Will see her Sentlove, and
Bring off my heart armed, but single thought
Of one that is dead, without a wound, and when
I have made your folly prisoner, i will laugh at you.

Sent. She shall expect you, trust to me for knowledge.

Lor. I Am for the present somewhere else engagd,
Let me hear from you.

Sent. So I am glad he is yet
So near conversion.

Alex. I am for Aretina.

Sent. No mention of my Lord.

Alex. Prepare his Lady,
It Is time he were reduced to the old sport,
One Lord like him more would undo the court. Exit.

Enter Aretina with a letter. Decoy. De. He is the ornament of your blood Madam,
I am much bound to his Lordship.

Are. He gives you
A noble character.

De. It Is his goodness Madam.

Are. I wanted such an engine, my Lord has
Done me a courtesy to disclose her nature,
I now know one to trust, and will employ her.
Touching my Lord, for reasons, which I shall
Offer to your Ladyship hereafter, I
Desire you would be silent, but to show
How much I dare be confident in your secrecy,
I power my bosom forth, I love a gentleman
On whom there woo'not meet much conjuration
To meet -- your ear* --

De. I apprehend you, and I shall
Be happy to be serviceable, I am sorry
Your Ladyship did not know me before now,
I have done offices, and not a few
Of the nobility, but have done feats
Within my house, which is so convenient
For situation, and artfull chambers,
Such pretty pictures to provoke the fancy.

Enter Littleworth. Lit. Madam all pleasures languish in your absence.

Are. Your pardon a few minutes sir -- you must
Contrive it thus.

Lit. I attend, and shall account it
Honor to wait on your return.

Are. He may not
Have the least knowledge of my name, or person.

De. I have practisd that already for some great ones,
And dare again to satisfy you Madam;
I have a thousand ways to do sweet offices.

Lit. If this Lady Aretina should be honest,
I ha lost time, she is free as air, J must
Have closer conference, and if I have art,
Make her affect me in revenge.

De. This evening
Leave me to manage things.

Are. You will oblige me.

De. You shall commend my art, and thank me after. Ex.

Are. I hope the revells are maintained within.

Lit. By sir Thomas and his Mistress.

Are. How? his Mistress.

Lit. The Lady Celestina, I nere saw
Eyes shoot more amorous enterchange.

Are. Is It so?

Lit. He wears her favor with mere pride.

Ar. Her favor.

Lit. A feather that he ravished from her fan.

Lit. And is so full of courtship, which she smiles on.

Are. It Is well.

Lit. And praises her beyond all poetry.

Are. I Am glad he has so much wit.

Lit. Not jealous!

Are. This secures me, what would make other Ladies pale
With jealousy, gives but a license to my wanderings,
Let him now tax me if he dare -- and yet
Her beauti's worth my envy, and I wish
Revenge upon it, not because he loves,
But that it shines above my own. Enter Alex.

Al. Dear Madam.

Are. I have it, you two gentlemen profess
Much service to me, if I have a way
To employ your wit and secrecy.

Both. You Will honor us.

Are. You gave a high and worthy character
Of Celestina.

Alex. I remember Madam.

Are. Do either of you love her.

Alex. Nor I Madam.

Lit. I wod not if I might.

Are. She Is now my guest,
And by a trick invited by my husband
To disgrace me, you gentlemen are held
Wits of the town, the Consulls that do govern
The Senate here, whose jeeres are all authenticke,
The Tavernes and the Ordinaries are
Made academies where you come, and all
Your sins and surfets made times example,
Your very nods can quell a Theater,
No speech or Poem good without your seal,
You can protect scurrility, and publish
By your authority believed, no rapture
Ought to have honest meaning.

Alex. Leave our characters.

Lit. And name the emploiment.

Are. You must exercise
The strength of both your wits upon this Lady,
And talk her into humbleness or anger
Both which are equal to my thought, if you
Dare undertake this slight thing for my sake,
My favor shall reward it, but be faithful,
And seem to let all spring from your own freedom.

Ale. This all? We can defame her, if you please
My friend shall call her whore or any thing,
And never be endangerd to a duel.

Are. How Is that?

Al. He can endure a cudgelling, and no man
Will fight after so fair a satisfaction,
But leave us to our Art, and do not limit us.

Are. They are here, begin not till I whisper you.

Enter sir Thomas, Celestina, Marcana, Isabella. Ar. Ie vous pry Madam d'
excuser l'importunite de mes affairs
Qui m' ont fait offenser, par mon, absence, une dame de laquelle
I'ay receu tant d' obligation.

Cel. Pardonnez moy Madame; vous me faictez trop a honneur.

Are. C'est bien de la douceur de vostre naturel que vous tenez
Ceste language; mais j'espere que mon mary na pas
Manque de vous entretenir en mon absence.

Ce. En verite Monsieur nous a fort oblige

Are. Il eut trop failly, s'il n'eust tasche de tout fon pouvoir a vous render
toutes sorts de services.


Cel. Cest de sa bonte qu'il nous a tant favorise.

Ar. De la vostre plustost Madame que vous fait donner
D'interpretation si benign a ses efforts.

Cel. Ie voy bien que la victoire fera toutsjours a Madame, and de language,
and de la courtesy.


Are. Vrayement Madame, que jamais person a plus desire,
L'honneur de vostre compagnie, que moy.

Cel. Laissons en^je vous supplis, des compliments and permiettoz a vostre
servante de vous baiser les mains.


Are. Vous m'obligez trop.

Bo. I have no more patience, lets be merry again
In our own language, Madam our mirth cooles,
Our Nephew! Enter Frederick.

Are. Passion of my brain.

Fre. Save you gentlemen, save you Ladies.

Are. I am undone.

Fre. I must salute, no matter at which end I begin.

Are. There Is a complement.

Cel. Is this your nephew Madam?

Are. Ie vous pry Madame d* execuser les habitz, and le rude
Comportement de mon cousin. Il est tout fraischement
Venu de l universitie, ou on l'a tout gaste.

Cel Excusez moy Madam, il est bien accomply.

Fre. This language should be French, by the motions
Of your heads, and the mirth of your faces.

Are. I am dishonored.

Fre. It Is one of the finest tongues for Ladies to show their
Teeth in, If you will Latin I am for you, or Greek it,
My tailor has not put me into French yet,
Mill basia, basia mill.

Cel. Ie ne vous entende pas monsieur,
I understand you not sir.

Fre. Why so?
You and I then shall be in charity,
For though we should be abusive, we ha the benefit
Not to understand one another: where is my Aunt?
I did hear music somewhere, and my brains
Tuned with a bottle of your capering claret
Made haste to show their dancing.

Lit. Please you Madam,
They are very comfortable.

St. Alas Madam
How would you have me help it, I did use
All means I could, after he heard the music,
To make him drunk in hope so to contain him,
But the wine made him lighter, and his head
Flew hi'ther, ere I mist his heels.

Ale. Nay he spoke Latin to the Lady.

Are. Oh most unpardonable! get him off
Quickly, and discreetely, or if I live --

St. It Is not in my power he swears I am
An absurd sober fellow, and if you keep
A servant in his house to cross his humor,
When the rich sword and belt comes home, he will kill him.

Are. What shall I do? Try your skill, Master Littleworth.

Lit. He has never a sword, sweet Mr. Frederick*

Bo. It Is pity Madam such a syen should
Be lost, but you are clouded.

Cel. Not I sir,
I never found my self more clear at heart.

Bo. I could play with a feather, your fan Lady,
Gentlemen, Aretina, ta ra ra ra, come Madam.

Fre. Why my good tutor in election?
You might have been a scholar.

Lit. But I thank
My friends they brought me up a little better,
Give me the town wits, that deliver jeasts
Clean from the bow, that whistle in the air,
And cleave the pin at twelvescore, Ladies do
But laugh at a gentleman that has any learning.
It Is sin enough to have your clothes suspected,
Leave us, and I will find a time to instruct you;
Come here are sugar plumbes, it is a good Frederick.

Fre. Why is not this my Aunts house in the strand?
The noble Rendevous? Who laughes at me?
Go, I will root here* if I list, and talk
Of Retoricke, Logic, Latin, Greek, or any thing,
And understand 'em too, who says the contrary?
Yet in a fair way I contemn all learning,
And will be ignorant as he, or he,
Or any taffata, satin, scarlet, plush,
Tissue, or cloth, a bodkin gentleman,
Whose manners are most gloriously infected;
Did you laugh at me Lady?

Cel. Not I sir?
But if I did show mirth upon your question,
I hope you wod not beat me little gentleman.

Fr. How little gentleman? you dare not say
These words to my new clothes, and fighting sword.

Are. Nephew Frederick!

Fr. Little gentleman,
This an affront both to my blood and person,
I am a gentleman of as tall a birth
As any least nobility, though my clothes
Smell of the lamp, my coat is honorable,
Right honorable, full, of or, and argent,
A little gentleman!

Bor. Coze you must be patient,
My Lady meant you no dishonor, and
You must remember she is a woman.

Fre. Is she a woman, that's another matter,
Dee hear, my uncle tells me what you are.

Cel. So sir.

Fr. You called me little gentleman.

Cel. I did sir.

Fre. A little pinke has made a lusty ship
Strike her topsaile, the Crow may beard the Elephant,
A whelpe may tame the Tiger, spite of all
False decks and murderers, and a little gentleman
Be hard enough to grapple with your Ladyship
Top and top gallant; will you go drink uncle?
The Other enchanted bottle, you and I
Will tiple, and talk philosophy.

Bo. Come Nephew,
You will excuse a minutes absence Madam.
Wait you on us.

St. My duty sir.

Are. Now gentlemen. Ex. all but Cel. and Alex. and Little.

Alex. Madam I had rather you accuse my language
For speaking truth, then virtue suffer in
My further silence, and it is my wonder
That you, whose noble carriage has deserved
All honor, and opinion should now
Be guilty of ill manners.

Cel. What was that
You told me sir?

Lit. Do you not blush Madam?
To ask that question.

Cel. You amaze rather
My cheek to palenesse, what you mean by this?
I am not troubled with the hickup gentlemen,
You should bestow this fright upon me.

Lit. Then
Pride and ill memory go together.

Cel. How sir?

Al. The gentleman on whom you exercise
Your thin wit, was a nephew to the Lady
Whose guest you are, and though her modesty
Look calm on the abuse of one so near
Her blood, the affront was impious.

Lit. I am ashamed on it,
You an ingenious Lady and well mannerd?
I Will reach a Bear as much civility.

Cel. You may be master of the College sir
For ought I know.

Lit. What College? Of the Bears.

Cel. Have you a plot upon me? Dee possess
Your wits, or know me gentlemen. Enter Bornewell.

Bor. How Is this?

Al. Know you? yes we do know you to an atome.

Li. Madam we know, what stuff your soul is made on.

Cel. But do not bark so like a mastive, pray,
Sure they are mad, let your brains stand awhile
And settle gentlemen, you know not me,
What am I?

Lit. Tha'rt a puppet, a thing made
Of clothes and painting, and not half so hansome
As that which played Susanna in the fair.

Cel. I heard you visited those canvas tragedies,
One of their constant audience, and so taken
With Susan, that you wishd your self a rival
With the two wicked elders.

Al. You think this
Is wit now, come you are --

Cel. What I beseech you?
Your character will be full of salt and satyr,
No doubt, what am I?

Al. Why you are a woman.

Cel. And that is at least a bow wide of you knowledge.

Al. Would be thought hansome, and might pass in the country
Upon a market day, but miserably
Forfeit to pride and fashions, that if heaven
were a new gown, you would not stay in it a fortnight.

Cel. It must be miserably out of fashion then,
Have I no sin but pride?

Al. Have any virtue?
Or but a good face to excuse that want?

Cel. You praised it yesterday.

Al. That made you proud.

Cel. More pride?

Al. You need not to close up the praise,
I have seen a better countenance in a Sibill.

Cel. When you wore spectacles of sack, mistook
The painted cloth, and kissed it for your mistress.

Al. Let me ask you a question, how much
Have you consumed in expectation
That I would love you.

Cel. Why? I think as much
As you have paid a way in honest debts
This seven year, it is a pretty impudence,
But cannot make me angry.

Lit. Is there any
Man that will cast away his limbs upon her?

Al. You do not sing so well as I imagind,
Nor dance, you reele in your coranto, and pinch
Your petticoate too hard, y ave no good ear
Toth' music, and incline too much one shoulder,
As you were dancing on the rope, and falling,
You speak abominable French, and make
A courtsey like a Dairie maid, not mad?

Lit. Do we not sting her hansomely

Bor. A conspiracy.

Al. Your state is not so much as it is reported
When you confer notes, all your husbands debts
And your own reconcild -- but that's not it
Will so much spoil your marriage.

Cel. As what sir?
Let me know all my faults.

Al. Some men do whisper
You are not over honest.

Cel. All this shall not
Move me to more than laughter, and some pity,
Because you have the shapes of gentlemen,
And though you have been insolent upon me,
I will engage no friend to kick or cudgel you
To spoil your living, and your limbs together,
I leave that to diseases that offend you,
And spare my curse, poor silken Vermin, and
Hereafter shall distinguish Men from Monkies.

Bo. Brave soul, you brace of horseleaches, I have heard
Their barbarous language Madam, yare too merciful,
They shall be silent to your tongue, pray punish them.

Cel. They are things not worth my character, nor mention
Of any clean breath, so lost in honesty
They cannot satisfy for wrongs enough,
Though they should steal out of the world at Tiburne.

Lit. We are hanged already.

Cel. Yet I will talk a little to the pilchards,
You two that have not twixt you both the hundred
Part of a soul, course woollen witted fellows,
Without a nap, with bodies made for burdens,
You that are only stuffings for apparel
As you were made but engines for your Tailors
To frame their clothes upon, and get them custom;
Until men see you moove, yet, then you dare not
Out of your guilt of being the ignobler beast
But give a horse the wall, whom you excel
Only in dancing of the brawles, because
The horse was not taught the French way, your two faces,
One fat like Christmas, the other lean like Candlemas,
And Prologue to a Lent, both bound together
Would figure Ianus, and do many cures
On Agues and the green disease by frighting,
But neither can with all the characters
And conjuring circles charm a woman, though
Sha'd fourscore years upon her, and but one
Tooth in her head, to love or think well of you;
And I were miserable, to be at cost
To court such a complexion, as your malice
Did impudently insinuate, but I waste time
And stain my breath in talking to such tadpoles.
Go home and wash your tongues in Barley water
Drink clean Tobacco, be not hot in the mouth,
And you may escape the Beadle; so I leave you
To shame and your own garters, Sir I must
Entreat you for my honor do not penance em*
They are not worth your anger, how I shall
Acquit your Ladies silence.

(...). Madam, I
Am sorry to suspect, and dare revenge

Cel. No* caus^ (...) mine.

B^r. It must become me to attend you home.

Cel. You are noble -- -- farewell Mushroomes.

Are. Is she gone.

Li. I think we peperd her*

Al. I am glad it is over*
But I repent no service for you Madam.
Enter servant with a letter. To me? from whence a Jewel a good preface,
Be happy the conclusion.

Are. Some love letter -- He smiles upon.

Lit. He has a hundred Mistresses, you may
Be charitable Madam I ha none,
He surfets, and I fall away ^th kidnyes.

Al. I Will meet,
It Is some great Lady questionless, that has
Taken notice, and would satisfy her appetite.

Are. Now Mr. Alexander, you look bright of the sudden,
Another spirit's in your eye.

Al* Not (...) Madam*
Only a (...) to (...) a friend.

Ar. What friend?

Lit. By this Jewel, I know her not*

Ar. It Is a she friend* I Will follow gentlemen,
We may have a game (...) before you go*

Al. I shall attend you (...)

Lit. It Is our duty.

Are. I blush (...) my own thoughts,
Some strange face gove^^^ me, (...)
The ways are east already and we thrive
When our sin fears no eye nor perspective. Exit.

The fourth Act*
Enter two men leading Alexander ^^ded, and go ^f suddenly. Al. I am not hurt,
my patience to obey*em
Not without fear to ha my throat cut else,
Did me a courtesy (...) ha they brought me
It Is devilish dark, the bottom of a well
At midnight, with but two stars on the top,
Were broad day to this darkness, I but think
How like a whirlewinde these rogues caught me up
And smoothered my eyesight, let me see,
These may be spirits, and for ought I know
Have brought me hither over twenty steeples,
Pray heaven they were not Bay^iefes; that's more worth
My fear, and this a prison, all my debts
Reeke in my nostrill, and my bones begin
To ache with fear to be made dice, and yet
This is too calm and quiet for a prison;
What if the riddle prove I am robbed; and yet
I did not feel em search me? How now? music?
Enter Decoy like an old woman with a light. And a light? What beldam's this, I
cannot pray;
What art?

De. A friend, fear not young man I am
No spirit.

Alex. Off. De. Despise me not for age,
Or this course outside, which I wear not out
Of poverty; thy eyes be witness, it is
No cave or beggars cell tha'rt brought too, let
That gold speak here is no want, which thou may spend,
And find a spring to tire even prodigality
If thou be wise*

Alex. The devil was a coyner
From the beginning, yet the gold looks current.

De. Tha'rt still in wonder, know I am Mistress of
This house, and of a fortune that shall serve
And feed thee with delights, it was J sent for thee,
The jewel and the letter came from me*
It was my art, thus to contrive our meeting,
Because J would not trust thee with my fame,
Until J found thee worth a woman's honor.

Al. Honor and fame? the devil means to have
A care on's credit, though she sent for me,
J hope, she has another customer
To do the trick withal, J wod not turn
Familiar to a witch.

De. What say? Can thou
Dwell in my arms to night, shall we change kisses,
And entertain the silent hours with pleasure?
Such as old time shall be delighted with,
And blame the too swifte motion of his wings
While we embrace.

Al. Embrace? she has had no teeth
This twenty years, and the next violent cough
Brings up her tongue, it cannot possibly
Be sound at root, I do not think but one
Strong sneeze upon her, and well meant would make
Her quart^rs fall away, one kick would blow
Her up like gunpowder, and loose all her limbs;
She is so cold, an Incubus wod not heat her,
Her phlegm would quench a furnace, and her breath
Would dampe a musket bullet.

De. Have you sir
Considerd.

Alex. What?

De. My proposition,
Can love?

Alex. I could have done, whom do you mean?
I know you are pleased, but to make sport.

De. Thou art not
So dull of soul as thou appearst.

Alex. This is.
But some device, my granam has some trick in it:
Yes I can love.

De. But can thou affect me.

Al. Although to reverence so grave a matron
Were an ambitious word in me, yet since
You give me boldness, I do love you.

De. Then
Thou art my own.

Al. Has she no cloven foot?

De. And I am thine, and all that I command
Thy servants, from this minute thou are happy,
And fate in thee will crown all my desires.
I grieved a proper man should be compeld
To bring his body to the common market,
My wealth shall make thee glorious, and the more
To encourage thee, how er^ this form may fright
Thy youthful eyes, yet thou wo't find by light
Of thy own sense, for other light is banished
My chamber, when our arms tie lovers knots,
And kisses seal the welcome of our lips,
I shall not there af^right thee, nor seem old,
With riveld veins, my skin is smooth and soft
As Ermines, with a spirit to meet thine,
Active and equal to the queen of Loves
When she did court Adonis.

Al. This does more
Confirm she is a devil, and I am
Within his own dominions, I must on,
Or else be torn a p^^ces, I have heard
These Su^cubi must not be crossed.

De. We trifle
Too precious time away, I Will show you a prospect
Of the next chamber, and then out the candle.

Al. Have you no sack in the house, I would go armed
Upon this breach.

De. It shanot need.

Al. One word
Mother, have not you been a Cat in your days?

De. I am glad you are so merry sir, you observe
That bed.

Alex. A very brave one.

De. When you are
Disrobed, you can come thither in the dark,
You shanot stay for me, come as you wish
For happiness. Exit.

Al. I am preferred, if I
Be modest and obey, she cannot have
The heart to do me harm, and she were Hecate
Herself, I will have a strong faith, and think,
I march upon a Mistress, the less evil,
If I escape fire now, I defy the devil. Exit.

Enter Fred: Littlew. Stoward. Fre. And how dee like me now?

St. Most excellent.

Fre. Your opinion Mr. Littlewor.

Lit. Your French tailor
Has made you a perfect gentleman, I may
Converse now with you, and preserve my credit,
De'e find no alteration in your body
With these new clothes?

Fre. My body altered? No.

Lit. You are not yet in fashion then, that must
Have a new motion garb, and posture too,
Or all your pride is cast away, it is not
The cut of your apparel makes a gallant,
But the geometrical wearing of your clothes.

St. Mr. Littleworth tells you right, you wear your ^a^:
Too like a citizen.

Lit. It Is like a Midwife,
Place it with best advantage of your hair,
Is half your feather molted? this does make
No show, it should spread over like a Canopy,
Your hot reind Monsieur wears it for a shade,
And cooler to his back, your doublet must
Be more unbotton'd hereabouts, you will not
Be a sloven else, a foul shirt is no blemish,
You must be confident, and outface clean linen!
Your doublet and your breeches must be allowed
No private meeting here, your cloak's too long,
It reaches to your buttocke, and does smell
Too much of Spanish gravitie, the fashion
Is to wear nothing but a Cape, a coat
May be allowed a covering for one elbow,
And some to avoid the trouble, choose to walk
In qui^po thus.

St. Your coat, and cloak's a brushing
In Long-lane Lumbard.

Fre. But what if it rain?

Lit. Your belt about your shoulder is sufficient
To keep off any storm, beside a reed
But wau'd discreetly, has so many pores,
It suckes up all the rain that falls about one,
With this defense* when other men have been
Wet to the skin through all their cloakes, I have
Defied a tempest and walked by the Tavernes
Dry as a bone.

St. Because he had no money
To call for wine.

Fr. Why you do walk enchanted,
Have you such pretty charms in town? But stay,
Who must I have to attend me?

Lit. Is not that
Yet thought upon.

St. I have laid out for servants.

Lit. They are every where.

St. I cannot yet be furnished
With such as I would put into his hands.

Fr. Of what condition must they be, and how
Many in number sir?

Lit. Beside your fencing,
Your singing, dancing, riding, and French-master,
Two may serve domesticke to be constant waiters
Upon a gentleman a fool, a pimpe.

St. For these two officers I have enquird,
And I am promisd a convenient whiskin,
I could save charges, and employ the Pie wench
That carries her intelligence in whitepots,
Or it is but taking order with the woman
That holds the ballads, she could fit him with
A concubin to any tune, but I
Have a design to place a fellow with him
That has read all Sir Pandarus works, a Trojan
That lies concealed, and is acquainted with
Both city and sub^rbian fripperies
Can fetch em with a spell at midnight to him,
And warrant which are for his turn, can for
A need supply the Surgeon too.

Fre. I like
Thy providence, -- such a one deserves a livery twice a year*

St. It shanot need, a cast suite of your worships
Will serve, he will find a cloak to cover it
Out of his share with those he brings to bed to you.

Fre. But must I call this fellow Pimpe?

Lit. It is
Not necessary, or Jack, or Harry,
Or what he is known abroad by will sound better,
That men may think he is a Christian.

Fre. But hear you Mr. Littleworth, is there not
A method and degrees of title in
Men of this a^t.

Lit. According to the honor
Of men that do^ employ em. An Emperor
May give this office to a Duke, A King
May have his Viceroy to negotiate for him,
A Duke may use a Lord, the Lord a Knight
A Knight may trust a gentleman, and when
They are abroad, and merry, gentlemen
May pimpe to one another.

Fre. Good, good fellowship!
But for the fool now, that should wait on me,
And break me jeasts.

Lit. A fool is necessary.

St. By any means.

Fre. But which of these two servants
Must now take place.

Lit. That question Mr. Frederick
The school of Heraldry should conclude upon;
But if my judgment may be heard the fool
Is your firstman, and it is known a point
Of state to have a fool.

St. But sir the other
Is held the finer servant, his employments
Are full of trust, his person cleave, and nimble,
And none so soon can leap into preferment
Where fools are poor.

Lit. Not all, there is story for it,
Princes have been no wi^er than they should be,
Would any noble man, that were no fool
Spend all in hope of the Philosophers stone,
To buy new Lordships in another country,
Would Knights build Colleges, or gentlemen
Of good states, challenge the field and fight
Because a whore wo'not be honest, come,
Fools are a family over all the world;
We do affect one naturally, indeed
The fool is Leiger with us.

St. Then the Pimpe
Is extraordinary.

Fre. Do not you fall out
About their places; here is my noble Aunt^ Enter Aretina.

Lit. How do you like your nephew Madam now?

Are. Well, turn about Frederick, very well.

Are. Am I not now a proper gentleman?
The virtue of rich clothes! now could I take
The wall of Julius Caesar, affront
Great Pompeys upperlip, and defy the Senate,
Nay I can be as proud as your own heart Madam,
You may take that for your comfort; J put on
That virtue with my clothes, and J doubt not
But in little time, J shall be impudent
As any Page or Players boy, J am
Beholding to this gentleman's good discipline,
But J shall do him credit in my practice,
Your Steward has some pretty notions too
In moral mischief.

Are. Your desert in this
Exceedes all other service, and shall bind me
Both to acknowledge, and reward.

Lit. Sweet Madam!
Think me but worth your favor, J would creep
Upon my knees to honor you, and for every
Minute you lend to my reward, i will pay
A year of serviceable tribute.

Are. You
Can complement.

Lit. Thus still she puts me off,
Unless J speak the down right word, she will never
Understand me, a man would think that creeping
Upon one's knees Were English to a Lady. Enter Alex.

Ale. How is it Jack? Pleasures attend you Madam,
How does my plant of honor?

Are. Who is this?

Al. It Is Alexander.

Are. Rich and glorious!

Lit. It Is Alexander the great.

Ale. And my Bucephalus
Waits at the door.

Are. Your case is alterd sir.

Ale. J cannot help these things, the Fa^es will have it,
It Is not my land does this.

Lit. But thou have a plough
That brings it ^^

Are. Now he looks brave and lovely.

Fre. Well (...) my gallant Macedonian.

Al. Madam you gave your Nephew for my pupil,
I rea'd but in a tavern, if you will horror us,
The Bear at the bridge foot shall entertain you,
A drawer is my Ganim^d, he shall skinke^
Brisk Nectar to us, we will only have
A dozen Partridge in a dish, as many Phesants,
Quails, Cocks and Godwits, shall come marching up
Like the trained band, a fort of Sturgeon
Shall give most bold defiance to an army,
And triumph ore the table.

Are. Sir, it will
But dull the appetite to hear more, and mine
Must be excusd, another time I may
Be your guest.

Ale. It Is grown in fashion now with Ladies,
When you please i will attend you; Littleworth
Come Frederick.

Fre. We Will have music, I love noise,
We will out roar the Thames and shake the bridge boy. Ex.

Lit. Madam I kiss your hand, wod you wod think
Of your poor servant, flesh and blood is frail,
And trouble some to carry without help.

Are. A coach will easily convey it, or
You may take water at strand bridge.

Lit. But I
Have taken fire.

Are. The Thames will cool.

Lit. But never quench my heart, your charity
Can only do that!

Are. I will keep it cold
Of purpose,

Lit. Now you bless me, and I date
Be drunk in expectation.

Are. I am confident
He knows me not, and I were worse than mad
To be my own betrayer, hre's my husband. Enter Born.

Bor. Why, how now Aretina? What alone?
The mystery of this solitude? my house
Turn desert of the sudaine, all the gamsters
Blown up? Why is the music put to silence?
Or ha their instruments caught a cold, since we
Gave them the last heat? I must know thy ground
Of Melancholy.

Are. You are merry, as
You came from kissing Celestina.

Bor. I
Feel her yet warm upon my lip, she is
Most excellent company, I did not think
There was that sweetness in her sex, I must
Acknowledge it was thy cure to disinchant me
From a dull husband to an active lover,
With such a Lady, I could spend more years,
Than since my birth my glass has run (...) minutes,
And yet be young, her presence has a spell
To keep off age, she has an eye would strike
Fire through an adamant.

Are. I have heard as much
Bestowed upon a dull faced chambermaid
Whom love and wit would thus commend, true beauty
Is mocked when we compare thus, it self being
Above what can be fetched to make it lovely,
Or could our thoughts reach some thing to declare
The glories of a face, or bodies elegance,
That touches but our sense, when beauty spreads
Over the soul, and calls up understanding
To look when thence is offered, and admire,
In both I must acknowledge Celestina
Most excellently fair, fair above all
The beauties I ha seen, and one most worthy
Man's love and wonder.

Bor. Do you speak Aretina,
This with a pure sense to commend, or i^^
The mockery of my praise

Aret. Although it shame
My self, I must be just, and give her all
The excellency of women, and were I
A man.

Bo. What then?

Are. I know not with what loss,
I should attempt her love, she is a piece
So angellically moving, I should think
Frailty excusd to dote upon her form,
And almost virtue to be wicked with her. Exit.

Bor. What should this mean? this is no jealousy,
Or she believes I counterfeit, I feel
Something within me, like a heat, to give
Her cause, would Celestina but consent,
What a frail thing is man, it is not worth
Our glory to be chaste, while we deny
Mirth and converse with women, he is good
That dares the tempter, ye^ corrects his blood. Exit.

Celestina, Mariana, Issabella. Cel. I have told you all my knowledge since he
is pleased
To invite himself he shall be entertaind,
And you shall be my witnesses.

Mar. Who comes with him.

Cel. Sir William Sentlove, that prepared me for
The honorable encounter, I expect
His Lordship every minute. Enter Sentlove.

Sent. My Lord is come. Enter Lord. Hairecut.

Cel. He has honored me.

Se. My Lord your periwig is awry*

Lo You sir -- While Hairecut is busy about his hair, Sentlove goes to
Celestina.

Sent. You may guess, at the gentleman that's with him.
It is his Barbar, Madam, dee observe
And your Ladyship want a shaver.

Hai. She is here sir,
I am betrayed Sentlove your plot, I may
Have opportunity to be revenged Exit.

Sent. She in the midst.

Lo. She Is fair, I must confess,
But does she keep this distance out of state.

Cel. Though I am poor in language to express
How much your Lordship honors me, my heart
Is rich and proud in such a guest, I shall
Be out of love with every air abroad,
And for his grace done my unworthy house,
Be a fond prisoner, become anchorite,
And spend my hours in prayer, to reward
The blessing, and the bounty of this presence.

Lor. Though you could turn each place you move in* to
A temple, rather than a wall should hide
So rich a beauty from the world, it were
Less want to lose our piety and your prayer,
A throne were fitter to present you to
Our wonder, whence your eyes more worth than all
They look on, should chain every heart a prisoner.

Sent. It Was pretty well come off.

Lo. By your example
I shall know how to complement, in this
You more confirm my welcome.

Cel. I shall love
My lips the better, if their silent language
Persuade your Lordship but to think so truly.

Lo. You make me smile Madam.

Cel. I hope you came not
With fear that any sadness here should shake
One blossom from your eye, I should be miserable
To present any object should displease you.

Lo. You do not Madam.

Cel. As I should account
It no less sorrow, if your Lordship should
Lay too severe a censure on my freedom.
I wonot court a Prince against his justice,
Nor bribe him with a smile to think me honest,
Pardon my Lord this boldness, and the mirth
That may flow from me, I believe my father
Thought of no winding sheet when he begot me.

Lor. She has a merry soul, it will become
Me ask your pardon Madam for my rude
Approach so much a stranger to your knowledge.

Cel. Not my Lord so much stranger to my knowledge,
Though I have but seen your person a far often,
I am acquianted with your character,
Which I have heard so often, I can speak it.

Lo. You shall do me an honor.

Cel. If your Lordship will
Be patient.

Lo. And glad to hear my faults.

Cel. That as your conscience can agree upon em,
How ever if your Lordship give me privilege,
I Will tell you what is the opinion of the world.

Lo. You cannot please me better.

Cel. You Are a Lord
Borne with as much nobility as would
Divided serve to make ten noble men
Without a Herald, but with so much spirit,
And height of soul, as well might furnish twenty.
You are learnd, a thing not compatible now
With native honor, and are master of
A language that does chain all years, and charm
All hearts, where you persuade, a wit so flowing
And prudence to correct it, that all men
Believe they only meet in you, which with
A spacious memory make up the full wonders;
To these you have known valor, and upon
A noble cause, know how to use a sword
To honors best advantage, though you were none;
You are as bountiful, as the showers that fall
Into the Springs green besome; as you were
Created Lord of fortune, not her steward;
So constant to the cause, in which you make
Your self an advocate, you dare all dangers,
And men had rather you should be their friend,
Than justice or the bench, bound up together.

Lor. But did you hear all this.

Cel. And more my Lord.

Lor. Pray let me have it Madam.

Cel. To all these virtues, there is added one,
(Your Lordship will remember when I name it,
I speak but what I gather from the voice
Of others) it is grown to a full fame
That you have loved a woman.

Lo. But one Madam?

Cel. Yes many, give me leave to smile my Lord,
I shall not need to interpret in what sense,
But you have showed your self right honorable,
And for your love to Ladies have deserved,
If their vote might prevail a marble statue,
I make no comment on the peoples text.
My Lord I should be sorry to offend.

Lor. You cannot Madam, these are things we owe
To nature for.

Cel. And honest men will pay
Their debts.

Lo. If they be able, or compound.

Cel. She had a hard heart, would be unmercifull,
And not give day to men so promising,
But you owed women nothing,

Lo. Yes I am
Still in their debt, and I must owe them love,
It was part of my character.

Cel. With your Lordships
Pardon I only said, you had a fame
For loving women, but of late men say
You have against the imperial laws of love,
Restraind the active flowings of your blood,
And with a Mistress buried all that is
Hoped for in loves succession, as all beauty
Had died with her, and left the world benighted!
In this you more dishonor all our sex
Than you did grace a part, when every where
Love tempts your eye to admire a glorious harvest,
And every where as full blown ears submit
Their golden heads, the laden trees bow down
Their willing fruit, and court your amorous tasting.

Lor. I see men would dissect me to a fiber,
But do you believe this?

Cel. It is my wonder!
I must confess a man of nobler earth
Then goes to vulgar composition,
Borne and bred high, so unconfind, so rich
In fortunes, and so read in all that sum
Up humane knowledge, to feed gloriously,
And live at court, the only sphere wherein
True beauty moves, natures most wealthy garden,
Where every blossom is more worth, than all
The Hesperian fruit, by jealous Dragon watched
Where all delights do circle appetite,
And pleasures multiply by being tasted,)
Should be so lost with thought of one, turn ashes.
There Is nothing left my Lord that can excuse you,
Unless you plead, what I am ashamed to prompt
Your wisdom too?

Lo. What that?

Cel. That you have played
The Surgeon with your self

Lo. And am made Eunuch.

Cel. It were much pity.

Lo. Trouble not your self,
I could convince your fears with demonstration
That I am man enough, but knew not where
Until this meeting beauty dwelt; the court
You talked of must be where the queen of love is,
Which moves but with your person, in your eye
Her glory shines, and only at that flame
Her wanton boy does light his quickening torch.

Cel. Nay now you complement, I would it did
My Lord for your own sake.

Lor. You would be kind,
And love me then.

Cel. My Lord I should be loving
Where I found worth to invite it, and should cherish
A constant man.

Lor. Then you should me Madam.

Cel. But is the ice about your heart fallen off,
Can you return to do what love commands?
Cupid thou shall have instand sacrifice.
And I dare be the Priest.

Lor. Your hand, your lip,
Now I am proof against all temptation.

Cel Your meaning my good Lord.

Lor. I that have strength
Against thy voice and beauty, after this
May dare the charms of womankind, thou art
Bella Maria unprophaned yet,
This Magic has no power upon my blood.
Farewell Madam, if you durst be the example
Of chaste as well as fair, thou were a brave one.

Cel. I hope your Lordship means not this for earnest,
Be pleased to grace a banquer.

Lo. Pardon Madam.
Will Sentlove follow, I must laugh at you.

Cel. My Lord I must beseech you stay, for honor
For her whose memory you love best.

Lo. Your pleasure.

Cel. And by that virtue you have now professed,
I charge you to believe me too, I can
Now glory, that you have been worth my trial,
Which I beseech you pardon, had not you
So valiantly recoverd in this conflict,
You had been my triumph, without hope of more
Than my just scorn upon your wanton flame;
Nor will I think these noble thoughts grew first
From melancholy, for some femall loss,
As the phantasticke world believes, but from
Truth, and your love of Innocence, which shine
So bright in the two royal luminaries
At Court, you cannot lose your way to chastity,
Proceed, and speak of me as honor guides you. Exit Lord.
I am almost tired, come Ladies we will beguile
Dull time, and take the air annother while. Exeunt.

The fifth Act.
Enter Aretina and Servant. Are. But has Sir Thomas lost five hundred pounds
Already?

Ser. And five hundred more he borrowed,
The Dice are notable devourers Madam,
They make no more of pieces, than of pebbles,
But thrust their heaps together to engender,
Two hundred more the Caster cries this gentleman,
I am w'ee. I ha that to nothing sir, the Caster
Again, it is covered, and the table too,
With sums that frighed me, here one speaks out,
And with a Martyrs patience, smiles upon
His moneys Executioner, the Dice,
Commands a pipe of good Tobacco, and
In The smoke on it vanishes; another makes
The bones vault ore his head, swears that ill throwing
Has put his shoulder out of joint calls for
A bone setter that looks to the box, to bid
His master send him some more hundred pounds,
Which lost, he takes tobacco, and is quiet;
Here a strong arm throws in, and in, with which
He brusheth all the table, pays the Rookes
That went their smelts a piece upon his hand,
Yet swears he has not drawn a stake this seven year.
But I was bid make haste* my master may
Lose this five hundred pound ere I come thither. Exit.

Are. If we both waste so fast, we shall soon find
Our state is not immortal, some thing in
His other ways appear not well already. Enter sir Thomas.

Bor. Ye Tortoises, why make you no more haste,
Go pay to the master of the house that money,
And tell the noble gamsters, I have another
Superf^uous thousand pound, at night i will visit em.
Dee hear?

Ser. Yes and please you.

Bor Do It ye drudges,
Ta ra ra -- Aretina.

Ar. You have a pleasant humor sir.

Bor. What should a gentleman be sad?

Ar. You have lost.

Bor. A transitory sum, as good that way
As another.

Are. Do you not vex within for it?

Bor. I had rather lose a thousand more, than one
Sad thought come near my heart fort, vex for trash,
Although it go from othermen like drops.
Of their life blood, we lose with the alacrity,
We drink a cup of sack, or kiss a Mistress,
No money is considerable with a gamster,
They have souls more spacious than Kings, did two
Gamsters divide the Empire of the world
They d make one throw for it all, and he that lost
Be no more melancholy, then to have played for
A morning draught, vex a rich soul for dirt,
The quiet of whose every thought is worth
A Province:

Are. But when Dice have consumd all;
Your patience will not pawn for as much more.

Bor. Hang pawning, sell outright, and the fears over.

Are. Say you so? I Will have another coach to morrow
If there be rich above ground.

Bor. I forgot
To bid the fellow ask my Jeweller,
Whether the chain of Diamonds be made up,
I will present it to my Lady Bellamour,
Fair Celestina.

Are. This gown J have worn
Six days already, it looks dull, i will give it
My waiting woman, and have one of cloth
of gold enbrodered, shoes and pantables
Will show well of the same.

Bor. I have invited
A covey of Ladies, and as many gentlemen
To morrow to the Italian Ordinary,
I shall have rarities, and regalli as
To pay for Madam, music, wanton songs,
And tunes of silken petticotes to dance to.

Are. And to morrow have I invited half the Court
To dine here, what misfortune it is your company
And ours should be divided? after dinner
J entertain them with a play.

Bor. By that time
Your play inclines to the Epilogue, shall we
quit our Italian host, and whirle in coaches,
To the Douch Magazine of sauce, the Stillyard,
Where deal, and backragge, and what strange wine else,
They dare but give a name too in the reckoning
Shall flow into our room, and drown Westphalias,
Tongues, and Anchoavis, like some little town
Endangered by a sluice, through whose fierce ebb
We wade and wash our selves into a boat,
And bid our Coachmen drive their leather tenements
By land, while we sail home with a fresh tide
To some new randevous.

Are. If you have not
Pointed the place, pray bring your Ladies hither,
J mean to have a Ball to morrow night,
And a rich banquet for them, where we will dance
Till morning rise, and blush to interrupt us.

Bor. Have you no Ladies in the next room, to advance
A present mirth? What a dull house you govern?
Farewell, a wife's no company -- Aretina,
J've summed up my estate, and find we may have
A month good yet*

Are. What mean you?

Bo. And J do rather
Be Lord one month of pleasures, to the height
And rapture of our senses, than be years,
Consuming what we have in foolish temperance,
Live in the dark, and no fame wait upon us,
I will live so, posterity shall stand
At gaze when I am mentioned.

Are. A mon'th good,
And what shall be done then.

Bor. I Will over Sea,
And traile a pike, with watching, marching, lying
In trenches, with enduring cold, and hunger,
And taking here and there a musketshot,
I can earne every week four shillings Madam,
And if the bullets favor me to snatch
Any superfluous limb, when I return
With good friends, I despair not to be entold
Poor Knight of Windsore; for your course Madam,
No doubt you may do well, your friends are great,
Or if your poverty, and their pride cannot
Agree, you need not trouble much invention,
To find a trade to live by, there are customers,
Farewell, be frolic Madam, if I live
I will feast all my senses, and not fall
Less than a Phaeton from my throne of Pleasure,
Though my estate flame like the world about me.

Are. It Is very pretty. Enter Decoy.
Madam Decoy.

De. What melancholy Exit.
After so sweet a nights work? Have not I
Showed my self Mistress of my art.

Are. A Lady.

De. That title makes the credit of the act
A story higher, you have not seen him yet,
I wonder what he will say.

Are. He Is here.

Ale. Bear up Enter Alexander and Frederick.
My little Mirmidan, does not Jack Littleworth
Follow?

Fre. Follow? He fell into the Thames
At landing.

Alex. The devil shall dive for him
Ere I endanger my silk stockings for him,
Let the Watermen alone, they have drags and engines,
When he has drunk his Julip, I shall laugh
To see him come in pickeld the next tide.

Fre. He Will never sink, he has such a cork brain.

Ale. Let him be hanged or drowned alls one to me,
Yet he deserves to die by water, cannot
Bear his wine credibly.

Fre. Is not this my Aunt?

Ale. And another hansome Lady, I must know her.

Fre. My blood is rampant too, I must court some body,
As good my Aunt, as any other body.

Are. Where have you been cozen?

Fre. At the bridge,
At the Bears foot, where our first health began
To the fair Aretina, whose sweet company
Was wished by all, we could not get a lay,
a Tumbler, a Device, a bona roba
For any money, drawers were grown dull;
We wanted our true firkes and our vagaries;
When were you in drink Aunt?

Are. How?

Fr. Do not Ladies
Play the good fellows too? there is no true mirth
Without them, I have now such tickling fancies,
That Doctor of the chair of wit, has read
A precious lecture, how I should behave
My self to Ladies, as now for example.

Are. Would you practice upon me?

Fre. I first salute you,
You have a soft hand Madam, are you so
All over?

Are. Nephew.

Fre. Nay you should but smile,
And then again I kiss you; and thus draw
Off your white glove, and start to see your hand
More excellently white, I grace my own
Lip with this touch, and turning gently thus,
Prepare you for my skill in Palmistry,
Which out of curiosity no Lady
But easily applies too, the first line
I took with most ambition to find out,
Is Venus girdle, a fair semicircle
Enclosing both the mount of Sol and Saturn,
If that appear, she is for my turn, a Lady
Whom nature has prepared for the careere,
And Cupid at my elbow, I put forward,
You have this very line, Aunt.

Are. The boy's frantic.

Fre. You have a Couch or Palate, I can shut
The Chamber door, enrich a stranger when
Your Nephew's coming into play.

Are. No more.

Fre. Are you so coy to your own flesh and blood?

Al. Here take your playfellow, I talk of sport,
And she would have me marry her.

Fre. Here Is Littleworth. Enter Littleworth wet.
Why how now Tutour?

Lit. I ha been fishing.

Fr. And what ha you caught?

Lit. My belly full of water.

Al. Ha ha, where is thy rapier?

Lit. My rapier's is drowned,
And I am little better, I was up bi'th heels,
And out came a tun of water beside wine.

Al. 'Thas made thee sober.

Lit. Would you have me drunk
With Water?

Are. I hope your fire is quenched by this time.

Fre. It is not now, as when your worship walkd
By all the tavernes Jack, dry as a bone.

Al. You had store of fish under water Jack.

Lit. It has made a poor John of me.

Fre. J do not think but if we cast an angle
Jnto his belly, we might find some Pilchards.

Lit. And boild by this time, dear Madam a bed.

Al. Carry but the water Spaniel to a grasseplot
Where he may roll himself, let him but shake
His ears twice in the Sun, and you may grind him
Into a posset.

Fre. Come thou shall to my bed
Poor pickerell.

De. Alas sweet gentleman.

Lit. I have ill luck, and I should smell by this time,
I am but new taken I am sure, sweet gentlewoman.

De. Your servant.

Lit. Pray do not pluck off my skin,
It is so wet, unless you have good eyes
You Will hardly know it from a shirt.

De. Fear nothing.

Are. He has sack enough, and I may find his humor. Exeunt.

Al. And how is it with your Ladyship? you look
Without a sunshine in your face.

Are. You are glorious
In mind and habit.

Al. Ends of gold and silver.

Are. Your other clothes were not so rich, who was
Your tailor sir?

Al. They were made for me long since,
They have known but two bright days upon my back,
I had a humor Madam to lay things by,
They will serve two days more, I think I ha gold enough
To go to the Merc^r, I Will now allow my self
A suite a week as this, with necessary
Dependances, Beaver, silk stockings, garters,
And roses in their due conformity,
Boots are forbid a clean leg, but to ride in,
My linen every morning comes in new,
The old goes too great bellies.

Ar. You are charitable.

Al. I may dine w'ee sometime, or at the Court
To meet good company, not for the table,
My Clarke o'th Kitchins here, a witty Epicure,
A spirit that to please me with what is rare
Can fly a hundred mile a day to market,
And make me Lord of Fish and Foul, I shall
Forget there is a butcher, and to make
My footmen nimble, he shall feed on nothing
But wings of wildfoule.

Are. These ways are costly.

Al. Therefore I Will have it so, I ha sprung a mine.

Are. You make me wonder sir, to see this change
Of fortune, your revenew was not late
So plentiful.

Al. Hang durty land and Lordships,
I wonot change one lodging I ha got
For the Chamber of London.

Are. Strange of such a sudden,
To rise to this estate, no fortunate hand
At dice could lift you up so, for it is since
Last night, yesterday, you were no such Monarke.

Al. There be more games then dice.

Are. It cannot be
A Mistress, though your person is worth love,
None possibly are rich enough to feed
As you have cast the method of your riots,
A Princess, after all her Jewels must
Be forced to sell her provinces.

Al. Now you talk
Of Jewels? What do you think of this?

Are. A rich one.

Al. You Will honor me to wear't, this other toy
I had from you, this chain I borrowed of you,
A friend had it in keeping, if your Ladyship
Want any sum, you know your friend and Alexander*

Are. Dare you trust my security.

Al. There Is gold,
I shall have more to morrow.

Are. You astonish me, who can supply these?

Al. A dear friend I have,
She promisd we should meet again in the morning.

Are. Not that I wish to know
More of your happiness, then I have aready
Heart to congratulate, be pleased to lay
My wonder.

Al. It Is a secret.

Are. Which i will die
Ere I Will betray.

Al. You have always wished me well,
But you shall swear not to reveal the party.

Are. I Will lose the benefit of my tongue.

Alex. Nor be
A fraid at what I say, what think you first
Of an old Witch, a strange ill favored hag
That for my company last night, has wrought
This cure upon my fortune? I do sweat
To think upon her name.

Are How sir a Witch?

Ale. I would not fright your Ladyship too much
At first, but Witches are a kin to Spirits,
The truth is -- nay if you look pale already,
I ha done.

Are. Sir I beseech you.

Ale. If you have
But courage then to know the truth, i will tell you
In one word, my chief friend is the devil.

Are. What devil? How I tremble.

Ale. Have a heart,
It Was a she devil too, a most insatiate
Abominable devil with a tail
Thus long.

Are. Goodness defend me, did you see her?

Al. No it was in the dark, but she appeard first to me
In The likeness of a Bedlam, and was brought
I know not how, nor whither, by two Goblins,
More hooded than a Hawke.

Are. But would you venture
Upon a devil?

Al. I for means.

Are. How black
An impudence is this? But are you sure
It was the devil you enjoyed.

Al. Say nothing,
I did the best to please her, but as sure
As you live, it was a Helcat.

Are. De'e not quake?

Al. I found my self the very same in in the morning,
Where two of her familiars had left me. Enter Servant.

Ser. My Lord is come to visit you.

Al. No words,
As you respect my safety, I ha told tales
Out of the devils school, if it be known
I lose a friend, it is now about the time
I promised her to meet again, at my
Return I Will tell you wonders, not a word. Exit.

Are. It Is a false glass, sure I am more deformed,
What have I done, my soul is miserable. Enter Lord.

Lor. I sent you a letter Madam.

Are. You expressed
Your noble care of me my Lord. Enter Bornwell, Celestina.

Bor. Your Lordship
Does me an honor.

Lor. Madam I am glad
To see you here, I meant to have kissed your hand
Ere my return to Court.

Cel. Sir Thomas has
Prevaild to bring me to his trouble hither.

Lor. You do him grace.

Bor. Why what is the matter Madam?
Your eyes are tuning Lachrimae.

Are. As you
Do hope for heaven withdraw, and give me but
The patience of ten minutes.

Born. Wonderful!
I wonot hear you above that proportion,
She talks of heaven, come, where must we to counsel?

Ar. You shall conclude me when you please.

Bo. I follow.

Lor. What alteration is this? I that so late
Stood the temptation of her eye, and voice,
Boasted a heart, 'bove all licentious flame,
At second veiw turn renegade, and think
I was too superstitious, and full
Of phlegm not to reward her amorous Courtship
With manly freedom.

Cel. I obey you sir.

Bor. I Will wait upon your Lordship presently.

Lor. She could not want a cunning to seem honest
When I neglected her, I am resolved,
You still look pleasant Madam.

Cel. I have cause
My Lord, the rather for your presence, which
Has power to charm all trouble in my thoughts.

Lor. I must translate that complement and owe
All that is cheerful in my self to these
All quickening smiles, and rather than such bright
Eyes should repent their influence upon me,
I would release the aspects, and quit the bounty
Of all the other stars; Did you not think me
A strange and melancholy gentleman
To use you so unkindly.

Cel. Me my Lord?

Lor. I hope you made no loud complaint, I wod not
Be tried by a Jury of Ladies.

Cel. For what my Lord?

Lor. I did not meet that noble entertainment,
You were late pleased to show me.

Cel. I observd
No such defect in your Lorship, but a brave
And noble fortitude.

Lor. A noble folly
I bring repentance fort, I know you have
Madam a gentle faith, and wonot ruin
What you have built to honor you.

Cel. What Is that?

Lor. If you can love i will tell your Ladyship.

Cel. I have a stubborn soul else.

Lor. You are all
Composd of harmony.

Cel. What love de'e mean*

Lor. That which does perfect both, Madam you have heard
I can be constant, and if you consent
To grace it so, there is a spacious dwelling
Prepared within my heart for such a Mistrisse.

Cel. Your Mistress, my good Lord?

Lor. Why my good Lady?
Your sex does hold it no dishonor
To become Mistress to a noble servant
In the now court, Platonicke way, consider
Who it is that pleades to you, my birth, and present
Value can be no stain to your embrace,
But these are shadows when my love appears,
Which shall in his first miracle return
Me in my bloome of youth, and thee a Virgin,
When I within some new Elisium
Of purpose made and meant for us, shall be
In every thing Adonis, but in his
Contempt of love, and court thee from a Daphne
Hid in the cold rind of a bashful tree,
With such warm language, and delight, till thou
Leap from that bays into the queen of love,
And pay my conquest with composing garlands
Of thy own myrtle for me.

Cel. What Is all this?

Lor. Consent to be my Mistress Celestina,
And we will have it Springtime all the year,
Upon whose invitations when we walk,
The winds shall play soft descant to our feet,
And breathe rich odors to repure the air,
Green bowers on every side shall tempt our stay,
And Violets stoop to have us tread upon em.
The red rose shall grow pale, being near thy cheek,
And the white blush overcome with such a forehead,
Here laid, and measuring with our selves some bank,
A thousand birds shall from the woods repair.
And place themselves so cunningly, behind
The leaves of every tree, that while they pay
As tribute of their songs, thou shat imagine
The very trees bear music, and sweet voices
Do grow in every arbor, here can we
Embrace and kiss, tell tales, and kiss again,
And none but heaven our rival.

Cel. When we are
Weary of these, what if we shift our Paradise?
And through a grove of tall and even pine,
Descend into a Valley, that shall shame
All the delights of Tempe, upon whose
Green plush the graces shall be called to dance
To please us, and maintain their Fairy revells,
To the harmonious murmurs of a stream
That gently falls upon a rock of pearl,
Here does the Nymph forsaken Echo dwell,
To whom we will tell the story of our love,
Till at our surfeit and her want of joy,
We break her heart with envy, not far off
A grove shall call us to a wanton river,
To see a dying Swan give up the ghost,
The fishes shooting up their tears in bubbles
That they must lose the Genius of their waves,
And such love linsey woolsey, to no purpose.

Lor. You chide me hansomely, pray tell me how
You like this language.

Cel. Good my Lord forbear.

Lor. You need not fly out of this circle Madam,
These widows so are full of circumstance,
I Will undertake in this time I ha courted
Your Ladyship for the toy, to ha broken ten,
Nay twenty colts, Virgins I mean, and taught em
The amble, or what pace I most affected.

Cel. You Are not my Lord again, the Lord I thought you.
And I must tell you now, you do forget
Your self and me.

Lor. You Will not be angry Madam.

Cel Nor rude, though gay men have a privilege,
It shall appear, there is a man my Lord
Within my acquaintance, rich in worldly fortunes,
But cannot boast any descent of blood,
Would buy a coat of arms.

Lor. He may, and legs booted and spurred to ride into the country.

Cel. But these will want antiquity: my Lord
The seal of honor, what is a coat cut out
But yesterday to ma^e a man a gentleman?
Your family as old, as the first virtue
That merited an Escucheon, does owe
A glorious coat of arms, if you will sell now
All that your name does challenge in that ensign,
Il^ help you to a chapman, that shall pay
And power down wealth enough fort.

Lor. Sell my arms?
I cannot Madam.

Cel. Give but your consent,
You know not how the state may be enclind
To dispensation, we may prevail
Upon the Heralds office afterward.

Lor. I Will sooner give these armess to the hangmans axe,
My head, my heart, to twenty executions
Than sell one atome from my name.

Cel. Change that,
And answer him would buy my honor from me.
Honor that is not worn upon a flagge
Or pennon, that without the owners dangers,
An enemy may ravish, and bear from me,
But that which grows and withers with my soul,
Beside the bodies stain, think, think my Lord
To what you would unworthily betray me,
If you would not for price of gold, or pleasure,
(If that be more your idol) lose the glory
And painted honor of your house -- I ha done.

Lor. Enough to rectify a Satires blood,
Obscure my blushes here. Enter Sentlove and Hairecut.

Ha. Or this or sight with me,
It shall be no exception that I wait
Upon my Lord, I am a gentleman,
You may be less and bea Knight, the office,
I do my Lord is honest sir, how many
Such you have been guilty of, heaven knows.

Sent. It Is no fear of your sword, but that I wod not
Break the good laws established against duells.

Ha. Often with your periwig, and stand bare.

Lor. From this
Minute i will be a servant to thy goodness,
A Mistress in the wanton sense is common,
I Will honor you with chaste thoughts, and call you so.

Cel I Will study to be worth your fair opinion.

Lor. Sent love, your head was usd to a covering,
Beside a hat, when went the hair away.

Sent. I laid a wager my Lord with Hairecut,
Who thinks I shall catch cold, that i will stand bare
This half hour.

Ha. Pardon my ambition
Madam, I told you truth, I am a gentleman,
And cannot fear that name is drowned in my
Relation to my Lord.

Cel. I dare not think so.

Ha. From henceforth call my service duty Madam,
That Pigges head that betrayed me to your mirth,
Is doing penance for it.

Sent. Why may not I
My Lord begin a fashion of no hair.

Cel. Do you sweat sir william.

Sent. Not with store of nightcaps.

Enter Aretina, Bornwell. Are. Heaven has dissolved the clouds that hung upon
My eyes, and if you can with mercy meet
A penitent, I throw my own will off,
And now in all things obey yours, my nephew
Send back again to the college, and my self
To what place you will confine me.

Bor. Dearer now
Than ever to my bosom, thou shat please
Me best to live at thy own choice, I did
But fright thee with a noise of my expenses,
The sums are safe, and we have wealth enough,
If yet we use it nobly? My Lord -- Madam,
Pray honor to night.

Are. I beg your presence,
And pardon.

Bor. I know not how my Aretina
May be disposd to morrow for the country.

Cel You must not go, before you both have done
Me honor to accept an entertainment,
Where I have power, on those terms I Am your guest.

Bor. You grace us Madam.

Are. Already
I feel a cure upon my soul, and promise
My after life to virtue, pardon heaven,
My shame yet hid from the worlds eye.

De. Sweet Madam. Enter decoy.

Ar. Not for the world be seen here, we are lost,
I Will visit you at home; but not to practice
What she expects, my counsel may recover her.

Enter Alexander. Al. Where Is Madam? pray lend me a little money,
My spirit has deceived me, Proserpine
Has broke her word.

Are. Do you expect to find
The devil true to you.

Al. Not too loud.

Are. I Will voice it
Louder, to all the world your horrid sin,
Unless you promise me religiously,
To purge your foul blood by repentance sir.

Al. Then I Am undone.

Are. Not while I have power
To encourage you to virtue, i will endeavor
To find you out some nobler way at Court
To thrive in.

Al. Do It, and i will forsake the devil,
And bring my flesh to obedience; you shall steer me,
My Lord -- your servant.

Lor. You are brave again.

Al. Madam your pardon.

Bor. Your offense requires
Humility.

Al. Low as my heart. Sir Thomas
I Will sup with you, a part of satisfaction.

Bor. Our pleasures cool, music, and when our Ladies
Are tired with active motion, to give
Them rest in some new rapture to advance
Full mirth, our souls shall leap into a dance.

Exeunt. FINIS.

