LECTVRES Or Readings upon the 6. verse of the 22. chapter of the Proverbs,
concerning the virtuous education of Youth:

A treatise very necessary for all parents in this corrupt and declining age
of the world.

AT LONDON, Printed by Felix Kingston for Thomas Man. 1602.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS EGERTON Knight, Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England, and one of her Majesty's privy Council, my very good Lord:
health and prosperity, with the increase of grace in this life, and eternal
happiness in the life to come.
NOn datur beneficium nisi propter officium, says a learned Father. Wherefore
having performed this small part of my duty in the house of God, now at last I
am bold to offer it to your good Lordship, first as a sign of my duty for
your good Benefice in Suffolk lately bestowed upon me, and secondly for
patronage. For whereas since my going into Suffolk, by means of some of my
friends I was discovered to my enemies in the flesh, but not in the Lord, to be
the author of this book, which at the first came forth like a fatherless
orphan: unworthily I was cast upon the obloquie of all men (they seeing in me
nothing worthy of this meanenes) and behind my back was bought and sold for
a vain glorious man. Thus while I shunned the title of vaineglorie, and would
not be like those Philosophers, which (as Tully says) put their names to the
books which they make in contempt of glory; ere I wist, as Job says, the
thing which I feared fell upon me. Notwithstanding taking patience for my
buckler, and a clear conscience for my defense, I satisfied my self, though I
could not satisfy mine adversaries. Now so it is come to pass, that all the
first fatherless edition is spent, and the virtuous call upon the Printer, and
the Printer calls upon me for a second press, exhorting me to make some
addition or correction if I were so disposed, that so it might come forth the
second time with a happier success. The which thing having performed according
to my weak measure, I am bold to present it to your Lordships patronage, to
cover my simplenes under the shadow of your wing, and to crave protection both
for the work and my self: which if your Lordships favor shall vouchsafe, you
shall encourage a poor Minister beginning at low steps to ascend higher in
religious duties: the young infants which as yet suck upon their mothers
breasts shall thank God for you, and my self shall be always bound to pray
for you.

Your Honors in all duty most bounden, ROBERT SHELFORD.

READINGS UPON THE SIXTH VERSE OF THE 22. chapter of the Proverbs, for the
virtuous education of Youth.
Teach a child in the trade of his way, and when he is old he shall not depart
from it.
THis verse, of which we are here to speak at this present, naturally
deuideth it self into two heads. The first is a precept or commandment. The
second is the reason of the precept. The precept is contained in ye former part
of the verse, Teach a child in the trade of his way. The reason follows in
the latter part, and when he is old he shall not depart from it. Now first for
the precept, because it is set down indefinitly, the question may be moved who
should teach, and to whom this charge and commandment is here directed? The
Magistrate is not here spoken unto, because his office is not to teach and
instruct by word of mouth, but to rule and govern by law, neither ever have
we heard of any civil law given to children: first, for by reason of sooner
instruction, they are not yet fit and capable of it: and secondly, for that
they are under the government of those that are commanded by it. Again, these
words do not properly bind the Ministers of the Church: first, because this
duty is no where expressly commanded unto them in Gods word: secondly, because
their duty is to teach the parent how to bring his children up: and thirdly,
because the subject of this teaching is more then belongs to the profession
of the Minister. It is to teach a child in the trade of his way, which is not
only to instruct him unto godliness, but also unto all other humane duties.
Wherefore this duty then belongs unto parents, and they are here bound by
these words of this text, and this we will prove both by reason and conference
of holy Scripture. For who should teach and inform the child, Reasons.
but they which have the government and commanding of him? But it is well
known that parents only have the government and commanding of their children,
or such as they shall procure for their better education, and therefore this
precept lies upon them, and they must look unto it. Again, this is apparent
even by the general law of nature, which has taught the very brute beasts to
bring up their own young. And further, this duty is yet enforced from the
opportunity of the thing commanded. For even as a plant will sooner take
nourishment and thrive better in the soil where it first grew and sprung up,
then in any other ground, because it likes his own soil best: so children
will sooner take instruction and good nurture from their parents, whom they
best like, and from whom they had their first being, then from any other: and
therefore you parents are in fault if your children are not well taught. For
whatsoever good comes from the parent to the child, is natural and kindly,
no otherwise then the warm milk from the mothers dugge. You shall sooner be
heard of your children, then either the sage counsel of the ancient, or the
forcible and moving speech of the learned. Lastly, the rule of justice does
require that even as the first parent Adam, and so all other after him have
been a mean of falling to all their posterity in begetting children in their
own image, Genesis 5.3.
which according to the law of creation should have been borne in Gods image:
so now in lue of this, al parents should lend their hands to lift them up
again, and never cease until they see in some measure the beauty of the
first image, and the virtue of the second Adam. This is a thing so evident and
so ingraffed in nature, as that the holy Ghost thought it not a matter of
necessity to express here the name of parent. But now let us go forward to
confirm the same by testimonies of holy Scripture. In the fourth chapter of
Deuteronomie, the Lord commands parents to teach their children the wonders
of his law; and that they might not trifle this over and make no great
reckoning of it, and think it but a childs matter, the Lord there lays a
great weight upon this charge, in exhorting them to do this with all diligence
and carefulnes: Take heed unto thy self, Deuteronomy. 4.9.
and keep thy (...), that thou do not forget those things which thine eyes
have seen, and that they do not depart from thy heart all the days of thy
life: that thou may make them known unto thy sons and thy sons sons.
Take heed, says he, as if he should have said, it is not a little matter that
I command thee, but great and weighty, and therefore I would have thee to
take special care of it: and that thou might do this diligently in deed,
I would not have these things which I have showed thee to depart from thy heart
all the days of thy life, that is to say, any one day of thy life, that so
thou might teach them to thy sons and thy sons sons continually. The
Lord would not have his holy word and his wonders which he showed unto his
people at the giving of his law, to be one day absent from the heart of the
parent, that so no one day might pass without instructing of their children.
If this one precept which the Lord here so carefully commands, were drawn
over the hearts of parents now a days, how many might it shame and condemn of
too great negligence, which scarce once in half a year give any one word of
instruction unto their children? Again, in the II. chapter of Deuteronomy. the Lord
still calls upon parents in this duty. Therefore lay up these words in your
hearts, Deuteronomy. 11.18.19.
and in your minds, and teach them to your children, talking of them when thou
art at home in thine house, and when thou go abroad, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up. Here the Lord commends to parents his dear
and precious word to be treasured up for their children: as if the Lord should
have said, you parents use to lay up for your children the most precious jewels
and the best things you can get, here are jewels passing al earthly treasure,
my words the instruction of your lives, and the light of your souls, lay up
these in your hearts, and keep them for your children: and because your
children are dear unto you, be always imparting of them unto them, teach them
unto thy children, talking of them when thou art at home in thy house, and when
thou go abroad, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. As if
the Lord should have said, take all occasions, and use all seasons and
opportunities to instruct thy children. The Lord would have us to begin the day
with teaching our children, and he would have us to end the day with the same.
O wonderful care of our God, oh loving father of heaven, that so dearly love
our children! But how do we answer this carefulnes of our heavenly father?
when we rise in the morning is our first care for our children? No, the Hog,
and the Horse, and the Cow shall be first served: and as for our children,
whose souls stand more in need of good nurture and education, then the bodies
of beasts do of corruptible food, they are forgotten all the day long. A
pitiful thing it is that the unreasonable creature, whose spirit perishes
with the body, should have his just tending and looking to, and that the soul
which is made after Gods image, should be suffered to run into al manner of
danger and undoing without regard. Oh that we should be so earthly minded, as
to regard these transitory things above that which is to last for ever!
Consider with thy self (beloved) and God give thee feeling: if thy cattle or
beast want his tending and looking to, happily it shall pine away for want of
food, happily it shall stray so far that thou shall never see it again, or
happily it shall fall into some pit, where it shall either drown it self, or
break his neck: what have thou lost now? thou have lost but a carcass: but if
thou through thy negligence or ill government, suffer thy child to stray
away from the Lord thy God, and he fall into the pit of hell, thou have lost a
soul more worth then all the world, and the Lord shall require his blood at
thy hands, because he has committed him to thy safe keeping, and thou, in
that thou have not kept him, have cast him away. Oh danger to be flyed and
looked unto before all dangers! And yet such is the blind miserablenes of many
parents, that they had rather see their sons swearers, drunkards,
whoremasters, or any other profane person, then to behold one of their beasts
hides to hang on the beam: whereby it comes to pass, that the very brute
beasts are eftsoons better taught then the sons of men, as the Prophet Esaias
lamentably complains of the children of Israel: Esai. 1.3.
The ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib: but Israel has not
known, my people has not understood. Again, S. Paul in the 6. of the
Ephesians, gives this same charge unto parents: And ye fathers provoke not
your children to wrath, Ephesians. 6.4.
but bring them up in instruction and information of the Lord. And the Prophet
in the 78. Psalm says, Psalm. 78.5.
He established a testimony in Jacob, and ordained a law in Israel, which he
commanded our fathers that they should teach their children, that the
posterity might know it, and the children which should be borne should stand
up and declare it to their children.

Many other places of Scripture might be brought, but these shall be
sufficient to show unto every parent to whom the Lord here speaks, Teach a
child, and also to show him how great charge and weight the Lord lays upon
this commandment. But now because this duty of parents is communicated to
many* as to Rectors of Schools, to masters of families, to dames, to patrons
and guardians, and such like: let all they here understand whosoever they be,
that have the government of children or any youth committed to their charge,
that they are here bound by the voice of the Almighty, and that they must do
the duty of parents unto them, as if they were their natural children. Teach
a child in the trade of his way: that is, thou pare^t teach, thou master
teach, thou dame teach, thou mistress teach, thou tutor teach, and in a word, al
you that have the duty of parents committed unto you.

Now the vices which are committed about this commandment and ought to be
flied, are these.

1. First, the ignorance of the parent: as if the parent be so rude that he is
not able to teach his child, he breaks this commandment of almighty God,
and is here sent to school himself, teach a child, that is, get thee so much
nurture and knowledge, as that thou may be able to instruct others under thee.

2. The second vice is the prophanenes of many parents, who, so they may
provide liuelihood and necessaries for their children, they care for no more.
Of this fault of parents writes Chrysostom: Mothers be loving to the bodies
of their children, but the soul they despise: they desire them to welfare in
this world, but they take none heed what they shall suffer in the other: the
lust of their bodies they would buy dear, but the health of their soul they
make no reckoning of. If they see them poor or sick, they sorrow and sigh:
but though they see them sin they sorrow not. And in this they show that they
brought forth the bodies of their children, but not their souls.

3. The third vice is committed of such poor parents, which make no great
choice with what masters and dames they place their children, so they have
meat and drink enough and wages thereto competent, and are neither back
beaten nor belly beaten, as they say. Alas, such poor children while they
serve for their bellies, they may lose their souls, because they want godly
masters and dames to give them wholesome instruction, to hold them in by good
example, and to govern them continually in the fear of the Lord. Wherefore
here let all parents learn that it is their duty to make choice of such
masters and dames for their children as are godly and religious, wise hearted,
such as are both able and well disposed to train up youth in all good nurture
and Gods service: and not only this (for the greatest care of al lies upon
the parent) but also they must so often as conveniently they may repair unto
them, and see how they profit, and hold them up by their good counsel, and be
careful to entreat those which have the government of them, to be good unto
them in this chief point above the rest. Prou. 18.21
For as Solomon says: Life and death is in the power of the tongue: So we may
well say, life and death is in the education of our children. If they be well
brought up, it shall be life unto them: but if it be otherwise, they are trained
up to everlasting death.

4. The fourth vice is the fault of many masters and dames, who make no further
reckoning of their servants then they do of their brute beasts. For so long as
their work and business be well done by them they care for no more, and they
will teach them no further then may serve for their own turn and benefit,
that is, to be a profitable servant unto them. Such masters make their servants
drudges to the world and the devil, and the life of such youth dies while it
shoots up. All these sin and trespass against this commandment of the
heavenly father, because they are contrary to good nurture and godly
instruction.

Now having showed what parents and all other governors of youth are to shun
in the education of children and servants, we must come to the second point,
which is to show wherein this careful and diligent instruction is to be
executed; and this is contained in these words, in the trade of his way. I will
not trouble you with the idiome of the original, the words are faithfully
translated and significant enough. Under these words are contained three diverse
instructions, in all which the Lord here commands parents to bring up their
children.

The first is that which we commonly call an occupation, The first part of the
trade of the way.
or profession of life: and this is either mechanical, which we call
handicraft; or liberal, which is the learning of Schools: and the end of this
is either to get his living honestly and in Gods ordinance, or else if he
wants no maintenance, to apply his profession and trade of life to the
benefit of the Commonwealth. No child of what birth and stock soever he be
of, ought to want this instruction and bringing up. If thou say, my child
has no need of any trade, yet the Commonwealth and Gods Church has need of
him, and the very Heathen Philosophers will teach thee that no man is borne for
himself, but his friends will require one part, his kindred another, and his
country the third. And if handicrafts like thee not, thou have the Liberal
Sciences, of which no man ever was yet ashamed, but many have made them their
crown of glory. Mithridates the great King of Pontus was trained up in
Physic, and has left unto all posterities that worthy confection which is
called of his own name Mithridate, a treasure more worth then Princes Crowns.
Justinian the Roman Emperor was that great Lawyer, which by his own
industry gave perfection to the law of Nations. Quintus Cincinnatus was called
from the plow, to bear that high office of the Dictatorship in Rome. Saul was
anointed King while he was seeking his fathers Asses: and David was taken from
the sheepfold to feed with his wisdom, and govern with his prudence that
honorable people of the children of Israel. And again, we read that those
two famous Prophets Elisha and Amos, the one was called from the plow, and the
other from keeping of beasts. Which examples do plainly teach us, that the
great and reverend God despises no honest trade of life be it never so mean,
but crowns it with his blessing, to draw all good minds to his holy
ordinance. But now adays such is the pride of our hearts, (a thing to be
lamented through all our land) that our gentle men's children may not be brought
up in any trade: oh it is too base and beggarly for the^; they must live of
their lands, they must maintain their gentry, a small learning will serve
their turn: but while this ordinance of God is neglected, what misery from
hence ensues? who are the wasters of patrimonies? who are the robbers and
reuers in the Commonwealth? who are the deflowrers of maidens? who are the
defilers of matrons? who are ye corrupters of youth? and to speak in one word,
who are the seeds men of all mischief in our country, but these children of
gentlemen, who have not been taught and trained up in the trade of their way
while they were young? For even as a weed if it grow in a rank soil will
wax out of measure noisome: so these children coming of honorable parents,
brought up in ease, and pampered with the delights of gentry, they wax
immeasurably vicious, and who may keep them under? neither laws, nor
Magistrates, nor any other good mean. Wherefore here the Lord that he might
hold all youth under his obedience, which otherwise would run out into all
manner of extremities, he straightly commands all parents whosoever (...)
bring up their children in some honest (...) and profession of life, that so
thereby they might be kept from committing much evil, and that when they be
come to years of government, God might be glorified by them, and the
Commonwealth in which they live, receive the common mutual duty. Now then
you plainly see here what God requires; none must live idly, but all must be
taught to benefit Gods Church and the commonwealth, and such a one is not
worthy to live in any well ordered and good Commonwealth, which cannot one way
or other discharge the common duty thereof.

The second part of the trade of the way.
The second thing which the Lord requires at the hands of parents toward their
children under the name of the trade of their way, is, that they should teach
the^ good manners and civil behavior, to rise up to their betters, to uncover
the head, to make obeisance, to be courteous toward their equals, to be gentle
and lowly to their inferiors, and loving and kind to all. This is another part
of the trade of childrens way, and this is no less needful for youth then
their meat and their drink. And if this trade and way of nurture be not
taught our children while they be young, when they be old they shall be found
so headstrong, that they will not be governed, but this consequent must
needs follow, that all order shall be taken away, and then confusion must
needs ensue. For if nurture be neglected, then our elders and governors shall
not be reverenced; if they be not reverenced, they will not be regarded; if
they be not regarded, they will not be obeyed; and if they be not obeyed, then
steps in rebellion, and every one will do what he lusts. Now is fulfilled
that heavy curse which the Prophet Esaias threatened against the children of
Israel: Esaias. 3.5.
The people shall be oppressed one of another, and every one by his neighbor:
the children shall presume against the ancient, and the vile against the
honorable: now the bands of the Commonwealth are broken, and now is such a
nation subject to be rooted out, to be ouerrun of every enemy, or to be
destroyed of it self. For whence comes wars? whence comes seditions, enuies,
braules, quarrels, fightings? whence comes strife and lawings? whence comes all
manner of loosenes of life? and whence comes it that one neighbor can not live
quietly by another, but he pineth away, and is the worse every time he sees
his brother? All this mischief springs from the neglect of this duty, for
that the hearts of such people were not broken and brideled while they were
young by good nurture. Now one neighbor like a cur dog leapeth in the face of
another: whereas if he had been trained up in civility and good manners,
though he neither feared God nor loved man, yet even very shame would hold him
from committing this folly. Oh beloved, good nurture and manners, they are the
cords and bands of the Commonwealth, they are the nurserie of sweet love and
concord, and they are the preparation to religion it self. For nurture a child
well, break his affections, and teach him awfulnes at home, and when he
comes to Church and hears the preacher denouncing the heavy threatenings of
God against sin, he will by and by begin to tremble, he will lay it to his
heart, and fear least he fall afterward into the same danger: whereas the
child that is not thus prepared and manured before, when he comes he cares
not whether he hears or no, but is ready to toy and play with every babble
that runs in his eye: and though at sometimes whether he will or no the word
beats upon his ears, and he must needs hear, yet it goes in at one door
and out at another, he cares not for it, but goes away as lewd and reachles
as he came: and why? because he has not bin trained up in awfulnes, and has
not been so much as instructed and governed in civil duties. Again, hereof
springs an other mischief, that even those which have embraced
christianity, for want of this good education do not live so lovingly
together as becomes: For when one neglects duty and reverence toward
another, by and by there arise dislikings, dislikings breed contempt, and
contempt stirs up bitter hatred and dissensions. So that what is the cause, why
even the best professors many times fall out amongst themselves? they embrace a
religion which is not divided but one, they all think one thing, and speak
one thing, but this clownish rudenes and want of civility will not suffer them
long to agree together. So that take away good nurture and civility, and there
will be no quiet and orderly living either in the Church of God or
Commonwealth. And therefore the Apostle diligently calls upon this duty:
Romans 12.10.
In giving honor go one before another. As if he should have said, study and
strive who may be most dutiful. For he which is most dutiful excels
others, and is most honorable. Again, S. Peter says worthily, 1. Pet. 2.17.
honor all men: where the Apostle by the wisdom of the holy spirit takes
away a double objection. This first is made in the person of the honorable:
What do I owe duty to those that are so far my inferiors? they are to
honor me, and I am not to honor them. The holy Ghost here steppeth in and
says, honor all men. There are degrees in honor; and he is most unworthy
which receives much, and cannot be content to return some part back again;
neither is there any kind of men so base which retain the least part of Gods
image, (for in the image of God made he man) but they are worthy of some
honor for the image sake. Genesis 1.27.
The second objection is made in the person of the common people laboring
together in poor estate and base trades. What must we honor one another? it
is enough for us to reverence our betters, small duty will serve among us.
The holy Ghost here again replieth, honor all men. As if he should have said
in more words, let there be no degree or society of men so barbarous as to
contemn and avoid all reverence; honor all men, honor thy poor equals, and
thy poor inferiors. But now adays when neighbors meet there is no courteous
salutatio^, there is no preventing of duty, but some one bold word or other
cast out, and as they meet with rudenes, so they depart with clownishnes. O if
men would use civility and courtesy one toward another, and regard it, it
would so link their minds together in friendship and good will, that no small
offense or damage should break them asunder. But here let us find out the
cause why this disorderly rudenes so fast springs up amongst us. Truly the
only cause is the negligence of parents in instructing their children. And
again, what is the cause of this negligence of parents? but that either they
themselves were brought up so rudely too, and so they teach their children no
more, because they know no better themselves: or else this comes of a muckish
mind, because the hearts of parents are so set upon this world, that so their
business be done by their children and servants, they care not what language
they give them, nor how unmannerly they stand before them: they do not teach
them to honor themselves at home, and therefore there is no duty and reverence
toward others abroad. Wherefore you parents know your estate, let not the
dross of this world so blind your eyes that you should forget your honor,
know that the Lord has made you parents, and given you to look for duty and
reverence from your children and servants: and though you do not regard this
duty, and your minds be so base that you look not after any reverence, yet for
your childre^s sake require it, that so they may be brought up in the knowledge
of their duty, and receive the blessing which God has promised unto them for
it: Exodus 20.12.
Honor thy father and thy mother that thy days may be prolonged in the land
which the Lord thy God has given thee. This is the first commandment with
promise, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.2.
Ephesians. 6. that he might especially allure us to the observing of it. But here
we must understand, that as this commandment is a commandment with promise,
so the promise is with a condition, which is of honoring our parents: so that
if children do not honor their parents, they have no promise of life, but
stand subject every hour and moment to have Gods wrath powered down upon them.
O then you that are parents, have pity upon your dear children, teach them
their duty, teach them good nurture, teach them reverence both toward your
selves and others: for if you do not, you do as much as in you lies, cut off
your childrens lives. For God (beloved) has care of his Church, and if he
should suffer rude children to increase, they would become rude parents, and
rude parents would again bring up rude children, and thus confusion would
spread it self over all the world, and therefore the Lord to meet with this
mischief, has promised his blessing only to the dutiful and obedient, and
all other stand out of his protection, subject to the violence of every danger.

The third part of the trade of the way.
The 3. and last part of the trade of the way, in which the Lord here commands
parents to bring up their children, is godliness; namely, that they should teach
them to know God and their duty toward him. And this instruction is that
which parents ought above all things to regard. The former instruction serves
to teach them how they might live ciuilly and decently with men: but this
instruction prepares them to live and walk with God. Wherefore this trade is
the head of all trades, and happy is that soul which can learn it. Prouer.
1.7.
Solomon says, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge. Although a
man has never so much worldly wisdom, and policy, and civility; yet if he
want this the fear of God and true godliness, he is the greatest fool in all
the world: for the more wise that he is without religion, the more fool he is,
because he does not apply his wit unto that which is the head and original of
al wisdom, and without which al other wisdom is foolishnes and confusion.
Again, Solomon says worthily, Prouer. 14.27.
Pro. 14. The fear of the Lord is as a well spring of life to avoid the snares
of death. And again, in the 3. chapter speaking of this divine and heavenly
instruction, Prouer. 3.13
he says, Blessed is the man that finds wisdom: that is, this godly
wisdom, whereby a man learneth to know God and his duty toward him. For,
says he, The merchandise thereof is better then the merchandise of silver, and
the gain thereof is better then gold: it is more precious then pearls, and
all things that thou canste desire are not to be compared unto her. Length of
days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and glory. Her ways
are ways of pleasure, and all her paths prosperity. She is a tree of life to
them that lay hold on her, and blessed is he that retains her. O what
honorable profits and commodities come by this instruction? this is that which
I said unto you before, that this trade is the head of al trades. O you parents
that are wise-hearted come you hither: I know that every parent would gladly
have his child brought up in the best trade, and that which shall one day be
most profitable for him: O here is a trade that has the profits of all other
trades under it. 1. Tim. 4.8.
Godliness (says saint Paul) is profitable unto all things, and has the
promise of the life present and of the life to come. O you parents, you are
more then mad if you find not out this trade for your children. First it is a
rich trade. Solomon says, that the merchandise of it is better then the
merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof is better then gold, it is more
precious then pearls, and all things that thou can desire are not to be
compared unto it. Secondly, it is an easy and pleasant trade. Her ways are
ways of pleasure (says Solomon) and all her paths prosperity. Thirdly, it is
an honorable trade; because Solomon says, that glory is in her left hand. If
glory be in her left hand, then what is in her right hand but the life
eternal? Fourthly, this trade is not like unto other trades, which if they be
hardly followed, in time wear away man's strength: but this increases life and
vigor to al those that occupy it; it is a tree of life to al those that lay
hold on it. Fifthly and lastly, this trade is the most certain trade in all the
world; it never fails, and it never changes, because S. Paul says, it has
the promise of this life and of the life to come. All other trades be they
never so profitable, yet they are subject to the course of this world: now
good, now bad: now profitable now again as beggarly: besides, how many
ventures and casualties they are subject unto, such as have experience in them
can better tell then I can: but this trade I know well can never fail, because
God has sealed up his promise to it. S Paul says, it has the promise of
blessing both of the life present, and of that which is to come. O you wise
children hear my words: though your parents will not bind you to this trade,
yet come you and offer your selves of your own accord, embrace it, and catch
hold on it with both your hands: for if ever you will come to happiness this is
the way.

Now then I hope you that are parents see the scope of this text, and what the
Lord here requires at your hands. Teach a child in the trade of his way: that
is, first teach him the trade of occupation, that thereby he may get a
competent maintenance of things necessary for this life, that so he may live
well among his neighbors another day without iniuring any man, or using any
unlawful means: or if he has no need of this, that the^ by the trade of his
education, he may bend his endeavor to profit the Commonwealth, which will
always have need of men well trained up in some good Art or other. Secondly,
Teach a child in the trade of his way: that is, teach him nurture and good
manners, teach him his duty toward all men, that so he may another day live
an honest, comely, and well ordered life amongst his neighbors without
contentions, braules, and quarrels, which are the diseases both of Church and
Commonwealth. And thirdly and chiefly, Teach a child in the trade of his way:
which is as much to say, as teach him godliness and the fear of the Lord, that
he may live and dye Gods servant, that he may know his salvation in Christ
Jesus, and continue in his love and favor unto the end. All these three points
pertain unto the trade of every man's way, and every child must be trained up
in all these three: otherwise Gods ordinance is perverted, and his
commandment broken, and then we can look for no blessing upon our children,
but shame and confusion and utter destruction.

Having showed how every parent is to bring up his children in the trade of
their way, which signifies first an occupation, secondly good manners, and
thirdly godliness: now it falls so out by man's lamentable corruption, that
many parents themselves know not what these things are, nor how to teach their
children the same: and therefore here I think it will be the best part of my
duty to lay down such rules, and draw such a method out of Gods word, as
may best help the parent to teach, and the child to learn. For the first
part, that is, for the trade of occupation, I will so entreat as the scope of
a Divine and the nature of the thing will permit, exhorting industry,
painfulnes and diligence, chasing away idleness, and furnishing the parent with
convenient and meet helps for this part of education. And to this end for the
more sensible teaching, I will adioyne this text to the former, Lamentations of
Iere. 3.26.

It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth.
HEre by the yoke is understood not only the cross and afflictions, as the
special application of the text does pretend, but generally all manner of
pains and labors, whereby the mind of man may be brought to patience, and
quietly to bear the Lords burden of what kind soever it be, and to be held
in from running out into any manner of extremity. Wherefore this yoke in one
particular which we here purpose to follow, is the yoke of government and
painful education. Whosoever is not used to this yoke while he is young, shall
never be fit for any good service either in the Church or commonwealth when
he is old. For as the brute ox and ass would never endure their hard labor,
except they were held in by their yoke, but would stray every way: so
unbridled man if he be not in his youth held in by the yoke of painful
labor, he will never abide it when he is old, but will run out into every path
of destruction. For what is the cause why our land is so oppressed with rogues
and thieves and beggars, which are worse then beasts, because they cut
themselves from the mean of salvation, which is the word and Sacrament? And
what is the cause why the greatest part of the world uses unlawful and
damnable means to live by, as to lie, to swear, to forswear, to forge, to
dissemble, to cosen, to counterfeit, to bribe, and a hundred such like, but
because they cannot endure to bear the yoke: and why can they not endure it?
but because they were not straightly held with it while they were young.
Wherefore O you good parents, you that desire to have your children good old
men like to your selves, and to live in the Lords holy ordinance, which is the
pathway to heaven, hold their necks under with the yoke of painful labor
while they be tender? lay it upon them even from their cradle, and then they
will not forsake it to their grave. Iustine lib. 12.
How came Alexander ye great by such a puissant army, whereby he conquered the
world, but by having children borne and brought up in his camp, whereby they
became so well acquainted and exercised with weapons from their swaddling
cloutes, that they looked for no other wealth or country but to fight: even so
if thou would have thy children either to do great matters, or to live
honestly by their own virtuous endeavors, and not to gape unjustly after other
men's goods, but to be content with the blessing of God upon their own labors,
thou must acquaint them with the yoke even from their cradle. Some men set
their children to learning, some place them in offices, some bind them
prentices: but many of these prove not, because they were not first well held
in by their parents with the yoke of painful education: so that break the
yoke, and deliver all youth to undoing. There is no function and no exercise
either of body or mind that has not need of this yoke. Let us examine the
matter familiarly, and not hold scorn of the plain steps of the truth. What
is the cause why some prentice can endure with hard fare, now and then bear a
deserved blow, and take a thousand reproaches and chidings upon his shoulders
without murmuring, and carry all the hardness of service, until he has gotten
his freedom and science the crown of his labors: and some other again
rather the^ he would endure this, he will run as far as his legs can
carry him, or sail over sea to take sanctuary against his happiness? the one
has been used to the yoke, the other has not. Again, why does the poor man's
child arise in learning? why is he called to bear office in the Church of God
and Commonwealth, and the children of Noblemen and great gentlemen refused?
the one by reason of his former pains in virtuous studies can bear this
honorable burden; the other wanting this mean, has neither will nor power to
sustain it. Moreover, what is the reason why even in the service of God one
Christian goes before another? why can one better bear the cross then an
other? why do some men's zeal so far exceed others? and why do some men's
labors shine in Gods Church before others? There can no other cause be rendered
but the reason of the yoke. This breeds such a hard braune in the soul, that
no pains can pearce it. Wherefore be ye comforted in your honest travails
you good husbands of the country, you are the staple of the land, you raise
up the pillars thereof, by your honest labors the king is maintained, you
furnish the Church of GOD with painful Ministers, you garnish the
Commonwealth with wise and grave Counselors, you provide all necessaries for
the good of the country by your thriftines and painful education of your
children. For without labor how should Schools be maintained? how should
laws be executed? and how should all honest functions stand? and where should
that honorable troop of virtues show themselves? where should liberality
be praised? where should sobriety and gravity be reverenced? and where
should that kingly magnificence be extolled? do we not see that painful
labor is the fair handmayde to all these, and ministers matter for them to
work upon? so that take away painful labors, and you loosen the cords of
the Commonwealth, you exile all virtues; and then we must live like wild
beasts and feed upon herbs, devouring and being devoured one of another.

Now the contrary to this yoke of good education is idleness. And as in all
things natural there is one thing or other which is the spoil of it, as the
canker to the rose, the worm to the apple, and the caterpillar to the leaf:
so the common spoil to all youth is the contrary to this yoke which is
idleness. Therefore S. Bernard worthily calls idleness the mother of all evils,
and stepdame of all virtues. Ezech. 16.49
The Prophet Ezechiel in his sixteenth chapter, teaches that idleness was one
of the principal sins of Sodom, which pulled down fire and brimstone from
heaven upon their heads: this idleness is the devils confederate, for even as
the traiterous servant while his master is a sleep, and all things at rest,
sets open the door for the thief to enter in upon him and spoil him at his
pleasure: so idleness while we are not aware, lying soft upon the pillowes of
security, opens the door for ye devil to enter into us with full swing to
the destruction both of body and soul. Matthew. 13.25.
Saint Matthew says chapter 13 that while men slept, the enemy came and sowed
tares among the wheat: so the fittest time that the devil can find to work
upon us, is when we are idle, for that is the sleep of the soul. In the 11.
chapter of the 2. Sam. We read that while David tarried idly at home in the
beginning of the year when Kings used to go forth to battle, he was soon
overtaken with those two foul sins of adultery and manslaughter. Oh that
men saw to how many vices and evils they shut the door when they cease to be
idle, and give themselves to honest labors. So long as Sampson warred with the
Philistines, Judges. 19.
he could never be taken or overcome, but after that he gave himself to
idleness and pleasure, he not only committed fornication with the strumpet
Dalilah, but also was taken of his enemies, and had his eyes miserably put out.
If these two which were such excellent men, endued of God with singular gifts,
the one of prophecy, and the other of strength, and such as no labor or
trouble could overcome, were notwithstanding overthrown and fallen into
grievous sins, by yielding for a short time to ease; then what crimes, what
mischiefs, and inconveniences are not to be feared of them, who all their
life long give themselves to idleness and loytering? But such has always been
the perverse incredulity of man's heart (as Haymo repeateth out of Origin) that
they will not believe that other men have perished until they themselves perish
also. If we be utterly void of understanding, let us go to the brute
creatures which want those helps of reason and government that man has,
Prou. 6.6.
and learn of them. Go to the Pismire O sluggard (says Solomon) behold her
ways and be wise: for she having no guide nor ruler, prepares her meat in
the summer, and gathers her food in the harvest. Let us set before our eyes
the looking glass of all creatures: the birds fly, the fishes swim, the
worms creep, the heavens turn, the elements move, yea the earth it self,
which is the most brute and senseles creature of all other never cease her
working, bringing forth her burden in summer, and laboring inwardly all the
winter, concocting and digesting her nourishment for the next spring. What
should I speak of the strange operation of stones and metals, and herbs,
whereof one is called the Load stone and the Magnet stone of his mighty force
and working? God, who is the first mouer of all things, seeing all excellency
to lie in moving, and being of himself infinite good, cannot but create all
things good; and as the nature of the efficient cause is to make his effect
like unto himself: so God being excellent in motion and working has made all
his creatures endued with this bonitie of nature. Now seeing God has made all
his creatures in this perfection, and seeing himself is the continual mouer
of al things, as the Apostle says, Acts 17.28. In him we live and move, and
have our being; then there can nothing be more contrary to Gods working and
man's perfection, then the privation thereof, which is idleness. God (beloved)
sustaineth and vpholdeth the whole frame of the world by his daily and
continual working, and if he should draw his hand back but one minute, all
creatures would presently fall to nothing from whence they first came. Why do
we not then see that idleness is the ruin and destruction of all things? and
how can we persuade our selves that we are the sons of God, when by our idle
life, we show our selves most contrary unto him, who is always in working?
The perfection and excellency of every creature is his working; and therefore
the wise Grecians call the soul of man, which the prophet David calls his
glory, (...), that is, a continual working: yea so excellent a thing is it,
and so fit to set forth Gods glory, that he has ordained most forcible
means to stir up and thrust forward man unto it, as all manner of wants and
necessities. For what is the great glory of God but his omnipotency and
power? and how is his power seen but by working? and how should we see Gods
working, and how should we come to the understanding of his omnipotency,
except we saw it in his creatures? Romans 1.20.
for the Apostle says, that the invisible things of God, as his eternal power
and Godhead, are seen by the creation of he world, being considered in his
works: and therefore when I see so many millions of thousands in the world
moving upon the face of the earth, and all occupied in such variety of
trades, one this way, another that way; when I consider the strange monuments
of war, the mighty works of peace, the curious inventions of Arts, and the
manifold chaunges of government, disposition and actions, from age to age; I
must needs acknowledge that there is an high and supreme power which is called
omnipotency, which works all in all these things, and that that man which is
the greatest imitator of God in honest and virtuous working, comes nearest
unto the divine nature, most sets forth Gods glory, and shall have the
greatest reward both in this life and in the life to come: but the idle and
slugglish soul who has received power of God, and uses it not in some honest
labor, he obscureth Gods glory, he oppresses as in him lies his
omnipotency and power, and in that wherein I compare him he is worse then the
devil, for he never cease compassing the world, Job. 2.2. 1. Pet. 5.8.
Job. 2.1. Pet. 5. Wherefore thou good parent, if thy desire be to have thy
son to be Gods son, and to follow his working, and to have him brought up
in all good nurture and instruction; and if it be the death of thy heart to see
thy dear child drowned before thine eyes in that deadly lake of all filthy
vices, in the hardness of his heart, in stubbornes, in rebellion, in Atheism,
in whoredom, and other impiety; then now while thou have time lay the yoke
upon his neck, lay it upon him while he is young and tender, for now he will
suffer thee to put it on, and afterward he will not. O you tender mothers,
Matthew. 2.18 Iere. 31.15.
you that know the dear price of your children, remember Rahels weeping for
her children, and would not be comforted because they were not: and what
comfort should you find not when you have lost children without being, but when
you have by your great pains borne them, and by your long and chargeable
education brought the^ up for hell fire? Remember godly Rebekas care for her
son Jacob, Genesis 27.46.
Genesis 27. I am weary of my life for the daughters of Heth, if Jacob take a
wife of the daughters of Heth, what avails it me to live? so if your sons
while they dwell idly at home with you, should betake themselves to this folly
or that, how could your lives be pleasant unto you? Wherefore send your sons
forth to Laban as Rebeka did, and let him lay the yoke upon their shoulders.
But here peradventure some man will say, have not I enough to leave my child? is
he not mine heir and the principal of my strength? why should I then without
cause set him to drudging and droyling? But O thou unwise man laboring of the
streightnes of understanding, have thou provided for thy son liuelihood? and
why do thou not provide also that he may keep it? was it not first gotten
by labor and careful diligence, and can it be kept without the same mean by
which it was gotten? And why do thou not see how that the Lord by this yoke
would prepare thy son for another yoke? Matthew. 11.29.
Take my yoke on you, and learn of me that I am meek and lowly of heart,
Matthew. II. And was not Christ Jesus, Mark. 6.3. Luke. 2.51.
the heir of heaven and earth, a carpenter, and labored faithfully under
Joseph, being subject unto him until the time came that he should preach the
Gospel? And was not Jacob, the great father of the twelve Patriarchs, Isaaces
son and heir? and was not Isaac Abraham's heir? and was not Abraham that
great man in those days and wonderfully rich, Genesis 24.35.
as we may read Genesis 24? how could Isaac then suffer his son Jacob who was
borne to so great patrimony, to serve twenty years together in such hard
service, as Jacob himself confesses, Genesis 31.38.
Genesis 31? I was in the day consumed with heat, and with frost in the night,
and my sleep departed from mine eyes. It may seem that parents were not then
so sick of their children as they are now a days. But this cockering and
cokish bringing up of children in our time marreth all: for such is the foolish
love that many poor parents have toward their children, that rather then they
will put their tenderlings to any laborious business, they will do al
themselves; yea and rather ouercharge themselves, the^ see them to take a
little pains with them. Oh it will hinder their growth, say they: nay it will
make their growth firm and stable, and one such child which is honestly
brought up in moderate pains and labors even from his cradle, shall hold out
longer, and be able to do more good service when he is grown to be a man,
then two other long lubbers that have not bin held under the yoke while they
were young.

Now the necessary adjuncts of the yoke, The adjuncts of the yoke.
which are fit helps unto parents for the virtuous bringing up of their
children in the trade of their way, are these.

1. First, not to suffer children and youth to have their own will. For
Solomon says, Prouer. 11. Prou. 11.20
They that are of a froward heart are abomination unto the Lord. And again, in
the 29. chapter, Prou. 29.15
A child set at liberty makes his mother ashamed. But what will some be
ready to answer in this case? Oh he may be broken of that time enough
afterward. But what says the wise man, Eccles. 25.27
Eccle. 25? Give no passage to the waters, no not a little. The heart of a
child is as the violent waters; and as those which have experience in keeping
and repairing of the sea banks can easily tell us, that if the raging waves
should be suffered to break over but one tide, they should hardly in many days
recover it again: so if thou suffer thy childs affections to have the full
swinge and course yea but a small season, thou shall hardly or never again win
this breach.

2. The second adiunct of the yoke is moderation in diet; not to pamper
children with too much meat, or that which is delicate, but to give them that
which is wholesome and sufficient and no more. For excess breeds diseases
both in body and mind. And for confirmation of this help, we bring the
example of the good huswife in the last chapter of the Proverbs, Prou. 31.15
where it is said, And she rises while it is yet night, and gives the
portion to her household, and the ordinary to her maids. Thou must therefore
give them their portion, and not more: if thou give them more then their
portion, thou make them unapt for the yoke, or any honest burden, thou
make them gluttons and drunkards, consumers of patrimony, and this vice
draws a thousand more with it. And even as the fattest soil brings forth
the rankest weeds: so pampered children brought up without due government
and discipline, thrust forth the greatest and most ouergrowne vices.

3. The third adiunct or help, is not to clothe them with costly apparel, or
to attire them with new fashions. For this again is contrary to the nature
of the yoke, and stirs up pride. For even as the soft flax soon catches
hold on the fire: so youthful nature will soon be enflamed with this vice,
as lamentable experience too much teaches this day. For from whence comes
this monstrous apparel, but from the wanton and dissolute education of youth?
This is the special sin of England, and if any thing be the overthrow of
it (which God for his mercy turn away) it will be this, the land is too
heavy of this sin. For the pride of all nations, and the follies of all
countries are upon us, how should we long bear them? How art thou fallen from
heaven O Lucifer son of the morning? Esaias. 14.12. Zeph. 1.8.
And it shall be in the day of the Lords sacrifice that I will visit the
Princes, and the Kings children, and all such as are clothed with strange
apparel.

4 The fourth adiunct and help, is reprehension or chiding. And this is taught,
Pro. 29 The rod and correction give wisdom. Prou. 29.15.
Where by the rod is understood chastisment, and by correction is understood
chiding or reprehension, as it is well known to those that understand the
Hebrew text. The want of this help was the utter spoil and undoing of
Adoniah, 1. Kings 1.
as we may read, 1. Kings 1. where we see how rebelliously and disloyally he
usurped his fathers kingdom he being yet alive, and again how he assayed it
after his fathers death in demanding Abishag his Concubine, which cost him his
life for it, as we may read in the 2. chapter following. The whole cause of
this mischief is expressed in the 6. 1. Kings. 1.6
verse of the first chapter: And his father would not displease him from his
childhood, to say why have thou done so? And here I cannot but justly find
fault with most parents, who though they be somewhat careful for their
children while they be tender; yet when they beecome to some years of
discretion, as to fifteen or sixteen, (which time is most fit for
reprehension, because then by all reason it should soonest enter, and which
time again is most dangerous, because then our affections are most strong in
us) oh then they be grown to men's and women's estate, they may not be
reprehended, they may not be disgraced. But know thou O wise parent, that so
long as thou have a child, so long thou art a parent; and so long as thou art
a parent, so long thou must carry a fatherly authority and power over him.

5. The fifth adiunct or help is chastisement, and it may well be called a
help, because where reprehension will not serve that must help, and this must
be used in order and method as the Physician works: for as the skillful
Physician will not give his strong and bitter pill before his preparatiue,
least the working of it should be hindered by the stubborn and indurate
obstructions: so the wise parent in curing his sons vices, must not strike
before he has reprehended or premonished; least either he be too much cast
down and discouraged, or wax obstinate. This kind of Physic as it is more
strong then the former, so it has a more forcible and excellent working. The
Council of Turon says worthily: Conc. Turon. 2. in prolegom.
Magna est in ipsa seueritate pietas per quam tollitur peccandi facultas: Great
is the godliness in that severity by which the power of sinning is taken away.
And again, Solomon in the 22. of the Proverbs says more worthily, Prou. 22.15
Foolishnes is bound in the heart of a child, but the rod of correction
shall drive it away. And again in the 13. Pro. 13.24.
chapter, He which spares the rod hates his son: that is, he is an
enemy unto him. Wherefore know thou this O thou father, that when thou see
thy son dangerously sick with the disease of sin, and do not use this
help and remedy which God in his holy word has prescribed unto thee, thou art
accessarie to thy childs death as an enemy, and his blood shall be required
at thy hands; because that where thou might have saved him, thou have
wilfully cast him away: for Gods love good parents look to your children. Oh
that parents had less natural affection or more wisdom: for every parent is
blind in his own children: oh is it not a pitiful thing, that parents should
themselves make graves for their own children, and bury them quick without
all compassion, and think they do well in it? And is it not a folly above all
follies, that while the parent lays his hand upon his childs mouth to keep
away the cold wind, he presses it down so hard, that he strangleth him
therewith? Thus many a father and mother in the world have killed their dear
ones by their inordinate love and cockering of them, and thus many poor
infants must still be murdered, because parents will not be warned. Wherefore
now I will lament with the Prophet Jeremy; my soul shall mourn in silence,
and mine eyes shall cast forth rivers of waters while I walk solitary,
because I see the destruction that is to come upon the children of my people
for want of good education and government. The yoke is too heavy, breaking is
violent, chiding discourageth, the rod makes bluenes: therefore while we
contemn the Lords helps, death breaks in upon us. Now let us fall down
before the Lord, and beseech his pittifulnes, that he would even without
means save some of those poor infants, which know not the right hand from
the left, and whom the inordinate love, and blind folly of cursed parents have
destinate to destruction, etc.

Only let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ. Phil.
1.27.
Now having finished the first part of the trade of childrens way, we are
come to the second to teach good manners. Wherein I mind not to trouble you
with court fashions, and new fangles, and toys of curious heads; but only
to teach such nourture and seemly behavior, as Gods word commends and well
becomes the Gospel of Christ Jesus. The duties of nurture in which parents
are to bring up their children, are either private to themselves, or common to
all. The duty which the parent must teach his child private to himself, Good
manners to Parents.
is unfeigned obedience without any semblance of disliking in all things that
he shall command him, not being contrary to the word of GOD, yea though
he sees no reason of the thing commanded, (as Isaac went obedientlie with
his father to the altar, though he saw no burnt offering) nay though his own
reason goes against it. For the parent should give his child to understand
that God himself has so disposed of him in his holy ordinance, that he
should not grow up in his own will and government, but be subject unto
them in all things. And this is commanded, Colossians 3.20. Children obey
your Parents in all things, Coloss. 3.20.
for that is well pleasing unto the Lord. And here Parents must remember to
chastise and banish away from their children all murmuring* and reasoning of
the matter or answering again: for this is the breach of good manners, and
forbidden of the Lord, Phil. 2.14.
Phil. 2. Do all things without murmurings and reasonings. There must be no
grumbling, and there must be no debatings or delays, as why may not he go,
why may not she do it, (this is a foul and a shameful hearing) but every
one so soon as he is commanded must go or be made to go without any more
ado. This is good nurture, and Gods commandment; and example of this we
have in the servants of that worthy Centurion whose praise is in the Gospel;
Matthew. 8.9.
and I say unto one go, and he goes; and to another come and he comes;
and to my servant, do this, and he does it.

Now the rest of the duties which parents must teach their children not only
toward themselves, but also toward others, consist in reverence and
courtesy: and this is to be showed in these two heads, either in speech or
gesture. Again the duties of our speech are to be divided into other two
heads, which are fair speech and conference.

1. The first duty of fair speech, Good manners in speech.
is to call our betters by an honorable name. And thus we read that Abigaile
called David Lord at every word, yea fourteen times together in that small
speech, 1. Sam. 25.24.
1. Samuel. 25. And thus again we read in the tenth of Mark, that that
civil and well nourtured ruler used this courteous speech unto our savior,
where he says, Mark. 10.17.
Good Master what shall I do that I may possess eternal life? And when he
made answer again he said, Master, all these things have I observed from my
youth. Of this sweet duty of fair speech Solomon gives this commendation,
Pro. 16.24.
Prouer. 16. Fair words are as an honey comb, sweetenes to the soul, and
health to the bones. Here on the contrary, parents must have a special care
to keep their children from al foul and unseemly speech, for this is
contrary to fair speech, Ephesians. 4.2^.
and forbidden, Ephesians. 4. Let no corrupt speech proceed out of your mouths.
(...).
Now this corrupt speech are those foul terms which are so common in the
mouths of unnurtured children, as knave, drab, whore, thief; this is rotten
and corrupt speech most unseemly for the mouth of any Christian: and this is
that that destroys good manners, 1. Cor. 15.33.
as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 13. Evil words corrupt good manners. And here
further I must put you in mind to keep your youth from speaking
contemptuously of those which are in authority, yea though they he evil men,
for we are to reverence them, not so much for themselves, as for Gods
ordinance; and weaken once the majesty and good estimation of governors, and
then all will go awrie: Jude makes this vice a mark of a reprobate. Iud.
verse. 8.
These sleepers also defile the flesh, and despise government, and speak evil
of them which are in authority: and we read in the 2. Kings 2. that two and
forty children were devoured of two bears, for mocking Elisha Gods Prophet.
Again on the other side, children must not only be compelled to leave this
filthy and corrupt speech, but also they must be commanded to use fair and
gentle words; the child must lovingly entreat the servant, and the servant
must again gently answer the child: and this is commanded Ephesians. Ephesians. 4.23.
4. Be ye courteous one to another, and tender hearted. We must therefore use
courteous and loving speech one to another, for out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks; if the heart be tender, the speech cannot be rough
and hard. If this discipline were practiced amongst us, oh what sweet and
comfortable houses should we have, even like unto the amiable communion of
Gods saints; it would do any man good to live in such a family which is like
unto Gods dwell there, where skoulding and brawling, and cursed speech runs
to and fro, like ye yelling of the wicked spirits in that infernal dungeo^.

2. The second duty of good nurture about the government of the tongue in
fair and comely speech, is not only to speak well and honorably of others,
but also to speak modestly and humbly of our selves, and this point of good
manners we learn of that wise matron Abigaile; 1 Samuel 25.41
in 1. Sam. 25. where we read, that when she was sent for of David to be his
wife, she first bowed her self to the servants, and then made this lowly
answer to him that brought the message: behold let thine handmaide be a
servant to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord.

3. The third duty of Christian manners in fair speech, is lovingly to salute
our friends and acquaintance, and generally all others whom we take to be
brethren. This salutation is to pray well to others, wishing health and
prosperity unto the^: and example of this we have in the Angel Gabriel, who
being sent of God in message to the virgin Marie, Luke 1.28.
he first saluted her in these words: Hayle thou that art freely beloved, the
Lord is with thee, blessed art thou amongst women. And again as we read
afterward in the same chapter, Luke. 1.40.
thus Marie ye mother of our Lord, went and saluted her couse^ Elizabeth, who
was then with child of John Baptist, where to the great co^me^datio^ of this
kind and dutiful salutatio^, we read that ye babe sprang in her belly for joy,
according to that which before we repeted out of the Proverbs, Fair words are
as an honey comb, sweetness to the soul and health to the bones. Now our
salutations are either common upon every meeting, or extraordinary upon some
new occasion. Common, as God give you good morrow, God speed you well:
extraordinary, as I pray God give you much joy of your advancement. And
example of this we have 1. Kings. 1. where it is said, that the people came to
bless or salute King David upon the annoynting of Solomon his son king, and
in their salutation they said: 1. King. 1.47
God make the name of Solomon more famous then thy name, and exalt his throne
above thy throne.

4 The fourth duty of fair speech, is to acknowledge a benefit where we have
received it, with giving of thanks. And this duty is counseled of the wise
man, Eccles. 29.16
Eccles. 29. Forget not the friendship of thy surety: for he has laid his
life for thee. And example of this duty we have in Laban toward Jacob, Genesis
30. To whom Laban answered, If I have now found favor in thy sight, Genesis 30.27.
tarry, I have perceived that the Lord has blessed me for thy sake. So if men
would acknowledge with thankfulness unto their good friends, that they had
received a blessing from God by their means, this would encourage them to
continue their bounty and good will toward them, as Jacob was now contented
to dwell still with Laban: but this rude unthankfulness rendeth us from al good,
being abhorred of God and hated of man.

5. The fifth duty of fair speech, is to confess an offense where it is
committed, with humble craving of pardon. And example of this we have in that
virtuous and fair spoken matron Abigaile, as we may read, 1. Sam. 25. where
she taking upon her the person of her loutish husband Nabal, appeaseth the
fierce wrath of David, and redeemeth the lives of all her family with this one
duty of good manners: 1. Sam. 25.23
And when Abigaile saw David, she hasted and lighted off her ass, and fell
before David on her face, and bowed her self to the ground, and fell at his
feet, and said, Oh my Lord, I have committed the iniquity, and I pray thee
let thine handmayd speak unto thee. Let not my Lord I pray thee regard this
wicked man, Nabal: for as his name is, so is he: Nabal is his name and folly
is with him, etc. Then David said to Abigaile, Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel which sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy counsel, and
blessed be thou which have kept me this day from coming to shead blood, and
that mine hand has not saved me, etc. Oh that men saw what great dangers they
draw upon them by the neglect of this duty, and might prevent: and also what
gracious blessings they might procure both to themselves and others, by means
of it, as this virtuous Abigaile kept David from sheading innocent blood, saved
her own life, with the lives of all her family, and in the end was received
to be a Princes wife for the wise carrying of her self in this matter, as we
may read in the end of the chapter.

Now the second thing which we are to observe in our speech.

1. For the teaching of good manners, is our conference. And here the first
rule which we must learn, is to keep silence while our betters are in place,
until we be spoken unto; and the^ we must make answer in few words, without
unnecessary circumstances, and directly unto the matter. This is taught,
Proverbs 17. Pro. 17.27.
A man of knowledge refraineth his words, and a man of understanding is cold
of spirit.

2. The second rule, is to give our elders and betters leave to speak before
us. Example of this we have in Elihu that wise young man, Job. 32.4.
Job. 32. Now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken, for they were more ancient
in years then he, and he said; I am young in years, and ye are ancient,
therefore I doubted and was afraid to show mine opinion. For I said, the days
shall speak, and the multitude of years shall teach wisdom.

3. The third rule, is not be loud, babbling, or hot in speech, but cold and
mild. For Solomon says, A man of understanding is cold of spirit. Prou. 17.27.


4. The fourth rule, is not to interrupt or trouble others while they are
inspeaking. For Solomon says, See thou a man hasty in his words? there is
more hope of a fool then of him, Prou. 29.20
Prou. 29. Wherefore then if we will keep the bounds of good manners, we must
not be streporous or troublesome in talk, but every man must observe and take
his due time and course; and if there be any thing spoken unto which we would
willingly make answer, we must either courteously crave leave of him that
speaks, or else we must carry it in remembrance until our turn comes to
speak, which is the better of the twain.

5. The fifth rule, is to give an intercourse of speech unto others; we must
suffer others to speak by us. For as there is a time for a man to speak: so
there is a time to keep silence, and to hear others speaking. He that will
have all the talk passes the bounds of good manners, and breaks the rule of
Saint Ambrose, who requires three things in the government of our speech: that
is, a yoke, the balance, and the metewand; the yoke to hold it in gravity,
the balance to give it weight of reason, and the metewand to keep it within
measure, that it be neither too long nor too short. And thus much for the
duties of good manners in our speech.

The second general head of good manners which parents ought to teach their
children, is the framing of their gesture to a reverent and duetifull behavior
toward others, Good manners in gesture.
which consists in these six points.

1. The first, is to meet those that are coming toward us. And of this we
have example in holy Abraham, Genesis 18. where it is written, And he lifted up
his eyes and looked, and lo three men stood by him, Genesis 18.2.
and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent door. Again,
this example we find even in K. Solomon sitting upon his regal throne, 1.
King, 2.19. 1. Kings. 2.19
Bathsheba therefore went to King Solomon to speak unto him for Adonijah, and
the King rose to meet her.

2. The second, is to rise up to our elders and betters when they pass by us.
And this is taught, Leuit. 19.23
Leuit. 19. Thou shall rise up before the bore head, and honor the person of
the old man, and dread thy God, I am the Lord. But now here I must warn you
of a great abuse which is committed amongst you, and which tends to the high
dishonor of God, which is this, that you know not ye time of your duties, but
you will then rise up to men, when you should kneel down to God; as if one
that is more honorable among you shall come into the Church while you are upon
your knees in prayer unto God, presently you start up and leave God to
reverence men. Is this religion? is this devotion becoming Gods house? is not
this all one as if a man should say, stay God, here comes in my worshipful
neighbor and my good friend, to whom I am much beholding, I must do my duty
unto him, I must rise up till he be past, and then I will come to thee again?
What is this but to prefer men before God? I have forewarned you of this vice
before, but some spurned at me for it, and the rest have not reformed
themselves. Wherefore I call the stones of the walls of this house to witness
against you, that if you continue still in this obstinacy, you are lovers of
men more then God: and you that take this duty and reverence upon you, are
robbers of Gods honor, and you shall answer him for it. Is there no time to
show our duty toward men, but even then when we are about Gods service? why
know thou that when man stands before God, how honorable soever he be, he is
but dung and filth, and not to be regarded: and learn you this wisdom, that
while we teach you duties toward men, it is not to rob God of his worship,
but there is an appointed time unto every duty and purpose, as Ecclesiastes in
his third chapter well admonishes: To all things there is an appointed time,
Eccles. 3.1.
and a time to every purpose under the heaven. It is recorded of Leuy to his
eternal praise, Deu. 33. that in Gods cause he said of his father and mother,
Deuteronomy. 33.9.
I see him not; neither knew he his brethren nor his own children. Even so
beloved, our eyes, and our minds, and devotions should be so fixed and intent
upon God when we are in his service, that we should not see or regard any man
in that while. And again, we read in the 2. chapter of the Gospel after S.
John of our Savior himself, who though he was the most dutiful child that
ever was borne of woman, yet when he was about his fathers business, he says
unto his mother, John. 2.4.
Woman what have I to do with thee? which examples well teach us, that when we
are about Gods service, all other duties must sleep and be laid apart.

3. The third duty of good manners to be observed in our gesture, is to stand
while our betters are sitting in place. Example of this we have in holy Abraham
our father, Genesis 18. where it is written of his entertaning of the two
strangers: And he took butter and milk, and the calfe which he had prepared,
Genesis 18.8.
and set before them, and stood by himself under the tree, and they did eat.
Well may Abraham be called the father of the faithful, for giving his children
so good example. For if we consider the circumstances, we shall find this to
be a most rare example, and going beyond all the courtesies of these our days.
For these me^ were but strangers unto him, he knew not from whence they came,
nor whither they would: again this was at his own house, and at his own
table, and the common proverb is, that every man is a Lord in his own house:
yet so much did courtesy and civility prevail with this reverend old father,
Genesis 24.35.
exceeding rich and mighty, that he waited and stood there, where he might
have commanded a seat.

4. The 4. duty is to bend the knee, in toke^ of humility and subjection.
Example of this, Mar. 10. And when he was gone out on the way, there came one
running and kneeled to him, Mark. 10.17
and asked him; good master, what shall I do that I may possess eternal
life? Again, this kind of courtesy is showed even from the kings throne, that
no degree might hold scorn of fair and comely manners, 1. Kings. 2.19.
1. King. 2. and the King rose to meet her, and bowed himself unto her. And
Abraham the great Patriarch, bowed himself down to the ground to his guests.
Genesis 18.2.

5. The fifth thing, is to give the chief place to our betters, and to offer
the same to others in courtesy. And example of this we have in King Solomon,
(and who would not learn manners of a King) as we may read, 1. King. 2.19
1. King. 2 where we read that when he had rose from his throne, and
dutifully saluted his mother which came to him, he caused a seat to be set
for her at his right hand. Again, our Savior himself gives this good
precept of nurture in the 14. of Luke. Luke. 14.8.
When thou shall be bidden of any man to a wedding, set not thy self down in
the chiefest place, least a more honorable man then thou be bidden of him, and
he that badde both thee and him come, and say to thee, give this man room,
and thou then with shame begin to take the lowest room: but when thou art
bidden, go and sit down in the lowest room, that when he which bad thee
comes, he may say unto thee, friend sit up higher: then shall thou have
worship in the presence of them that sit at meat with thee. For whosoever
exalts himself shall be brought low, and he that humbles himself shall
be exalted. Agreeing to this are the wise Proverbs of Solomon chap. 16.18.
Prou. 16.18. and 15.33.
Pride goes before destruction, and an high mind before the fall. And chap.
15.33. before honor goes humility.

6. The sixth duty, is to uncover the head. And though we find no example
for this in holy Scripture, as being not used in those former times: yet seeing
the thing is civil and comely, and one of the special courtesies of our days,
we will confirm it also with the authority of Gods word, Philip. 4.8.
Phil. 4. Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are of good report,
those things do. 1. Cor. 14.40
And again, 1. Cor. 14. (...). Let all things be done decently and according
to order. But this kind of civility is both decent and according to order, as
also honest and of good report, and therefore warranted and commended by Gods
word, and so worthy to be followed. And here in these words of the Apostle we
have a general rule for the teaching and governing of all good civility. If
it be (...), that is, of a good form, dece^t and comely, then is it courtesy
and good manners: but if it be toyish, newfangled, or french-like, it has no
warrant out of Gods word, and so not to be regarded of any modest Christian,
and rather to be laughed at then to be imitated.

Hitherto I have showed you all the parts and memb^^s of good manners: yet this
is but as a dead man, or as a bare anatomy consisting of bones and sinews,
and therefore now we must put a spirit and life into them, to move all these
good parts in a comely order. Love, the soul of good manners.
Now this spirit which must give life and moving to all these is love. For the
Apostle says, 1. Tim. 1 The end of the commandment is love out of a pure
heart. As if he should have said, love is the principal and chief thing in all
our duties and in whatsoever is commanded. Without this all our courtesies and
manners are but shadows of courtesies and pictures of manners, and there is no
more life in them then is in a dead carcass: but if thy courtesy comes from
a loving and willing mind, it moves all men, and stirs up others to render
the like duty again. Now lastly it remains to teach you the helps of good
manners, which serve for their aid and upholding, Helps.
and these are three in number.

1. The first is meeknes, of mind, whereby every man must esteem others
better then himself. Philip. 2.3.
And this is commanded, Philip. 2. That nothing be done through contention or
vain glory: but that in meeknes of mind every man esteem others better then
himself. Without this help we may teach manners never so long, and yet all
our labor will be but lost in the end. For so long as the mind swells with
the vain shadow of his own estimation, every man will look for duty and
reverence from others, but yield none himself. And therefore if parents will
have their children to be brought up in good nurture, they must keep down
their high and lofty affections, and not hold scorn to teach them their
duty even to those that are meaner then themselves, 1. Sam. 25.41.
as Abigaile made cursie to David's servants, 1 Samuel 25.41.

2. The second help, is to cast our eyes upon our brothers virtues, that so we
might be stirred up to reverence the good gifts of God in them. And this is
commanded in the same 2. chapter to the Philipians and the verse following:
Look not every man on his own things, Philip. 2.4.
but every man also on the things of other men. What is the cause why there is
so little courtesy and so great strangenes amongst us many times, as though we
were scarce men? why every man looks upon his own things* (and yet indeed
they be not his own, for what have thou which thou have not received) the
rich man he looks upon his wealth, 1. Cor. 4.7.
the strong man upon his strength, the welfauoured man upon his beauty, the
Nobleman upon his birth, the officer upon his office, the learned man upon his
knowledge, and the witty man upon his co^ceits, and every man because he
dwells nearest himself can easily see his own gifts, but no man's else: and
from hence it comes that there be so many which gape for duties, and so few
that perform them. Whereas if every man would look one upon another gifts,
as the holy Apostle here commands, every man should render mutual duty
and kindness to each other, and then should be fulfilled that sweet saying of
the Apostle, Romans 13. Owe nothing to any man but to love one anether. Romans 13.8.


3. The third help, is to look upon God and his ordinance. For now while we
look only upon men, we see no such reason why we should so humble our selves
in duty unto the^; but when our eyes are turned unto God, and behold him
inuesting our superious and governors, setting them in his own throne, and
giving them his own name, as in calling our Princes and Judges Gods, Psalm.
82.1.
Psalm. 82. and in calling our Ministers his Ambassadors, and such as occupy
not their own place, but are in Christ stead unto us, 1. Cor. 5.20.
2. Cor. 5. and in terming our parents fathers after his own name: therefore now
we will reverence the^ not slightly, or for fashion sake, but for Gods sake,
and for his holy ordinance sake, though they be not worthy of it. And this is
taught in many places of S. Paul's Epistles: Submit your selves one to another
in the fear of God. Ephesians. 5.21 6.5.7.
Ephesians. 5.2.1. in singlenes of your hearts, as unto Christ. Ephesians. 6.5. with good
will serving the Lord, and not men, verse. 7. And whatsoever ye do do it
heartily as to the Lord, Coloss. 3.23.
and not to men. Oh if all our duties were done as unto the Lord, what lights
should we be unto the world, shining in all honest and godly conversation? but
now we look only upon men, and therefore Gods ordinance is neglected, and our
duties perverted,

Thus have I drawn before your eyes as in a fair table, the lively picture of
good manners, the which if we would imitate, we should lead such a comely life
before others, as that every man would be glad of our company: we should then
be looking glasses for the ruder sort to dress themselves by, and we should
beautify Gods Church even to the eye of the world. For as ye material
sanctuary had his outward ornaments, as gold and silver, precious stones,
silk, purple, fine linen, and such like: so the spiritual sanctuary which now
consists not of wood and stone, but of the souls of christians, besides
religion which is the inward beauty, it must have also the outward ornaments,
which are good manners and comely behavior, that nothing may be wanting unto
the due honor and dignity thereof.

Now by Gods blessing we are come to the third and last part of the child's way,
which is the chiefest and highest of all the rest; wherein that I might
instruct parents with more facility and profitable application, I have made
choice of this text, Psalm. 130.3.4.

If thou O Lord straightly markest iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? But
mercy is with thee that thou may be feared.
The first part of the Catechism.
THe parts of this text are three, and so ye sum of al divinity is threefold
too. The first is to teach us our misery in our selves, contained in these
words; If thou O Lord straightly markest iniquities, O Lord who shall stand?
The second is to show us a mean how we may escape out of this misery; and
this mean is the only mercy of God in his son Christ Jesus, expressed in
these words, But mercy is with thee. The third part is to teach us what we
ought to do when we are delivered from our misery, and that is to fear God;
under which word is comprehended the whole service of God, and all that
thankfulness which is required at our hands for our salvation and redemption:
and this is contained in the last words of this text, that thou may be
feared. For whom we fear, him we would not offend; and whom we would not
offend, his will we would obey, and whose will we obey, him we honor, serve and
worship. Now the literal and plain sense of the first part of this text is
this: O Lord if thou should deal with us according to justice, and the
streightnes of thy law, no man that lives were able to stand before thee, but
he must needs fall under thy revenging hand, and the tortures of thy
judgments. This lesson every pare^t must teach his children to understand and
confess. For until they know how much they are endangered to God, and in
what a fearful estate they stand, by reason of their sins: and until they
know what a great God the Lord is, so mighty in power that he is able to cast
all the world down headlong into hell, and that he will do so indeed,
except they crave mercy at his hands, turn unto him, seek his favor, and
endeavor to please him before I say they know this, and this knowledge be
deeply settled in their hearts, they will never seek after god, but dwell still in
their old estate, because they think it is good enough until death set upon
the^ unawares, and they be cast away eternally. Wherefore here the first thing
that parents are to beat into the heads of their children, is the greatness of
God, his infinite power, and fearefulnes; insomuch that seeing he has made
all mankind of the claye of the earth, as the potter does his pottes, and when
he has done so, he may break them all to pieces again, and who shall say
what do thou? even so if God after he has made us, shall condemn us all to
hell, which he may do if it please him, which of us all dare open his mouth
against him? If thou O Lord straightly markest iniquities, O Lord who shall
stand? O Lord if we had offended but an earthly majesty, or if we had
transgressed but a temporal law, or if we were brought but before the bar
of one of the monarchs of the earth, we would not so much tremble and quake,
though our cause were capital; for they can do no more but kill the body:
but thou if thou will, can kill both soul and body in hell; oh who would
not fear thee? If thou take displeasure against us, who shall turn thee to
mercy? Yet he is of one mind (says Job) who can turn him? Job. 23.13.
yea he does what his mind desires. And again in the ninth chapter he
says, If we would dispute with him, Job. 9.3.15.19.30.
we could not answer him one thing of a thousand. For though I were just, yet
could I not answer, but I would make supplication to my judge. If we speak of
strength, behold he is strong: if we speak of judgment, who shall bring me
in to plead? If I wash my self with snow water, and purge mine hands most
clean, yet shall thou plunge me in the pit, and mine own clothes shall make
me filthy. Wherefore here teach al your children to cry out when they make
their humble prayers and supplications unto God, If thou O Lord straightly
markest iniquities, O Lord who shall stand?

The second thing which the parent must teach his child, is to know his
miserable estate in Adam. The Lord in the 51. chapter of the prophecy of
Esaias, says unto the children of Israel, Look unto the rock whence ye are
hewn, Easay. 51.1
and to the hole of the pit, whence ye are dug: so you must call upon your
children to look upon Adam their great grandfather, out of whose loins all
nations and people of the earth are dug. And here first in that the Lord
uses a metaphor of a rock, a pit, and digging, you must teach your children
that they are no better then the dust of the earth, as we may read in the
creation of man, Genesis 2.5. and that their hearts naturally are as hard as any
flint to receive grace; and being but dust and void of all goodness, so soon
as ever the breath of the Lord blows upon them, they fall to their earth
again. Here you must teach your children that when all we, even all the nations
of the world were in the hole of Adams side, and as yet uncut out, God gave
unto Adam, and so unto us being in his loins a law with two, conditions, the
law was this, that we should not eat of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, standing in the midst of the garden of Eden, Genesis 2.17.
as we may read, Genesis 2. The conditions of this law were these: the one life
everlasting if we would keep this law figured out unto us by the tree of life,
of which it was lawful for us to eat every hour: the second was, that in the
same day wherein we should break this law, we should dye the death. It was
not long after this law was made, but Adam broke it, Genesis 3.6.
as we may read in 3. chapter of Genesis, and so death presently seized upon
Adam and al us his posterity, being yet in his loins, according unto Gods
word, who said in the same day that thou shall eat of it, thou shall dye the
death, and as it is said, 1. Cor. 15. 1. Cor. 15.22 Romans 5.12.
In Adam all di, and as it is said, Romans 5. By one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin, and so death went over all; in whom all men have
sinned. So that now if we would look unto our fountain, and to our original
pit from which we were first dug; we should soon see our miserable estate
which is nothing else but deadly. And now that we might come to the bottom of
this pit, that so we might the more fully and clearly see all our misery, to
humble us under the mighty hand of God; I must show you how death has
entered upon us, and how it has killed us, and given us the deadly wound even
while we live, and yet we perceive it not. This death has first seized upon
our reason and understanding, and put out the light of it; so that now we be
as blind as a stock to behold any heavenly thing. For Saint John says in
his first chapter of the Gospel, John. 1.5.
The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not:
that is, Gods word shines into our minds, and yet we cannot see it, so blind
are we of our selves. Now if we cannot see the light it self though it
shines into us, which light is the cause why all other things are seen as the
Apostle shows, Ephesians. 5.13.
Ephesi. 5. For it is light that makes all things manifest; then much less
can we truly behold any other thing else. And whereas the Apostle here
calls our reason and understanding darkness, which is all the light of our
souls if it were light, then how great is our darkness? Our Savior says
in the fifth of Matthew: Math. 6.22.
The light of the body is the eye, wherefore if the light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness? so we may here say, if our reason
and understanding, which is the eye of the soul be darkness, how great is
this darkness? oh death has killed us, it has put out all our light in
heavenly things. Secondly, our misery which has fallen upon us through this
death is so much the greater, for that though all our light be put out, yet we
think we see; and therefore we do not with the two blind men in the gospel
cry out unto our Savior. O Lord the son of David have mercy upon us.
Matthew. 20.30.
For the whole has no need of the physician; and so we walk in blindness all
our days to our destruction, and go on without any mistrust, even as the
sheep that are driven unto the slaughter, until we fall from the darkness of
this life, unto that utter darkness in the life to come, where is nothing but
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Oh great misery. A demonstration of this
doctrine we have in the ninth chapter of the gospel after Saint John, where
our Savior says; I am come unto judgment into this world, John. 9.39.
that they which see not might see, and that they which see might be made
blind. Then some of the Pharisees said, are we blind also? They could not
believe that they were blind, and therefore our Savior there tells them
that their sin remained. And thus much to show you how death has taken the
possession of the mind and reason of man, in so much that it has spoiled it
of al light in heavenly understanding. Secondly, this death has passed from
the understanding and reason, and has entered upon the will and affections, and
given them also the deadly blow; so that now we cannot will or affect any thing
that good is, and profitable to life eternal, no more then a stone that is
without life, until such time as Gods preventing grace repaireth us, and
gives us a new power from heaven. And therefore our Savior says in the sixth
of John, No man can come to me, except the father which has sent me draw
him. John. 6.44.
And Saint Augustine upon these words says; Non trahimus nisi nolentem. We
do not draw any thing but that which is unwilling. So that now we having lost
the life of our will, we must be haled and drawn by Gods grace, even as men
hale and draw a logge that has no moving in it, or else we can never come to
heaven. This doctrine is confirmed by the saying of the Apostle, Romans 7. where
he speaks of the same thing; Romans 7.24.
Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? as if he should have said,
all is dead, every part and member of it. Moreover this death has not only
made the will incapable of all good things: but also it has so disturbed it,
that it is become like a furious or mad man repugning and striving against all
reason: Gal. 5.17.
and therefore the Apostle says, Gal. 5. The flesh lusts against the spirit,
and the spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary one to another, so
that ye cannot do the same things that ye would. And again Romans 8. Romans 8.7.
The wisdom of the flesh is enimitie against God: for it is not subject to
the law of God, neither in deed ca^ be. 3. This death has not rested in the
reason and will, but it has gone further, and taken hold on the body also, and
every member of the body, and strooken them all out of frame: so that now our
ears are the ears of folly, our eyes are the eyes of vanity, our hands are
the hands of strife, our mouth is a mouth of cursing, our lips are full of
poison, our throat is an open Sepulcher, and our feet are swift to shed
blood; and generally al our members are the instruments and weapons of
unrighteousness as the Apostle speaks, Roman. 6. Romans 6.13.19
every one being captives to sin, and standing fighting against God and our
own salvation: so that now if the Lord should straightly mark what were amiss
in us, Oh Lord who shall stand? 4. This death has not only taken the
possession of all the parts about us, and of all the powers and faculties of
every part: but also it has brought forth infinite fruits in us to eternal
condemnation. Whereupon the prophet David in his 19. Psa. cries out, Who can
understand his faults? O cleanse me from my secret sins. Now beloved if our sins
and wicked transgressions be so many, that we cannot number them, nor
understand them all, they be so hidden in heaps in every member about us, and
the wages of every one sin yea even of the least that can be committed is
death, Romans 6.23.
as the Apostle teaches, Romans 6. then again, how great is this death which
lies upon us? Here lies the man that was travailing between Jerusalem and
Jericho bleeding by the high ways side, having received his deadly wound, and
being already more then half dead? wherefore except that good Samaritan Christ
Jesus, does shortly power in wine and oil into our wounds, me must needs
perish eternally. Fifthly, that we might yet the better and more clearly see
into our own misery, we must go unto Gods law which is our looking glass,
for that will show us the very least moate of sin that cleaves unto us, and
when we are come hither, alas this will cast us all down upon our faces. Oh
says the Apostle, Rom 7. I once was alive without the law, Romans 7.9.
but when the commandment came sin revived. We think that we are jolly
fellows, and that we are in case good enough, until we look our faces in
Gods glass, and alas then we see nothing but death, and then we cry out with
the Apostle, O wretched man that I am, Romans 7.24. Math. 5.22.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? This teaches thee, that if
thou art but angry with thy brother unadvisedly, Math. 5.28.
thou art a murderer; this teaches thee, that if thou do but look upon a
woman to lust after her in thine heart, Math. 15.19
thou art an adulterer; this teaches thee, that if thou dooest but desire thy
neighbors goods, though thou never layest hands upon them, yet thou art a
thief and a fellon; and this tells thee, that though thou speak a truth
by thy neighbor with a mind to discredit him, 2. Cor. 12.20.
thou art a slaunderer; and this teaches thee, that every little wicked
thought which ryseth up in thy mind is sin, Romans 7.7. Exodus 20.17.
and so deserves everlasting death; yea though thou never give consent unto
it. So that if we would examine our selves by this glass, we must needs all
of us cast down our selves at Gods feet, and say with the Prophet, If thou O
Lord streightlie markest iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? Now that which I
have here taught you, I beseech you by the mercy of God by which only you must
be saved, teach it your children again: for this is the end of all my labor
to save your childrens souls which are so dear unto you. Sixthly, and lastly,
after you have beaten into their heads their miserable estate, by reason of
their falling from God and breach of his law; then you must show them the
fearful punishments be longing unto the same, and bring them even unto the
brinke of hell and bid them stand fast in Christ Jesus, and look in. First, you
must bid the^ behold the vnque^chable fire always feeding upon the soul and
body of man, and never co^suming the substance. 2. You must show them further
the utter darkness which is as it were that irksome smoke which arises out of
this horrible and infernal fire. 3. You must point out unto them where the
worm of conscience lies always gnawing upon the tender heart and soul of man
with torments unspeakable. 4. You must show them in this hideous place the
fear and dreadfulnes of God wrapped about with his wrath, which shakes all
the parts of soul and body, from whence arises the gnashing of teeth. And
lastly, here at once you must lay before their eyes all the unspeakable
torments of hell, which cause that intolerable noise of howling and crying
which is to be heard in that place. Here is yt Tophet which Esaias speaks of
in his 30. chapter, the burning thereof is fire and much wood, and the breath
of the Lord like a river of brimstone does kindle it. Here lies Esau weeping
for his birthright: there lies Jerusalem crying out, because she knew not
the time of her visitation. Here lies Caine for killing his brother: there
lies Judas for betraying his master. Here lies Iezabell torn of the dogs
of hell for stoning of Naboth: there lies Dives boiling in brimstone for not
showing compassion on poor Lazarus. Here lie burning night and day the five
Cities of Sodom, because they burnt with unnatural lust while they lived
here: and there ly all the old world drowned with the sea of Gods wrath,
because they had corrupted every man his way upon earth. O you good parents,
take heed to your children, and give them good counsel, that they come not
into this place of torment. Should you not cry out, woe worth the day that
ever you begat a child for this place? here even upon this pittes brinke
stands every mothers child as he is naturally borne into the world. We are by
nature the children of wrath says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.5.
Ephesi. 2. and we have al of us even from the conceptio^ fought against God
with our sins, and provoked the holy one to anger: and therefore now here it
were just with God if he should with his foot spurn us all into hell.
Wherefore dear parents ere the Lords anger be kindled against you and your
children, remove them from hence, draw them out of this cursed estate: for if
God should here examine them, O Lord which of them all should stand? they were
all no better then cast away for ever.

But with thee is mercy

Hitherto we have spoken of our own misery, and now we are come to the remedy
which is Gods mercy. The second part of the Catechism. Psalm. 101.1.
Wherefore as the prophet David in the 101. Psalm. says, I will sing mercy and
judgment unto thee O Lord: so we having already sung of judgment, Sanctus
Bernardus in sermon. de S. Maria Magdalena.
now we will come to sing of mercy. These two (as one of the fathers says) are
as it were the two legs of god wherewith he walks toward us. If God should
come toward us with the leg of his justice only, alas who might abide him,
and who should stand before him? but now he comes with mercy also, and
therefore we will praise him. All the paths of the Lord (says the Prophet)
are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant. Psalm. 25.10.
This truth is Gods justice whereby we are humbled: his mercy is the mean
whereby we are raised up again. This is the way of Gods walking toward us,
which is most wise in the eyes of the almighty. For if God should come to us
only in justice, then we would not love him: and again, if he should come
only in mercy, so licentious are we, that we would not fear him. Wherefore
sweet is this intercourse of gods mercy and judgment, most healthful to the
soul of every Christian. Psalm. 85.10.
Mercy and truth have met together, righteousness and peace have kissed each
other. Let all Christians rejoice at this happy meeting. Let the sea make a
noise, and all that is therein, let the floods clappe their hands, and rejoice
their fill, let the mountains skip before the Lord like young rams, and let
every mouth confess unto the Lord, and sing mercy and judgment. Oh if Gods
mercy had not met his justice by the way, and kissed and imbrased it, we had
all of us bin swept away with the whirlewinde of his wrath long ere this day:
but with thee is mercy says the Prophet: Gods mercy has stayed his justice
from dealing extremely with us. Who can sufficiently praise this mercy of God?
The Lord is gracious and righteous (says the prophet) therefore will be teach
sinners in the way. Psalm. 25.8.
Oh what a glory is it to the Lord to save poor souls that were wandering
down to hell? and oh what cause have we now above all creatures to sound out
the praise of this merciful God, who were brought even to deaths door, and
are now lifted up again by his grace: this name gracious and merciful is
Gods sweet name, and sounds as much as Jesus, whom ye church in the 1. of
the Canticles describes after this manner; Cant. 1.2.
Thy name is as ointment poured out, therefore the virgins love thee: because
God has mercy in store for poor sinful creatures, therefore we will run
after him by the smell of his garments, and remember his love more then wine:
all our talking shall be of him and his mercy, and of his praise there shall
be no end. Wherefore now you good parents, you which are the Lords deputies,
sing mercy and judgment to your families continually; and sing not only
mercy, but sing judgment also; and again sing not judgment alone, but sing
judgment and mercy both together. If you teach your children Gods justice and
judgments only, then they shall fall upon the rocks of despair, and so go
mourning down to hell. Again, if you learn them only Gods mercy, then will
they sink in the sands of security, and so be cast away eternally. Wherefore
if your desire be to have your children pass the dangerous sea of this world,
that so they may arrive in the quiet haven of blessed rest, you must teach them
to sail both by Gods justice and mercy. And now having taught you out of the
former verse, the way by the straight line of Gods justice, now we are come to
the calm and pleasant sea of his mercy. But with thee is mercy. Now then
look to your wounds; for here is the baulme of Gilead, whereby our souls are
cured, even Gods mercy. Is the candle of thy soul the light of thy mind put
out through the darkness of sin, so that thou can not tell how to walk in the
course of this life acceptably to God, and inoffensiuely to thy neighbor? here
is Gods mercy in Christ Jesus ready to enlighten thee, but with thee is
mercy. As if the Prophet should have said, with thee is Christ Jesus, in whom
are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Coloss. 2.3.
With thee is mercy, with thee is Christ Jesus, 1. Cor. 1.30.
who is made unto us wisdom and righteousness. With thee is mercy, 2. Pet.
1.19.
with thee is that light that shines in a dark place until the day dawne,
and the day star arises in our hearts. With thee is mercy, that is, 2. Cor.
4.6.
thou art he which commanded the light to shine out darkness, and thou art he
which shines in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory
of God in the face of Christ Jesus. And to conclude, with thee is mercy, that
is, thou art that loving God which do counsel us for our own good, to buy
of thee eye salve, Apo. 3.18.
and to annoint our eyes therewith, that the sight of our understanding may
recover again to behold all thy wonderful mysteries in thy son Christ
Jesus, the which the Angels desire to behold. And with thee is the well of
life, Psalm. 36.9.
and in th light shall we see light.

2. Secondly, are thy will and affections out of frame, so that thou have no
power of thy self to will and desire any heavenly good? behold Gods mercy is
at hand again to repair the^, and to put a new power and faculty in them, as
the Apostle teaches, Phil. 2.13.
Phil. 2. For it is God that works in you both to will and to do, even of his
own good pleasure.

3. Thirdly, are all thy members distempred with sin, by reason of that law
of sin and body of death, which has settled it self in every part and member
about thee, so that thou criest out with the Apostle, O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Christ Jesus the son of this
merciful God, being sent down from heaven by his merciful father, has taken
upon him our whole nature, and every power of our nature, and has sanctified
it all for us, as the Apostle teaches us, Heb. 2.11.14
Heb. 2. For he that sanctifies and they that are sanctified, are all of one:
wherefore he is not ashamed to call them brethren. And again in the same
chapter: For as much as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part with them, that he might destroy through death him
that had the power of death that is the devil. So that now if thou wile lay
hold on Gods mercy and Christ's merits, which he once purchased for thee in
thine own nature, the power of sin shall every day more and more dye in
thee, and thou shall grow into the image of Christ thy Savior, and all thy
members which before were the instruments and weapons of unrighteousness, now
they shall be changed into the instruments of righteousness, and fight for God.
Now thine eyes shall behold the thing which is right, now thine ears shall be
open to hear the word, now thy hands shall make peace, now thy lips shall
speak truth, thy mouth shall bless, thy feet shall be swift to all goodness,
and every member shall be sanctified unto the Lord. Oh great is this mercy of
God, that has given his son Christ Jesus to do so great things for us.

4. Fourthly, does the multitude of thy sins which thou have brought forth out
of this body of death, lie boiling in thy conscience, so that thou can take
no rest neither night nor day? come again hither to the mercy of God: In
that day (says the Prpohet Zachary) there shall be a fountain opened to the
house of David, Zach. 13.1.
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness. That day is
this blessed time of the Gospel in which we now live, having his precious
word sounding unto us on both ears, and this fountain is that pure
righteousness and merits of his son Christ Jesus, which he wrought for us
while he lived here upon earth with us. Here every one may wash away all his
sins, be they never so many and filthy. This is that river of Jordan where
Naaman may wash away all his leprosy, and his flesh shall come unto him
again, like the flesh of a young child. And this is that poole of Bethesda,
where every one may be cured (if he wash lawfully) of whatsoever disease he
has. Oh let us bless God for this fountain of living waters!

5. Fifthly, if the law of God terrify thee, and threaten thee with the
sentence of death and condemnation, then appeal thou to the Gospel and to the
law of faith, this law is the law of life, and is above the law of wrath and
the law of death: this law is like unto the court of Chancerie, which
mitigateth the rigor of all other courts: this is the law of mercy, this is
the new law which Christ brought with him from heaven, and therefore he would
not condemn the woman that was taken in adultery: here, even here thou may
find succor and relief whenever thou art oppressed with the law of wrath,
if thou will appeal unto it.

6. Lastly, whenever the pains of hell catch hold upon thee, and the worm
of conscience begin to gnaw within thee, (for some have even here in this life
a taste of the torments of hell) even now I say after thou have felt the sting,
if thou can cast thine eyes upon the brazen Serpent Christ Jesus, and look
upon Gods mercy, all thy horror and fear shall presently fly from thee. For
he is our redemption, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 1. By whom we have
redemption through his blood, Ephesians. 1.7.
even the forgiveness of our sins: and being redeemed joy and peace of
conscience must needs follow. Romans 5.1.
Wherefore (says the Apostle) being justified by faith, we have peace
toward God. They therefore that being not content with a moderate and lawful
sorrow for sin, will by no means be brought to receive the comforts that
Christ has purchased with his most precious blood, are as much to be blamed as
mad me^ and contemners of this blessed work of our redemption. For what man
(except he were mad) when he is redeemed from his prison, would go and
chain up himself again, and bight his own flesh, and so be a prison unto
himself. I know (beloved) if God would, and if he were willing with it, we
should be tormented with the sight of our sins and with a guilty conscience
continually: if he should straightly mark what were amiss in us every
moment, O Lord who should stand? we should fall upon our sins, and our sins
should fall upon us, and we should both fall under Gods revenging hand, and
then all comfort should fly from us: but the Lord (beloved) he is a God of
mercy, he would not the death of a sinner, as the Prophet Ezechiel teaches in
his 18. chapter, Ezech. 18.32
I desire not the death of him that dies, says the Lord God. With God is
mercy, with God is joy, with God is comfort, with God is light: oh who would
not embrace this merciful and sweet God? And on the contrary, if we fall away
from him, and if we now neglect his bountiful mercy, in offering his grace so
freely to redeem us from al our sins and miseries; then it cannot be
avoided, but we must needs be whurled into the pit of desolations, and one
destruction shall follow another. Now (beloved) seeing that we know our own
misery, and that there is nothing in us which is found, as I have already
showed unto you; Esaias. 1.6.
from the sole of the foot unto the head there is nothing whole therein, but
wounds, and swellings, and soresful of corruption; they have not been wrapped,
nor bound up, nor mollified with oil: within are horrible desolatio^s, without
are terrors and the sound of mighty judgments, and our destruction is like
the overthrow of strangers: oh why do we then sit still while we perish
utterly? Is there no baulme at Gilead, says the Prophet Jeremy? Ierem. 8.22.
is there no mercy in God? wherefore now beloved, I witness unto you al here
this day, that the Lord is innocent from the death of you all, and that if you
will not lay hold upon his mercy, so freely proclaimed in your ears by the
mouths of his messengers, your blood shall be upon your own heads: for with
God is mercy, with God are all means of your salvation, if you will sue unto
him for it. Now you good fathers of families, make these things known unto
your children, that they may teach the same again unto their children after
them, that God may have the praise of his mercy through al ages, and that all
Israel may be saved, Romans 11.26.
as it is written: Make your houses little sanctuaries for Gods worship, and be
telling of his loving kindness from day to day, and let the mercy of God in
Christ Jesus, be as well known to your family, as their meat and drink: be
not ashamed to speak Christ Jesus, because you cannot speak eloque^tly: the
Gospel of Christ as the Apostle tells you, stands not in words and wisdom
of men, 1. Cor. 2.4.
but in power and evidence of the spirit: the Lord open your mouths, and fill
your hearts with all heavenly wisdom, that you may be helpers of Gods
ministers to build up his temple with spiritual stones, and that you may lay
your children and servants the polished corners thereof.

Now after you have taught your children the remedy against their own misery,
The mean to come by Gods mercy.
which is Gods mercy: (for there is no other help besides this, whether we
look to the East, or to the West, to the North or to the South) the^ you must
show them also the mean whereby they may come by this, and how this mercy of
GOD may be profitable unto their souls. This mean is the hand of faith: and
without this hand of faith Gods mercy shall profit us nothing at all. God is
merciful in deed, yea his mercies are infinite, they are a multitude of
mercies, as the Prophet David speaks: but if thou have not a hand of faith to
lay hold upon them, Gods mercies abide still in himself, and they shall
nothing avail thee. For all the benefit of Christ's Gospel is in the use and
application of it. Christ is called Emmanuel, that is to say, God with us. Alas
(beloved) though God be never so good, yet without us he does us no good.
Wherefore we must get us faith to draw him into our hearts; and this is as the
hand that lays the plaster upon the wound: and even as it little profits
the wounded man to have the best medicine lying by him, except he had a hand to
lay the plaster upon the sore; even so the mercies of God can do us small
good, except we had a faith to apply them unto our sinful souls.

This then you see is a special point, and therefore most carefully to be
called upon: yea this is even as necessary for the life of the soul, as the
wind pipe is for the life of the body. For by this mean the breath of our new
life is conveyed into us, as the Prophet Habacuck says chapter 2. Habac. 2.4.
The just shall live by faith. 2. Cor. 1.24. 2. Cor. 5.7.
And S. Paul in the 2. Corin. 1. says, we stand by faith. And again, in the
fifth chapter of the same Epistle, we walk by faith: so that now all is by
faith, all our life, and all our actions, and all our welfare, and without
faith there is no goodness to be hoped for of us, because there is no other
mean whereby Gods grace and mercy can be conveyed into us. And now next after
this, seeing our faith is such a special instrument for us, you must teach
them the means how to preserve and maintain it, because all their life
hangs upon this. For our faith is to the soul, even as our hand is to the
mouth, and the mouth to the stomach, and the windpipe to the heart: so that if
thou have not a hand to feed thy mouth, and a mouth to feed thy stomach, thy
body must needs soon perish: and again, if thy windpipe should be cut
asunder, presently thy heart dies, and all thy members fall down, because
they want the breath of life: even so if thy faith which is the only mean
whereby thou receiuest the breath of Christ's spirit into thy soul, and whereby
thou live that new life in Christ Jesus, of which the Prophet Habacucke
speaks, The just shall live by his faith: if this pipe and conduit (I say) be
perished or broken in thee by thine own negligence, or cut off by thine
adversary the devil, who seeks nothing else night nor day but thy
everlasting spoil, then certainly both thy soul and body must needs perish
too. Wherefore maintain and uphold your holy faith by all means. The means
of maintaining our faith.
And these means are six in number: the first, is the hearing of the word
preached with all diligence: the second, is the reading of the word with
understanding and careful meditation: the third, is the instruction in the
catechism: the fourth are devour and hearty prayers for the continuance of
Gods favor and love unto the end: the fifth are often meditations of Gods
goodness toward us: the sixth and last are continual watchings in our souls
over all our ways and every particular action: if these things be in you and
abound, your faith shall never fail, but it shall be unto you a fountain of
living waters, and Gods mercy shall stand unto you and to your children for
ever: which God grant unto you all for his son Christ Jesus sake.

Now, The third part of the Catechism.
after that you have taught your children first their own misery in
themselves, and secondly the remedy against their misery, which is Gods
mercy in Christ Jesus, whereby they are saved and redeemed: the third thing
now to be taught them, is what they should do after they are saved and
redeemed, and that is to fear God, which is as much to say as to serve him.
But with thee is mercy that thou may be feared. And here first that I
might prove unto you that this phrase in our text to fear God, signifies to
serve God, I will bring two places of holy Scripture for confirmation. The
first is in the first chapter of Malachy, verse. 6. A son honors his
father, and a servant his master: If I be a father, where is my honor, and if
I be a master where is my fear? that is as much to say, as where is my
service? for we know that the duty of servants is to serve their master,
and that their fear toward them is required not simply for it self, but for
their service sake, that so they might the more diligently seek to please
them, whom they fear to offend. The second is in the first chapter of the
Gospel of Saint Luke, and is an argument drawn from the end of our
redemption, in these words, Luke 1.74.
That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him
without fear all the days of our life, in holiness and righteousness before
him. In which words we are to learn four instructions. The first is, that
when we are redeemed from the burden of our miseries, and set in the state of
salvation, then consequently we should give our selves wholly to Gods service,
because then we have nothing else to do. The second doctrine teaches us how
long this service should continue: that is, not for a day or two, but for all
the days of our life. For seeing Christ has redeemed us not for a day or two,
but for ever, therefore it is just that we should serve him for ever: and
seeing Christ has thought no pains too much to suffer for our sakes; so we
should think no labor too long or wearisome for his sake again. Our Savior
in the tenth chapter of Matthew teaches us, that he only shall be saved which
continues unto the end. Mat. 10.22.
The third instruction teaches us the sum or chief parts of this service
of GOD, which are holiness and righteousness; holiness toward GOD, and
righteousness toward our neighbor, upon which two hang all the law and the
Prophets. The fourth teaches us, first the true and only manner of performing
this holiness and righteousness, which is spiritual, sincere, and which is done
and taken in hand with an eye unto GOD: before him. So that if thou take good
duties in hand, and do not look up unto God with the eyes of thy mind,
and with the zealous affections of thine heart, and say, Lord this is for thee,
and for thy sake I do it, thy holiness and righteousness is not before God, and
so no part of his service, he accepts it not. Secondly, this teaches us to
distinguish between the true holiness and righteousness, and that which is false
and counterfeit, which is no part of his service. If thy holiness and
righteousness be of thine own making, and the fancies of thine own brain, as
the toys of popery are; then it is not before God, and so shall never please
him. Wherefore if thou will seek to show thy self thankful to God for thy
great deliverance, thou must serve him with such holiness and righteousness as is
before him, and that is such as his word only commands. Now let no man
think that this place is contrary to that which we labor to make plain by
conference and consent, which is our text: the one affirming to fear God, the
other to serve God without fear. In a word, this clause (without fear) in the
1. of Luke is not contrary to our text, Psalm. 130. because the one is
understood of the fear of God, which is his service; and the other of the
fear of our enemies: and so the allegation is contained in the word service,
and not in the word fear: that we being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, might serve him: that is, fear him, and fear him that we might serve
him. Now having laid out unto you the undoubted sense and meaning of our text,
I will show you why the holy Ghost here rather uses the word fear, then the
word service, saying, that thou may be feared, rather then that thou may
be served. This is for that the Lord thereby might the better prepare us unto
his service, and being prepared might continue and hold us in the same, as it
were with a bridle, from running out. And therefore we see in holy Scripture,
that when the Lord would make any man fit for his service, he as it were
manureth him first by his fear, as we may see first in the Prophet Esaias, as
we may read in his 6. chapter, where when the Lord called him to bear his
hard message unto the children of Israel, he appeared unto him in a fearful
vision sitting on his throne of majesty, to the end that this sight might
strike so deep an impression into his heart, that never after he might forget
the bounds of his calling: Esaias. 6.5.
Woe is me (says he) for I am undone, because I am a man of polluted lips:
for mine eyes have seen the King and Lord of hosts. Again, Ezech. 1.29. and.
2.12.
in the calling of Ezechiel, as we may read in his first chapter, we may see
what a fearful vision he had, so that he fell down upon his face before the
Lord, and could not stand up any more until Gods spirit had entered into him
and held him up. And again in the 19. of the first book of the Kings, when
the Lord called his servant Eliah to go about a dangerous and hard piece of
service, (which was to annoint two Kings, and both against his Lord and
sovereign Achab, 1. King. 19.15.
to be avenged of him and his bloody wife Iezebel for destroying his Prophets)
yt he might not at any time fly out from his charge, as Jonah did, the Lord
prepared him before with fearful signs: first he sent a mighty strong wind
which rent ye mountains, and brake ye rocks before him. 2. after the wind he
sent an earthquake, after the earthquake there came a fire, and after the fire
when Eliah was now sufficiently humbled and prepared, came a still and a soft
voice, and then he received his message. In like manner also when the Lord gave
the law of this his service unto his people upon mount Horeb, what fearful
signs did he send before? there were thunderings and lightnings, ye earth
quaked under the^, the air was rent above the^ by reason of the horrible noise
of the trumpet of God and fearful thundercracks, and before their eyes all
was of a smoke and burning fire, in so much that Moses himself, though he
was a man very well acquainted with God, and accustomed with wonders, yet he
also feared and quaked (as the author to the Hebrews says) and all the people
fled back. Heb. 12.21.
Thus then you now see even by the Lords own method and proceeding, how
necessary the fear of God is for his true and faithful service; yea so
necessary is it, that without it there is no serving of God aright.

The wise man, Solomon in the first chapter of the Proverbs, Pro. 1.7. What
man is he that fears the Lord? him will he teach the way that he shall
choose. Psalm. 25.12.
says, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge: and the Hebrew
phrase says it is the head of knowledge: which signifies not only the
beginning, but also the chief and principal part thereof, from whose
fountain the very life of all good understanding is derived, even as the head
gives continual sense and moving to all the members of the body.

2. Secondly, this fear of God is not only the beginning of Gods service, but
it is also the continuer and conseruer of it, holding us always within our
limits, who like wild horse are ready at every step to run out of the way.
For this cause Moses after the giving of the law, as we may see in the 20.
chap. of Exodus, teaches the Israelites the true use of those fearful
sightes which they had seen, which was that Gods fear might continue with
them to be ever after a bridle unto them to withhold them from sin: Exodus 20.20
and that his fear may be before you that you sin not. So that now take away
gods fear from before our eyes, and presently we will fall into sin, and break
off gods service, though we have made never so good an entrance. The force of
this bond of fear when Jacob beheld, he toulde his uncle Laban plainly,
Genesis 31.42.
Genesis 31. that except the fear of Isaac had been with him, meaning the
fear of God who was Isaacs fear, he would have sent him away empty: and even
so beloved, it is with us all, except Gods fear remain and continue with us,
though the Lord has deserved never so much at our hands, yet we like
unthankful Labans would send him empty away, and rob him of the praise of
all his blessings and graces bestowed upon us. Moreover this fear of God was
of such account amongst the holy Patriarchs, that it was taken then to be the
only bond in the world: and therefore when Joseph would persuade his
brethren before they knew him, to leave one of them behind in prison till they
had cleared themselves of suspicion, which was objected against them, Genesis
42.18.
as we may read, Genesis. 42. he also to give them to understand of
faithfulness on his part* used this only reason unto them: For (says he) I
fear God; as if he should have said, I dare not do to the contrary. Genesis
50.19.
Again, in the 50. chap. of Genesis when Jacob their father was dead, Joseph's
brethren, fearing then that he might seek to be revenged of them for their
unkind and inhumane handling of him, they came to make supplication unto him,
prostrating themselves before him, desiring him to forgive them their offense:
to whom he answered, Eccles. 34.14 Who so fears the Lord fears no man,
neither is afraid: for he is his hope. Psalm. 19.9.
Fear not, for am not I under God? as if he should have said, I fear God, and
therefore you need not fear me. 3. The fear of God is not only the beginning
of Gods service, and the continuance of Gods service, but also it is the end of
Gods service, and endures for ever, as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 19. The
fear of the Lord is clean, and endures for ever: and our text says, that
thou may be feared.

Again Solomon in the 14. chapter of the Proverbs, extolling the excellency
of the fear of God, Prou. 14.27.
says. The fear of the Lord is as a well spring of life to avoid the snares
of death. Here then is the fountain from whence all the streams of Gods
service, and every part of his worship are first fetched. And again in the
16. chapter he says, Prou. 16.6.
By the fear of the Lord we depart from evil. So that now as you see all
goodness comes by Gods fear; it is the beginning of Gods service, it is the
continuance and conservation of Gods service, it is the end of Gods service,
and it is the walls of Gods service, whereby both the enemy is kept from us,
and we from running to the enemy; and what shall I say more? it is the irons
and boltes wherewith the old man is manacled, and it is the bridle wherewith
our stubborn and effrenate affections are held in, and whereby we are
governed and directed in the new and living way, as the Apostle speaks. So
excellent a thing is the fear of God, that nothing may be compared unto it.
Whereupon Ecclesiasticus says well, Chap. 40.26. Riches and strength lift up
the mind: but the fear of the Lord is above them both: there is no want in the
fear of the Lord, and it needs no help. 27. the fear of the Lord is a
pleasant garden of blessing, and there is nothing so beautiful as it is.
Wherefore you good fathers, which have a desire to teach your children and
servants the true service of God, in token of thankfulness to their maker and
redeemer Christ Jesus for so great benefits and graces received, you must enter
them with the fear of God, and you must hold and continue the^ in the same
with the fear of God: if you lay not this foundation all your labor is lost,
Gods service shall eftsoons slide away from them, and then they might better
never to have known the way of righteousness: without this there is no stay or
help from apostasy, which state is most miserable of all other. This makes
us to tread surely in all the ways of the Lord, whereas the forward children
which have no fear catch many a fall. For Gods love look well to this point,
and ever carrye in your mind that most wholesome saying of the Apostle in the
second chapter of the Epistle to the Philipians, Philip. 2.12
Make an end of your salvation with fear and trembling: and Pro. 28.14.
Blessed is the man that fears always.

Titus 2.11.12. For the grace of God that brings salvation unto all men has
appeared, and teaches us that we should deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts,
and that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present
world.
HItherto I have spoken of the beginning and true foundation of Gods service:
and now it follows in order that I should teach you the whole buildinge, with
all the parts thereof, that so good parents might go forward in their duty
until they have brought their children to a comely frame in Gods house. But
here first before we come to these parts, we must speak something of the
connection of this text with the former, and of the words of the text as they
lie in order. This word the grace of God is al one in effect with that which is
translated mercy, in the 130. Psalm, and they both tend to one end, that is,
to stir up men to the service of God: the one noting out unto us the
relenting and pitiful affection in God upon the sight of our miserable estate,
into which we had cast our selves helpless: and the other the gladsomnes of
our heavenly father in bestowing this his mercy upon us, which is signified
under the word grace. From the nature of which two words I gather this double
fruitful exhortation. First, that seeing our God which was our judge, and not
only our judge, but also the party grieved and offended, did notwithstanding
yearne in compassion toward us, and pity our misery, and forgave us all our
debt and trespass: so now we in token of thankfulness to him again, should
yearne and grieve within our selves to see his name dishonored. And secondly,
whereas God has bestowed his grace so frankely and gladsomelie to save us: so
now we being saved by his grace, it should be our joy to serve him for it in
all obedience and in every good duty. And whereas the Apostle says, that
this grace has appeared, (or as the Greek verb says shined) he notes out
unto us the magnificence thereof, as if the Lord had reared it up in the
midst of the firmament like the sun to give light unto all the parts of
the world* Great is this grace of GOD in Christ Jesus, which has shined and
appeared unto all nations, knreds, and tongues, and unto all kinds of men,
honorable and inhonourable. And teaches us that we should deny ungodliness
and worldly lusts. In these words the holy Ghost lays down the true and
only method of proceeding in this service of God; which is that we should
first wash out of the heart all ungodliness and worldly lusts, that so there
may be a convenient room for his worship to come into. For even as a foul and
stinking vial infecteth the pure and good ointment which is put into it: even
so the worship of God if it be placed in a foul heart, it will soon corrupt
and shortly turn into flat idolatry and impious dissembling. Agreeable to
this the holy Ghost teaches, 1. Cor. 5.7.
1. Cor. 5. Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lamp.
And again in the sixth verse. a little leaven leaueneth a whole lump: so a
little ungodliness and wordly affections sowreth the whole mass of Gods
service, and makes it unpleasant unto him. Wherefore all must be cleansed
out. And again in the fifteenth of the Acts, the Apostle speaking of the
working of the holy Ghost in gathering into his Church the polluted Gentiles
says, having purified their hearts by faith. Acts 15.9.
So that now we see, he yt will keep his vessel holy unto the Lord, and
prepare his heart aright to serve God, he must wash it, and rince it, and
purify it before; he cannot make it too clean, for the service of God is the
purest thing in all the world. And here that we may the better stir up our
selves unto this divine service of God, let us diligently observe the phrase of
the holy Ghost* The grace of God teaches us that we should deny ungodliness
and worldly lusts. This is a metaphorical speech taken from military
affairs, and is answerable unto the word abandon. For when the good Captain
finds just cause of disliking in his soldiers, he is said to abandon them,
that is, to thrust them out of his band, and to put them from their pay, and so
turn them away. Again on the other side, when the good soldier shall see the
misgouernment of his captain, and his bad cause in hand, he leaves his
captain and turns to the just cause, denying and defying by solemn
sacramental oath of war his former colors. Without this denying, the
soldier shall not be received, but shall be taken and held as a spy and a
traitor, and so rejected. Even so beloved, when we have once renounced the
black colors of the devil, the world, and the flesh, and are turned to the
Lord Jesus, because we see his cause is just, and his pay best: now this great
captain and Lord general of heaven and earth, before he will admit us into
his band, he requires of us that we should deny and defy our former colors,
that is, all ungodliness and worldly lusts, unto which we have hitherto borne
weapons. For no man can serve two masters, as our Savior says in the gospel.
And therefore thou whosoever thou art, that wilt be a good soldier of Christ
Jesus, and do him true and faithful service, because he has raunsomed thee
from the tyranny of the devil; thou must renounce and deny from thy heart all
ungodliness, and that is all that prophanenes of mind, wherein before thou
did live when thou regardedst not God nor religion, and all worldly lusts;
that is, all the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, 1. Ioh. 2.16.
and the pride of life, as Saint John teaches us, 1. Epist.2.16. all which are
the very arms and ensigns which the devil the prince of darkness bears
against thy dear Savior and redeemer. Now after that thou have washed thy
hands from all uncleanness, and renounced the devil with all his adherents the
world and the flesh, and art now become emba^ded in the Lords troops; now thou
must next learn how to stand in Gods array, and what is the whole duty and
service which he requires at thy hands. This consists in these three parts,
as we are here taught in this text: first, in living soberlie to our selves:
secondly, in living righteouslie to our neighbors: and thirdly, in living
holily or godly toward god. In these three points wholly stands the service
of God, so much as of man is required. The first and second parts are contained
in the second table of Gods law, the third is contained in the first. Now in
the first part of Gods service (following the order of our text, beginning at
our selves, and rising as it were by steps from the lowest to the highest) is
to live soberly toward our selves; and this is to govern our own bodies and
persons in such measure and comely behavior, as that the Lord who is the
continual beholder of all our actions, as well private as public, and as well
secret as open, be not offended at us. Wherefore here every man must learn
to temperate and moderate himself in his speech, in his gesture in meat and
drink, in apparel, in pleasures, in pains and labors, and generally in
whatsoever concerns a man's own person, and in all his lawful liberties: so
that our speech may not be too rough, nor too ridiculous: our gesture may not
be too light, nor too lowering: our meat and drink neither too much, nor too
delicate: our apparel not too gay, nor too sluttish: our pleasures neither too
long, nor in bad causes: our sorrows not for every vain loss, nor in any
defect or excess: and our labors such as may rather preserve life then quench
it; in all which we must always hold this rule, to consider not what we are
able to do, but what is most meet to be done, agreeable with our estate
(wherein we may not flatter our selves) and seemly both before God and man.
This sweet sobriety is the honest grace and flower of our life, which
whosoever wants, he comes too short of that duty which God requires at
his hands, being unthankful to God who has redeemed him to live in such an
honorable estate, 1. Cor. 11.10.
offensive to men and angels, and hurtful to his own soul and body. For what
is the cause why our souls corrupt and stink in the filthy lusts and
pleasures of the flesh, and in all manner of excess and riotous kind of living,
but because they want this sale of sobriety whereby they should be kept sweet?
why can thou not endure to bear the labors of Gods service? why dooest thou
wax faint in prayer? why do thou think it long to hear? why do thou
think much to streine thy heart unto God in the zeal of thanksgiving? and
why can thou not away to carry patie^tly the easy yoke of Christ Jesus? why
thou have not been acquainted with sobriety, which is as it were the yoke to
hold all men within their religious and virtuous endeavors. Again, let us
come to the duties of the second table, and ask what is the cause why we
cannot live within the compass of them? Why do some lift up the heel against
their governors like the untamed horse? why do others live in continual
contentions and fightings, like the savage wolves and Tigers? Why do some wast
their strength in pleasures, as the flame which consumes the tallowe? and why
do other neglecting the tender budde of their decaying stock draw all through
their own throats, while their wife and children starve for hunger? and why
do other envying the age to come gape upon all things present like Behemoth,
as though they would make an end of the world with themselves? and why do other
some kindle such discord amongst their neighbors by that fire of the tongue,
as Saint James calls it, that it can never after be quenched unto the death?
and why is hell let loose within our selves, to disturb all the powers and
senses about us with wicked thoughts and lusts? why this virtue of sobriety is
absent from us. So that take away sobriety, and you undo all Religion.
Wherefore you good parents, you which have a care of the posterity and of the
Church of God to come, and you which think nothing too dear for the
redemption of your own souls and the souls of your children: show your
thankefulnes unto GOD in instructing your household, teach them holiness toward
God, and righteousness toward men, and teach them not only holiness and
righteousness toward God and men, but also train them up in sobriety toward
themselves: for this is the lock and key to religion, it is the yoke of our
life, it is the salt of our souls, and it is the grace of all our actions. O
you good youth, I call to you which love the Lord, I call to you which honor
all those which give you good instruction, and I call to you who had rather dye
an honest and godly death while you are young, then to live in the filthy
pleasures of sin for a season, and in the end to be cast away eternally:
embrace this noble virtue of sobriety; if there be any understanding, if
any love of virtue, if any zeal of chastity, if any courage for good
things, fulfill my desires in the Lord, who love your souls so dearly, and
God almighty rain down a blessing upon you.

2. The second part of Gods service, is to live righteously toward men, and
that is to give every man his due and right. Give to every man his due, Romans
13.7.8
says the Apostle, Romans 13. Tribute to whom ye owe tribute, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom vee owe honor. Owe nothing to
any man, but to love one another: for he that loves another has fulfilled
the law. Now this whole duty of loving our brethren, and in giving every
one his due, we may generally comprehend in this division. First, in honoring
and obeying our superiors and governors: secondly, in relieuing our inferiors
and all such as stand in need of our help: and thirdly, in being kind to our
equalles, and loving to all. For the duties toward our superiors; the
subject must honor his magistrate with obedience, reverence, and common
maintenance: so the people must honor their pastor, the child his parent, the
wife her husband, and the servant his master. All these must be honored and
obeyed of us not slightly, but seriously and unfeignedly, even as purposing to
honor God in them. for this also is a part of Gods service, and the duties
which we give unto them we must give as unto God himself, setting God
always before our eyes, whom in all things we ought to worship and
reverence. And on the other side, superiors must know so to carry themselves
toward their inferiors, in governing, teaching, and defending of them in all
wisdom and gravity, that they may seem worthy of those honors which
according to Gods ordinance are bestowed upon them. Secondly, for the helping
and relieuing of our brother, we must not do it by halfes, but fully, as God
himself has commanded. We must not aid him in his body, and hurt him in
his goods; and we must not help him in his goods, and offend him in his
name: and lastly, we must not care for him in his body, goods, and name, and
suffer his soul to perish by us for want of our spiritual counsel and
exhortation; but we must labor to uphold and defend him in all these
together, but especially in his soul, because this is more precious then all
the other. For even as one member of our own body is as dear unto us as
another: so should all our brothers things be unto us, because we are all
members of our dear Savior, who has loved us all alike in giving his whole
self for us all. Thirdly, and lastly, so should we love all men, as well
those which have no need of us, as those which stand in need, that no offense
being given on either side, we living as lights in the world, and showing
forth the virtues of him that has called us out of darkness into his
marvelous light, as Saint Peter says, 1. Pet. 2.9.
, all men may have just cause to praise GOD for us, and so God to be honored
all in all.

3. The third and highest part of our service, is to live holily toward God:
and this is to set up and exalte the Lord only in our hearts, and to
establish his kingdom and government in our souls, banishing and avoiding
from within us all foreign powers of the world, the flesh, and the devil,
that so there may be but one sole and absolute regiment of Gods spirit within
us, that he only may command, forbid, control, chastize, and direct in all
his ways. And secondly, that as he only is wise to prescribe, so we should
give our selves wholly to serve him not as we our selves think best, but as
he commands in his word; that is spiritually, inwardly, and unfeignedly,
and in such particulars as he himself sets down unto us. And thirdly,
because he is such a great GOD holding all the world under his obedience,
saying to the king as it is in Job 34. Job. 34.18. Translatio Tremelij.
Thou naughty man, and to the nobles you wicked men: therefore now we should
use his name with all holy reverence, and never presume to speak of him, but
with titles of majesty and honor. And fourthly and lastly, we must perform
all our homage and service unto him, in frequenting his courts diligently, in
hearing his word preached gladly, in praying to him devoutly, in receiving his
holy Sacraments reverently, and in casting our selves down at his feet,
acknowledging all our possessions, wealth, honors, privileges, and whatsoever
else we enjoy that good is, all to be held from his gracious hands, most
heartily thanking him for the continuance of them unto us, and being ready
whenever he shall call to surrender them up unto him again. In this present
world. Now in that the holy Apostle restrains his exhortation to the time of
this present world, he teaches us that there is no longer deferring to serve
God, but we must even now at this present instant change our hearts, and set
upon his work: for this present instant is a part of this present world, and
so you see here that the Lord has left us no time in this life to serve our
own lusts and pleasures. Secondly, the Apostle here sets forth unto us
the common stade of Gods service, which is this present life. This present life
and this present world God has appointed out for service, and that which is to
come he has ordained for reward and rest. Wherefore now if men will serve
God, they must serve him in this life, or else they shall never serve him. I
know well that many could be content to serve God after they be dead, so they
might enjoy and follow their pleasures in this present world, then they would
live soberly, and righteously, and holily, but then it is too late. For this
present world, as I said, is the time of service, and the next is the time of
reward; the reward of glory, and rest to such as have served God in this
world, and the reward of vengeance and torment to such as have disobeied him.

Verse. 13.14. Looking for that blessed hope, and appearing of that glory of
that mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar
people unto himself, zealous of good works.
NOw having taught you what the whole service of God is, and what is required
at our hands for our salvation and redemption, because our hearts are so heavy
and sluggish, that few of us regard these things: And again, such of us as
regard them, can better talk of them then perform them: and considering the
lets of Christianity to be many, I have thought good here to use such
forcible motives, as I can best gather out of Gods word, whereby our cold
zeal may be enflamed, and we violnttlie thrust forward to lay hand upon
Gods business.

1. The first motive which the holy Ghost here offers unto us, is the
lifting up of our eyes unto the mark or reward which is set up for us at the
end of our race, to draw us forward with all our might. For as it is in the
game of running (which similitude the Scripture often uses) there is a mark
or crown of reward erected up on high on some pillar at the race end, to
the end it might be seen a far off, and that it might be always in the eye
of the runner, like the lodestone to draw him forward with all his might and
power: even so unto us Christians, which run in the spiritual race of Gods
service, wherein the great God and his Angels are lookers on, there is a great
price set up for us even in the height of the heavens, which is here called
the blessed hope, and the glory of the mighty God, which at that day shall
break forth as a flood of light from his own glorious majesty to glorify
all his saints. And for the more efficacy of this motive, I will bring for
example our Savior himself, who being the author and finisher of our faith,
used this help through all his way, as we may read Heb. 12. Hebr. 12.2.
Who for the joy which was set before him, endured the cross, and despised the
shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. Again, this help
that worthy light of the Church the Apostle S. Paul used, Philip. 3. Philip.
3.13.14.
I forget that which is behind, and endeavor my self unto that which is
before, and follow hard toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus. But what is this mark, and what is this price which is
always so in the eye of the Apostle, that he forgets all other things, and
regards nothing but it? Apoc. 7.2.
This mark is that palm branch, which is given unto all those faithful
servants of Christ Jesus, who have ouercommed all the difficulties and hardness
of this life: and this mark is that immortal inheritance and undefiled, and
which withers not, reserved in the heavens, of which S. Peter speaks, 1.
Pet. ^.4.
1. Epistle 2. chapter: and this mark is the fulness of joy, as the Prophet
David says, Psalm. 16.11.
Psalm. 16. In thy presence is the fulness of joy, and at thy right hand there
are pleasures for evermore: and this mark, and this blessed hope, is the
crown of righteousness laid up for all Gods faithful servants against the day
of this appearing of the glory of this mighty God our Savior Jesus Christ:
From hence forth is laid up for me (says the Apostle) the crown of
righteousness, 2. Tim. 4.8.
which the Lord the righteous judge shall give me at that day, and not to me
only, but to all those that love that his appearing. 2. Tim. 4. O if a man had
a crown always in his eye, what would he not do to come by it? Why do we
then stagger under our burdens? and why do we wax faint in the Lords
service? why we do not look up unto our blessed hope, and we do not set
that glorious appearing of our Savior Christ Jesus always before our eyes,
whose presence shall wipe away all tears from our cheeks. This would hold up
our hands if there were any life in us. Cast your eyes then upon your
inheritance which shall not wither? What service can be sufficient for a
kingdom? what duty for the crown of heaven? what loyalty for the adoption
of the sons of God? and what pains taking for the fulness of joy? O you
Christians that you saw and knew your happiness, that you might love and serve
the Lord.

2. The second motive is taken from that exceeding love of Christ, in giving
himself so freely for us, and therefore now we should give our selves and all
our things unto him again, as we are taught of our mother the Church, Cantic.
6.2.
Canticles 6. I am my welbeloueds, and my well-beloved is mine. O if Christ Jesus
that heavenly bridegroom has bestowed himself upon us, and given himself
for us, which sometimes were more vile then the clay in the street, how can
we now deny him any service, or any thing which is within us? shall the heir
of eternity and the son of God bestow himself upon us with a full dowry of
the kingdom of heaven, and all the joys of the life to come, and with the
fruition of the divine nature, as S. Peter says, and shall not we now bestow
our selves and our lives upon him again? for that love of Christ constrains
us (says the Apostle) because we thus judge, 2. Cor. 5.15.
that if one be dead for all, then we are all dead, and he died for all,
that they which live, should not hence forth live unto themselves, but unto
him which dyed for them and rose again. O had not we need now be a dear
and loving spouse unto our husband Christ, who has bought our love with his
own death? would not this meditation constrain any reasonable heart unto all
duetifull service? wherefore now I speak like a troubled soul out of the
affection of my heart, I had rather be hanged in the air, I had rather be
burnt in the fire, I had rather be torn with the rack, yea I had rather run
through hell it self, then I would willingly offend and displease this
merciful Lord, who has loved me and given himself for me. Gal. 2.20.
For I was dead, but now I am alive: I was lost, but now I am found: I was
forsaken, but now am I beloved. Acts 21.13.
What do you weeping and breaking my heart, says the Apostle? for my life is
not dear unto my self, Acts 20.24
so that I may fulfill my course with joy. Oh we have not half frank hearts
to deal with God; we think much to serve God with our persons, our souls,
and our bodies: and as for our goods we lay them to aside, they may not go
with us into the Lords Sanctuary for fear of losing: and yet our Lord has
not only given soul and body to ransom us, but also has stripped himself
naked of al his heavenly royalty and riches, and took upon him the form of a
servant, as the Apostle teaches, Philip. 2.7.
Phil. 2. O where is now that constraining love of the Apostle to stir up our
dull and cold hearts?

3. The third motive to stir us up with all cheerefulnes unto Gods service,
are those great and unspeakable pains and labors which our dear Savior
has taken upon him to bear and go through with for our redemption. Who gave
himself for us, says the Apostle, that is, who gave himself to endure all
manner of torments, calamities, and sufferings for our redemption; and all
manner of painful service for our justification. Now has Christ our Savior
given himself to do so much for us, and shall we give our selves to
security and live as we lust? has Christ watched for us, and shall we give
our selves to sleep? has Christ fasted for us, and shall we give our selves to
banqueting? has Christ bin tempted for us, and shall we yield to every
suggestion? has Christ suffered persecution, and shall we look to line at ease?
and has Christ so lived here upon earth for our sakes, that he would not please
himself, Romans 15. and shall we sport in the delights of this life, and the
sensuality of our own flesh? and has Christ not only suffered all the
troubles of this life, but also took upon him the torments of the life to
come, to free us from that dreadful lake of eternal judgment, and now shall
we cast our selves down under the green boughs of the pleasures of this
world, and shun the heat and burden of the day, and give our selves to idle
loytering, when God calls us forth to labor in his vineyard? O what a shame
were this to Christians, at whose hands the Lord has deserved so great duties
through his infinite labors and sufferings. If Christ our Savior had redeemed
us without any pains taking, as easily as a rich man pulls out twenty
pounds out of his pocket to ransom a poor captive whom he takes pity on,
yet respecting the unspeakable misery from which we are delivered, and the
great freedom into which we are brought, that is, into the glorious liberty
of the sons of God, and to the inheritance of the Saints, and to be citizens
of heaven, this would deserve infinite duties of thankfulness: but now this was
not our dear Saviors case, alas it was no ease for him to save us, as the
monument of this day can well witness unto us, at what time he finished the
term of 32. years servitude and half, having trodden the wine press of the
Almighty, borne the fierce wrath of God his father, sweat water and blood, with
strong cryings and tears, and now having passed the iron gates of death, he
appeared unto us, bringing salvation through no little sorrow, and therefore
now as the matter thus stands, who is sufficient for these things, and who
shall give us thankfulness, and duties, and service for so great deserts?

Blessings past and present.
4. The fourth motive, are all those sweet graces and blessings both temporal
and spiritual, which are bestowed upon us by Christ, in giving himself for us.
For as the Apostle says, Romans 8.32.
Romans 8. Seeing he spared not his own son, but gave him for us, how shall
he not with him give us all things also? So then when God gave us his son,
and Christ gave us himself, all good things were given unto us to. Have I been
as a wilderness unto Israel, Ierem. 2.21.
says the Lord? Ierem. 2. Has the Lord been barren unto us, or as a land of
darkness? is not he that God who has made the light of England to shine
ten times brighter then ever it did before? is not he that God who has
planted peace in all our borders? has not he in our days crowned the earth
with foyson of all things? has not he made the plowman to touch the mower, and
the treader of grapes him that sows seed? has not he made the hills to
drop fatnes, and the furrows to rejoice and sing? has not he made our
desert like Eden, and our wilderness like the garden of the Lord? and is not
he that God who has taken away from us that famine of the word, which
heretofore oppressed the land more then the dearth of Egypt, and made our
souls like a well watered garden, and given unto us abundance of spiritual
blessings, and set our Priests and our Levites as in times past? Now (beloved)
seeing it is thus, and our eyes are full of Gods blessings which way soever we
turn us, can we forget our duty toward our gracious God, who has opened
his hand so wide unto us? Ierem. 2.32.
Can a maid forget her ornament (says the Lord) or a bride her attire? yet my
people has forgotten me days without number. O good brethren, let us not
provoke the Lord to speak unto us by his judgments, complaining as he did
sometimes of the children of Israel, Esaias. 1.2.
Esaias. 1. Hear O heavens, and hearken O earth, for the Lord has said, I have
nourished and brought up children, but they have rebelled against me. And
again in the fifth chapter, Esaias. 5.4.
What could I have done any more unto my vineyard, that I have not done unto
it? and when I looked that it should have brought forth grapes, it brought
forth wild grapes.

Promises, and reward to come.
5 The fifth motive, is that great and plentiful reward which God that cannot
lie, and with whom is no variablenes nor shadow of turning, has in his word
promised, and will hereafter perform to all his faithful and diligent
servants. Though the Lord has already deserved our service, and ten thousand
times more the^ we ca^ do in saving our souls which were lost, yet such is the
magnificent franknes of our God, that he will not receive the least duty at
our hands for naught, no not so much as a cup of cold water bestowed upon his
servants for his sake, but he will render a double reward for it. O is it not
good serving of such a master, where all things are still coming in, and where
nothing is laid out, and no time spent but brings in double gain, both in
this life and in the life to come? Verily I say unto you (says our Savior
Christ, Mark. chapter 10. verse 29.) there is no man that has forsaken house,
or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands,
for my sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold, now at this
present, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and
lands with persecutions, and in the world to come eternal life. O if men would
serve the Lord, what plenty of al good things should we enjoy? Malac. 3.10.
Prove me now herewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open the
windows of heaven unto you, and power you out a blessing without measure?
Malac. 3. Again, Esaias 48.18.
Esaias. 48. Oh that thou had harkened unto my commandments, then had thy
prosperity been as the flood, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea.
Furthermore, the Prophet David uses most excellent similitudes, to set forth
this estate worthy of due meditation, Psalm. 92.
Psalm. 92. The horns of the righteous shall be exalted like Unicorns, they
shall be anointed with fresh oil, they shall flourish like a palm tree, they
shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon, they shall be fat and flourishing, and they
shall bring forth fruit in their age: that is, they shall have a power even
above nature: lo thus shall the men be blessed that serve the Lord, and men
shall say, verily there is fruit for the righteous.

6. The sixth and last motive to stir us up to this industry in Gods service,
is the Lords end, and as it were the mark and butte whereat he shoots in
saving us, which is, that we should give over our lives wholly unto him in
the zeal of good works, thereby to set forth the praise of his glorious
working toward us. And this is expressed in the 130. Psalm: But with thee is
mercy that thou may be feared. And secondly in this our text, Who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to
be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works. And thirdly, S.
Peter in his first Epistle and second chapter says, That we are a chosen
generation, 1. Pet. 2.9.
a royal Priesthood, a holy nation, and a people set at liberty, that we
should show forth the virtues of him that has called us out of darkness into
his marvelous light. This is the end then of Gods redemption. Now (beloved)
shall the Lord lose his end by our negligence, and bestow all his labor in
vain, and shoot as it were at a wrong mark? has he culled and picked us out
of all the world to be a special and peculiar people unto himself to be
zealous of good works, to excel all other in virtue, and to hold out his
glorious virtues unto all the world, and shall we now neglect the high caller,
and contemn his honorable and heavenly deseruings at our hands? we cannot do
it. If our gracious Prince to show her puissance against a foreign power,
should call forth one or two of her subjects, who are most beholding unto her,
to just and turnie in her presence for her honor, would they not strain all
their strength in this service, yea and their lives too? Now, shall we do
more for our Prince then we would for God? Has not our God called us out by
name to fight for his honor, to be a chosen and peculiar people unto
himself, to stand on his parts, to show forth his virtues, and to be zealous
of good works, (yea and that we might the better perform this service, he
has furnished us with his own armor and weapons, yea and his own hand is
with us too, though all men see it not) and shall not we now do valiantly for
our God? and shall not we now endeavor our best to answer the expectation of
our heavenly King? O my dear brethren, see the end of your calling. You are
not called to show your own strength, or your own virtues, or your own
holiness? but you are called to show forth the strength, and the virtues, and
the holiness of the almighty, and to be zealous of good works. But what is
this zeal that we may know it and follow it? This zeal, as the Spouse in the
last chapter of the Canticles teaches us, is no small matter, but a most
ardent and burning love unspeakable, ouercomming all the affections in man:
Love is strong as death, Cantic. 8.6.
and zeal is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are fiery coals, and a
vehement flame: yea the flame of God, as the Hebrew word signifies, Much
water cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it. Now then (beloved)
you see the end of your redemption and calling: it is not only to do good
works, but to be zealous of good works you are called and redeemed to the heat
and fire of good works, you are called and redeemed to such a burning love of
them, that nothing may quench it: nay even as death and the grave overcome all
things; so this zeal in us of good works should overcome and cast down
before us all the lets and impediments which stand up against us in the service
of our God: for love is strong as death, zeal is cruel as the grave.
Wherefore O you redeemed of the Lord, not with gold and silver, as Saint
Peter speaks, but with the precious blood of his own son, lay this unto
your hearts, and stir up your selves unto Gods service; you that have ears
to hear, hear; and you that have zeal within you, be inflamed, for every
one cannot. I call upon you all, as the Apostle Saint John writes, I call upon
you little children, because you are well acquainted with your fathers dear
love and tenderness toward you; I call upon you young men, because your
affections are strong in you, and you are best able to bear the Lords
burden; and I call upon you old men, because you by reason of your long
experience have most knowledge of your duties, give the Lord his due and
right, and abound in all manner of good works, which he has ordained for us
to walk in, to the glory of his holy name.

Teach a child in the trade of his way, and when he is old he shall not depart
from it. Pro. 22.6.

When I began to read this verse unto you, I told you it consisted of two
parts: of a precept, and the reason of the precept. Hitherto I have spoken of
the precept, and of the necessary circumstances belonging unto it, and now I
am come to speak of the reason of it, that so I might stir up the life of
the precept in his working in you: And when he is old he shall not depart from
it: that is, if thou faithfully instructest him in his way while he is young,
he shall have the benefit of it all his life after. But now that parents might
be compassed about with a cloud of exhortations, I have thought good here not
only to press forth the principal scope of this text, but also to suck out
of the bowels thereof the more hidden and abstruse collections, and to gather
the like arguments out of other scriptures, because the whole scripture is one
and lends hand to it self.

1. The first reason which should move parents to take in hand this duty of
instructing their children in this trade of their way, The necessity of
teaching.
is drawn from the necessity of the precept, because every child naturally is
conceived and borne out of the way, as the Prophet David teaches us, Psalm.
51.5
Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother
conceived me. And the Apostle Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 2. Ephesians. 2.3.
That we are by nature the children of wrath. Genesis 6.5.
And Moses in the 6. chapter of Genesis teaches us, that all the thoughts and
imaginations of man's heart are continually evil: and the Apostle says, 1. Cor.
2. that the natural man cannot perceive the things which are of the spirit
of God. 1. Cor. 2.14
And again, Romans 8. he tells us that the wisdom of the flesh is enimitie
against God, Romans 7.8.
for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. Wherefore now
you see plainly how every mothers child is borne into the world, blind in his
understanding, froward in his will and affections, corrupt in all the motions
of his heart, dead in the life of God, and wholly possessed with sin; so that
except now his nature be changed by good education, he cannot possibly apply
himself unto any good way, but he must needs all his life long run astray,
and in the end fall headlong into hell fire. Wherefore O you parents, as you
have given your children the worse, so give them the better also, as you have
brought them forth the children of wrath and death, so now teach them how they
may become the children of grace and life; teach your children in the trade of
their way, they must needs be taught, for except their education and teaching
be better then their birth, they are cast away for ever, and they may curse
their parents that ever they brought them into the world.

2. The second reason to move parents to this virtuous teaching of their
children, The opportunity of teaching.
is taken from the opportunity thereof. For if ever they will do their
children good, now they must do it while they be children. The Smyth must
strike wile the iron is hot, and the Plowman must plowe while his ground will
work, and the Sayler must sail when he has wind and tide; and as you see
every trade has his proper opportunity: so this trade also of education has
childhood for his fittest time to work upon. If you do not teach your
children and train them up in good nourture while they be young, all your
labor shall be but lost afterward; you shall strike upon the cold iron,
you shall plowe in the hard rock, and you shall strive against both the wind
and the stream. Again do we not see that while the plant is young and tender
a man may wind and bend it which way he will, but if you assaye this when it
is grown old, it will sooner burste then bend: even so is it in the
education of youth, and therefore if parents will do their children any good,
and bend their crooked disposition to a comely stature, they must do it while
they be tender and young; for now they will bend, now they be pliable, now they
will work, therefore Solomon says, Teach a child, and not teach a man. For
how came Paul to be so mighty a teacher in the scriptures after he was
converted, and wrote more then the rest of the Apostles, but because he was
brought up in them from his youth at the feet of Gamaliel? Act. 22.3.
And how came Timothy to be such a famous scholar of so worthy a master as
Paul was, 2. Tim. 3.14 15.
but because he had known the holy scriptures of a child? And how came Daniel
to be so excellent a prophet, Dan. 1.12.
but because he was so religious being a child, that he chose rather to feed
upon hard pulse, the^ to pollute himself with the kings delicates? Every
thing grows well in the spring time; and so the best planting of any
goodness is in the youth, for then it will grow if it be well watered and
looked unto. But here I find two principal wants in parents which greatly
hinder this virtuous work. The first is the want of following and continuance.
For many think that if now and then they give their children some good
instruction, that then they are discharged before God, and that they have
performed a very great duty; but alas this is but little worth. Every trades
man can easily tell us, that no science will go forward well except it be
hardly followed. And again, the minds of children are like the soft wax (the
which as it will soonest take the print, so it will be soonest beaten out
again) and therefore have need often to be imprinted. The second principal
want is the want of government, as when parents teach their children good
things, but do not look diligently after the practice of them, nor see how
they take root in them, this is but a dead kind of teaching, and therefore
loses his fruit: but they do worst of all, who after they have taught well
suffer the clean contrary, for these build with one hand and pull down with
the other. Wherefore here the careful parent must not only teach, but continue
in teaching, and not only continue in teaching, but also look for the fruit of
his teaching: and again not only look for the fruit of his teaching, but
also wall it about with his diligent govern- that in the end it be not lost.

3. The third reason is drawn from the true end and proper good of every child.
The proper good of every child.
Teach a child in the trade of his way, that is, teach him in the trade of his
own way, and that is, as I have showed you, in some honest profession, in good
nourture and godliness. This is called a childs way, not because he of his
own will inclines unto it, but because the Lord who is only wise and most
loving, has of his great grace appointed out this way for him to walk in for
his own good. Now you tender parents, would it not grieve you that your
children should take a wrong course, and drudge and droyle for other men all
the days of their life without any profit or pleasure to themselves? but now
it were well with them if they were men's drudges, for if they miss of their
own way and of their own trade for want of good guiding and instruction,
they fall presently into the Devils way, because there be but two ways, and
now they are become the devils packehorse bearing his burden unto hell gates:
shall they not be well paid for their pains when they come there? wherefore
good parents if you would not have your children to be the devils drudges, and
to labor all their lives for his profit, then teach them in the trade of
their own way and hold them in it.

The ^lessing of God upon the parent for teaching.
4. The fourth reason is fetched from the special blessing of God upon the
parent for this virtuous care of instructing his children, as we may read in
the eighteenth chapter of Genesis, Genesis 18.17.
and the seventeenth verse. Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do?
for I know him that he will command his sons and his houshoulde after
him, that they keep the way of the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment,
that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that he has spoken unto him.

Here we see plainly to no small encouragement to good parents, how the
Lord refers to godly instructing of families, as unto the mean of his
working, not only the imparting of his blessed secrets, but also all other
blessings in general; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that he has spoken
unto him. Now what was that he had spoken unto him? why the promise of all his
blessings both temporal and spiritual as we may read, Genesis 12.2.
Genesis 12. I will make of thee, a great nation, and will bless thee, and make
thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing. I will also bless them that
bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, and in thee shall all families of
the earth be blessed. O great is the blessing that comes by the mean of
this virtuous teaching, the fruit of it shall remain with our posterity even
long after we are gone, and the benefit shall be poured out from age to age
unto the worlds end. Godliness makes great housen, for the Lord has promised
his blessing to a thousand generations of them that love him and keep his
commandments. But on the contrary, what is the cause why the Lord hides his
secrets, keeps back many a heavenly instruction, and withholdeth great
blessings from most parents, but because they will not do as Abraham did, they
have no care that these blessed monuments may not die, but be derived from age
to age to Gods eternal glory. Wherefore thou good parent go thou forward in
this virtuous education of thy children, and then GOD shall hide no necessary
secret or instruction from thee, and he shall withhold no good blessing from
thy posterity; thou shall be a father of the faithful as Abraham was, if thou
have the same care for thy children and family that he had.

5. The fifth reason to stir up dull and careless parents to this their
duty, Threatenings and punishments.
are those punishments and hard threatenings of God in holy scripture denounced
against both pare^t and child failing in their duties. Solomon says, Pro.
17. He that begets a fool begets himself sorrow, and the father of a
fool can have no joy. Pro. 17.21.
Here by the word fool is not meant an innocent or idiot, but the child that
is foolish and untaught, as Salomo^ expounds himself, Chap. 19.13.
chap, 19. verse 13. A foolish son is the calamity of his father. And again
chap. 29.15. A child set at liberty makes his mother ashamed. and. 29.15.
Wherefore oh you good children, you that have more understanding then the
rest, take pity upon your dear parents yt have taken so much pains for you,
and suffer them not by your dissolute life to be made a spectacle of shame and
a gazing stock unto all others. Again Solomon speaking of unnurtured children
says, Pro. 20. He that curses his father or his mother, Pro. 20.20.
his light shall be put out in obscure darkness: that is, in the utter darkness
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. Chap. 30.16.
Again in the 30. chap. he says, The eye that mocketh his father and
despises the obedience of his mother, the ravens of the valley shall job it
out, and the eagles shall eat it up: that is, he shall be slain in the field,
and the birds of the air shall devout him. Again Job speaking of wicked and
ungodly parents in his 27. chap. says, Job. 27.14.
If his children be multiplied they are multiplied to the sword, and his
posterity shall not be satisfied with bread. Again the Lord in ye prophecy of
Amos says, Though they bring up children, yet will I deprive them from being
men, Amos. 9.12.
yea woe to them when I depart from them. And again verse. 13. Ephraim shall
bring forth his children to the murderer. Now from whence comes all this
mischief and the cause of this great misery both upon children and parents?
what is the cause of this ruthful sorrow? whence springs this mothers shame?
and how comes it to pass that the parents own doung is cast in their faces
by their own children in mocking and despising of the^? and whence arise all
these heavy plagues and judgments of God upon their children to ye consuming
of their eyes, but from this their own negligence in bringing up their
children? for it is even just with God, that seeing they have offended him in
his greatest blessings, they should be plagued in the same thing wherein they
offended with his greatest judgments. O you unnatural parents, Luke 16.27.
Dives in hell shall rise up against you in the day of judgment and condemn
you; for he being in hell had a care of his fathers house that they might be
forewarned, and therefore desired Abraham to send Lazarus to his brethren to
testify unto them that they came not into that place of torment: but you will
not admonish your children, you will not teach them Moses and the prophets, and
you will not show them the danger of Gods heavy displeasure hanging over their
heads, and therefore your own children shall be one of the furies in hell to
torment you. The Lord open your eyes to foresee and fly these fearful
judgments.

The diuturnitie of the good of good education. Psalm. 78, 5.6
6. The sixth and last reason to move parents to this excellent duty, which is
the principal scop of this text, is ye diuturnity of this good; their children
shall be the better for it al their lives after; nay the world to come shall
reap this benefit: for such children as you now bring up, such parents shall
they be after you when you are gone: and look what parents you leave behind
you, the like children again shall they rear up. Wherefore O you parents, you
are either the making or the marring of the world: for if your children learn
no good erudition at your hands, how should they be good fathers after you? and
how should they leave that to their posterity by the right of inheritance
which they never received from their ancestors? Let no man think that I dwell
too long in this thing: For this is so profitable both for you, and your
children, and for the whole Church of God, as that if I should turn aside from
it, I know not what ground I should choose to be so profitably occupied in
again; this is a most excellent course, to this business I will lay both my
shoulders, and if this did so much move you as it does me, we should shortly
see a wonderful change in Gods Church. Oh whose heart would it not rejoice to
see the walls of Gods kingdom raised up? Wherefore ye that are the Lords
remembrancers keep not silence, and give him no rest until he repair and set
up Jerusalem the praise of the world: call upon the Lord to move the hearts of
parents, and call upon parents to remember their duties, and you parents
hearken when you are called unto, and stop not your ears like the deaf Adder.
Your children are the seed of Gods husbandry: 1. Cor. 3.9.
We together are Gods laborers, says the Apostle, Ye are Gods husbandry and
Gods building. Now even as it is in the husbandry of this world, the good
husband before he reapeth his crop will plowe and prepare his ground for
another harvest to follow that, and when he has prepared his ground, his next
care is for his seed, that it may be of the best, he dresseth it, and sifteth
all the unprofitable soil out of it, that so in time to come he might receive
the more happy increase: even so you good parents, you must not live so
careless as though the world should end with your selves; no you must plow and
fallow, and prepare your seed for another harvest before you reap your own
crop, the Lords husbandry must not die to the end of the world, and he has
made you his plowman together with his ministers, and your children are the
seed. Again, you parents are the Lords orchard and vineyard, as we may read
Cant. 4. Esaias 5. and therefore your children are the nurserie unto it. The old
trees cannot always stand, and the time shall come when all we shall be cut
down with the axe of death. Now as he that will continue his orchard of good
fruits unto his posterity, will always keep a nurserie of young impes to
succeed as the old shall decay, and as he will be more careful for them then
for his older trees, because they by reason of their tenderness may sooner catch
hurt: for if they should be bitten and nipped while they be young, or the
canker should take them, they should prove but scrubbed trees, and would never
be fit for their rooms: even so you parents which are both the Lords husbandry
and his husbands, if you do not keep a nurserie for the Lords orchard, and if
you do not look well to your children, which are the young olive plants in
this spiritual garden, the cankerworme of evil vices shall catch them, and
the wild beasts of the forest the heard of devils which stray continually
seeking whom to devour, shall so bite them, that they shall not after us be
fit to come into our rooms, and so the Lords vineyard should in time to come
grow waste. For Gods sake good people look well to this; if your own
children do not move you, yet let Gods Church and his glory for many years
to come prevail with you. Now adays parents think it to be the only
succouring and nourishing of their children, to give them meat and drink to
the fill, and ease enough, and to cocker them under their wing, and thus in
deed their bodies grow tall, but their souls they suffer for want of
spiritual instruction and good manners, to dye and decay in them in the mean
while, whereby they show (as S. Chrysostom says) how that they brought forth
the bodies of their children, but not their souls. This is not to keep a
nursery for Gods Church which is built of spiritual stones. The Lord be
thanked we our selves have at the least some care to serve God, oh let us not
leave Gods Church in worse case then we find it, for then should we leave our
shame behind us when we are gone: but it is to be feared (beloved) except we
take better means in hand then we do begin, we shall leave behind us such a
stink, to the great annoyance of Gods Church after us, that the ages to come
shall be greatly infected with it. For in very truth and diligent watchfulnes
I speak it, I find far less duty in our youth, who owe reverence to their
elders, then in the elders themselves, who ought to be reverenced. What is
become of the ancient discipline of parents? a few late years of ease and
plenty have made it to be forgotten, as a law worn out of mind. Wherefore
good parents, now lay to your hands before all run to ruin, take unto you the
ancient bonds wherewith your selves were held when you were young, receive all
the helps of which I have showed you, and teach your children the whole trade
of their way, that they may keep it when they be old men, and deliver the same
enlarged and perfected to their children again, that so Gods Church and his
glory may not dye, but still be provided for to the end of the world. Al our
hope is upon this youth now being; for if they be well brought up then they
will also have care of the posterity following, and the posterity following
shall again commend this good education by eternal tradition to the day of
doom? Oh you parents, cast your eyes upon this present offspring framed of God
so comely, as though they were destinate to some strange and singular
reformation. Consider with your selves how the world to come shall rejoice over
us, and speak of this happy conversion to all posterities: and lastly, lift
up your eyes to heaven, and behold the bridegroom Christ Jesus, preparing for
his second coming, and prepare you also the world for him, that so we being
found faithful stewards at his return, we may with our dear children and
beloved posterity, enter with him into the Masters joy, which he grant that
has made us all, to whom be all honor and praise and every good duty world
without end. Amen.

FINIS.

