DIVINE MEDITATIONS AND HOLY CONTEMPLATIONS.

BY That reverend Divine R. Sibbes D. D. Master of Catherine Hall in Cambridge,
and sometimes Preacher of Grayes Inn, LONDON.

LONDON Printed for John Crook and Richard Sergier in Pau^ Chur^ yard. 1638



DIVINE MEDITATIONS AND HOLY CONTEMPLATIONS.

BY That reverend Divine R. Sibbes D. D. Master of Catherine Hall in Cambridge,
and sometimes Preacher of Grayes Inn in LONDON.

LONDON Printed by Tho. Cotes for John Crook and Richard Sergier and are to be
sold at the sign of the Gray-hound in Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
COurteous Reader, thou have here Meditation upon Meditation offered to thy
consideration, as a help to thee when thou art privately alone.

As sweet spices yield small savor, until they are beaten to powder, so the
wonderful works of God are either, not at all, or very slightly smelt in the
nostrils of man, who is of a dull sense, unless they be rubbed and chased in
the mind, through a fervent affection, and singled out with a particular view,
like them which tell money, who look not confusedly at the whole heap, but at
the value of every parcel: So then a true Christian must endeavor himself to
deliver not in gross, but by retaile the millions of Gods mercy to his soul,
in secret thoughts, chewing the cud of every Circumstance, with continual
Contemplation. And as a thriftie Gardi ner, which is loath to see one Rose
leaf to fall from the stalk without stilling; so the Christian soul is
unwilling to pass, or to stifle the beds of spices in the Garden of Christ,
without gathering some fruit, Cant. 6. which contain a mystery and hidden
virtue, and our Champhire clusters in the Vineyards, of Engedie, Cant. 1. must
bear solved into drops, by the Still of Meditation, or else they may be noted
for weeds in the Herball of men, which has his full of all kinds, but some
are slightly passed over, as the watery herbs of vanity, which grow on every
wall of carnal men's hearts, and yeeldbut a slight taste how good the Lord is,
or should be to their souls: It therefore behooves us first to mind the tokens
of his mercy and love, and afterward for the helping os our weak digestion to
champe and chew by an often revolution every part and parcel thereof before we
let it down into our stomachs, that by that means it may effectually nourish
every vein and living artery of our soul, and fill them full with the pure
blood of Christ's body, the least drop whereof refreshes, and chereth the soul
and body of him which is in a swound through his sin, and makes him apt to
walk and talk, as one who is now living in Christ.

By this sweet Meditation, the soul takes the key where all her evidences
lie, and peruses the bills and articles of Covenant agreed and condescended
unto, between God and man; there she sees the great grant and pardon of her
sins, subscribed unto, by God himself, and sealed with the blood of Christ.

There he beholds his unspeakable mercy to a prisoner condemned to die,
without which at the last, in a desperate case he is led and haled unto
execution, by the cursed crew of hellish furies.

Here she learneth how the holy land is intailed and retaileth by discourse,
the descent from Adam, unto Abraham and his son Isaac, and so forward unto all
the seed of the faithful; by Meditation the soul prieth into the soul, and
wit ha reciprocal judgment, examineth her self, and every faculty thereof,
what she has, what she wants, where she dwells, where she removes, and
where she shall be.

By this she feels the pulses of Gods Spirit beating in her, the suggestions
of Satan, the corruptions of her own affections, who like a cruel
steppe-Dame mingleth poisons and pestilent things to murder the Spirit, to
repel every good motion, and to be in the end the lamentable ruin of the
whole man.

Here she stands, as it were, with Saul upon the mountains, beholding the
combat between David and Goliath, botweene the Spirit, and the uncircumcised
raging of the Flesh, the stratagems of Satan, the bootlesse attempts of the
world.

Here appear her own infirmities, her relapses into sin, her self astoned
by the buffets of Satan, her Fort shrewdly battered by carnal and fleshly
lusts, her Colors and prosession darkened and dimmed through the smoke of
affliction, her faith hidden because of such massacres and and treasons, her
hope banished with her mistrust, her self ho vering ready to take flight from
the sincerity of her profession.

Here she may discern, as from the top of a Mast an army coming, whose
Captain is the Spirit guarded with all his graces; the bloody arms of Christ
by him displaied, the Trum. pets sound, Satan vanquished, the world conquered,
the flesh subdued, the soul recvived, profession bettered, and each thing
restored to his former integrity.

The consideration hereof made Isaac go meditating in the evening, Genesis 24.

This caused Hezekiah to mourn like a Dove, and chatter like a Pie in his
heart, in deep silence, Esa. 58.

This forced David to meditate in the morning, nay, all the day long, Psalm. 63.
and 119. 148. ver. as also by night in secret thoughts, Psalm. 16.

This caused Paul to give Timothy this lesson to meditate, 1 Timothy 4. And God
himself commanded Joshua when he was elected Governor, that he should
meditate upon the Law of Moses both day and night, to the end he might
perform the things written therein, Ioshu 1.

And Moses adds this clause teaching the whole Law from God himself These
words must remain in thy heart, thou must meditate upon them, both at home and
abroad, when thou go to bed, and when thou risest in the morning, Deuteronomy. 6.

This meditation is not a passion of melancholy, nor a fit of fiery love, nor
covetous care, nor senseless dumps, but a serious act of the Spirit in the
inwards of the soul, whose object is spiritual, whose affection is a provoked
appetite to practice holy things, a kindling in us of the love of God, a zeal
toward his truth, a healing our benumbed hearts, according to that speech of
the Prophet, My heart did wax hot within me, and fire did kindle in my
meditations, Psalm. 39. Tho want whereof caused Adam to fall, yea and all the
earth into utter desolation, for there is no man considers deeply in his
heart, Ier. 12. If Caine had considered the curse of God, and his heavy hand
against that grievous and crying sin, he would not have slain his own
brother; if Pharaoh would have set his heart to ponder of the mighty hand of
God, by the plagves already past, he should have prevented those which
followed, and have foreslowed his haste in making pursuit with the destruction
of himself and his whole Army.

If Nadad and Abihu had regarded the fire they put in their Censers, they might
have been safe from the fire of heaven.

To conclude, the want of meditation has been the cause of so many fearful
events, strange massacres, and tragical deaths, which have from time to time
pursued the drowsy heart, and careless mind; and in these our days is the
butchery of all the mischiefs which have already chanced unto our Countrymen;
for whilst Gods judgments are masked, and not presented to the view of the
mind, by the serious work of the same, though they are keen and sharp, it
being sheathed, they seem dull, and of no edge unto us, which causes us to
prick up the feathers of pride and insolency, and to make no reckoning of the
fearful and final rekoning, which most assu redly must be made, will we,
nill we before Gods Tribunal. Hence it comes to pass that our English
Gentlewomen do brave it with such outlandish manners, as though they could
dash God out of

countenance, or roist it in heaven as they carve it here, so that thousands
are carried to hell out of their sweet perfumed chambers, where they thought
to have lived, and are snatched presently from their pleasant and odoriferous
Arbours, dainty dishes, and silken company to take up their room in the
dungeon and lake of hell, which burns perpetually with fire and brimstone.

And for the want of this, Gods children go limping in their knowledge, and
carry the fire of zeal in a flintie heart, which unless it be hammered, will
not yield a spark to warm and cheer their benumbed and frozen affections
toward the worship and service of God, and the hearty embracing of his truth.

By this Gods Works of Creation are slipped over, even from the Cedar, to the
Hyssope that grows on the wall.

The Sun, the Moon, the Stars, shine without admiration, the sea and the
earth, the fowls, fishes, beasts, and man himself, are all esteemed as common
matters in Nature; thus God works those strange creatures, without that glory
performed which is due, and his children receive not that comfort by the secret
meditation of Gods creation as they might. Hence it proceeds that they are
often in their dumps, fearing, as though they enjoyed not the light; whereas if
they would meditate and judge aright of their estates, they might find theey
are the Sons of God, and heirs of that rich kingdom most apparently known,
and established in heaven, and shall suddenly possess the same, even then most
likely, when their flesh thinks it farthest off; as the Heir being within a
month of his age, makes such a reckoning of his lands, that no careful
distress can trouble him; but this consideration being partly through Satan's,
and partly through their own dullness and over-stupidnesse, they fare like men
in aswound, and as it were bereaved of the very life of the Spirit, staggering
under the burden of affliction, stammering in their godly profession, and
cleaving sometimes unto the world; through this they carry Christ's promises
like comforts in a box, or as the Surgeon his salves in his bosom.

Meditation applies, Meditation heals, Medditation instructs; if thou
love wisdom and blessedness, meditate in the Law of the Lord day and
night, and so make use of these meditations to quicken thee up to duty, and to
sweeten thy heart in thy way to the heavenly Jerusalem, Farewell.

E. C.

DIVINE Meditations.
THat man has made a good

A Wife when she marries a Husband, gives

When we come to Religion, we loose not downright, as Austin says, Lord I
have wanted of thy sweetness over long, all my former life was nothing but
husks.

God takes care of poor Esaias 40. 11.

Whatsoever is good for shall have it, if crosses be good they shall have them,
if misery be good they shall have it, for all is ours to serve for our maine
good.

Gods Children have these outward things with

The whole life of a Christian should be nor sleep, but eat to God, and
sleep to God, and work to God, and talk to God, do all to his glory and
praise.

Though God deliver not out of trouble, yet he

What are we but a Model of Gods favors, matter of praise to us, the sins
of others should make us praise God, and say, Lord, it might have been my
case, it might have befallen me.

God pitties our weakness in all our troubles and Psalm. 125. 3.

Is it not an unreasonable speech, for a man at get out of this, it will
always be thus with me.

Do the wicked think to shame or fear good Stephens did, when he was
stoned, Act. 6. 15.

If God hides his face from us, what shall become Thou turn' dst away thy face,
and I was troubled, Psalm. 30. 7.

When we have given up our selves to God, let David's, and Gods Paul's, and Gods
Abraham's, we have an everlasting being in him.

A special cause of too

God has made the poorest

It is the peculiar wisdom

God has made himself too good for us, he is not satisfied in giving us the
blessings of this life, but he gives himself unto us.

As we receive all from God, so we should lay all

Gods people have sweet intercourse with God in

We glorify God when world, when we give him the highest place in our love and
in our joy, when all our affections are set upon him, as the chiefest good.
This is seen also by opposition, when we will not offend God for any
creature. When we can ask our affections, Whom have I in heaven but thee?

There is no true zeal to Gods glory, but it is joined

If we do not find our the means of salvation, and wait Gods good time,
and stand not disputing, perhaps God has not a purpose to save me, but fall
to obedience, casting thy self into the Arms of Christ, and say if I perish,
I will perish here.

The love of God in CHRIST is not barren

Our desires are holy, if spiritual things: David desires not to be great, to
be rich in the world, or to have power to be revenged upon his enemies, but
that he may dwell in the House of the Lord and enjoy his Ordinances, Psalm. 27.
4.

Desires show the frame of the soul more than any

Desires spring from the will, and the will being as the accomplishing of that
it desires. Those therefore that pretend they have good desires, and yet
neglect all means, and live scandalously, this is but a sluggish desire.

An Hypocrite will not pray always, but a child The Lord will fulfill the
desires of them that fear him, Psalm. 145. 19.

Prayer does exercise all the graces of the Spirit, us set a high price upon
that we seek after, and to use it well.

God takes it unkindly if

The religious affections of Gods people are mixed, for they mingle their joy
with weeping, and their weeping with joy, whereas a carnal man is all simple,
if he joy he is mad, if he be sorrowful (unless it be restrained) it sinks
him, but grace always tempers the joy and sorrow of a Christian, because he
has always something to joy in, and something to grieve for.

We are members of two worlds; now whilst yet we must use the world as if we
used it not, for there is a danger, least our affections cleave to the things
of this life.

It is a poorness of spirit in a Christian to be over-joyfull,

A sincere heart that is burdened with sin, desires not heaven so much, as
the place where he shall be free from sin, and to have the Image of God and
Christ perfected in his soul, and therefore a sincere spirit comes to hear
the Word, not so much because an eloquent man preaches, as to hear divine
truths, because the evidence of Spirit goes with it, to work those graces. You
cannot still a child with any thing but the Breast, so you cannot still the
desires of a Christian, but with divine Truths, as Esaias 26. 8. The desires of
our souls is to thy name and to the remembrance of thee.

There is a thousand things that may hinder good success in our affairs, What
man can apply all things to a fit issue, and remove all things that may hinder?
Who can observe Persons, Times, Places, Advantages, and Disadvantages, and when
we see these things there is naturally a passion, that it robbes us of our
knowledge; as when a man sees any danger, there is such a fear or anger, that
he is in a mist. So that unless God give a particular success, there is
none. As it is in the frame of a man's body, it stands upon many joints, if any
of these be out of frame it hinders all the rest.

If we will hold out, because the error is in want

What is the reason that Gods children sink not to

In prosperity, or after some deliverance its the have been delivered, the
more will the spirit be enlarged to praise God.

When ever we receive

Take heed of Satan's

Whatsoever God takes away from his children, great earthly favor, or else
with strength to bear it, God gives charge to others to take a care of the
fatherless and widow, and will he neglect them himself.

That is spiritual knowledge, Harmony between our nature and truth.

If we will walk aright in Gods ways let us have Moses upon him that is
invisible.

A man may know, that he loves the world, if he all in getting, and nothing in
distributing; this man is a worldling, though he be moderate in getting
without wronging any man, yet the world has gotten his heart, because he
makes not that use of it he should.

It is a sottish conceit to think that we can fit our

As natural life preserves and strength to repel that which is contrary.

It is the nature of the soul, that when it sees a

In the Covenant of Grace, God intends the strength, or excellency in the
creature, and so it gives all the glory to God and Christ.

What we are afraid to

The heart of man, till he if a man have but a little scruple in his
conscience, he is like a ship in the sea, tossed with contrary winds and
cannot come to the Haven.

The righteousness of Works leaves the soul

Glory follows afflictions, not as the day follows

This life is not a life for the body but for the soul; mine in the earth,
that did fast for me, and pray with me: it will speak for it as Pharaohs
Butler to the King for Joseph.

Afflictions makes a divorce

When the soul admires spiritual things, its long it will not stoop to any
base comfort. We should therefore labor to keep our souls in an estate of
holy admiration.

All those whom Christ

Spiritual duties are as members nimble and strong, and cheerful; so where
the Spirit of God is in any man, it makes him nimble and strong, and cheerful
to good duties, but when we are drawn to them as a Bear to the stake, for
fear, or an inbred natural custom, this is not from the Spirit, for where
the Spirit is, there duties are performed without force, fear, or hopes. A
child needs no extrinsecall motion to make him please his father, because its
inbred and natural to him.

As the weights of a Clock makes all the with things without them, for they
want this inward principle to make them do good things freely; but where the
Spirit of God is, it works a kind of natural freedom.

As the woman in the Law, when she was forced

Good duties come from Spring, yet because there is flesh in them as well as
spirit, therefore every duty must be gotten out of the fire. And yet there is
a liberty, because there is a principle in them that resists the flesh.

Gods children are hindered in good duties by an

A child of God is the greatest Freeman, and the best Servant, even as Christ
was the best Servant, yet none so free, and the greater portion that any man
has of his Spirit, the freer disposition he has to serve every one in love.

Sight is the most noblest it sees Christ in heaven, and looks down into the
world, it sees backward and forwards, it sees things past, present, and to
come; and therefore it is, that Faith is expressed by beholding.

A Veil or Covering Moses face. Both these are now taken away in Christ; for
we serve God as sons, and as a Spouse her husband; we are still in subjection,
but not servile, and now also with open face, we behold the glory of the Lord,
we behold the things themselves, they are now clearly laid open, the Veil is
taken away.

Our happiness consists in our subordination God: for his carriage to his
friends, He would not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed;
he did not cast Peter in the teeth with his Denial; He was of a winning and
gaining disposition to all: for his carriage to his enemies, He did not call
for fire from heaven to destroy them, but shed many tears for them that shed
his blood, O Jerusalem, etc. and upon the Cross, Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do: So that if we will be minded like unto Christ,
consider how he carried himself to his Father, to his Friends, to his
Enemies, yea to the devil himself, when he comes to us in wife, children,
friends, etc. we must do as Christ did, bid avoid Satan, and when we have to
deal with those that have the spirit of the devil in them, we must not
render reproach for reproach, but answer them, It is Written.

When we find any and shall I cast my Crown into the dirt? No, I will be
more honorable; these are no proud thoughts, but the befitting our estate.

Those that are besotted of God and his Angels.

As men after a fit of

That which we drew from the first Adam, was Adam the favor of God, from the
first Adam we drew corruption, from the second Adam we drew Grace; from the
first Adam we drew misery and death, and all the miseries that follow death;
we draw from the second Adam, life and happiness; whatsoever we had from the
first Adam, we have it repaired more abundantly in the second.

Grace makes us glorious, because it puts glory Christian that has grace is
above other men.

It is an evidence that we are gracious men, and to hear good of men that are
dead, but they cannot endure good in the lives of others to be in their eyes,
especially, when they come to compare themselves with them, they love not to be
out-sh ined.

As the Sun goes his heartedness, sometimes they grow not in extention, that
they may grow at the root, upon a check grace breaks out more; as we say
after a hard Winter, usually there follows a glorious Spring.

Gods children never hate corruption more, than

When the truth of grace is wrought in a Christian,

Christ is our Pattern, whom we must strive to live by faith in our
sanctification.

Consider Christ upon

With our Contemplation, let us join this kind pride, that he became humble
to the death of the Cross to redeem me from it, and shall I be proud? and
when we are stirred up to revenge, consider that Christ prayed for his
enemies; when we are tempted to disobedience, think God in my nature was
obedient to the death, and shall I stand upon terms: and when we grow hard
hearted, consider Christ became man, that he might show bowels of his mercy:
let us reason thus when we are tempted to any sin, and it will be a means to
transform us from our own cursed likeness into the likeness of Christ.

When we see God blasphemed, or the like,

We must look upon Christ, not only for healing, let us know that we shall
be countable for those good examples which we have from others; there is not an
example of an humble, holy and industrious life, but shall be laid to our
charge, for God does purposely let them shine in our eyes, that we might take
example by them.

As the spirits in the arteries quickens the blood in Paul speaks to Lydia,
but the Spirit speaks to her heart. As it was with Christ himself, so it is
with his members; He was conceived by the Spirit, anointed by the Spirit,
sealed by the Spirit; he was led into the Wilderness by the Spirit, he
offered up himself by the Spirit, and by the Spirit he was raised from the
dead: even so the members of Christ do answer unto Christ himself, all is by
the Spirit, we are conceived by the Spirit; the same Spirit that sanctified him
sanctifies us: but first we receive the Spirit by way of Union, and then
Unction follows after, when we are knit to Christ by the Spirit, then it
works the same in us, as it did in him.

When a proud wit, and supernatural truths meet have some thing of his own;
therefore in reading and studying of heavenly Truths, especially the Gospel,
we must come to God for his Spirit, and not venture upon conceits of our own
parts, for God will curse such proud attempts.

Many men think that the knowledge of divine

When men understand

Those that measure lands, are very exact in every

This life is a life of Faith, for God will try

The nature of Hope is that we daily meet withal.

It is too much curiosity to search into particulars, Peter did, 1 Pet. 1. 1.
when he thought of an inheritance immortal and undefiled, and that fades
not, he gives thanks, Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us, etc.

When we see men look big and swell with the things of this life, let us in
a holy kind of st ate think of our happiness in heaven, and carry our selves
accordingly. If we see any thing in this world, lets say to our souls, this
is not that I look for, or when we hear of any thing that is good, let us
say I can hear this, and therefore this is not that I look for, or when we
understand any thing here below, this is not the thing I look for; but for
things that cye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor that ever entered into the
heart of man.

There are four things and go to him in all his consultations for his
counsel: thirdly, he places contentment in him alone, because in his worst
conditions he is at peace and quiet if he may have his countenance shine upon
him: fourthly, he seeks to please him, because he labors to be in such a
condition, that God may delight in him, his love stirs up his soul to remove
all things distasteful; it seeks out, as David did, Is there never a one left
of the house of Saul, to whom I may do good for Ionathans sake.

Infirmities in Gods children, preserves their in Gods Scripture where God
honors the Saints; their weaknesses are made known: Jacob wrestled with God
and prevailed, but he halted; and Peter, Upon this Rock will I build my
Church; yet get thee behind me Satan. Paul was exalted above measure with
Revelations; but he had the messenger of Satan to buffet him.

It is the poysonfull nature we can by love and meekness.

Christians find their corruptions more offensive to

The more will, the more sin, when we venture and he will suspend his
comforts for a long time; therefore let no man venture upon sin, for God will
take a course with him that shall be little to his ease.

The reason why mean Christians have more loving soul goes to heaven with
more joy, whilst others are entangled.

Many men are troubled with cold affections, and

When we love things baser than our selves, its our love, that we may love him
with all our souls, and with all our mind, and with all our strength.

As the Sun, when it David did, comfort himself in the Lord his God.

Many men would be in Canaan as soon as they Egypt, they would be at the
highest pitch presently; but God will lead us through the wilderness of
temptations and afflictions, till we come to heaven; and it is a part of our
Christian meekness to submit to God, and not to murmr, because we are not
as we would be; but let us rather magnify the mercies of God that works in us
any love of good things, and that he vouch safes us any beginnings.

As noble men's children have Tutors to guide have the Spirit dwelling in them.

A Christian is now in his

The Word of God is then in our hearts when it who shall get out that which
Gods finger has written in our hearts; no Fire nor Faggot, no temptation
whatsoever.

We shall never be satisfied to our comfort, that as a natural truth, when
they look upon holy things, not in a divine, but in a humane manner.

When the Word dwells

God excepts against none, if we do not except Lord and Husband, for better
for worse, with persecutions, afflictions, crosses, etc. Take Christ thus, and
take him for ever, and then thou shall be saved.

When we believe divine truths by the Spirit,

We may be brought very low, but we shall not creature; in the judgment of
the world we may be confounded, but a hand of mercy shall fetch us up again,
let the depth of misery and disconsolation be what it will be, we shall not be
ashamed.

The reason why Gods

For want of watchfulness, God oftentimes gives us up to such a perplexed
estate, that we shall not know that we are in Grace, and though we may have a
principle of Grace in us, yet we shall not see it, but may go out of the
world in darkness.

We ought not at any time to deny the Truth, pictures of silver, therefore
direction must be our guide, for speech is then only good, when it is better
than silence.

It is not lawful for any Dinah ventured abroad and came cracked home; its just
with God, that those that dally with these things should be caught, as many
idle Travelers are, its pity but those should perish in danger, that love
danger.

He that will not now in time of peace, will hardly be brought to it in time
of trouble.

We must not only stand for the truth, but we Peter 2. 15. to do it in
meekness and fear; we must not bring passion to Gods cause, nor must our
lives give our tongues the lie.

There is such a distance soul to a nearer distance, than those that are wild
persons.

Nature cannot work above its own powers, as Israel in the Wilderness saw
wonders upon wonders, and yet when they came to be proved, they could not
believe.

Its Gods free love that should therefore teach us sound humility, co^fidering
that God must open, to else we are eternally shut.

Seeing Grace is not of our own getting, therefore this should teach us
Bethesda for the moving of the water.

He that attends to the Word of God, does not know what Faith and Repentance
is; there is at that time a spiritual Echo in the soul, as Psalm. 27. 8. When
thou said, seek ye my face, my heart answered, thy face Lord will I seek:
and therefore must men judge of their profiting by the Word, not by their
carrying of it in their memories, but by how much they are made able by it to
bear a cross; and how they are made able to resist temptation, etc.

There should not be intimate familiarity, but where we judge men faithful,
to be entreated; and we wrong them if we show our selves strange unto them.

True faith works love, and then it works by love

The Word of God is ancienter than the Scripture; The seed of the Woman should
break the head of the Serpent. The Scripture is but that Modus, that manner of
conveying the Word of God; this Scripture is the Rule whereby we must walk,
and the Judge also of all controversies of Religion, and in spite of the Church
of Rome, it will judge them. S. Augustine has an excellent Discourse, When
there is contention betwixt brethren, witnesses are brought, but in the end,
the Words, the Will of the dead man is brought forth, and these Words
determine: Now shall the words of a dead man be of force, and shall not the
Word of Christ determine, therefore look to the Scripture.

All Idolaters shall be ashamed that worship Images, Cesternes. Let those be
ashamed that trust to their wits and policies; all those shall be ashamed that
bear themselves big upon any earthly thing, for these crutches will be taken
away, and then they fall; these false reports shall make them all ashamed.

The way to bring faith into the heart, is, first, David says, I have seen an
end of all perfection. Secondly, the soul must be convinced of an excellency
in Religion above all things in the world, or else it will not rest, for the
heart of man would choose the best, and when it is persuaded, that the gain in
Religion is above the world, then it yields. And thirdly, a consideration of
the firmness of the ground, whereupon the Promise is built, put God to it
therefore, either to make his Promise good, or to disappoint us, and he will be
sure to make it good in our forgiveness of sin, proceeding in Grace, and
strength, against temptations in time of trouble.

Man is naturally of a short spirit, so that if he

There be many things to hinder this Grace of waiting, crosses we meet with,
as the scorn and reproach of this world, and many other trialls, God seems
also to do nothing less than to perform his promise; but lets comfort our
selves with this, that he waits to do them good that wait on him.

We should labor to agree this world; God will have distinctions for order
sake, but else there is no difference.

Christians are like to many men of great which they want in this world, shall
be made up in grace and glory hereafter.

We ought daily to imitate Christ in our places, to be abundant always in the
works of the Lord; lets labor to have large hearts, that we may do it
seasonably and abundantly and unweariably; the love of Christ will breed in us
the same impression that was in him.

None come to God without Christ, none where God has sent it; therefore where
there was no means of salvation before the coming of Christ, there was no
visible intendment of God ordinarily to save them.

Preventing mercy is the before I had a being, and therefore much more will thou now have a care of me (whom thou have reconciled unto thy self) and
remember me in mercy for time to come.

If Gods mercy might be overcome with our

God is rich in mercy, not only to our souls, Buckler; He gives us all good
things, and so he is called a Sun, He keeps us in good estate, and
advances us higher, so far as our nature shall be capable.

The Sun shines on the Moon and Stars, and

We are styled in Scripture to be good and righteous, because our
understandings, our wills and affections are our own; but so far as they are
holy, they are the holy Ghosts: we are the principle in our actions, as they
are actions; but the holy Ghost is principle of the holiness of the action;
the gracious government of the new creature is from the Spirit, if the holy
Ghost take away his Government, and do not guide and assist us in every holy
action, we are at a stand, and can go no further.

Every man naturally is himself, but in setting upon divine things in his own
strength, as if he were principal in his own actions, coming to them in the
strength of his own wit, and in the strength of his own reason, this seed is
in all men by nature, until God have turned a man out of himself, by the
power of the holy Ghost.

Those that care not for the Word, they are strangers veins and arteries in
the body, that give quickening and life to the whole body, and therefore where
the Word is most revealed there is most Spirit, but where Christ is not opened
in the Gospel, there the Spirit is not at all visible.

When Christ comes into the soul by the Spirit, and makes us go boldly to God
in all our wants.

As we may know who dwells in a house, by observing but those in whom the
Spirit dwells, they will consult with it, and not regard what flesh and blood
says, but will follow the directions of the Word and Spirit.

A Christian will not do actions, and sometimes the worser part will appear
most, but here is the excellency of a Christians estate, that the Spirit will
work it out at the last; it will never let his heart and conscience alone till
it be wrought out by little and little.

The Spirit of God may the Spirit is there in some measure.

Where the Spirit dwells He can do all things through Christ that strengthens
him, his mind is content and settled; he can bear with the infirmities of
others, and not be offended (for it is the weak in the Spirit that are
offended) he is ready in his desires to say, Come Lord Jesus come quickly, but
where corruption bears sway, there is, O stay a little that I may recover my
strength, that is, stay awhile that I may repent: For the soul is not fit to
appear before God, but where the Spirit dwells in Grace and comfort.

When we are young,

God gives comforts in the exercise and practice that we love God, we must
keep his Commandments, we must not keep one but all; it must be universal
obedience fetched from, the heart root, and that out of love.

It is a true rule in Divinity, that God never takes away Eliah was taken from
Elisha into heaven, God doubled his Spirit upon Elisha; if God take away wife
or children, he gives better things for them; the Disciples parted with Christ
bodily presence, but he sent them the Holy Ghost.

God will be known of us in those things wherein it is our comfort to know
him: In all our devotions, the whole counsels of heaven comforts us jointly;
the second Person prays to the Father, and he sends the third; and as they
have several titles, so they all agree in their love and care to comfort.

In trouble we are prone to forget all that we have things at such times when
we have most need of the.

Those that care not for the Word of God, reject

No man is a true Divine but the child of these things, yet they know them not.
Take the mysticallest points in religion, as Justification, Adoption, peace of
Conscience, Joy in the holy Ghost, the sweet benefit of Communion of Saints,
the excellent estate of a Christian in extremity, to know what is to be done
upon all occasions; inward sight, and sorrow for sin, they know not what
those things mean; for howsoever they may discourse of them, yet the things
themselves are Mysteries, Repentance is a Mystery, Joy in the holy Ghost is a
Mystery; no natural man, though he be never so great a Scholar, knows these
things experimentally, but he knows them as Physicians know Physic by their
Books; but not as a sick man by experience.

It is a great scandal to Religion, that men of these things excellently; and
with admiration, yet in particular he has no power of the^ in his heart.

It is good and comfortable to compare our condition Matthew, 25. I thank thee
O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. It is good in all outward
discouragements, when things go not well with us, thus to reason with our
selves, will thou change thy estate with the men of the world? God has
advanced thee to a higher Order: Let them have their greatness, alas they are
miserable creatures notwithstanding all that they do enjoy.

If we desire to have the Spirit, we must wait Israel in the Wilderness had
no Manna, till they had spent their Onyons and Garlic, so this world must be
out of request with us, before we can be spiritual: let us therefore labor to
see the excellency of spiritual things, and how cheap and poor all the glory
of the world is to those: these things thought and considered on, will make us
more and more spiritual.

The holy Ghost would not come till Christ by his was received before; was by
virtue of this, so that the sending of the holy Ghost is the best fruit of Gods
reconciliation.

Let a particular judgment

Every man by nature, though the wisest, till he in the world, Satan leads
them to honors and voluptuousness, as a sheep is led by a green bough, he
goes with the stream of man's nature and so is never discerned.

As a man that is called before a Judgment Seat, being hold of it. In this
sense (as some Divines speak) no finne, but infidelity condemns a man, for if
a man could believe and repent, no sin should be prejudicial to his
salvation; we had need therefore to look to our faith, when want of belief
seals a man up under sin; a man is imprisoned in his conscience, until he
come to Christ, and his conscience is his Iaylor; his conscience enlightened by
the Law, tells him, that he is guilty of such and such sins; and hereupon
keeps him to further judgment.

There is a miserable men will deny sin, or else mince it, as Adam did, and
as Saul, when Samuel came to convince him, I have, says he, done the
Commandment of the Lord; and when he was driven from that, then he did but
spare them for sacrifice, but when nothing could satisfy; then I pray thee
honor me before the people: things that we cannot justify, yet we will
excuse them, unless God come by his Spirit, we are ready to shift them off;
but when the Spirit comes, and takes away all these figge-leaves, then it
convinces him of his miserable condition, not only in general, but the Spirit
working together with the Word, brings him to confess I am the man.

The affections of grief

It is the policy of the slight the gracious work of conviction; for he
knows that whatsoever is built upon a false foundation will come to nothing,
and therefore he makes us slight the work of self examining and searching of
our selves; but slight this and slight all; for if thou be slight in
searching and examining thy self, though wilt also be slight in thy
repentance and obedience.

Naturally men labor to men when they are alone, are afraid of themselves; as
the Elephant will not come near the waters, because he has an ill shape; he
would not see himself: So men by nature will not come near the light, least
they should see their ill deformities, for nature is so foul; that when a man
sees himself, unless he be set in a better condition it will drive him to
despair.

We ought to have especial us from the fear of it.

No sin is so great, but the satisfaction of Christ

The greatest spite of a carnal man, is that he cannot

The quintessence and the for without this joy and peace, what are all the
things in the world, and in the want of these outward things; if we have him,
we have all, because the spirits of all is in him.

Prayer is a venting of our desires to God, from

It is not so easy a matter our selves from our lusts; there is also a great
rebellion in our hearts against any thing that is good, Satan also is a
special enemy; for when we go to God by prayer, he knows we go to fetch
help and strength against him; and therefore he opposes all he can; but
though many men do mumble over a few prayers, yet (indeed) no man can pray as
he ought, but he that is within the covenant of Grace.

A child of God may to pray, will a King regard the petition of a Traitor, that
purposes to go on in his rebellion. Therefore when we come to God, we should
renew our purposes of better pleasing him, and then remember the Scripture, and
search all the Promises as part of our best riches, and when we have them, we
should challenge God with his promise, and this will make us strong and
faithful in our prayers, when we know we never pray to him in vain.

When we pray; God should still look back to our life past, perhaps God
sees thee running to this or that sin, and before he will hear thee, thou
must renew thy repentance for that sin: for our nature is such, that it will
knock at every door, and seek every corner before we will come to God, as
the woman in the Gospel, she sold all before she came to Christ. So that God
will not hear before we forsake all helps, and all false dependence upon the
creature, and then he get the greatest glory, and we have the greatest
sweetness to our souls: the water that comes from the Fountain is the
sweetest; and so divine comforts are the sweetest, when we see nothing in the
creature; and he is the best discerner of the fittest time, when to give us
comfort.

When God means to

A fools eye is in every only object of the soul, Is that one thing
needful, and this will fill all the corners of it; when a man has sucked out
the pleasure of worldly contentments they are then but dead things, but grace
is ever fresh, and always yields fresh and full satisfaction.

Desires are the spiritual

In the Arc there was Manna, which was a Type and the rod of Aaron was a Type
of government; wheresoever therefore there is spiritual Manna, and the Word
preached, and the rod of Aaron in the government, there is a true Church,
though there be many personal corruptions.

The bitterest things in Religion are sweet; there heart touched, Is not
Pardon sweet to a condemned man, and riches sweet to a poor man, and favor
sweet to a man in disgrace, and liberty sweet to a man in captivity: so all
that comes from God is sweet to a Christian, that has his heart touched with
the sense of sin.

It is not happiness to see, things concur to make up our everlasting
happiness; the excellency of the thing with the sight of it, and interest in
it.

We see by experience that there is a succession Paul says, Phil. 3. I
account all things arosse and dung in comparison of Christ.

In prayer we tempt God, if we ask that which we labor not for; our
endeavor must second our devotion, for to ask maintenance, and not put our
hands to the work, it is as to knock at the door, and yet pull the door unto
us that it open not: in this case, if we pray for Grace, and neglect the
Spring from whence it comes, how can we speed: It was a rule in the ancient
time (Lay thy hand on the Plough and then pray) No man should pray without
ploughing, nor plough without praying.

Wisdom is gotten by experience in variety of has no wisdom to judge of
another estate, or how to carry himself to a Christian in another condition,
because he was never abased himself, he looks very big at him. And
therefore that we may carry our selves as Christians, meekely, lovingly, and
tenderly to others; God will have us go to heaven in variety, not in one
uniforme condition in regard of outward things.

There is no condition, a gracious man is not dejected overmuch with
abasement, nor lifted up overmuch with abundance, but he carries himself in
an uniforme manner, becoming a Christian in all conditions, where as those
that have not been brought up in Christ's School, nor trained up in variety of
conditions, they learn to do nothing, if they abound, they are proud if they
be cast down, they murmr and fret, and are dejected, as if there were no
providence to rule the world.

There is a venom and a vanity in every thing when Grace comes, it takes out
the sting of all ill, and then it finds a good in the worst.

Christianity is a busy the Tempter; if we look to the World, it is full of
snares, there must be a great deal of spiritual watchfulness, that we be
not surprised; if we look to our selves, there are required many duties to
carry our vessels in honor, and to walk within the compass of the holy
Ghost, to preserve the peace of our consciences, to walk answerable to our
worth, as being the sons of God, and coheires with Christ; he must dispense
with himself in no sin, he must be a vessel prepared for every good work,
he must baulke in no service that God calls him unto, and therefore the life of
a Christian is a busy trade.

Sincerity is the perfecti on of Christians, Let not

A Christian is able to

We have not only the life of Grace from Christ at the first, and then a
spiritual power answerable to that again, whereby our powers are renewed, so
as we are able to do something in our will; but we have the Deed it self,
the doing is from Christ, he strengthens us for the performance of all good.

God preserves his own

Though Christ be a Head of influence that own good pleasure, and the exigents
of his members, sometimes we have need of more Grace, and then it flows into
us from him accordingly; sometimes we have need to know our own weakness,
and then he leaves us to our selves, that we may know that without him we
cannot stand; and we may know the necessity of his guidance to heaven in the
sense of our imperfections, that we may see our weakness and corruptions,
that we had thought we had not had in us, as Moses, by Gods permission, was
tempted to murmr, a meek man, and David to cruelty, a mild man that
thought they had not had those corruptions in them.

God is forced to mortify

We may for the most to abound, as we should when we had it.

As we say of those that out, for one time or other it will stick by thee.

When God visits with sickness we should think David dealt directly and
plainly with God, and confessed his sins, then God forgave him them, and
healed his body too, Psalm. 32.

It were a thousand times better for many persons to

It is an art wherein we should labor to be expert to consider Gods gracious
dealing in the midst of his corrections, that in the midst of them we might
have thankful and cheerful, and fruitful hearts, which we shall not have,
unless we have some mat ter of thankfulness: consider therefore, does God
make me weak, he might have struck me with death, or if not, taken away my
mortal life, yet he might have given me up to a spiritual death, to an hard
heart, to desperation.

In this latter age of the world, God does not use his government is now more
inward, therefore we should take the more heed, for he may give us up to
blindness, to deadness, to security, which are the greatest judgments that
can befall us.

We should labor to judge our selves for those not conscience of spiritual
sins; God gives us up to open breaches that stain and blemish our profession.

Many men put off the Cor. 11. 30, 31.

Our whole life under nesse: the state of the Gospel requires, that we should
deny all ungodliness, and worldly lust, and live righteously and soberly, and
godly in this present world etc. Therefore when we find our selves otherwise,
we should think, Oh this is not the life of a Christian under the Gospel; the
Gospel requires a more fruitful, a more zealous carriage, more love to
Christ, etc.

If any man be so uncivil, another day, if men were not spir^tually besotted,
would they swell and be angry against such a man; therefore take the benefit of
the judgment of others among whom we live: this was David's disposition, when
he was told of the danger, going to kill Nabal and his house hold, so we
should bless God, and bless them that labor by their good counsel, and
advise to hinder us from any sinful course whatsoever it is.

Those that trusse up the loins of their souls, and only comfortable
Christians, that can think of all conditions, and of all estates comfortably.

It is an ill time to get grace

God takes a safe course with his children, that they

to hate them, that they may not love the world, but be crucified to the world,
he makes the world to be crucified to them, therefore they meet with crosses,
and abuses, and wrongs in the world, because he will not have them perish with
the world; he sends them afflictions in the world, and by the world.

If God should not meet

In the governing of a all but as rods in Gods hands: look therefore to the
hand that smites, look to God in all, he chastises us, as David says in the
matter of Shimei, and as Job says, It is the Lord that has given, and the
Lord has taken away.

We have oftentimes

we should not only justify God, but glorify and magnify him for his
mercy, that rather than we should be condemned with the world; he will take
this course with us.

Though our salvation wit, that because God will save me, therefore I will
take liberty; no, though God will save thee, yet he will take such a course
with thee, thou shall endure such sharpness for thy sin, that it shall be
more bitter, than the sweetest of it was pleasant.

Gracious persons in

God oftentimes makes wicked men friends to his Nehemiah* 2. 8. God put it
into the Kings heart to favor his people; so Genesis 33. 4. Esau was not changed,
only God for the time changed his affe ctions to favor Jacob, so God puts
into the hearts of many groundedly naught, to favor the best persons.

Usually in what measure we in the times of our we cast down, or more deeply
in discomfort: when our adulterous hearts cleaves to things more than become
chaste hearts, it makes the cross more sharp and extreme.

A man indeed is never

Partial obedience, is no obedience at all; to single will do more than they
need; but our obedience must be universal to all Gods Commandments, and that
because he commands us.

In every evil work that we are tempted unto, we

That Christian who is

We should watch and from the Word and Promises, and marking how our prayers
speed; when we shoot an Arrow, we look to the fall of it; when we send a
ship to sea, we look for the return of it; and when we sow seed, we
look for a harvest; and so when we sow our prayers into Gods bosom, shall we
not look for an answer, and observe how we speed; it is a seed of Atheism to
pray, and not to look how we speed, but a sincere Christian will pray, and
wait, and strengthen his heart with promises out of the Word, and never leave
till God do give him a gracious answer.

Take a Christian, and Iudc speaks of them that eat without fear: the true
servant of God has fear accompanying him in all his actions, in his speeches
and recreations, in his meat and drink; but he that has not this fear, how
bold is he in wicked courses, and loose in all his carriages? But mark a true
Christian, and you shall always see in him some expressions of an holy fear.

The relation of servant is of great consequence to put us in mind of our
duty; if we will be Gods Servants we must make it good by obedience, we
must resolve to come under his government, and be at his command, or else he
will say to us, as to them in the 10. of Judges, Go to the gods whom you have
served. Therefore empty relations are nothing to purpose; if we profess our
selves Gods servants, and not show it by our obedience, its but an empty
title; therefore let us make our relations good, at least in our affections,
that we may be able to say, I desire to fear thy name.

In reading of the Scriptures, Nehemiah 1. 8, 9. If you sin you shall be
scattered, and if you return again I will be merciful: we should practice
this in our lives, to see how God has made good his threatenings in our
corrections, and his Promises in our comforts.

Those that have had after him, He absents himself that he may enlarge the
desires of the soul, and after the soul has him again, it will not let him
go, he comes for our good, and leaves us for our good, we should therefore
judge rightly of our estates, and not think we are forsaken of God, when we
are in a desertion.

When men can find no comfort, yet when they sweetly understand before, by
discourse we understand them better: this should teach us to be in love with
holy conference, for besides the good we do to others, we are much bettered
our selves.

We may use Gods creatures, them we must be sober, not eating nor drinking
immoderately, nor using any thing uncharitably, whereby others may take
offense: for albeit we have a right to Gods bounty, yet our right and use
must be sanctified by the Word and Prayer.

Many men fall to questioning, Oh that I had assurance therefore attend upon
the means, until we have strength to obey; wait upon Gods Ordinances till
he stirs in thy soul; all that love your souls, attend upon the means,
and have a care to sanctify the Lords Day, Revel. 1. 10. John was ravished in
the Spirit on the Lords Day.

God takes nothing away from his children, but call us unto in this world: It
is hard to persuade flesh and blood hereunto, but those that find the
experience of this as Christians do find withal particular comforts flowing
from the presence of Christ's Spirit, Saint Paul would not have wanted his
whippings to have missed his comforts.

Christ does chiefly manifest himself unto the gather it self to God.

Christ took upon him our nature, and in that nature

There is not any thing, his Law in naked Commandments, but he enlivens these
with the practice of some one or other of his servants, who can read David's
Psalms, but he shall read himself in them? He cannot be in any trouble, but
David is in the same, etc.

As children in the capacities, and large affections for this world, but for
heaven and heavenly things.

Take a Christian that

As men do cherish young plants at first, and so God be sets his children
first with proppes of inward comforts, but afterward he exposes them to
storms and winds, because they are better able to bear it. Therefore let no
man think himself the better, because he is free from troubles, it is
because God sees him not fit to bear greater.

When we read the What soever was written aforetime, was written for our
learning, etc.

As the Spirit is necessary the Word; and so long as Faith continues, we keep
all other graces in exercise.

There is no true Christian,

If we would have hearts Grace, and abundance of Grace answerable to the
degrees of good, whatsoever we have more than nature, is abundant Grace;
whatsoever we have as Christians, though poor and distressed in our passage
to heaven is abundant Grace.

There are three maine parts of our salvation; first,

That we may be convinced of sin, the Spirit Thou art the man: this
convincing is also universal, of sins of nature, of sins of life, sins
of the Understanding, of the Will, and of the Affections, of the misery of
sin, of the danger of sin, of the solly and madness of sin, of sins
against so many motives, so many favors: proud Nature arms it self with
deftnesse, strong translations, strong mitigations. Its necessary therefore,
that the holy Ghost should join with men's consciences to make them confess, I
am the man.

The convincing of the Spirit may be known not the better man, only he is
tortured and tormented, but a man that is convinced by the Spirit, he joins
with the Spirit against himself, he accuses himself, he takes Gods part
against himself, he is willing to be laid open, that he may find the
greater mercy.

It is not enough to know and therefore the Spirit only works Faith to see
Christ is mine. Further, only the Spirit can work the conscience to be quiet,
because he is greater than the conscience, and can answer all inward objections
and cavills of flesh and blood, unless therefore the holy Ghost apply what
Christ has done, the conscience will not be satisfied.

The best men in the estate first by the Spirit, but in our continued course of
Christianity. This therefore should make us to come to Gods Ordinances with a
holy devotion; Oh Lord vouch safe the Spirit of Revelation, and take the scales
from mine eyes, that as these are truths, so they may be truths to me, do thou
sway my soul, that I may cast my self upon thy mercy in Christ.

Spiritual convincing is not total in this life, but anchor holds it, so it
is with the soul, that is convinced weakly, it is sure of the maine, yet it
is tossed with many doubts and fears, but the anchor is in heaven.

The Spirit of God does

When we neglect prayer, in our own strength, and in confidence of our own
parts; if we belong to God we shall be sure to miscarrie, though another man
perhaps may prosper; and therefore we should be continually dependant upon
God for his direction, and for his blessing in whatsoever we go about.

As many women, because entertain them, that when they are kindled they may
turn to resolution, and resolution into practice.

This is a common Rule, that we cannot converse

It is rebellion against Cast thy self down, but what says S. Paul to the
Iaylor, Do thy self no harm, for we are all here. We should so carry our
selves, that we may be content to stay here till God has done that work he
has to do in us and by us; and then he will call us hence in the best time.

He is a valiant man that

The reason why many

Whatsoever good is in a course is corrupted.

The sense of assured Pet. 1. 10. Give all diligence to make your calling and
election sure; Insinuating that it will not be had without it; it is the
diligent and watchful Christian that has this assurance, otherwise the holy
Ghost will suffer us to be in a dampe, and under a cloud, if we stir not up
the Graces of the Spirit; It is grace in the Exercise, and love in the
Exercise, that's an earnest, and so Faith and Hope in the Exercise is an
earnest: I^ Grace be asleep, you may have Grace, and not know it; therefore
we should labor to put our graces into exercise.

Those that have assurance of their salvation,

He to whom this pilgrimage that we should sit by them, but that God follows
us with several crosses, therefore let us take in good part any cross,
because it is out of heavenly love that we are exercised, least we should
surfeit upon things here below.

In melancholy distempers, especially when by sight in such a distemper, yet
let him then live by Faith.

Though God do personate

The reason why the from troubles; they are also subject to fall into gross
sins, and therefore worldly men think; Are these the men that are happier
than we? They see their crosses, but not their crowns; they see their
infirmities, but not their graces, they see their miseries, but not their
inward joy, and peace of conscience.

To walk by Faith, is brought again by Faith, and lead our lives upon such
grounds as Faith affords: We must walk by Faith, looking upon Gods Promise,
and Gods Call, and Gods Commandments, and not live by Opinion, Example, and
Reason.

In the exercise of our callings, when we think

A Christian has sense and together with his faith; it is not a naked faith
without any relish, but that sense and experience we have here is given to
strengthen faith for time to come; and therefore when we have any sweet
feelings we must not rest in them, but remember that they are given to
encourage us in our way, and to look for fullness in another world.

There is a double Act of Faith: First, the direct act feelings are oftentimes
divided from the first act, for God may enable a man to cast himself upon
Christ, and yet for some ends he shall not know it, because he will humble
him, God gives the reflect act (which is assured hope) as a reward of exact
walking, but we must trust to that closing act of Faith, as to that which
saves us; we ought to live by this direct act of Faith till we come to
heaven; but add this, that there is no man walks by Faith that wants comfort.

God oftentimes deferres because he will have them live by Faith, and not by
sight, as good Iehosaphat, We know not what to do, but our eyes are toward
thee: So Saint Paul received the sentence of death in himself, that he might
trust in the living God. This is the cause of Divine desertions, why God leaves
his children in desperate plunges, seeming to be an enemy to them, because he
will have us live by Faith, and when we live by it, then he rewards it.

Howsoever things are in fight, yet we should give to be, as to Reprobates,
yet let us believe his Word, he cannot deny it, say, Lord remember thy Promise
to thy servant wherein thou have cause me to trust. Therefore wrestle with God,
for thereby he does convey secret strength to his children, that they may be
able to overcome him.

The reason why many

Confidence does then arise from Faith, when stronger; therefore it is a true
evidence, when confidence increases with opposition, great troubles breeding
great confidence; Again, its a sign a man's confidence is well bred, when a
man can carry himself equal in all conditions, when he has learned to want,
and to abound; he needs a strong brain that drinks much strong water: now
when a man has an even Spirit to be content in all conditions, it argues a
well grounded confidence.

None can be truly confident, of two or three for a time, but it is a false
strength; and it is when they are lifted up upon the wings of ambition and
favor of men; but these men in the time of trial sink; The hope of the
Hypocrite shall perish.

Wicked men depart out Lord now let thy servant depart in peace according to
thy Word. To be in the body is a good condition, because we live by Faith; but
it is better to be with the Lord, because then we shall live by sight.

An Ambitious man is an

We should study the Scriptures, that we may we should study to be holy, and
gracious, and merciful: This is the Will of God, says the Apostle, 1 These. 4.
even your sanctification, that is to be holy as God is holy. Those that will be
acceptable to God, must be good in private, in their Closet, because sincerity
supposes that God sees all; they must be humbled for the rising of sin,
because these things are seen of Christ with grief and hatred.

If in our Recreations, or or how this may hinder me, for the most glorious
Actions of Religion, are no service at all, if not done in faith, and with
respect to Christ.

Let no man be discou raged in the doing of good Romans were straight in their
civil government; and God so blessed them for it, that their Commonwealth
flourished for many hundred years. Let the people be what they will (if
civil) they shall have their reward suitable to that good they do; as for
heaven and happiness in another world, they care not for it, yet every man
shall have his penny.

It is a great art in Faith

It is much to be desired, that there were that love in all men, to teach what
they know; and that humility in others to be instructed in what they know not;
God humbles great persons, to learn of meaner; and its our duty to embrace
the truth whosoever brings it: and oftentimes mean persons, are instruments of
comfort to greater than themselves; as Aquiia and Prisilla instructed Apollo,
Acts 18. ver. 26.

He that seeks us before we sought him, will depth, and length, and breadth of
sin; there is also much more the height, and depth, and length and breadth of
mercy in God; and though we have played the Harlot with many lovers, yet
return again, Ier. 3. 1. For his thoughts are not as ours, and his mercies
are the mercies of a reconciled God.

When we are under a cloud of temptations; let does bind up the soul, and
makes it in a palsy temper, we are not fit to do any thing as we ought
without some love, and some joy; and though we be at present under a cloud, yet
the Sun is always the same; we may therefore for a time want the light of
his gracious countenance, but never his sweet influence.

Most men if they could, they would always live

Many men that make a

Christ has an especial cause to be disconsolate; and therefore where the
heart of any man is upright toward God; it is not to be expressed what
indulgence there is in him toward such a poor sinner: for though Peter had
denied him, yet in Mark 16. 7. Go tell his Disciples, and tell Peter: so that
Christ took great care to secure him of his love, though he had most
shamefully denied him.

God has not in vain of punishment; a little is enough from a Father:
therefore in all temptations, it should teach us by prayer, to fly under the
wings of our heavenly Father, and to expect from him all that a father should
do for his child, as Provision, Protection, Indulgence, yea and seasonable
corrections also (which are as necessary for us as our daily bread) and when we
die we may expect our inheritance, because he is our Father; but yet we must
understand also, that the name of a Father is a word of Relation, something
also he expects from us; we must therefore reverence him as a Father, which
consists in fear and love; He is a great God, and therefore we ought to fear
him; he is also merciful, yea has bowels of mercy, and therefore we ought
to love him: if we tremble at him, we know not that he is loving, and if we
be over bold, we forget that he is a great God; therefore we should go
boldly to him with reverence and godly fear.

Those that are at peace to ce^sure the infirmities of others, yet it argues
their own weakness, for it is a sign of strength, where we see in men any
good to bear with their weaknesses; who wasmore indulgent than Christ, he
bore with the infirmities of his Disciples from time to time; therefore we
should labor to carry our selves lovingly toward them that are weak, and
know that nothing should raise us so high in our esteem above others, so as to
forget them to be brethren, in as much, as those infirmities we see in them
shall be buried with them.

Many men will make and men of excellent parts, but there may be a great deal
of hypocrisy in that; and therefore the truth of our love is tried in this; if
we bear a sincere affection to all the Saints, Ephesians. 6. 18.

We must take heed of coming to God in our spiritual blessing, consider of
it in Christ first; all the Promises are made to Christ, he takes them first
from God the Father, and derives them to us by his Spirit: the first fullness
is in God, and then he empties himself into Christ; And of his fullness we
all receive grace, etc.

God is said to be our God, or to be a God unto and his inheritance. There is
more comfort in this, that God is our God, than the heart of man can conceive;
its larger than his heart; and therefore though we cannot say that riches, or
honors, or friends, etc. are ours, yet if we be able to say by the Spirit of
Faith, that God is ours, then we have all in him, his wisdom is ours to
find out a way to do us good; if we be in danger, his power is ours to bring
us out; if under the guilt of sin, his mercy is ours to forgive us; if any
want, his all-sufficiencie is ours to supply, or to make it good; if God be
ours, then whatsoever God can do is ours, and whatsoever God has is ours.

God is the God and Father Solidum, even as the Sun is wholly every man's; so
is God, he cares for all as one, and for every one, as if he had but one.

There is not only a In Psalm. 97. 2. Clouds and darkness are round about
him; you cannot see him he is hid in a cloud; I but Righteousness and
Judgment are the foundation of his Throne, howsoever he wrappe himself in a
thick cloud, that none can see him, yet he is just and righteous: therefore
when any thing befalls us, for which we can see no reason, yet we must
reverence him and adore his Counsels, and think him wiser than we.

When we are diligent in our calling, keeping a and Standing, and wise
Carriage; then whatsoever befalls us, we may with comfort say, The will of the
Lord be done; we are now in his way; and may then expect a guard of Angels
without, and a guard of his Spirit within.

All the contention between the flesh and the Isaac, we must submit to him,
and even drown our selves in the will of God; and then the more we are
emptied of our selves; the freer we are, by how much we are made subject to
God; for in what measure we part with any thing for him, we shall receive
even in this world an hundred fold in joy and peace, etc.

Whatsoever outward good things we have, we David when he thirsted for the
waters of Bethlehem, would not drink it, because it was as the blood of his
three Worthies; so though we have a free use of the creatures; yet we must be
careful to use them with moderation and reverence.

There is nothing of God can please the world, because Michals of this world
scoff at us for our goodness: for when they are offended at us, God is
delighted with us.

To discern of our estate in Grace, let us

We may apprehend the love of God, but we cannot comprehend it; all the fruits
of his love passes our common understanding, and therefore we have the holy
Spirit given to us to take away the veil, and to make report of it to the
soul; and then as soon as this love of Christ is apprehended, it constraines
us to all holy duties, not as fire out of a Flint, but as water out of a
Spring: the love of a wife to her husband may begin from the supply of her
necessities, but afterward she may love him also for the sweetness of his
person; so the soul does first love Christ for salvation, but when she is
brought to him, and finds that sweetness that is in him, then she loves him
for himself.

It should be our continual with inward peace and comfort, having carried our
selves as in the sight of God.

That a man may be fit for the increasing of their knowledge, that they may be
able to discourse; whereas the special intent of the Ministry, is to work
upon the heart and affections.

As we must approve our selves to God and to our if we walk scandalously,
they will evidence, that we by our ill courses and examples drew them to ill
courses, and hardened them in evil: it should be our care therefore to approve
our selves to the consciences of men, that we may have them to witness for us,
that such men of who^ we have deserved well may be our crown at the last day.

A man does then keep his own, he seeks no advantage to himself, he lives
so, as that the world may see, he is in good earnest, he speaks so, as that
he makes it good by his life; now if our care be to walk thus, we shall
approve our selves to the consciences of men.

There are many that will give some way to divine Herodias is once touched,
then John Baptists head must off; such truths as come near makes them fret,
because their conscience tells them they cannot yield obedience to all; the lust
of some sins has gotten such domination over their affections, that the
conscience says I cannot do this; and then that hatred that should be turned
upon the sin, is turned upon the Word and the Minister, like unto some
vermin, that when they are driven to a stand, they will fly in a man's face;
so these men when they see they must yield, they grow malicious, so that what
they will not follow, that they will reproach: therefore it should be our care
at all times to yield obedience, according to what we know.

There is a generation of watch for offenses, because they would go to hell
with some reason, they will not see who are weak, and who are hypocrites, but
they cast reproach upon all; and therefore oftentimes God in justice to them,
suffers good men to fall, that such men may take scandal at them to their
ruin.

A man may know that greatest enemy: but if we live in a course, that we are
loath should be touched, it is a sign our hearts are full of guile; corrupt
men they mould their Teachers, and fashion them to their lusts, but a good and
upright heart is willing that Divine truths should have their full authority
in the soul, giving way to our duty, though never so contrary to flesh and
blood.

It is the duty of Ministers should labor to relish the person, for secret
surmises are stones to stumble at; therefore both Ministers and people should
be careful to remove them.

A man ought not to commend himself, but in right out of Gods hand; but now on
the contrary in some cases, we may praise and commend our selves, as when we
have a just calling to make an A pologie in way of defense, and for the
conviction of them that unjustly speak evil of us: secondly, we may speak
well of our selves in way of example to others, as Parents to their children,
and this does well become them, because it is not out of pride or vainglory,
because the end is discovered to be out of love unto them.

Its the duty of those that are Gods children when take the defense of others
upon them: and thus did the blind man, John 6. He defended Christ against the
Pharisees; and Jonathan spoke to his Father in the behalf of David, though he
was called the son of a rebellious woman, yet he knew that he ought this
unto the truth; God has a cause in the world that must be owned, and therefore
when the cause of Religion is brought upon the stage, then God seems to say as
Iehu did, Who is on my side, who? God commends his cause and his children to
us: And therefore curse Judge. 5. 23.
ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants
thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the
Lord against the mighty: so a curse lies upon those, that when the truth
suffers, have not a word to defend it.

Usually the defamers of who are so near Gods children, as vainglorious
Teachers that are of the same profession; Pilat a Heathen showed more favor to
Christ than the Pharisees: and this use we should make of it, not to take
scandal when we see one Divine deprave another, for it has been so, and will
be so to the end of the world.

All things out of God, are but grass; when we without Grace they will
provesnares; at the hour of death what comfort can we have in them, further
than we have had humility and love to use them well: Therefore if we would
have our hearts seasoned with true joy, lets labor to be faithful in our
places, and endeavor according to the gifts we have to glorify God.

To glory in any thing there is none, we have a prohibition; Let not the wise
man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, nor the rich man
in his riches: God will not give his glory to another; and therefore when men
will be meddling with glory, which belongs to God alone, he blasts them, and
sets them afide, as broken vessels, and disdaines to use them.

A Christian joys aright, when there is good terms between God and him; for
our joy must spring from peace, Romans 5. Being justified by Faith, we have
peace toward God. The Apostles begin their Epistles with Mercy, Grace and
Peace; Mercy in forgiveness, Grace to renew our natures, and Peace of
conscience here: these are things to be gloried in, if we find our sins
pardoned, our persons accepted, and our natures altered; then we may comfort
our selves in any thing, in health, in wealth, in wife, in children, in any
thing, because all come from the favor of God; we may joy in afflictions,
because there is a blessing in the worst things, to further our eternal
happiness, and though we cannot joy in affliction it self, as being a contrary
to our nature, yet we may joy in the issue, so that we may joyaright, when
having interest in God, we glory in the testimony of a good conscience; when
looking inward we find all at peace; when we can say upon good grounds, that
God is mine, and therefore all is mine, both life and death and all things, so
far as they may serve for good.

The hearts of men, yea things; when the weak Disciples had cast out devils,
they were ready to be proud; but Christ quickly spies it, and admonishes them,
not to rejoice that the devils were subject to them, but that their names were
written in the Book of life. Therefore when we find the least stirrings to
glory in any thing, we must check our selves, and consider what Grace we
have to temper them, what love we have to turn these things to the common
good; for whatsoever a man has, if he have not withal, humility, and love
to use it aright, it will turn to his bane.

It has been an old imputation to lay distractednesse John the Baptist was
accused to have a devil, and Christ to be besides himself; and the Apostles
to be full of new wine, and Paul to be mad: and the reason of this is,
because as Religion is a mystical and spiritual thing, so the Tenants of it
seem Paradoxes to carnal men: as first, that a Christian is the only
Freeman, and other men are slaves; that he is the only Rich-man, though
never so mean in the world; that he is the only Beautiful man, though
(outwardly) never so deformed; that he is the only happy man in the midst
of all his miseries. Now these things though never so true in themselves seem
strange to natural men; and then again when they see men earnest against
sin, or making conscience of sin, they wonder at this commotion for
trifles, as if we made Tragadies of toys; but these men go on in a course of
their own, and make that the measure of all, those that are below them are
profane, and those that are above them are indiscreete: by fancies and
affections, they create excellencies, and then cry down spiritual things as
folly; they have principles of their own; to love themselves, and to love
others only for themselves, and to hold on the strongest side, and by no
means to expose a man's self to danger: But now when men begin to be
religious, they deny all their own aims; and that makes their course seem
madness to the world; and therefore they labor to breed an ill conceit of
them, as if they were mad men and fools.

Gods children are neither mad men nor fools, the world: They are the only
wise men, if it be well considered; for first, they make the highest end their
aim, which is to be a Child of God here, and a Saint hereafter in heaven;
secondly, they aim to be found wise men at their death, and therefore are
always making their accounts ready: thirdly, they labor to live answerable to
their rules; they observe the rule of the Word to be governed according to the
same: fourthly, they improve all advantages to advance their end, they labor
to grow better by blessings and crosses, and to make a sanctified use of every
thing: fifthly, they swim against the stream of the times, and though they
eat, and drink, and sleep, as others do, yet (like the Stars) they have a
secret course and carriage of their own, which the world cannot discern, and
therefore a man must be changed and set in a higher rank, before he can have a
sanctified judgment of the ways of God.

Those that lay the imputation choice of things; and how do carnal men make
their choice, when they embrace perishing things for the best: secondly, a
carnal man has not parts to apprehend spiritual things aright; he cannot
see things invisible: thirdly, in his heart he accounts it a vain thing to
serve the Lord: fourthly, he judges his enemies to be his best friends; and his
best friends to be his worst enemies: fifthly, the principles of all his actions
are rotten, because they are not directed to the right object, therefore all his
affections are mad; as his joy, his love, his delight; his love is but lust,
his anger vexation, for his confidence he calls Gods love into question; but
if a false suggestion comes from the devil, that he embraces, and therefore
is he not now a mad man? And this is the condition of all natural men in the
world.

True freedom is when the heart is enlarged, and

When the love of Christ is manifested to me, and Lord, where fore will thou
show thy self to us, and not to the world? what is the reason thou love me
and not others? when the soul has been with God in the Mount, and when it is
turned from earthly things, then it sees nothing but love and mercy; and this
constraines us to do all things out of love to God and men.

When Joshua cursed the Jericho, he was not in commotion and fury, but in a
peaceabletemper. So that when cursing comes from such a one, he is a
declaratory instrument, and the conveigher of Gods curse: Therefore every man
must not take upon him to curse, for men oftentimes curse where they should
bless, which is an arrow shot upright, that falls down upon his own head;
but those that come in the name of the Lord, and are qualified for that
purpose, their cursings or blessings are to be esteemed, for they are a means
oftentimes to conveigh Gods blessings or his cursings upon us.

It is overcurious to exact changed, the man is the same.

Where the soul desires the forgiveness of sin, this we cannot withstand
our enemies, or bear any cross, without it we cannot go on comfortably in
our course; without this we cannot do any thing acceptable and pleasing to
God.

God will be as the dew Israel, and he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth
his roots as Lebanon, Hos. 14. 5. These are not words wastfully spent; for we
have great need of such promises, especially in a distressed estate, for then
our spirits are apt to sink, and our hearts to faint, and therefore we have
need to have the same comforts often repeated. Profane hearts think what
need all this; but if ever thou be touched in conscience for thy sins,
thou will then be far from finding fault; when God uses all the secrets in
the book of Nature, and translates them to assure us of his mercy and love.

Gods children are strengthened by their They take root downward, and bring
forth fruit upwards.

A Christian in his right And his smell shall be as Lebanon: We should
therefore make use of all natural things, and apply them to spiritual, if we
see a Lilly, think of Gods Promise, and our duty, we shall grow as Lillies;
when see see a tall tree, think I must grow higher in Grace; and when we see a
Vine, think I must grow in fruitfulness; when we go into our Orchards or
Gardens, let the sight of these things raise our thoughts higher unto a
consideration of what is required of us.

As its the glory of the

When we go about any action or business, let us always ask our souls
this question, Is this suitable to my calling, to my hopes? but if not, Why do
I do it? I that am a King to rule over my lusts, does this agree with my
condition? this base act, this base Company; shall such a man as I do this?
When a man brings his heart to reason thus with himself, it will breed
Ephraims resolution, What have I any more to do with Idols, and in walking
thus circumspectly, we shall find a heat of comfort, accompanying every good
action, and a sweet relish upon the conscience, with humility and
thankfulness, acknowledging all the strength we have, to be from the dew of
his Grace.

In times of calamity, God will have a care of his Deute. 19. The Israelites
were commanded; that they should not destroy the trees that bare fruit; so
though Gods Judgments come amongst us, yet God will have a special care of
his children that be fruitful, but the Judgments of God will light heavy upon
barren trees, And howsoever God may endure barrenness in the want of means,
yet he will not in the use of means, It were better for a bramble to be in
the wilderness than in an Orchard, nothing will bear us out, but
fruitfulness.

It may be observed that old men (seem not to grow, nor to be so zealous
though old Christians be not carried with a full stream, yet they are more
stable and judicious, more heavenly minded, more mortified, they grow in
humility out of a clearer sight of their own corruptions.

In true conversion the soul is changed to be of from their sins, only out
of terror of conscience, they are afrighted with sin, but they do not hate
it; therefore a loathing of evil is required as well as the leaving of it.

If we would make it evident, rooted affection than anger, anger may be
appeased, but hatred is against the whole kind: fourthly, if our hatred be
true, it hates all ill in our selves first, and then in others; he that hates a
toad, hates it most in his own bosom: Many like Judah are severe in censuring
of others, but are partial to themselves; fifthly, he that hates sin truly,
hates the greatest sin in the greatest measure, he hates it in a just
proportion: sixthly, our hatred is right, if we can endure admonition and
reproof for sin, and not be in rage with him that tells us of it; therefore
those that swell against reproof, hate not sin; only with this caution; It
may be done with such indiscretion and self-love, that a man may hate the proud
manner; therefore in discovering our hatred of sin in others; we must
consider our calling; it must be done in a sweet temper, with reserving due
respect of those to whom we show our dislike, that it may be done out of true
zeal, and not out of wildfire.

All love and associations consider the persons what they are; if we see any
signs of Grace, then it is good, but if not, there will be a rent. Throughout
our whole life this ought to be our Rule, we should labor in all companies,
either to do good, or receive good, and where we can neither do nor receive
good, we should take heed of such acquaintance: Let men therefore consider
and take heed, how they stand in combination with wicked persons.

Whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution, he must
have his nature changed, and carry his hatred against all opposite courses; and
therefore to frame a Religion that has no trouble with it, is to frame an
Idol: but Neuters in Religion are like unto Batts, that men can scarce
distinguish from Myce, or flying foul, because they have a resemblance of
both; take heed therefore of neutralitie in Religion; after the first heat
many become lukewarm, and from that they fall to coldness; let us therefore
look to our beginnings, pure affection in Religion must also be zealous.

Wisemen will do nothing without great ends; greater are their ends; shall we
attribute this to men, and not to the wisecome of God? Christ would never have
appeared in our nature, and suffered death, but for some great end; shall we
think that this Mystery of Gods taking flesh upon him, was for a slight
purpose. Now the end of his coming was to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. He came
to bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3. 18 But he that will save us must first bring us
out of Satan's bondage; therefore Christ came to destroy the works of the
devil, 1 Ioh. 3. 8. It must needs follow therefore, that the salvation of our
souls is of great consequence, seeing for this only end, Christ took our
nature upon him and suffered for us.

Christ came to destroy our corruptions is faith; we fell by Infidelity and
Disobedience; now Christ comes and displants Infidelity, and instead thereof
he plants Faith, which unites us to him, and then by a divine skill, it draws
a particular strength from Christ to fight his battles against corruption.

Temptations at first are like Elias cloud, no bigger they do not abide there
long; let us therefore labor as much as we can, to be in good company and
good courses, for as the holy Ghost works by these advantages, so we should
wisely observe them.

Its hard to discern the working of Satan from so strange sometimes, that
even nature it self abhorres them: the Spirit of God leads sweetly, but the
devil hurries a man like a Tempest, that he will hear no reason, as we see
in Ammon for his sister Tamar. Again when we shake off motions of Gods Spirit,
and mislike his Government, and give way to passion, then the devil enters;
Let a man be unadvisedly angry, and the devil will make him envious and seek
revenge; when passions are let loose, they are Chariots in which the devil
rides; some by nature are prone to distrust, and some to be too confident, now
the devil he joins with them, and so draws them on further, he broods upon
our corruptions; he lies (as it were) upon the souls of men, and there broods
and hatches all sin whatsoever: All the devils in hell cannot force us to
sin, he works by suggestions, stirring up humors and fancies, but he cannot
work upon the will: we betray our selves by yielding before he can do us
any harm, yet he ripens sin

There are some sins, that's let Satan loose upon Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7.
Secondly, conceitednesse and presumption, as we may see in Peter, Matthew. 26.
33. Thirdly, security, which is always the fore runner of some great
punishment, or great sin (which also is a punishment) as we see in David;
fourthly, Idleness, its the hour of temptation, when a man is out of Gods
business: fifthly, Intemperance, either in looseness of Diet, or otherwise;
therefore Christ commands us to be sober and watch,, and look to sobriety in
the use of the creatures: sixthly, there is a more subtle intemperance of
passion, for in what degree we give way to wrath and revenge and covetousness;
in that degree Satan has advantage against us: seventhly, when a man will not
believe and submit to truths revealed, (though but a natural truth) therefore
God gave them up to vile affections, Romans 1. 26. because they would not cherish
the light of nature; much more when we do not cherish the light of Grace.

As Christ wrought our salvation in an estate of easily digest a flourishing
condition, we are naturally given to affect outward excellencies, when we are
trusted with great matters, we are apt to forget God and our duty to others:
This should therefore teach us to justify God, when we are any ways abased
in the world.

There are a world of more tractable. Therefore when we are under any cross;
observe how it works, see whether we join with God or no, when he afflicts
us outwardly, whether inwardly we be more humble; when he humbles us and
makes us poor, whether we be also poor in spirit: When God goes about to take
us down, we should labor to take down our selves.

Poverty of spirit should holy duty; for though we have grace, yet we cannot
bring that grace in to Act, without new grace, even as there is a fitness in
trees to bear fruit, but without the influence of heaven they cannot. That
which oftentimes makes us miscarry in the actions of our callings, is, because
we think we have strength and wisdom enough; and then what is begun in
selfe-confidence, is ended in shame; we set upon duties in our own pride, and
strength of parts, and find success accordingly; therefore its a sign that
God will bless our endeavors, when out of the sense of our own weakness
we water our business with prayer and tears.

It is not sufficient for a Christian to have habitual to pray unto Christ to
blow upon us with his Spirit.

God does not so much look at our infirmities, as David and others were
accounted upright, and yet had many imperfections.

Watching is an exercising of all the graces of the we have enemies about us
that are not asleep, and our worst enemy is within us, and so much the worse,
because so near; we live also in a world full of temptations, and wicked men
are full of malice, we are passing through our enemies Country, and therefore
had need to have our wits about us; the devil also is at one end of every
good action, and therefore we had need to keep all our graces in perpetual
exercise: we should watch in fear of jealousy, taking heed of a spirit of
drowsinesse, laboring also to keep our selve unspotted of the world.

It may be asked, how we shall know the Scripture to be the Word of God. For
answer, Do but grant first, that there is a God, it will follow then that he
must be worshipped and served; and that this service must be discovered to us,
that we may know what he does require: and then let it be compared what Word
of God can come near to be the same with this. Besides God has blessed the
superstition of the Jews, who were very strickt this way, to preserve it for
us; and the Heretics since the Primitive Church have so observed one another,
that there can be no other to this Word. But now we must further know, that we
must have some thing in our souls, suitable to the truths contained in it,
before we can truly and savingly believe it to be the Word of God, as that we
find it to have a power in working upon our hearts and affections, Luke 24.
32. Did not our hearts burn within us, when he opened to us the Scriptures.
Again, it has a divine operation to warm and pacify the soul, and a power
to make a Felix tremble; it has a searching quality to divide between the
marrow and the bone; we do not therefore only believe the Scriptures to be
the word of God, because any man says so, or because the Church says so; but
also and principally because I find it by experience working the same effects
in me that it speaks of it self; and therefore let us never rest, till when
we hear a promise, we may have some thing in us by the sanctifying Spirit,
that may be suitable to it, and so assuring of us, that it is that Word alone
that informs us of the good pleasure of God to us, and our duty to him.

There is in God a fatherly we humble our selves: There is one says well; A
child of anger, and a child under anger: Gods children are not children of
wrath; but sometimes they are under wrath; when they do not carry themselves
as sons; when they venture on sins against conscience, etc. but if they
humble themselves and reform, and fly to God for mercy, then they come into
favor again, and recover the right of sons.

We may know that have communion and familiarity with him whom God loves, to
them he discovers his secrets, even such secrets as the soul never knew
before: He reveals them to us when our hearts are wrought to an ingenuous
confession of sin; and when we have no comfort but from heaven; even as a
father discovers his bowels most to his child when it is sick; so God
reserves the discovery of his love, especially, until such a time, when we
renounce all carnal confidence: therefore if we can assure our souls that
God loves us, let us then be at a point for any thing that shall happen to us
in this world, whether it be disgrace or contempt, or whatsoever, because we
may fetch patience and contentedness from hence, that Gods love supplies all
wants whatsoever.

After a gracious pardon man be subject to passion, when this is working
disturbance in the mind, it is infirmity; but when for want of watchfulness,
it breaks forth into action, then it is weakness, and these diseases are
suffered in us, to put us in mind of the bitter root of sin, for if we
should not sometimes break forth into sin, we should think that our nature
were cured: Who would have thought that Moses so meek a man, could have so
broken out into passion; we see it also in David, and Peter, and others: and
this is to show that the corruption of nature in them, was not fully healed;
but there is this difference between the slippes and falls of Gods children,
and of other men; when other men fall, it setles them in their dregs; but
when Gods children falls, they see their weaknesses, they see the bitter root
of sin, and hate it the more, and are never at quiet till it be cast out by
the strength of Grace and Repentance: Therefore let no man be too much cast
down by his infirmities, so long as they are resisted, for from hence comes a
fresh hatred of corruption; and God looks not upon any sin, but sin
ungrieved for, unresisted, otherwise God has a holy end in suffering sin to
be in us, to keep us from worse things.

There is none that out Paul desires to meet with the Romans (though they
were his converts) that he might be strengthened by their mutual faith, Romans
1. 12.

When once the Spirit does fasten the wrath of merciful, then the soul says
what shall become of me; and as the Spirit lets in some terrors, so he lets in
also some hopes; as, What shall I do to be saved, implying are signation of
the will totake any course, so he may be saved, and then all the world for one
drop of mercy.

Christ never comes into any heart but where he is and submit to Gods
Ordinances, they will be effectual to subdue our corruptions, and when once
God has taken up the heart of man for his Temple, he will then bring into it
all his Treasures* there will be a mutual fellowship between God and the
soul, when we are once subdued.

God is so powerful an Ordinances shows grea ter reasons for goodness, than
Satan can in his carnal courses, then all falls down: Those therefore that
are not fully subdued, yet let them come to the Ordicances; for then they are
within Gods reach: when the Word of God discovers the baseness, vileness, and
danger of sin, then the soul stoopes; therefore let none despair, for
though thy heart be stone, yet God can work powerfully, nothing is difficult
to infirmities, but its a divine work to pull down a wicked sinner.

However we take pains and blessing comes from God: We pray for daily Bread,
and yet he gives it, though we labor for it; there is a gift of success,
which unless it be given us from above, we shall with the Disciples catch
nothing.

Gifts are for Grace, and Grace for Glory; Gifts are so many men have great
parts, but they have also a divellish spirit; Grace comes from more special
love, and yet men had rather be accounted devils than fools; account them men
of parts, and then count them what you will.

It is a hard matter to and not merely from the Object, and therefore we must
distinguish between affections stirred up, and the inward frame, for those
that are suddenly stirred up, do presently return; the waters in the Bath
have a natural hotnesse, but water when it is heated will return to its
former coldness.

Though we be sure of victory over our spiritual Moses said of the Egyptians,
Those enemies that we now see, we shall see them no more for ever. Be strong
therefore in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephe. 6.

FINIS.

