EVANGELICALL SACRIFICES. In xix. Sermons.

1. Thankful commemorations for Gods mercy in our great deliverance from the
Papists powder plot. 2. The successful seeker. 3. Faith Triumphant. 4.
Special preparations to fit us for our latter end in four Funeral Sermons.
5. The faithful Covenanter. 6. The demand of a good Conscience. 7. The sword
of the wicked.
BY The late Learned and Reverend Divine, RICH. SIBBS. Doctor in Divinity, Mr.
of KATHERINE Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher to the Honorable
Society of GRAYES-INNE.

The third Tome.

Published and perused by D. Sibbs own appointment, subscribed with his hand
to prevent imperfect Copies after his decease.

ROMANS 12. 1. I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable service.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for N. Bourne, at the Royal Exchange, and R.
Harford, at the guilt Bible in Queenes-head Alley in Paternoster Row. 1640.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD, Viscount MANDEVILL and his LADY ANNE, his
Pious Consort, increase of GRACE.
Right Honorable,
A Pious Christian whilst upon earth, takes his time to do his task, he is or
would be, all in grace, and all to duty; well knowing that the time is short,
the work great, the wages sure; and that the best improvement of parts and
talents will bring in the master the greatest advantage, and himself the
present and most lasting comforts: This is the fruit of a well led life, to
advance God in glory and a Christian in comfort: such as serve God in
fulfilling his will must to heaven, carry their graces with them, enter into
their masters joy, and if they be eminent in profession or public in place,
leave behind them their example, or some other monument to the world of their
fidelity in their places; happy such servants that can thus employ their times
and improve their talents: This was the endeavor of that shining, and burning
lamp D. Sibbs the author of this work which I now make bold to present unto
your Honors; such holy and useful truths were delivered by him in his life
time, that the judicious conceive, may prove very profitable unto the Church,
being published after his death; I conceive thus of the man; what he did in his
ministry in public, or in his conference in private, it was done aptly,
pithily and profitably; his art was to hide his art, and Artis est celare artem.
to say much in few words; he did not desire to cloud his matter from his
hearers, or to walk so long about any one text, till errors were vented, or his
auditors tired; you shall find him to be himself and one constant to his own
principles, al along the treatise; here you have no new errors broached, or old
truths deserted, but opened maintained and honored, the glory of teachers,
expectation of hearers, and recompense of readers. Having found this to be
your Honors honor (and let it still be) to content your selves with humble
knowledge, cordial respect and vital expressions of received truths, that you
are not in number with those that change their judgments, (and I fear their
religion) as they do their frinds and fashions; being constant in inconstancy,
and that with you it is not, truths Non ex personis probamus fidem, sed ex fide
personas, Tertul.
for persons, but persons for truth. I doubt not the admittance of these
Sermons unto your respect and patronage; my only request is, that as the
author did honor you, so these labors of his (now made public) may be as
so many divine beams, holy breathings, and celestial droppings, to raise up
your spirits to hate the dominion of the Beast, to help forward the ruin of
mystical Jericho, and all other Unprosperous buildings, and builders; that you
may become Successful seekers, gayning faith Triumphant, to acquaint you with
the Hidden life, that at length you may obtain the redemption of your bodies,
knowing that Balaams wish is not enough, unles the faithful Covenanter take
you into covenant with himself, this alone yielding to you the demand of a
good conscience, which shall be your defense against the Sword of reproach.
These I leave with you, and you with God, and rest,

Your Honors at command, JOHN SEDGVVICK.

To the Reader.
SO precious the remembrance should be of GODS thoughts of mercy to usward,
when he delivered us from that hellish plot of the Gunpouder Treason, that if
there were nothing else to commend this Treatise to us, the first Sermons here
presented to us, which were preached upon that occasion, may justly procure it
a ready and hearty welcome.

When GOD works such wonders for a Church and people as that was, it is not
enough to praise GOD for the present, and to rejoice greatly in the great
salvation He has wrought for them; yea the more a people are in such a case
affected for the present, the more inexcusable they must needs be, if afterward
they slight and disregard it, and that because their former joy prooves, they
were thoroughly convinced of the greatness of the mercy, and so discovers their
following ingratitude to be the more abominable; whence it was that when
Jonathan put his Father Saul in mind how David killed Goliath, and thereby had
wrought a great deliverance for them (to the end he might no longer seek his
ruin, that had been the means of so much good to GODS people) withal he
wished him to consider that he himself stood by, an eyewitness of that Noble
exployt of David's, and was then mightily affected with joy when he saw that
formidable Giant fall under his hand, Thou saw it (says he) and did
rejoyee, 1 Samuel 19. 5. intimating, how inexcusable it would be, if he should
forget that deliverance, concerning which himself had been so wondrously
affected when it was done.

As therefore we have great cause to bewail the general decay of men's
thankfulness for this great deliverance (at ^e first discovery of that cursed
plot, ^r mouths were filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing all the
Land over, and every man could say, The Lord has done great things for us
whereof we are glad, as Psalm. 126. 2, 3. and yet now scarce one amongst many
is affected with it (as in former times) so have we also great cause to bless
GOD for the holy alarms of Gods Watchmen, whereby they have endeavored to stir
up those that are fallen from their first joy, and so amongst the rest for
these of Reverend D. SIBBS, the Author of them, wherein he has so feelingly
set forth the misery of that Antichristian ^ondage, from which we were
delivered (...) that Deliverance, that methinkes he that reads them with due
care must ^eeds find his heart rowsing up it self, ^s Deborah did, Awake,
awake, Deborah, ^wake, awake, utter a song, Judge. 5. 12.

As for the other Sermons, which in this third Tome, be styled Evangelicall
Sacrifices, which are published together with these, you shall find them no
less profitable then these, though in diverse other respects. The most of them
tend to fit Christians for their latter end (a work of greatest importance)
and do so sweetly set before our eyes that recompense of reward reserved for us
in heaven, that I hope many of that brood of travelers, the generation of
those that seek^ Gods face and favor here on earth, shall find them a great
help to the finishing of their course with Joy, and others shall be wakened,
that are too ready to slumber and forget whither they are going to strive to
enter in at the strait gate, and not to content themselves with a lazy Balaams
wish; which, Reader, let us seek from him, who only gives the blessing, to
whose Grace I commen^ thee, resting still,

Thine in the hearty desire of thy Spiritual welfare,

Arthur Jackson.

THE BEASTS DOMINION over Earthly KINGS. A Sermon preached upon the 5th of
November, in remembrance of Our Deliverance from the Papists Powder Treason.

BY The late Learned and Reverend Divine, RICH. SIBBS. Doctor in Divinity, Mr.
of KATHERINE Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher to the Honorable
Society of GRAYES-INNE.

REVEL. 16. 14. For they are the Spirits of Devils working Miracles, which go
forth to the Kings of the earth.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for N. Bourne, at the Royal Exchange, and R.
Harford, at the Bible in Queenes-head Alley in Paternoster Row. 1639.

THE BEASTS DOMINION over Earthly KINGS.
REVEL. 17. 7. For God has put into their hearts to fulfill his will, and to
agree to give up their Kingdoms to the Beast, until the Word of God shall be
fulfilled.
THE occasion of this days solemnity has been long and well known, and we
have often in this place spoken of it; and it were a thing not unseasonable for
the day, to set out in its lively colors that facinorous act, which will
scarcely be credible to posterity, it exceeds my conceit to set it out in the
right colors: I have therefore taken a text tending that way, and serving for
our present purpose.

It pleases our blessed Savior out of his love to his Church, not only to
give directions what to do, and what not to do, what to believe, and what not
to believe, but to foretell likewise al future calamities, that so the Church
might be fore-armed, and might not be surprised with terror upon the sight of
some sudden or strange accident; as especially the flourishing estate of
Antichrist: He therefore foretells all, both the beginning, the growth, the
strength, the proceeding, and at last the destruction of that Man of Sin.

The Church in this world is always under some prophecy, it is always under
somewhat that is unfulfilled; for until we come to heaven there is not an
accomplishment of all prophesies.

This Book is a setting down of prophesies of future events to the end of the
world.

This Chapter sets out in lively colors the state of the Pontificality, the
state of Rome, under the Bishop of Rome, the Pope: and not the state of Rome
under the Heathen Emperors. It sets down likewise the judgment of God in
this life upon this Beast, and upon the Whore that sits upon the Beast.

The description is large in the former part of the Chapter, it would take up a
great deal of time to unfold that; but because I have diverse other things to
speak of, I will pass that by.

The judgment of God upon the Beast and Whore, is set down partly in the
verse before the Text: The ten Horns which thou saw upon the Beast shall
hate the Whore, and make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire, for God has put into their hearts to fulfill his will,
and to agree to give up their Kingdoms to the Beast, etc.

Here the Judgment is set down, what it is, and by whom it shall be, by the
ten Horns; that is, the ten Kings; and secondly, what they shall do, and that
is set down in order.

First, these ten Horns, these ten Kings, Western Kings, They shall hate the
Whore.

Hatred is the beginning of all actions that are offensive; for it is the
strongest, and stiffest affection of ill, as love is the strongest of good
affections, They shall hate the Whore: It is not only anger, but hatred.

They shall make her desolate and naked; that is the second degree, they shall
leave her, they shall strip this Strumpet of her ornaments and strength,
whereby she set out her self.

They shall eat her flesh, that is the third; that is what they have given her
before to enrich her, withal, that which made her in such well liking, that
which commended her, that which is her living, the riches of the Popes Clergy
gotten (most of it) by ill means they shall take from her.

But that is not all, but there is a higher degree then all this, They shall
burn the Whore with fire.

So that in the foregoing verse you see is set down what the Judgment is, and
who shall bthe Executioners of this judgment.

But why must all this come to pass? He rises to the highest cause: God has
put into their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree with one consent to
give their kingdoms to the Beast: God afterward put into their minds to hate
the Beast.

So that in this verse is the severity, and the mercy of God, his justice and
his goodness: His severity in putting into the hearts of these Kings to agree
with one consent, to give up their kingdoms to the Beast. A great Judgment so
to besot them: but here is a limitation of that severity at last, till the time
come, until the Word of God shall be fulfilled; that is, until they shall
cease to be thus deluded by the Bishop of Rome, and then they shall begin to
hate the Whore, as much as ever they were deluded by her, and shall eat her
flesh, and consume her with Fire.

For the explication of these words, they being somewhat hard, I will spend a
little time to unfold them. And first I must show who is this Beast.

For God has put into their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree to give
up their Kingdoms to the Beast.

The Beast is mentioned in three places in the Revelation, in the ninth Chapter
there is mention of the Beast coming out of the bottomless Pit; and in the
13. of the Beast that rose out of the Sea; and here in this 17. of a scarlet
colored Beast, having seven heads and ten horns.

The Beast (in a word) is the state of Rome, sometime under the heathenish
Emperors, sometime under the Pontificality: the Question is, whether the Beast
here spoken of be the state of Rome, under the Roman persecuting Emperors
before Christianity prevailed much, or the state of Rome under the usurpation
of the Bishop of Rome?

I answer, undoubtedly it is here meant of the state of Rome as it is upheld,
the Whore. The Beast, that Beast: For it is meant here of one that seduced by
lying miracles, of one that should come in a mystery, of one that should deal
with fornication, and such courses.

Now heathenish Rome it overcame men by violence, and by force, and not by
whorish insinuations, by drawing them on to Idolatry: It is said in the fifth
verse, that upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the great,
Mother of Harlots: Babylon in a Mystery, and this Mystery is a great word too
with them: the Mystery of the Mass, in every thing there is a Mystery, all
their Ceremonies are Mysteries: This word Mystery therefore in the forehead
of the Whore, shows what Beast it is, that is here meant.

It is observed by diverse Writers, that in the Frontlet of the Popes Diadem,
there is written this name, Mysterium, as in Julius the seconds time; but
afterward when they smelt that he was construed thereby, to be the very Whore,
they rased out that, and put in Julius secundus, etc.

And she sits upon many waters, She sits, mark, the Spirit of God will not
suffer us to err: what is the regiment of the Pope called, Sitting? such a
Pope sat so long, the Whore sits in the very phrase, and what is the seat
called? the Sea of Rome, the Sea of Antichrist: Diverse other particular things
there are to show that he means Rome; that is, the state of Rome under the
Bishop of Rome to be the Beast here spoken of.

Especially considering the connection of this Chapter with that following,
where is set down the final destruction of this Beast: now we know that
heathenish Rome ended long ago; therefore that Beast which is here meant must
needs be that which follows in the next Chapter, and therefore it must needs
be Rome, as it is under the Bishop, the Pope of Rome.

It is said in the 13. Chapter, that this Beast made the former Beast to
speak, did enliven and quicken the former Beast; so indeed this Beast, Rome
considered under the Pope, which succeeds that Beast, Rome as it was under the
Roman Emperors, quickens the former Beast: for now all is as glorious as ever
it was in heathenish Rome: For after that the Goths and Vandals had possessed
Rome, the Pope put some life into the Empire of Rome, and did himself become
Emperor. For indeed the Emperor of Germany, though he be entitled King of
Rome, yet that is but a mere titular thing, the Eagle is deplumed of her
fea^thers, of her authority; it is only the title he bears: And if any
Emperor come to Rome, the Pope will make him swear fealty, and he must not
long stay in Rome, he cannot endure that.

And it is well said in the Revelation, that this Beast is the Image of the
former Beast, for the Pope is altogether like the Emperors, almost in every
thing. For the Emperors were crowned: The Pope for failing has three Crowns:
The Emperors had their scarlet: this is a purple colored Whore in scarlet;
They spoke the Latin tongue, and forced all nations almost to speak Latin, as
a monument of their slavery. So all in the Popish Church is in latin, their
prayers in Latin, all in latin, even for the simple and sottish people to
use. Ancient heathen Rome had their grave Senators; the Pope has his
Cardinals. The heathen Emperors, as Domitian and others would be adored as
Gods: So likewise is the Pope of Rome adored, and mark the slight; he has a
Crucifix upon his feet, and Kings must kiss that, and so with adoring of the
Cross they adore his person, as they did Heliodorus, that heathen Emperor.
Thus in every thing almost they agree with ancient Rome, and in many other
things I might run over their likeness to the former Beast.

Now this Beast (to describe him a little better, that we might know what these
Kings did, when they gave up their Kingdoms and Thrones to the Beast.) It is
said in the 13. chapter, that the Dragon gave power to the Beast: the Dragon is
the Devil; and as he wrought effectually in the former Beast in heathen Rome,
to make war with the Saints, so is this Beast, Pontifical Rome stirred up, and
acted by the Devil, the Dragon to persecute the Church: So that this Beast
has the power, and the spirit of the Dragon, the Devil himself.

And that you may discern that I do them no wrong, consider how the Dragon,
and this Beast (which is moved, and lead, and acted by the spirit of the
Dragon) agree in their courses. I will name two or three to you.

The Dragons course is to make us distrust God; you know how in Paradise he
taught our first Parents to distrust the word of God, Ye shall be as Gods,
knowing good and evil. So the force of Popery is to dishonor, and to
discredit Gods truth, to put out the peoples eyes, to lead them blindfold, to
make the Scripture a matter of error and heresy, and bid the people take heed
of it; as if God meant to deceive them, to go beyond them in giving them his
Word; as though it were not a word of salvation. As the Dragon himself said to
Christ, If thou will fall down and worship me, all these will I give thee: So
the Pope takes upon him the Dragons power, these that will be good sons of
their Church, these and these preferments will he give them, when he has as
much right to them as the Devil had to those.

The Devil fell from heaven at the preaching of the Word, at the preaching of
the Gospel; the Apostles when they returned from preaching, told our Savior
that they saw Satan fall down like lightning. So Antichrist falls by the
preaching of the Gospel, by the breath of the Lords mouth, he is not able to
stand before it no more then Dagon before the Arc; the Word preached is as
fire to consume him, so he is like the Dragon in that.

In disposition he is like the Dragon: The Devil is a Liar and a Murderer
from the beginning, the father of lies; so likewise the Pope is a Liar, all
Popery is nothing but lies; therefore 2 Thessalonians. 2. it is said, They are given
over to believe lies, Popery is a grand lie, it is a lie in the primacie,; for
it came in by forgery and intrusion, it is a lie in Purgatory, which is a mere
conceit; it is a lie in their miracles, which they have devised to maintain
their false worship with; It is a lie in their works of supererogation, that
they can fulfill more then the Law requires. So that all Popery consider it
distinctly from our Religion (because they have that which we have, and some
patches of their own) consider it by it self, it is a mere lie.

Besides that, they maintain the doctrine of Equivocation, which is a lie, a
justifier of lies, which is worst of all.

And to murder; this present day and occasion tells us that murders come from
them, their Doctrine maintains it, and they make orations in commendations of
Traitors, as Sixtus Quintus did in praise of him, that killed Henry the third,
King of France, and the bloody Massacre of France is pictured up in the Popes
Court: As the Devil is a Liar and a Murderer, so is this Son of the Devil,
who is led by the Spirit of the Dragon, in disposition they are alike.

In course of life they are alike. The Dragon is said to draw the third part of
the stars of heaven down to the earth; that is, to draw men which were as the
stars of heaven, to make them deny their Religion. So this Dragon, this Pope,
the instrument and vassal of Satan, he draws the third part of the stars
from heaven, and he draws men from the love of the truth by preferment and
honor, men that are learned, men that are otherwise of excellent parts, he
draws them from heaven to earth; that is, he draws them from the knowledge
of the truth and goodness to earth, and lower then earth too if they do not
repent, even to hell it self from whence he came. Thus I might go on to show
that this Beast is Rome under the Pontificality, and not Rome under the Heathen
Emperors: likewise that this Beast is acted, lead, and guided by the spirit of
the Dragon, by reason of the resemblance which it holds parallel with him in
these and other things. So much for explication of this Beast.

But why is the state of Rome called the Beast?

Daniel first knew the great Empires, the one of Babylon, called a Lion, the
Persian Monarchy, a Bear, the Grecian a Leopard; but here in this Chapter is a
strange Beast, that has all the cruelty and fierceness of all those
Monarchies: Called therefore a Beast for her fierceness and cruelty.

Gods Church they are sheep and lambs, Christ himself the Lamb of God, the
opposite Church of Antichrist, a Beast, acruel Beast. If you go to plants, Gods
Church are lilies, the opposite kingdom are thorns. If you go to Fowls,
Gods Church are Doves, Turtles, mild and gentle, the opposite Church are Eagles
and birds of prey.

But I say they are called Beasts, for their cruelty: The state of Rome under
those heathenish Emperors was a Beast, and in those ten persecutions the
Emperors are rightly called Beasts; so likewise Rome Papal is a Beast. Our
Religion, true Religion entertained makes of Beasts men, the true knowledge of
Christ alters their natures, turns Lions into Lambs, as the Prophet says,
Isa. 11. But the Popish religion, it makes of men beasts, makes them worse then
themselves: For these Gun powder-traytors, many of them as they were by birth
Gentlemen, so their dispositions were gentle and mild, diverse of them, not of
the worst dispositions, only that bloody Religion made them worse then their
nature was: So I say Papal Rome is a Beast, and popish religion makes men
beasts.

Well, I will not enlarge my self in the uses of this point, because I shall
speak of it afterward, if the time will give me leave, only this, have nothing
to do with this Beast, keep out of her paws, keep out of her claws: A Lion,
or a cruel Beast may seem to be calm for a while, but a Lion will (as we
say) show a Lions trick once a year. Meddle not therefore with this Beast, it
is a Beast; so much for that, what the Beast is, the state of Rome under the
Bishop of Rome.

For God has put into their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree to give
up their kingdoms to the Beast.

Whose? The Angel sets down in the verse before, the ten Horns, the ten Kings;
the ten western Kings, whether it be a certain number for an uncertain, or
whether it be a certain number, I will not dispute of now, but take it so as it
cannot be disputed against, a certain number for an uncertain: A number of the
Western Kings gave up their kingdoms for a while to the Beast, until the
Word of God should be fulfilled.

But mark the phrase, God put it into their hearts to give up their kingdoms
to the Beast. Will God put into their hearts to give up their kingdoms to the
Beast? why then the Pope of Rome need not pretend Constantines donation, that
he 300. years after Christ gave unto them many territories about Rome: But
they may depend upon a higher donation, God put it into the hearts of the Kings
to give up their kingdoms to the Beast: Here is a higher title then the
donation of Constantine.

But we must know that this is not meant, as if God gave him a right, by
putting into the hearts of the Kings to give up their kingdoms to the Beast:
but God seeing these ten Horns, these ten Kings to be in a sinful estate, who
deserved to be left of him, and to be given up to further illusion, and by
withdrawing his grace to give them up to the occasions of sin, to this
seducing Beast and Whore, he put into their hearts to give up their kingdoms
to the Beast.

But this must be a little cleared. Is God the Author of sin? God put it into
their hearts, he did not only rule the events, but he put into their hearts,
etc.

I answer: The phrases of the Scripture are well enough known in this kind.
God gave them up to a reprobate sense, Romans 1. 12. The falling of the people
from Rehoboam, it is said, it was of the Lord; And God bad Shemei rail, diverse
such phrases there are in the Scripture: How must these be understood? thus.
Not that God does allow or command any thing that is evil, much less that he
does infuse any evil into men, so that, when it is said he put these things
into their hearts, here is neither an outward command, nor an inward infusion;
what is it then? Here is a finding of them in an evil and sinful estate, and
God uses that evil and mischief, and wickedness that he finds to his own
end, and purpose, He infuseth no malice or evil, but finding of it he uses it
to his own particular end and purpose, and makes way and vent for it upon
particular occasions. These ten Kings, he infuseth no love of superstition into
them, but finding them evil, and not as they should be Subjects of his
kingdom, and misliking his sweet government, it was just with God to give them
up to be slaves to the Beast, and by consequence to the Devil himself, that
spoke and wrought by the Beast: So I say God took away the impediments, and
opened a way to their evil disposition: He used their evil disposition to
this or that particular thing, even as a Workman that finds an ill piece of
timber, he makes not the timber ill, but when he finds it ill, he uses it to
his own good purpose; and as a man (it is Luthers comparison) as a man that
moves a Horse that is lame, he does not put lamenesse into the Horse, but
uses him to his own purpose being lame; so God finding these men evil in the
general, he directs this ill into particular courses, to work it self this
way, and not that, in this particular action, not in that: For God although he
be not the Author of evil, yet he is the Orderer of it, and he determines and
directs it, both to the object, and also to that end which he pleases.

In a word, consider sin in three distinct times, before the commission, in
it, and upon the performance: Before, God does not command it, nor infuse it,
but disallow and forbid it: In the sin, he permits it to be done; how? by
substracting of his grace, in not working, then by offering occasions that are
good in themselves: And thirdly by tradition, by giving men up to Satan; as
here the Beast is given up to Satan, and the Kings were given up to the Beast:
So that God gives men up by substraction of his grace, and by tradition, and
then he does uphold them in the committing of sin, upholds the powers: And
when it is done, applies them to this particular, and not to that particular:
In the doing of it, he limits it, he sets the bounds of it, both for the time
of it, as also for the measure of it, as here in the Text: Thus long shall the
ten Kings give up their Crowns to the Beast; and thus far shall they go,
until the time come, that the Word of God shall be fulfilled: so he limits
sin in the committing of it, both for the measure, and also for the time: The
Rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the back of the righteous.

Thus you see the meaning of the words, God will put into their hearts; that
is, by withdrawing of his grace, which they deserved by their sinful courses;
and offering to them this Man of sin, this Beast, which shall come with such
efficacies of error, so that his grace being with-drawne, and they given up to
the Devil, to Satan, and the Beast, they shall without doubt be deluded, and
seduced, but with this limitation, until the time come, that the Word of God
shall be fulfilled,

I might be large in this point, but it is not so suitable to the occasion,
only somewhat must be said for the unfolding of the Text: So much therefore
for that.

God put into their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree to give up their
Kingdoms to the Beast.

They agree all unto it, and therefore it was not a thing done by force: Rome,
and the heathen Emperors did compel men, did overcome men by force of Arms;
these agree, it was a voluntary, and a free act in them; necessary it was in
regard of Gods judgment, but it was free and voluntary in regard of
themselves, for with one consent they gave up their Kingdoms to the Beast.

Thus having unfolded the meaning, we come to observe some truths and
conclusions that do arise out of the words. I will not mention all, or the
most that might be observed, but only some special.

God put into their hearts to give up their Kingdoms to the Beast.

Here first of all from this arises, Gods special providence in Ill, in the
greatest evil that can be there is his special providence apparent; God put
into their hearts to give up their Kingdoms to the Beast: Observe here many
acts of his Providence, the withdrawing of his grace, the giving them up to
Satan, and to ill occasions, the presenting them with good occasions, which
meeting with an ill disposition makes them worse; for good occasions meeting
with an ill disposition makes it worse, makes it rage the more; as the stopping
of a torrent makes it rage and swell the more; as also the limitation of all
this, until his Word shall be fulfilled; thus in this work, Heaven and Earth
and Hell meet in one action: Thus it was in that great action of the crucifying
of our blessed Savior, there is the action of God, in giving his Son to be a
sweet Sacrifice, and the action of Judas, and the Devil in him betraying of
Christ, and the action of the Soldiers, in crucifying him. Saint Augustine in
the unfolding of this point, of the Providence of God in Evil, observes how
many may concur in one action, God without blame, man without excuse: God
without blame, he finds men ill, and leaves men (deserving to be left) he
takes away his grace, and as a Judge gives men up to Satan: Man without
excuse, because man works willingly, They with one consent gave up their
Kingdoms to the Beast. That is the first.

The second is this, that the will of man may be swayed by divine governance,
and yet notwithstanding work most willingly, and freely.

Here, God puts into their hearts to do this, and yet they willingly, and with
one consent gave their Crowns to the Beast.

God first has his Providence in ill, and then that providence is such, that
it does not rob man of his liberty, because God finding man in an ill course,
he forces him not to this or that particular ill, but directs him only: The
hearts of Kings are in the hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of waters. A Man
when he finds a River of water, he does not make the stream, but only
makes way, that it may run this or that way, as it pleases him; so God,
finding the hearts of Kings, or the hearts of any, as the Rivers of water, He
opens vent, that they should run this, and not that way; that they should be
given to this, and not to that, here is the action of God, and yet the free
liberty of man.

But how could this be free, when they ^ould not avoid it?

I answer, they were not privy to Gods directing, they worked not in
conscience of Gods moving, but they followed their own ^usts and will:
Between Gods work and Man's will, there is always sin: God never works
immediately in Man's will; for Man's will is free, but Man's sinful Free Will is
the ^ext cause in sin: Although God put it in^o their hearts, yet he found
them sinfully disposed.

And then, the judgment is not bound or ^yed. The hearts of these Kings told
them, that they might give their Crowns, or not give them to the Beast, their
judgment saw they had reason to do it, though their judgment were corrupt;
so, a sinner sees reason to do this or that, and although it be corrupt
reason, yet it moves him at that time, his judgment is not bound up, but God
lets his judgment be free, though he take away his heavenly light, and so he
judges perversely That Is the second.

The third is, That it is a terrible judgment of God to be given up to a man's
own will, to leave a man to his own consents.

It is here spoken by way of judgment, That God put it into their hearts to
give up their Kingdoms to the Beast. And indeed so it is a terrible judgment.

There are some objections to be taken away, for the clearing of this weighty
point.

How is it a judgment, or a punishment, when it is voluntary? They willingly
gave up their Kingdoms.

I answer, the more voluntary, and free a man is in sin, the more and greater
the judgment is; and as when sin is more restrained, either inwardly by the
Spirit, and by the conscience, or outwardly by the Laws and terror, the more
mercifully God deals with men, so the more free the current of the disposition
runs in ill ways, the more wretched a man is.

Yea, but will the heart of some Atheistical person presently say, what
punishment is it, as long as I have liberty in evil, and meet with no
hinderance in my courses, and feel no harm, but rather the contrary, as many
that get their riches by ill means, and those great Papists, those great
Usurpers, we see what estates they get to themselves.

I answer, Spiritual Judgments are so much the greater, by how much they are
less sensible, because if they be not sensible to us here, they will be the
more sensible to us hereafter: And those that have their will most here, shall
suffer most against their will hereafter: It is the greatest judgment in this
world, for a man to have his will in sinful courses: He that shall make an
Idol of his will (especially a man that is in great place of Honor) that
shall make all ways serve for the accomplishment of his will, when he has ^t,
he is the most miserablest man in the world; ^or he that has his will most in
courses unjustifiable, shall suffer most against his will, when he comes to a
reckoning: such men therefore are the more miserable, because such taking
themselves to be absolute persons, and their ways the best wais, though they
have many determents from their base courses, yet they will hear no counsel;
and therefore the ^rder to be reclaimed; It does not therefore take away from
their punishment, but rather aggravate it.

I beseech you let me press this a little, that these Judgments are great
Judgments (although we do not feel them) when with a free consent we give
our selves unto ill: It is a heavy Judgment when God leaves us to our own
lusts, and takes away the guidance of his Spirit, we had better that God should
give us up to the Devil for a while to be tormented, we had better be in Hell
(if a man might come out at a certain time) then to be given up all our life
time, to do with our own consent and will, that which is liking to our own
will and lust; because by yielding to our own will, we yield to the Devil
that rules in a Man's affections and will: For a Man's affections, when they are
carried to evil, they are the Chariots of Satan; when the Devil sees
excessive sinful affections; as excessive sinful joy, and delight in sinful
pleasures; he being about us, is always carried in these affections, and
carries us also strongly in the ways that lead unto eternal perdition.

We judge, when a man suffers some outward punishment, as casting into prison,
or the loss of his sight, oh he is infearfull case; but what is the case of a
man blinded by Satan, and his own lus^s? A man that is a slave to his own
base affections, and by consequent to the Devil, which rules in his
affections, and so consequently to damnation; A man that lies under the wrath
of God, that has no heart to repent; If a man had spiritual eyes, to consider
the case of that man, he would never pity so much the case of those men that
suffer outward losses, as he would pity those which he sees to live, and
oftentimes to die in evil courses of life.

This should therefore be an use of direction to us, that seeing we hear, that
God rules the hearts of men, that he takes away his Spirit, and leaves men to
occasions, we should pray to God to rule our hearts himself; Lord take thou
the rule of our hearts to govern them thy self: It was a good prayer of the
Ancient Church, Oh God from whom all holy desires, and all good counsels do
proceed, etc. Indeed it is he from whom all good counsels do proceed. These
ten Horns, they were ten Kings, no doubt but as they were men of great place,
so of great parts, but without Gods Spirit, without his light, the greatest and
the wisest man is but mad, he is as a man out of his wits, puzzeled in
darkness, and knows not which way to go. When God gives men over to their
own lusts to their blind affections, they lead men to judgment, and they must
needs fall into the pit.

Let us desire God to put into our hearts holy desires, holy purposes; for from
him all holy desires come; let us desire him not only to govern our estate,
and to preserve our bodies from danger; but Lord keep thou our hearts, we
cannot keep our hearts of our selves, do thou bend our understandings, bow
our affections, and our wills, that they may run in the right way.

And (to stir us up to this the more) we must know, that that Evil which
we do not, we are beholding to God for, as much as for the good we do. Why
do not men, having an ill disposition, and corruptature, do ill? Because God
offers not occasions of ill; if God should offer occasions, they would commit
the Evil as well as others; It is God that puts into men's hearts to hate that
Evil: If God should take away his Spirit, men would not hate evil, when
occasions are offered, as these men did not, when the occasion was offered,
They gave up their kingdoms and thrones to the Beast. So that we are beholding
to God, for all the ill that we do not, either it is his not offering occasions,
or else his giving us strength in the occasions. This we forget. We are apt to
say, this wicked man has done this, this good man is fallen into this, this
man has done that: but where is our devotion at this time? we should rather
say, Lord it was thee for causes thou best know, for if thou had left me
(especially when occasions were presented and offered, and there was a
correspondent corruption in my heart) to close with the occasion, I had fallen
into the like sin, it was thy keeping, and not my goodness.

One thing more, the Beast is expressed before in Chapter 13. to be lead by the
Devil. So that howsoever the Devil, who by Saint Paul is called the God of
this world, and the Pope the subordinate Vicar to the Devil (and so by
consequence he is the Devil, for the Devil, the Dragon rules him:) Howsoever
I say there be the Devil, the God of this world, and the Pope in this world,
the Vicar of that Dragon, yet there is but one Monarch, one that rules all,
both Devil and Pope, and all the wicked limbs of both to his own ends. It was
God that put it into the hearts of these Kings to give up their Kingdoms to
the Beast: It is he alone that is absolute, that gives the liberty of the
Chain, both to men and devils: Thus far they shall go, and no further. It
is a good saying of the Schools, There is no Ill so ill, as there is good that
is good, there is not any ill so strong, as God is good: but every ill must
come under the government of God: The Devil himself, nor the vile heart of
man cannot go out of his rule, yet may run out of his Commandments, but
then it runs into his Justice, he may go against the revealed will of God,
but then he runs into his secret will: there is no Ill, Ill in that degree,
that God is good, but every Ill is in somewhat, and from somewhat, and for
somewhat that is good, as it is overruled by God. The crucifying of Christ,
which was the worst action that ever was, yet it tended to the greatest good,
viz. the salvation of mankind. So this giving to the Beast, of these ten
Thrones, by these ten Kings, it was a sin, and a punishment of their sin,
but it was for a good end, as we shall see afterward, if the time will give
leave.

This should teachus absolute dependence, and subjection to this great God;
they need fear no creatures, that fear God, they need fear no Devil, nor
Turk, nor Pope, nor all the lims of them, for God is the absolute Monarch of
the world, he can do what he will, and if God be on our side, who can be
against us? It is said, that he is a wise Politician, that can make his own
ends out of his enemies designs: The great Governor of heaven and earth can
do so; He can put a hook into the nostrils of the Leviathans of this world,
and can draw them, and rule them as he pleases; they may do many things, but
it shall be all to accomplish his ends and purposes, they shall do his will:
God put it into the hearts of these Kings to fulfill his will; (He) put it
into their hearts, to agree to give up their kingdoms to the Beast; and so
they did submit themselves to Antichrist, for a great while.

In the next place it is expressed how this came, They (Gave) their Kingdoms
to the Beast. We are to see how far faulty these Kings were, and how far
faulty the Pope, the Beast, was to whom they gave their Kingdoms. For it may
be objected, that these men they did but obey God, for he put it into their
hearts, and for the Pope, they offered their Kingdoms to him, and who would
not receive offered Gold? But here is a deal of devilish deceit; for first,
God gave them over to themselves, and they gave themselves, and their Kingdoms
to the Beast; what then was sinful in them? This, to give their Kingdoms to
the Beast?

This, they betrayed their Kingdoms; Here is a wrong to God, a wrong to
themselves, and a wrong to their Subjects. A wrong to God, whose Vicegerents
they were; did he give them their Kingdoms, to give them to his Enemy, to give
them to the Beast, and by consequence to the Devil? Does God raise up men to
rule, that they should enthral themselves, and their Kingdoms to the Beast, to
give them to Gods Enemies? No, Kings reign by Him; The Pope says, by me: Is
their constitution of men? No, Kings reign by God, they derive their authority
from him: It is he that has power over Kings, Dan. 2. They reign not if he
will, and they may rule ^f he will, by his will permitting, else no man can
reign, By me Kings reign: If then they reign by him, it is a treason
against God to betray the Kingdoms, that he has given them, into the hands
of his Enemies: It is a wrong to Christ, whereas they should kiss the Son,
by kisses of subjection, as Princes use to do in the Eastern Countries, to
fall down and kiss their Sovereigns toes, they do (in this) the clean
contrary.

Here is a wrong to themselves, they betray their own authority, that when God
has made them Kings to rule, they will be slaves, and it is a great sin for
a man not to maintain his standing, as it is well observed by his Majesty, who
(if ever Prince did) does vindicate himself, and challenge his regal
authority, and it shall continue, and make him live even to the worlds end. It
is the greatest sin for a man to betray himself; Every man is to maintain
that place and standing, that God has set him in. These ten Horns they
wronged themselves, and their place, God made them Kings over their people, and
they become slaves to an Antichristian Priest.

It was a great wrong to their Subjects, kingdoms we know follow their Kings,
and if Jeroboam make Israel to sin, all Israel will quickly sin: diseases
come from the head, if the head be naught, there will be a disease in the body
ere long; A greater stone being tumbled down from a Hill, it carries lesser
stones along with it; so, great Kings when they fall themselves, they draw
their Kingdoms after them: therefore the phrase of the Scripture is, God put
into their hearts to give, not only themselves, but their Kingdoms to the
Beast: for commonly the Idol of the people is their King, and being led by
sense, and not by faith, they fear him more then they fear God, and their
own restraint, more then they fear Hell, and so they come to this damned
Religion by depending upon him: therefore it is a wrong to the people, knowing
they are so slavish by nature, and wanting faith, are fearing terror led by
the present command of their King. Thus it was a wrong in these Kings every way.

But the Pope, the Beast, what was too blame in him? He did but take that which
was offered him, They gave their Kingdoms to the Beast.

I answer, Indeed he took that which was offered him, but he did abuse these
Kings, he abused the Christian world, He had no title to these Kingdoms, but
was a fraudulent Possessor of them, because he came to them by a slight; He
raised himself to the Popedom by the ruins of the Empire; for upon the
divisions of the Empire, the Emperor having enemies in the East, he was feign
to rest in Constantinople, and thereupon Rome being much neglected, at last was
overrun by the Goths and Vandals, and the Pope taking occasion of the absence
of the Empe^our set up himself; thus raising himself by ^e ru^nes of the
Empire, and then he being ^stablished, set up Pepine, Father of Charles the
Great, and put down Childerick; who (being (...) weak Prince) he deposed, and
set the other (...), that he might gratify him so; so he col^ogued with
Princes.

And then again, he wan respect and authority from the Horns, by diabolical
and (...) courses. For first, he abused their under^andings, keeping them from
the Scriptures: and then he abused their affections, and drew ^em this way, and
that way with toys. They ^ave him great matters, and he gave them In^ulgences
and Pardons, and consecrated Grains, and such like things.

Then again, he would often force them to ^ield by Excommunications, and many
false ^itles of Peter's Successor, and Peter's Chair, so by the terror and
dread of Excommunica^ion, he awed them.

Again, he wrought by subtilty, joining with one Prince against another,
setting one against another: And if he joined with any party, he had such a
slight, that he would be sure to make him a slave to the Papacy, one way or
other, or else he would excommunicate him, and then before they should be
absolved, they must either pay a great sum of money, or else they must go
such a voyage, or set such men or such on such an Enterprise.

And then again, he gave dispensations to sell souls, and so men might do
what they would, they should have Pardon, otherwise they should have
Excommunication.

And then again, he had preferments for the Sons of the Horns, Cardinals
places for their second Sons, that they should be great Princes, he had high
places for them.

Then again, he laid his foundation on false grounds; He would be universal
Bishop, and the Church could not err, and al of them must fetch, and determine
of their matters from him, and appeal must be made to none, but to him, and in
certain cases none could satisfy the Conscience but him. So that he greatly
raised his authority by these false and cousening means, and all that yielded
to him, were a deluded company of people, that were deluded by the false and
subtle courses that he took. And therefore, although they gave their
Kingdoms to him, yet he possessed them by a fraudulent ritle, the means he
used were diabolical. They gave their Kingdoms to the Beast, till the word of
God should be fulfilled.

Well, we see here the Judgment of God upon the Christian world; It was not
only a Judgment upon these Kings, as they were Kings, but God punished the
peoples sin in the slavery of these Kings to the Beast.

See here, the Judgment of God upon Kings and Princes, for not esteeming as
they should do the glorious Gospel of Christ, for they both, Princes and
people had it, but they esteemed it not, but delighted in untruths; therefore
God gave them up to believe lies.

We are not therefore overmuch to pity our Ancestors, though they deserve
pity, yet we excuse them over much this way; for certainly God is just in his
Judgment, who seeing them delight in lies, more then in his truth, took away
his grace, and gave them up to this Beast, that they should give up their
authority, both Prince and people to him; And because they would not be ruled
by Gods will, thinking themselves wiser then he: He appointed them to be ruled
by one that should be ruled by the Devil: For the Devil was in the Pope, and
who would serve the Devil, if he knew it? But because they would not yield
unto Christ's sweet government; therefore he gave them over to a government fit
for them, even to be governed by the Beast.

I beseech you take notice of this point, when we entertain not the glorious
Gospel of Christ, the good word of God, that word that declares salvation unto
us, and which is an Instrument to work grace in us, to fit us for heaven; that
word that is the seed, and the food of our new Birth, the Evidence of our
Inheritance; that good word, which is the greatest Jewel under heaven, when we
do not value that, it is the greatest error that can be, and it is just with
God, to give us up to this, and to that error, if not unto Popery, yet unto
some one error that the Devil is in, and contrary to the Spirit of God. Do
ye think, if a Master should see his servant take ill courses, and would not
do according to his appointment and admonition, that he would not leave him to
take his own course, and so let him do his own will, that thereby he might
see his folly, in not being ruled by him* So it is just with God, when he sees
that we do not make much of his Gospel, of his soule-saving Gopel, that we
will not have that alone, but Traditions with it, and that besides Christ, we
must have other Mediators, as if Christ were not rich enough: It is just with
God to give both Prince and people up to the Beast. Let us therefore make much
of the Gospel: what moved God to give up the Eastern Empire, those glorious
Churches in Saint John's time, unto the Turk? nothing but this, they did not
value the Gospel: What moved God to give up those Western Kings to Romish
Antichrist (for those two, the Turk and Pope are twins, they had their
beginning at once, about 700. years after Christ) what moved this? But only
when God had dealt graciously with them at the first, and gave them his truth
to save their souls, (which is the most comfortablest thing in the world, to
have God discover what he means to do with us, and what he would have us to
do) when he discovered his will to them, and saw them leave his will, saw them
leave Gold, and take Dross, prefer the traditions and wisdom of men before
the wisdom of God, it was just with him to give them up to believe lies. They
gave their Kingdoms to the Beast (mark the limitation here, until) until the
word of God should be fulfilled.

I see I cannot make an end of the Text; a little further, and so I will
conclude.

Here is an Until, here is a stop, the Devil and the Beast had their time to
seduce the Kings, and the Kings had their time to be seduced, and to give up
their Kingdoms, but God has his time, Christ has his time: Christ gives his
enemies time, and then takes time himself: Until the time that the Word of
God shall be fulfilled.

We see here then a mixture of mercy with justice, that after God had given
them up justly, not only the Eastern Empire, but also the Western Kings to the
Pope, yet notwithstanding here is an Until. God limits Ill, not only for the
measure of it, but also for the time of it; God at length turns the stream of
things, so that these Kings that were thus abused, and baffeled by this Man of
sin, this Beast, at last they grow wise, by the in^nct of God, and hate the
Beast, as much as ever they loved her.

So then this is the point. That the same God, that by divine Providence gave
way to these Kings, to abuse the doctrine of the Gospel, and that gave way to
these people, that were unthankefull, to yield themselves in such slavery to
the Pope, yet notwithstanding in mercy God at the last put into the hearts of
these Kings to withdraw their necks from this yoke, and to put their necks
under Christ's yoke.

This Until, has had a beginning many year ago; for we know, (to omit
other Kings of other Countries) King Henry the Eight of famous memory, (take
him without those things we cannot upbraid; now he was a man of great, and
excellent parts, as he was of great vices:) He was an excellent instrument of
Christ, to unhorse the Pope, to shake off his government, to hate the Whore,
and to eat her flesh; that is, to overthrow the Monasteries, those Cages of
unclean Birds, and those Peter Pence, those exactions; for indeed the Pope
made England his Ass, to bear his burdens: It would move any man's patience,
to see how pitifully the Popes of Rome have abused this Island, so that we may
now truly say as Christ says: If the Son make you free, you are free indeed;
Christ has made us free, the Gospel has made us free, and ever since the
coming of the Gospel we have flourished. King Henry shook off the yoke
first, and after him King Edward, and after him Elizabeth of blessed memory,
and now our gracious King. So that this Until, it begun long since to hate the
Beast, and to eat her flesh; one thing ther^ is yet undone, To burn her with
fire, if they hate the Beast, and eat her flesh, this will come to^, to burn
her with fire, even the ten Kings that were subject to her before shall do
that.

We see wickedness shall not thrive always, it shall not always be night,
but the Sun shall arise at the last, Impostures shall not always abuse the
world, their madness shall be made manifest at length; as Paul says, 2 Timothy
This is our Comfort, that there is an Until, a time prefixed of God, to
discover, and to lay open all Impostures: And now the time is come, that most
of this should be fulfilled, some of these words of God are fulfilled, the
Beast is hated, and now the Beast is known to be the Beast, to be cruel,
witness the blood of Saints, the Murder of Kings, those horrible acts that
are allowed from Rome. The Beast I say is now discovered, and hated.

The Affections that are due to the Beast is hatred. If ever we hatred any
thing, we may hate the state of Rome: It is a Beast, and the object of hatred,
and ever was; and if ever I say we hated any thing that was deserveable of our
hatred, it is that, why? do we not hate a Harlot? do we not hate an old
Strumpet, an old painted Strumpet? do we not hate her that is a Bawd? there
was never Bawd, there was never Whore that did the thousand part of that harm,
that this Bawd, this Beast, this Whore of Rome has done, drawing so many
thousand souls to hell.

Of all the Judgments that ever were since the beginning of the Christian
world, that God has visited the pride and wickedness of men with, there was
none so grievous, as to suffer this Man of sin to rule in the Church: the
spiritual judgment of the Papacy, it is the greatest judgment of God, that
was ever inflicted upon any.

We hate them that misuse us under the pretense of love, that cheat and cozen
us, and we delight in their punishment; there was never Cheater, never Cozener
like this: And surely so God has fulfilled his word, that she is hated even
in our Children, that know but the grounds of Religion, to whom Christ has
shined by the evidences of his thuth, that have the Spirit of God in them, they
hate those Impostures, those abuses of Christian Religion, with which this
Beast has deluded the Christian world, which shows that they have a contrary
spirit to the Spirit of God; and indeed so they have, for besides their own
base government, they maintain the corruptions of men, feeding the pride and
vanity of men's natures, with outward, formal, empty things; so that the very
weak ones, even Children now they hate the Whore, hate her Impostures, hate
her Cruelty, hate her Lying, and all.

I see the time is past, I can go no further, ^ut will draw to an end, only a
little to still us up. Shall God then reveal, and discover this painted
Strumpet, this Bawd, and shall we labor to conceal her ill, shall we dawbe,
shall we make her better then she is? shall we hinder Gods purpose? Gods word
is, that she shall be revealed, the Princes shall hate her, and consume her
with fire: Let every one of our purposes help Gods purpose and Providence, and
decree in this point, that this shall be, it is Gods purpose; and whosoever
stops it, certainly they bring the judgment of God upon them; those that
would rear up ^ericho again, we know what befell them, and they that rear
up Rome, that begins now to be discovered, they bring the Judgment of God
upon them: God will perform this as well, as he performed the other, as he put
it into the hearts of these Kings to betray their Kingdoms to the Beast, so
he will put into their hearts to hate the Whore.

Now that we may hate her, let every one labor in his place, Ministers in
their place to lay open their Impostures, their cousenings, and all their
filthiness, whereby they deceive the people: Magistrates in their place to
ocuntenance the Ministers, to see the laws executed as they may: These that
through ignorance are seduced, that are not Iesuited (for there is no hope of
them) but others, their persons many times in the policy of state may have
favor, but not their Religion.

Let us all take heed that we grow in knowledge: Let us labor to make more of
the Gospel of Christ, the more Christ appears in glory, the more Antichrist
will appear in shame; Let us labor by prayer, and not give God over by
prayer, to plant the love of the truth in our hearts, to entertain the truth
with love, to value it according to the respect it deserves at our hands, and
let us labor to be molded into that truth, to obey it, else though we have it;
yet if we do not love it, if we be not transformed into it, though our wits
and parts be never so great, we may be seduced to error: God gave over these
Kings, men of great place, and of great parts, because they did not love the
truth, to believe lies.

My purpose was to have showed the danger, if we do not further Gods purpose in
discovering this wicked Antichrist: A state wherein the Devil, the Dragon, is
effectual, and this Book wondero^sly sets down the danger. It is another
manner of danger now to relapse, and to apostatize, after the appearing of the
glorious Gospel of Christ: then it was a hundred years ago under darkness,
and we know it to be so: of all the judgments in this world it is the
greatest for God to give up a man to decay in his love to the truth, to affect
this cursed Religion, that the sentence of God has past upon, and it must be
fulfilled, That they shall hate the Whore, and burn her with fire, that she
shall be left desolate and naked.

But you may object. Alas how is that likely to be, when we see now what
strength the Beast has gotten, and how he ru^fleth in the world at this time,
how he triumphs and trampleth the poor Church under his feet.

Well, it is but a living before death, undoubtedly Babylon is fallen, it is
fallen, says John in his time; that is, it is as sure to fall, as if it were
fallen already: the word of God has said so, the power of man cannot hinder
it: He that put it into the heads and hearts of the Kings to betray their
Kingdoms, he shall also put it into their hearts and heads to hate, and burn
the Whore with fire at the last; It must be so, the Angel said it was done, as
if it were done already, it is as sure as if it were done; therefore let us
never take scandal at the flourish^ng state of the enemies of the Church
abroad, let us never dislike our Religion for that. Babylon is fallen, the time
will come when it shall be done, Heaven has concluded it, and earth cannot
hinder it, no nor Hell neither, God has said it, and shall not he do it? It
is the word of him that is Lord of his word; because he is Lord of hosts, and
Lord of the Creatures: It is the word of him that is Lord of Lords, that is
Lord of heaven and earth, Lord of all things; He has said that Babylon is
fallen, and therefore it must be so, he being Governor and Lord of all things,
and of his word too, that can make all things prove serviceable to his purpose:
Let us comfort our selves therefore, as if it were present, and not take
offense at the state of the Beast, and the Whores flourishing, but present him
to your selves as he is set out in the Text, see him growing, see him rising,
see him decaying, and at last see him cast into the bottomless pit, to burn
in the Lake of fire for ever: It is you see the word of God from heaven, that
he is fallen, and cast into the earth as a Mil^one, and shall never ^ise
again: He shall never quicken again. Heathen Rome was quickened by Papal
Rome; the Pope quickened the former Beast: But there shall never be Beast after
this Rome, and therefore he is said in this Chapter, To go into destruction;
that is, he, and his state, and all (without repentance) shall so go into
destruction, that there shall never be other Beast.

And that that shall help this destruction forward, shall be the course that
themselves take; God as he has decreed their destruction, so he has
appointed that their own plots, which they have devised for their own
maintenance, shall turn to their confusion: Do you not think that the ruin
of the Pope will be by the Jesuits, who are grown (by their pressing
themselves, and by their pragmaticall meddling into Princes affairs, by their
drawing and assuming all business to themselves, and by their striving, and
bringing all to their profession) to such hatred of the world, that even these
means, which they themselves take, will be the means of the overthrow, and
downfall of Popery: As the counsel of Achitophel was, the means to infatuate
him, so their own courses will cause their own overthrow.

In the Powder Treason, they thought they had been made for ever, but God
turned their wickedness upon their own heads. And now in these later times,
we may see that God takes his cause into his own hands, and you know who spoke
it by observation, Hamans wife, If thou begin to fall, thou shall not prevail,
but shall surely fall before him; so if God take the matter into his own
hands, as he has done already, let them fear; For they shall surely fall and
not prevail, until he has wrought his work in Sion, until he has thoroughly
purged his Church: they shall prevail; there is a little time allotted them,
but it is nothing, let us see by the eye of faith, what this Book says of
them, that they shall be destroyed, and let us look on the courses they
themselves take which will cause their destruction; was there ever any thing
that weakened Popery so much, as this desperate attempt that we now celebrate
this day? Indeed if we go to an ignorant Papist, and tell him what doctrine
they teach, and what upholds their doctrine, tell him of the Powder treason,
ask him concerning the traitors, he will mince the matter, oh they were
unfortunate Gentlemen, etc. But how did Sixtus Quintus mince the matter when
they had success in the massacre in France, when many thousands of people we^e
sl^ine, against the Law, slain under pretense of being married, and bidden to
a marriage? He was so far from disallowing the act, as that he caused it to
be pictured in his Palace: So if these had achieved this, they had not been
unfortunate Gentlemen, they had been made, they had been sainted, as some of
them are; Saint Garnet, S. Devil; if the Devil himself will help them, and
further Popery, he shall be sainted, and if they be never so base, yet for
their Rebellion, and destruction of Kings, they shall be sainted by them; will
not this provoke men to hate the Beast and the Whore, to make her desolate and
naked, and to eat her flesh, and to burn her with fire?

Well, the time is past, I cannot finish the Text as I thought to have done: To
speak to the particular occasion I need not, it is yet fresh: And what should
we speak of the Gunpowder-treason? the Jesuits and Priests having the Devil
for their Midwife, they are big of such like plots, Hell, Rome, and Satan,
and the Jesuits, those Frogs of the Bottomless pit, they are full of devising
such attempts. But I rather thought to speak against Popery, against the Beast,
and her Religion at this time then Rhetorically to amplify that act of theirs;
when indeed we are ready to have a new one continually, for they are always
plotting and devising, I mean those Jesuits; Our comfort is to look to the
Scripture, to look here what shall be the end of these Frogs, and of the
Beast, ere long they shall be cast into the burning Lake: Let us bless God
that we live under this government, of so Gracious a Prince, that has more
weakened the Pope by his learned Writings, then ever any Prince did. So much for
this time.

THE RVINE OF MYSTICAL JERICHO. A Sermon preached upon the 5th of November, in
remembrance of Our Deliverance from the Papists Powder Treason.

BY The late Learned and Reverend Divine, RICH. SIBBS. Doctor in Divinity, Mr.
of KATHERINE Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher to the Honorable
Society of GRAYES-INNE.

JOSH. 6. 10. And it came to pass when the people heard the sound of the
Trumpet, and the people shouted with a great shout, that the Wall fell down
flat, etc.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for N. Bourne, at the Royal Exchange, and R.
Harford, at the guilt Bible in Queenes-head Alley in Paternoster Row. 1639.

THE RVINE OF MYSTICAL JERICHO.
HEB. 11. 30. By faith the Walls of Jericho fell down, after they had been
compassed about seven days.
THIS Verse suites somewhat to November, 5.
the occasion: therefore I have made cho^se of it at this time. This Chapter
contains the triumph of Faith in the hearts and souls of those in whom this
blessed grace is planted; so that the excellency and office of all graces are
attributed to it, there is a stirring up of al other graces whatsoever in
says. All the Worthies that are spoken of before they did that they did, And
obtained a good report by faith. The Spirit of God goes on here, and shows a
glorious effect of this blessed grace, in the falling down of the Walls of
I^richo. This short Verse is taken out of the Sto^ie of the Conquest of
Jericho, mentioned in Ios. 6. in the later end of the Chapter, where Joshua 6.
you have the whole Story set down at large, I need not rehearse it: And
withal you have there a curse set down; that whosoever should go about
again to build the walls of Jericho, he should lay the foundation in his first
borne, and in his youngest Son he should set up the gates. He that would
raise up such a cursed building again, he should do it with the overthrow of
his own building, of his own Family; (as the Scripture calls a man's house a
building) he should lay the foundation in his eldest Son, and build the Gates
at the death of his youngest Son.

And a little to acquaint you with the fullness of the word, before I come to
the Story: you have an audacious cursed attempt to build the walls of Jericho
again, in 1 King. 16. toward the latter end, in a wicked Kings time, in 1
King. 16. 34.
Ahabs time. There was one so adventurous, one Hiell, that he would build
Jericho, he laid the foundation in Abiram his firstborn, and set up the
Gates in his youngest Son Segub, according to the word of the Lord spoken by
Joshua, the Son of Nun: you see whence this story is fetched. By faith the
walls of Jericho ^ll down, after they had been compassed about se^en days.
They were compassed about seven ^ayes, and the Arc in the midst; and the
se^enth day, they went seven times about, and ^en the walls fell down, as you
have it in the ^tory. But to come to the words, and to ha^en to that that I
specially mean to touch at this time.

First of all observe here, that Jericho had mighty walls, as you see in the
Story; it had walls, and trusted in these walls; or else they would have come
out, and have made condi^ions of peace with Israel: but as they had ^als, so
they were confident in them; as you ^ee the Spies, in Numb. 14. they tell what
Numb. 14.
^alled Cities they had, and that terrified them.

And next you see here, that God overthrowes their walls, and by what means? by
^oore, and base means, by Trumpets of Rams^ornes; they had silver Trumpets, but
they used not them, but meaner Instruments, Ramshornes, those were the means,
and the time that they used them seven days together, and then that by faith,
using these means, they overthrew the walls of Jericho, they fell down. From
hence by Analogy, and proportion we may see.

First of all, that carnal men they build up walls, and put their trust in them.

The secondis, that God confounds these courses.

The third is, that God does it by weak, and silly means believed by faith.

The last point is, that faith in the use of these means overcomes all. By
faith the walls of Jericho fell down after they had been compassed about seven
days. And then we shall come to other things that concern us, and apply it
to the time. Natural men since the fall they must have somewhat to trust to.

Since man lost his first prop, and confidence, and communion with God, he
turns to the Doct. 1. Men naturally trust to somewhat.
creature, there is always some confidence in some creature, and men leave God
in what measure they trust that. When Cain was banished his Fathers house, then
hefals to building of Cities, he must have some contentment* and those that
were escaped the flood, within a hundred years after the Flood they must build
a Tower of Babell, that should reach to Heaven, to get themselves a name,
wanting better courses. Every one will have some Castle, and wall of Jericho to
trust to; Riches are the Rich-mans strong hold, as Solomon says. Achitophel
trusted to a shrewd head and policy, that proved his ruin afterward. The
Jews had outward sanctity to trust to, opposing it to the righteousness of
Christ, the righteousness of faith, Romans 10. they would set a foot a dead
Righteousness that could not Romans 10.
stand, and therefore they were shut from the Righteousness of God in Christ.
Man will have a holiness, a wisdom, a strength, and power of himself, in
the things below here, as I might show at large, both in examples, and
otherwise: naturally we find it in our selves; if we be sick, we trust to the
Physician, and other means; if we be in danger, we flee to the arm of flesh,
to some mighty man, we trust in some great friend, if we have any; If we be in
danger of invasion, or such like, we trust our walls and defenses, and till
strong temptations come, we trust in our ownstrength till Satan pick so many
holes in it, that we cannot stay there, and that conscience upbraids us:
Always a man has somewhat to trust to, till he be brought to desperate
conditions; and rather then he will have nothing to trust to, he will trust to
the broken Reed of Egypt, he will trust to that that will deceive him, and
hurt him, as the Reed of Egypt did the Jews, rather then they would trust God,
and the word brought by the Prophets, they would trust Ashur, and Egypt.

Now the Spirit of God in the Scriptures takes notice of this pronenesse to
false confidence: Issue of false confidence dangerous.
Trust not in uncertain Riches. If Riches increase, set not your hearts on
them. And man when he sets his heart upon false confidence, the issues are more
dangerous, he will come against God; he does not only set up these holds,
that he has in rebellion against God, but he proclaims (as it were) defiance
to God, and his word, and his ordinances, till afterward God destroy all his
false confidence, and bring him to shame.

In 2 Cor. 10. there is a notable place to show what holds there are in the
heart of man, that 2 Cor. 10.
oppose against God, and his truth in his word, holds that Satan keeps in man,
and man joining with Satan the Enemy, holds against God and his truth. The
weapons of our warfare (says he) are not carnal, but mighty through God, to
cast down strong holds: The holds are within us, and we are so far from
preparing our selves to Grace, and to entertain Grace when it is offered, that
naturally we set up holds against God and Grace. There must be strong power to
over-turne all, to lead them into captivi^y to the obedience of Christ; To cast
down the imaginations, and every high thing, every high thought that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God, and to bring in Captivity every thought. So
there are three mighty things in 3 things in man by nature.
every natural man.

This false reasoning, and Sophistry; there is no man will go to Hell without
reason; take the debauchedst wretch that lives, he is 1 False reasonings.
mad with some reason, and he will be damned with some reason; God is
merciful, Christ is come; and others are as bad as I, and I hope in time to
repent; this vile reasoning must be turned out of a man before he can be saved.
2 Proud thoughts.


Then there are proud thoughts, what? shall I yield to such a one as he? I am
better then he; I understand these things as well as he: As that proud
Cardinal in Germany said, I confess these things that Luther finds fault with
are naught; but shall I yield to a base Monk? so men think, shall I yield to
a Minister? the proud, rebellious heart of man, is lift up in proud thoughts
against God.

And then there be fore-casts; if I do thus, 3 Fore-casts of danger.
this danger will come of it, I shall provoke such an Enemy, I shall lose such
a friend, I shall endanger my self: Now when the truth of God comes, down goes
all these sophistries, and high thoughts, and all these fore-casts, they all
lie flat when the Spirit of God comes in the power of the word: but naturally
every man has these, he builds up some Castle against God, he builds up the
walls of Jericho, and trusts in them too. Thy wisdom has caused thee to
rebel, says God to the King of Baby lon: Let not the wise man trust in his
wisdom, insinuating that wise men are subject to trust in their wisdom, and
the rich man in his riches, and the strong man in his strength; therefore God
commands that they should not do so. Thy wisdom has made thee to rebel.

Let us take notice of this, and make this use Use. Trial of our trust.
of trial of it, that if by the power of Gods Spirit, we can use all outward
means, and not trust in them, that we can trust in God, and not to our
strength, then we have somewhat in us above nature; for naturally every man
before he be in communion and covenant with God, he has some earthly false
support or other to trust on, either within him; some policy, and wisdom; or
without him some friends, or riches; some Bulwark or other, and this sets him
against God, and against the means of salvation, till God come in effectual
calling, and overturne all: but this does but make way to other things,
therefore I only touch it.

The second thing is this, that God first or last overturnes all vain
confidence in the creature, Observe. 2. God overturnes vain confidence in the
creature.


The walls of Jericho, down they must; and whatsoever exalts it self against
God, either it shall end in conversion, or confusion: because the time must
come, that God must have all the glory: Was there ever any man sierce against
God, and prospered? The rage of man turns to the glory of God, says the
Psalmist. There is neither wisdom, nor policy, counsel nor strength, or any
earthly thing against the Lord, as the Wiseman says, Prove. 6. God will
confound all, he scattered Proverb. 6.
the proud in the Imagination of their own hearts, as the blessed Virgin says:
And when they had built Babell, to get them a name, they found confusion. There
is a notable place in Esaias 50. Behold all you that kindle a fire, that compass
your selves about with sparks; Walk Isay 50.
(says God) in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have
kindled; this ye shall have at my hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow: Men
that will walk in the light of their own fire, that will have a wisdom of
their own; distinct may contrary (often times) to Gods: Well, go on, walk in
the light of your own fire that ye have kindled; but take this withal with
you: You shall have this at my hands, says God, ye shall lie down in sorrow.
What became of Hamans plots? what became of Achitophels policy? they all
turned upon their own heads; although men build up Castles to secure
themselves in their earthly defenses, and munition, yet God overturnes all.

Therefore let us make that use that Jeremy Use. Ier. 20.
does, Ier. 20. Therefore let not the wise man trust in his wisdom, or the
strong man in his strength, or the rich man in his riches, let a man joy in
none of these: but if he will joy, let him joy in this, that he knows the
Lord, that he is in covenant with God. That for the second, briefly.

The third is this, that God does this by base and weak means.

He confounds great, and mighty Enterprises, Observe. 3. God dothit by weak
means.
and mighty persons, and uses but base and despised means: As here the walls
of Jericho fell down with the noise of Rams-hornes. This I might carry along
through all the stories in the Scripture, from the creation to this present
time, to show how God does great things by despised means, sometimes by no
means at all; sometimes clean contrary to all means. When our Savior Christ
gave sight to the blind, he put clay upon his eyes, that one would think were
fitter to put them out. We see in the story of the Israelites what an Ox Goad
did, and what Sampson did with the law bone of an Ass: We see by what a trick
the Midiani es were put to flight by Gideon. In all the Stories we see when
God would do great matters, he does it by base means: when he would
confound the pride of Pharaoh, he will do it by Frogs, and Lice, and such base
creatures, that were fittest in Gods wisdom, to overthrow the pride of that
wretched King: God, as he over-turnes the pride of men; so for the most part
he does it by weak, and despised means.

And the Reason is clear, that he may have all the glory; sometimes the means
that he Reason. That God may have the glory.
uses have no influence at al to effect the thing: but are only joined with
the thing; as here, what influence could poor Trumpets of Ramshornes have to
cast down Walls? they could have none, but only it was a thing joined before
the walls fell down; they were things that must be used to try their obedience;
and that they might know that it was not by chance that they fell down, but by
Gods power, and for other reasons. But if there be any influence from the
cause to the effect, it is supposed it cannot produce the effect of it self:
therefore I say God does this, that he may have all the glory; for that is his
end, and it ought to be our end: we see here though they had silver Trumpets,
yet they must by Gods appointment use these base means, Trumpets of
Rams-hornes.

Now they were to use them seven days Digression.
together, and therefore on a Sabbath day: but it was no breach of the day,
because God can dispense with his own Law; In case of Charity good works may
be done on the Sabbath, and in case of duty likewise, as the Priests killed the
sacrifice on the Sabbath: so here was sufficient warrant for them, God gave
them a command, God that made the Law, can dispense with his own Law in things
that touch not upon his nature, as his truth, and purity, etc. does: In things
that touch his nature, he should deny himself, if he should dispense: God
cannot lie, because truth is natural to him; God cannot do any thing that is
unfit for his nature: but for things that are out of him, he is Lord of days,
he is Lord of goods and life, he has a right to dispense here, as we see in
the taking away the Egyptians Jewels, and the like; they were outward things:
But for those things that are intrinsecall in God, he cannot command that
which is contrary to his truth, and nature, other things belong to his
Sovereignty; but that by the way.

They were to compass the walls seven days: if they had made an end before the
seventh day, the walls had never fallen down: howsoever there was no power in
their going about to effect that, yet God would not work the effect till he
was waited on in all the seven days. The means appointed by God must be used,
and so long as God will have them used, there must be a depending and waiting
upon God all the time.

To give a little further light, to that I touched before, you will ask, why
God uses Quest.
means, and does not work immediately? why he did not cast down these walls
by his own will, and pleasure?

Besides, that I said before, God uses second Answ.
causes, not for defect of power, but for demonstration of his goodness, and
for the trial of our obedience, and the like: therefore being Lord of Hosts he
has multiplicity of rancks of creatures, which he uses to effect those
things, that he could do himself, if it pleased him: therefore let such
questions cease: it pleased God so to do.

The last point is this: It was by Faith, in the use of means, that the
Observe. 4. It is by faith in the use of means.
Walls of Jericho fell down.

If they had not depended upon God, in their going about seven days, the walls
had stood still. It was by faith they did it, and it was a great faith, that
using such a ridiculous stratagem as this, to go about the walls with
Rams-hornes, they should think the walls would fall: It might shake their
Faith, and likewise expose them to the scorn of those of Jericho within:
therefore it was a great faith in them: Not that all had faith; for certainly
diverse of them were unbeleeving persons: But Joshua their Captain, and some
others of them had faith, and al of them had hope of the best. It was faith
that believed this in this unlikelihood of second causes; for there is the
strength of faith, when second causes are weak, then faith is strong. Abraham's
faith was the stronger, by reason there was more indisposition in the second
causes, in Sara's womb to conceive a child; for her womb was dead; in the
course of nature she could not conceive: therefore it is said by Saint Paul,
Romans 4. He being strong in faith, gave glory to God, strong faith gives glory
to God. So here Romans 4.
was a strong faith, because the means were weak, or none at all; for these
means had nothing in themselves to work such a glorious effect as this, that
the falling of the walls should follow; it was but a means adjoined; that it
should be done by such a poor thing as this, it was the strength of faith. But
was it the strength of faith in it self? could faith do this? Quest.


Oh no; but that which that faith lays hold Answ.
on does, that faith is said to do: God honors the grace of faith, by terming
that to be Faith said to do that which God does.
done by it, that he does himself; for it was the power of God, the goodness
of God to them, and the justice of God (against the sins of these people) that
overturned the walls of Jericho, faith it was, but an empty hand to lay hold
upon this power; it was the grace, whereby they went out of themselves, and
denied themselves, and gave glory to God, in accomplishing the truth of his
word, and his wisdom, and power, and justice. So God did it, but it is said
to be done by faith; because as I said, God honors faith thus much. What
strength God and Christ has, when faith la^es hold on them, faith has that
strength: because it builds upon them, faith sets a man upon God and Christ,
and upon the truth of God: Hereupon it comes to be so victorious, and
conquering a grace as it is, because it caries us to that that does all, by
faith they did this.

But here were other graces likewise that Why only faith is named.
sprang from faith, that helped them also: There was a great deal of patience
to go about after that silly fashion, with Rams-hornes seven days together,
here was patience, and perseverance, and hope: But as I said before, because
faith does enliven all other graces, it gives life to all, and stirs up all,
therefore that is named. In the whole Chapter the exercise of other graces is
attributed to faith, because they draw strength from that to quicken them all,
and to stir them all to their several offices: strengthen faith, and strengthen
all other graces whatsoever. Thus you see we have briefly gone over these four
maine things.

Now let us by way of proportion raise them 1 Kingdom of Satan resembled by
walls of Jericho.
higher, and make use of them to other things. To give a little touch. The walls
of Jericho represent to us many things. The Kingdom of Satan in general, the
power of the Devil in himself, and in his instruments, who hinders what he
can, our coming out of Egypt to Canaan, he labors to come between us, and
Heaven, to hinder us all he can by all means. He has walls of many kinds, the
strength of Tyrants, the subtlety of Heretics. What a world of ado was there
to bring Israel out of Egypt? God was put to it (as it were) to work so many
Miracles, to bring that poor despised people out of Egypt, to bring them
through the Red Sea, when they were in the wilderness: what ado was there to
bring them thence? what opposition? and then when they came to Jordan, what
Miracles were wrought? the division of the waters by the Arc coming through,
and then the first, the frontier Town, that was (as it were) the key to let in
all, and to stop all: Jericho the first town, for the entrance into Canaan,
there was opposition made, when they would have entered into Canaan. It is no
easy thing to come out of Egypt, and to enter into Canaan, it is a mighty
work to bring a poor Christian out of the Kingdom of Satan, to bring him
out of spiritual Egypt, through the Wilderness of this life, (...) bring him
through Jordan, those waves of death to put him into Heaven, to bring him at
length to his own country, to Canaan: because there is spiritual
wickednesses stand in the way, both in regard of Satan himself, and in regard
of the instruments he uses.

But Christ came to destroy the works of the Devil, as it is said 1 Ioh. 3.
8. and he himself 1 Ioh. 3. 8.
overcame Satan, and triumphed over him, as it is Colos. 2. He lead him in
triumph: he triumphed Coloss. 2.
over Satan himself, and he will triumph over Satan in all his members: as
he over-came Satan in himself; so he will overcome in us all; For stronger
is he that is in us, then he that is in the world. The Spirit of God, as he is
in us, is stronger then Satan, not only Christ our glorious Captain overcame
him, and is now in Heaven, but the Spirit of God in us weak creatures, with
faith laying hold upon the word of God, is stronger then he that is in the
world, he is stronger then the Devil, and all that are against us.

But besides Satan, there is in us much opposition, 2 Our own corruptions.
that must be subdued before we come to Canaan: as we saw before, in 2 Cor. 10.
those reasonings and sophistries, proud high thoughts, all must be brought
down, because Satan does join with these; and if it were not for enemies
within us, Satan could not prevail over us; as it was Dalilah that betrayed
Sampson, or else the Philistines could not have hurt him: so it is with our
own corruptions, there be these walls within us, these betray us to Satan, he
could not hurt us, but that we ^etray our selves.

Now by little and little, all these walls shall fall; not all at once, as the
walls of Ieri^ho did, but they shall molder in pieces by little and little; God
by degrees will perfect the work of mortification, and sanctification, ^ill
he make us take his Son Christ; like our Husband, and Head, that we may be
fit for so glorious a Head.

But to come to the particular occasion: 3 The Kingdom of Antichrist.
Besides other enemies that are between us, and Heaven, Satan is powerful,
and effectu^ll, and strong in the Kingdom of Antichrist: And by all means,
that Church (which is opposite to Christ) has studied to build up walls, to
build up Jericho, and to stop the Church of Christ, to hinder it what they
could. Now what walls have they built up? As Pharaoh said, Let us deal wisely,
how wittily have they gone to work, to overthrow the Church of God in all
times, and to set up themselves, and their own Kingdom? It were a large
discourse, it would take up the whole time to show their policy and the plots
they have had, to give an instance in a few.

How strongly have they built up walls in their own conceit, when they had got
the whole world almost into subjection to them? before Luthers time all the
world followed them: They had used the matter so, that Kings themselves had
betrayed their very Crowns to them, they had betrayed their Kingdoms, they
were rather Vassals to them then Kings; they had gotten the temporal sword
into their hands, as well as the spiritual. And they had raised up to
themselves a bloody Inquisition, to suppress all light of truth as soon as
ever it sparkled out, all beams of truth were stopped with their bloody
Inquisition; they thought they had fenced themselves safe enough. Then again
they had disabled all the Kings, and Princes of Christendom. And then because
the Pope would engage Princes to him, to strengthen the walls higher, and to
make them stronger; the young sons of Princes he would make them Cardinals.
And then he would arrogate to himself a power absolute to dispense in case of
marriage, and oaths, and such like: And besides, what plots have they had for
the counterfeiting of Authors, for falsifying of Authors, purging out true
Authors, that they might have none give witness against them? what tricks have
they to keep people in ignorance? (because it is a Kingdom of darkness) the
Bible they must have: God has preserved that; but they would have it in an
unknown tongue: And what other devises to abuse the people withal? How have
they fenced themselves, by applying themselves to humor all sorts of people?
For even as the Devil enlarges his Kingdom, by applying himself to the
cursed sinful disposition of men: so does the Pope here upon earth, apply
himself to the ^infull disposition of all sorts of men. There ^re no kind of
men, but they have a bait in Popery. For loose Libertines, there are stews.
For others that are of a more reserved, and severe disposition, there are
Monasteries. For superstitious persons, there they have a world of ridiculous
Ceremonies, devised to themselves of their own brain, and never used in the
Primitive Church: For those that are covetous, they have the riches of the
world in their own hands; they have had at least before, more then they now
have. For proud ambitious persons, they have honors of all sorts. For the
people, they have many carnal liberties for them. And for all the senses of the
body, they have something to delight them, to draw people from the power of
Religion, to carnal outward worship. So they have studied, and whetted their
wits all the ways that might be to apply themselves to the dispositions of
all sorts of men whatsoever, that so they might strengthen the walls of Jericho.
I might be large, I give you but a taste.

Well, but what has God done? God has infatuate, and overthrown their walls,
and by weak means. Luther a poor Monk, with a Luther.
Trumpet of Rams-hornes, with his preaching, and with his writing; you see how
he shook the walls of Rome, how much they have lost within the last hundred
years, the last age, the last Centurie of years they have lost a great part
of this Western part of the world, that they had in slavery before, and how by
weak means (as you heard) by the preaching of the Gospel, by Learning, and
Knowledge. It is no wonder that the Devil hates Knowledge and Learning, as
Luther says well, He hates the quils of Geese, because they are Instruments
to write against them. He has a Kingdom of darkness; and Hell, and the
Pope is a King of darkness: Now when the light of Knowledge, the light of the
Word of God, the ordinance of God, when preaching came; these poor Trumpets
did shake the Church of Rome: As we see in England, the walls of Jericho fell
down; by what m^anes? by a Child (in manner) King Edward the sixth, and Edward
6.
after by a woman; and if the word of God had gone on in like proportion in
other places* Popery had been lower then it is.

So we see then, that as high as they built, and as much as they fortified,
though they be not wholly cast down, yet they are shaken, and that by weak
means. Now the way to effect this, that these walls may fall down more The
means to cast down the walls of mystical Jericho.
and more: It must be by the spiritual means that God will use; we must use
the means that God has appointed us, poor contemptible means, Trumpets of
Rams horns, the 1 The preaching of the word.
preaching of the Word, the discovery of the truth; and by this means we
shall more and more gain upon them. And undoubtedly, let them but give free
liberty, to the preaching of the Word in other countries, and we shall see
them shortly as heretical (as they term it) even as London, and England is.
Such a power there is in Gods Ordinance, the Spirit of God accompanying it,
that it carries all before it, it lays all flat, it beats all strong holds
down before it.

What shall we do then?

By faith use the means that God has appointed, the weapons appointed, and
sanctified by God, they are strong through God, to beat down all strong holds.
And take heed especially that we do not build up the walls of Jericho again,
nor suffer them to build them: You know Joshua pronounces a curse upon all that
should build the walls of Jericho, he should lay the first stone in the death of
his eldest Son, and the last at the death of his younger; and so as we have
it in the story of Hiel, it was made good. I beseech you therefore, let every
one of us in our place, labor to ruinate these walls of Jericho, and take heed
how we build them again, or suffer any to build them again.

What way have we to prevent their building, Quest.
that the walls of Jericho be not built again? they go about it what they can;
we see what course they take: They have all the art of Hell, to help them,
lies, and equivocations; How many Kings, and great ones have they at this day
to support, and help them, to keep them from falling? they do all that they
can to keep life now; how shall we prevent this, that they build not up the
walls of this spiritual Jericho again?

First of all, every one labor to do what they can in their callings.
Magistrates to execute Answ. How to prevent the building the walls of spiritual
Jericho.
the Laws of the Kingdom, which (as those say that are well acquainted with
them) are very beneficial to the Church of God: Therefore the Magistrates in
their place should do what appertains to them.

And so for Ministers; the spiritual means, 1
whereby such heresies must be confounded, it 2
is by the breath of the mouth of Christ, as it is 2 Thessalonians. 2. He shall consume
him with the breath of his mouth: For things are dissolved contrary 2 Thessalonians. 2.
to that way that they were raised at the first, and contrary to that way they
were maintained: Popery, as it was raised; so it is maintained by darkness,
and blindness, and ignorance of the word of God, and of divine truth: the way
to hinder it therefore from being built again, is to lay open divine truths,
and to plant the ministry: Every one must labor for this, to be faithful in
their place, and standing. Saint Paul says, 2 Timothy They shall prevail no
longer, because their madness shall be manifest. How does that follow? The
very manifestation of error hinders the prevailing of it: That is the way to
hinder Popery from prevailing, to manifest it by preaching, and writing, and
such good means: For the demonstration of errors to be so, is a refuting of
them: For who would willingly be deceived? Therefore the laying open of the
madness of Popery, and the folly of their devises, it hinders their
prevailing; no man willingly would have his soul led into error: Therefore
let us lay their errors open in the Ministry, and the grounds of them, the
danger of Popery, how pernicious it is. When this is discovered in the
Ministry, men as they love their own souls will take heed: That is the way
therefore to keep the walls of Jericho from being built, to set an able
Ministry every where, and to countenance them; and those that are Gods
Captains to fight his battles against them.

It is a world of hurt that comes to the Church by impropriations, especially
in the North parts; as we hear too much by reports: In great and mighty
Parishes to set up poor, and weak men, and others wholly to receive the
Revenues, and that is the reason of the swarm of dangerous Papists in those
parts. Oh! that these things had been looked to in time; The walls of Jericho
had not been built again in those parts so much as they are. This is one
maine way, the planting of an able ministry: for this painted Harlot, she
cannot endure the breath of the Ministry, it discovers all her painting, it
lays her naked and open, she knows it well enough.

Then again, take heed of the spreading of 3
infections: Men should be careful this way; they build up their Religion
thus, that else would fall down more and more: We are so confident in our
cause, that we suffer men to read any Popish Treatises. They on the other side
watch all things, so that there cannot a Spark of our light break into them,
what by their Inquisition, and other cou ses that they take; Confidence in our
cause has made us careless, and secure in this kind; therefore care this way
is one means to help it.

And then encouragement of good learning: Popery fell with the beginning of
good learning; 4
Religion, and good learning came in together; If I were in some place, I
should speak more of this; for as I said before, it is a dark Religion, not
only in regard of the Religion it self; but it grows, and thrives with
Ignorance, and Barbarism, and not understanding of Arts, and tongues, they
have helped very much toward the overthrow of these walls of Jericho. Every one
should contend for the faith once given. As Saint Jude admonishes; every one,
the poorest man may contend with his prayers. He that says, Thy Kingdom come,
what does he pray for? If he pray in faith, he desires that God would pull down
all opposite Kingdoms, to the Kingdom of his Son Christ; that the Kingdom
of Christ may come, more and more in the hearts of his people, that he may
reign every where more freely, and largely then he does; every one may help
forward the Kingdom of Christ, he may help forward Jerusalem, and ^ull down
Jericho, every one that has a fer^ent devotion of prayer.

And by a holy life; for when men are vicious, 5
and carnal, they occasion God (for not ^oving, and embracing the truth) to
give them ^p to Popish errors, and such like. Many ways there be to stop the
building up of Jericho.

But this is one especial, which this day occasions; 6
that is, thankfulness to God, a thank^ull Remembrance, how God has fought
for (...); how God has by little and little ruinated the walls of this Jericho,
and has helped us to build the walls of our Jerusalem. A thankful Remembrance
is a notable means to hinder the growth of Popery: For when we remember their
attempts, how God has cursed and crossed them, it will make us love our
Religion, that God has witnessed to by so many Deliverances, and it will make
us hate theirs the more: Therefore it was a worthy work of that Reverend
Bishop, that set out in a Treatise all the Deliverances that have been from
Popish Conspiracies, from the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's time to this
present; it was a worthy work, beseeming that grave, and Reverend Person.
Prayer gets blessings, but thankfulness keeps them: so thankfulness to God
for that which is past, for so many Deliverances, is a means to preserve Gods
love, and care of us still; that he will be our Buckler and castle, and hold,
and al defense, thankfulness will do this. We are over prone to look upon
civil grievances (which are to be regarded, and helped in season) but
naturally our nature is subject to complain more then to be thankful; we are
so sensible of ill, as to pray for remedy: but then let us always be thankful
to God for the good we have had these many years together, and the good that
still (blessed be God) we enjoy. What cause have we to be thankful, that we
are as the three young men in the Furnace? Al Europe has been in combustion,
and we have been untouched, and safe in the midst of the Furnace, under a
quiet government. What cause have we to bless God, f^ continuing the
liberties of the Gospel, where by the soul is built up in saving knowledge,
and Ignorance banished? It was a fault in Rehoboams time, in the beginning of
his Reign, it was a fault in these men, they could complain of the government
of Solomon; and certainly there were many grievances in Salomons: He was a
great Builder, and it was not without some cause they complained: Yet
notvvithstanding Salomons time was a blessed time, and they had great cause to
bless God, for the government of Solomon: Now it is very likely in the story,
that they forgot it, and only lighted upon some grievance. I beseech you let us
in these times stirrpour hearts to be thankful, as upon other occasions; so
upon occasion of this day, we are to bless God for this glorious deliverance,
which we have spoken of (...) again, and again, and therefore we need ^t
be much in the particular setting out that ^inorous, and prodigious fact, that
gives the ^y occasion to be remembered, as it has often ^ne before. Let that
Remembrance I say ^re us up to thankfulness, to show our ^ankefulnesse, and
love to that truth that God ^th defended. Has God been a wilder^sse to us? As
the Prophet complains; has ^ligion done us any harm? why should ^e grow
cold, and lukewarm? why should (...) decay in our first love? why should we
be (...) unfruitful, when God has given us so ^any encouragements to be
thankful, and (...), as he has done? I beseech you let (...) consider with
our selves, if we be not more ^ankefull upon these occasions for these
deli^erances, and work our hearts to love Reli^on, and to hate Popery more;
it will be just ^ith God, that they shall be thorns in our ^des, more then
they have been, and pricks (...) our eyes, that we shall see what a dangerous
^ction they are, and what case we are in. For ^ose that are drunk with the Cup
of this Har^t, it takes away their wits from them, those that worship Images
and stocks, they are stocks themselves. Though the danger be great to
themselves, yet they labor to make others ^orse than themselves, there is no
trusting to them: we should more fear them, then foreign ^nemies; both reasons
of State, and reasons of Religion, and reasons of our own safety, all should
be forcible to have a special regard to prevent the growth of Popery.

For our selves, that hear of the destruction of this Jericho; we have heard
what Jericho was How to prevent our own destruction.
before it was destroyed. For ought we know God may destroy Jerusalem, as well
as Jericho, and by a worse people then themselves, as the Prophet says, Ezekiel.
17. by a base people. It Ezekiel. 17.
is no matter, though others be worse then ourselves: God when he plagues his
people, will do it by worse then themselves, and cast the Rod into the fire
when he has done, Ash^ the Rod of my wrath, Esaias 10. Therefore let us Isay 10.
look to our selves, that we be thankful to God: It will be no plea that we
have bin safe thus long, thus many years: for these people of Jericho, God let
them alone four hundred years, as it is in Genesis 15. They were threatened, but
Genesis 15.
the sins of the Amorites were not yet (...) Jericho was a part of that
Country; but when their sins were full, then they were destroyed. God had
patience four hundred years, to the sins of the Amorites, to this people: And
at last judgment came upon them fearfully. So howsoever God has been
forbearing, and long suffering toward us: Yet let us look about us, oh
destruction may be near. It is not sufficient to think that God will destroy
Antichrist, that the walls of Jericho shall down, he may do that, and yet he
may destroy us, there may bedanger toward us too. And it is no comfort to them
neither, that God will punish us; or that eases not their overthrow neither:
^or if he do so to the green Tree, what will he ^oe to the dry? If his
Children be whipped with Scorpions, what will he do to Rebels? ^f the
Children of God scarcely be saved, where shall the sinner and ungodly appear?
If the Children taste of the wrath of God, then the enemies shall taste of the
dregs of his wrath; it is no comfort for them; for their Doom is set down,
Babylon is fallen. It will not be so much comfort to us, that God will destroy
them, as it will be to look to our selves in time before a peremptory Decree
come forth to make our peace with God. The King of Sodom, and others, were
delivered by Abraham: but a^terwards we see how fearfully they perished.
Pharaoh was let alone for a time, yet after he was destroyed in the Sea:
Jerusalem had warning after warning; yet afterward it was destroyed: so,
though we have had deliverance upon deliverance, yet if we make not more of
Religion, and grow more in detestation of that Religion, that God would have us
set our selves against, it will be just with God to punish us, and to lay us
open to them that we have sinfully favored. Use. To set against Popery by
faith.


We see what great matters faith will do in the use of means: though they be
poor, weak, base means: Therefore let us set upon Popish Religion in our
places, and callings in a spirit of faith, in the use of means; and let us
never think, we are too weak, and now they are mighty, and strong. It was
said to Luther, when he began to write against the Luther.
Pope, oh! poor Monk, get thee into thy Cell, and say Lord have mercy upon
thee, do thou think to overcome the whole world with thy writing? so the
walls of Jericho may seem so mighty, the opposite power that we are to set
against, as if we should loose our labor to set against it: but whatsoever is
opposite to Christ we have a promise, it shall be overthrown: Let us, in a
spirit of faith set upon them in the use of means, and God will make it good,
as in former times.

And for all other things that stand between To set against our corruptions by
faith.
us, and heaven, all the walls of Jericho, all opposition, let us set upon them
with a spirit of faith in the use of means: for he that has overcome for us
(as I said) will by little and little overcome in us: These corruptions of ours
shall fall before the Spirit of God, by little and little; And as Hamans wife
could tell him, If thou begin to fall before that people, the shall certainly
fall: so if the work of Grace be begun in us, that corruptions begin to fall,
undoubtedly, and certainly they shall fall: they cannot stand before the
Spirit. For grace is in growing, and corruption is in decaying continually in a
Christian. Quest. Why God does not subdue corruption at (...)


Why does not God all at once subdue these walls of Jericho in us; but by
little, and little?

God will exercise our faith, and patience: we are Warriers here in this
world, our life is Answ.
a warfare, and he will exercise grace in us, he ^ill have us combat with
enemies; these in^ard enemies among the rest.

Again, he will let us see what he has done ^r us: If we were not exercised
with enemies, ^e should not be thankful sufficient, for victo^e over the
Devil: When we have bin vexed ^ith the Devils temptations, then blessed be
God, and Christ, that at last these troubles are ^ased. How much are we
beholding to Christ, that has freed us from the danger of ^hese? we are only
annoyed with the trouble. ^his will make us thankful, when we have ^arted.

This keeps us likewise from soul devour^g sins: less infirmities in us,
keep us from ^ide, and security: God has many ends. ^ut to cut off other
things, because the point (...) large, I only give a taste.

Let this comfort us, that the walls of Jericho that is to say, whatsoever
opposes us in ^ur coming out of the state of nature, and ^ur entrance into
the state of heaven, whatsoe^er opposition is between shall fall: Therefore ^et
us strengthen our faith, in the use of means.

How shall we strengthen our faith this way? Quest.


Faith is strengthened by the knowledge of Answ. How to strengthen faith in the
fall of our corruptions.
^he attributes of him, whom we lay hold upon, those power does all: the more
we know ^im, the more we shall trust him: Let us la^our to know God in
Covenant, to be our Father, and to know Christ as he is, in his nature, and
offices, what he is to us: to know his wisdom, and power, and truth, that
there may be a bottom for faith to build on: the more we grow in spiritual
knowledge, the more we shall grow in faith, and the more we grow in faith
(the more we shall grow in other graces) whereby we overcome all our enemies
that set against us.

Again, let us make use of all former experience to strengthen faith: Has God
beg^n the work? do the walls of Jericho begin to f^ll? He that has begun a
good work, will finish it to the day of the Lord. Let us take in trust the
time to come, by experience of Gods truth for the time past: for the work of
the Spirit is a continued work. The Spirit of God in subduing our corruptions,
he would not have begun, if he had meant to have left off, and interrupted the
work. The Spirit suffers us to fall sometimes, but it is to teach us to stand
better afterward; he turns our very falls, and slips to our good. Let us
strengthen faith therefore from former experience, as David did: we have
overcome the Bear, and the Lion; therefore let us set on the Philistine: And
as Joshua set his foot on the necks of the ten Kings, and said; Thus shall
the Lord thy God destroy all thine enemies: so has the Spirit of God, set his
foot as it were upon some corruptions? thus shall God deal with all
corruptions, and temptations at length, and never leave the blessed government
of us, till he have subdued all. Let us rise from one experi^ent to another,
to strengthen faith; God is ^like in all truths. You know in Judges 5. says
Judge. 5.
^he holy woman Deborah. So let all thine ene^ies perish: The heart of that
blessed woman ^as (as it were) enlarged prophetically; when ^ne falls, they
shall all fall, there is like reason. See how gloriously Hannah in her Song
enlarges her faith, by Gods power, and goodness, because she had experience
in her self: so ex^erience in our selves, or others will-inlarge ^ur faith to
look for greater matters still from ^ur gracious, powerful God: thus we ought
^o labor to strengthen our faith.

And the third thing to help faith in all spi^ituall 3
oppositions that we meet with, is daily ^xercise in using it, to make it
brighter conti^ually every day, by working with it upon ^ur enemies. And in the
state of Grace to live by it, both for this present life, to depend upon God
for all things; and likewise for necessary grace: As the Disciples when they
were enjoined a hard duty, Lord increase our faith, say they; they go to
exercise their faith upon it. If that be increased, all is increased. And so in
our callings, exercise it by depend^ng upon God for strength, and success.
Says Peter to Christ, Lord at thy word I will cast out the Net, though it were
very unlikely it should do any good; they had fished all day, and catched
nothing: but yet he would wait, and go on still, At thy word I will cast out
the Net: He did it, and the Net brake with the multitude of fish. Let us
exercise our faith, in daily obedience to God, depend upon him in the use of
means.

And learn this, to wait in the exercise of 4
our faith; as they that went about the walls of Jericho, they did it seven
days: Put case they had done it six, and no more, the walls had stood still.
He that has ten miles to go, and goes but nine, she shall never come to his
journies end: When God has set down such a time, so long thou shall wait,
and use the means, and depend upon me by faith, in the use of the means; if
we be short spirited, and lengthen and strengthen not our faith in the use of
the means, we shall never attain our desire; therefore let us labor to
wait. Here is the difference between Christians, and others; Difference
between Christians and others.
there is no man, but he would be happy, if so be it were not for this waiting:
If a wicked man should see Hell open, would he commit sin, if he should see
it present? If he should see Heaven open, and Christ coming with his reward
with him, he would be godly: there is not the vilest wretch in the world, but
he would be so, if these things were present: but because it is only
discovered in the word of God, and faith must believe, and wait for the reward,
and faith must wait all the time of our life, here is the trial: So that a
Christian differs nothing from a worldly man, but in a Spirit of faith, and
waiting, and continuance of that faith, in the ^ane time before a man come to
enjoy, and ^eive what he looks for: Faith gives God (...) glory of all his
attributes, the glory of his ^th he has spoken, and therefore he will ^ke it
good. The glory of his wisdom that (...) has found out such a course for us
to walk (...); The glory of his mercy that he has ^de such promises to such
wretches; so all ^er attributes faith gives glory to; therefore ^od glorifies
faith, and the special act of ^ith is waiting: If I tarry long, wait thou:
and we have need of patience: Faith stirs up ^tience to help, and assist it,
as we see here ^ese waited seven days: Remember there^re to exercise faith in
continual dependence upon God; take heed of being short spirited, ^ough God
defer the rewarding of the ^ighteous, and the punishment of the Wic^ed: yet
hold out still, he that has promi^d will come in time, and make good that
that ^e has said in due time. Give God the glory ^f appointing the fittest
time; He is the best ^iscerner of opportunities, Our times are in ^is hand,
all kind of times, therefore let us de^end upon him for that, only labor to
have a ^trong spirit of faith, that we may wait his good leisure.

And to help us, do but consider, what if we wait a few years, what is
that to Eternity? I might enlarge the point: what great matters faith will
do, both in heaven, and earth, every way. We see here, faith shakes the very
earth: God he is the Lord of heaven, and earth. The earth is the Lords, because
these walls were built upon Gods earth, we see here one puff of God blows them
all down; and faith laying hold upon this casts them down; though faith does
it not immediately, yet God does it, because he is laid hold on by faith.

Let us labor therefore to have faith above all other graces: It is the Mother
Grace, it is To labor for faith.
the Grace that is the spring of all Graces, if we wo^ld have patience, and
hope, and love, and perseverance, and constancy together; let us labor to
have faith strengthened, and to feed our faith the more, let us look to the
word of God, make it familiar to us: the Spirit goes together with the word, to
strengthen and increase our faith, and that being strengthened, all is
strengthened whatsoever.

Now the way to try, whether we have this To try if we have faith.
faith or no (not to speak largely of the point, but as the Text leads me) is,
if we humbly attend upon the means that God has appointed, though they seem
base to carnal reason: As how do we know that these Israelites had faith,
when they went about the walls of Jericho? because they have humbled themselves
to use the base means, that God had appointed, though they were very unlikely.
Naaman, out of the pride of his heart, says he, what are the waters of Jordan?
have not we waters that can do as much? but if the servants had not been
wiser then the Master, he had gone home a Leaper as he came: so when men hear
the word preached, they think, cannot we read good books at home? and for
the Sacrament, it is a poor Ordinance; what is there, but wine and bread, and
such like? Take heed of a proud heart: God will have weaker means to try us,
whether we will humble our selves to his wisdom, or no: where there is true
faith, it will be careful to use all good means, or else it is a tempting of
God, and not a trusting of him, when we do not use the means that he has
sanctified.

And where there is faith, as there will be a careful use of all means, so
there will be a care in the use of means, not to depend upon the means, but to
trust in God. There will be a joining of both together; faith does not take
away the use of means; nay, he that is most certain of the end, should strive
to be most careful of al means used to that end. There ought no man to be more
diligent in using the means, then he that is most certain of the end; because
he is encouraged to use the means, knowing that he shall not beat the air,
that he shall not loose his labor, so if we by faith lay hold upon God for the
destruction of Antichrist, and that God would subdue our corruptions, and that
they shall fall before the Spirit by little, and little; if by faith we lay
hold upon this that God will perfect the good work he has begun in the use
of good means; this will stir us up to use all means with cheerfulness, and
constancy. There are none that are more careful of the means, then those that
are most sure of the issue. Those that are careless of the means, let them
pretend what they will, they are presumptuous persons, they have no faith: for
that will stir us up to use the means, and in the use of means to depend
upon God: so careful is faith to use the means, as if without them God would
do nothing; and yet in the means it is so careful to depend upon God; as if
the means could not do any thing without God* Thus, faith walks between the
means, and the great God.

Let us go on constantly in living the life of faith, and using all the
blessed means that God has sanctified: God ha^h sanctified the preaching of
the Word to beat downeal these spiritual walls, let us go on, all our life
time, and at length, the last Trump shall sound, another Trumpet shall sound;
and then not only the walls of Jericho, but the walls of heaven and earth shall
fall down; and then we shall enter into that heavenly Canaan, both body and
soul. In the mean time, let us exercise faith: and to quicken our faith the
more, let us have those blessed times in the eye of our soul; let us see them
as present: It is the nature of faith to apprehend things to come, as present:
let us see heaven, and earth on fire: see Christ coming to judgment; let us
see ^ll the walls down, the Graves open, whatsoe^er opposes, and stands
between us, and glory; see all gone, let us see our selves at the ^ight hand
of Christ, and triumphing in heaven: For the Scripture speaks of that, that is
^o come, as if it were past: We sit in heavenly ^laces with Christ, and we are
saved by faith, and ^ee are glorified. Thus the Spirit of faith ^eakes of the
glorious times to come, when ^ll enemies shall be trodden under foot: Sa^han,
and all enemies whatsoever, shall go to their place, the opposite Church shall
be no longer; when the last Trump shall blow, we shall all stand together at
the right hand of Christ, and be for ever glorious with Him.

THE VNPROSPEROVS BVILDER. A Sermon preached upon the 5th of November, in
remembrance of Our Deliverance from the Papists Powder Treason.

BY The late Learned and Reverend Divine, RICH. SIBBS: Doctor in Divinity, Mr.
of KATHERINE Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher to the Honorable
Society of GRAYES-INNE.

HAB. 2. 12. Woe to him that builds a Town with blood, and establishes a
City by Iniquity.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for N. Bourne, at the Royal Exchange, and R.
Harford, at the guilt Bible in Queenes-head Alley in Paternoster Row. 1639.

THE PROSPEROVS BVILDER.
Ios. 6. 10. Cursed be the Man before the Lord, that rises up, and builds this
City Jericho: He shall lay the foundation of it in his Firstborn, and in his
youngest Son set up the Gates thereof.
THE words are a terrible denunciation of a curse; of the man of God Joshua,
wherein you have the Curse generally set down. Cursed be the man before the
Lord, that rises to build this City Jericho, and then a specification in
particular, wherein the Scope of the words.
Curse stands; the two branches of the Curse are these, He shall lay the
foundation of it in his Firstborn, and in his youngest Son set up the Gates
thereof. It shall be with the rasing out of his posterity. So that the Text is
nothing else but a terrible denunciation under a curse of the destruction of
the family of that person, that should labor to build up Jericho again. I
will not speak much of Cursing or Blessing, being not pertinent to my purpose;
only to give a touch of it. As in Blessing there are three things
considerable, that come near one another; there is a Blessing, a Prayer, and a
Prophecy; the Prayer is for a blessing to come, the Prophecy, is of the
certainty of it, that it shall be, the Blessing is an efficacious application
of the thing to the person. I mean those three, because the one gives light to
the other. So it is likewise in Cursing, there is a Prayer, that God would
pour forth his vengeance upon the enemies of the Church, and a prophetical
Prediction that God will do it, and a Cursing, when it comes from a qualified
person, that is lead by a better Spirit then his own (for every one is not fit
to cast these bolts;) Cursing is an efficacious application of the curse to the
person. When a man is (as it were) the declarative instrument, whereby God
works, and brings the curse upon the person; so that we must account a curse
to be a wondrous deep thing. The persons qualified for cursing or blessing,
they are Parents, either politic, as Magistrates, or Parents natural, to
curse or bless their children, as we see in Noah, Cursed be Cham, etc. Or else
Parents spiritual, whose office it is indeed especially, to bless, or curse.
It is a greater matter then the world takes it for, a blessing, or a curse,
especially from a spiritual Father. The Apostles that were spiritual Fathers
of the Church, they begun their Epistles with blessings, and so the Prophets
and Patriarchs.

Therefore we should regard the blessing, Blessing of Ministers to be regarded.
that God gives by his Ministers: Some are ready to run out before the
blessing, as not esteeming either blessing or curse. Luther a man of great
parts, and grace, says of himself; That if a man of God should speak any
thing terrible to him, and denounce any thing against him, he knew not how to
bear it, it would be so terrible. The Jesuits themselves, amongst the rest one
De Lapide, he says, The Priest cannot sooner come into the Pulpit, but if
there be a Nobleman there, down he falls, and all look for the blessing of
the Priest. The Devil is always in extremes, either to drive people to
superstition, or else to profaneness, and Atheism, either to regard the
blessing of those whom they should not regard, or not to regard any blessing at
all; not to regard that good men should pray for them, or their Children; if
the Devil can bring men to Hell, by either ex^reames, he has his will. As for
the blessing of Rome we expect it not; and for their curse, we need care no
more for it, then an armed man, needs to ca^e for a headless arrow, or for a
Child's Pot-gun. But those men that come in the name of God, and are qualified
with callings to pray, and to bless, their prayers and blessings are highly to
be esteemed, and so likewise their curses. I would it were more esteemed, it
would be a means to convey Gods blessing more then it is. Cursed be the Man
before the Lord.

Take this Caution by the way; though Joshua were a man of God, he was a mixed
person; he was both a Magistrate, and in some sort a Minister: As we say of
Kings, they are mixed persons, they are Keepers of both tables; Custodes
utriusque tabulae.
there is more in the supreme Magistrate, then is common. Every one must not
take upon him to curse upon every motion of the flesh; for here it is not (as
one of the Ancients says well) The wrath of a man in commotion, and fury; but
the sentence of a man in a peaceable temper, who is the Conveyer of Gods curse;
it is passive here, as well as active.

In the New Testament we are commanded to bless, and not to curse. It is a
common fault, upon every distemper to fall a cursing, and often times it lights
as an Arrow shot upwards upon the head of the Curser: we are people of Gods
blessing, all true Believers, and we should delight in blessing, having felt
the blessing of God our selves upon our souls, we should be moved to blessing;
both by way of gratitude to those that are our superiors, and have done us
good, that God would bless them: and by way of amity, and friend-ship to those
that are under us, or about us; and by way of mercy to our very enemies; we
should pray for, and bless our very enemies themselves, as our Blessed Savior
prayed for themthat cursed him. This should be our ordinary disposition, we
should be all for blessing. As for curses we must take heed, that we direct
them not against any particular person, we have Not to curse particular persons.
no such warrant, though the Primitive Church pronounced a curse against
Julian, a notable Enemy: And Saint Paul, he cursed Alexander the Copper-smith;
but for us this time, the safety way is to pronounce all those curses in the
Psalms, and else where in Scripture, upon the implacable, and incorrigible
enemies of the Church, the whole body of the malignant Church, and so we should
not err. I will not dwell longer upon this Argument, only I thought good to
remember you to regard the blessing, of those that have the Spirit of God to
bless, especially that have a calling to do it, and to take heed of cursing.
But to come to the particulars. Cursed be the Man before the Lord.

That is, let him be cursed indeed, that that is done before the Lord is truly,
and solemnly done: this was a solemn Curse, a heavy Curse, and it did truly
light upon him. And let him be cursed before the Lord, however the world bless
him, as a man cannot do such a thing, as to build a City, but the world will
commend a man for doing such a thing, but it is no matter for the worlds
commendation, if a man set upon a cursed cause, so much for the phrase, Cursed
be the Man before the Lord; that is, he is truly, and solemnly cursed and
cursed before the Lord, though men bless him. That rises, and builds this
City Jericho.

That is the cause why he should be cursed? because he would build that City,
that God Why God would not have Jericho built again.
would have to be a perpetual monument of his Justice. Why would not God have
Jericho built again?

God would not have it built up, partly, because he would have it a perpetual
remembrance of his goodness, and merciful dealing As a monument of Gods mercy
and justice.
with his people, passing over Jordan, and coming freshly into Canaan: for we
are all subject to forget; therefore it is good to have days set apart for
remembrance, and somewhat to put us in mind, as they had many things in old
time to help memory. If this City had been built again, the memory of it
would have been forgotten, but lying al waste and desolate, the Passengers by
would askethe cause, as God speaks of his own people: what is the reason that
this City lies thus? and then it would give them occasion, of speaking of the
mercy of God to his people. And likewise it would give occasion to speak of
the justice of God against the idolatrous Inhabitants, whose sins were grown
ripe: God foretold in Genesis, that the sins of the Amorites was not yet ripe:
but now their sins were ripe, they were Idolaters.

And likewise it was dedicate to God, as the 2. It was dedicate to God.
first fruits, being one of the chief mother Cities of the land, it was
dedicate, and consecrated to God, as a thing severed, it was to be for ever
severed from common use. There are two ways of severing things from common
use, one by way of destruction, as here the City of Jericho: Another by way of
dedication, as the Gold of Jericho. God would have this City severed from
common use, as a perpetual Monument, and remembrance of his mercy, and justice.

And likewise he would have it never built 3 For terror to the rest of the
people.
up again, for terror to the rest of the Inhabitants: For usually great
Conquerours set up some terrible example of justice to terrify others: Now
this being one of the first Cities, after their passing over Jordan: God would
have the destruction of it to strike terror, together with this sentence of a
curse, upon all that should build it again for ever.

And then that this terrible sentence might 4 To draw others to come in.
be a means to draw others, to come in to Gods people to join with them, and
submit, and prevent their destruction, seeing how terribly God had dealt with
Jericho. Many such reasons may be probably alleged: but the maine reason of
reasons, that must settle our 5 God would have it so.
consciences, God would have it so. Iosu^, he was but Gods Trumpet, and Gods
instrument to denounce this curse. Cursed be the man before the Lord, that
shall build up this City Jericho, we must rest in that. I will go over the
words, and then make application afterward to the occasion.

I come to the specification of the Curse, wherein it stands. He shall lay the
foundation thereof in his Firstborn.

If any man will be so venturous to build it The specification of the curse. 1
King. 16. 34.
up again, as one Hiel did, in 1 King. 16. 34. If any man will be so
audacious, he shall do it with the peril of the life of his first begotten;
and if he will not desist then, he shall finish the Gates of it, he shall make
an end of it with the death of his younger Son. It is Gods custom, to
denounce a threatening of a curse 3 God threatens before he strike.
before he execute it. It is a part of Gods mercy, and of his blessing, that he
will curse only in the threatening: for therefore he curses, that he might
not execute it: and therefore he threatens, that he might not smite, and when
he smites, he smites that he might not destroy, and when he kills the body, it
is that he might not destroy the soul, as 1 Cor. 11. 32. Therefore some of
you are weak, and sick, and 1 Cor. 11. 32
some sleep, that you might not be condemned with the world. Thus God is
merciful, even till it comes to the last upshot, that men by their rebellions
provoke him; Gods mercy strives with the sins of men. Mark here the degrees
of it, first God threatens the Curse, Cursed be the man. And then in the
particulars, he begins with the eldest Son. First there is a threatening, and
when the execution comes, he takes not all his Sons away at once, but begins
with the Eldest; and if that will not do, he goes to the youngest.

This carriage of God, even in his threatenings, To move us to turn to him.
it should put us in mind of Gods mercy; and likewise it should move us to meet
God presently, before any peremptory decree be come forth (as we shall see
afterward:) for if we leave not sinning, God will never leave punishing: He
might have desisted in the death of his first Son: but if that will not be, God
will strike him in his youngest Son, and sweep away all between: for so we
must understand it, that both elder, and younger, and all should die.

Now for the judgment it self. He shall lay the foundation thereof, in his
Firstborn.

There is some proportion between the Punishment proportionable to the sin.
judgment, and the sin. The sin was to raise up a building, a cursed City
contrary to Gods will: The punishment is in pulling dow ea man's own building:
for Children (according to the Hebrew word) are the building, the Pillars of
the house; and since he would rais^ up a foundation, and building contrary to
Gods mind, God would pull up his foundation. Cities are said to have life, and
to grow, and to have their pitch, and then to die like men: And indeed they
do, observing only a proportion of time, they are of longer continuance: but
otherwise Cities live and grow, and die, and have their period as men have. Now
he that would give life to a City, that God would have buried in its own
ruins, God would have his sons die, he would have his sons (as it were)
buried under the ruins of that City, that he would build in spite of God,
that would give life to that City that was cursed. Often times we may read our
very sins in our punishments, there is some proportion. But to go on to the
particulars. He shall lay the foundation in his Firstborn.

A heavy judgment; because the Firstborn, Death of the Firstborn a great
judgment.
as you know he says of Reuben, he was his strength, and he was King, and
Priest in the Family: the Firstborn had a double portion; he was redeemed
with a greater price (as we see in Moses Law) then other sons. It was a
heavy judgment to have his Firstborn smitten in this fashion, to be taken
away.

If any ask why God was so severe, that he Why God sometimes punishes
parents in their children.
did not punish Hiel in himself, but take away his children, it may seem
against reason.

But we must not dispute with God: for we must know that God has the supreme
power, of life and death.

Then we must know again, that children ^re part of their Parents, God
punishes the parents in their children: and it is a heavier punishment often
times in their esteem, then in themselves: for they think to live, and
continue in their children; now when they see their children took away, it is
worse then death; men often times live, to see things worse ^hen death, as those
that see their children killed before them, as Zedechias, and Mauritius the
Emperor: for indeed it is a death often. A man dies in every child, this man he
died in his eldest son, and he died in his youngest son; he died in regard of
the apprehension of death, it was more sharp in apprehension, then when he
died himself. So it is a heavy judgment to be stricken in our children: God
when he will punish, he punishes often times in posterity; As we see it was the
most terrible judgment of all upon Pharaoh, that in his Firstborn, God drew
them all to let Israel go out, when He smote their Firstborn: It is a heavy
judgment for a man to be stricken in his Firstborn, either when they are
dissolute, and debauch*ed, and lawless, (for God has judgments for the
soul, as well as for the body) or else when they are taken out of the world.

But thirdly, which is very likely another reason that moved God (that we may
justify God, in all our sentence, that we give of him) he took them away,
because they imit^ their father in ill; and God has a liberty (...) strike
when he will, when there is cause; and whom he will, he will spare for so many
Generations.

You will say, why does he light on such (...) Quest.
Generation? and why not on such a place?

It is his liberty, and prerogative, when (...) Answ.
deserve it, and he lights upon one, and (...) upon another: we must not
quarrel with God, but leave him to his liberty; it is a part of (...)
prerogative, Who art thou oh man that dis^test? Why God, when all are equally
(...) strikes one, and not another, why he exec^ judgments in one age, and not
in another: there may be reasons given of it, but it is (...) mystery that
must not be disputed; but I cannot stand on these things. He shall lay the
foundation thereof in his Firstborn, and in his youngest Son set up the
Gates thereof.

This terrible sentence we see executed (...) 1 King. 16. 34. In Achabs time,
there was 1 King. 16. 34.
one so venterous, as to build Jericho again. There is an accent to be set
upon that, that it was in Achabs time. Hiel would needs build Jericho again,
and why should he build it? Hiel no doubt saw it a wondrous commodious place
to found a City, being near to Jordan: And then he saw, and considered that it
was accounted a famous thing to be founder of a ^itie. And then no doubt he
thought, that ^hab would not only permit him to do it, but ^ould gratify him:
wicked Ahab, which had ^ld himself to work wickedness; that was (...)
abominable Idolater himself, and coun^nanced Idolatry, and had set up the
false ^orship of B^al; it was likely enough in his ^me that Jericho should be
built; and therefor no doubt, but he did it partly to insinuate ^imselfe with
Ahab. And to show how little ^e cared for Iosua's, or Iehova's threatening, as
^sually such impudent persons that are grown up with greatness, that have sold
themselves to be naught, that have put off all humanity, and modesty; they are
fittest to carry wicked, and desperate causes, being agreeable to them: so this
wicked person was a fit man to do this, and he thought to please Ahab by it.

Man is a strange crea^ure, especially in greatness of riches, or place, etc.
A piece of earth that will be puffed up, if he have flatterers, and sycophants
about him, and a proud heart withal; he will forget, and dare the God of
heaven, and trample under foot all threatenings, and menaces whatsoever. As this
wicked Hiel, rather then he will miss of his will, he will break through
thick, and thin, and redeem the fulfilling of his will, with the loss of his
own soul, and of his children, his Firstborn, and his last, and all, Men's
mihi pro regno, let a man be happy in his will, he cares not for all the
world; if he may have his will, (...) all go upon heaps: this is the nature
of man One would think that this threatening might have scarred a man that had
loved himself, (...) his posterity: but nothing would keep hi^ he would
venture upon it, as we see in (...) place, 1 King. 16. Thus we have passed
ov^ the words.

To come to handle the words by way of The words handled by way of Analogy.
Analogy, how they may agree to other things by way of proportion, and in a
spiritual mystical sense.

There are diverse degrees of men, that venture upon curses, and thereupon grow
to be cursed Men build Jericho again.
themselves, even as this man ventered upon the building of Jericho, so there
be many tha^ do the like in a proportionable kind. I shall name some few.

God did determine, that the Jewish Ceremonies By retaining Jewish Ceremonies.
should determine, and have an end and period: Now in Saint Paul's time, there
were many that would put life into them, and join them with the Gospel. Saint
Paul tells them, Christ shall profit you nothing: Those are they that build
Jericho again, that revive, and put life into that, that God has determined
should never revive again. When the Jewish Ceremonies were honorably
interred, and laid in their graves, these men would raise them out of their
graves again, and so venture upon Gods curse, and be excluded from Christ.
These are one sort of men, that raise Jericho again. And so afterward in the
Church, ^here were those that would build up Jericho, that would still retain
Jewish Ceremonies, and Heathenish in the Church, and some at the first with no
ill minds. But then afterward, as Augustine complains, they so pestered the
August.
Church, with Jewish and Heathenish Ceremonies, that the Jews condition was
better then theirs; for these things should have been buried. Gerson, that had
many good things in him, though he lived in ill times: Oh says he, good
Augustine, Do thou complain of those times? what would thou have said, if
thou had lived now? What is Popery, but a mass of Jewish, and heathenish
Ceremonies, besides some Blasphemies that they have? I speak concerning what
they differ from ours, which are decent and orderly; what a mass of
Ceremonies, and fooleries have they, to mislead men that are taken away with
fancies to distaste the truth of God, and to have respect to fancies, to
outward pomp, and gorgeous things, rather then the Gospel? These men build up
Jericho again, and bury the Gospel as much as they can.

There are another sort of men, that raise up 2 By reviving old heresies.
Jericho, that revive all the heresies that were damned to Hell, by the ancient
Councels. The heresy of Pelagius, was damned to Hell by the ancient Councels:
The Affrican Councels, diverse of them, diverse Synods (wherein Augustine
himself was a party) they condemned Pelagius heresy. Are there not men now
abroad, that will revive these heresies? And there must be expected nothing,
but a curse, where this prevails: for they are opinions cursed by the Church
of God, that have bi^ lead by the Spirit of God heretofore, such opinions I
mean, as speak meanly of the grace of God, as if it were a weak thing, and
advance the strength of Free Will, and make an Idol of that; And so under the
commendation, and setting up of nature, are enemies of grace: These are those
that build up Jericho.

There are a company that build up Jericho 3 By breaking statutes and wills.
likewise, persons that will venture upon the (...) of Founders of Colleges,
etc. those that have left Statutes, and Testaments, and Wills, established, and
sealed them with a curse, as it were against the Breakers of them; yet some
make no more bones of breaking these, either Statutes or Wills, then Sampson did
of breaking his coards; as if they would venture upon the curse of former times,
and persons that very likely were led by the Spirit of God, and could say Amen
to their curses, as if they were nothing like Hiel, that would venture upon the
terrible curse of Joshua, come what would, he would break through all.

But the Jericho especially, that a world of 4 By upholding Popery.
people go about to build again, is Popery. How many have ye to build up the
walls of Jericho again in this kind? But to make this a little clearer, because
the occasion leads to this something, I will be the larger in it.

How came they to build these walls of Jericho? Quest.
by what means came this Religion, that is so opposite to the Religion of the
Scripture, this Religion, that was gathered by the Coun cell of Trent into one
Sea (as it were) that whosoever drinks of it dies, as it is in the Revelation:
how comes this Religion? how crept it into the world?

I could be long to show that it came by degrees, Answ. How Popery sprang up.
while the Husband men slept, then the Devil sowed his tares by Heretics, and
such like: It grew by degrees. And then the world was scarred, and terrified
with shows, and fancies; as with the succession of Peter, that is a mere
fancy; and then they were frighted with Excommunications, the terrible
sentence of the Church. And then again it is a kingdom of darkness, Popery
is; by little and little they brought in Ignorance, not only of the Scriptures,
but of other things, they had their prayers in an unknown tongue, forbidding
the Scriptures, and the like. In the night they might do what they would, when
they had put out the Candle; when they had buried the knowledge of the word of
God, they might bring in any heresy, many ways they came in.

Now the preaching of the Gospel, is the How it is pulled down.
means to pull down these walls of Jericho, it is the going about the walls of
Jericho: By the preaching of Luther, and others, the walls have fallen, though
not utterly: yet notwithstanding, in the last hundred years there has been a
great ruin of Popery.

What means have they now to build the walls again? How they bestir
themselves: Quest.
there is a new sect of Jesuits, that are the spirit of the Devil for
knowledge, and industry, it is a strange project they have now to build up the
walls of Jericho again, and 3. things they have in their project, and these
are, to set up the Pope again, and a Catholic King under him, as he is the
Catholic Head of the Church: and to set up the Council of Trent in the (...)
vigor: these are the maine projects they labor to set up, and so to build
Jericho again this way, and what course do they take?

The Devil has a thousand wiles, I cannot Answ. How this Jeri cho is built
again.
reckon all the Instruments of Satan, who can tell all his wiles? They go
about to build the walls of Jericho again among other ways,

By shutting out of all light, by their terrible Inquisition, a most cruel
thing; by the tyranny of this Inquisition they shut out a^ light of Gods truth
in all places, where Po^ pery is established.

Then again they have all Satan's arts to build up Jericho, by slanders, and
lies; they labor to estrange the hearts of people, what they can against the
truth of Religion; and therefore they raise all the lies, and slanders they
can; nay and they will not suffer so much as a Protestant Writer to be named;
but the ^ame of such a one say they be blotted out(...) ^hen they have their
Index Purgatorius, to ^urge all, that savor of truth, that favor our ^ause.
And then they have their Dispensations. And (to cut off other things, for where
should (...) end?) indeed their policy is almost endless ^n this kind, they
have the quintessence of their ^owne wit, and of Satan's, to sharpen them in
this kind.

They deal as the Magicians of Egypt, when Moses came to do wonders, they
imitated him in all the rest, except in one: so they strengthen themselves much
in imitating the Protestants. We labor to build the walls of Jerusalem, they
imitate us in building the walls of Jericho. We preach, to shake off
drowsinesse, and they fall a preaching. We print, and they print. We publish
books of devotion, they go beyond us. We set out books of Martyrologie, to
show the cruelty of them, and they have lost much by that; hereupon they do so
too, and aggravate things, and add their own lies. So by imitating our
proceedings, wherein we have gained upon them, they like the Egyptian Magicians
do the like, and God hardens their hearts, as he did Pharaoh's, by the
Magicians.

Again, by laboring to make divisions, between Kings and their subjects, what
they can in those places, where their Religion has not obtained ground, that
they may get a party they cherish division like the Devil, they divide and
rule.

It was Iulians policy, to provide that n^ Christian should bear any office
in the war^ to be Captain, etc. So if the Jesuits and Papists may have their
will, no man that is opposite to them, shall have any place; those the shall
have the place to manage offices, and suc^ like, shall be those that incline to
them: the they bring to pass, if they can; and so (...) Captains in the wars,
etc. As Julian the Apostate, he cared not for Iudaisme, but did wh^ he did, out
of spite to the Christians: so (...) the most of their plots thus they work
(...) way or other. I say there is no end of their plots, only it is good to
know them; for so we may the better prevent them.

How shall the building up of Jericho be stopped, seeing they go about it so:
and indee^ Quest.
they have built much of late years, and ha^ raised up their walls very high,
and labo^ what they can to stop the building of Ierus^ lem?

The way to stop this Jericho, that it nev^ Answ. How to stop the building of
this Jericho.
go up again, is the judicious knowledge (...) Popery, that it is a Religion
contrary to the blessed truth of God. God has left us hi^ Testament, his Will,
wherein he has be que^thed us all the good that we can challenge from him.
Now this Religion is contrary (...) our Fathers will; and they know it we^ 1
Knowledge of their tenants.
enough, and therefore they build their co^s upon men's devises, and not upon
divine ^th. They know if people come to know the ^estament, that they should
loose, and there^re they labor to suppress knowledge, and ^xtinguish it; we
should labor to know the ^ontroversiall truths between us, and them, and to
have the knowledge of the Scriptures: ^or knowledge is a notable means to
streng^hen us; there are none that know Popery; that will be deceived by it.

And then, together with the knowledge of 2 Of their practice 2 ^im. 4.
their tenants, to know their courses, and pra^tises, and policy, in 2 Timothy 4.
They shall pre^aile no longer (says Saint Paul) for their mad^esse shall be
made manifest. Why shall they not prevail any longer? their madness shall be
manifest: so that the manifesting of the madness of men, is the cause why they
shall prevail no longer. It were good to know al their ^ndermining tricks, and
all the policy of the Jesuits, and Papists, that lay their trains a far
off, that they may be the less seen: As the Spider gets into a corner, that
she appear not; so themselves will not appear; but they draw women, and other
licentious persons, and they have greater then them too: so they lay their
trains a far off, that they may have their will: It is good to know their
devilish practices, that so their diabolical madness may be manifest, that so
they may prevail no longer: for undoubtedly, if their courses were laid open,
there is no man that loves his own safety, and the safety of the Kingdom but
would hate them.

Another way to stop the building of Ieric^ is to have young ones instructed. I
would Parents 2 To instruct young ones in grounds of divinity.
would have more care of catechizing* and others in their places, would have
more care of grounding young ones in the ground of Religion. Popery labors to
overthrow that: for the worshipping of Images, it is directly against the
second Commandment, and they are so guilty of it, that they take it away in
some of their books. The young^ sort that are the hope of the succeeding
Church should be well grounded in Religion: that that is right, will discover
that that is crooked, it would make them impregnable against all Popish solici
ations.

The neglect of this, is the cause why many Gentlemen, and of the Nobility; the
neglect of their education by those that should over look them, has made them
fit for Jesuits* and Priests to work on, having ripe wi^s otherwise; And al
because of the Atheism of those that have neglected their breeding, and filled
their heads with other vanities, it has been the ruin of many families in
this Kingdom; therefore it is good to season younger years with the knowledge
of the grounds of Religion.

And in all the dark corners of the land to 3 To set up lights in dark place.
set up lights that may shine; for these Owls fly in the dark, they cannot
endure the light of the Gospel by any means, they see the ^reath of Gods mouth
is too hot for them, and ^ey must be consumed at length by that, by ^e
preaching of the Gospel; not with the word, but with the sword of Christ's
mouth, ^ntichrist must especially be consumed; and ^ey know this by experience,
therefore they ^bour under hand (they will not be seen in (...); but often
times others are Instruments more ^en they are aware) to stop the preaching of
^e Gospel, by all the policy they can.

Again (as I said before) Popery is a King^ome 4 To cherish good learning.
of darkness, and nothing will undo (...) but light: therefore we should
labor to ^errish all good learning; it is a notable ^eanes to assist against
Popery. Julian knew ^at well enough: therefore he would not suf^er Parents to
send their children to School, ^ut to be brought up in Ignorance: And so
^apists would have a neglect of learning, that ^ight help this way.

And because they labor to reign in divi^on, let us labor to unite our
selves, and not 5 To labor for Unity.
^reakeupon small matters, but to join toge ^her with one shoulder, as one
man, against that malignant Generation; and mark those among us, that are the
causes of division, as the Apostle says, Mark them, they serve not Christ,
but their own bellies, they serve their ^wne turns that reign in division.
Let us la^our as much as may be, if we will join ^rongly against the enemies
of God, and his Church, to unite our forces together, and no^ to entertain
slight matters of breach on^ from another.

And with these, let us join our prayers to 6 To be thankful.
God, and our thankesgiving; we are not thankful enough, that God has
brought us out of the Kingdom of darkness; not only out of the darkness of
sin, and Satan; b^ from the darkness of Popery. We have no^ been
thankful to God for that Deliveran^ in Queen Elizabeth's time, out of the
Egyptia^ darkness, and the Deliverance in our la^ Kings time, and
deliverances in later times* we are not thankful enough; and we beg^ to show
it, in not making much of Religion* and growing in further, and further
obedienc^ of Religion. Is this our thankfulness t^ God? what does Religion
hurt us? are (...) not beholding to God for our Religion, and t^ Religion for
our peace, and Deliverance (...) has not God witnessed the truth of our
Religion from Heaven by Deliverances? has no^ God been with us strangely, by
the confusion of the plots of others? and how do we (...) quite it? by
growing to a lukewarm temper. A lukewarm temper is odious in the sight of
God. I would thou were hot or cold, says Christ. The best Religion in the
world is odious, if it be cold; God will not endure us t^ join the Arc and
Dagon, Christ and Belial. Certainly, if we do, God will spue (...) all out;
it will be the confusion of the Church d State; and yet this is the
thankfulness ^at we give to God, for the Gospel of peace, ^at we have been
so much beholding to ^im for.

Therefore it is good to take occasions, as ^ee have one ministered this day, to
call to ^ind the former dealing of God to us, in the ^un-powder-treason, and
other Deliverances; which we have had several occasions upon ^is day to
speak of. And (to come nearer ^ur selves) let us stir up our hearts to
thank^ulnesse, which is the maine end of this day; and among the rest for our
gracious Prince, that God has delivered him as the 3. Chil^ren in the fiery
Furnace, they were kept, and ^reserved untouched of the fire: so God has
^reserved him in the fiery Furnace. The not ^eing thankful for these things,
will be a ^eanes for God to lay us open to his, and our ^nemies. Therefore let
us make use of this ^ay, especially to stir us up to thankfulness. To go on.

For the building of the walls of Jericho 7 To set against our corruptions.
what should I speak of Popery, and the like? We should labor to overthrow
that Jericho. All of us have vowed in Baptism, to fight against the world, and
the Devil, and the maine Enemy of all that is within us, that is our flesh: we
could not be hurt by them, we betray our selves, as Sampson betrayed himself
to Dali^ah. Those that are baptized, and especially that have renewed their
vows by solemn fasting, and renewed their Covenant, in taking the Communion;
as there are none of us all* but have vowed against our corruptions, and sins,
in Baptism, and have renewed their solemn vows in the Communion, and in
public fasting: Well, when we go about to strengthen our corruptions, and
the corruptions of the times, in the places where we live; what do we go
about? to build the walls of Jericho again: what do we go about, but to
strengthen that that God has cursed? There is nothing under Heaven so cursed,
as this corruption of ours, that is the cause of all the curses of the
creatures; of all the curses that ever were, or shall be, even to the last
curse, Go ye Cursed to eternal destruction. This Pride, and Sensuality, and
secret Atheism, and Infidelity, that we cherrish, and love more then our own
souls; this is that, that many go about to build, and oppose all the ways
that are used to pull down Jericho: and have nothing so heartily, as the
motions of Gods Spirit, and the means that Gods Spirit has sanctified, to
pull down these walls of Jericho.

Must not this be a cursed Endeavor, when we go about to build, that that
we our selves have vowed to pull down? when we go about to raise that, that
we have formerly destroyed by our own vows? As Saint Paul says, Gal. 2. If I
again build the things I have destroyed, I make my self a transgressor.
Indeed when we go about to build the things that we have vowed their
destruction, we make our ^lves transgressors.

Let us take notice of the wondrous poison, and rebellion of the corruption of
our hearts ^n this kind. Has not the Lord threatened ^urse upon curse, against
many particular sins? ^ursed is the man that calls evil good, and good ^vill;
have we not many that do so? In Deu^ronomie there is curse upon curse, to
those that mislead others. And in the New Testa ^ient there is curse upon
curse: Saint Paul ^hreatneth, that such and such shall not enter unto the
Kingdom of Heaven; yet not with^tanding the Curse, we go about to build
Ieri^ho again, to set up that that God has pronounced a Curse upon.

We cry out against Popery, and well we may, when the Scripture directs
curses against their particular opinions, as where it ^aith, If an Angel from
Heaven, shall teach other doctrine, let him be accursed. The Coun^ cell of
Trent has cursed those that s^y tradi tions are not of equal authority with
the Scriptures, and so they set curse against curse. We wonder at them, that
they are not af aid of the curse of God, nay to countercurse God as it were;
when he curses disobedience, to curse the practice of obedience to him. And
then there is a curse to those that shall add or take away from the Scripture.
Saint John seals the whole Scripture with a Curse. Cursed is he that adds, or
takes away, etc. Now they add to the Scripture that that is no Scripture; and
they take away what they list, as the second Commandment, and the Cup in the
Sacrament, I say we wonder at them, tha^ they will run upon the curses, that
they will be stricken through with so many curses, more then Absalom with
Iavelins, or Acha^ with stones, Cursed is he that worshippeth graven Im^ges;
besides particular things that are cursed in Scripture: We wonder at them that
they are so desperately blind to run on. But are no^ we as ill? are there not
many curses in the Scripture, and denunciations of being excluded from the
Kingdom of God, against the courses that are taken by many men? and ye^ we
venture on it. Will a negative Religion bring any man to Heaven, to say he is no
Papist, nor no Schismatic? No, certainly, therefore profane persons that
maintain corruptions, and abuses, and abominations, against the light of
conscience, and nature, and Scriptures, they raise up Jericho again, and they
are under a curse.

Let me ask any one why Christ came? Application concerning the feast of the
nativity.
The Apostle says (and they will be ready to say) To dissolve the cursed
works of the Devil* It should seem by many notwithstanding, especially at
these times, that he came to establish the works of the Devil: for what good
we do in the Ministry, in three quarters of a year, it is almost undone in
one quarter; At the time when we pretend great honor to Christ, we live as
if he came to build up the ^ursed walls of Hell, to break loose all. Whereas
he came to destroy the works of ^e Devil: He came to redeem us out of the
^ands of our enemies, that we might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness all the ^ayes of our life, He came to redeem us from ^ur vain
conversation: nay, many live as if ^ee came to give liberty to all
conversation. ^s not this to raise Jericho? to raise a fort for ^athan, to
enter into our souls, and keep pos^ession in us? to beat out God, and his
Spirit? ^o fight against our known salvation, when we rear up courses
contrary to Christ's coming in the flesh, and to the end of Christ's dying for
us, which was to free us from our ^aine conversation, and to redeem us from
the world, that we should not be lead as slaves to the customs of the world.

Therefore let us consider what we do, what To consider our course of life.
^our course of life is, if it be a proceeding, and ^edification, and building
up our selves more, and more to Heaven, a growing in knowledge, and in holy
obedience, to the divine truths we know; if it be a pulling down of sin more
and more, a going further, and further out of the Kingdom of darkness, and a
setting our selves at a gracious liberty to serve God; oh! it is a happy thing,
if it be so: if our life be a taking part with Christ, and his Spirit, and his
Ministry, to grow in grace and piety; oh! it is an excellent thing when we
grow better; the longer we live in the world, and this cursed Jericho, the
corruption of nature (which if we cherrish, will be the cause of an eternal
curse after) if it go down, and we r^ine it more, and more, and we suffer the
word to beat down the forts of Satan, those strong Imaginations, etc. But if
our life be nothing else but a living answerable to our lusts; that as we are
dead, and cursed by nature, so we make our selves twice dead, a hundred times
dead by sin, and bring curse upon curse by our sinful conversation; we are
then under Gods broad seal cursed. We are all borne accursed, til we get out
of the state of nature, to free us from which, Christ became a curse; if we
get not out of this, but go on, and feed our vanity, and corruption, what will
be the end of it, but an eternal cursr afterward? Therefore let us consider
what we do, when we maintain, and cherish corruptions, and abuses in our
selves, and others; We build that that God has cursed, we build that that we
have vowed against our selves.

And how will God take this at the hour of death? thou that art a careless
drowsy hearer of the word of God, and a liver contrary to the word of God; how
will God take this at thee, at the hour of death, when thy conscience will
tell thee, that thy life has been a practice of sin, a strengthening of
corruption? The old Adam that thou have cherished, it will stare, and look on
thee with so hideous a look that it will drive thee to despair. For
conscience will tell thee, that thy life has bin a strengthening of pride, of
vanity, of covetousness, and of other sins, thy whole life has been such;
and now when thou should look for comfort, then thy corruptions, which thou
should have subdued, they are grown to that pitch, that they will bring
thee to despair, without the extraordinary mercy of God to awaken thy heart by
repentance. Why therefore should we strengthen that that is a curse, and will
make us cursed too? and will make the time to come terrible to us, the hour of
death, and the day of judgment? How shall men think to hold up their faces,
and heads at the day of judgment, whose lives have been nothing else, but a
yielding to their own corruption of nature, and the corruptions, and vanities
of the times, and places they have lived in? that have never had the courage to
plead for God, that have been fierce against God, Who ever was fierce against
God, and prospered? When men make their whole life fierce against God, against
the admonitions of his word, and Spirit, and their whole life is nothing but a
practice of sin; how can they think of death, and judgment without terror?

Now it were wisdom for us, to carry our selves so in our lives, and
conversations, that the time to come may not be terrible, but comfortable to
think of; that we may lift up our heads with joy, when we think of death,
and judgment: but when we do nothing but build Jericho; when we raise up sin,
that we should ruin more, and more, what will the end of this be, but
despair here, and destruction in the world to come?

You may shake off the menaces, and threatenings Christ's sentence unavoidable.
of the Ministers, as Hiel shook off I^suah's; he was an austere, singular
man, and it is a long time since Jericho was cast down, and God has
forgotten; has he so? he found that God had not forgotten. So there are many
that think, that words are but wind of men, opposite to such, and such things:
but though our words may be shooken off now, and the word of God now in the
preaching, may be shook off; yet it will not when it comes to execution. When
we propound the curse of God against sinful courses, you may shake off that
curse: but when Christ from Heaven shall come to judge the quick, and the dead,
and say, Go ye cursed, that were borne cursed, that have lived cursed, that
have maintained a cursed opposition to blessed courses; that have not built up
your own salvation, but your corruptions, you that loved cursing, Go ye
cursed to Hell fire, with the Devil and his Angels for ever: will you shake
off that? No, no, howsoever our ministerial in r^aties, may be shaken off: yet
when God shall come to judge the quick, and the dead, that eternal threatening
shall not be shaken off. Therefore I beseech you, consider not so much what we
say now, but what God will make good then, What we bind on earth, cut of the
warrant of Gods book, Shall be bound in Heaven, and God will say Amen, to that
we say agreeable to his word.

Think not light of that we speak: for To tremble at Gods word.
God will make good every word, he is Jehovah, he will give being to every
word. He is not only mercy, but justice (we make an Idol of him else) and we
must fea^e him in his justice. He loves to dwell with such as are of a contrite
Spirit, that tremble at his word.

It is said of David, that when Vzzah was stricken, he trembled. Hiel, and such
kind of persons regard not the threatenings of God, but go on, and treasure up
wrath. It is a sign of a wicked man to hear the menaces, and threatenings, and
not to tremble. To end all with two places of Scripture; says Moses, He that
hears these things, and blesses himself, my wrath shall smoke against him.
Gods wrath shall smoke, and burn to hell against such a one as blesses
himself, that knows he is cursed under the seal of God, that does ill, and
yet he blesses himself in doing ill: therefore take heed of that, add not
that to the rest, Gods wrath will smoke against such a one. And you know what
Saint Paul says, Romans 2. If thou go on and treasureup wrath, thou buildest
Jericho, that thou have vowed the destruction of. Every time thou take the
Communion, thou treasurest up wrath against the day of wrath. For there will be
a day of the manifestation of the just wrath of God, and then these things will
be laid to thy charge.

Let us every one labor to get out of the state of nature, to break off our
wicked lives, and to get into Christ the blessed seed, and then we shall be
blessed, we shall be made free, free from the curse of nature, and of sin. Let
us renew our Covenants against all sin, and make conscience to be lead by
the Spirit of Christ, that we may gather sound Evidence every day, that we
are in Christ, and so out of the Curse.

THE SVCCESSEFVLL SEEKER. In two Sermons, on PSALM 27. 8.

BY The late Learned and Reverend Divine, RICH. SIBBS. Doctor in Divinity, Mr.
of KATHERINE Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher to the Honorable
Society of GRAYES-INNE.

1 CHRONICLES. 16. 11. Seek ye the Lord, and his strength: seek his face
continually.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for N. Bourne, at the Royal Exchange, and R.
Harford, at the guilt Bible in Queenes-head Alley in Paternoster Row. 1639.

The Successful SEEKER.
PSALM. 27. 8. When thou said, seek ye my face; my Heart said unto thee, thy
face Lord will I seek
IN the former Verse, David begins a prayer to God, Hear oh Lord, have mercy
upon me, and answer me. This Verse is a ground of that prayer, Seek ye my
face, says GOD; the heart answers again, Thy face Lord will I seek;
therefore I am encouraged to pray to thee: In the words are contained,

GODS Command, and David's Obedience.

Seek my face, thy face Lord will I seek. Gods warrant, and David's work
answerable, the Voice, and the Ecchoe: the Voice, Seek m^ face: the rebound
back again of a gracious heart, Thy face Lord will I seek.

When thou saidst] it is not in the original, i^ only makes way to the sense;
passionate speeches are usually abrupt, seek my face, thy f^ Lord will I
seek. The first thing that I will observe from the inco^ragement is, that God
shows himself to his understanding Observe. God shows himself to the
understanding creature.
creature.


God begins you see, seek my face, he mu^ open his meaning, and show himself
first, God comes out of that hidden light that he dwells in, and discovers
himself, and his will to his creature, especially in the word. It is our
happiness now, that we know the mind, and meaning of God.

What is the ground of this? what need God stoop thus?

There is the same ground for it, as that there is a God; these things go in
an undivided knot, God.

The reasonable, understanding creature, and Religion that ties that creature
to God, a discovery of God what that Religion shall be.

For in the intercourse between God and Man must not appoint how to serve God.
Man, man can do nothing, except he has his warrant from God. It is extreme
arrogance for man to devise a worship of God. Do we think that God will suffer
the creature to serve him as he pleases? No, that were to make the creature,
which is the Servant, to be the Master. It belongs to the Master or Lord to
appoint the service: what Master, or Lord will be served according to the
liberty, and wisdom, and will of his servant? And shall ^he great God of
Heaven and earth be worshipped, and depended upon, as man pleases, or from
any encouragement from himself* shall not he design his own worship? he
that singles out his own work, makes himself master in that; therefore God
begins with this command, seek my face, and then the heart answers, thy face
Lord will I seek. God must first discover his mind of necessity to the
creature.

Scriptures might be forced hence to show the duty owing from the creature,
Man, to God: for the creature must have a ground for what ^he does, it must not
be will worship, Infringit, etc. It is a rule, it weakens the respect of
obedience that is done without a cause: though a man does a good deed, yet what
reason, what ground have ye for this? and that we may do things upon ground,
God must discover himself, therefore he says, Seek my face.

It may be objected, that every thing proclaims The knowledge of God by the
creatures insufficient.
this, to seek God, though God had not spoken, nor his word, every creature
has a voice to say, seek God, all his benefits have that voice to say, seek
God, whence have we them? If the creature could speak, it would say, I serve
thy turn, that thou may serve God, that made thee and me: as the Prophet
says, the rod and chastisement has a voice, Hear the Rod, and him that
smites, every thing has a voice. We know Gods nature somewhat in the
creature, that he is a powerful, a wise, (...) just God, we see it by the
works of creation, and providence: but if we should know his nature, and not
his will toward us, his commanding will, what he will have us do, and his
promising will what he will do for us; exce^ we have a ground for this from
God, the knowledge of his nature is but a con^ed knowledge, it serves but to
make us unexcusable, as in Romans 1. it is proved at large. It is too confused to
be the ground of obedience, unless the will of God be discovered before,
therefore we must know the mind of God.

And that is the excellency of the Church of God above all other people, and
comp^nies of men, that we have the mind and will of God, what here qui^ of
us, by way o^ duty to him; and what he will do to us, as a liberal, and rich
God: These two things which are the maine are discovered, what we look for
from God, and the duty we owe back gain to God, these are distinctly opened
in the word; you see here God begin^ with David, seek ye my face.

Indeed God is a God of order: in this subordination of God and the creature,
it is fit that God should begin, it is Gods part to command, and ours ^o obey.
This point might be enlarged, but it is a point that does but make way to that
that follows, therefore I will not dwell upon it. Again in this first part
Gods command or warrant, Observe. 2. God is willing to be known.
seek ye my face; you see here,

God is willing to be known, He is willing to open and discover himself; God
delights not to hide himself: God stands not upon state, as some Emperors
do, that think their presence diminishes respect: God is no such God, but he
may be searched into. Man, if any weakness be discovered, we can soon
search into the depth of his excellency, but with God it is clean otherwise,
the more we know of him, the more we shall admire him. None admire him more,
then the blessed Angels, that see most of him, and the blessed Spirits that
have communion with him; therefore he hides not himself, nay he desires to
be known, and all those that have his Spirit, desire to make him known: Those
that suppress the knowledge of God in his will, what he performs for men, and
what he requires of them, they are enemies to God, and of Gods people; they
suppress the opening of God, clean contrary to Gods meaning, seek my face, I
desire to be made known, and lay open my self to you.

Therefore we may observe by the way, that That God does not shine on us is our
own fault.
when we are in any dark condition, that a Christian finds not the beams of
God shining on him, let him not lay the blame upon God, as if God were a God
that delighted to hide himself; oh no, it is not his delight, he loves not
strangeness to his poor creature; it is not a point of his policy, he is
too great to affect such poor things: No, the fault is altogether in us, we
walk not worthy of such a presence, we want humility and preparation. If
there be any darkness in the creature, that he finds God does not so shine on
him, as in former times, undoubtedly the cause is in himself, for God says,
seek my face, he desires to open himself; but it is a point that I will not
be large in.

We see hence likewise, that Gods goodness is a Communicative, spreading
Observe. 3. Gods goodness communicative.
goodness.

That is peculiar to God, and to those that are lead with the Spirit of God,
that are like him, they have a communicative diffsive goodness, that loves to
spread it self, Seek my face. I am good in my self, but I desire to shine on
you, to impart my goodness to you.

If God had not a communicative, spreading Or else he had not created the world.
goodness, he would never have created the world: the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, were happy in themselves, and enjoyed one another before the world
was, but that God delights to communicate, and spread his goodness, there had
never been a Creation, nor a Redemption. God uses his creatures, not for
defect of power, that he can do nothing without them: but for the spreading of
his goodness: and thereupon comes all the subordination of one creature to
another, and all to him.

Oh that we had hearts to make way for such a goodness, as God would cast into
us, if we were as we should be. Gods goodness, is a spreading imparting
goodness. It is a common distinction, there is the goodness of the Fountain,
and the goodness of the Vessel, that is our goodness, because we contain
somewhat in us that is good: the goodness of the creature, that is but the
Channel, or the Cisterne, but the goodness of God is another manner of
goodness, the goodness of the Fountain. The Fountain begs not from the
River, the Sun borrowes not light from the Candle, God begs not goodness
from the creature. Ours is a borrowed goodness, but his is a communicative
goodness, seek my face: that I may impart my goodness. The Sun delights to
spread his beams, and his influen^ in inferior things, to make all things
fruitful: such a goodness is in God, as is in a Fountain, or in the breast
that loves to ease it self of milk.

I note it, that we may conceive aright of Gods willingness to bestow his
goodness.
God, that is more willing to bestow good, then we are to ask it; he is so
willing to bestow it, that he becomes a Suitor to us, seek ye my face, he
seeks to us to seek him. It is strange that heaven should seek to earth; and
yet so it is.

Whence comes this in God, the at ribute o^ Quest.
goodness, the spreading goodness in his (...) ture, that he desires to
impart, and to comm^nicate himself?

There is no envy in God, he has none above Answ. No envy in God.
him, and therefore he labors to make al good* There is a mystery in it, but
if some be (...) good, the fault is in themselves; as it is a prerogative in
him to make some more, and some le^ good; so there is a fault in them: that I
(...) no better, it is my own fault. The prerogative belongs to God, we must
not search into that: but every man may say, I might have been better, and
more enlarged, I did not seek his face, that he might take occasion to
^nlarge himself toward me; would we be like our heavenly Father? let us
labor to have large affections, to have a spreading goodness.

Two things make us very like God, the Two things wherein we are like God.
much concern this point: To do things freely, of our selves, and to do them
far. To communicate goodness, and to communicate it fa^e to many. The
greater the fire is, the further it burns, the greater the love is, the
further it extends, and communicates it self. There are none more like God,
then those that communicate what good they have to others, and communicate it,
as far, and remote as they can, to extend it to many. Our Savior Christ, you
see what a world were beholding to him, Heaven and earth were beholding to him;
and the nearer a man comes ^o Christ, the more there is a kind of felfe^eniall,
to do good to others. Saint Paul had (...) great measure of Christ in him, he
was con^ent to be bestowed for the good of the Church, the care of all did lie
upon him. A ^ublike mind is Gods mind, a public mind is a mind that loves to
do good freely, and large^y to others: therefore God says, seek my face, that
I may have better opportunity to empty my goodness to you. Seek my face, that
is, seek my presence; the face is the glass of the soul wherein we see the
mind of a man, seek my face; that is, seek my mind, seek my presence, as we
shall see afterward. I will speak no more of that point, Gods warrant, or
command, but go on. My heart said unto thee, thy face Lord will I seek.

Here is the work, and obedience, My heart said unto thee, etc. David's heart
was set in a good, and sanctified frame by God; it was between God, and his
obedience. The heart is between God, and our obedience, as it were an
Embassado^r, it understands from God what God will have done* and then it lays
a command upon the whole man. The hear* and conscience of man is partly divine,
partly humane; it has some divinity in it, especially if the man be a holy
man. God speaks, and the heart speaks; God speaks to the Heart, and the
Heart speaks to us: And often times when we hear conscience speaking to us, we
neglect it; and as Saint Augustine said of himself, August.
God spoke often to me, and I was ignorant of it. When there is no command in
the word, that the heart directly thinks of (as indeed many profane careless
men, scarce have a Bible in their houses) God speaks to them thus, conscience
speaks to them some broken command, that they learn against their wills, they
heed it not, but David did not so, God said, Seekeyee my face, his heart
answers, thy face Lord will I seek.

The heart looks upward to God, and then to it self: My heart said] It said
to thee, and then to it self: First his heart said to God, Lord I have
encouragement from thee, thou have commanded that I should seek thy face, so
his heart looked to God, and then it speaks to it self, Thy face Lord will I
seek: It looks first to God, and then to all things that come from it self.

My heart said] it said of that point, concerning the thing thou said, seek
my face.

My heart said [to thee] David saw God in all his commandments, Thou said to
me, seek my face, My heart said to thee. I know the command is from thee, I
have to deal with thee, in the command and encouragement, and in the warrant,
I look not to the words, but to thee, the authority, and strength of them
comes from thee. My heart said to thee, thy face Lord will I seek.

Between the answer of David, and Gods command and warrant; the heart comes to
think seriously upon the command, and then to enjoyne the duty. This is to be
considered, because there is no knitting of these two together, but by the
heart, the serious consideration of the heart, when God faith, seek my face,
he answers, I will seek thy face. How comes this return? The soul considers
the ground of the return, before the return. A man when he does any thing,
he does it from the principles of a man; a holy man when he does a thing, he
does it from the principle of a holy man; and what is the principles and
foundation of the practice of a holy man: a sanctified understanding to tell
him what God has said, and what he has promised, and wherein God has
discovered himself.

Well, when the heart knows that once, the heart has enough from heavenward,
it has enough from heaven, God has said, and promised it: then the heart by a
work it has of it self, speaks to it self, and to the whole man, to seek
God. The heart will not stoop without reason, the heart of an understanding
man, but when it sees the command first, seek my face, then it answers, thy
face Lord will I seek. So that this command of God, and this encouragement,
and warrant from God, Seek ye my face, it was in David's heart, it was
written, and set, and grafted in his heart, and then his heart being awed with
the command of God, God has said thus, the heart goes again to God, thou have
said thus, Lord, Thy face will I seek.

See the depth of David's speech, when he faith, Lord thy face will I seek. It
came from his heart root, not only from the heart, but from the heart grounded
upon the command, and encouragement of God. Seek my face; there is the ground,
the heart digesting this thoroughly, this is Gods Command, I understand it, and
understand it from God, I see the authority from whence itcomes, therefore I will
stir up my self, Thy face Lord will I seek: I shall have occasion to speak
somewhat of it afterward, in the next thing his obedience, therefore I go on.
Thy face Jehovah will I seek.

Here is his return again to God, that he will seek the face of God, I will
seek thy face in all my necessities, then I will seek to thee; and in all
thine ordinances I will seek to thee, whereinsoever thy presence is
discovered, thy presence is in all places, especially in thine ordinances, thy
presence is in all times, especially in the time of trouble, and need; in all
times of need I will seek to thee, in all exigences I will seek unto thee,
and in all thi^e ordinances wherein I may find thee; I know I may meet with
thee there, thou give thy people meetings in thine ordinances, it is thy
walk, therefore thy face Lord will I seek where I may be sure to meet thee,
in thine own way and ordinances: So much for the meaning. Thy face Lord will I
seek.

Here is first of all an Application, and obedience from Application; they be
words of particular Application: Thy face will I seek. God had given him a
ground, Seek ye my face, his heart makes the Application, Thy face I will
seek, applying the general encouragement to himself in particular. So that
you may observe hence that, The ground of all obedience, of all holy
intercourse Observe. The ground of obedience, application.
with God, is a Spirit of Application.

Applying the truths of God, though (generally spoken) to our selves in
particular. It is spoken here in the plural number, Seek ye my face; but the
general implies the particular, as London is in England, Seek ye my face,
all ye that are the people of God; but I am one of them: what though I be not
named? (that tenent in Popery is against sense) when a man is condemned by the
law, is his name in the law? It is against such a fact; he is a Malefactor:
And so the particular is included in the general, Seek ye my face. David
knew that, reason taught him that, and not Religion.

Now the ground of Application of divine 1 Gods truth belongs to all.
truths to our selves in particular, is this; that the truth of God (setting
aside some circumstantiall things, that arise sometimes to particular persons,
that sometimes limit the command to one person, or the promise to one person
(cut off those distinctions) all comfortable truths agreeto Gods people in all
ages, while there is a Church in the world. Al truths are eternal truths, die
not as men do. David is dead, and Moses is dead, but this truth is not dead,
Seek ye my face: Paul is gone, and Peter is gone, we are the David's, and the
Mose's, the Peter's, and the Paul's now, those truths that were good to them, are
good to us. Whatsoever was written before, was written for our comfort. There
is an eternal truth that runs through all ages of the Church, that has an
everlasting comfort* God has framed the Scriptures not to be limited to the
times, wherein they were written, as the Papists idly speak, Bellarmine and
others, as if they were occasional things, that the Scriptures were written by
occasion of such, and such men, and concerned only those times: but the
Scriptures were written for all times, and it concerns a times to apply all
truths to themselves (setting aside those circumstances, that are applied to
particular men, which are easy to discern) in Heb. 13* that that was said to
Joshua, Ios. 1. the Apostle applies it to the Church in his time, and to all:
Be not afraid, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, it is a general
truth. And Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness,
that whosoever believes as Abraham, is a son of Abraham. These truths are
universal, and concern every one, as well as any. And so many other places of
Scripture: The promise of the blessed seed, the believing of it runs from the
beginning of the world, in all ages to the coming of Christ. All other
promises were but an enlargement of that, that was the Mother-promise; that is
the ground of Application, that the general truths agree to all the Churches.
The truth of God is the portion of every child of God, he may claim every
promise, and ought to follow the direction of every command.

The reason is, because all the Church of God are Heirs alike; Heirs of the
Promise, Children of Abraham, Heirs of salvation, they have interest in
Christ-alike, in whom all the promises, are Yea, and Amen; in whom all the
promises have their making, and their performance. And by reason that there is
an indifferent equality (in regard of the maine things) of all the children of
God: they have interest alike in all the benefits by Christ; in all truths, in
all substantial duties to God, and all favors from God, that is the ground of
the equity of Application.

But if you will have the ground of the necessity 2 Ground of necessity of
application.
of it, nature will show that: for the truths are food, if food be not taken,
what good does it do, without application* The word of God is a sword: what
will a sword do, if it hangs up in a man's Chamber* or if it be not used, when
the enemy approaches* The Application of the sword of the Spirit gives the
virtue to it, it is to no purpose else, divine truths are physic, if it be not
applied, what use is there of physic?

There is a necessity (if we will obey God) of a Spirit of Application; there
is nothing that will do good, but by application, neither in nature, nor in
grace: There must be a virtuall application at least: the heavens work upon
the earth, there is no Application bodily, the heavens are too high; but there
is a virtuall Application, there comes light in, and influence to these
inferior bodies: therefore we say the Sun is in the house, and in the place
we are in, though there be only his influence there. But there must be
application of divine truth to the soul, it must be brought near the soul,
before the soul can moove* There is a necessity of Application from a
principle of nature, to make it our own.

Now as in nature there is a power in the soul, to work out of the food, that
that is good for every member, which we call a digestive power and faculty;
that applies, and as^milates the meat and nourishment we take to every part.

There be fibra sucking veins, that suck out of the meat strength, for this
and that purpose. So there is in the soul of every Christian, and holy man,
there is a spiritual sucking, there is a drawing, assimilating digesting
Spirit, that digests and draws out nourishment out of the book of God, that
is fit for him, that he can say, this is mine, this is for me; I want comfort,
and strength, and direction, here it is; I want light, here it is; I am weak,
here is supply for it: so there is a digestive power by the Spirit of God in
every Christian, to suck, and to draw out of the word, that that is fit for all
purposes and turns, and he can apply the word upon every occasion; as if it be
a command, he obeyes it; if it be a threatening, he trembles at it; if it be
comfort, he rests in it; if it be a direction, he follows it likewise: He
applies it answerable to the nature of the word whatsoever it is, his heart is
molded answerable to the word, by reason of the Spirit of Application.

As there is a ground of the Application of A principle of Application.
the word, and a necessity of it; so there is a principle of Application; that
is, the Spirit of God in the hearts of the children of God, teaching their
spirits to draw wholesome truths fitting to themselves, and none but the
children of God can do it, that have the Spirit of God, they cannot apply the
word of God aright. False Application of the word of God, is the cause of all
mischief sometimes, when those that apply the law, should apply the Gospel;
and on the contrary, when those that should apply the law, sinful secure
persons, apply the Gospel. Many times poor distressed persons, that comfort
belongs to, Oh comfort my people, they apply the Law that belongs not to them,
in that case false application is the ground of mischief; therefore the Spirit
of God is the principle of Application of divine truths, according to the
exigence, and estate of Gods people.

Therefore we should be stirred up to beg Use To beg the spirit of application.
the Spirit of Application, to maintain our communion, and intercourse with
God, that we may apply every thing duly, and truly to our selves, and our own
fowls; all is to no purpose else, if we do not apply it: if it be not brought
home to our souls, and digested thoroughly in our hearts, we must say, this is
from God, and this belongs to me; when we hear truths unfolded, to say of our
selves, this concerns me; and say not, this is a good portion, and a good
truth for such a one, and such a one, but every one take out his own portion,
this is for me. God says, Seek my face, thy face Lord will I seek, with a
spirit of Application.

If we do not, as indeed it is the fault of the times, to hear the word of
God loosely; we care not so much to hear the word of God, as to hear the
gifts of men, we desire to hear fine things to increase notions, we delight
in them, and to hear some empty creature, to fasten upon a story, or some
phrases by the by) alas you come here to hear duties, and comforts, if you be
good, and sentences against you, if you be naught, we speak Gods threatenings
to you, that will wound you to hell, except you pull them out by repentance. It
is another manner of matter to hear, then it is took for. Take heed how you
hear says Christ, so we had need, for the word that we hear now, shall judge
us at the latter day, thereupon we should labor for a spirit of Application,
to make a right use of it, as we should.

Therefore those humble souls that are cast down in the sight, and sense of
their sins, they must apply the sweet, and blessed comforts of the Gospel, such
as are contrite in spirit, Blessed are the poor in spirit, blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after righteousness. Come unto me, all ye that are
weary, and heavy laden, etc. Those on the other side, that go on in a course
of sin, and will not be reclaimed, let them consider what Moses says, Deuteronomy.
29. If a man go on, and bless himself, my wrath shall smoke against such
Deuteronomy. 29.
a man, and burn to hell. I will not remove my wrath from him, till by little
and little I take my good spirit from him, and let him go with some temporal
comforts, and then bring him to hell. I will curse him in his blessings, he
shall have blessings, but he shall be cursed in all that he does, and all
things shall be in wrath and anger, that shall burn to hell. Such like places
let such men apply to themselves: there is no comfort at all to men that live
in sin wittingly, and willingly: If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not
hear my prayer. If a man (...) me ordinance of God, hearing, and good means,
His prayer shall be abominable. He that will (...) hear the Law, his prayer
is abominable. The applying of these things would make men bethink
themselves, and turn to God, when he considers what part of the word belongs
to him, and makes a right Application.

If we make not a right Application of Gods Danger of not applying the word.
truths, this mischief will come ofit, we (...) hour God, and his bounty: has
God been 1 We dishonor God.
so bountiful, as to give us so many instructions, and such promises, and
shall not we (...) them our own? what is the end of the ministry, but to
spread before us the unsearchable riches of Christ? they are yours, if you will
take them, when you have not a spirit of Application, and are not in case to
take them, they are lost; Gods bounty is discredited.

The Devil rejoices, when he sees what (...) We rejoice the Devil.
excellent things are laid open in the Church of God, in the ministry, what
sweet promises and comforts, but here is no body to take them, and lay hold on
them: Like a table that is richly furnished, and there is no body comes and
takes it; it makes the Devil sport, it rejoices the enemy of mankind; when we
loose so great advantage, that we will not apply those blessed truths, and
make them our own. There is no greater delight to Satan, then for us to refuse
those dainties that God has provided for us; what can rejoice an enemy more,
then to see courtesies refused? He sees that all the Scripture is for comfort
to poor distressed souls, and when they refuse their comforts, and set light
by them, as they tell Job, Set thou light by the consolations of the
Almighty? Then Satan, the enemy of mankind, and especially the enemy of our
comfort, since he has lost all comfort, and al hope of it himself, he
rejoices to see us in this condition comfortless; therefore let us lay claim
to the promises by a spirit of Application.

Again, we are inju^ious to our selves, we 3 We injure our selves.
rob our own souls; the want of this makes Christians be discouraged, and
droope as they do; when they are cast down, all comfortable truths belongs to
them; yet they put them off, this is not for me; and those in my case, when God
says, he will come and dwell with a humble heart, this is not for me: this
spirit of peevishness and frowardness, is that that keeps them long from
that comfort that they might enjoy: What, to be in the midst of comforts, and
to starve, for a man to be at a feast, and to starve, because he has not a
spirit to digest, and to take that that is fit for him?

We detest, (and deservedly) those misers that in the midst of all their
abundance, will not spend six pence upon themselves; what a spirit of baseness
is this, in the midst of spiritual contentments and refreshings, when God
offers to feed our souls with the sa^ things of his house, to say oh, no, this
belon^ not to me; and cherish a peevish froward spirit that puts all away. Why
do we not labo^ to be in such a condition, that we may be cherished? and that
we may have satisfaction* to be truly hungry, and poor in spirit, that we may
be filled, and satisfied; and not to go on thus stubbornly. There is a proud
kind of modesty, oh, this belongs not to me, I am unworthy: if we will hearken
to our own misgiving hearts in the time of temptation, we shall never answer
God, and say, Lord thy face will I seek. Therefore let us labor for aspirit
of supplication: I will not enforce that point further.

Now from this spirit of Application (from this general, seek ye my face)
comes obedience: for it is a speech of obedience. Thy face Lord will I seek.

I will seek by thy strength and grace: for We seek God by his strength.
when God utters a general command to his children, theregoes with that
command a secret virtue, whereby they are enabled to seek him. There came a
hidden virtue with this, seek my face, when David's spirit was raised by God to
think of it, together with the thought of this, seek my face, there was a
virtue enabling his soul to return back to God, to say, Lord thy face will I
seek. So though David said, I will seek thy face, yet there was a spiri^uall
virtue that enabled him. God must find is before we can seek him; he must not
only give the command to seek his face, but together with the command, there
goes a work of ^he Spirit, to the children of God, that ina^leth them to seek
him.

In the covenant of grace, God does his part and ours too: our part is to seek
God, to ^lease him, and walk before him (they are all ^ne, I need not be
curious in particulars.) Now ^his was not a speech of self confidence: but
(...) speech of the spirit of God, that went with the command to him.

This is a greatincouragement (by the way) to hear good things, and to come to
the Congregation; we hear many great things, high duties, but we are not able
to perform them; It is true, but the Gospel is the ministry of the Spirit,
and together with the duty there goes the spirit to enable us to the duty.
Stand up and walk, says Peter to the poor lame man, and there went an
enabling virtue to raise him. Arise, says Christ to Lazarus, and there went a
divine virtue to make him rise, and here, seek my face, there went a divine
virtue to make him seek, which those that contemn the ordinances of God want,
because they will not attend upon the ordinances: so much for that.

Now I come to his obedience, Thy face Lord will I seek. David's obedience.


This obedience arises from Application and his obedience has these
qualifications.

It was present, as soon as he heard God 1 Present.
will, as soon as his heart did think of the word, he puts not off. The
Spirit of God, and the works of it are not slow in the children o^ God; but
when they hear their duty, then is a spirit presently, Thy face will I seek,
before the heart grow cold again.

Again, this return and answer, as it wa^ 2 Pliable.
present, so likewise it was a pliable obedience, Thy face will I seek: It is
a speech of a ready cheerful, pliable heart. Where the Spirit o^ God works,
it makes not only present, and quick, but cheerful, and pliable: For the
Spirit of God is like fire, that softens the hardness of the heart, that
naturally is like iron, and makes it pliable. Gods people are a voluntary
people, as it is Psalm. 110. a people of devotion, Psalm. 110.
of readiness of will, and cheerfulness, a free hearted people, a people set
at large they are lead with a Royal spirit, a spirit above their own; and that
makes that easy, and pleasant to them, that otherwise is difficult, and
impossible to nature.

When Isaiah's lips were touched with a co^ from the Altar; that is, he had
somewhat from the Spirit of God, to encourage nature, the here I am Lord, send
me, he detracted the busines^ before, and put it off as much as he could. The
Spirit of God makes pliable, as we see in the Acts, they cared not for
suffering whips, or any thing, because they were made pliable to Gods Act. 4.
service, they accounted it an honor to suffer any thing for Gods sake; the
obedience that is good, is pliable and cheerful.

God would have things in the Church done by such people, the very building of
the Ta^ernacle was done by such voluntary people, that brought in, as God moved
their hearts. Oh (Beloved) a Christian knows what it is to have a Royal
Spirit, a free spirit. David knew it, when he had lost it by his sin, he pra^ed
that he might have a free spirit, a cheerful spirit in the service of God, and
in his particular calling: for sin darkens, and straitens the soul. Thy face
will I seek, his heart was weary, and pliable now as God would have it.

So should our hearts be, and they will be so, if we have the Spirit of God,
ready, and cheerful. God has none to fight his battles against Satan, and
the Kingdom of Darkness, but voluntaries: all Gods people are voluntaries,
they are not pressed soldiers; I mean, not against their wills in that sense.
Indeed they have presse-money in Baptism, to fight against the world, the
flesh, and the Devil; but they are not pressed, they are voluntaries, they know
they serve a good General, that will pay them abundantly; therefore they
labor to be voluntary: It is a good saying, there is no virtue in men that
do things against their wills: for that is virtue, and grace that comes from a
man, from his own principles, from cheerfulness, God loves a cheerful giver.
I might enlarge this, but I do but take it, as it may strengthen the point:
our obedience to God, it must be pliable, and cheerful, and voluntary.

Again, obedience, if it be true, it is perfect, 3 Perfect or sincere.
and sincere, looking to God. Thy face Lord will I seek: we must eye God in
it, and Gods commandment, and not have a double eye, we must not look to our
own selves, it must be perfect obedience; that is, opposite to that which is
hypocritical, that is the best perfection: for the perfection of degrees is
not to be attained here, but this perfection of soundness is to be labored
for, as we see here, it was a sound obedience, Thy face Lord will I seek, I
will not seek thy favors, and blessings so much, as thy face. It was perfect
obedience, as perfection is opposed to unsoundnesse.

It was likewise a professed obedience, before 4. Professed, or resolute.
all the world, in spite of Satan. Thy face will I seek; let the devil, and
the world do what they can, let others do as they will; but as Joshua says,
If you will worship other Gods, if you will fall away do: But I and my house
will serve the Lord: what if his house will not serve the Lord? If my house
will not serve the Lord, I will. So we should all be of Iosua's mind, I and my
house will serve the Lord; let the world go which way it will. In blessed
Saint Paul's time, oh, says he, There are many of whom I have told you often,
and now tell you weeping, who are enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose end is
damnation, who mind earthly things. What does Paul in the mean time? oh, but
our conversation is in heaven, we swim a contrary way, we care not to let the
world know it, our conversation is another way. So our obedience must not only
be present, and pliable, and perfect, but a professed obedience, that is, to
break through all the oppositions of the Devil, and the world, with an
invincible resolution, to b^eak through all difficulties, and scandals, and
examples of great persons; and of this, and that; if we will go to God, and
say truly, Lord thy face will I seek: Let other men seek what they will, let
them seek the face, and favor of others, thy face will I seek, thou shall be
in stead of all to me, as indeed he is.

Again, as it is a professed, so it is a continued, 5 Perpetual.
a perpetual obedience; he is resolved for the time to come: Thy face will I
seek, not only now, and then turn my back upon thee afterward: but I will
seek thy face, till I see thee in heaven. I see thy face in thine ordinances,
in the word, in thy people, where two or three be gathered, thou are among
them. I will see thy face as I may, till I see it in heaven: so here is a
perpetual resolution, Thy face I will seek.

Lastly, the^e is one thing more in this obedience and answer to Gods command,
that his answer to God, is an answerable answer; that is, the answer and
obedience is suitable to the command; Gods command was, seek my face, his
answer is, thy face Lord will I seek. So the point is, that, Our obedience to
God must be proportionable to that, that is commanded. Observe. Obedience to God
suitable to his command.


It must not be this, or that devised by men, when the Lords eye is on you in
this place, and gives you a charge to do thus; the obedience must be suitable;
when he says, seek my face, we must obey, thy face Lord will we seek.
Therefore it may in some poor sense be compared to an Echo, we return
obedience in the same kind: the Spirit of God teaches the children of God to
do so, to answer God in all the things he does. I know not a better evidence
of a child of God, then this answering Spirit. How shall I know that God loves
me? I love him again, therefore I know he has loved me first, it is an
undoubted argument: How shall I know that God has chosen me? I choose him,
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and what is there in earth in comparison of
thee? It is an undoubted Argument, shall I be able to single out God, to be
instead of all to me, and has not he chosen me first? Can there be any thing
in the Current, that is not in the Spring before? It is impossible. I know God,
I look on him as my father, certainly he has shined on me first. I have said
to him, thou art my God, certainly he has said before, thou art my servant; If
I say to him, thou art my God, certainly he has said before, I am thy
salvation, he has begun: for this is the order, God begins, he says, Seek
my face, then if we have grace to return answerable obedience to God, Thy
face Lord will I seek, when thou biddest me, Lord, I will love thee, I will
choose thee, and delight in thee, thou shall be my God; if we have this
returning spirit back again, we cannot have a better argument, that God loves
us, then by answering Gods course.

This is that that Saint Peter has in 1 Pet. 3. 1 Pet. 3.
that that does all in Baptism, it is not, the washing of the filth of the
body, but the (...), the answer, or the demand of a good conscience, but answer
is better: the answer of a good conscience cleanses in Baptism. What is that?

In Baptism, do thou believe, says the Minister, in God the Father
Almighty? I do believe, that was the answer: do thou believe in God the Son?
I do believe: do thou believe the Forgiveness of sins, the Resurrection of
the body, and the life everlasting? I do believe; do thou renounce the
Devil, and his works? I renounce them; that is the answer of a good
conscience; where that is from the heart, there God has spoken to that heart
before, and there is obedience to purpose; Thy face will I seek, it is that
that brings comfort, not the washing of the water, it is not the eating of the
bread, and drinking the wine, and hearing the word of God, when there is not
the answer of a good conscience; when we say we believe, and we will do this,
to do it indeed, Lord I will believe, I will go out of the Church with a
purpose to practice what I hear. Here is the answer of a good conscience, when
we mingle what we hear with faith, and labor to practice it, or else it will
do no good.

Our obedience must be suitable, and answerable, as I said before, if it be a
direction, to follow it; if it be a command to obey it; if it be a threatening,
to fear it; if it be a comfort, a promise, to rest upon it: Let there be a
sutablenesse of obedience to the word, thereafter as the word is. Let us have a
spiritual desire to these things, to imitate the holy man of God, as we desire
to share in his comforts.

I will follow this point of the answerablenesse of obedience; a little
further, and then come to the particular of seeking.

Let our obedience be every way answerable first, let the heart think, what
God says, what God commands, and promises, let the heart take the word of
God, the second time, and ruminate on it, and go over it again. Let us look
into the word, and see what is commanded, and what is promised, and then let
the heart go over it again. And then upon that all eage it to God.

Put case a man be in trouble, Lord thou have To allege the promise to God.
commanded, Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will b^re thee, Psalm. 50.
Let the heart think of it, and go over that encouragement (it is 1. In
trouble. Psalm. 50.
rather an encouragement then a command, though indeed God lay a command on us,
to be good to our own souls; it is a duty to love our selves: Therefore he
commands us to go to him, to seek his face, as though we wronged him by
disobedience, when we injure our selves by our peevishness, as indeed we do.
God loves us better, then we love our selves) let us think of the command, and
invitation; thou have commanded me Lord, and encouraged me to come; I am now
in trouble, experience teaches me. I come to thee, thou have said, He that
sits in darkness, and sees no light, let him trust in the name of the
Lord. I am in darkness, and see no light now, I trust in thy name, let the
heart think of the promise, and then allege it to God, and come with an
obedient answer, and cast it self upon him, and trust in him.

We are in want perhaps, and see no issue, no 2 In want.
supply, think of Gods gracious promise, I will not fail thee, nor forsake
thee. I come to thee, and claim this promise, I am in covenant with thee, etc.

So we should take the promise, thou have 3 For acceptance.
said, At what time soever a sinner comes to thee with a repentant heart, thou will forgive his iniquities, and though his sins, were (...) scarlet, thou will
make them as snow, and white as wool; my soul thinks of that command, and I
come to thee.

Thou have bid all that are weary, and (...) laden in soul, that are troubled
in conscience with the sense of their sins, to come unto thee: my heart thinks
of thy command, and invitation, I come to thee, I am weary, and heavy laden.
First let us think of the encouragement, that is our warrant, and then yield
present obedience: And then what will be the issue? what will spring from it?
when the heart and obedience join with the command, that there is a meeting,
that they concentrate the heart, and obedience: God bids the heart obey, the
heart says I do obey, when these meet, the issue must be exceeding
comfortable, it cannot be otherwise. When the obedient heart meets God in his
command, in his promise.

In all perplexity of business, Commit thy way to the Lord, and he shall
establish thy thoughts, Prove. 3. Prove. 13. and other places: Lord I commit my
ways to thee, establish my Prove. 3. Prove. 13.
thoughts and designs, agreeable to thy will: because thou have bid me commit
my ways to thee.

In the hour of death, let us commend our selves to God, as to a gracious, and
merciful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. Lord I commend to thee my 1 Pet. 4.
soul, who art the Creator of my soul, and the Redeemer of it, here is an
obedience answerable, what can be the issue of it, but comfort?

Therefore let us learn by the example of this blessed man, that when he had
but a hint from God, seek ye my face, answers, Thy face Lord will I seek.

Faith will see light at a little crevice, when it sees an encouragement once,
a command, it will soon answer; and when it sees a promise, half a promise,
it will welcome it; it is an obedient thing, The obedience of faith: it
believes, and upon believing, it goes to God: As the servants of the King of
Assyria, they catch the word presently, Thy servant Benhadad, so faith it
catches the word.

To put God in mind, it is an excellent thing with the Prophet, whosoever
penned the 119. Psalm. 119.
Psalm, whether David, or some other, Remember thy promise, wherein thou have
caused thy servant to trust. As it is Nehem. 1. Remember Nehem. 1.
Lord, he puts God in mind of his promise; and so it is good often, to put God
in mind, Lord thou have made such and such promises, I know thou can not deny
thy self, if thou sh^uldest deny thy word, thou must deny thy self, thy word
is thy self. Remember thy promise, wherein thou have caused thy servant to
trust: If I be deceived, thou have deceived me, for thou have given me this
promise, and this command: This is an excellent way to deal with God (as it
were) to wrestle with him. By t^ promise thou have quickened me, Psalm. 119. When
Psalm. 119.
I was dull and dead hearted, then I thought o^ such, and such a promise, I
allege that promise, and apply it by a spirit of faith, and that quickened me.

And indeed (as I said) God has made us fit to answer him, and we should
study in all things to return unto him by his spirit; whatsoever God does, the
heart should return back again, love for love, knowledge for knowledge,
seeking for seeking, choosing for choosing. He begins with us, he chooses us, he
loves us, he seeks us; and we if ever we intend to be friends with God, and
to entertain a holy communion (as all that shall be saved must do) we should
labor to have our hearts to return to God, what we find from God first. Thy
face Lord will I seek.

To come more particularly to this seeking, which is the particular of the
obedience, and of the application. Thy face Lord will I seek.

Seeking implies, that our happiness is out What implied by seeking.
of our selves, it implies that there is somewhat in our selves, in the
application to which there must be some happiness; therefore we go out of
our selves to seek. It is a motion, and it is out of an apprehension of some
want, a man seeks out of some want, or out of some loss, or out of some duty.
Either he has loss, and therefore he seeks; or else he Ground of seeking.
wants, and therefore he seeks; or else he owes respect and duty, and
therefore he seeks: it is somewhat without a man that moves his seeking.

God need not seek the creature, he has all fullness in himself: Indeed his
love makes him seek for our love, to be reconciled to him. But the creature,
because his happiness is out of himself in communion with God, the Fountain
of all good, he must seek. Christians must be Seekers. Christians are seekers.


This is the generation of Seekers, Psalm. 24. Psalm 24.
All mankind, if ever they will come to heaven, they must be a generation of
Seekers. Heaven is a generation of Finders, of Possessors, of Enjoyers, Seekers
of God: but here we are a generation of Seekers; we want somewhat that we must
seek; when we are at best, we want the accomplishment of our happiness. It is
a state of seeking here, because it is a state of want, we want something always.

But to come more particularly to this seeking the face of God, or the presence
of God.

The presence of God, and the face of God, Presence of God.
where is it to be sought for?

Know that first for a ground: The presence 1. Every where.
of God it is every where: but that is not the thing here purposed.

There is a face, and presence of God i^ every thing, in every creature:
therefo^ In the creatures.
every creature has the name of God, some times a Rock, because as God is
strong, so^ Rock is strong. So likewise a shield, as a shie^ defends, so God
defends us: there is some resemblance of God in the creature, therefore God
has the name of the creature: but the is not here meant.

The presence of God meant here, is that presence that he shows in the time
of need, 3 In necessity.
and in his ordinances. He shows a presence in need and necessity, that is a
gracious presence to his children, a gracious face. As in want of direction,
he shows his presence of light to direct them: In weakness he shows his
strength: In trouble and perplexity he will show his gracious, and comfortable
presence to comfort them. In perplexity he shows (...) presence to set the
heart at large: answerable to the necessity there is a presence: So in need God
is present with his children, to dire^ them, to comfort them, to strengthen
them, if they need that.

And in the issue of all business, there is a 4 In the issue of all.
presence of God to give a blessing: for there is a presence must be even to
the end of things: when we have all we would have, yet God must give a
blessing: so you see there is a presence of God answerable to the necessity of
man; as it has reference to this place.

Thy face will I seek, to direct me by thy hea^enly light when I know not what
to do, as ^ehosaphat said, we know not what to do, but our ^yes are toward
thee. And so in weakness when we have no strength of our own, then go to
God, to seek the face of God that he would be present with us. So, when we
are comfortless, go to God that comforts the abject. The God of all comfort,
go to him, for his presence, for help. And when we are troubled in our
hearts about success; what will become of such and such a business, go to
GOD that gives success, and issue to all. Thus we see a presence of God
answerable to every necessity of man.

There is a gracious presence of God likewise 5 In the Ordinances.
in his ordinances; that is the chief presence, next to heaven, the presence
in Gods Ordinances, that is, in the unfolding of the word, in the
administration of the Sacraments, in the communion of Saints. Indeed in the
Ordinances God is graciously present; Where two or three are gathered together,
I will be in the midst of them. Therefore in Rev. 1. It is said, Revel. 1.
that Christ walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlestickes, that is,
in the midst of the Church; There is a gracious presence of of Christ in the
midst of the Candlesticks; he takes his walks there, Christ has a special
presence in his Church in the ordinances, and that David aims at here too, not
only, I will seek thy face introuble, and necessity, when I need any thing
from thee: but, Thy face will I seek in all thine ordinances, to enable me for
the other. For it is in vain for a man to think to seek God in his necessity
and exigence, if he seek not God in his ordinances and do not joy in them. So
you see where the face, and presence of God is to be sought: in necessities of
all kinds, and in the ordinances.

Now in our seeking the presence or face of In seeking Gods face there is,
God, there is four or five things that I will touch the heads of.

First of all, seeking implies observance, 1. Observance.
seek my face, that is, observe me, respect me as a God. Thy face I will
seek, I will be a follower of thee; As in English an observer is a follower,
a creature, It is a proud word: as if man could make a man of nothing. And
indeed they are creatures in that kind, they are raised of nothing. To seek a
man is to observe him, there is a notable place for it, Prove. 29. 26. Many
seek the rulers favor. Prove. 29. 26.
In the Greek translation, the Septuagint the word is, to observe, and respect
a man, which is translated seeking. Many observe the ruler, but every man's
judgment comes from the Lord. You see, those that think to rise by the
favor of such or such a man, they will be his followers, as I said, and
observe him, they study men: as those that rise by favor that way, they study
not books so much as men, what may delight such a man what he respects;
surely they will serve him at every turn. A base Atheist makes a man his god;
that he may rise, he will deny God and the motions of Conscience, and honesty,
and all to observe the face of a great man whom he hopes to rise by: but a
true Christian observes the great God, the greatest preferment comes from him;
so it signifies to observe.

In Psalm 62. there you shall see the ground Psalm 62.
of observation is that power belongs to God. I have heard once, nay twice. He
heard it twice by the meditation of it by going over it in his heart again. I
have heard, once, nay twice, that is, I tho^ght again and again on it, that
is hearing of it often. We may hear a truth a hundred times, that is, by
meditating of it, I have heard once nay twice, that power belongs to God, that
is, riches and power to advance a man. Atheistical men think, all belongs to
the creature, but power belongs to God. That is one thing that is meant by
seeking, diligent observing of GOD, and respect to him and his will and
commandments in all things.

If so be that a person of great place should say, observe me, and I will
prefer you, I hope men would be ready enough, they need no more words: Here is
the Atheism of our hearts, God says, I will do all good for you; the
greatest preferment is to be the child of GOD here; and the heir of heaven
after. What preferment is there to that of Christianity? and he says, seek my
face, observe me, respect me, let the eye of your souls be to me; as it is in
the Psalm, As the eyes of a maid are toward the hand of her Mistress. The
obedience of a servant is toward the eye of the Commander; so the obedience of
a Christian is toward the eye of God, to see what God commands; we should be
more serviceable to God. It is an argument of the atheism of our hearts, to
take more encouragement from a mortal man that can raise us, and do us a
pleasure, then from God himself. But to let that go, that is the first
branch, Seek my face, that is, observe me.

Then seek my face, that is, depend upon 2 Dependence.
me, to seek Gods face is to depend upon him for all, it argues dependence:
for him that we observe, we observe him for something; we depend upon him to be
our rayser and maker; so seek my face, seek my countenance and favor, depend
upon me, and it shall be sufficient for you.

Then, in the third place. Seek my face, that 3 Seek Gods favor.
is, seek my favor, and grace; favor appears and shines in the face: Seek
my face, observe me, depend on me, for what? for my favor. What is that? It is
all, if we have the grace of God, we have all: for the grace of God is in every
thing that is good to us. If we have the graces to salvation, they come of free
grace: every good gift is the grace of God. Children are the grace of God: So
if we have the grace of God, we have all for our good: we have all in the
spring of good which is the grace and favor of God. As men, if they be graced
from a great person, they study not this and that particular thing, they think
I have his favor; and that favor of his is ready for all exigences. And
therefore in way of complement, they say, I seek not this or that, but your
favor.

The favor of God it is a storehouse and spring and fountain better than
life it self, as the Psalmist says. The loving kindness of the Lord is
better than life. When life fails, the favor of God never fails: life will
fail, and all earthly comforts, but the favor of God is better than life it
self, it is everlasting: and eternal. In Psalm 4. you see how worldly Psalm
4.
Atheistical men rejoice, when their Corn, and Wine, and Oil increase. And
who will show us any good? Who? It is no matter who, any good, any hope of
preferment, it is no matter what way; and it is no matter what, any good: and
let them but show it, and we will wo^k it out, we have wit enough. O says he,
but your wit I stand not upon, nor your courses: but Lord, let thy face shine
upon me, lift up the light of thy countenance, and that shall be instead of all
honors, and preferments. So in seeking, we must observe God, and depend upon
him, and for what? for his favor especially: for the face, and favor of God;
let me have a good look from thee oh Lord, let me have thy favor and love,
for other things I leave them to thy wisdom, thou art wise enough; only let
thy face shine on me.

Oh this favor and face of God it is a sweet thing, this presence of God. What
is heaven, but the presence of God there? Let God be present in a dungeon, it
will be a paradise; let God be absent, Paradise, it is as a hell or dungeon, as
it was to Adam; after he had sinned he run to hide himself. What is hell,
but the want of Gods presence, Gods face and favor is not there? What makes
hell in the heart of a man? God is not there, but leaves the heart to its own
darkness, and confusion; oh, therefore the face, and favor of God, seek that
especially.

Again to seek the face of God, is to pray to him, to put this in execution
in prayer: every To pray to him
where in Scripture, it is all one, to pray, and to seek Gods face, it is
called the spirit of prayer: which because I have spoken of at large out of
another Scripture, I will now say nothing of it.

Likewise in the next place, to seek he face 5 To seek him in his ordinances.
of God, is to attend upon the presence of God, wheresoever he reveals
himself: to attend upon the word, and ordinances, is to seek the face of God.
It is said that Caine went from the face of God, when he went from the worship
of God in his fathers house, he went out from God. Where God is worshipped,
there God is present; and when we leave the place where God is worshipped, we
leave Gods presence, God is more especially present there: therefore seeking
the face of God is to attend upon Gods ordinance. I will seek thy face, that
is, wheresoever there is any presence of thee, I will seek thee.

Christ when he was lost, he was found in the Temple: that has a literal
sense, but it is true in a spiritual sense; if we loose Christ, and have not
comfort from Christ, we shall find him in the Temple, the sweetest presence of
his spirit is there. His body is in heaven, and his spirit is his Vicar in the
world: if we want comfort and direction from Christ, we shall meet him in the
Temple: there he gives us sweet meetings by his spirit; there we have the
comfort, and direction, and spiritual strength that we wanted before we
came. There is the best meeting. As in the Canticles, Christ goes into the
Garden of spices. He goes among his children, that are as a watered garden, and
as so many plants of righteousness, and beds of spices; he delights to be
there. Christ is in the communion of Saints, in the ordinances, Therefore, Thy
face will I seek, especially in the Tabernacle, and Temple after, especially
in the Church, and communion of Saints, there thy face will I seek. Thus we
see, the unfolding of this promise of a gracious, obedient, respective heart,
Thy face will I seek. I will add no more, but come to the use of it. Use.
Direction to seek Gods face.


And in the first place by way of direction: That we may seek the face of God;
that is, observe him, and depend upon him, and enjoy his favor, and meet with
him in his ordinances, 1. Know him and our selves.
we must first get,

The knowledge of God, Our selves.


Get the knowledge of God; for they that know him will seek to him: they that
know his riches, his power, his sufficiency; in a word, his all sufficiency for
all things, they will seek to him. And they that know themselves; that know
their wants, their inability to supply those wants, and know the greatness of
those wants, and that they must be supplied, they will out of themselves. They
that have nothing at home will seek abroad. The knowledge of these two
therefore: of the great God, the all-sufficient God; and of our selves, the
unsufficiency of our selves every way, either for direction, or for protection,
(...) for comfort in distress, or for strength in (...) tie to go through
business; or for issue when we are about any thing, They that know that the
way of man is not in man, as Jeremy says, they would certainly out of
themselves. Therefore let us grow in the knowledge of God, and of our selves,
of our own wants and necessity.

And especially know God now in Christ's. To know God in Christ.
For there is enmity between the nature of God, and the nature of man, of
sinful man: but that Christ has taken our nature now and made it lovely to
God, and God lovely to us. Christ Emanuell, God, and man, God with us, has
made God and us friends: therefore now we must go to God in that Emanuel, in
Christ, that Ladder that joins heaven and earth together. See Gods face
shining in Christ, his gracious face, and this will encourage us to go to God,
together with our wants; go not to absolute God, a god without a mediator: for
then God is a consuming fire.

In the next place when we go to God, and seek to God, be sure to seek his
favor, and 2. Seek Gods favor first.
grace in the first place. If we want any particular thing, protection, or
direction, or comfort in distress, go not for that in the first place, but
let us see in what terms God and we are; let us be sure that reconciliation,
and peace be made. For if we seek to God in our particular wants, and have not
made our peace before, but have sought to other gods, to men, and to our
shifts, God may say, you seek to me? Go to the gods you have served, to the
great men you have served, to the riches you have trusted unto, go to your
shifts. Therefore first, make peace and reconciliation with God before you
seek other things. If a man have offended a great person, he does not go and
seek particular favors, till first he have made peace and taken up the
quarrel. Let us take up the quarrel between God and us by repentance, and a
promise of new obedience, get reconciliation that way, and then seek for
particular favors after.

For what if God give you particular favors, if they be not from his grace
and favor, what will they do us good? What will all that a reprobate wretch
has do him good? What will his favors, his riches, and honors and
preferments do him good when he dies, when he shall conflict with the anger
of God? when he shall see hell before him, and see heaven shut? He sees he
has all, from a general providence, and as a reward for his care in this
world; God answers him with a civil enlargement for his civil obedience,
but he has his reward: heaven he has not, he cared not for it; what will all
do without the love of God in Christ? therefore I beseech you, let us first
seek the favor and mercy of God in Christ.

And then for particular things go to him as the exigence is: for in God there
is a supply for all turns; and that is the ground of seeking: for our seeking,
it must be a wise seeking: now it were not wise, unless there were a supply
in God for every want whatsoever it is. If the creature could do any thing
without God, we should upon good ground make that God. If any thing could raise
us without God (I mean) to comfort, we might seek to them, and make them God,
upon good reason: but what can they do? In anger, God may let a man enjoy
favors, as the fruits of his displeasure, but what can they do without him?
They can do nothing. Therefore it must be the supreme cause, the highest
cause, the great wheel that turns every little inferior wheel in the world,
they turn with the great wheel of divine providence, and goodness, therefore
go to him as the first cause.

Again in seeking the favor of God, we 3 With pure consciences.
must search our consciences, to come with pure and clean hearts to God to
seek him. If we regard iniquity in our hearts, God will not Psalm 66.
hear our prayers. We come to God with a purpose to offend him; if we come
not with a purpose to leave our sins, why do we come? God will not regard our
prayers. We must come with pure consciences to God, as it is excellently set
down, Psalm. 24. 3. Who shall assend Psalm 24. 3.
into thy hill, O Lord, who shall stand in thy holy place? He that has clean
hands, and a pure heart. And then he says after. This is the generation of
them that seek him, those that have clean hands, and a pure heart. Thou have
foul hands; thou art a briber, a corrupter; thou have an impure heart, thou
art a filthy creature, thou have lived in such and such sins, cleanse thy
hands, and thy heart. This is the generation of them that seek him. If a man
seek the pure and holy GOD, with an unclean heart, and unclean hands; if he
be corrupt in his hands, and in his heart, that is the fountain, he may seek
God long enough, before he find him; and if he see GOD, it is in anger.

Again if we would seek the face, and favor of God, let us study the word
hard; study the promises as I said before, bind him with his own word; thou
have said thus, I allege thy own word: Jacob when he wrastled with God,
Genesis 32. then he saw God; he called Genesis 32.
the place Penuell, that is, the face of God, because of seeing God. Upon
wrestling; when the heart by faith wrastleth with God by the promise. Lord thou
have done this: though I feel no comfort, yet I will rest upon thee; that
place will be Penuell, The face of GOD will be there, GOD will show himself.

And let the extremity be what it will; seek Seek God in extremity.
God in extremity: allege the Word of God in extremity. What word have you for
extremity? In the mountain God will be seen. His face will be seen in the
mount, that is, when there is no other help whatsoever. God is a present help
in trouble, Psalm. 46. He is the God that comfort the abject, that none else
can Psalm. 46.
comfort, And he that is in darkness and sees (...) light, let him trust in
the name of the Lord. And though I were in the valley of the shadow of death,
if the Lord be with me, I will trust in him, Psalm. 23. And though thou kill me,
yet will I trust in Psalm. 23.
thee, says Job. In extremity seek God then; and find out words and promises
then, as the Scripture is large in that kind: for then there is most need of
seeking God. Lord if thou help not now, none can help. Difference of men in
extremity.


And this is the difference between a true Child of God and another; in the
time of extremity Saul seeks to the witch: but David seeks to God as here,
Lord thy face will I seek. Many things upbraided David no question with his
sin, and the affliction he was in. Thou seek God? thou have offended him,
and now thou indurest some sign of his displeasure: a heavy case (beloved)
sometimes, especially in the time of extremity, then conscience says, I am in
extremity, and withal God follows me with such, and such sins, a guilty
conscience meets me in my prayers to God and upbraids me, thou have done so,
and so: that if there be not faith, and a word of God to lay hold on in
extremity, what will become of the poor soul? It is swallowed up. No question
David was now in pangs, and many things offered to thrust him off; and he might
say. I have many things to discourage me, yet thy face Lord will I seek, for
deliverance out of trouble, and for pardon of sin. Set the promise of God,
and the pardon of sin above all extremity whatsoever. God is the God of all,
and above all, he is the God of comfort, if comforts be wanting, he can make
them a new. In the want of means, and when means are against us, let us see
lie to God. Jonah in the Whales belly, that was a creature, that might have
consumed him with heat, When he was in the belly of hell, he called unto God.
If a man be as low as hell, if he have a command to come, and a promise, it
will fetch him thence, therefore allege the promises, and the word.

What a miserable taking are they in, that in extremity have no acquaintance
with Gods word? with the promises, or good examples? that have stored up
nothing? Alas, they are in the midst of a storm; naked, in the midst of
war, and opposition, disarmed: they lie open to all assaults. Therefore as
you love your own souls, gather grounds of comfort, treasure up promises and
holy truths; that in extremity you may say with David upon good ground, Lord,
thou have said thus, and thus, and in this extremity I come to thee. Thy face
LORD will I seek: break through all fears, and discouragements whatsoever,
allege the command of God, and the promise of God and the encouragements of
God: my discouraged heart says thus, and Satan says thus, but Lord thou say
thus, seek my face, shall not I believe and obey God, more than the devil or
mine own lying false heart? therefore except we will betray our souls to
temptations, and betray the comforts that we have, let us seek GOD in all
extremities.

I desire you to remember these directions, To seek God in his ordinances.
and be encouraged to seek to God: join the seeking in extremity with the
seeking him in his ordinances. If we do not seek him in his ordinances, in
the time of peace, let us never think he will be so familiar with us, in the
time of trouble. If we be not acquainted with him in his ordinaces in
prosperity, in extremity he will be far off. Therefore seek the face of God
now in all his ordinances; that is the way to have provision of strength
against all other extremities whatsoever. It is a great comfort in extremity to
one that has sought God in his Ordinances before. Foolish Atheistical men
seek not the wisdom of God in his Ordinances, God Prove. 1.
cries to them, and they regard it not; but then they cry to God, and God will
not answer them, but laugh at their destruction. And as it is in Zachary, you
cry, and I will not hear, because I cried, and ye would not hear. When GOD
speaks, and we regard it not, we shall cry, and he will not regard it: Therefore
as we desire his presence in the evil day let us labor to hear him now. Let
us search his will, what he requires of us, and what he will do for us, and
labor to be armed with obedience against the time of distress.

And let us seek him betimes, now presently To seek God betimes. Psalm. 63.
seek the favor of God, you that are young, In the morning early will I seek
thee, Psalm. 63 In the morning of your years, In the morning of the day it is
good to seek God before the heart be possessed with other business, that he may
bless all our affairs: Seek his face, that his blessing and direction and
strength may be upon all. Let us set upon things in his wisdom and strength,
and hope on his blessing.

And in the morning of your years, early put not off: for here is the
mischief, if we^ seek not God early, betimes, the heart wi^ be hardened and
willgrow worse: to morro^ we shall be more unfit then to day. The^ those that
seek in their sickness, and at the hour of death, that is self-love; it is
grace, to seek God for himself, out of old acquaintance and love; but to
seek him in sicknes^ only, and to neglect his ordinances, it is mee^ly
self-love. As a malefactor that carries himself ill in prison, and then
seeks the judges face at the bar: when God arraignes (...) man at the bar,
then to seek him, it come from self-love. But that obedience we ow^ to God is
to seek him out of a new nature, o^ of love of Gods goodness and grace: wh^
we seek him in extremity, not out of the lo^ of grace, but to escape the
danger of hell and damnation, such seeking seldom proves good. Many make a
great show of repentance and turning to God; many of those prove false. He
that is good in affliction only is never good. Therefore put not off seeking
Gods fac^ by prayer, and the use of all good means.

Many men, first settle their estates, and then send for a Physician, and the
divine la^ of all, when they are sick. Oh, but seek God first, and above all
things in the world, or else we have adulterous, Idolatrous hearts, to make
the face of man our Idol, or health ou^ Idol, we should seek Gods face above
all.

The Scripture sets him out sweetly to us: Encouragements to seek Gods face.
^erefore one way to encourage us to seek to ^OD, is to present to our souls
GOD under ^ose sweet terms. He is a rock in the mid^st of the waves, He is
a habitation in the ^ddest of a storm, thou art our habitation. ^e is called a
hyding place, he has the shad^ow of his wings to coverus, let us fly under ^e
shadow of his wings, he is presented ^eetly to us in Christ. Therefore let us
have ^course to him upon all occasions, and now, ^w, that we may be familiar
with him, that ^e may be acquainted with him now, in the ^yes of our youth,
and he will know us in age, ^d sickness; if we be not acquainted with him ^w,
he will not acquaint himself with us ^en: therefore seek his face now, and
above ^l things seek it.

And can we have more encouragement? ^here was never any that fought the face
of ^od that went away sorry. It is said of some ^ood Emperors, that never any
man went sor^ out of their presence, either they had the ^rant of their suits,
or good words. God sends ^one sorry away; there are none that come ^to the
presence of God but they are the bet ^er for it, they go away more cheerful,
and ^ore satisfied; their consciences are quieted, ^hen they pour out their
souls to God. There is the peace of God which passes understan^ing preserves
their souls, as it is, Philip. 4. In Philip. 4.
nothing be careful, but let there be thanksgiving for favors received, and
let your requests be (...) known to him, and the peace of God shall prese^
your hearts and minds. You shall not despair, and be over much cast down,
peace will preserve you.

And if we do not seek the face of God, now when we may enjoy his presence,
we^ shall never see his face in glory hereafter: (...) must now be acquainted
with him or else we shall not when we would. Therefore, as we may enjoy the
presence of God in his Ordinances; so in all our affairs let us seek his
face, and blessing; let us have what we have, and do what we do in his
blessing and assistance, and not in the strength of wit, and shifts. Let us do
what we do by divine strength, and in confidence of his blessing. That, that we
do by his strength we may expect his blessing on, we cannot do so by our
shifts. Let us in*ure our selves in these courses, and we shall find much peace,
and by long acquaintance with God we shall be able to commit our souls to him,
we shall be able to look him in the face at the hour of death. He that looks
God i^ the face often in prayer, and seeking him, may look death in the face.
These things may be made effectual if your hearts be prepared, as the
Scripture phrase is.

And because I mentioned preparing, that is a word in Scripture that is set
before seeking. Rehoboam did not thrive; he did not prepare his heart to seek
God. Iehosaphat was blessed of God, he prepared his heart to seek the Lord.
Therefore let us come prepared to seek God, prepare our hearts to seek him.
Think, when I go to the congregation, I go to seek Gods face, therefore
come in humility, and subjection. And in all the courses of our lives, let all
of us prepare, and set our hearts in frame to seek God in all things: and let
us set upon nothing that we cannot depend on him for assistance, and look to
him for a blessing. And when we cannot enjoy his favor, and blessing in any
thing, we were as good be without it as have it.

This is the way to have our wills in all things. Christ, the truth it self
has left ^s this one sweet promise, Seek ye first the kingdom of God. He
speaks there of seeking our own good, what is the best thing we should seek
for? Seek ye first the kingdom of God, of grace, and of glory: the favor of
God, and the fruit of his favor, grace. Seek those best things in the first
place; what then? It is the way to have all things else as far as they are
for our good. But we would have more, we think if we seek to God, and depend
upon Gods divine principles, and rules, it is a way to beggary and disgrace.
Oh, no, It is the way to have our own desire in all things as far as is for
our good. Let us seek first the kingdom of God, that God may rule, and reign
in us, and we shall reign in the kingdom of God. For other things, God will
bring it to pass I know nothow, they shall be cast upon us. He that is f^ll
for heaven and happiness, GOD will make him full for the world, and
successful, as much as he sees (...) to bring him to heaven: if God see any
thing that would hinder him, he must leave that to his wisdom.

Therefore let us labor to be able from truth of heart, to return to the
commandment, and promise of God, this sweet and gracious answer of the holy
man David, when God says generally or particularly, Seek my face, Thy face
Lord will I seek.

FINIS.
FAITH TRIVMPHANT. In five Sermons, on HEB. 11. 13.

By The late Learned and Reverend Divine, RICH. SIBBS. Doctor in Divinity, Mr.
of KATHERINE Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher to the Honorable
Society of GRAYES-INNE.

LUKE 7. 50. And he said to the woman, thy faith has saved thee, go in
peace.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for N. Bourne, at the Royal Exchange, and R.
Harford, at the guilt Bible in Queenes-head Alley in Paternoster Row. 1639.

FAITH TRIVMPHANT.
HEBR. 11. 13. These all died in faith; not having received the promises, but
having seen them afar off, they were persuaded of them, and embraced them,
and confessed that they were strangers, and pilgrims on earth.
THis Chapter is a little book of Martyr^; it discovers the life, and death of
the holy Patriarchs, and by what means Gods Children are brought into
possession of that that they have an interest, and right unto upon ear^h; it is
by faith: by faith we do, and suffer, all that we do, and suffer, all that God
has ordained us to go through, till he have brought us and invested u^ to
heaven, which is prepared for us.

In the former part of the Chapter there is an induction, the instances of
particular blessed Patriarchs: and after he had named diverse particulars he
sums, them up in this general. All these died in faith.

In this verse there is,

First, the general set down. All these died in faith.

And then the particular unfolding of this. They received not the promises,
having scene them a-farre off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them,
and confessed they were strangers, and pilgrims on earth. He sets down their
faith particularly, hereby setting down what might hinder it and yet did not
hinder it, the not receiving of the promises. They received not the promises,
and yet they believed the promises, that is, the things promised, they were
afar off, and yet they saw them. They saw them, that is the first degree,
They were persuaded of them; that is the second.
They embraced them; that is the third.
They confessed they were pilgrims and strangers, that is the fourth.
All these died in faith.


There is one faith from the beginning of the One faith from the beginning of
the world.
world: as there is one Christ, one salvation, so there is one uniforme faith
for the saving of our souls, we hope to be saved by Jesus Christ as they
were. I do but touch that.

Then again here is implied, a continuance Perseverance in faith.
and perseverance in faith. All those died in faith, that is, they lived in
faith, and by says, till they died, and then they died in faith. Faith first,
makes a Christian, and then after he lives by faith; it quickens the life of
grace, and then he leads his life by that faith, he continues in it till he
come to death, which is the period of all, and then he dies by that faith. But
of perseverance to the end, and the helps to it, I spoke at large upon another
occasion, therefore I omit it. All these died in faith. Faith carried them
along all their life time till death it self. Now that faith that helped them
through all the difficulties of this life, that faith by which they lived, in
that faith they died. They dyed in faith.

In the faith of the Messiah, infaith of Canaan, in faith of heaven. For the
Patriarchs, they had not Canaan till many hundred years after, it was a type
of heaven; they had not Christ till some thousands of years after: So they
died in faith of Christ, of Canaan, and of heaven, the benefits by Christ is
the upshot of all this. They died in faith. He does not say how otherwise they
died; because it is not material whether they died rich or poor, great, or
mean, God takes no great notice of that, nor a Christian takes no great notice
of it. They died in faith. Whether they died a violent or a peaceable death it
is no matter, they died blessed, in that they died in faith. They died in
faith, which in other phrases, is to dye in the Lord, to sleep in the Lord:
because whosoever dies in faith dies in Christ. Faith lifts them up to Christ,
and they steep in Christ. It is a happy thing to dye in Christ; Now those that
die in faith, they die in Christ, Blessed are those that die in the Lord, they
rest from their labors, says the Apostle. All these died in faith.

They continued in faith to death, and then they ended their days in faith:
When death closed up the eyes of their bodies, then with the eye of faith they
looked upon Christ, upon God in Christ reconciled to them; the point is clear,
that The grace of faith, it is such a grace that it Doct. Faith carries a
Christian through all the passages of his life.
carries a Christian through all the passages of this life.

It inableth him to hold o^t to the end, to suffer those things that he is to
suffer, and in the end by it he dies: and when all things else leave him in
death, when riches leave him, when friends leave him, when honor, and great
places leave him, when his life, and senses leave him, when all leave him, yet
faith will never leave him, till it have put him in full possession of heaven;
and then it cease when it has done the work it has to do, which is to
bring us to heaven, then it is swallowed up in vision, and sight, and hope into
fruition, and enjoying of the thing hoped for. It is a blessed grace that
stands by us, and goes along with us, and comforts us in all the passages of
this life, and even in death it self, in those dark passages; it never
forsakes us till it have put us in possession of heaven. All these died in
faith.

What is it to die in faith? Quest.


To die in faith (as I said) is to die in the Answ. To die in faith what.
Lord by faith, and it looks to the Time Past. Present. To come.


To the time past, to die in faith, is to die in 1 In respect of the time past.
assurance of the forgiveness of sins, when by faith and repentance we have
pulled o^t the sting of sins past: for faith looks upon Christ, and Christ has
taken the sting of death in his own body, and death ever since has been
stinglesse, and harmless to his members; he has disarmed it, death had
nothing to do to kill Christ; now seizing upon him who should not have died,
who was our surety, death has lost his sting: so that to die in faith is to
die in assurance of forgiveness of sins past, by Christ.

For the present, in the present instant of death, to die in faith, is to see
God reconciled 2 The time present.
to us in Christ, and with the eye of Stephen to see Christ ready to receave
our souls; to see Christ sitting at the right hand of God, to break through
all that is between, to see our selves sitting at the right hand of God in
heavenly places with Jesus Christ; This is to die in faith, to see our selves
there with our head, where we shall be ere long. Faith makes things to come
present. To die in faith is to die in assurance of that blessed salvation
presently, even at that instant of time, at the parting of soul, and body,
that Christ will receive our souls that are redeemed with his precious blood,
that cost him so dear; he will not suffer the price of his blood to miscarry.
Faith apprehends that Christ will go down with us to the grave, as God said
to Jacob, fear not to go down into Egypt, I will go with thee: so God would
not have us fear to go down into the grave, those dark cells, and dungeons,
God will go down with us. Our flesh shall rest in hope, because Christ our
surety was raised out of the grave, and sits in heaven in glory, and majesty,
therefore our flesh rests in hope, as it is, Psalm 16. 5. Thou will not Psalm.
16. 5.
suffer thy holy one to see corruption; therefore our flesh rests in hope till
the resurrection, because GOD did not suffer his holy one to see corruption:
this is to dye in faith. 3 The time to come.


And for the time to come, to die in faith is by faith to overcome all the
horror of death. Death is a terr^ble thing: and of all the passages wherein we
have occasion to use faith, it is most exercised in death. It requires more to
die in faith, then to live in faith: for then the soul it looks to the
horror of the grave, it sees nothing there but dust, and rottenness. It
looks to the panges of death, sense; and nature does. And likewise the soul
so far as it has noth^ng but nature in it, it looks to the dissolution of
two friends, the body, and the soul, who have been long coupled together, and
their parting is bitter. And then it looks to the parting with friends here
with whom they have lived lovingly, and sweetly. In death, nature sees an end
of all employment in this world, of all the comforts of this life, etc. and
therefore it is a terrible thing. Now to die in faith is to die in conquering
all these, with a spirit above all these. What does faith Faith overcomes all
that is terrible in death.
in the hour of death? It over-comes all these; and all such like.

For when the soul by faith considers the The horror of the grave.
horror of the grave, as the chambers of death; faith considers they be but
resting places for the body, that it sleeps there a while till the day of the
resurrection, and then they meet again. And it considers that the flesh rests
there in hope of a glorious resurrection; and faith sees a time of restoring as
Saint Peter says, There shall be a day of restoring of all things, There is a
day of refreshing, and restoring to come, when those eyes where with we now
look up to heaven, and those fee^e that carry us about our callings, and about
the exercis^ of religion, and those hands that have been lift up to God; that
body that has been the vessel of the soul shall be restored, though it be
turned to dust and rottenness. Faith seet^ the faithfulness of God; that God
in Christ has taken these bodies of ours in trust: (...) know whom I have
believed, 2 Timothy 1. 12. and be 2 Timothy 1. 12.
is able to keep that I have committed to him. I have committed to him my
soul, my body, my whole salvation. I know he is able to keep that I have
committed to him. And I kn^ that my Redeemer lives says Job, it was his
comfort in all extremity, that he should see him with his very same eyes.

And then for the pangs of death which nature The pangs of death.
trembles, and quakes at, faith consider^ of them as the pangs of Child birth.
Every birth is with pangs: now what is death, but the birth to immortality, the
birth of glory? we die to be borne to glory and happiness. All our life time
we are in the womb of the Church, and here we are bringing forth glory: now
death I say, it is the birth day of glory and a birth is with pain; faith sees
it is (...) birth day, it sees that presently upon it the^ shall be joy, as
with a woman after she has brought a man child into the world, so it comforts
it self against the pangs of death. Again faith sees them short, and sees the
glory after to be eternal, it is a little dark passage to an e^nall glorious
light.

Then for the dissolution, and parting of Parting of soul and body.
^o friends, soul, and body, faith sees that ^is but for a wh^le, and then
that that parting (...) a bringing in a better joining; for it brings ^e soul
immediately to her beloved, our Sa^our Christ Jesus, and faith sees that it is
not ^g till body and soul shall be reunited a^ine for ever, and they shall be
for ever with (...) Lord.

And then for friends; faith sees, indeed, ^at we shall part with many sweet
friends; Loss of friends
^t says faith, we shall have better friends, we ^e to GOD, we go to the
souls of per^ct men, we go to innumerable company of ^ngels; we go to
better company a great ^ale.

And for all the employments we have here Company and employment.
^we have below, faith sees that there will be ^rcise in heaven, we shall praise
God with ^gels and all the blessed and glorious com^ny of heaven. So consider
what you will ^at is bitter, and terrible in death, faith con^ers it, it sees
an end of it and opposes to it ^tter things: because notwithstanding death ^ts
off many comforts, yet it brings better; (...) is a blessed change, it is a
change for the bet^r every way; faith sees that there is a bet^r place, better
company, better employment, ^tter liberty, all better. And which is more, (...)
die in faith is to die in assurance that all is ours as the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 3. 16. (...) 1 Cor. 3. 16.
death is ours, Paul is yours, Christ is yo^ death is yours. This is our
comfort when^ days shall be closed up with death; faith b^lieves that death is
ours, that is, it is for (...) good: for as I said, it brings us to our wish^
haven, it brings an end to all misery, an (...) our sins, an end to our
pain, an end to (...) vexations, an end to our discomforts, and to (...)
scandalls here below, an end to all the tempt^tions of Satan. The Lord will
wipe all tears fr^ our eyes then. And it is the beginning of ^pinesse that
shall never end. So indeed fai^ sees that the day of death is better than t^
day of birth: when we come into misery (...) not so good as when we go out of
misery, (...) enter into happiness. This is to dye in faith. (...) the time
past to see the forgiveness of al^ (...) sins, to see the sting pulled out.
And for (...) present, to look to Christ ready to receive^ souls, and to see
him present with us to comfort us, to strengthen us against the p^ngs (...)
death. And for the time to come, by ^aith (...) overlook the grave, to over
look death, (...) all, and to see all conquered in Christ, (...) our selves in
heaven already with Christ; (...) thus a Christian being upheld with this gr^
he ends his days in faith.

This should stir^ us up (if this be so) to (...) Use. To labor for faith.
this grace of faith, above all graces to get ^rance that we are in Christ
Jesus, that so (...) may live with c^mfort, and end our day^ with comfort, and
live for ever happy in the lord. It is only faith, and nothing else that ^ill
master this King of fears, this giant that ^bdues all the Kings of the earth
to him. This ^onster death, he out faceth all, nothing can ^ut face him but
faith in Christ, and that will ^aster him. As for your glorious speeches ^f
Pagans, and moral civil men, they are Death terrible.
^ut flourishes, vain, empty flourishes, their ^earts give them the lie:
Death is a terrible ^ing, when it is armed with our sins, and when (...) is the
messenger of Gods wrath, and cites ^s before God, it is the end of happiness,
and ^he beginning of torment. When we look upon it in the glass of the law,
and in the ^lasse of nature, it is the end of all comforts, it ^s a curse
brought in by sin. It is a terrible thing, nothing can conquer and master it
but ^aith in Christ. Oh let us labor therefore to get it while we live, and
to exercise it ^hile we live, that we may live every day by ^aith.

It is not any faith that we candie by, it must (...) a faith that we have
exercised, and tried before; it is a tried, a proved faith, that we must end
our days by: For alas, when death comes, if we have not learned to live by
faith before, how can we end our days in faith? He that while he lives will
not trust God with his children, that will not trust God with his soul; he
that will not trust God with his estate, but will use ill means, and put his
hand to ill courses to gain by; he that will not trust (...) for his
inheritance, that will not cast his br^ upon the waters, and trust GOD to see
(...) gain; he that will not do this while he liv^ how shall he trust God for
body and soul, (...) all in death? he cannot do it. It must be^ faith that is
daily exercised, and tried, where by we must commit our souls to God w^ we
dye, that we may dye in that faith: t^ we may be able to say, all the days of
(...) life, I had experience of Gods goodness, (...) depended upon him, and I
have found him (...) in all his promises; I committed my self, an^ my ways to
him, and I found him good, a^ gracious in blessing me, I found him giving (...)
a good issue, and now I am strengthened there by, to trust GOD that has been
so true (...) me all my life time, I will trust him (...) with my soul, that
he will never fail^ me.

Let us all labor for this faith: for tho^ it cannot be said of us that we die
rich, or the we die great in the world; perhaps we may die a violent death:
(as there be diverse diseases that lead the body into distempers) it (...) no
matter how we die distempered, and in any estate, so it may be said of us, we
die in able^sed faith.

But it may be objected, that all Gods children Object.
die not in faith, because some die raging Answ. Christians die in faith
notwithstanding distempers.
and distempered, and in such fits.

But we must know that they die in faith not with standing all that: for then
they are not ^em selves; the covenant between God and ^em was made before,
they have given up ^emselves to GOD, and committed their ^ules to God before,
for a Christian gives ^p himself every day; he commits himself ^ule and body
continually to God, as a bles^ed sacrifice of a free will offering; so he
^arns to die daily, daily labors to live in the ^state he would die in; he
ought to do thus; and many Christians do thus: therefore notwithstanding
these distempers, the covenant ^etweene GOD and the soul remains still, and
he dies in faith. It is said here, they all di^d Christians may want feeling.
in faith: he says, not they all died in fee^ing. A man may die in faith, and
yet not die ^n feeling; and sometimes the strongest faith ^s with the least
feeling of Gods love. Fee^ing may be reserved sometimes for heaven: ^et
notwithstanding we must not take it so as (...) there were no feeling where
there is faith; for there was never faith yet, but upon the ^ouch of faith the
soul drew some strength and some inward feeling, though it be not discerned of
the soul in regard of the immode^ate desire of the soul to have more: yet
there is always so much feeling, and strength, and comfort that supports the
soul from despair, take the child of GOD at the worst. Therefore when I
speak of feeling, I speak of a glorious demonstration, that God sometimes
takes away from his children. They died in faith though not always in feeling of
(...) they died in faith, though not always by a fai^ death, or in a comely
manner outwardly, (...) the applause of the world: it is no matter, for that
they all died in faith, and that is sufficient.

It is the desire of Gods Children, that they may dye in faith, and die in
Christ, as they have lived in faith, and lived in Christ. Fai^ is a blessed
grace; by it we live, by it we stand, by it we conquer, and resist, by it we
endure, by it we die, by it we do all those worthy matters we do, in spite of
the devil, and his kingdom: this is that excellent grace of faith by which we
live, and by which we die. These all died in faith.

For they lived as they died, and died as they As men live so they die.
lived. It is a usual general rule, as men live so they die, he that lives by
faith, dies by faith; he that lives profanely, dies profanely. If we suffer
the devil to lead us and abuse us all the time of our life, we must think God
in just judgment will give us up, that he shall delude us, and abuse us at the
hour of death. Carnal confidence disposes men, to think they shall step our
of their filthy blasphemous course of life, out of their sinful cursed
condition to leap to heaven presently, it is no such matter. Alas, heaven it
must be entered into on earth; there must be a fiting and preparing time on
earth for heaven: we must look to die as we live. There is but one example of
a man that died by faith that did not live by faith, that is, the good thief,
and yet that little time of life we see how fruitful it was: but the rule is,
all that will die in faith must live in faith; and usually men are affected,
and disposed, and their speeches, and carriage are on their death bed as they
were when they lived, GOD in just judgment giving them up to that course.

Many wish that they may live in popery, and enjoy the liberty of that carnal
religion, but they would not die by that religion; they live by that religion,
and die by ours, when they have had the sweetness and liberty that is given
them there to sin, and then open all in confession and be clean, and then sin
again, and such easy courses they have that betrays thousands of souls to
damnation: Now this is their course, when conscience is awakened they fly to
savation by CHRIST, if they understand any thing at all, or else they die
desperate, if they look to be saved by that religion as they live by it: if we
look to die by faith, we must live by it. These all died in faith, not having
received the promises.

For God promised them Canaan, and they died many hundred years before, their
posterity came into Canaan; he promised them Christ, and they died long before
Christ came; he promised them heaven, and they entered not into heaven till
death, so they received not the promises, that is, they received not the things
promised; for else they received the promise, but not that that was promised;
they received not the type, Canaan, not the things typified; Christ, and
heaven. This is added as a commendation of their faith, that though they
received not the things that they looked for, yet notwithstanding they had such
a strong faith that they continued to live by faith, and died in faith. The
promises here are taken for the blessed things promised.

This should teach us this lesson, that Gods promises are not empty shells,
they are real things. And then whatsoever God promises God deals with men by
promises.
it is not barely propounded to the soul but in a promise, it is wrapped up in
a promise: he gives us not empty promises nor naked things, but he gives us
promises of things which we must exercise our faith in, in depending upon him
for the performance of them till we be put in possession. For here all the
blessings they looked for, is wrapped up in the name promises; they received
not the promises; the meaning is, they received not Canaan; they received not
Christ in the flesh, not life everlasting. Now the believing soul, it looks
upon all the good things that it looks for from God, not nakedly, but as they
are involved, and wrapped, and lapped up in promises, it must have a word for
it, it looks to GODS word. For the soul looks not now immediately as it shall
do in heaven, it looks not to God, and to Christ directly: but it looks to
Christ and heaven, and happiness, as it is in a promise. It dares not expect
any thing of God but by a promise. Alas the guilty soul, how dares it look
God in the face but by a promise? except he have engaged himself by promise,
and he has engaged himself by promise that he will do it, he has pawned his
faithfulness that he will do it: and then the soul looks to the promise,
and in that it looks to Christ, and grace, and heaven, and happiness, and all
good things.

A presumptuous idle person that knows not Faith looks on God by the promise.
what God is, that he is a consuming fire, he rusheth into Gods presence. Faith
dares not go to God but first it pleads his word to him, it pleads his promise
to him; it looks on God by a promise. The very phrase inforceth this upon us
that we should make great account of the promises, because we have all good
wrapped in them. The promises are the swaddling clouts; Christ, and Heaven, is
wrappped in them. And when we have a promise, let us think we are rich
indeed, for God will perform his promise. From the promise then the soul goes
to the nature of GOD, then it thinks of his justice, his justice ties him to
perform it; it thinks of his mercy, and truth, faithful it he that has
promised. Then it thinks of that great name Jehovah, that gives being to the
world, gives being to (...) things, nay, and that will turn all things that
are now to nothing, as when they were nothing he gave them being at the first:
that Jehovah has made these promises of life everlasting, of necessary grace
to bring us thither, he has made a promise of perseverance, and of comfort
under the cross, and affliction, a promise of provision, and the like. That
great God Jehovah that gave being to all is faithful, he has bound himself,
he has laid his faithfulness to pawn, that he will make all good, that is
here promised. The soul after it sees the promise it rises up, and looks to
God. They received not the promises, that is, the things promised, so much I
desire to observe from the phrase. They received not the promises.

He speaks in the plural number, though he Why he says promises.
mean but one maine promise, that is, the Messiah, for all other were types of
him. Believers are called Children of the promise. Here they are called
promises, for the repeating of them. The promise of the same thing it was made
often: there was no new promise, the promise of the same thing was seven times
repeated, and renewed to Abraham presently one after another. So they are
called promises, to show that the promise can never be too much thought on,
though it be the same promise, of Promises to be often thought on
life everlasting, the same promise of grace, and of comfort, the same promise
of the resurrection, etc. All the promises of good things to come we cannot
think of too often; nor receive the Sacrament the seal of the promise too often;
God knows what we are, he will have us often receive the Sacrament, and often
hear the same things. We see the Prophet Esaias, and the rest, how often they
inculcate the same promises of comfort, to the people in captivity concerning
their deliverance out of it; they repeat it again, and again: the same
reason should enforce the soul to have recourse to the promises again, and
again.

When there is any doubt or darkness arises, to comfort the soul with the
promise again, and again. Satan puts clouds, and darkness before the soul
every day: there is a repeating of sin, of infirmities, and darkness every
day: we should every day repeat the promises still though it be the same pro
mise, and the seal of them. This I observe from the number. They received not
the promises.

There is a distinction of the words Evangelion, (...).
and Epangelia in the Greek, they have a different signification, Epangelia is
of the time of the promises that were before Christ, and they were all in
expectation of the promise, of the promised Messiah: the time of that
dispensation was Epangelia, Evangelion that was the time of the Gospel, when
the promise was brought into performance, when our salvation was wrought by
Christ in his first coming: so they lived under the promise, but they lived
not under the things promised; they had Epangelia the promise made to them, but
they had not Evangelion, that is, the dispensation of time wherein Christ
lived, which were indeed glorious times, when Christ came in the flesh, they
received not those, yet notwithstanding they died in faith. To shame us, that
have so many means, and helps, and yet notwithstanding are so earthly minded,
and so stagger and doubt in matters of salvation, and have our faith to seek:
when all these blessed worthies the Patriarchs died in the faith that they
lived in, and yet they received not the promises, no, not the type of the
promises, they received not Canaan, which was an earthly type of heavenly
Canaan, which was promised them; they came not to reap that till long after,
when they came out of Egypt, as for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, they lived in
the land of promise as strangers. They received not the promises.

They were comforted notwithstanding that their posterity should receive them.
Canaan, was a type of CHRIST, and of Heaven, I observe this by the way that,
God does not reveal all things at all times. Obser.


God does leave diverse things to be revealed God does not reveal all things
at all times.
in diverse ages of the Church. God does not reveal every thing in every time.

To comfort all ages of the Church. We see not every thing in our times, we
must be To comfort all ages of the Church.
content.

There is to come the conversion of the Jews, many good souls desire that:
there is to come the confusion of Antichrist, and many good things, that God
will bring to pass in another age, our posterity they shall see it. Let it
comfort us: by faith we see the promises, though we do not receive the things
promised, we have the promise in the Scriptures: let us comfort our selves in
that, that the benefit is reserved to our posterity. Every age has several
privileges, that that one age has not, another has: these-grand Patriarchs
saw not what their posterity saw, their posterity saw not what those that lived
in the time of Christ saw: those in Christ's time saw not the discovery of
Antichrist which we see, our posterity shall see the confusion of Antichrist,
which (it may be) we shall not see.

Again this should help us against the common To be thankful for what we
have.
infirmity that Christians are subject unto, we should be thankful for some
things, though we have not all that we would have. These received not the
promises, they had the promise, they had the word, though they had not the
things promised, and that comforted them, though they had not the thing, no,
not so much as the type of the thing, not Canaan these blessed Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, yet they were thankful, and cheerful, and died in
faith.

It is a common infirmity which our na^ Unthankfulness.
is too prone to, if the Church be notinall things as we would, we will not
hear, we care for nothing, like cursed children, if they have not all they
would have, they care for nothing. Theseall, they had the promises, they had
not the things promised; but did they take pet upon this? Oh no; they embraced
(...) promises, and looked for thethings promised in due time, though they had
them not themselves. So it is with particular Christians, other Christians they
see go comfortably i^ their Christian course, and they have nothing; no grace,
no faith, no love, no goodness: because they have not all they would have,
therefore they have nothing, what an ill affection is this? We should be
thankful for that we have, that we can deny ourselves, and we should be content
to wait for that we have not: this is the disposition of a Christian that is
in a right temper: and that is it which holds many from comforts, that they do
not thankefully acknowledge that they have. Our covetousness, and greediness,
of that that we have not, and yet would have it, makes us that we do not see
that we have already. We all look forward, we would have more, and more, and
are not thankful for the present grace. The Patriarchs were not so, they
wanted many things that they desired heartily to have; and yet they comforted
themselves, and died in faith, though they did not receive the promises. They
saw them afar off.

They saw them afar off, and were persuaded Order of Gods Spirit working.
of them, and embraced them, etc. This is the order of Gods spirit, first to
open the eye to see, and by sight to persuade, and upon persuasion to stir up
the heart and affections to embrace: for good things are brought into the soul
through the understanding, by the spiritual sight of the understanding, and
from that into the will and affections, by embracing the things we know: this
is GODS course daily, therefore he says they first saw them, and then were
persuaded of them, and then embraced them. They see them afar off.

Indeed they saw them a far off, they were not fulfilled till many years,
and generations after, yet they see them.

By what eye? The eye of faith.


By the eye of faith: faith makes things present though in themselves they be
far off. It is the nature of faith to make things that are absent to be
present to the believing soul, and it affects the soul somewhat as if it were
present. We know things work not upon the soul but as present: a danger that
is, many years to come, it affects not the soul unless Things affect as
present.
it be apprehended as present; nothing affects the soul but as present. Now
there are two ways of things being present. One is when the things themselves
be present, that is, when we shall be in heaven, and enjoy Christ, and all the
joys of heaven; then the things are present themselves. And then there is a
presence of faith, when faith apprehends the things promised to us as present;
faith makes the things present in somesort, not in all respects: for then faith
were all one with vision, and possession: but in regard of certainty they are
present, and in regard of sound comfort: therefore God gives other graces,
between faith, and possession, to strengthen and enable faith that it do not
sink in the work, between faith, and the full possession of the good things
we believe, we have patience, and hope, and many other sweet graces; but all
dispose the soul comfortably to wait for the accomplishment of the things
believed. Now though the presence of faith affect not so much as the presence
of sight: yet it does affect. What is the reason that a holy man is so much
affected with heavenly things, he feels no more joy many times than a wicked
man? It is the nature of faith that so represents them to him, and sets before
his eyes the excellency of the things that he sees them as present.

Faith, has her eye, faith has her senses, What kind of eye faith has.
faith has feet of her own, whereby she goes to Christ: faith has arms of
her own to graspe, and to claspe Christ. Faith has ears of her own, to
hear the word of God, and believe it; faith has eyes of her own; and what
kind of eyes? to seethings afar off, to see things invisible; to see things
within the veil, to see things that are upward, things that sense and reason
can never reach unto. Reason sees more then sense, but faith sees more than
reason. Faith sees the resurrection of the body, faith sees the glory in
heaven, that all the eyes in the world cannot see. Faith corrects the error
of reason, reason corrects the error of sense. They saw him afar Faith sees
afar off.
off, with the blessed eye of faith. Faith has an eye that sees a far off,
it sees things remote both intime, and place.

It sees things far off inplace, faith sees 1 In regard of place.
things in heaven, it sees Christ there, it sees our place provided for us
there, it sees God reconciled there, by it we see our selves there, because we
shall be there ere long: faith sees all this, it breaks through, and looks
through all, it has most piercing beams, the eye (...) faith. And it works
in an instant, it goes (...) heaven in a moment, and sees Christ.

And for distance of time, the eye of faith, 2. Time. 1. Past.
it sees things past, and things to come. It see^ things past, it sees the
creation of the ^ld, it sees the redemption of us by Jesus Christ, (...) sees
our sins there punished in Christ our su^ety, it sees us crucified with
Christ Jesus, (...) sees all discharged by him. Faith see^ (...) the Sacrament:
when we take the bread, (...) has recourse presently to the breaking of (...)
body of Christ, and the shedding of the blo^ of Christ. Then Christ is
crucified (...) us, (...) dies to us, when we believe Christ was (...)fied for
us, and died for us, faith makes it present.

And so for the time to come, faith has (...) 2. To come.
eye that looks a far off, it sees the resu^ction of the body, and life
everlasting: (...) sees the general judgment, it sees eternal happiness in
heaven; it sees things afar^ o^. It is the Evidence of things not seen.

What is the reason of it?

It makes things not otherwise seen, be seen, and presently seen; it gives a
being to things. It is a strange power that faith has: faith is the eye of the
sanctified soul, it is the light of the soul.

In the dark, though things have a colo^ and a luster in them, yet till light
come to make them clear, they are all as if they (...) not, they are not
seen: but when the light discovers them, then those things that were
impossible to be seen, and had in them color, and luster, they come to be
actually seen. So it is wi^h faith, there is the happiness of a Christian,
there is glory, and grace; reason it sees not this; here is a night of all
these things, if there be not light in the eye of faith: now when there comes
the promise of God as a light discovering them, and the eye of faith to see all
this, then here is an evidence of the things, a clear sight of them which
without faith are as excellent things in the night that no eye can see. Faith
is a further light, a light beyond all, a supernatural heavenly light, and
sight, it sees beyond all other eyes, beyond the eye of the body, or beyond the
other eye of the soul, which is reason.

Now this work of faith is called sight, among Sight of faith quick.
other respects for this, that sight is the most capacious, and comprehending
sense; it apprehends its object quickly, and sight it works upon the
affections, so faith has a quick eye sight, it pierces through the dark
things of the world, it pierces through contraries. Gods children, though they
see their estate often times contrary to the promise, as if God did not regard
them: yet they break through that. You know Gods manner of working is in
contrary estates, when we die, faith sees life; when we most apprehend our
sins, faith sees the forgiveness of sins: when we are in the greatest
mystery, faith has so quick a sight that it sees happiness, and gl^y through
all. It sees a far off notwithstanding the interposing of any thing contrary,
by flesh and blood.

Faith is sometimes called taste, and by the Things requisite to sight.
name of other senses, but especially by the name of sight. As in sight there
is both the light outward, and a light in the eye, and the application of the
light in the eye to the object: so in faith there is a light in the things
revealed, a promise, and discovery of it by the light of the Gospel, and an
inward light in the soul, answerable to the inward light in the eye: for a
dead eye sees nothing, and a quick living eye sees nothing without the light of
the air. So there is a double revelation, by the word, and by the spirit: the
spirit works an eye of faith in the soul, and then it discovers to it the
things of God. They saw them a far off.

God created a new eye in the soul, a new sight which they had not by nature:
for even as the natural eye cannot see things that are invisible; so the
natural man cannot see the things of God, which are seen not by a natural,
but by a supernatural eye, eye has (...) seen, nor ear heard, nor has
entered into the heart of man to conceive, what God has prepared (...) his
children, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. The eye theretherefore 1 Cor. 2. 10. 11.
that must see things a far off, it must be a supernatural eye; and the
light that must discover them must be the light of Gods truth: for reason
cannot see the resurrection of the body, and the life to come, and such
glorious things as the word of God reveals to us.

If you ask why this sight of faith is so necessary, Quest.
this supernatural sight.

I answer, nothing can be done in religion Answ. Sight of faith necessary.
without the supernatural eye of the soul, nothing at all: for a man may see
heavenly things with a natural eye, and be never a whit the better: a man may
see the joys of heaven, he may hear much of heaven, and happiness, and
forgiveness, and think oh, these are good things: but yet notwithstanding he
does not see these things with a supernatural eye, he does not see these
things to be holy, and gracious, and to be fit for him: he wishes them with
conditions, but not with the altering of his disposition. As a man may see an
earthly thing with a heavenly eye: because he sees God in it, and there is
somewhat of God in it to lead him to see him: so a man may see heavenly things
with a carnal eye, as Balaam wished to die the death of the righteous. A
carnal man may be ravished with heavenly things; but he must look upon them as
things suitable, or else all is to no purpose.

How does faith see this? how comes faith Quest.
to have this strength?

Because faith sees things in the power of God, it sees things in the truth of
God; he (...) Answ. Faith looks to Gods power and truth.
Jehovah, he gives being to things: therefore as God Almighty gives being to
things in their time, when they are not: so faith in his promises sees that
these things will be, it sees things in the truth of God, in the promise of
God; there it has these eyes to see a far off It self is wrought by the
mighty power of God in the soul, for it is a mighty power for the soul to
neglect the things it sees, to neglect riches, and honors, and pleasures, and
to stand admiring of things that it sees not: for a man to rule his course of
life upon reasons which the world sees not, because there is a happiness to
come, and a God that he believes in, etc. It is a mighty power that plants
such a grace in the heart, faith is wrought by the mighty power of GOD. As it
self is wrought by the power of God, so it lays hold upon the power of God,
that the promises shall be performed. In all the promises it sees, and lays
hold on the mighty power and truth of God, and therefore it has such an eye.

Our duty then is to labor to have our faith Use. To labor for strong sight
of faith.
clear, to have this eye of faith, to have a strong faith, a strong sight.

When is the sight of faith strong? Quest.


When it is as the faith of these Patriarchs Answ. Three things in a strong
sight.
was.

There are three things that make a strong sight, that makes us conceive that
he sight of faith is a strong sight.

When the things are far of that we see, then if the eye see them it is a
strong sight: a weak eye cannot see a far off.

Secondly, when there are clouds between though the things be near; yet when
there are clouds between, to break, and pierce through them, there must be a
strong sight.

Then thirdly, when there is but a little light; when there are many obstacles
in the midst, and to break through all by a little light to seethings
remote, here is a strong eye, and this was the sight of these blessed men, they
had a strong eye.

For the things they looked on were remote, a far off, diverse thousands of
years 1 When the thing seen is far off.
they saw Christ by faith: the soul mounted up on the wing of faith, it flew
over many thousands of years in a moment, and see Christ the Messiah, and see
heaven it self typi fied in Canaan. So swift is the eye of faith, it mounts
over all in a moment. As the eye of the body in a moment can look to the
v^sible heavens, so a strong faith, it sees Christ in heaven.

And then between them, and that they 2 When there are clouds between.
looked to what difficulties were there? Blessed Abraham who was a type of
Christ, how many difficulties had he? besides other of the Patriarchs. We see
God commanded him to slay his son, a command (one would think) against
reason, against affection, against hope, it was faith against faith as it were,
It was against reason in the eye of flesh. Now in this case to strive against
all these difficulties, what a many clouds must Abraham break through here,
against sense, and against affection, he must hope against hope, he must have
faith against faith, he must deny affection, he must go and take his only
begotten son Isaac, and he must be the executioner and butcher himself and
slay him for a sacrifice; Here must be a strong faith in the power of God, that
must see God raising Isaac from the dead, as he did after a sort: for when he
was bound for a sacrifice ready to be slain, he caused a Ram to be taken in
the thicket, and to be offered, and Isaac escaped. It was a strong faith to
break through all these. Indeed blessed Abraham saw more excellency, and power
in the work of God then in his beloved Isaac. So faith that is strong it sees
more comfort, and joy, and matter of benefit and blessing to the soul in the
promises, and in the word of God then in Isaac, that is, then in the dearest
thing in our own account that we have, that the faithful soul had rather
part with all then with God: it will not part with his promises for all that is
in the earth, not for the dearest thing in this world, Isaac shall go rather.

Then for their light to go by it was but 3 When there is little light.
little, what a little light had they? Answ. Promises, they saw things in
types, and glasses, a few promises, and what was that they sought? A heritage
far off. We on the contrary have all set nearer hand that may help us, but
we have a weaker faith. One would think it should greatly help us to lead our
lives till we come to heaven: for that that we believe is nearer, heaven is
nearer, how little a time is between us, and the day of judgment? how little a
time between us, and the glory that is to be revealed? For the clouds that we
have between they are none in comparing our light with theirs. How many
promises have we discovered before hand? we have Christ come in the flesh and
risen again: we have the Gentiles called, and all these things we have light
upon light: we have larger promises, and a larger unfolding of divine truths;
the Canon is enlarged, the Bible is enlarged, more than it was then; there are
many books added, and the New Testament. Now how does it come to pass that we
see not so well as they, nor so strongly as they? I answer, the reason is this,
their light was less, but their sight was stronger, we have more light, and
less sight; we have things nearer, but our sight is weaker. (the more shame
for us) A strong eye may see a far off by a little light. When a weak eye
cannot see so far by a greater light. The eye of their soul, the eye of
faith was stronger, and more light some: the spirit of God was stronger in
Abraham, but his light of revelation was lesser; he had fewer promises: for he
desired to see Christ's day, and saw it not.

So it is with Christians sometimes, when there is a great strength of faith,
yet it may be there is not so much light: a weak Christian may have more
light, but he has a weaker eye, and he in that respect sees better then a
stronger. To a stronger God does not discover to him so much outwardly
sometimes suitable to his inward, Gods dispensations are diverse in this kind.

Now to help our sight to heaven, this To help the sight of faith.
sight of faith, that we may every day ascend with the eye of our souls, with
this blessed sight.

Let us take heed of the God of this world Satan, that he do not with the
dust of the 1 Take heed that Satan blind not.
world dim our sight: what is the reason that many cannot see the glorious
things of GOD? The God of this world, says the Apostle, has blinded their
eyes; he casts dust in their eyes, they are covetous, they are blind in their
affections they have dark souls. The soul when it is lead by affections, and
lusts; when the affections will not suffer it to see, it covers the eyes of it.
And then the outward things of the world, they are cast into the eyes, we must
take heed of these inward, and outward lets, take heed of Satan, that he do
not with outward objects bewitch us. For as it is in prospective glasses: you
know such glasses, Simile.
some are of that nature, they represent to a man things that are a far off,
as if they were near, so faith it is a kind of prospective glass, it presents
to the soul by reason of this super natural light, things that are far off
as if they were near. Now as God has his prospective glasses, to see a far
off; so the Devil has prospective glasses, that when things are near he
makes them seen a far off (as such glasses there are too) when death, and
danger, and damnation are nea^e; When a man carries the sentence of damnation
in his bosom, when he carries a stained, defiled conscience; the devil with
his prospective glass makes him see death, and destruction as a far off. I
may live so many years, and enjoy my pleasure, and my will. Now this is but a
false glass, the devil abuses them: for your life is but a death, and when
we begin to live we begin to die: why should we account therefore of the time
to come? death and life go in equal pace one with another, everyday we live
so much is taken from our life; and then the cutting off of all is uncertain:
let us take heed that Satan blind us not.

And withal desire God to open our eyes 2 Desire God to open our eyes.
every day, to take the scales from the eye of our souls, that we may see the
promises, that we may see Christ, that we may see God shining on us in Christ:
that he would take away the veil from the things by exposition, that he would
open the truth to us by his Ministers: and that he would take away the veil
from our hearts, that our hearts may join with the things. That when by
ministerial means the things are clear, that there may not be a veil of
infidelity on our hearts, but that our hearts may sweetly join with them. Let
us beg daily that GOD would take away the things that hinder, inward and
outward, that we may see the things a far off: that we may not be as Peter
says, mop eyed, that we cannot see a far off, but that we may set heaven
before our eyes, and the judgment and the happiness to come, that we may see,
and view and eye those things by faith, and that we may square our lives
answerable.

Then again to help our sight of Christ, and happiness, let us get a fresh
sight of our 3 Get a sight of corruption.
corruption, and sin every day: let us every day look on that terrifying
object of our corruption of nature hang it in the eye of our souls as an
odious object to humble us. Let us see every day what a corrupt heart we carry
about us, see how odious these things are to God, how it offends him, see how
it exposes us to the wrath of God, if he should take us in the midst of our
sins, and corruptions: let us have these things fresh in our eyes every day,
and that will clear our sight. Men are loath to look in the book of their
consciences, because they are loath to be disturbed from their pleasures.

Let us see what need we stand in of Christ: the view of our corruptions will
make us glad to see a better object, it will make us turn our eyes to CHRIST,
to the promises, and all things that we have by Christ, we shall be glad to look
to him: What is the reason we have no more delight to see the glorious things
afar off? We see not the dimension of our corruptions: for then we would be
glad to see all the dimensions of Gods love in Christ, the height, and breadth,
and depth and all. So much for that. They saw them a far off.
They were persuaded of them.


It was such a sight of the things as was Persuasion follows sight.
with convincing; with persuasion. And indeed this follows well upon sight:
for sight of all other senses persuades best: hearing is not so persuasive as
sight: supernatural sight: brings forth supernatural persuasion. Sight is a
convincing sense even outward sight: so inward sight it is a convincing thing
it persuades, and sets down the soul that a thing is so, when a man sees it.
All the men in Sight convinces.
the world cannot persuade the weakest man in the world, when it is day, or
night; when the sun shines, or it is dark, that it is not so: when he sees
it, he will believe his own eyes more than all the world besides. And as it is
in sensible things, we believe our own eyes: so much more in spiritual things
we believe our eyes. When there is a spiritual light of revelation in the word
discovering such things, and also to spiritual light a spiritual eye: when
the spirit puts an eye into the soul to see supernatural things that reason
cannot attain to; then there is persuasion: though all the world should
persuade the soul that such a thing were not so, it would say it is so, it
will believe its own eyes. If all the world should persuade a Christian that
there is no such excellency in religion, that his ways are not good, that he
is but foolish, etc. he knows the contrary, and will not be scorned out of his
religion, and driven out of it by any contrary persuasion of men whom he
pitties (though perhaps they are otherwise beyond him) in the state of nature:
for sight it is a convincing thing.

Especially when there is some taste with Especially with taste.
sight: for taste together with sight convince (...) of the goodness of things;
as we see in those that lead their life by tasting and feeling. The creatures
maintain their life by tasting some proportionable food fit for them. So a
Christian, when once he has tasted of spiritual things, the proper food of
his soul, when he has seen, and tasted of them, he will never be driven out
of his religion, and his (...) by any means, when he has seen, and (...)ed,
he is thoroughly persuaded. A man must not dispute against taste, when he has
tasted a thing to be so, talk to him otherwise, he says, I have tasted, and
feel, and see it to be so; and therefore we see that after sight comes
persuasion.

Now this persuasion is a supernatural persuasion, Persuasion supernatural.
and it is General, Particular.


A general persuasion of the things, of the general truths, and a particular
personal persuasion of our interest in them. When we are persuaded that the
truths are so, generally, that are revealed in the word of God; and when we are
persuaded by the help of the spirit that we have a particular interest in
them, a portion in them. And both are here meant. They see them a far off,
and were persuaded of them, they were convinced both of the truth, and
goodness of them: and of the truth and goodness to them in particular.

Now persuasion is a settled kind of knowledge. Persuasion what.
Persuasion comes diverse ways, there be diverse degrees tending to
persuasion. Degrees to persuasion.


First, the poorest degree of the apprehension of things, is conjecture; a
guessing that 1 Conjecture.
such a thing may be so or otherwise, but I guess it rather to be so.

Beyond conjecture there is opinion, when a man thinks it is so, upon more
reasons 2 Opinion.
swaying him one way: and yet in opinion there is fear on the contrary that it
may be otherwise.

And the third degree beyond opinion is certain knowledge, when a man is not
only conceited, 3 Knowledge from argument
that the thing is so, his opinion is so upon some reasons inducing him; but
he knows it by arguments, and reasons: that is science and knowledge, when
the mind is persuaded by arguments; but that is not so much here meant, the
persuasion by argument.

There is another degree then, of knowledge 4 Persuasion from authority of the
speaker.
which is by the authority of the speaker, a persuasion from thence: when I
know not the thing by the light of the thing so much, because I see the reason
of the thing; but because I know such a one says it; that is the persuasion of
faith. When one is persuaded of a thing not so much out of his own knowledge,
out of the principles of the thing; setting out the causes of the thing, as out
of the credit of the person that speaks. Now this persuasion rises out of
faith in the authority of the person, when I believe a thing for the authority
of the speaker: it arises from the knowledge of him that speaks; that he is
able, and that he is true and that he is honest, and good: that he will not
deceive because he is good, and he will not be deceived because he is wise; we
conceive that he is wise, and holy, and able with all, one that we trust. If
together with this knowledge and persuasion, from the authority, and truth, and
goodness and wisdom of the speaker, there be joy^ed sense and experience, we
see it proved; and when there is experience, there is reason why And some
experience.
we should believe that he says because we have found the thing to be so. So
when there is both the authority of the speaker, and some inward sense, some
sight, and taste, and feeling, and experience of the thing spoken; here comes
that settled persuasion: for he is undoubtedly true that has spoken it, and I
have found in some degree the thing true that he has spoken. Now both are
here meant in some degrees, they saw the things a far off, both by the
authority of the promise; as likewise by their own sight, and some taste they
had.

For God reserves not all for heaven, God gives his children some taste, and
feeling, some little joy, and comfort; the first fruits of the spirit here. So
they were persuaded, from the authority of the speaker, and some sense, and
feeling of the thing in somemeasure.

Now this persuasion has its degrees. Degrees in this persuasion.


There is a full persuasion.

And there is a persuasion that is not so full that is growing to further
persuasion still.

And this persuasion has degrees, both in the general persuasion, of the
truths themselves, and in their particular interest: for all Christians are not
alike persuaded of divine truths themselves, nor all Christians are not a like
persuaded of their particular interest in those truths. There be degrees in
both respects. For the things themselves, we may 1. In general.
grow stronger, and stronger persuaded: even as the light, and our eye grows
clearer, the stronger is our sight: so our persuasion while we are here may
grow stronger, and stronger. It was strong in Abraham; yet not so uniformely
strong, but that it was weaker sometimes then others, as we see in the story.
And 2. Particular.
so for particular persuasion, the spirit of God may give assurance that may
be shaken, I but he recovers himself presently: the tenor of a Christians
life is usually a state of fight, and persuasion, when he is himself, and when
he remembers his own principles.

To come particularly, you see here that, Spiritual persuasion is necessary.
Spiritual persuasion necessary.


Both of the things in general, and of our interest in them.

It may be asked whether there may be Quest.
a persuasion of the truth in general, without a persuasion of our own
particular interest in them?

I answer no; not a sound, undoubted spiritual Answ. Sound persuasion is with
particular interest. Conviction double.
persuasion. There is a double conviction, a conviction when a man cannot tell
what to say against it: but spiritual conviction is when a man is convinced of
the truth, and goodness of ^he thing, and this always draws the other with
it, first or last. A man may be convinced that he cannot tell what to say
against the truth, but that is not properly persuasion. A man is persuaded by
divine truth that all the promises a^e true in the Gospel, and it draws with
it a particular light: he sees, and is persuaded of his own interest in it,
first or last: for a strong persuasion of divine truth, of Gods word; when I
know it is Gods word, it works in my flesh, it changes me, it lifts me up, it
casts me down, etc. So that a Christian knows that the word of GOD is the word
of GOD by a spiritual persuasion wrought by the efficacy of the word; from an
intrinse call principle in the word it self.

But sometimes it falls out that a Christian may be convinced of the truth of
the word in general that it is Gods word, and that the promises of salvation
are true, and yet notwithstanding he may not feel the particular persuasion of
the forgiveness of his sins, and of his acceptance to life everlasting, and
his interest in Christ; these two are sometimes separable in regard of feeling.
A Christian has always a persuasion of the truth of GOD, of the things, but he
has not always a like persuasion of his own interest in them.

How do you prove that these are severed Quest.
sometimes.

Thus; There is the birth, and infancy of a Answ. Particular persuasion
sometimes weak.
Christian; when a Christian is in his birth, he is not persuaded of his own
good estate, as he is after when he is grown, then he knows his estate. A
soul that is in the state of grace that hungers and thirsts after good things,
at that time it may be it is not acquainted that it shall be satisfied, it is
not acquainted, of its own interest, but stretches it self forward for
entire satisfaction, and it shall be satisfied: that is, the soul that
hungers, and thirsts after the persuasion of GODS love in Christ, and the
forgiveness of sins, and life everlasting, there is never soul that thus
^gers, and thirsts but God satisfies it at length, for the most part in this
world, or else certainly in the world to come forever. But always where there is
this persuasion supernatural, that the word of GOD is true indeed, that there
is salvation to all true believers, when it is wrought by the spirit; there is
either a persuasion of our interest, or somewhat tending to persuasion, some
hungering and thirsting, some desire that God accepts for the deed, to show
that such a man is in the state of grace.

I speak this the rather, because some are deceived in their own estates,
they do not conceive aright of themselves, they think they are not in the
state of grace when they find not that particular, strong assured persuasion.

I answer they may be in the state of grace God suspends the knowledge of being
in a good estate.
notwithstanding. A Christian knows not his own estate always, at all times.
It is one grace to be in a good estate, and another to have the knowledge of
it, they be different gifts of God, and God suspends the knowledge of a man's
being in a good estate, for several ends.

Sometimes, among the rest for this one, to humble us, to keep us from
security, to make 1 To humble us.
us careful, and diligent; to make us know that he has the keeping of our
feeling and persuasion in his own hands. As he has the keeping of all our
grace, so he has the keeping of the knowledge that we have grace, and of our
comfortable walking, that we may know we have every thing from him, both
grace, and the feeling of grace: and if we take liberty to our selves, he
will take liberty, to keep our feeling at that time: to make us humble, and
to make us seek reconciliation again, It is one part of Gods dispensation
with his children, to hinder their persuasion of their particular interest
sometimes.

Sometimes the children of God may be in such a condition; as that they may
think for a time in their judgment, that they be in a contrary esta^e; they
are misperswaded of themselves, not to be Gods children (as it were) God may
suffer this, that they shall not only have a weak staggering persuasion, but a
persuasion to the contrary though it be a false persuasion.

But how shall they know that they are Gods Quest.
children at that time? They say they are so shaken, and at a stand, they are
so conceited that they are none of Gods: that God has left them, and forsaken
them.

You may know it by this, that at the same Answ. How to know Gods children in
loss of assurance.
time they are conscionable of al heavenly duties, at the same time, they
neglect no means of salvation: at the same time they complain against their
own corrupt course of life that has given God occasion to leave them thus to
themselves, at the same time they strive against this, and labor to be
persuaded of GODS truths in general. And though the devil sometimes shake
that persuasion, that Gods truth is not Gods truth, and make them question
whether it be the word of God or no, and whether there be such a thing as life
everlasting: (the devil shakes us in principles sometimes) but yet a Christian
in such temptations, though he be shaken in his principles by the force of
wickedness, yet he attends upon the means, and goes on more conscionably, he
does not give back, but labors for satisfaction, and further settling still,
and is ashamed of himself that he should have such beastly thoughts as the
Psalmist says, so foolish was I Psalm 73.
and ignorant, and as a beast before thee, when he began to stagger in the
principle of the providence of God. So sometimes a Christian is brought, to
stagger in principles, in the maine general persuasion of the word of God, but
he likes not himself, he accounts himself as a beast, and labors for
satisfaction still in sanctified means and never gives over; Though he have
not particular persuasion, he gives not over holy duties, but goes on in
spiritual duties, he labors to obey God in all things, he is conscionable to
God, in fear and trembling in the least thing. A man may say to such a soul,
it shall find peace at the length: for Gods ways are unsearchable: GOD has
cause, and reason why he keeps such a soul under for a time, and withholds
some sense and persuasion: but usually GODS comforts come more abundantly to
such a soul, he reserves it for the time of affliction, or the hour of death.

The truth is, it is a constant rule, that though Usually Gods children have
particular persuasion.
it may be thus with some in some cases: yet ordinarily Gods children may be
persuaded of their particular condition; yea, and they ought to labor after
this persuasion, and assurance, that their souls may be filled with marrow,
and fatness, and that they may joy in God, and have boldness to come before
God in prayer, that they may be fruitful in all holy duties: that they may be
strong to suffer afflictions, and to resist temptations. Therefore though God
sometimes in his wise dispensation, suffer them to be hindered: yet not
withstanding this is a thing that is both attainable, and that they ought to
labor for, and never give their hearts rest till they attain to it.

I say we ought to labor for it: for the soul is never in such a frame as it
ought to be but when it has gotten some assurance of Gods love. But I must
add this; we must labor that this persuasion be supernatural by the spirit
of God, both of the truths in general, of the promises in general, and of our
interest in particular in them, we must labor that it be by the spirit to our
spirits, that the spirit may seal them to our spirits. For it is not
sufficient to know the word of God to be the word of God, and the promises, to
be the promises, because we have been brought up in them, and can say them by
heart, and it were a shame for us to conceive the contrary, that is not
sufficient: for that will deceive us. We must labor (as I said of knowledge,
that we may be supernaturally convinced, so also that is from that knowledge,)
that it may be spiritual, or else it will deceive us.

How do we prove that? Quest.


To make it a little clearer, because it is a Answ. If persuasion be not
supernatural.
point of some consequence, even as I showed of what consequence the sight of
faith is: so I may say of this persuasion. We must labor therefore to know how
we come by this persuasion, and whether it be such as we can hold out in,
whether it be such by which we can stand out in the time of temptation. If
there be nothing but that argument of breeding, and of general light, of
discourse, that we see one thing how it follows from another: I say it will
deceive us: because constant obedience will never follow upon such a
persuasion; nor constant holding out to death, nor constancy in death (if the
conscience be once awaked) neither will we be fruitful in our lives, and
conversations. To make this clear.

If the soul be not persuaded by the spirit 1 There will not be obedience.
of God, together with the spirit of the Scripture, for the same spirit that is
in the Scripture, must be in our spirit, working our natures suitable to the
Scriptures to be holy: if we do not by that spirit by which the Scripture was
endited, know those truths, we shall never be obedient to them, not constantly.
For what is the reason, that men when they are told, God does forbid you to
take his name in vain; God forbids you to seek after earthly things, God
forbids you by the Scriptures to defile your vessels, he forbids you to seek
these things below, he forbids you these courses. Now a man that has knowledge
that is not supernatural, that has it not by the spirit, he hears these
things with a kind of scorn, and despises them as nicities, he never maks
scruple of these things, because he knows they are forbidden, or commanded of
God, because he hears so; but he has not known by the spirit of God that
penned the Scriptures, that these indeed are Gods divine truths, the spirit
has not sealed these truths to his soul, this is Gods word; he has not felt
it in converting his soul in mortifying his corruptions, in raising him being
cast down; in working wonders in his conscience, in bringing all into a
spiritual subjection. When he has not felt the word work thus, for all his
general knowledge by education, and breeding, and reading, he may be a
disobedient wretch, and live, and die a rebel, and bitter opposite against the
power of grace: because he has not knowledge of the word of God and of
particular truths by the spirit of God, it is no persuasion of the spirit.

And this is that that men wonder at, that know not the mystery of these
things: to see great Scholars, men of great knowledge, perhaps Divines, that
are Preachers to others, to see such an one vicious, to see him carnally
disposed as others, when a man sees this he thinks, what do you talk of
the word of God, if there were such a thing, men that know these things must
needs lead their lives after the rule. It is no wonder, the devil has
knowledge enough, but he is no divine at all, because he has it from his
nature being a spirit: so a man may be a devil incarnate, he may have
knowledge of these things, and yet no true divine. But he that is taught by
the spirit of God, the things in the word of God, the spirit works a taste in
them. Historical truths are known by their own light, there is no such need
of the spirit to discover them, but the promises, and threatenings, and such
things, are known by the spirit, a man feels the power of the word of God,
then a man is convinced; otherwise if the spirit do not reveal these things,
a man will never obey, but be rebellious.

And as there willbe no obedience, so there will be no holding out in time of
peril and 2 No holding out
temptation. The persuasion that a carnal man has that is not a sanctified
persuasion, it will not hold out in the hour of death, in the time of
temptation, in strong temptation, either on the right hand by preferments, and
favors, or on the left hand by threatenings, and persecutions; it is but a
seeming persuasion, when any thing comes that is stronger than it, it will not
hold; when there is afflictions, and persecutions in the Church, we see many
excellent learned men hold not out in their profession, Why? they were drawn
to the profession of Religion by dependence on such kind of men, or they only
followed religion as they saw reason for it, or they have been so bred in it,
etc. Now reason may be brought against reason; when men have no other motives
then these, when persecution comes that they must loose their preferments or
their friends or their life, they fall away altogether: because that persuasion
that they seemed to have before, it was no spiritual persuasion wrought from
intrinsecall grounds of divine truth, that has a majesty, and a spiritualnesse
in it self, but it was merely wrought out of foreign grounds. Now we see a
meaner man that has his knowledge wrought by the spirit of God; the same
spirit seals that knowledge to him with the word of God, that indicted the
Scripture, and acted the holy men of God, that wrote the Scriptures. As his
portion is incomparably great, so he is persuaded of his interest in those good
things, the same spirit that convinces him of the truth, and of the certainty
of the things, it convinces him likewise of his part in them, and this
supernatural persuasion together with his interest in those good things
persuaded of, sets down the soul, so as it will not move: he holds out in
persecution, because he has felt the work of divine truth in his soul; he
has found the spirit of God casting him down, and raising him up to comfort,
therefore he holds out in his persuasion in all trials, and never apostatizeth
from that estate, and condition.

And so for unfruitfulnesse in conversation, 3 No fruitfulnes.
notwithstanding all those motives we have in the word of God, a man that is
not convinced spiritually of those excellent things, he goes on deadly as if
there were no motives, because the spirit of God has not sealed them to his
spirit: he has not given him an apprehension of the divine encouragements
wrapped up in the promises in the Scripture, and when death and danger come,
for the most part such men are desperate notwithstanding all their learning,
and knowledge literal that they have. For it will not hold water, all
knowledge that is not wrought by the spirit of God sealing divine truth to the
soul, with some evidence of the power of it, it will not hold out in the
trial. all.

Especially when Satan with his fiery darts comes with strong temptations: for
the soul never felt the working power of the word. It feels then the
temptation, it apprehends the poysonfull fiery temptation but it has not so
inwardly digested the truths of the spirit, and therefore is surprised with the
horror and spaire: there is not wrought in heart an deexperimentall feeling of
knowledge, and therefore the heart cannot beat back the temptation.

When the Devil shall come and tell men you have been thus, and thus, and
they have not felt the truth of that they seemed to believe; conscience tells
them, it is true I have heard, and read such, and such things, I never believed
them, they never sunk deeply into my heart: when temptation shall be nearer
the soul then, the truth shall be, when temptation presses sore, they are
swallowed up of despair: therefore let us labor that our general knowledge
from the word and our particular knowledge and persuasion that it may be
spiritual.

Now how does the spirit work this particular Quest.
persuasion?

I answer, the spirit of God works it in Answ. Persuasion wrought by the
spirit.
the soul together with the word: the spirit and the word go together, All
the men in the world cannot persuade the soul, without the spirit of God
join, Paul preached, but God opened Lidia's heart. We have it not of our
selves, it must come from without, from Gods spirit opening our eyes, and
persuading, and convincing our hearts, God persuade Iaphet to dwell in the
tents of Sem, no creature can do it, it is passive, it is said here they were
persuaded. That persuasion that is sound, that carries a man to heaven, by
which he dies in faith, (...) must be from the spirit of God. All the words of
the ministry, and all reasons, nothing will do it but God, God must persuade
thesoule.

Now what does the spirit here?

The spirit enlightens the understanding which Quest.
I spoke of before, it opens the understanding in Answ. How the spirit
persuades.
persuasion, it does propound arguments, and motives from the excellency of the
things promised, and the privileges of religion, and the good things we have
by Christ, etc. and together with propounding these excellent encouragements
and motives, the spirit strongly works upon the disposition, upon the will, and
affections, it works upon the soul, and so does persuade and convince.

And thereupon comes embracing (which I shall have occasion to speak of
afterward) The soul being persuaded imbraceth.

Now this persuasion is not only by propounding of arguments by the word, and
spirit, but likewise a working upon the will, from whence there follows an
inclination of the will, and an embracing of the things we are persuaded of.

For let all the arguments in the world be brought to a man to persuade him,
that God will be merciful to him in Christ: tell him of the free offer,
Whosoever will, let him come in, all that will; a large offer, let him join to
that offer of mercy the inviting, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will ease you: a sweet inviting: Join with the invitation a
command; it is his command that we should believe in his son Jesus: let him
strengthen that command with the threatening, he that believes not is damned
already. Let a man remove all objections that the soul can make, of its
unworthines, Come unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, and I will
ease you, though you groan under the burden of your sin. Let a man object
again, I have nothing worthy in my self. Why, come, and buy though you have
no money. Let him strengthen all these proposalls with examples of the mercy of
God to Manasses, to Peter, to Paul a persecutor, to Mary Magdalen and the like,
let all these arguments be wondrous effectually propounded, the soul will not
yield unless Gods spirit join with these arguments, (and all in that kind)
and convince the soul of our particular interest in these things, and persuade
the will to embrace these things offered.

That, God has reserved in his own power, to bring our hearts, and the
promises together: to bring our hearts, and divine truths together. Let there
be never so much set before us in the ministry, he has reserved this
prerogative, and authority that our hearts, and the truth should close together
to embrace them in hearing. All things depend upon the spirit; when we do not
regard the spirit, in hearing and reading, etc. Let all the things the
Scripture has be propounded, and set on with all the excellency, and eloquence
that may be, GOD has reserved it to himself, by his spirit, to give faith to
persuade our souls that these belong to us, and to incline, and draw the will.

I have showed you then, the kinds of persuasion, general, and particular; and
how it is wrought by the spirit, that unless this persuasion be wrought by the
spirit, we shall never hold out in it, though we have all the arguments in the
world, we shall be disobedient. Disobedience comes when things are not
discovered by the spirit; and apostacy when the persuasion is not wrought by
the spirit: and desperation, when the knowledge is not spiritual.

Now the manner is by removeing contratraries, The manner of working this
persuasion.
and moving the heart, and drawing it. With the word of man, God enters into
the very will, and affections: for as he made the soul, and framed it, so he
knows how to work upon it, and to draw it sweetly by reasons, but yet
strongly that it may be carried to the things revealed. GOD at the same time
works strongly by carrying the soul; and sweetly with reasons. For God first
comes into the soul by divine light, by reas^; and then he sinkes into the
soul by his spirit, ^o draw the soul to these reasons: without this we never
yield to those reasons, but stand ^ut in rebellion.

GOD persuades the soul sweetly of the 1. Sweetly.
truth by showing a man the goodness of it, and ^he sutablenesse to our
condition, and the reasons of it, how they agree to our nature: he does not
force the soul, but does it with reasons and arguments sweetly. And ^e does it
2. strongly.
strongly, that the soul when it is persuaded would not for all the world be
of another mind; it is so strong that the persuasion, and ^he promises, are
stronger then the temptations of Saran, and the corruptions of the ^esh, or
then the candals of the world, that nothing ^an separate us from Christ;
nothing can drive ^s from our faith, and hope, the persuasion is ^et so
strongly upon the soul because it is a divine persuasion. It is a strong work
to persuade the soul. A strong work to persuade the soul.


For the spirit of God. When it brings a light into the soul it brings agreat
many graces with it, when it shines upon the soul, and discovers better
things, it brings other graces ^o persuade, and to embrace the things it
discovers.

As it is an infinite mercy, and goodness of God to discover to our souls
such excellent things, as we may be persuaded of; as if (...) estate to be such
as indeed it is above our (...) prehension in this world, neither eye has
(...) nor ^are heard nor has entered into the heart (...) man, the things that
God has prepared for (...) that love him: so likewise it is Gods infinite
work of power to frame the soul to be persuaded of this: it is as much power
to (...) the soul to this persuasion, as it is mercy (...) discover them in a
manner: there is such (...) ward rebellion, and distrust in the soul, (...)
ling these truths into question, as if the^ things were too good to be true.
Consider^ our own unworthiness, and vileness, (...) the excellency of these
things, laying the^ together, the unbelieving heart of man (...) prone to
unbelief above all other sins* (...) can hardly conceive that there are such
thin^ for Gods children, except the heart be (...) (...) tily wrought on,
unless together with (...) swasion there be some work in the soul* whence it
may gather by the work of the spirit that they are those to whom such good
things belong, because the spirit of God has sing^ed them out, and set his
seal, and stamp on them, above other men by some evidence^ of grace.

It is another manner of work then the world takes it to be: For as I said
before, together with the Scripture, there must a spirit of persuasion go,
there is a sec^et messenge^ goes with the outward peech, both of the preacher,
and of the Scripture or else all the ^guments will not be to purpose, they will
be ^f no efficacy.

As the Israelites they had arguments, and ^otives enough to persuade them of
Gods love and care to them, yet notwithstanding GOD ^ave them not a heart,
Deuteronomy. 29. In Christ's Deuteronomy. 29.
^me, what miracles did they see? yet their ^earts were hardened, because God
together ^ith his shining in the outward means did ^ot subdue the rebellion of
their wi^ and af^ections; and therefore the more they saw, ^he more they were
hardened: the Scribes and ^harisees, and some of their desperate fol^owers.

Well then considering that the spirit does Use. To labor for spiritual
persuasion.
^his great work, let us labor that our know^edge may be spiritual; that our
persuasion of divine truth in general, and our part, and ^ortion in divine
truth that it may be spiritu^ll: for as Saint Paul divinely, and excellent^y
sets it down, 2 Cor. 2. 10, 11. that as no ^an knows the things that are in
man, but the spirit 2 Cor. 2. 10, 11.
that is in man: so no man knows the things of Gods word, divine truths, nor
his part, and por^ion and interest in them, but by the spirit of God. If we
bring the Engine of our own ^it, and parts to Gods truth, ^o sermons and
^ookes, we may never be the better, if we ^ome not with a spiritual
intention, with ^everent, and humble hearts, and implore the ^eaching of the
spirit that together with the revelation of the word there may bee^ (...) ving
of the veil by the spirit, that with (...) outw^rd teaching there may be the
inwar^ teaching of the spirit; that with the (...) opening the ^are there may
be the opening (...) the hear^, that he that has the key of (...) may open,
and inoline, and persuade the (...) that he may persuade Iaphet, as the Scrip^
phrase is.

It is fac^legious presumption to come (...) holy places, and to set upon holy
duties, (...) hear or read the word of God, without (...) ting up our hearts
to God for his holy (...) We cannot plow without his Heifer. Can (...) know the
mind of God without the (...) God* What arrogance is this to thin^ (...) be
saved; and the spirit never tell us with (...) word so: but it is only a
presump^ (...) (...). This is a sacrilegious surpation (...) (...) Gods glory.
The spirit of God know^ (...) things are in God toward us, and reveals (...)
our spirits Gods inward love to us, The (...) ^eacheth us to know the things
that are (...) God. We only know the good that G^ means us by his own (...)
and therefore let us labor every day more and more (...) (...) spiritual, and
heavenly minded.

And above all things to make it (...) (...) To beg the spirit. Luke 11.
of our desires as it (...), Luke 11. to pray (...) (...) spirit, he will give
his holy spirit to them that (...) it, it is the best, and the chiele gilt of
all: (...) this makes our knowledge heavenly, our (...) swasion heavenly; and
sound, and constant in ^e, and death. And this spirit carries the whole soul
with it: this spirit makes us like the word of GOD, because it is spiritual it
makes us so, and we love it in our inward man, and consent to it, and joy in
it. Whereas naturally there is inward rebellion in the greatest Scholar in the
world against the word of God, the heartriseth against divine truths they are
as opposite as fire, and water, as heaven, and hell. The proud heart of man
slights the promises of mercy as nothing to petty things of the world, it
slights the comforts of the word, to carnal comforts, and the Commandments of
GOD in respect of the commandments of men. The proud man looks scornefully,
upon the things of conscience, and of the spirit: only the spirit of God brings
the proud heart of man to be subject to the word of God; Nothing that is not
spiritual, w^ll hold out. Whatsoever is not spiritual, Christ will not own
at the day of judgment. I^ the spirit seal (...), and set a stamp upon us,
Christ will look on his own stamp of the spirit, where the (...) fr^its are
not, the harvest will not so low. The spirit is an earnest; where the earnest
is not, the barg^ine will not follow. I beseech you let us labor for the
spirit in the use of all means: let us ^ttend upon the word, which is the
ministry of the spirit, and we shall find that the spirit will alter, and
change us, and show us our interest in the promises, and the goodness of them.
(...) more we a ^end upon the means, the more (...) shall see it, and the more
we pray the mo^ (...) shall have the spirit: and the more we ob^ God, the more
we shall have the spirit of Go^ God gives his spirit to them that obey him.

And this should reach us when we come (...) Use. To desire God to persuade us.
hear, or to read the word of God. Lo^ pen mine eyes, LORD penswade my (...)
LORD bow the neck of my soul, (...) my inward man, that Iron sinew, Lord
(...) away my hard heart and give me a (...) ^sh, teach my heart, thou must
persuade, (...) incline me, incline my heart Lord.

We wa^ religious carriage in this, (...) come presumptuously upon con^ (...)
wit, to hear Se^ons, and to (...) (...) and so we come away worse than we
(...) Why? w^ do^ not (...) too Go^ (...) swa^ us. They ^ere (...) (...) of
(...)

Man^ here, (...) he opens ^he eyes, and God persuades with enlightening.
(...) he persuades. God persuades the (...) (...) (...), (...) (...) (...)
(...) Devil (...) (...) his Vlcar, (...) (...) ^wade by darkness, by
maintaining (...) ^ome of darkness. The Devil all (...) shows no reason, he
keeps the soul (...) ^esse, and blindness. Anti christ pe^ (...) men to
their religion, how? by fleshly allure. men's, not instructing them, and
opening their eyes, inlightning their understandings, ^ut GOD opens their eyes,
to see, and ^hen teaches, and persuades. The devils instruments they persuade,
and so they teach, and draw away, they persuade with carnal objects, and the
like, to draw, and bewitch the ^ffections, and so the judgment is dark still.
But where there is true dealing, there is no ^are of the light.

Therefore those that are enemies, to the means of salva^ion, that fear, Gods
people should know too much, they take a course contrary to God: for God
enlightens, and then persuades, and knowledge enlightneth: so that knowledge is
necessary. All divine persuasion of faith has the name of knowledge. They were
persuaded by the spirit of God of the truth of GOD having their eyes opened.

It is an evidence we are not persuaded, we Evidence that we are not persuaded.
come to Church, and attend upon the means, we go on in a course of sin; we
are not divinely persuaded, God has not persuaded our hearts, he has not
enlightened us. For if the covetous man were persuaded, that neither covetous
nor extortioners should enter into the kingdom of heaven, would he not leave
that course? Light and persuasion, always rule the action: for we work, as we
see, and are persuaded in every thing.

The very beasts do as they see, and as sense leads them: an Ass bears
burdens, you know nature has s^amed, and made him for it: but can you drive
the silly creature into the fire? he knows that will consume him. So that men
they are brutish, they will not be persuaded by the spirit of God, they run
into courses, that if they had light in their souls, and if they were
persuaded whither it tends, they would never run into hell fire. If there
were a pit open before a m^ns eyes, would he plunge himself into that pit
that were before his eyes? A man that lives in sins against conscience, he
runs into a pit. There are no manner of liers, of who^ mongers, of covetous
persons, of such wretches as take the name of God in vain, that shall escape
unpunished. Men leada life in a course wherein they see a pit before them, and
yet they run on; are they persuaded. No, no, certainly they are not
persuaded.

And so for the means of salvation, men that care not for hearing the word,
are they persuaded it is the word of God to salvation? they are not persuaded.
We may know the truth of our persuasion by the power it ha^ to r^le our lives
and conversations. What is the reason that a simple man, a weak man, (...)
lives. Christianly, and dies in the faith he lived by; when as a great man, in
conceit, in know ledge he lives wickedly, and dies worse? he cause the one
has not this knowledge of the spirit, the spirit of God never opened his eyes,
the spirit of God never persuaded him, he has it in books, and by education
and the like. There are none that ever hold out but those that have the spirit
of God to be their teacher and perswader. We must see things in their own
proper light, the spirit of God has to deal with the heart, God has only
power of that: he must deal with the heart, we must not trust therefore to
education, or to outward things. If a man should ask the reason of men, why
do you leave these courses, why do you do this good? a Christian does not
say, I was brought up to this, or I cannot do otherwise: but I do it from a
principle of the New Creature. Let us desire God, that we may do things from
reasons of Scripture, from reasons of pleasing God, that we may do them from a
holy sanctified affection, that we may be persuaded by the spirit, and then it
will hold out. They were persuaded of them. And embraced them.

They embraced the promises: the good things promised, Christ's coming in the
flesh, and Canaan the type of heaven, and heaven it self; though they had not
these things, yet they embraced what they had, they embraced the promises. That
is the nature of Faith makes much of what it has.
faith, if it have not that it looks (as it has not till it come to heaven;)
yet it makes much of that it has, it imbraceth the promises, and in the
promises the thing it self promised.

Now these things follow one another in a Embracing follows persuasion.
most natural order: for sight brings persuasion; sight and conviction brings
strong persuasion, and persuasion breeds embracing: for we embrace that in our
affections that we are persuaded of to be good. According to the strength of
conviction, and persuasion, is the strength of the affections: those things
that we have a weak persuasion of, we have a weak affection to, those things
that we are fully persuaded of, and are great withal, the affections cannot
but stretch forth themselves to embrace them. When the understanding was
enlightened to see the truth, and to be persuaded of the truth of the promises;
then the will, and affections they join and embrace those things: the will
makes choice of them, and cleaves to them, the affection of desire extends it
self to them, the affection of love imbraceth them, the affection of joy
delights in them. Spiritual conviction, always draws affection. For God has
framed the soul so, that upon discovery of a good o^ of it self, it does
stretch out it self to embrace that object, the good thing presented, it
cannot be otherwise.

We see, the eye it cannot but delight in beautiful objects: so the
understanding of itself it delights in true things, and the will in things
that are good, that are delightfully good, or spiritually and conveniently good
to the person, it cannot but be so.

The author of nature, God, does not overthrow nature, but preserves it in its
own work: therefore where he gives a light to discover, and persuade, both
of the truth in general; and of our particular interest in those things; he
gives grace likewise, to the will, and affections, to that part of the soul
that is carried to good things to embrace them; and upon discovery of evil, in
that part of the soul that is affected to evil, there is an ave^sation, and
loathing of things that are in convenient, and ^itfull, it must needs (...) in
the light of reason.

We may know whether the spirit of God Trial of our estate by embracing.
have wrought any thing in (...) by o^ embracing of good things: for (as I
said) Godhath made our souls thus, when the soul (...) convinced of the
truth, and goodness of a thing, and isperswaded, the affections will always
follow that that is showed to be the best. Now when the spirit of God discovers
to the soul the excellencies of religion to be above all other excellencies
whatsoever. That the favourof God is better than life itself, and discovers to
the soul the vanity of all other things; then comes the soul to embrace them
for the soul cannot but (...), which the understanding being (...) (...) (...)
best, and best for me: in comparison of all other things, this is now at this
time all things considered best for me to do; hereupon comes embracing
always; the affections follow spiritual persuasion.

There be two maine branches of faith. 2. Branches of faith.
One is spiritual conviction, and persuasion, that things are so good, and
that they belong to us. Another branch of faith is to go out, and close, and
meet with the things. Upon discovery of the excellency of the things; the heart
opens it self to let in those things.

It is in grace as it is in nature; the heart is open upwards, and pointed
downward: (...) the heart and soul of a man opens to heaven ward when those
things are discovered by the spirit to be best, the spirit opens, and closes
with those things.

A man may know what he is in religion by his affections, by his affection of
love: for the affection of love, will open to the things that are discovered to
be best whereof heeis persuaded, and his affection of joy, h^ will delight in
those things: and his affection of grief, his heart will be shut to things
that are contrary: and his affection of zeal, in the p^sute of the means, and
in opposing that that is an enemy to that good, it is always so, the heart
imbraceth what we are persuaded of.

God has made the affections of the soul for supernatural things: he (...)
made our understanding to conceive, of the heavenly light and those
prerogatives, and privileges; and he has made our affections to embrace
those heavenly things. And then a man is in his right subordination, in his
right state under God, he is framed as he should be; he is in a right frame of
soul: when his soul is convinced of the excellency of the best things and
when his affections of joy, and love, and delight, of zeal, and trust, and all
are set on those things. For then a man is raised above the condition of an
ordinary man: such a man is come to his perfection, he is come out of that
cursed estate that naturally all are in: for now the soul is set upon things
that make it better than it self. For the soul is as the things are it is
carried to: when the soul is persuaded of heavenly things, and of its interest
in them, and is carried to them by the sway, and weight of the affections of
love, and joy, and delight (which is called here im bracing) then the things
embraced transform the soul to be like them, as they be heavenly, and
glorious, and excellent, there is nothing in the world to be named with them,
all else is ^g, and dross: then a man comes to be holy, and heavenly, and
spiritual, he is raised in a condition far above others, above all
othermen, though he be never so mean in the world: when his soul is
enlightened, and answerable to the light, there is heat; when there is light in
the understanding, and heat in the affections accordingly to embrace, then the
soul is in a right temper, a man is a holy, and happy man, therefore no wonder
if upon persuasion, and sight, they embraced those things.

Let us try the truth of our estate by our affections, To try our estate by
our affections.
by our embracing of good things, by opening our hearts to the best things, by
our joy, and delight in them. Is there a holy wonderment at them? Oh! how I
love thy (...)! and one day in thy courts is better than ten thousand
elsewhere, and Oh, the depth of his mercy! and one thing have I desired of the
Lord, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life. When
the soul stands in admiration of God, and good things; when it is ready to
welcome Christ, and heavenly things, and the state of religion; now away all
former vanities; away all lusts of youth, away all confidence in beauty, and
strength, and riches, all these are but dung to the soul; the soul has seen
better things, there is a discovery of better things, and now the respect of
all other things falls down in the soul, when there is a discovery of better
things.

The soul cannot do otherwise, when it is convinced supernaturally; the same
spirit that discovers better things, opens the soul to ^low them, it is so
with every soul that has the true work, and stamp of the spirit in it, it
is set upon heavenly things; it says with Saint Paul, I account all dung and
dross, in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Christ. There is an
attractive, a drawing magneticall power in heavenly things, when they are
propo^nded to the soul, by the spirit to draw the affections and to make us
spiritual like themselves.

Let us therefore labor more and more to have our affections wrought upon. As
we are in our affections, we are in religion. It is impossible that a
Christian should be spiritually convinced that there are such excellent things
belong to religion, and that he has his part and por ion in them: and not be
transformed to a spiritual state, and frame of soul, to love, and delight in
holy things, and to despise that which is contrary.

And when he is in such a state, what is all the world to him? What cares he
for riches, or pleasures, or honors, when the soul sees incomparable better
things? Whom have I in heaven but thee? and what do I desire on earth in
comparison of thee? says David. When he had a little meditated of the vanity
of earthly things, and saw the goodness of God to his children. It is good for
me to draw near unto God. It is a speech of conviction: the soul is
convinced that it is good, and best to draw near to God in holy means, and in
holy duties to keep close to him, and then it cries out, whom have I in heaven
but thee?

Therefore let us never rest in such a knowledge of holy things, as does not
convince us of the goodness of them, and of our interest in them so far as
may draw, and work upon our affections to embrace those things.

When we find our hearts, and affections wrought on, that holy things, as they
are excellent in themselves, so they have an answerable place in our hearts;
that as they are holy, and high, and best, so they have a high place in our
hearts, then a man is in the estate of a Christian: or else a man may very well
doubt of his estate, when he can hear of heaven and happiness, and of the
excellency of the children of God, that they are heirs of heaven, etc. and his
heart be not affected with these things: he may well question himself: do I
believe these things? here are rich and precious promises, but where is my
precious faith to close with, and to embrace these things? do I believe them?
If Idoe, how is it that I am no more affected with them? and so let us stand in
the meditation of the excellencies of Religion so long till our hearts be
affected and warmed with them. This will follow affections, a desire to think
often of them: as David joins both together. Oh! how do I love thy law, it is
my meditation continually. That that a man loves, he often thinks of, that
stirs up love, and love makes him often consider of it: and when it is thus
with a man, he is in such (...) condition as these holy Patriarchs, fit to
live and die by his faith. They saw them, and were perswad of them, and
embraced them.

Therefore I say we may know whether we have this spiritual light; whether we
have true faith or no, if we have these imbracings; if we be so persuaded of
them that we embrace them, with delight, and desire, and love, and joy: if we
make choice of them, and esteem them highly, and cleave constantly to that
which is revealed to us; then it is a divine light, and persuasion; because we
embrace them.

Certainly, there is nothing in religion divine, Faith carries the whole soul
unless the affections be carried with it. True faith carries the whole
soul, to whole Christ, out of a man's whole self. It carries the understanding
to see, and the will to choose, and to cleave, it carries the affections to joy,
and delight, and love, it carries all. Therefore those, that when holy things
(...) discovered, they have not a high esteem of them, that they pri^e them not
above earthly things, that they cleave not to them with a disesteeme of other
things, that they joy not in them as their best portion, that they do not
embrace them, there is no true faith at all, for where there is true faith
there is this embracing.

God has made the soul (as I said) for these The soul made for heavenly
things.
heavenly things; and when the soul and they close together, there is a sweet
embracing then the soul is raised above it self, the soul is quieted, and
stilled, and satisfied. There is nothing in the world else will better the
soul, but the embracing of these things; nothing else will beautifi^, and
adorn the soul in God^ sight, our souls are made forthem, our desires are
made to embrace them, our love, and o^ joy to delight in them, our wills to
cleave to them, and ^ke choice of them above other things.

We abuse our souls: they are not made (...) Love of earthly things abaseth
the soul.
close, and graspe with the world: they are no^ made for th^se things that are
base^ (...) (...) selves, we abase our souls. A cove^ (...) (...) himself woe:
sethan ^is: (...) he is called the world, because he has nothing in him
better than the world. If we embrace Christ, and the promises of salvation, the
things of anotherlife the embracing of these rayseth the soul to be excellent
like the things, and it does (...), and rest (...) (...) (...) For nothing
(...) (...) but in its (...) (...) as the heavic (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) What quiets the soul.
in the middle p^int of the earth; and light bodies rest (...) to their (...)
So the soul it (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) faith resting in the (...) (...)
God (...) (...) soul ^rying it to the thing it is made for. (...) these holy
men, in all the ^yles, and (...) bles of tho world, in all confusions, the
souls of these blessed (...) rested in Christ.

We may say of all earthly things, as (...) has this sentence of them, Micah
2. (...) (...) Micah 2.
hence, here is not your rest so we may say to the soul concerning ri^hes, and
honors, and friends, here is (...) yours rest. You were not made to embrace,
and to cleave to these things, Our rest is in Christ, and in the good things we
have by him. These good (...) embraced him with their whole soul.

This shows that many men have not faith, Want of faith, scene by want of
affections.
they know not what it means. Where there is tr^e faith, there is always, love,
and joy, and delight in the things believed, it carries the soul with it. In
what measure we apprehend the goodness of a thing, in that measure our love is
to it: In what measure we apprehend the greatness, and fitness of a thing in
that measure our affections are carried to it. The understanding reports it to
the affections of love, and liking, and they are naturally carried to that
which the soul makes report of to be useful; the understanding makes them
follow it: therefore it is a sign our understandings are not persuaded, our
eyes are not opened, when we love not good persons, and good things, when we
cleave not to them above all things. Those that do not embrace, and cleave in
their will, and affections to good things, let them say what they will, they
do not believe. If there were but a light conjecture in men, if there were but
a guessing, that there were such a happiness, and that there were such
horrible ^orments for sinners that live in sin, they would live otherwise
then they do. Therefore deadness in the affections discovers Atheism in the
judgment, and heart, it shows there is unbelief: for how is it possible that
a man should not be carried in his affections to a good that he is persuaded
of? and how is it possible he should not loath ill, and dest (...) things? If
he were persuaded that hell were such as it is; and that these courses lead to
hell, and destruction, and estrange him from the favor of God, whose loving
kindness is better then life it self, if men were persuaded, of (...) things
in any strength, their souls would not be affected as they are.

Therefore if we would know whether nature How to know nature is corrupted.
be corrupted or no, we may do it by this. You have some men that are
conceited, especially when they are in their ruff, and have all things plenty.
Divines talk much of the corruption of nature, and such things; they think all
is well. O! but do but lay these things together, the excellency of the things
promised, and the terror of the things threa^ed, and our ^ndisposition to
these things in regard of persuasion, that we live as if we did not think these
things to be true. What a disposi^on o^ soul is that that calls divine truths
into question? To believe the lies of our own hearts, and the temptations of
the devil, and the world that lies in mischief, before the (...)ved truth of
GOD it self, that is sealed (...) the oath of God? And yet the heart of man
(...) naturally carried to believe these things mo^ than God himself. Witness
the lives of me^ who have dead, car^, base affections (...) regard of heavenly
things: they show (...) they are not persuaded of them, notwithstanding all the
sweet arguments, and persuasions that the Scripture has. They do not
profess that they call them in question: yet they live as if they made no
doubt that they are all false. It is a folly not to believe those things that
are sealed by so many evidences as divine things are: but it is more desperate
folly to live as if we did not believe them at all.

If these things were digested, they would make us out of love with our own
natural estate, and to labor for a spirit of faith to persuade our souls:
both that those things are so indeed that God has revealed, and to get assured
persuasion of our part, and interest in them. Indeed a dead faith is no faith
at all; it is the effect of the whole Epistle of S. James, that it is no faith
that is dead, it does not work upon the heart, and affections, nor the life,
and conversation: a dead faith is no faith at all.

Let us shame our selves therefore: Lord, To shame our selves in want of
affections.
do I profess I see things above nature? that I see Christ in heaven, and see
my self there? and do I profess that I am persuaded that the word of God is
true, and am I no more affected? where is my love? where is my joy? where is my
comfort? does my heart run after other things, that profess my self to be
persuaded of better things? Let us never rest, but be angry, and wroth with
our hearts and affections: for they are made for these promises, our precious
faith is made to embrace precious promises, and to carry the whole soul to
them.

And let us help this with complaining of To pray for affections.
our selves, and with prayer. Lord, thou have discovered excellent things in
thy word, and have persuaded me, Lord open my heart, the heart is thy throne:
the heart, and will and affections thou dealest with especially: Lord incline
my heart, enlarge my heart. The LORD has promised in the new covenant to teach
our bowels to love: Lord teach my heart to love thee. Thou have opened my
understanding to conceive holy things; or else I had never been able to
understand thee, and thy truth: teach my bowels also to love, teach them to
cleave to the things: take off my love, my joy, and delight, from earthly
things and plant them where they should be, enlarge them the right way: fill my
heart with thy self, as thou have made it for thy self. This should be our
desire.

What be the affections whereby the soul imbraceth Quest.
these good things it is persuaded of?

The soul imbraceth these things in the affections of faith, and hope in the
first place: for faith is an emptiegrace in it self, it is carried Answ. What
affections embrace good things.
to somewhat out of it self, that it imbraceth, and lays hold on; and hope
is with faith always. Together with the work of faith and hope there is a
sanctified affection of the embracing soul, there is a love of the things
promised; (which is embracing;) and a love of the means; and likewise joy, and
delight in them, expressed by thankfulness. As you see the Patriarchs in the
story of Genesis, when God discovered holy things to them a^resh that he would
give them the land of Canaan; and the Messiah to come, and all that happiness;
there was thankfulness, presently they built Altars to God. And which always
accompanies thankfulness, humility. As Abraham, Genesis 17. 3. down he falls
when God made him such a large promise, he falls down on his face, as if he
were unworthy of Genesis 17. 3.
such a thing: so, this disposition always accompanies a soul that imbraceth,
together with faith, and hope, that leads the affections after them, there is
love, expressed in a constant obedience and care of duty to God, many ways; As
it is an affection that will not be concealed. And joy, and delight, with
thankfulness, and humility, considering the excellency of the things, and our
unworthiness, that we cannot but have this disposition always; thankfulness, and
humility. And likewise contentment to end our days: a disposition that
follows embracing in faith, for where embracing of faith and love is in an
imperfectestate, there will be joy when that comes that makes way to full
embracing, that is, in heaven it self: as Simeon rejoiced when he embraced
Christ in his arms; what did the old man think we, when he came to heaven
when Christ and he met there? And Abraham rejoiced to see CHRIST'S day with the
eye of faith, and likewise embraced it with faith, and that wrought joy. What
did Abraham then when he came to heaven? when he see all ended there? I say
death, that makes way to full enjoining, and embracing, in this very respect,
it is not only patiently entertained of Gods children, but comfortably, as
letting them in to the good things that they esteem above all the world
besides: to the possession of Christ, to heaven, and happiness. Let us
consider of these things.

To come to direct us a little, about this embracing, in faith, and hope, and
love, and joy, and the whole soul, when the soul (as it were) goes out to the
things we are persuaded of. Quest.


How shall this be wrought upon the soul?

This embracing we see it follows upon Answ. How this embracing is wrought.
persuasion; and persuasion follows seeing: they saw them far off, and were
persuaded of them, and thereupon they embraced them. Therefore let us labor
for a clear understanding of divine things. That which the eye sees, the heart
grieves for in ill; and that that the eye 1. By supernatural knowledge.
sees the heart imbraceth in good. And in what measure our eye sight of
heavenly things is clearer, and our persuasion stronger, in that measure our
embracing is lovely, and full of joy and delight. Therefore let us labor to
grow in knowledge, in supernatural spiritual knowledge; and that our
persuasion may be stronger every day more and more, for answerable to that, our
affections will grow, and will be carried to the things discovered.

And there is nothing more effectual to commend knowledge to us then this,
that it is a means to work, a holy and heavenly disposition, and temper in us,
especially if it be spiritual. And let us meditate upon what we seem to know
and are persuaded of; let us dwell upon things still, to work them upon the
will and affections, let us dwell upon them till our hearts be warmed well
with the things known; and that we profess our selves to be persuaded of.

And join with it an enquiry upon the soul; are these things so? do I know
these things? and am I persuaded of these things that they are so? how is my
disposition answerable then, am I so affected as I should be? is my love so
hot? and my joy so working, and spiritly, and quick as it should, or no? and
hereupon take occasion to stir up our selves, and to check our own souls.
Alas that I should have such things discovered, and that I should see such
things, in such a strong persuasion in the book of God, and profess my self
to be persuaded of these things and yet be so dead at all times.

And if we find our affections any thing working, that we are disposed to
embrace these things then we cannot but be in an excellent temper and bless
God that vouchsafed together with the excellency of the things themselves, to
show us our portion by his holy spirit, to enlighten our understandings, and to
persuade us, let us bless God for this, for it is a work above nature.

And withal, because the soul cannot close To let go other things.
with, and embrace these things; but it must let loose other things: (for you
know, in embracing there must be a letting go of those things that were
formerly within the gripe) if we would gripe these things in our affection and
will, we must have them only, we must not think to graspe the world, and them
together; the things here below, and them together; as we shall see after in
that point, they accounted themselves strangers to earthly things. Therefore
this is one way to come to this embracing, to come to the sight of the vanity,
and insufficiency of all things in comparison of Christ, and the happiness we
have by Christ. To see in matter of judgment, the insufficiency of works, and
merit, and such like in the matter of justification; the insufficiency of all
such trash as the popish religion abuses the world withal. And so in matter
of conversation, to see the insufficiency, and emp^nesse, and vanity, yea the
vexation of all things besides these good things here offered, the good things
that Gods spirit offers to the eye of our souls that he offers to our wills
and affections; what are all, to these; and effectually think so, think what
should draw a man's affections after it; beauty or strength; consider what will
become of these ere long.

And then withal consider the excellency of the estate of the body, and soul
in heaven, if we carry our selves as we should do, and preserve our selves in
our spiritual condition; let us lay these things together, and then we shall
see how infinitely the one is beyond the other. If it be for honor, and favor
of the world; consider the vanity of them, and how short a time we may enjoy
them; and the things themselves are subject to alteration. And withal consider
the constant excellency of the favor of GOD in Christ Jesus which will comfort
us in life, in death, and for ever. And so for riches, and possessions in this
world consider how soon all here must be left, and how the soul is larger
then all these things, if we had a thousand times more abundance then we have,
and that our souls that are more large, and more excellent, they are not made
for these things, but for better; and what use we shall have of better things
when these fail, the soul being immortal, and eternal. This will make us
let go earthly things in our affections and hold them in their place, in a
secondary place, as things serviceable in the way to heaven, and not to graspe
them in our affections, for then they pierce the soul to death and damnation.

And if we would be affected as we should be to good things, let us keep our
affections Keep the affections tender
tender, and keep them clear from the guilt of any sin, that may work
fears, and doubts: for together with sin goes fears, and doubts, they are
bred in sin naturally: therefore if we would maintain this embracing, oh,
let us keep our souls, as we keep our understandings clear, so keep our
affections tender by all means, and keep our consciences unspotted; that so
our affections of joy, and delight, and love, may be ready pressed to good
things, even to the best things.

Another way is in particular to meditate To meditate of Gods love in Christ.
of the love of Christ, the love of GOD in Christ, and of his embracing of us.
For we must know that our embracing is upon persuasion of Gods embracing of
us. We embrace not the promises of Christ as a man imbraceth a dead post that
cannot return embraces to him again: this embracing of Christ, and heaven, it
is a mutual embracing, and it is a second, reflexive embracing; we embrace
God, and Christ, because we find God in Christ embracing our souls first in
the arms of his love, therefore we embrace him again in the arms of our
affections, because we find Christ embracing us in the arms of his affections.

Therefore let us attend upon the means, upon private reading of the word, and
upon the ministry: for what are the ministers but to contract Christ and the
soul together? they are friends of the Bridegroom, to discove* CHRIST'S love
to us, and his loveliness; his loveliness in himself, his riches in
himself, and his love to us to allure us again to CHRIST? the ministry is
for this end especially, to draw Christ, and the foul together. And what is
the Scripture in the intent and scope of it, but to discover to us the excellen
ci^ of Christ, and the good things we have by him, his love and good intention
to our souls? Now hearing these things in the ministry, they are effectual
together with the spirit to draw our affections back again to him. And
naturally we cannot but love those that love us. Now when we are persuaded of
Gods love tous in Christ, and Christ's love to us (God having made our souls
for love to himself, and friendship with himself, and the nearest, and
sweetest conjugall friendship, now therefore) the more his love is discovered
to us, the more we shall love him.

Therefore let us be constant in attending upon good means; we shall always
hear something, that will either strengthen our faith in the promises of God,
or show us our duty to God again; we shall have something discovered whereby
the spirit will be effectual to help this embracing. Let us go to reading and
hearing with this scope, and intention: Now I come to hear, I come to have my
soul wrought on; I come to hear some message from heaven, to hear some good
thing to draw my mind from the world and worldly things; and upon hearing our
duty to God, to walk lowly in thankfulness for those good things that we
have, and that we hope for in another world? It is no wonder that men lose
their affections that are careless in the use of me^nes; and if they loose
them, will they not loose all? The best man living if he be care less in using
the means of salvation, and give himself to the world altogether, or to his
calling, things not in themselves unlawful, his affections will be dead, he
shall loose them: for God has ordained that our affections should be quickened
by heavenly means, and GOD knows better than we our selves that has
sanctified these means to this purpose. In attending upon the means, we shall
hear a discovery of good things, and hear comforts, and have our light
strengthened by new discovery of new Scripture, or by old Scriptures lively
applied, something to increase the life of our persuasion at every Sermon, and
reading good books, and by every good company, and that which increases
knowledge, and persuasion makes our affection, and embracing stronger.

I beseech you let us take these courses, or else all is to no purpose: the
maine thing in religion is the will and affections: and when the will and
affections are wrought on, the work is done in the matter of grace. And there
is no other way to know whether the former wor^ of the understanding, and
persuasion be effectual and to purpose or no but this; to know whether the
will choose, and cleave to good things; and whether our affections joy, and
delight in them: there is the trial of the maine work. The work indeed is
especially in the judgment, when it hears soundly and supernaturally of the
ills that are to be avoided, and of the good things that are to be embraced:
bu^ where is the trial of the judgment, but when it carries the whole soul
with it; when it carries the stern of the soul with it. Now that which is
immediate to our souls is our affection of joy, and delight, and the the like.
Therefore let us take to heart these things, and never think we are any thing
in religion till our hearts and affections be wrought upon; till our knowledge
be such as may sway that whole inward man.

Again consider the excellency of these The excellency and necessity of the
good we hope for.
good things that we have discovered to us in the Gospel, (that are the object
of our embracing) together with the necessity of them, that without them we are
wretched creatures, there is no hope for us. Let us every day consider what
ground of hope we have, (though the things be not yet possessed) whether the
things be true that we hope for; whether they be confirmed to be true or no;
and how we rest on them: for let things be never so excellent, and necessary,
unless the soul conceive of them as things attainable, as things belonging to
us, all is to no purpose, this effect of embracing will not be wrought in the
soul. Therefore consider more and more the hopefulnes The hopefulnesse of them.
of them, that may help this embracing.

A Christian, when he believes, and hopes for that happiness that shall be
revealed to him; the things promised; what a world of grounds of hope has he
for it? he has the word of God for an inheritance immortal and (...); he
has the will of Christ: Father I will the where I am, they may be, Ioh. 17.
his prayer to his father is his will; and his will must be performed: for he
lives for ever to make good John 17.
his own legacy to his Church. And he is now in heaven, preparing that
happiness for us that we so embrace with faith. And he has left us here his
spirit to be a pledge that he will come again: he has left his spirit, and
has taken our flesh to heaven, to strengthen our hope, that this shall follow.
Our flesh is in heaven in him already, and his spirit is in earth in (...); as
a mutual depositum in trust between him and us; and all to strengthen the
hope of that happiness that is reserved.

Besides, the Seal of the Sacrament; the end of which is to cherish
hopefulnesse of Christ, and of all the good we have by him. His oath is added
to his promise, that all things might be immutable, and unchangeable of the
forgiveness of sins and life everlasting etc. Now especially when we find
our hearts (...) sink downward, and not to have that life (...) they should
have, by meditating on these things, of their excellency, and necessity, and
to conceive in Scripture the grounds of hope of them, it will quicken us.

Add likewise (for our own interest) what work of the spirit we have; and
then what singular promises we have, that where GOD has begun he will make an
end. For why is the work of the spirit called an earnest, but that God will
make good the bargain? Consider what work of the spirit we have: for
whatsoever is spiritual is eternal in a man: what joy is spiritual, what
love is spiritual, what knowledge is spiritual, it shall be made up in
perfection, it shall never be taken away.

See then how the spirit seals us by the work of it; and what earnest we
have, in peace of conscience, and the work of it. This will cherrish hope: for
that is part of this embracing, to embrace them with faith and hope.

And this should be a daily course, to work upon the affections, to estrange
them from all things and from the meditation of all things else. And as I said
before to consider the love of God to us, and to love him again. And consider
likewise the hopefulnesse of good things, that nothing in the world is so made
good to us as the things of a better life, the things of grace, and glory. And
God has borrowed from all assurance amongst men, terms to show the assurance
of the good things we have in hope and faith. The pledge of the spirit; the
earnest of the spirit; the seal of the spirit: the witness of the spirit.
What terms are there used among men that may confirm any thing, that you have
not used to strengthen this supernatural assurance of these supernatural good
things? GOD herein succors our weakness, knowing how prone we are to call
these things into question. And consider especially our own unworthiness, our
vileness, and baseness, that we deserve none of this: when conscience is once
awaked to know aright our own unworthiness, then we shall find it a difficult
thing to believe these things. Therefore it is a work worthy our daily
endeavor, to search the Scriptures, which applies it self to our capacity,
and confers all the help in the world to increase our grounds of hope of the
best things; and then our disposition is as it should be.

And let us deeply consider of the necessity of heavenly things, and the
foulness of sin, and the danger of our natural condition, and this will
make us embrace better things, He that sees himself in danger of drowning,
will embrace that that may stay him. He that sees himself in danger to be
pulled away from that that upholds him from sinking, he will claspe about it
fast. Let us consider what a many things we have in this world to pull us away
from God and good things, and to loose our gripe, that we may not lay such
hold of them. The devil envies our embracing of these things, and there are
many things to loose our affections from them, consider the danger, and withal
the necessity of these good things: that if they be lost, we do not only
loose them, but we loose them with the loss of our souls with eternal
damnation in the world to come: we do not simply lose them, but we plunge our
selves into the contrary. Let us consider of this, and it will make us claspe
fast, and keep our hold by all means possible. In that measure that we
apprehend the danger, in that measure we shall embrace these excellent things.
Case.


Now to answer a doubt, and a case or two by the way: How happens it then that
Gods children sometime, when their judgment is convinced; yet their affections
are not so quick, they are something flat in their affections. As Gods people
complain sometimes: alas that I should believe such a happiness as heaven is;
and such glory; and yet find my affections no more stirred! Is it possible that
I should be the child of God, and believe these things, and find my self no
more affected? Sol. Why the affections of Gods children are sometimes dead.


Indeed this troubles the peace of Gods children sometimes, and good reason:
for we see here, after sight comes persuasion, then embracing; the will, and
affections, cannot but entertain that good they are persuaded of; and so there
is great ground for the objection.

But there may be some mistake in this, for sometimes the judgment may be
convinced, and yet the affections not be so quick: because there may be a
diversion at the same time: there may perhaps be some present cross, that may
be fall thee, or some present thing lawfully loved, that takes up the
affections at that time. As for example, the presence of Father, Mother, Wife,
or children, or of other friends may take up the affections for the time; now
the affections running that way at that time, perhaps not sinfully neither:
they are not so enlarged to heavenly things, God knows our capacity, and what
our affections can do.

Then again there may be some present grief upon them, that God to humble a
man may take up his affections, so that at that time he shall not be so
affected with good things: though ordinarily he comfort himself with the best
things; and so he does afterward, when he has given his grief, and his
present affections some liberty. There is a love of intention, and of valuing:
a man may be deceived that way. A man values his child more than a stranger
that he entertaines: yet for the present he may give a stranger better looks,
and better entertainment. Though he set mo^ value on his child, or his dear
friend that (...) has secured himself of; yet he will not show such
countenance to them as to a stranger on the sudden.

So it is here, Gods children, their constant joy is in the best things, and
they are judiciously carried to the best things; but on the sudden there may be
an entertaining of some other thing, and perhaps not unlawful neither; perhaps
it may be sinful; to humble Gods children: but that is but but on the sudden:
his course is to carry his affections above all earthly things.

Again in another case Gods children are deceived this way sometimes, for they
think they have no affections when they have affections. How is that seen? in
case of opposition; let God, and Christ, and heavenly things be opposed, and
you shall see then that they have affections. Those that for want of stiring up
the grace of God in them; or for want of good means or by indisposition of
body seemed to be dull in their affections; let religion be disgraced, or
opposed any way, and you shall find then their affections deep in their
hearts to heavenly things: but they appeared not before, because there was no
opposition. These, and such like thoughts we may have to content the soul that
is disquieted this way. But the rule is certain, that a man's affections are as
his persuasion is, and his persuasion as his light is: As he has a heavenly
light, discovering heavenly things, so is his persuasion of a better estate
then the world can yield; and answerable to his persuasion, his soul is raised
up to delight in the best things. This is his course; if it fall out to be
otherwise, there be reasons for it, which we must discreetly judge of, and not
trouble the peace of a good conscience. To go on. They confessed they were
strangers and pilgrims (...) earth.

The^e words contain, what they were in regard of earthly things: their
disposition, and carriage to all things besides the promises; to the things
below; they were strangers, and pilgrims in regard of their condition below.
Itsets down how they apprehended themselves to be, and how they discovered
themselves to the world to be.

They were in regard of heaven indeed, heirs of happiness, heirs of a
kingdom, in regard of the world, and earthly things, they were strangers, and
pilgrims. And as they were, so they made themselves, to be no better than they
were, they confessed it, they were not ashamed of it: they apprehended
themselves to be as they were, and they carried themselves answerable: their
life and course spoke as much as their tongues, they confessed both in word,
and in deed, that they were strangers, and pilgrims.

Now in the words I say, you have their disposition, and their profession;
their condition, Scope of the words.
and their confession. Their disposition, and carriage, and state, and
condition, they were strangers and pilgrims.

The discovery of it, they confessed they were so. And this confession is
double.

Their confession was either verbal, as Jacob confessed, when he came before
Pharaoh, few and evil have the days of the life of my pilgrimage been, says
old Jacob.

Or it was a real confession, discovered by their carriage, that they were
strangers: their course spoke louder then their words.

Those that in the whole course of their life, show a weaned affection to
earthly things, though they talk not gloriously, as some idle persons do in a
bravery, we are but strangers here, and we must be gone, etc. Though I say they
do not speak thus as some do that never think so: yet notwithstanding their
carriage bewrayes it: their course, and company, and conversation shows that
indeed they confess themselves pilgrims, and strangers.

Now the order of the words is this: strangers, Difference between pilgrims
and strangers.
and pilgrims: there is little difference between these two. Strangers, shows
our absence from home, that we are abroad in another country, that we are in
another place.

And Pilgrims, shows our carriage to our country, our going home: a pilgrim or
traveler is he that is going homeward. They confessed themselves that they were
not at home; but they were going toward that that was their home, toward
heaven, to that City whose builder and maker was God himself. We are
strangers, to show what we are here on earth; In regard of heaven we are
strangers on (...), and not mere strangers that rest, and do nothing, but
such strangers as are passing home toward their country, we are strangers, and
pilgrims on earth: the one implies our absence, the other implies our moving to
the place of our abode.

The points considerable are; first this, Th^s Gods children upon earth here,
are strangers, and pilgrims. They are not at home but are traveling toward
their country.

The second is this, that

They prosesse themselves to be so: They know they are so, and they confess
that they are so, they are not ashamed of it.

For the first,

It is the disposition of him that has truly interest Doct. Gods people
strangers on earth.
in better things (though but in faith, and hope) to be a stranger, and a
pilgrim in regard of all things here below.

And this follows the other: for where the eyes of the understanding, are
opened, and a man is persuaded, there is an embracing of better things, as our
proper good things; there is a considering of all other things as things that
do not belong to us, in a manner we are strangers. When faith apprehends
Christ, and heaven, and happiness to be our own, and our country to be above:
faith apprehending and grasping these things and embracing them: at the same
time, it is to be supposed, and necessarily follows; that we are strangers.

It follows out of the necessity of the thing it self: for upon the very
consideration that a man is an heir of heaven, that he has another country,
and condition, out of the necessity of the thing it self, though there were
no other reason for it, the affections of the soul will be closed up (as it
were) to other things; and he will consider of other things, in an inferior
condition as they are.

For the things, though they be good in their kind and order, both the things
above, and the things below, yet there being such a difference in these good
things; and the things here below, the contentments here on earth, being so
meanly good, and so short in continuance, and so weak in their satisfaction
of the soul, that they cannot be possessed together with the blessed
assurance of better things, but with the affections of strangers, and pilgrims:
this follows I say from the nature of the thing, that in whose eyes heavenly
things are great, in his eyes earthly things are mean. They are accounted as
they are, secondary mean things of the way, to help him forward home.

If a man were on the top of a great mountain, he would see the things below
to be very little, and the things above would appear greater to him, so when
the soul is raised up to see great things, though they be a far off, as
these did with the eye of faith; at the same time, his soul looking to things
below must needs apprehend them to be little in quantity, as indeed they are.

If a man were in body lift up to heaven, and should look upon the earth; what
were the earth, but a pooresilly point, the whole earth i^ self, much more a
man's own possession: so when the soul is lifted up to heaven by faith, (which
sets a man in heaven before his time;) when it looks from thence to the earth,
and earthly things, it must of necessity consider them as they are, to be
poor mean things. Therefore this follows, that being persuaded of the
promises, that is, of the good things promised in religion, in the word of God:
to earthly things, they were strangers, and pilgrims.

He that is from home, and has another home, which he is not at, he is a
stranger: but Christians have another home.

For first, they are bred from heaven, they are borne from heaven, they are
borne in Jerusalem Christians borne anew from heaven.
that is from above; they are borne in the Church by the seed of the word and
spirit: now as they are from heaven, so their (...) is to heaven again: for
every thing naturally rises as high as it springs. As we say of water, it
mounts as high as the head of it is: so our affections mount as high as the
spring of them is. Now a Christian being borne from Heaven a Christians Country.
heaven, he tends to that in his affections, that is his country. It is his
country, because his father is there, in his glory; and his Savior is there;
and a great part of his kindred are there, the souls of perfect men, and the
glorious Angels in a most glorious manner, (though they be in their attendance
upon the earth;) there is his country, his City, his house, there is his
happiness, his home. I shall not need therefore to prove that the godly are
strangers. If heaven be his country, earth must needs be the place of his
pilgrimage: there is no question but that follows.

It is said here, they were pilgrims, and strangers upon earth. Upon earth.
Because where ever a Christian is, if it be upon any place upon earth, he is a
stranger and a pilgrim; if he be in his own house, he is upon earth, and
therefore he is a stranger in his own house; if he be in his own possession,
he is upon earth, and therefore he is a stranger in his own possession. As
David confessed though he were a King, I am a stranger, and a pilgrim here as
all my fathers were, 1 Chronicles. 29. 15. A King in his kingdom 1 Chronicles. 29. 15.
is upon Gods earth, and therefore he is a stranger in his own kingdom here.
As Austin August.
says very well, quisque domus suae, etc. every man is a stranger in his own
house, we are strangers here on earth; therefore. It is not any condition on
earth that exempts a child of God from being a stranger, when the greatest
Kings in the world have confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims: so
that all Christians, of what condition Ioever they are, from the highest to the
meanest, they are all strangers upon earth, it is a clear point.

And it must needs be so, for the head of Christ a stranger on earth.
Christians was a stranger: his love made him a stranger: for he left his
fathers bosom, his love drew him from heaven to earth, and here, he conversed
as a stranger: he dwelt in his body here as a tabernacle which he laid aside
for a while, to work the work of out redemption; and then after to dwell in it
for ever. He was the prime stranger of all strangers, he that makes us all
strangers here and Citizens of heaven, he was a stranger on earth. He was not
indeed a stranger: for he was Lord of heaven, and earth: yet in regard of his
state of exaltation that was to come after; in regard of dispensation, he was
here as a servant: he lived here as a stranger. And indeed he was as strangely
used; for he came among his own, and his own knew him not, as it is in John
1. he was not known among his own Country John 1.
men the Jews: he was a stranger on earth.

He conversed with us here, and was among us as a stranger: you see how his
speech and carriage and conversation on earth, it was as a strangers. He was
talking always of his fathers house, and of the kingdom of heaven. When he
speaks of the estate of the Church, which is the only company of people here,
in whom God rules by his spirit; yet because they are ordained for the kingdom
of heaven; he calls them strangers here, and terms them by that that they are
ordained to. All his mind was of the kingdom of heaven: we see after he was
risen, the matter of his discourse, as the Gospel tells, it was of the
kingdom of heaven, he talked of things that belonged to the kingdom of God:
all his speeches were that way, and his comparisons were fetched that way. The
kingdom of heaven is like to such a thing, and such a thing. And all his work
was to draw men from the earth. As it was his grand work to redeem men from the
earth; that is, from hell, and from their cursed condition: so the matter of
his teaching was answerable to his work, to draw men to heaven, all the pains
that he took before, and after his death till he was taken into heaven it
tended that way.

He came from heaven to earth to woo us to be a spouse to himself, he came
from heaven into a strange country, to take us for his spouse, to take our
nature, and in our nature, to win us to die for us: he carried himself as a
stranger every way, he regarded not earthly things. Now answerable to our head
Christ must all Christians be in their affections and dispositions, we must be
conformable to him; we must be strangers as he was.

All that look to die in the faith of Christ, We must have affection of
strangers.
and to be happy for ever, they must witness their believing, and loving of
better things by an answerable carriage to all things here below, they must
have the affection of strangers, and travailers: Faith does enforce this. It is
the nature of the soul from a principle and ground of nature, that when the
soul is carried up one way, it is shut another: when it cleaves unto, and
imbraceth better things, when it is open to heaven, the point of the soul is
shut to the earth, and we look upon these things as strangers and pilgrims,
only for necessary use.

These, holy men the Patriarchs were strangers. The Patriarchs strangers.


Strangers in their own esteem, As Abraham, and Jacob, they confess they
were sojourners, 1. In their own esteem.
and David though he were a King, yet he says, he was a stranger, as all his
fathers were. Psalm. 39. 12.
So all the Patriarchs they professed themselves to be strangers, and
sojourners; and they did it not in word only but in deed: they showed it by
dwelling in tabernacles, and tents, poor things, fit for strangers; heaven was
their house, Tabernacles are moveable, weak things that have no foundation: So
they knew their life was like a tabernacle here. And their manner of life
showed what they looked for, they carried themselves as those that hoped, and
looked for better things. They were strangers in their dispositions, they
affected things above, and cared no more for these things then for necessary
use, to help them to serve God in their places; and those that are strangers
in their dispositions they desire to be at home.

Again they were strangers in GODS esteem. God termed them so; and so it is
with 2. In Gods esteem.
all that believe in Christ: when we once believe and are new creatures, newborn to a better inheritance, presently at the same time we are strangers here.

Strangers likewise in the esteem of the 3. In the worlds esteem.
world. The world used them as strangers, strangely. When a man leaves the
world and cleaves to God; presently the world sets on him by reproaches,
and all they can; because they think he will disgrace them by his change;
therefore they labor to make him, as black as they may that way: they use all
strangely that break from them. God will have it so: because he will have his
children not to love the world, therefore he will have the world hate them. So
they are strangers in that respect, they think it strange that they do not as
they did formerly; that they do not as they do, wicked men think it strange
that they run not with them into the same excess of riot: so, they are
strangers in the esteem of wicked men.

So they are strangers in regard of their place, heaven is their hope: they are
begotten to an inheritance, immortal, undefiled, etc. they live in a place
where they are strangers, they are every way strangers.

But you will say, wicked men are strangers, Object.
and pilgrims too? Answ. Wicked men how strangers here.


I answer, they are indeed so: for in regard of the shortness of their lives,
and the uncertaintie of the things they enjoy: for they outlive all their
happiness here, they are snatched hence before they be aware, therefore they
are but travelers here; but they go from ill to worse: yet in regard of their
affections they are no strangers, but account themselves at home from a spirit
of infidelity, and pride, and earthlinesse. Therefore they are called men of
the earth, and those that dwell on the earth, in the Revelation: because they
look no furtherthen the earth, and here they root, and fix their affections
upon this earth: they do not fix their hearts and affections upon the things
above, they look not after them, they care not for them, they value them not
nor esteem them. Therefore, answerable to their thoughts, and bent of their
soul and mind, is their discourse, their speech and carriage: and thereupon
they are called men of the earth, and called the world, because they love
nothing but the world; they are as it were changed into the things they love,
they are earth, as the Prophet says, Oh earth, earth, etc. and they are the
world, because their affection of love joins them to these earthly things. The
Church in the Revelation is called heaven: but the beast is said, to rise out
of the earth: for that which bred the carnal religion of Popery it was nothing
but earth, and earthly respects. Therefore how ever they are strangers here,
that they cannot be here long, and they have souls that are of an everlasting
continuance: yet because their affections, and the bent of their souls are all
here, they account themselves at home here, and here they plant themselves, and
their posterity, therefore though in some sense they be strangers, yet not in
that sense that the children of God are.

Every Christian is borne from above, and borne to things above, and he is a
stranger here. All his course from his new birth till he come to the possession
of his inheritance in heaven, it is nothing but a travailing, he never sits
down, but is always in his motion, and passage. Every good work is a step of his
way: he is in motion still; he takes degrees from better to better, from grace
to grace, from knowledge to knowledge, till he come to his home.

Let us make a trial of our selves, how our affections stand to these things;
whether our hearts be weaned from earthly things, undoubtedly if we have
embraced Christ, we shall use the world as though we used it not. We shall be
transformed into the Image of Christ, and he used the things of this world as a
stranger, only to comfort him in the way; we shall have the same mind that he
had. We shall carry our selves as strangers, as those that hope for a country
in heaven. Therefore I will name some particulars, to show the condition, and
carriage of a stranger.

First of all, a stranger is travailing to another The carriage o^ him that is
a stranger.
country (to join both in one, for the one follows the other) he that is a
stranger, that apprehends what he is, and apprehends that he has a country to
go to, he travailes toward 1. He is going toward his country.
it.

A stranger that is travailing homeward, he is content with his present
condition: for he 2. He is contented.
knows he shall have better at home. In Iere. 45. God by Jeremy speaks to
Bar^ch a good Jerem. 45.
man, I will destroy all these things, and do (...) seek great things for
thy self? If a Christian did consider, Iam going to heaven, to God, what do I
seeking great things here, which God will destroy? What will become of heaven
and earth, and all things here ere long? And if the time be long ere heaven and
earth be destroyed, yet what will become of me ere long? I shall be turned to
earth, and shall I seek great things here upon earth? Shall I not be content
with my portion? certainly a stranger is content with his present portion, he
that is a traveller, when he comes to his Inn, if perhaps things be not so
clean, if his usage be not so good; he thinks it is but a night and away; it
is no great matter, this is not the maine; he will not be over much discontent,
and quarrel at any unkind usage in the way, for he knows he shall have better
usage when he comes home. Therefore as he will be content with little, be it
what it will be, he knows it is not the maine.

So he will be patient if he meet with unkind 3. Patient.
usage, he will not stand quarrelling by the way, and so hinder himself in
his journey. he will be patient in the injuries, and wrongs in this life. If a
Prince be mis-used in another country, he is contented, and thinks with
himself, I have a country where I shall be more respected; and therefore he
bears it the more willingly. So a Christian is a King, he is an heir, and
being a stranger, he shall meet with dogs in this world; as, who do dogs
bark at, but at strangers? now being strangers we must look for dogged usage.
It is no wonder that dogs bark at strangers, it is their kind: they consider
it is the disposition of wicked men to do so, they do but their kind. Would a
man have dogs not to bark? and would we have wicked men that have evil
tongues not to scorn that they know not? to do otherwise is to forget their
kind. A Christian knows they do but their kind, he pitties them, and he does
not stop his journey and his course for it. He will not be scorned out of his
religion by a company of profane spirits, he will not be laughed out of his
course; he knows what he does better than they, they are mad, and fools, he
knows it; and they shall know it themselves ere long. He knows that he is in
a serious judicious course that he can approve, and they cannot theirs,
therefore he will not be scorned out of his course.

Thus faith in Christ makes him that is a stranger here, content, and patient.
He whose soul has embraced Christ is contented with any thing: any thing is
sufficient to his soul, that is filled with better things. Nothing will
content a covetous earthly man; a man of the earth: such men think themselves
at home, they make a league with hell, and death; the men of the world they
think they shall live here always: but a Christian, that imbraceth a better
life with Christ in happiness to come, he knows he shall not be here long,
he is here but as a stranger, and shall shortly be at home, and therefore he
is contented with any thing.

Likewise the knowledge of this that we are strangers and pilgrims, it will
make a man not 4. Thankful.
only content and patient, but thankful, for any kindness he finds in this
world; that God sweetens his absence from heaven, and his pilgrimage on earth
what; that God should love me so, not only to give me heaven; but to give me
contentments on the earth to sweeten my way to heaven, what a mercy is this! He
is thankful for any contentment, he is thankful to the world, to those that
do any thing for him, that afford him any courtesy here that may help him in
his pilgrimage, and make it less troublesome and cumbersome to him.

All the Saints in former time were wondrous thankful for that they had: for
what can a travailer look for but discourtesies, and hard usage? and if he find
any thing better he will be thankful: certainly it is more then I ^ooked for,
says he. When a man is bent toward heaven, he cannot but look for hard ^sage
from the world. We see when Christ did but look toward Jerusalem, the
Samaritans ^ad enough, they began to malign him, why? his face was toward
Jerusalem. So when base worldlings see that a man will to heaven, and leave
their company, and courses, they cannot digest this. A man of an ill conscience
when he sees another oppose that course that he resolved to stick to, he sees
he confutes his course, he sees his face is toward heaven, and therefore labors
to disgrace him. As the wench said to Peter, Thou speak as one of Galile,
thy speech bewrayes thee. So when a man is going toward heaven, every base
person, the veriest rascal of all, has pride enough to scorn Religion: So
we see they make not much of the world, nor the world of them, therefore they
are contented, and thankful if they find better: for what can a stranger look
for but strange usage in a strange place.

And therefore we see in Scripture, how thankful they were, even for
refreshings, for meat and drink: our Savior Christ was known by breaking of
bread; he used to be thankful. In all things give thanks. They saw the favor
and love of GOD, in a crum of bread, and in a drop of refreshing in any kind:
oh! here is a blessed God, that has given us these comforts in the way. The
Saints of GOD are wondrous thankful for the comforts of their pilgrimage, the
comforts of this life.

And this should make us more thankful, because The way to heaven smoother to
some.
all men's pilgrimages are not alike: (...) do we not see the life of some more
cumber. some? some live in a great deal of want, some live in a great deal of
opposition more than others do, others go in a smooth^ way to heaven. God sees
his childrens weakness, he sees they have not strength, and if in pity, he
keeps them that they shall not enco^ with opposition, but lead them a better
way then others, it is special matter of thankfulness to God and men too.

He that is a stranger, he is glad of any good 5. He is glad of company.
company; oh if he meet with a man of his own country, he is a man alone
for him; so it is with a Christian that walks in the way to heaven with him,
he is comforted much in it.

A stranger, he has his prime intention 6. They mind their journies end.
home to his country, and what he does in the way it is in virtue of his prime
intention, though he does not in every particular action that he does, think
of it. A travailer when he rides on the way he does not think of home in every
step. I but he does that that he does in virtue of his prime intention when he
first set out; and calls to remembrance often times as he goes home, he thinks
of his jou^es and by the way.

I observe this note of some weak Christians that think they are not heavenly
minded, except they do nothing but think of heaven, and heavenly things: that
is but a weak and ^lly conceit. It should be our thought in the morning, our
thoughts should open with that, it should be the key to open the morning, the
thought of this course what will become of us ere long in heaven: but then all
that we do should be in virtue and strength of that prime intention to please
God, and to go to heaven: though we think not always of the present business:
yet it is good as much as may be to quicken our endeavor.

And hence it is that there is another property 7. Though he step out of his
way, he comes in again.
of a stranger that is going to a place, perhaps he may step out of the way,
yet not withstanding by virtue of his first intention he gathers himself
home-ward again, if he take other matters in hand, he gathers home still:
though he go out of his way, in he comes; he considers, this is not my way. So
a child of God, sometimes he diverts, and turns aside, yet notwithstanding he
considers, does this way lead to God ward? to heaven ward? be these actions
Christian actions? are they the way to heaven? if he see they be not, though he
have stepped awrie, he comes in again, and is gathering homeward. Though he may
perhaps forget himself a little, (a traveller) yet his bent is homewards. So a
Christian man though perhaps in some particular he may forget himself, yet he
is always gathering home, his bent is home, and his course is godly. Take a
Christian, perhaps he may step awrie, but his course is godly, and he labors
to recover himself: and if a traveller stay at any time by the way, he makes
amends afterward by making more have. So does a Christian, if we consider him
with his affections loose to good things: yet he recovers himself again, and
sets upon religious actions and courses with more violence of spirit, and
recovers his former loss again.

A traveller and stranger he provides before 8. He provides for all
encumbrances.
hand for all encumbrances; he knows though he meet not with troubles, yet he
may, therefore he will be sure to go with weapons, and he will go with that
that may sustain him by the way. Religion teaches a man to gather out of the
word of GOD, comforts before hand, and munition before hand to carry with him:
put the case he never use them; he may have cause to use them, and then if he
have them no^, what will become of him? he lies open to adversaries by the way.
Therefore there is a spirit in a Christian, an instinct, that stirs him up,
he will be reading the word of God, and good books, and hearing the word: this
I may have use of at such a time, this I will lay up for such an occasion: put
the case that such an occasion come not, he loses nothing, he seasoneth his
soul, in the mean time, and prepares it for worse things if worse come Woe to
those that have not laid up strength and comfort against evil times before
hand. If a man go to s^a, and be not provided before hand, if he take a
journey, and be not provided before hand, then when a storm comes, what a case
is he in? It pleases God to teach us by these resemblances, heavenly things:
therefore because they are fit means to convay holier things unto us, it is
good to take this help that God affords us, considering that he shows us by
these shadows, better things. When we travail, and are going on in our
journey toward heaven, it is good to consider higher things, it is a good
meditation: therefore to go on a little further.

A traveller, and stranger is inquisitive of 9. Inquires of the way.
the way, whether he be in the way, or out of the way; he asks not at random,
that does not content him, whether he go West, or North, or South, or East,
it does not content him to ask where lies my country, Eastward, etc? No; but
he will ask the particular towns, and particular turnings and windings how
he may avoid going out of his way, and which is the right way; and he will ask
upon every occasion, because he knows, if he go but a little out of his way,
it will be a long time ere he shall recover it, and he will be ashamed to come
back again, and the more he goes out of the way, the more trouble it is to
come back again. So it is with a Christian, he does not only desire to know
in general, but he desires to have daily direction, what shall I do in such a
case of conscience, and in such a case? how shall I overcome such a temptation
if I meet with it? And so he is willing to have daily direction how to walk
with God day by day, that he go not out of his way in any thing.

For even as every step that a man takes is a part of his journey; so every
action of a man's life it is a part of his journey to heaven; and therefore he
is willing to have direction for every step, that he may walk step upon step,
upon good ground: therefore he goes upon good grounds of a good conscience, in
the duties of Christianity, he will have sound conviction, what is good, and
what is true in religion: what religion is true that he may venture his soul
upon; and what use he may make of his particular calling; what he may do with
a safe conscience, and what not; and what he may not do that he will not
meddle with, and what is clear to his conscience that he will do. So every
step he takes, though it be in his particular calling, it helps him forward:
As Saint Paul says, in the Epistle to the Colossians, of servants, that they
serve God in serving their master; so a poor servant in his drudgery may serve
God. So in our ordinary professions we are in the way to heaven, if they be
sanctified by prayer before hand, and do it in conscience and obedience to God,
that has set us in this way.

There are two callings, our general, and particular calling, and we show
religion, that is our general calling, in our particular calling, as we are
placed in this or that calling, and what we do in either of these callings, is
the way to heaven. Now the care of a Christian is, that he be well advised what
to do, and on what ground.

And even as a traveller considers of things 10. He uses things as they may
help in his journey.
by the way as they make to his end, to further his journey or hinder his
journey, he looks to heaven as his country that he hopes for, and therefore he
does not tangle himself with any more than may help him home; if they hinder
him once, away they go, if they may help him he takes them. A Christian in his
travail in the way to heaven, considers of things that may fall out by the
way, as they may help and further him to heaven. If I find that things,
Indifferent things.
though they be indifferent in themselves, if they trouble me in my way to
heaven (it may be they are not so to another, but they are to me) though
another can do it, yet I must consider whether I can do it, and find my self
enlarged to heaven as at other times? if not, away with it, it is not
indifferent to me, because it hinders my journey to heaven. A wise traveller
will venture upon things, and courses as they serve, or hinder the maine,
though they be things perhaps that he cannot overwell spare, yet if they
trouble him in his journey, off they go, that he may be more expedi^e and right
in his way.

I wonder at the boldness of many that profess themselves religious, and yet
dare ven ture upon any thing. Undoubtedly if they did search their own hearts,
they could not but say that such courses do dead and dull them, and make them
forget religion, that such company is not safe to keep, I find my self the
worse by it, why should I venture upon any thing, that may stop, and hinder, or
cool, and dead me in my way to heaven? If a man be wise, he will consider of
things as they help or hinder him to that.

As for sins whereof we are convicted, it is the Apostles counsel, Heb. 12.
he puts it Apparent sins.
out of all question, we must cast off all that burden that presses down,
etc. A traveller will not have a burden upon him. The sin that hangs so fast
on, we must labor to mortify, to kill our lusts and corruptions more and
more, and never leave till we have cast them off, these things are undeniable.
I spoke before of things in themselves indifferent, and to other men in
different, if they have a larger measure of wisdom; but for corruptions, and
sins, they fight against the soul; they fasten us to the world: therefore
above all things we must cast off them. As Saint Peter says excellently, in 1
Pet. 2. I beseech you brethren, as pilgrims, and I Peter 2.
strangers, abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against your souls.
Insinuating that pilgrims, and strangers should altogether abstain from lusts,
from the cherishing of carnal lusts, for these fight against the soul, they
fight against the comforts of the soul; against the graces of the soul, and
against the eternal well being of the soul. The more a man cherrisheth base
lusts, the more it damps his comfor^ and grace, and weakens his assurance of
life everlasting; they fight against all good in the soul; therefore, let us
abstain from fleshly lusts that fight against the soul. That is clear, all
confess that: But the other that I spoke of before, carfulness of things
indifferent if we find them not so to us; till we get more mastery of our
selves, we must even be careful of our liberties, and not give our selves
those liberties that others do if we find they hinder us in particular. Yet
with a secret concealing of it, not to entangle the consciences of other men,
who perhaps may use those things with less hinderance then we do. A wise
Christian will be wary in that kind: If he find the things of the world to
hinder him, he will not have his heart eaten up with the world, nor eaten out
with lawful things: being therefore to prepare for a better life and to do Gods
business, he will only take the things of this life as they may make for a
better life, and be a furtherance of him to his home; he winds home by all
means, he uses all advantages to come nearer to God, and whatsoever hinders
him he labors to avoid.

Again, he that accounts himself a stranger 11. H^ values not himself by
outward things.
here, he does not value himself by outward things: says teaches a man when
he is an heir of heaven, not to value himself by earthly things, he thinks
himself a stranger in his own house as David did, though he were a King (as I
said) every Christian is a stranger at home, he values not himself by his
honors, nor dignity, nor by the things that he has here; nor he does not
disvalue himself by poverty or disgrace, he knows he is a stranger, he is
going home, therefore he values himself by that he has at home. Christians
are Kings and heirs, they esteem not or disesteeme of themselves by what they
have here below, they account them as things in the way, that God gives them,
if they be good, to sweeten their pilgrimage; if they be ill to sharpen their
journey. It is necessary that God should give them these things, good things to
sweeten their journey, and if they loyter in their way to heaven, then that
they should have crosses to drive them homeward.

In all confusions in the world, faith teaches a man to stand as a man upon a
rock immovable, because he is a stranger: if any thing fall out in the City
or place where a stranger is, he carries his own Jewels, and things about him
and so goes away, his goods are not of that place: so in all confusions of the
world a Christian has good things of another world; the good things he carries
with him, are not subject to losses or crosses; they are not subject to the
misusing of the world: when all things shall be on fire, a Christian has his
treasure laid up in heaven, in a place where no earthly creature has power of
it; it is not subject to any ill; and that make; him in all estates contented
and patient. Let heaven and earth go together, a Christian when he has
embraced better things, a Christian thinks himself a stranger that is going
home, therefore in all his life he carries himself as a stranger. To go on a
little further.

A travailer in his way, must of necessity have refreshings by the way, or
else he will fail: therefore sometimes he sings, and some suseth other
refreshings. Now what says David? Thy statutes have been my song in the house
of my pilgrimage; that is, when I want other comforts, they are my song, my
joy, and delight. A travailer must needs have comforts that may revive him in
his ^ainting, he must have some pleasant walks for meditation. Let us therefore
when we grow weary, refresh our selves in walking, in holy meditation, take a
turn there, to think of the vanity of all earthly things, and how soon they
come to an end; and of the excellency, and eternity, of our glorious condition,
and estate when we come home; and then think of the helps and comforts by the
way, and such like. The Art of divine meditation is an Art for this end, that
since we are all travailers, that we are from home, and that we are going
home, we may walk in wisdom. Let us learn that art to feed and strengthen
our souls with such meditations as may clear them by the way: to set some
time apart when we grow dull, and indisposed in religion; then let us think how
to cherrish and refresh our souls with those excellencies that are indeed
above our comprehension, our hearts cannot conceive of it; it is set out in the
word of God to our conceit, but as it is we cannot conceive here what is
reserved for us when we shall come home: therefore let us do as travelers,
often think of home, and what is at home for us, and that will make us when we
are in the way, and any comfort would draw us out of our way, to think. O these
are good comforts, but this is not my home, I have betterat home then this, and
this will stay me from home. Therefore the cross is necessary for travailers,
that they may know they are not at home, that they may imbitter his comforts.
This consideration, that he is not at home, and that this is not his country,
as it will keep a Christian from temptations, so it will draw him on to
constancy in his love, and in going on: for a travailer sits not down, to stay
there; he thinks, here I am, and home I must go, and I shall not come home
by sitting here.

So the often thinking of home, it will both sweeten our troubles, and likewise
the comforts that we meet with in this world, it will make us that we shall
not be ens^ared with them; because, though they be comfortable things, yet
alas what are these? these indeed are fit to make a man forget home, to forget
heaven, as a man that sees goodly things, good^e houses, these things says
he, are they that make a man unwilling to go out of the world. But he that is
assured of a country, and knows that he has a better home then all these
earthly things, that are shadows and vanity; he thinks these are very goodly
things, but what are these to that that is reserved? and if I sit down by
these, if a travailer sit down by delights, and gaze upon things by the way,
when shall he come home? Let us think often of home, there are many uses to
think and meditate of that blessed day, this among the rest: that it draws us
on forward, and forward still, that we shall not sit quiet but go on still,
and not rest till we come home.

And the nearer we are home the more busy, and the more cheerful we should
be: as a traveller, when he comes near home he is more cheerful, when he
has home in his eye: when he sees the smoke of his country he rejoices. As
these Patriarchs, they saw the promises a far off. As men when they see the
tops of steeples and houses; they think, now we have them continually in
our eye, we see some thing of home, and the nearer they come the more they see,
and the nearer they come, still the more they see: so the longer a Christian
lives, the nearer and nearer he comes home: if he understand himself and have
any assurance in any degree, it makes him more joyful toward his end.

Thus it was with Gods people, when they were nearer their end, then they sung
sweetly the Swannes song, and then they were enlarged in their spirits: as
Jacob when he was dying, we see what a will he made, what legacies to his
children. And Joseph when he was dying, and Moses the man of God. The song of
Moses, and David the sweet singer of Israel. The last words of David what
sweet words they were. And Saint Paul when he was to go out of the world, I
have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, etc. And our blessed
Savior toward his end, we see how heavenly he was in his prayer. And good
Simeon, Lord now let thy servant depart in peace, etc. when he had grasped
Christ once, he was loath to live any longer: so it should be with Christians
as it is with travelers, the nearer they are home the more and more
comfortable they should be still.

It is a shame for old men to fear when they come near their end, when they
are near the haven then to fear. It is as if a man in a storm should fear
the haven; or a man that trav^ and sees a City to be afraid of his own house;
whereas he should rejoice and think he is nearer his happiness then other
men, as Saint Paul tells the Romans, your salvation is nearer now then when you
first believed. So we should think our salvation, and happiness in heaven is
nearer now then when we first believed; and therefore the less time we have to
travail here with encumbrances in the way to heaven the more joyful we should
be. The nearer we are to death, the nearer to our preferment, the nearer to
our country and our home. These are the advised thoughts of a Christian: and
when other thoughts come into a man, when he is stricken in years, surely they
are not in him as a Christian, but as he is weak, and wants faith, and
assurance of salvation. Oh, let us therefore labor to get assurance of another
a better country: for what made these holy men confess themselves strangers,
and pilgrims here? They saw the promises a far off and were persuaded of
them, and embraced them, and in that measure they were assured of a better
condition, they carried themselves as strangers and pilgrims here.

To wind up all in a word, you see here their disposition. I beseech you make
this text your pattern, to be molded into: you see how these blessed men long
ago lived in faith when their light was less then ours is, and they died in
faith, and will welcome us when we shall come to heaven, we shall go to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the rest of the Patriarchs and holy men. It will
be a blessed time when all the blessed men that have gone before shall welcome
us to heaven. If we look to be happy as they are, we must live as they did,
and die as they did: though we cannot so strongly as they did, see that with
the eye of faith that no eye else can see: yet let us desire God to persuade us
of these truths more strongly, then the devil of our own lusts shall persuade
us to the contrary: let us desire God to set on his truths so strongly that all
other things may not hinder us, that we may embrace them with our best
affections, of love, of desire, of contentment, that we may witness all this
by our demeanor to earthly things, by our base esteem of them, and carry our
selves as pilgrims and strangers on earth. If we do thus live in faith and die
in faith, we shall live with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven
eternally.

FINIS.
THE HIDDEN LIFE. In two Funeral Sermons upon COL. 3. 3, 4.

BY The late Learned and Reverend Divine, RICH. SIBBS: Doctor in Divinity, Mr
of KATHERINE Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher to the Honorable
Society of GRAYES-INNE.

1 JOHN 3. 2. Beloved, now ye are the Sons of God, and it does not appear
what we shall be.

LONDON, Printed by E. Purslow, for N. Bourne, at the Royal Exchange, and R.
Harford at the gilt Bible in Queens head Alley, in Paternoster Row. 1639.

THE HIDDEN LIFE.
COLLOS. 3. 3, 4. For ye are dead, your life, is hid with Christ in God.

When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him
in glory.


THE dependence of these words Dependence of the words.
(in a word) is this. The Apostle after he had laid the grounds of some
Doctrines, he does frame the building of a holy life and conversation. It is
in vain to believe well, unless a man work accordingly: he that lives
against his faith shall be damned, as he that believes against it. Thereupon in
this Chapter he comes to raise their affections to be Heavenly minded, and
stirs them up to subdue what soever is contrary to Heavenly mindedness. And
because it is a duty of great moment to be heavenly minded, and to subdue base
affections, he inserts weighty reasons between: If ye be risen with Christ,
seek those things that are above. And among other reasons, the^ (...) this,
ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. And thereupon he forces
seeking of the things that are above, and the mortifying of earthly members.
For the duties of Christianity ^e to be applied two ways, to be heavenly
affected and to subdue that which is contrary: to be heavenly minded, and to
mortify our earthly members. Now how shall we do both? For ye are dead, and
your life is hid with Christ in God, etc.

You see the first proposition, ye are dead, A Christian dead, how.
with whom? with Christ in God.

A Christian is dead many ways. He is dead to the law, to the moral law, he
looks not to have comfort and salvation by it: by the law, he is dead to the
law, and so flies to Christ.

A Christian is dead also to the ceremon^ll law: now in the glorious luster of
the Gospel, what have we to do with those (...) element that were for
Children? A ceremo^ disposition is opposite to the glory and luster of the
Gospel, as the Apostle speaks in the former Chapter.

He is dead likewise to sin, having communion with Christ (when he dyed for
sin) he is dead to sin. He that has communion in the death of Christ,
has the same affection to sin that Christ had. Christ hated it infinitely
when he suffered for it; so every Christian thinks that Christ dyed for my
sins, and by union with Christ, he has the same affection to it, he is dead
to it.

And because this is but an inchoation, and beginning, a Christian is not
perfectly dead to sin, he stands in need of afflictions, and in regard of
afflictions he is dead, they must help the work of mortification. And because
no affliction can sufficiently work mortification, but death it self, which is
the accomplishment of mortification, we are dead in respect of death it self,
which is the accomplishment of all: though we live here for a time, we are dead
in regard of the sentence that is passed on us, as we say a man is dead when
the sentence is passed on him; in that respect we are dead men, for our life
is but a dead life (besides the sentence that is passed upon us) death siezeth
upon us in the time of our life, in sicknesses etc. And so they prepare us to
death: thus, and many other ways we are dead.

The second proposition is, Our Life is hid with Christ in God.

We are dead, and yet we have a life. A Christian is a strange person, he is
both dead and alive; he is miserable and glorious, he consists of contraries;
he is dead in regard of corruption, and miseries, and such like, but he is
alive in regard of his better part, and he grows two ways at on^: it is a
strange thing that a Christian does, he grows downwards and upwards at the
same time; for as he dies in sin and misery, and natural death approaching; so
he lives the life of grace, and grows more and more till he end in Glory.

This life is said to be a hidden life, It is hid with Christ in God. Life of a
Christian hidden.


The life of a Christian, which is his glorious spiritual life, it is hid
among other respects.

It is hid to the world, to worldly men, because a Christian is an unknown man
to them: because they know not the Father that begets, therefore they know not
them that are begotten, as S. John says: they know not the advancement of a
Christian: he is raised into a higher rank then they. Therefore as a beast
knows not the things of a man, no more does a carnal man, in any excellency,
know the things of the spirit, for they are spiritually discerned; therefore it
is a hidden life in the eyes of the world: a wordly man sees not this life, in
regard of the excellency, he passes scorns, and contempts of it, of folly and
the like. A Christian, in respect of his happy life, is a stranger here, and
therefore he is willing to pass through the world, and to be used as a
stranger.

It is a hidden life likewise ofttimes, not only to worldlings, but in regard
of the children of God themselves: because by reason of some infirmities that
are in the best of Gods children, they are apt to judge amiss, harshly and
rashly one of another. Likewise by reason of those calamities that are common
to all men alike, they are afflicted as others, and have sicknesses, and are
contemned more then others, and by reason of this, the children of God often
censure those that have the beginnings of spiritual life in them. It is hid
from them.

It is hid likewise from themselves: for often Gods children know not
themselves, in temptation, in their nonage, in the beginning of their
conversion, in the time of desertion, and spiritual slumber and sleep, Grace
seems to be dead in them, and then they know not that they have this
spiritual life, especially if this desertion be joined with outward
abasement, they call their estate into question, as in Psalm. Psalm 73. 7.
73. 7. and in diverse places of Scripture: Gods children oftimes, by reason of
their inquisition and search, they raise clouds, whereby they conceal from
their own eyes, their own life. Partly through distemper of body, and partly
by distemper of spirit, there are clouds raised between them and their
happiness, that they cannot see their spiritual life.

But especially it is hid in regard of common infirmities, wanting gifts that
others have, that have not a dram of grace sometimes, that live to please
men, and look altogether to the outside, they do that many times to pleasemen
better then a Christian.

Sometimes God himself hides himself out of wisdom and mercy to us, when he
sees that we carry not our selves so reverently as we should. And this reason
may be sufficient of Gods dispensation: God will have it so: partly for the
further hardening of wicked persons, and for trial: for if all were laid open
in this excellent estate of a Christian, who should try their patience? who
would not be a Christian for the comfort, and for the sense, and feeling? Oh,
but this is not so, a Christian has a life, but it is a hidden life: therefore
God will try whether men will live by faith or sense, whether they will have
their ways now or no, or whether they will depend upon that glorious life that
God will reveal in time to come, and to exercise and strengthen faith: God
will have it so, that this life shall be now hid, that we may live by the
promises, though we have no feeling at all; that we may persuade our selves in
the greatest desertions and extremities, yet I have a hidden Life in Christ,
though I have little influence, and manifestation of it in me: yet I have a
glorious life in my head, and I live now by Faith, till I come to live by
sight. This is one reason.

We should not therefore take offense, we must not judge of Christians by
outward show and appearance, as CHRIST says, we should not judge of our
selves by outward appearance, nor of the Church. The Whore of Babylon has more
painting and setting out, in all glorious shows (it being an outside religion)
then the true spouse of Christ, whose glory and beauty is within, does it
follow therefore that she is the true Church? Oh no, for the beauty of the
wife of Christ it is a hidden beauty, she is glorious within, a stranger does
not meddle with the joy of the Church. Christians have a name indeed, and a
stone, that none know but them that have it: It is hidden Mannah, we must not
judge of the Church, or of Christians by outward appearance, we shall be
deceived in that. Our Life is hid with Christ, the spring of all spiritual
life. The Life of a Christian is a secret life, it is a peculiar life, it is a
safe life. It is secret because it is hid; as I said, Gods children are secret
ones, they are not known to the world, nor to themselves ofttimes.

But ordinarily faith in them breaks through the Cloud, and unmaskes God
himself, and sees Gods Fatherly face, though he hide himself. They have a
promise to lay hold upon, and they acknowledge him to be their Father, and
wrestle with him, it is a secret Life, but it is not so secret, but that Faith
ses into it, it pierces the Veil, and sees a glorious Life there. Faith will
see Gods glorious countenance; Faith makes it a glorious Life though it be
secret, therefore let us not judge our selves nor others by appearance.

And it is also a sure life, it is hid with Christ in God, mark on what
grounds it is sure.

First it is hid in Heaven, no enemy can come there, the Devil comes not there
since he first lost it, and was cast out. It is safe in regard of the place, it
is hid in Heaven.

And it is safe, because it is hid in Christ, who purchased it with his blood,
who has trampled upon all opposite powers, over death, and hell it self, it
is hid in heaven, and in him who has overcome all opposite power, therefore it
is a safe life.

And it is hid with Christ in God. Christ is in the bosom of God; Christ
mediator, it is hid with Christ in God, he is the storehouse of this life, it
is hid with him. If any can rob God, then they may rob our Life from us, for it
is hid with Christ in God; it is a sure life therefore. Oh! but we may lose it,
though it be sure in respect of God. Object.


Nay, says S. Peter, We are begotten again Answer.
to an inheritance, immortal, and reserved for us in Heaven, and we are kept
by the power of God to salvation. It is kept for us, and we are kept to it, God
has prepared it for us, and prepared us for it: so it is a most sure life,
especially because Christ lives for ever, with whom it is, It is hid with
Christ in God.

It is likewise a peculiar life, only to Gods people: for they only have union,
and communion with Christ, and therefore he says here, your life is hid with
Christ in God.

It is likewise a glorious life: for it is hid with Christ, who is the glory of
God, and he says in the next Verse, when Christ who is our life shall appear,
we shall appear with him in Glory. It is a glorious life, but of that I shall
speak in the next verse.

We see then that our life is hid in Christ, and what kind of life this is; it
is a secret, sure, peculiar, glorious life. Alas, we are ready to judge of our
selves by the present, and not to think it a glorious life: but he says, it
is hidden for us; Light is sown for the righteous, it does not appear for the
present. A garden has seeds sown, and herbs, but in the winter there is no
difference between it and a common field; but when the sun shines and
appears, then the herbs appear in their luster: so it is with a Christian,
there is light, and immortality, and happiness sown for him, when Christ, the
Son of Righteousness, shall appear, then we shall appear with him in glory.

As we may say of all things below, they have a hidden life, the plants and
the flowers in the winter, they live by the root, and when the Sun appears,
then they also appear with the Sun in glory. So it is with the Righteous,
they have a hidden life, it is hid now in the root, in their head, in this
life, when Christ the Son of Righteousness shall appear, when the spring
comes, when the resurrection comes, then we shall appear with him in glory;
and so I come to speak of that verse. When Christ, who is our life shall
appear, then shall ye appear also with him in Glory.

Our life is now hid, our happiness is vayled over, there are many things
between us and our life, but shall it always be so? Oh no, When Christ who
is our Life shall appear, we shall appear also with him in Glory: he meets
with a secret objection. The parts here to be stood on are these.

First, Christ he is our Life, he shall appear in Glory as our Life. This is
taken for granted, it is a supposed truth, When Christ who is our Life shall
appear, it is taken for granted that he shall appear in glory:

The next thing is, that we shall appear likewise with Christ. Christ shall
appear, and we.

And then the consequence, how these depend one upon another, because Christ
appears in Glory, therefore we, when Christ who is our life shall appear.

The Apostle cannot mention Christ, without an addition of comfort, and the
Christian soul loves Christ, it sees such matter of comfort, and such
righteousness in him, that it cannot think of Christ, without a comfortable
addition of Lord, Savior, Life, Hope, Glory, etc. Christ carries with him all
comforts, he is food, the bread of life, the water of life, all that is good
to the soul, therefore the Apostle gives this sweet addition, Christ out life.
How is Christ our life.

He is every way the cause of the Life of Grace and of Glory. And not only so,
the cause, but the root, and spring in whom it is: we have it from Christ,
and in Christ: we have it in Christ, as a root, and from Christ as a working
cause, and by Christ as a Mediator: For Christ procured Life at Gods hands, by
his Sactifice, and Death. We have it in Christ as a head, from him as a cause
(together with both the other persons) and through him as Mediator, who by his
death made way to life; appeasing the wrath of God: so we are reconciled and
pardoned by the death of Christ.

Christ is not only our Life so, but as the matter of our life that we seed
on; when he has wrought spiritual life in us, then the Soul lives by Faith
in Christ still, and seeds upon him, he is our life because we feed on him:
for as food nourishes the body, so the Soul, being every day set on by fresh
temptations, and afflictions, and troubles, and fresh discomforts, the Soul of
necessity is forced to look to Christ, every day, and to feed upon Christ, to
feed upon his blood af^esh, which runs conti nually: for he is a Mediator
for ever, and he is in Heaven to make good, that he has done by his death and
we look upon him every day, and feed on him, and so he maintains the life
he has begun. Christ is our life thus:

More particularly (for memory sake) Christ when by faith we have union with
him once, (as we can have no communion without union with him) when we are one
with him once by faith; we have life from Christ; the life of reconciliation
in law, opposite to our death in law, and in sentence; for by nature we are all
dead, and damned as soon as we are borne for our own sins, and the sins of
our first parents; we are dead in sentence: Now by Christ there is a reversion
of this sentence. Christ by his obedience, and suffering has satisfied his
father: so by our union with Christ we are alive in sentence, we are absolved
in GODS court of justice, for he will not punish sin twice.

And then after the life of justification being justified by faith, we have the
life of sanctification, and holiness: for GOD out of his love, when he has
pardoned our sin, he gives his spirit as the best fruit of his love: and we
having our consciences absolved, and acquitted by the spirit of GOD through the
obedience of Christ, we love GOD. GOD so loves us when he is appeased by
Christ, that the bar being taken away, our sins being pardoned, and the
sluice of mercy open, there is way made for another life, the life of
sanctification by the spirit: upon pardon of our sins he gives the spirit,
and we feeling that love, have love wrought in us to him again, and that love
stirs up every Christian to obedience.

In the next place, after he has acquitted us by his Alsufficient
satisfaction, being God and Man, and has given us his spirit: there is another
life, the life of comfort, which is the life of our life, in peace of
conscience, and joy unspeakable, and glorious, this life issues from the
former: for when we find our conscience appeased, that God says to our souls,
he is their salvation, and find a newness wrought in our nature by the spirit
of God, and some strength to obey him, then we begin to have a sweet peace, (as
the Children of God find in themselves) and joy unspeakable, and glorious.

This is the life of this life, having union with Christ, and his
Righteousness, and spirit, we have this peace, which is the way to Glory, and
the beginning of it. For besides that, Christ is our life in Glory afterward,
in this life he is our life. Answerable to our servile fear, as we are dead
in law, we have a life in justification. As we are dead in nature, so we have
a life in sanctification, we are dead in despair and run into terrors of
Conscience, so we have a life in joy, and peace.

But all those in this life are imperfect, because there is only an union of
Grace here till we come to the union of Glory in Heaven, and then at the day
of judgment there will be a perfect justifying of us, we shall not only be
acquitted in our conscience, as we are now, but we shall be acquitted before
Angels and Devils and Men, and Christ will acknowledge us: these are they for
whom I dyed, these are they for whom I made intercession in Heaven, we shall be
acquitted there, and there we shall be acknowledged:

And then the life of sanctification, that is now in part, shall then be
perfect, and likewise the peace that now passes understanding, shall then be
full, and our joy shall be full by Christ who is our life:

So then we see we have in Christ the second Adam, whatsover we lost in the
first root. Whence did we draw sin, and misery? by union with the first
Adam, we have damnation, we have the wrath of God, we have corruption opposite
to sanctification, we have terrors, and horror of conscience. By the second
Adam and union with him we have a spring of life, and peace, and all that we
lost in Adam, and more then all we lost, he being God-man. The sin of the
first Adam was the sin of a man: the obedience of the second Adam, was the
obedience of God-man, which raises us to life everlasting. Romans 5. So that
there is more comfort in the life we have by Christ, then there is discomfort
in our death by Adam.

We see then hence that in all our deadness and dullness, and want of grace,
there is a spring in our nature. God has given Christ, God-man, that there
should be a treasure in him for all the Church, that we may fetch supply out of
our nature. He is fit to be our life: for our nature in him is united to the
Godhead, therefore Christ is a fit fountain to derive grace to believers;
because man's nature in him is advanced, by being united to the second person,
he is God-man, able to derive all grace, and comfort, and righteousness
whatsoever. Shall the first Adam derive unrighteousness, discomfort and misery
that was a man? and shall not Christ God-man, derive righteousness, and
comfort, and joy, and peace, and whatsoever is good? undoubtedly he shall.
Therefore in all want of grace, in all temptations and assaults, let us go to
the fountain, to the fullness of grace, to the fullness of Gods love in Christ,
Christ, God-man is our life. As when we are cold, we come to the fire: so when
we are dull-hearted, let us come to this quickening spirit.

And to this end, let us be stirred up to use those means wherein Christ will
be effectual, (whereby as by veins, the blood of this spiritual life is
conveyed;) as the Word, and Sacraments, the Communion of Saints, and all
sanctified means, whereby the life of grace, and comfort may be conveyed to
us: let us never be out of such ways, and courses, as where by Christ derives
this life of grace, and let us take heed of those that are contrary.

But, how shall I know, says a weak soul, Question.
(that finds little comfort, and peace, and little sanctification, and is
besieged with troubles, and is doubtful, and knows not whether his sins be
forgiven or no, how shall I know) whether Christ be my life or no?

I answer that the life of Christ is but now Answer.
begun in us, and it is very little at the first. There is nothing less then
grace at the beginning. The life of Christ is conveyed to us from Christ
voluntarily not by necessity. He gives the will and the deed according to
(...); therefore we must know that we have more or less comfort, and more or
less grace as he pleases. He brings all to heaven in all ages that have the
true life of grace, though he make a difference, and give to some more, and to
some less, because he is a head that flows into his members, not out of
nature, but of his own pleasure.

And a Christian soul that has union with Christ, that has a being, and
station in him may know it; there are always some pulses from this heart: as we
know there is some life by the beating of the pulses: so Christ's dwelling in
the heart, is known by these pulses, there will be striving against
corruption, and complaining of it. (Nature, and corruption will not complain
against corruption: co^ption will not strive against corruption,) there will be
sighing, and groaning, which is seconded with a constant endeavor to grow
better, it is not a flash: these pulses beating in the soul of a true
Christian, show that there is the life of grace in him, that Christ's dwells in
his heart. And this often times does more appear in the greatest temptations:
Take a Christian at the worst, his heart sighs to God, to recover him, he is
sick, and yet he hopes in Christ, Christ in the greatest desertion is his life,
who was also our pattern, when he was at the lowest, My God, my God. So a
Christian at the lowest, he has a spirit of prayer, (though it may be) he
cannot pray distinctly, yet he can sigh, and groan, and God hears the sighs
of his own Spirit always: Therefore when these pulses beat in him, in the
greatest temptations he may know that Christ lives in him.

Sometimes Christ in respect of this life, in this world reserves himself to
the chief occasion; as some great affliction of the outward man. In 2 Cor. 4.
We see there, when the 2 Cor. 4.
body of Saint Paul was afflicted, when it was abased by many afflictions, The
life of Christ was most manifested in him. God reserves to poor Christians
(that now live in peace and quiet) the greatest feelings and manifestations of
Christ's living in them, till some great cross, till the hour of death, till a
time of need. The life of Christ is most manifest in the time of abasement.

By the way therefore, let us not avoid crosses for Christ's sake: avoid not any
abasement, though it be imprisonment, or death; the more our outward man is
abased, if it be for Christ's sake, the more this life of Christ, this blessed
life, this peace that passes understanding, and this joy in the Holy Ghost is
increased; we shall feel our absolution, and justification the more. This life
of Christ is most manifested when we honor him most by suffering for him.
Therefore let us avoid no cross for him. Christ who is our life, Shall appear:

There are two appearings (we know) of Christ; his first appearing, and his
second appearing. His first appearing was to work our salvation; his second
shall be to accomplish, and finish what he has begun to work. His first
appearing, was to redeem our souls from death, and his second shall redeem
our bodies from the corruption of the (...) so his second appearing shall be to
accomplish all the good that he came to do and to work by his first. As
verily therefore as Christ is come in his first appearing; so verily and
certainly he shall appear the second time. And as it was the description of
holy men before his first coming, to wait for him, To wait for the
consolation of Is^ael: so Christians now; those blessed souls that have the
report of this they wait for the coming of Christ.

There were all kind of witnesses then of his first coming, Angels, men,
women, shepherds, the Devils themselves, The Trinity from heaven witnessed of
him: so for his second coming there are witnesses. Christ himself says he
will come. The Angels say, This Jesus that ye see go up shall come again. It
is an Article of our faith, that he shall come. The Spirit of God in every
Christian says come, and that is not in vain, the desires of the Spirit of
God must be fulfilled, therefore he shall come; and the Spirit of God stirs
up our spirits to say come. There are all kind of proofs, and arguments for
it. It is an Article of our faith: it is laid here for a ground, and therefore
I will not enlarge my self in it: but come to the next point. Christ will
appear, and We shall also appear with him in glory.

We shall appear, and appear with him and appear in glory with him. Christ
himself his glory is in some sort hid now: for though he be King of the
Church, yet we see what enemies are in the Church; and Satan ruffles in the
Church a great while, and the nearer he is to his end, the more he rages; so
that Christ's glory seems to be hid; but Christ then shall appear, and his
Church shall appear with him in glory.

Why shall we appear with Christ, and be glorious with him? Question.


I answer, this is clear: partly because it Answer. John 17.
is Christ's will, in John 17. Father I will that where I am they may be also.
It is Christ's last Testament that we should be where he is, and be glorious
with him, and Christ's will must be fulfilled.

Again, consider what we are to Christ, how near we are brought to him, and
then this will be clear, that when Christ shall appear in glory, we must
appear with him: for Christ is our Husband, and we are his Spouse, when Christ
comes to be glorious, therefore his Spouse must be glorious; now is but the
time of contract, the time of the marriage, solemnity shall be at the appearing
of Christ: therefore when he shall appear, we shall appear with him in glory.
Christ in his own person, distinct from his Church, is now glorious as a head,
but Christ mystical is not glorious, Christ mystical suffers: there are many
members that are not yet called. Some are abased, and some are not brought to
the fold: And Christ has a care of his mystical body, as of his natural
body; and as that is glorious in heaven, so he will bring all his members to
be one glorious body. He gave his natural body to redeem his mystical body,
therefore as he is glorious in that in heaven, so he will be glorious in his
mystical body, in every believing soul at the last, when he shall come to be
glorified in his Saints, as the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 1. He is 2 Thessalonians. 1.
10.
glorious in himself now: then he will be glorious in his Spouse.

And then from the ground of predestination, Romans 8. We are predestinate to be
conformed Romans 8.
to Christ, that he might be the first borne among many brethren. Now Christ
being glorious, and we being predestinate before the world was to be like unto
Christ; first in abasement, to be abased for him that was abased for us, to
suffer for him that suffered for us, and to be conformed to him in grace; there
must be a time to be conformed to him in glory? From the ground of Election,
there must be a state of glory, our glory must be revealed when Christ shall
come and appear. I will press no more reasons that we must be glorious at the
second coming of Christ as well as himself.

Wherein stands this glory? Quest.


To clear this point a little, I will not be Answer.
long in it; because indeed this glory is such, as eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, nor has entered into the heart of man. The Apostles speak not much of
it, they speak of it in negative terms, by denying imperfections: It is an
inheritance incorruptible, immortal, etc. And when it is resembled to earthly
things, it is compared to a banquet, to a marriage, etc. But this glory, it
shall be in body, in soul in the whole man.

In soul, there shall be the knowledge of those mysteries of salvation, that
now we are ignorant of. Now we are in the Grammar school, but that shall be
as the University. Then we shall know things more clearly, we shall see God
face to face; and then our souls shall be raised to be capable of more
knowledge and grace. Now the vessel of our soul is not capable to know that
that we shall then, they are not capable as they shall be in heaven. Saint Paul
himself was not capable, therefore when he was taken up into the third
heavens, least he should be proud of his revelations, he was feign to be
abased. We are not capable, we cannot know the glory of heaven in a full
measure now: but then, God shall enlarge the heart, and sanctify it, that we
shall have strong spirits, and holy understandings, and affections to
understand holy things, we shall know God face to face. There shall be a
proportion between the glorious things in heaven, and our soul there shall be
a heavenly soul for a heavenly place, where as yet it is not so.

I forbear to show the particulars of the glory of the body: the Apostle Paul
sets it down, 1 Cor. 15. It shall be a spiritual body: it 1 Cor. 15.
shall be guided by the Spirit, and the body, it shall not then need meats and
drinks, but God shall be all in all. Now, our life at the best is fed and
clothed by the creatures, then, all shall be taken out of God himself, God
himself shall be All in all. The presence of God, and of Christ our Savior
shall supply all that we have now other ways. Now, comfort is conveyed from
this creature, and from that; but whatsoever comfort we have now dropped by the
creatures, we shall then have all in him, and in fullness, and for evermore. So
we shall be glorious in soul and body.

And in our whole man, the Image of God and Christ shall be perfectly restored,
we shall be like Christ, reserving the difference between the head, and the
members, reserving the difference of a natural Son, and of sons adopted;
he shall be more glorious then we; we shall be glorious as much as we are
capable off, in all fullness of joy, and grace, and dominion over the creature,
in freedom from ill, and readiness to good, we shall be glorious sons of God.
I need not to be long in unfolding these things.

When shall this be? Quest.


When he shall appear, says the Apostle, Answer.
we shall also appear with him in glory. It is carried indefinitely to stop
curiosity, there is no time set down: but when he shall appear, etc. In a
word, when all the Elect shall be gathered together. It is not meet that our
bodies and souls should be glorified, till all Gods people be gathered
together. As in a Simile.
family they do not sit down till all the servants be come in, and then they
sit down together: so in this great family of God; the Saints in heaven and
earth, there shall not be perfect glory, till all be gathered, and saved. And
then what a blessed time will that be, when every one shall be glorious
himself, and shall put down the Sun in glory in his body, and soul? and
when there shall be such a world of them so glorious.

If every Star be beautiful, how beautiful are all in their luster? when so
many Saints shall be gathered together they shall be far more glorious then
the Sun in his Majesty; and this glory is reserved till all be gathered
together. God said of the creatures severally they were good, but when he
looked on them together, they were exceeding good: so the several souls of
Christians are glorious: but at the day of Judgment when all shall be gathered
together, there shall be an exceeding glory. It is reserved I say for the
gathering together of the Saints: when Christ, who is the head shall have
gathered all by his word, and ministry out of this sinful world (which are
scattered here and there) then they shall come to perfect glory. Then there
shall be perfect union between the body and soul; then there shall be a
perfect union between us, and all that are dead together; then there shall be
a perfect union between us, and Christ, then we shall have the perfect
fruition of God, of Angels, of all the blessed company in heaven. Oh! what a
blessed time will this be? and this shall be at the glorious appearing of
Christ.

Christ shall appear in glory himself, as verily as he appeared in his first
coming, and we shall appear with him in glory.

Why should we doubt of it? is not that which is greater done already? has
not God himself become man? has not God dyed? and God been abased in his
first coming? Is not that more wonder, then that man should become like God in
his second coming? whether is greater for God to become man, or for men to be
raised out of their graves, and become glorious? certainly this is the lesser,
why should we doubt of it? Let us raise our hearts with this, that as verily as
he came in abasement to work our salvation, so verily he shall come, and
raise us to glory, and this is a lesser work then the former.

But to come nearer, to make some further use of this, surely these are maine
points, and should be often thought on. O! that the hearts of Christians were
exercised with them. Could we be dead either for grace or comfort, if we did
often think of this with application? Let us often warm our selves with these
things: let us bring our selves to the light, let us think of the blessed
times to come: could we be unfruitful? This made Saint Paul adjure Timothy,
and the Thessalonians, I beseech you by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
etc. I shall need no greater argument to press you, then as verily as Christ
shall come in glory, and as you shall be gathered to him: so hear what I say.
So Saint Paul charge Timothy, 1 Timothy 6. 13. 1 Timothy 6. 13.
I charge thee before Christ, who at his coming, etc. Keep this Commandment.
This will moove a man's conscience, and carry him to duty, if nothing else will.
Let us think seriously Christ will come with thousands of his Angels in glory
and majesty, and all shall be glory then, there shall be nothing but glory;
glorious in his company, glorious in himself, glorious in his enemies, he
shall trample them under his feet, by a glorious confusion, there shall be
nothing but glory in heaven and earth then. And we shall come to the same
glory; the Spouse shall partake of the glory of her husband. Let us think of
this, it will quicken, and inspire all our courses with a spiritual kind of
light to all actions, it will enliven, and quicken them.

And it will put a kind of manner upon all our actions, that they shall be
acceptable to God. For how should we perform all that comes from us? All
should be done in sincerity, and constantly, and abundantly, and chearefully,
readily, and willingly, for God requires these qualifications in what we do;
now what stirs us up to do all in this manner, acceptably to God, but this
consideration?

What stirs us up to do things sincerely to Christ? He will appear in
glory, therefore let us do things that may stand with his judgment. It is no
matter what the reprobates of the world judge, let us do things so as we may
stand before Christ at that day. A Christian studies to arraigne himself
before Christ, that he may do that that may approve him to him that shall be
his judge ere long.

And so let us hold out, we shall receive a reward, what will make us constant
but this? what makes a man sow his seed, that he scarcely can spare, but the
hope of a harvest? what makes a man run, but the victory, and the Crown? so
what makes a man work, but the hope of reward? be constant, for in him ye
shall receive the reward if ye faint not.

And so for abounding in good works, your labor is not in vain in the Lord:
what made Saint Paul press the abounding in good works? Finally my brethren,
be steadfast and unmooveable, al^y abounding in the work of the Lord, why? for
your labor is not in vain in the Lord: your bodies shall rise again ere long
in glory, when Christ shall appear you shall appear, and be glorious with
him. Therefore abound in the work of the Lord; sow to the Spirit, and you
shall reap glory; they that sow sparingly shall reap sparingly. What mkes men
abound in works of mercy and love, but this appearing of Christ? If their love
be perfect, they have comfort in this appearing, and if they abound in mercy,
Christ will appear in mercy to them.

And so for cheerfulness: that God also requires in every action, what
inlargeth the heart of a man in Gods work? what puts fire into his affections
but this, that Christ will come and appear in glory ere long? that he will
come, and crown every good work, that we shall not loose a good word that
has been spoken in a good cause, not the least good action, not a cup of cold
water, but all shall stand on our reckoning at that day when Christ shall come
to be (...) in his Saints. This makes us do things sincerely, constantly,
abundantly, and chearefully.

I beseech you consider from what ground these things come: for these are
principles that should be grounds of faith: they are pregnant, and spread
themselves through the whole course of a Christians life, and therefore are
worthy to be thought often on.

Again, why does God reveal these things before hands, that we shall appear
in glory in our body and soul, in our whole man? As it shows us our duty, and
the manner ofit, so it is a ground of comfort in all estates; A Christian may
think: Now my life is a hidden, secret life. I pass under censures, it is
thus in the world, and thus with me; well there will a time come, the time of
Resurrection that will make amends for all; for this sickness of body, and
disquiet of mind, and all annoyance, 2
and adversity; and it is revealed before hand for our comfort that there shall
be such a time that we may make use of it, that we may ground our patience
upon it. When Saint Paul exhorts to patience, says he, The Lord is at hand,
and Saint James says, The Judge stands at the door. Let us be patient in
infamies, and sufferings, it will be otherwise ere long, Christ is at hand.

Again, that we might continually be breathing out thankfulness to God. Our
whole life should be spent in thankfulness to God. Even as the Angels in
heaven that stand in the presence of God, and the blessed spirits in heaven,
they spend that vigor that is in them: they spend all that is in them, in
praising God, in thanks and laud to God, and sing, Glory, glory: so beforehand
knowing that ere long we shall appear with Christ, and appear in glory, let
us thank him before hand. As Saint Peter says, Blessed be God that has
begotten 1 Pet. 1.
us again to an inheritance, immortal, undefiled, etc. reserved in heaven for
us. Let us bless God beforehand, as if we were in heaven already. Certainly
if we hope to be with those that shall sit in heavenly places in heaven to
praise God, we will begin it on earth: for the life of heaven is begun on
earth, we are Kings now, we are Priests now, we are conquerours now, we are
new creatures now: we must praise God, and begin the imploiment of heaven now
for what they do perfectly, that we begin to do. In heaven we know there is no
ill company, we will abstain from it now; there is no defilement of sin, we
will conform our selves to that estate we hope for: There is nothing but
praising of God; as much as may be we will warm our hearts with the
moditation of what God has done, what he does, and what he has reserved for
the time to come, with that we have in hope. The best things of a Christian
especially are in hope: for that which we have by Christ, principally is not in
this world: therefore considering that the best things that Christ died for are
in hope, let us rejoice in hope, and in rejoicing have our hearts enlarged with
praising of God, for that we hope for.

And be comforted in all the changes of this life, all the changes for the time
to come, and in death it self, which is the last change: are not all degrees
to make way for that glorious appearing with Christ? for the soul at death
goes to heaven, and the body shall come after: why should we be loath to die,
when death is nothing but a change from misery to happiness? a change from the
danger of sinning, to an impossibility of sinning, from a vale of misery to a
place of happiness, from men to God, from sinful persons that trouble our
peace and quiet, to better company in heaven, from actions that are sinful, to
actions altogether free from sin. It is a glorious and blessed change every
way; we shall have better company, better place, better employment, all
glorious then, till the time come that all the Elect be gathered together, and
then body and soul shall be for ever with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4. Why then
should we 1 Thessalonians. 4.
fear changes, when all changes shall end in that that is better? Is a
laboring man loath to have his hire, or a weary man loath to have rest? is a
King loath to be crowned? is a party contracted loath to have the marriage
consummate? why should we be loath to die? We should be ashamed of our
selves, that we have bin so long in the School of Christ, and yet have not
learned to unloose our affections from earth, to beter things, that we stand
in fear of death, that makes way to the glory of the soul now; and the
eternal glory of body, and soul after.

In a word, we are exhorted in the beginning of the Chapter, to have our minds
in heaven, where Christ is, and we are exhorted after the text to mortify our
earthly members: two necessary duties, to have our conversation in heaven,
before we be there, and to mortify our earthly members, to dye in our
affections to earthly things, before we dye indeed; would we have strength
put into our souls to perform both these? Let us often meditate of the things
that are between these verses. Let us consider that we are dead, so we should
be more lively to God. Consider that our life is hid with Christ, that Christ
shall appear ere long, and we with him in glory. We should raise our thoughts
to be with Christ, and draw our souls up to Heavenly things, for the more our
affections are upwards, the less they will be below: our affections are
finice, the more we spend them on heavenly things, the less they will run on
earthly. As a man in a trance, his thoughts are taken up with one matter, that
he is dead to Simile.
other things, so the soul which is taken up with the glory to come, and with
Christ, it is dead to earthly things, only it takes them for necessary use, as
having use of them in our travel, but it uses the world as if it used it not.
And this issues from this principle, that we shall ere long appear with
Christ in Glory. There is no man but will drown himself too much with the
things of the world, that has not this to raise up his soul, I shall appear
ere long with Christ in glory, and then these things will be consumed.

The last point is, how these depend one upon another, that because Christ
shall appear in Glory, therefore we.

I will touch it a little, because it is a point of faith, that helps our
judgment a little. It is a ground of Divinity, that whatsoever is in us that
are members, it is in our head first, for God is first, and then Christ
mediator, and then we, whatsoever is good is in us, or shall be to us, it is in
Christ first. He is justified from our sins, for he was our surety for sin,
he was abased for them first: therefore he shall appear then without sin to
Glory. Our sin was but imputed to Christ, he became our surety for sin, and he
must be abased, therefore we cannot be glo rious here, because of our
corruptions. Christ was surety for our sins in his first coming: now his
resurrection showed, that he had satisfied for our sins; the second time he
shall appear in glory: why are we justified from our sins? because Christ, our
surety, was acquitted.

We ascend glorious^ to heaven, where is the ground of it? he ascended first,
and we ascend for him and in him.

We sit in heavenly places, why? because he is in heaven before hand: as the
Husband takes up a place for his wife: why does she go into the country, and
take it up after? because her husband has gone before and taken it. Our
ascension rises from his, and our sitting at the right hand of God, from his.

And so at the day of judgment, our being glorious, it comes from his. He then
shall appear in glory, as the head, and husband of his Church, and shall shine
upon all his members. He, as the Sun, shall cast a luster and beauty, and
glory, upon all that are his, and then they shall reflect that glory they have
from him, upon him again, and he upon them again, so he shall be glorious in
them, and they in him, but the ground of all is, he is first in glory, he shall
appear in glory, and then we in him.

I speak this the rather, because I would have humble consciences to make use
of it in times of desertion, when God seems to be a God that hides himself,
when they find no life nor comfort, yet if they have but grace to believe, they
may comfort themselves in this: well, I have it but from Christ, and he is
perfect in glory, he is ascended, and I shall ascend, and rise, and be
glorious, because he is so: Put case now I feel no such matter: it is no
matter, I live by faith in Christ, that has all in fullness, and what he has
done for me, he will do in me, if I believe in him.

Let a troubled soul comfort it self with this, it is as impossible that he
should be damned, that believes in Christ, as that Christ should be damned,
because he believing in Christ, is one with him, and as verlly as Christ is in
heaven, he shall be there; for Christ rose for all his. The little finger
lives the same life, as the Simile.
hand or the foot does; so a weak christian that has little grace, he lives
by the same faith in Christ that is in glory, as well as they that are
stronger. Let us strive and fight with this encouragement, as S. Paul says,
fight the good fight of Faith. Oh! but shall we be always fighting and
striving? No says he, lay hold of eternal Life, and then we may well fight
against doubts and despair. Let us therefore labor to fight so, that we may
lay hold on eternal life, which Christ keeps for us, and keeps us for it, and
ere long we shall partake of that we hope for.

FINIS.
THE REDEMPTION OF BODIES, In one Funeral Sermon upon PHIL. 3. 2^.

BY The late Learned and Reverend Divine, RICH. SIBBS: Doctor in Divinity, Mr
of KATHERINE Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher to the Honorable
Society of GRAYES-INNE.

1 COR. 15: 44. It is sown a natural Body, it is raised a spiritual body.

LONDON, Printed by E. Purslow, for N. Bourne, at the Royal Exchange, and R.
Harford at the gilt Bible in Queens head Alley, in Paternoster Row. 1639.

THE REDEMPTION OF BODIES.
PHIL. 3. 21. Who shall change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious Body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue
all things to himself.
THE Apostle was now in prison, yet he had a spirit of glory, resting upon
him: for he speaks as if he were entered into Heaven, as if he were there
before his time; and therefore in Chap. 1. says he, I desire to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ, which is best of all. And I account all dung in
comparison of Christ, as he says in this Chap. and here in the former verse,
Our conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for the Savior, Jesus
Christ, who shall change our vile bodies, etc. God reserves abundance of
comforts to the fittest times, as we see here in Saint Paul in this place. Now
he brings in his own example to good purpose, as opposite to false Christians,
and false ^eachers, that he had mentioned before. There are many walk, of whom
I have told you often, etc. they are enemies to the cross of Christ, that mind
earthly things, etc. verse 18. But says he, our conversation is in heaven, he
regards not which way they went, he took an opposite course to the world, and
swims against the stream: As we see the stars, they have a motion of their own,
opposite to the motion that they are carried with. So S. Paul had a motion of
his own, opposite to the course of the world, their end is damnation, but our
conversation is in Heaven. A christian has his conversation in Heaven, while
he is on earth, he rules his life by the laws of heaven. There are always in
the visible Church, some that walk contrary ways, who make their Belly their
God, whose end is (...). There were some that were christians, (...) (...)
^achers of Christians many of them, yet he says, their end is damnation, their
God is their belly: carnal Christians say, we have all (...) the sacrament,
etc. Alas we may all partake of this common privilege, and yet our end may be
damnation. St. Paul looked on them with a a spirit of compassion, I tell you
weeping. So it may be with us, in our Goshe^ here, there may be a spirit of
cast-awayes in many, and in the abundance of means there may be many dead
souls. But S. Paul regards not what their course was, for says he, our
conversation is in Heaven. From whence we look for the Savior, etc.

That shows why his conversation was in heaven, because his Savior was in
heaven, and therefore his hope was in heaven, Where the treasure is, the heart
will be. Having entered into this blessed discourse, he goes on still, who shall
change our vile bodies, and fashion them like his glorious body. He brings it
in by way of answering an objection. If our conversation be in heaven, why are
our bodies yet subject to such afflictions and baseness in this world? It is
true they are; but the time shall come that Christ shall change these vile
bodies of ours, and fashion them like to his glorious body. I, but this
requires a great deal of power and strength, and we see not how it may be.
Therefore says he, he shall do it by that almighty power, whereby he is able
to subdue all things to himself, therefore he shall subdue death, the last
enemy; he will not do it perhaps according to thy fancy and conceit, but
according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself:
we must not regard our weak conceits in great matters, but Gods power; ye
err (says Christ to the Pharisees) not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power
of God.

Saint Paul then in these words, and in the verse before, sets down three
reasons why his course is opposite to the course of wicked men in his time.

First, my City is in heaven, and my conversation is answerable, I take a
contrary course, for I am a citizen of another City.

And then another reason is, his hope and expectation of a Savior from heaven,
the Lord Jesus. Hope and faith, which is the ground of hope, carry up the soul
where the thing hoped for is, Our conversation is in heaven, we hope for a
Savior from thence.

The third reason is, from the condition of the body, how ever it was now for
the present, He shall change our vile body, that it may be like his glorious
body. Who shall change our vile body.

You see here the Apostle having set himself upon a holy and heavenly
meditation, he could not satisfy himself, but goes from point to point,
setting down his present holy conversation, grounded upon his future hope of a
blessed state to come. Christ shall change our vile body. Our bodies are vile,
and our bodies, here is the point then that, The best men's bodies in this world
are vile.

Vile in regard of the matter whence they are taken, the earth, from the dust;
the fairest body is but well colored dust; base and vile from the beginning,
from the womb, base in the whole life, base in death; most base after death.
They are base I say in the beginning.

But especially, base in our life; our bodies are base in regard of labor; Man
is borne to labor (in this world) as the sparks fly upward. God would humble
the body of every man with labor, or else those that have not the labor of
men here, shall have the labor of devils hereafter. The best body of the best
Saints, are condemned to labor.

Vile, likewise in regard of sickness, and diseases, which grow out of the
body, so that be it kept never so warm and tenderly, yet as the worms grow
out of the very wood, and Simile.
consumes the wood that breeds it: so diseases grow out of, and come from the
body. There is a fight, and conflict between moisture and heat, till the one
prey upon the other, and consume it. In regard of sickness therefore they are
vile bodies.

In regard likewise of disposing the soul the worst way: for take all tempers
of the body, they incline the soul to some sin or other, to some ill
disposition or other. Choler, inclines it to intemperate anger. Melancholy, to
distrust, and darkness of spirit. The Sanguine, inclines it to liberty and
looseness, etc. Phlegm, to deadness, and dullness of spirit. So our base
bodies make the soul dull, it becomes an unfit instrument, whereby the soul
cannot work as it would; an unfit house; the body is often times a dark house:
sometimes a house that drops in with moist diseases, a house that lets in
water, and so consumes it to rottenness; sometimes, it is a house fired by
hot diseases, it is thus indisposed, and therefore a vile body.

A vile body likewise, that when it is thus indisposed, there is no comfort in
the earth that can comfort it: for all the foundation of comfort in this world,
is the health of this poor body. A Kingdom, nay all the Kingdoms in the
world will not comfort a man, if his body be not in tune, and alas, how soon
is this body out of tune? An instrument that has many strings, is soon
subject to be out of tune, and there are many strings in the body: how many
turnings? how many instruments does the soul use? if any be out of tune, the
music is hindered, it becomes an unfit instrument, in this regard it is a vile
body.

In regard likewise of the necessities of nature this body is vile in this
world. I speak not of what comes from the body, in which respect it is base
and vile: but how many things does this vile body stand in need of? man in that
respect, is the basest creature in the world; he is b-holding to the worms, he
is beholding to nature to feed him in health, and in sickness the body needs
patching up, and piecing by this creature, and by that; so it is a vile body,
in regard of the necessities of it, in health, in sickness, in youth, in age.
It is vile in life. I need not stand on this.

It is more vile in death, in the hour of death, then it is base and vile
indeed; can we endure the sight of our dearest friends? how noisome is their
presence after death? and the most exquisite temper, is the most vile, and
noisome of all; those that are most delicately fed, and most beautifully faced,
are most offensive, and this is the condition of all. That head that wore a
Crown, those hands that swayed a Scepter; those brains, and that
understanding that ruled many Kingdoms, all are subject to death, yea, and to
baseness after death, as well as those that are poorer. And then they are vile
bodies, because they are subject to all manner of deaths: the bodies of Gods
Saints have been cast out to the fowls of the Air; the poor Martyrs, how
many ways have they tasted of death? These bodies are subject to all manner of
deaths, to variety of deaths, therefore they are vile bodies.

And then they are vile after death; as we were taken out of dust at the
first, so we return to dust again; and if these bodies be not transformed to
be like the glorious body of Christ, they are most vile of all. The spirit of
despair, the spirit of anger that, is in reprobate persons, how does it
disfigure their faces? one may see their shame, their grief, their despair in
their very looks; so their bodies are most vile, and dishonorable: but I
speak of Gods Children. I say here in this world, in regard that they come of
parents that are miserable and sinful, Man that is borne of a woman, has but
a short time to live, and is full of misery, Job 14. 1. Man that is borne of a
woman, of a weak, miserable, sinful woman, John 14. 1.
in this respect it is a vile body. And in all the passages of our life, in
respect of labor and pain, and sickenesses, and diseases; and likewise for
indisposing the soul, that it is an instrument to ill: and in death it self,
more vile then in life, and after death most of all vile. So you see they are
vile bodies every way. To make some use of this.

If this be so, considering what the condition of our body is here; let this
abate the pride of the greatest: let them consider, when they look upon their
gay apparel, what does these garments hide? when great Magistrates, and others
have their purple on, let them consider, what does this glorious garment cover?
nothing but dust, a vile body, why should we be proud then of our bodies, or
of any ornament of our body, seeing it is a vile body?

Again, if our bodies be vile and base, why should we spend the strength of
our souls in searching to satisfy the lusts of so vile a body? and so make
our souls nothing else almost, but stewards to proule how to content, how to
cloth and how to feed this body? as it is the study of many idle, vain
persons, almost all the day long, to give contentment to the craving lusts of
this vile body, they make even an idol of this poor, base piece of flesh, and
sacrifice the best of their thoughts, and the best of their studies, and
endeavors, and labors to the contentment of it: certainly this is forgotten,
which the Apostle says here, It is a vile and base body.

Again, is our body a vile body, a base body, as we have it here? then let us
not make it more vile by intemperate courses, as wicked persons do, they
dishonor their bodies. They are vile indeed, make the best of them we can, and
they will end in dust; but we ought not sinfully to make them more vile and
base, as many wretched persons do by their loose and licencious courses of
life.

Again, if our bodies be vile base bodies, while we live here, let us not
offend God for any thing to gratify our vile bodies, let us do as Joseph did,
when his mistress tempted him, he left his garment behind him rather: so when we
are tempted to any sin, let us rather leave our garments behind us, let us
leave our bodies, they are but vile bodies, let us be stripped of them, rather
then offend God. It is pitiful to consider how this vile body, as vile as it
is, and shall be in death, how it tyrannizeth over the poor soul, and how men
wound their souls for their bodies. How many are there that justify errors
that they condemn in their hearts, to live a lazy, idle, a full, a plentiful
life? and how many do condemn those things, those courses, and those truths,
(to please others, and to live a large, and idle life) which they justify in
their very souls? and all to please the flesh. It is but a bad counselor, a
bad solicitor, I say it tyrannizeth over the poor soul. Let us not offend God
or conscience, to break the peace of it for any thing, to gratify this vile
flesh. This I thought good to touch concerning that. Who shall change our vile
bodies. Change.

The action that Christ shall exercise about them is Change. Christ will Change
our vile bodies. They are vile now, they shall not be always so, but Christ
will Change our vile bodies. He will not give us other bodies for them: but he
will change them in regard of quality. For even as the great world was the same
after the flood, as it was before the flood, and shall be when it is consumed
by fire, it shall be a new world for quality, but the same for substance: so
this body of ours, it shall be the same after the resurrection for substance,
that it is now: it shall be altered for quality, it shall not be changed for
substance. Therefore he shall change, he shall not abolish our vile bodies.
This is the action that our blessed Savior will exercise upon these vile
bodies, they shall be changed. Man is the most changable creature in the world,
for soul and for body too.

Take him in his soul, how many states is he in? There is first the state of
nature in perfection; and then the state of corruption in original sin; and
then the state of grace in the new creature, and then the state of glory. So
likewise he is changeable in his body, he was first taken out of the dust, out
of the dust God made this glorious creature of man's body; he is a painful
creature, in labor, in sickness, and then from strength he is changed to old
age, and from thence to death, and dust, and from dust then he is changed
again to a more glorious estate then ever he was in: the body is made like the
glorious body of Christ, he is changeable in soul and in body.

But this is our comfort, we shall change for the best, all the changes of our
bodies serve for the last change, after which, there shall never be any more
change, when they are changed once to be glorious, they shall be for ever
glorious: a blessed change, a blessed estate of a christian, all his changes
tend to a state that shall never change: for after these bodies are once
changed from base, to be glorious, they shall be for ever glorious,

Who

The person that shall change them is Christ, ^ho, who shall change our vile
bodies. In the person, we may consider the object and the action: Christ shall
change our vile bodies, he that made us will make us again, he that is the
Image of God will refine us, he will renew us in body and soul to be like God,
to be like himself, and he that changes our souls in this world, will change
our bodies in the world to come. His first coming was to change our souls, to
deliver them from the bondage of Satan; his second coming shall be to deliver
our bodies from the bondage of Corruption, that is, the day of the Redemption
of our bodies, as the Apostle calls it, Romans 8. So it is he that shall change,
but of this I shall speak more afterward.

What is the pattern, according to which this body shall be changed, by this
author of it, Christ Jesus? His own body; he shall change our vile bodies. That
it may be made like, or fashioned (...) his glorious body.

He is both the c^se and the pa^e the efficient, and the exemp^ cause. He is
the pattern, our bodies shall be like his glorious body, even as our ^oules
are like Christ's (...) for this is certain, we are renewed in grace, not to
the Image of the first Adam, but to the Image of the second Adam, we are
conformed in soul to the Image of Christ in ^nesse, and righteousness: so
likewise in the body, we shall be conformable to the body of Christ, the second
Adam: As we bare the Image of the first Adam in our first creation; so we must
bear the Image of the second in our (...)tion, at the day of the resurrection.
The glorious body of Christ is the pattern of this transmutation and change.

But we most understand this, as I said, (...) regard of quality, and not in
regard of equality: our body shall be like his glorious body, not equal to his
glorious body. There must be a reservation therefore of difference in heaven,
between the head and the members, the husband and the spouse, our bodies shall
be like his glorious body, not equal to it. To our capacity we shall have
full satisfaction, and contentment for body and soul too, and they shall have
security to be in that estate for ever, therefore, though there be a difference
of glory, yet that difference is no prejudice to the glory we shall have, we
shall have that that is fit for us, Our body shall be made like unto his
glorious body. Christ is our pattern.

Whence we see this point of Divinity clear to us, that

Whatsoever is in us, both for soul and body, (but here we speak of the
body) whatsoever excellency is in us, it is at the second hand.

It is first in our head, first in Christ, and then in us, He is first the
Son of God by nature, we are the Sons of God by Adoption: he is the
predestined Son of God to save us, to be our head, we are predestinate to
be his members; he is the son of Gods love, we are beloved in him, he is
full of grace, of his fullness we recieve grace for grace; he rose, and we
shall rise, because he rose first: He ascended into Heaven, by virtue of his
ascension, we shall ascend into heaven too. He sits at the right hand of God
inglory, and by virtue of his sitting, we sit there together with him in
heavenly places. Whatsoever is graciously, or glo riously good that is in us,
it is first in our blessed and glorious Savior.

Therefore let us look to him, and be thankful to God for him: when we thank
God for our selves, let us thank God first for giving Christ who is the
pattern to whom we are conformed. Let us give thanks for him, as S. Peter
does, Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: if he had not bin
his Father, he had not bin ours. We cannot stand before God of our selves,
but in one that is perfect in himself, God-Man. Therefore when we bless God
for grace, and glory that belongs to us, let us bless him for giving Christ,
that in him we are happy, he conformes us in grace here, and in glory
hereafter, in body and soul to our glorious Savior.

And as it is a ground of thankfulness to God for Christ, so it yields us a
rule for meditation: when we would think of any thing in our selves, let us
go to our head, to Christ, in whom we have all we have, and that we hope to
have: of his fulness we receive, not only grace for grace, but glory for glory:
of all the glory he has, we have answerable to him; and surely it is a
transforming meditation, to think of Christ's glory, and to see our selves in
him, to think of grace in Christ, and of our interest in grace in him, we must
not think of him as an abstracted head, severed from us, but think of his
glory, and our glory in him and by him, he is glorious, and we shall be
glorious likewise.

Again you see here, that how soever our bodies are vile for the present, yet
they shall not be so for ever, they shall be glorious bodies, like to CHRIST'S
Body; the point then is that,

As Christ is the pattern of the glory of our body, so our body undoubtedly
shall be glorious as his body is.

This vile body shall be glorious, even like Christ's glorious Body. I need not
stand to proveit, I proved it before. What should this afford us? Then ^let us
use them to a glorious end, let us not use these base bodies to base purposes.
Let every member of this vile body, while we live here, be a weapon of a
sanctified soul, a weapon of righteousness, ready to do good. Let us put
honor upon these bodies, that shall be thus honored, let us use them for
honorable purposes. Let us lift up our eyes to Heaven, let us reach forth our
hands to good works: let our feet that have carried us to ill heretofore,
carry us to the service of God; for these very vile Bodies, shall be glorious
bodies. The very same eyes that have bin lift up to God in prayer, those very
hands that now are instruments of good works, those very knees that are
humbled to God in prayer, and those feet that have carried us to holy
exercises, and those spirits that are wasted and spent in holy meditation, even
these, this vile body, that is thus holily used, shall be a glorious body,
therefore let us use it answerably.

And labor to lay it down with honor in the dust, to leave it with a good
report to the world, considering it shall be so glorious afterward. Do those
think of this, that use their bodies for base purposes? whose eyes are full of
Adultery, whose hands are full of rapine, whose feet carry them to base places,
where they defile themselves, whose bodies, every member is a weapon and
instrument of sinning against God? How can these dare to think of that
glorious day, wherein our vile bodies shall be made like the glorious body of
Christ, can they hope that those hands, and those feet of that body, shall be
made glorious, that have bin defiled? that have bin instruments to make others
likewise sin? can such a body look for glory? let us not deceive our selves;
this vile body indeed shall be a glorious body. I but it must be used
accordingly, unless we have a presumptuous hope.

This body shall be glorious, this very vile body, this corruptible shall put
on incorruption, the same body, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. I believe the
resurrection of this body, as we say in the Creed. S. Paul pointed to his own
body, this body, this mortal shall put on immortality.

If this body shall be glorious, how base soever it be in this world, then
again let us honor poor Christians, though we see them vile and base; and
honor aged Christians, and deformed: alas, look not on them as they are, but
as they shall be, as they are in the decree of Christ, and as they shall be
ere long by the power of Christ, he will make them like his glorious body. Let
us not despise weak, or old, or deformed persons, these vile bodies shall be
glorious: those that died in martyrdom, whose bodies were cast into the fire,
and cast to wild beasts, etc. they shall be glorious bodies. The Emperor
Constantine would kiss the very holes of the eyes of those that had their eyes
pulled out, that had bin martyrd: So even our vile bodies, when they are used
in the service of God, in suffering, they shall be glorious bodies, let us
honor our bodies, or theirs that suffer for Christ. S. Paul made it his plea,
and a ground of his confidence, because his body was vile for Christ. I Paul a
prisoner of Jesus Christ, and I carry in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.
The dying of Christ, that the life of Christ might be manifest. He carried
Christ's marks in his body: making this an argument of respect, that he was a
prisoner: so when any are abased for Christ's sake, let us think these are such
as shall have glorious bodies, how ere they are esteemed of the world. But to
enlarge the point a little further, these bodies shall be made like the body of
Christ.

Wherein shall this Glory of our bodies Quest.
consist?

Especially in these six indowme^ts, our bodies Answer.
be now vile, and perhaps imperfect, they want a member, a sense or a limb,
our bodies then shall be perfect, even as Christ's body is. Those martyrs that
have bin dismembered, shall then have perfect bodies. Let us not be asrayd to
lose a limb, or a joint, for Christ, or a good cause, if our bodies be made
vile for Christ, they shall be made perfect afterward.

Then again, our Bodies then shall be beautiful Adam in his innocence had such
a beauty in his body, that the very creatures reverenced him, he was awful to
the very creatures: so the body of our blessed Savior, now in heaven, is
wondrous beautiful, and so shall our bodies be, how deformed soever they be
now. Let us not stand therefore upon any present deformity of our bodies now,
with years* or sickness, or other means, they shall not always be so, we
shall have beautiful bodies.

Nay more then so, the third indowment is, we shall have glorious bodies: as we
see Christ in the mount, when he was transfigured, and Moses, and Elias were
with him, his body was glorious, they could hardly behold him. And Christ, in
Revel. 1. he appears, as the Sun in his Revel. 1.
full strength, his body is wondrous glorious now in Heaven, and so he is
represented there: If the very representation of him while he was upon earth,
was so glorious in the mount, what is it in Heaven? S. Paul could not endure
the light that shined to him. Act. 9. So shall our Act. 9.
Bodies be, like the glorious Body of Christ.

What a glorious time will it be, when the glorious body of Christ shall
appear, and all the Saints shall appear in glory? what a reflection of beauty
and glory will there be, one shining upon another, when Christ shall come to be
glorious in his Saints? Oh! the glory of the body of Gods children, it shall
put down all created glory, all the glory of the Sun, and Moon, and all the
glory of these inferior bodies are nothing to the glory of the body of a
Christian, that does abase his body here for Christ, and the Churches sake. You
see then these bodies shall be perfect, and beautiful, and glorious bodies in
regard of the Iust^e of them.

And likewise in the fourth place, they shall be immortal bodies, bodies that
shall never die, unchangeable bodies; there shall be no altoration, no death,
no sickness, all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, they shall be immortal
bodies that shall never die, as Saint Peter says, We shall have an
inheritance undefiled, immortal, etc. This is clear, therefore I will not
stand in the enlarging of it.

In the next place, our bodies shall be powerful and vigorous: now they are
weak, as Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 15. Our bodies are 1 Cor. 15.
^wen in weakness, but then they shall be able to ascend and descend; they
shall be strong, even as the body of Christ: we shall have strong bodies, as
all imperfection, so all weakness shall be taken away.

In the sixth place they shall be spiritual bodies, that is, they shall not
stand in need of meat, and drink, and sleep, and refreshings, as now they
do, but Christ will be all in all to them, he will be instead of meat and
drink, and clothes: yea, and in stead of the Ordinances that we stand in need
of here, the Word, and Sacraments, he will be all in all. And our bodies shall
be spiritual in another regard, because they shall be subject to the spirit;
whereas now our very spirits are flesh, because the flesh rules and tyrannizeth
over them: so our souls follow our bodies, the soul of a carnal man is
flesh; but then out flesh, our bodies shall be spiritual, not that they shall
be turned into spirits, that is not the meaning, but spiritual bodies;
obedient and obsequious to the very guidance of the soul, to a sanctified and
glorious soul: these shall be the indowments of our bodies. They shall be
perfect bodies, beautiful, glorious, shining bodies, immortal, unchangeable
bodies, powerful, strong, and vigorous bodies, ready to moove from place to
place, and spiritual bodies, they shall stand in need of no other help; and
they shall be obedient altogether to the spirit. You see now, how these vile
bodies draw away our souls; then all imperfections shall be taken away, we
shall have purged bodies, and purged souls. Thus you see wherein the glory of
the body shall consist.

Let us therefore often seriously think of these things: and let me renew my
former exhortation: let us be content to make our bodies here vile for Christ's
sake, that they may be thus glorious. Let us abase them in labor and pains in
our calling, in suffering, we do no more then he did for us first. Was not his
body first vile, and then glorious? and do we think that our bodies must not
be vile before they be glorious? not only vile whether we will or no; but we
must willingly make them vile, we must be willing to be disgraced for Christ's
sake, to carry his death about us, to die daily, in the resolution of our
souls. How was he abased before he was glorious? he took on him our bodies
at the worst, not in the perfection as it was created: but he took the body
of man now fallen. Again, what pains did he take in this body? and how was
he disgraced in this body? that sacred face was spit upon, those blessed hands
and feet, were nailed to the Cross, that blessed head, that is revere^ced of
the Angels, it was crowned with thorns. How was his body every way, in all the
parts of it, abased and made vile for us? he neglected his refreshings for us:
it was meat and drink to him to do good. If he became vile for us, if he
abased his body for us, certainly we should be ashamed, if we be not content
that our bodies should be made vile for him, that afterward they may be made
like his glorious body. Away with these nice Christians, that are afraid of the
wind blowing on them, or the Sun shining upon them, that are afraid to do
any thing, or to suffer any thing, and so in sparing their bodies, destroy both
body and soul. Consider, whoever thou art, this is not a life for thy body,
this present life is a life for the soul: we come now to have the Image of God
in our souls in this life especially, and to have in our souls the life of
grace here; but the life and happiness of our body, is for this second coming
of Christ, the glory of the body, this life is not a time for the body; do
what we can it will be a vile body; cherish it, set it out how thou can,
those painted sepulchers that would outface age, and outface death, and by
colors and complexion, etc. hide those furrows that age makes in the face,
they are but vile, and age, and death will be too good for them, to dust they
will. Why should we regard our bodies? this life is not for them, though we
(...) dainty of them. Let us use this body here so, as it may be glorious in
the world to come: we should suffer our souls to rule our bodies, and to do
all here, that both body and soul may be glorious after. For indeed all that
the body has here, it is beholding to the soul for, why therefore should it
not be an instrument for the soul in holy things? does not the soul quicken
it? has it not its beauty from the soul? when the soul is gone out of the
body, where is the life? where is the beauty, where is any thing? the body is a
loathsome carcass. Now therefore while the soul is in this body, look to the
soul especially, that when the soul shall go to heaven, the soul be
mindful of, and speak a good word for the body; as Pharaohs Butler did for
Joseph, that the soul there may think of the body, that it may think of the
pains, of the suffering; as the soul does, it has an apetite in heaven, a
desire to be joined again to the body, which it uses to labor in, to pray to
God in, which it used to fast in, which it used as an instrument to good
actions. Let us use it so here; that the soul may desire to meet it again,
that Christ at that day may bring body and soul together to be glorious for
ever.

That it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body.

We see here then, that the best is to come; the best change, after which there
shall be no change, is to come. The weakest is the first, and the second is
better, the second Adam is better then the first, and the second life shall be
better then the first; our bodies as they shall be glorious, shall be better
then they were in the first creation: they shall be glorious bodies, like unto
Christ's. Oh! the comfort of a Christian, there is nothing that is behind,
nothing to come, but it is for the better; there shall be a change, but it
shall be a change for the better. A Christian is a person full of hope, he is
under a glorious hope, under a hope of glory of soul and body, he is always
under hope, the hope of glory; therefore he joys under this hope, Romans 5. 1.

That it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body. Romans 5. 1.


But how shall any Christian know, that his Quest.
body shall be like to the glorious body of Christ?

I answer, he may know it from this.

The change of a Christian begins in his Answer.
soul: Christ begins the change of our souls to be like his, full of love,
and obedience to God, full of pity, and compassion to men, full of industry to
do good; our souls will be like Christ's soul: first look to thy soul, what
stamp that bears, is there the Image of Christ on thy soul? certainly he
that has transformed this soul to be gracious, he will transform the body to
be glorious, like his glorious body. Look to thy soul then; if thou art the
child of God by adoption, if thou have the spirit of adoption and grace, and
find peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost; thou may know thou
shall have the adoption of thy body, thou have the first adoption, in thy
soul, thou art the child of God; know that thou shall have the second adoption
spoken of, Romans 8. We wait for the adoption of our bodies. If thou partake of
the Romans 8.
first resurrection, that thy soul is raised from sin; thou shall partake of
the second resurrection, at the day of Judgment.

For Christ is a perfect Savior, he saves not only the soul, but the body,
though he begin with the soul, he ends with the body. He took our bodies as
well as our souls, and he will glorify our bodies, as well as our souls;
and if we find the work of grace, a Spirit of glory in our souls,
undoubtedly we may know that our bodies shall be glorious.

Again, thou may know that thou shall partake of this glorious estate, that
thy body shall be like the glorious body of Christ, by the use that this body
is put to; how do thou use this vile body for the time thou live now? do
thou use it to the base services of sin? do (...) beat thy brain, and thy
breast, and thy spirits, do thou take up thy time, and all to provide for
the flesh? whither does thy feet carry thee? what do thou ^eddle with in the
world? are all thy members weapons of an unsanctified soul, to offend God, and
to fight against thy soul? to cherrish lusts that fight against thy soul, and
against thy Maker and Redeemer? then know this, that thou have no hope of
glory, He that has this hope, purges himself, and is pure as he is pure.
This hope, where it is found, it is a purging, a cleansing hope, and all the
members of the body will be used to a sanctified purpose: a man will not
sacrilegiously use those members that are dedicated to Christ, that are Temples
of the Holy Ghost, that are fellow heirs, as Saint Peter says, concerning the
wife, and the husband; the body is a fellow-heire with the soul of glory, he
will not use it to the base services of sin. He that shall have a glorious
body, will esteem so of it here. What, shall I use the Temple of the
Holy Ghost, that, that is a fellow-heire of heaven with my soul, that is the
Spouse of Christ, a member of Christ, as well as my soul, shall I use it to
these, and these base services? It cannot be, if a man have the new nature in
him, he cannot, it will not suffer him to sin in this manner, he cannot
prostitute his body to base services, those that do so, how can they hope that
their bodies should be glorious like unto Christ's.

Saint Paul gives three Evidences in one place, to know our interest in this
glory 2 Cor. 5. 1.
of our bodies, in 2 Cor. 5. 1. says he, we know that when this earthly
house, or Tabernacle shall be disolved, we have a building, etc. We know we
have a glorious building, a double building, heaven and our bodies, we have
two glorious houses, heaven, and these bodies shall be a glorious house, But
how do we know this?

Says he, in the second verse, we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed
upon: there is a wondrous desire after this clothing, Romans 8. The creature
groaneth, much more we that have the first fruits of the Spirit. There will be
a sighing for this glory, awayting for the blessed coming of Christ; for
Christ to redeem soul and body perfectly, that is the first sign, a desire
and groaning earnestly.

In the fourth verse there is another evidence, He that has wrought us for the
same things i^ God. He that has wrought us for the blessed estate to come, is
God: so, whosoever hopes for a house in heaven, when this Tabernacle is
dissolved, he is wrought for it, that is, he is a new creature for it; God has
wrought his soul and body for it. God fits our souls here, to possess a
glorious body after, and he will fit the body for a glorious soul, so both
shall be glorious, a glorious soul, and a glorious body, he has wrought us
for the same. If a man therefore find the beginning of the new creature, that
it is begun to be wrought in him, he may know that he shall partake of this
glory of the body, because He is wrought for it.

The third is, Who has also given us the earnest of the Spirit, whosoever
finds in them the Spirit of God, sanctifying their souls and bodies, stirring
them up to holy duties, guiding, and leading, and mooving them to holy actions;
they may from the sanctifying Spirit, that is an earnest to them, know what
shall become of their bodies, He has given us the earnest of the Spirit.

To confirm this, there is an excellent place in To. 8. 10: If any man have
not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. If Christ be in you the body is
dead, etc. It is a vile body, it as good as dead, it has the sentence of death
already, it is dead, in regard it is sentenced to death for sin, as a
malefactor that has his sentence: But the Spirit is life in regard of
righteousness. What then? if the sanctifying Spirit of Christ dwell in you,
He that raised Jesus from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies.
The same Spirit that sanctifies these souls of ours, our bodies, and quickens
them to holy duties, the same Spirit shall raise our bodies. As the same Spirit
that sanctified the blessed mass of the body of Christ, that he carried, and
raised his body, the same Spirit that sanctifies our souls, shall raise our
bodies. The Spirit of God when he has begun to sanctify us, he never leaves
us, he goes along in all changes, in life, in death, to the grave, (as God
said to Jacob, I will be with thee there.) The Spirit of God, he will mold our
dead bodies, and make them like the glorious body of Christ; the Spirit of God
never leaves our souls or bodies. Therefore if we find the earnest of the
Spirit, if we find the work of the Spirit, or the comfort of the Spirit,
(which is the term the Scripture gives) Joy in the Holy Ghost and peace of
conscience; together with the Spirit sanctifying us, especially in the time of
trouble, when God sees his Children have most need, they have the earnest of
the Spirit, the beginnings of grace and joy, the beginnings of heaven upon
earth; by this they may know, as the first fruit is, so likewise is the
harvest; as the earnest is, even so is the bargain; as we have it now in our
souls, so we shall also have it in our bodies, and souls hereafter. These
three grounds Saint Paul has, why his hope of heaven was a good hope, we
groan for it, and we are wrought for it; we are fitted for it. There is no
man can hope to be glorious in his body, but his soul must be fitted for it,
it must be a fit jewel for so glorious a casket, a fit inhabitant for so
glorious a Temple, as the body shall be, the body shall be fitted for the
soul, and the soul for the body, they are wrought for it. And then he has
given us the earnest of the Spirit. What need I quote further evidences the,
Scripture being thus pregnant?

I beseech you often consider your desires, whether you be content to live here
always or no, to satisfy the vile lusts of your body, or whether you desire to
be dissolved and to be with Christ, when you have done the work that God sent
you for into the world: if we be content to abase our selves for God here, who
has provided so much glory for us hereafter, and when the time comes, we can
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, it is a good sign, (if we have
the beginnings of the new creature, ye are wrought for it) that our souls are
fitted for a glorious body, we have the earnest of the Spirit: the same Spirit
that sanctifies our souls, and that quickens our souls with joy and peace,
the same Spirit shall raise our bodies. Comfort your selves you that are
Christians (though you be weak) with this, that if you have but the earnest
of the Spirit, undoubtedly you shall have a glorious house instead of this
tabernacle of dust.

Christ will change these vile bodies, that they shall be fashioned like his
glorious body. I beseech you therefore often think of this, think of the time to
come, comfort your selves with* things to come. In 1 Thessalonians. 4. Saint 1 Thessalonians. 4.
Paul would have us talk one to another often of this, this should be the
matter of our conference, not only the state of the Church and our own estate
here, but how it shall be with us when we are gone hence, how it shall be with
us world without end hereafter, we should confer, and speak, and often
meditate and think of these things.

What can be grievous? what can be over burdensome to that soul that knows it
has the pledge, and earnest of glory hereafter? How does it quicken the soul
to any endeavor, when once we know, that how soever we abase our selves here,
yet we shall have glorious bodies hereafter. It will quicken us to any
endeavor, to any thing for Christ: therefore let us often think of our estate
to come, let us set our thoughts foreward to the time to come: Let faith make
the times to come present, and that will make us heavenly minded. What made
Saint Paul converse as if he were in heaven? faith made the estate to come
present, and hope, which is grounded on faith, it looks to Christ's coming, to
change our vile bodies, so faith and hope, they make the soul look upward,
they make it heavenly minded.

Our souls are dull, and our bodies are dull in this world; but as Iron if it
be touched with a Load stone, up it will; so if we get faith, and hope to
look foreward, what shall be done to us for the time to come? the spirit of
faith and hope if it touch the soul, will carry our dull bodies, and our dead
souls upward.

Therefore let us cherish our faith and hope, by often meditation of the
blessed estate to come, and think of these two things, of the excellent estate
of our bodies and souls then: for if our bodies shall then be glorious like
the body of Christ, our souls much more; the inhabitant, which is the special
part, the soul shall be much more glorious. Let us think often of this glory as
it is described in the Word; it transcends our thoughts: we cannot think high
enough of it, and our interest, and assurance of it. And daily search our
selves, whether our hope be good or no, that we have sound evidence, that our
title is good to glory. Let us examine our selves by those signs I named
before. Where are our desires? what work has the Spirit of God in us? how do
we use these bodies of ours? As we use them now, we must look they shall be
used hereafter. Let our tongues be our glory now, and they shall be glor^ous
tongues afterward to praise God in heaven: their bodies that have been
glorious here, shall be glorious in heaven. We may read our estate to come, by
that we are here: those that carry themselves basely, and filthily, and
dishonourably here, we may know what will become of them hereafter. Let us often
think of the estate to come, and of our interest in it; and both these
together, the excellency of the estate, and our interest in it without
deceiving of our souls, what life will it put into all our carriage? what will
be grievous to us in this world, when our souls are thus settled? Oh, let us
spend a few days fruitfully and painfully here amongst men, and do all the
good we can, and use these bodies of ours to all the happy, and blessed
services we can; why? we shall have glory more then we can imagine.

Let it comfort us in the hour of death, what death soever we die, or are
designed to. Now you know the sickness is abroad, and alas those bodies
especially are vile bodies that are under the visitation; so then, that their
dearest friends, dare not come near them: yet let this comfort us; they are
vile bodies for a time, put case we die the death that may hinder the comforts
of this life. Those that die in much honor and pomp, and have their bodies
imbalmed, do all what they can with the body, it will come to dust and
rottenness; it will be vile in death, or after death, at one time or other,
and those that die never so vile and violent a death for Gods sake; those that
die of this base death, that they are deprived of much comfort; yet let it
comfort them, Christ will transform their vile bodies to be glorious.

They talk much of the Philosophers stone, that it will change metals into
gold, here is the true Stone, that will change our vile bodies to be glorious.
Let us die never so base or violent a death, let us comfort our selves in our
own death, if it be thus with us, and in the death of our friends, these vile
bodies, when they are most vile in death, they shall be made like the glorious
body of Christ. Let us often think of these things.

FINIS.
BALAAMS VVISH. In one Funeral Sermon upon NVMB. 23. 10.

BY The late Learned and Reverend Divine, RICH. SIBBS: Doctor in Divinity, Mr
of KATHERINE Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher to the Honorable
Society of GRAYES-INNE.

PRO. 13. 4. The soul of the sluggard desires, and has nothing.

LONDON, Printed by E. Purslow, for N. Bourne, at the Royal Exchange, and R.
Harford at the gilt Bible in Queens head Alley, in Paternoster Row. 1639.

BALAAMS VVISH.
NUMB. 23. 10. Let me dye the death of the Righteous, and let my last end be
like his.
THe false Prophet Balaam goes about to curse, where God had blessed: but God
reveals his wonders in his Saints, by delivering of them, and keeping them
from dangers, when they never think of them, they never thought they had such
an enemy as Balaam. The Church of God is a glorious company, and the great God
does great things for it: so long as they keep close to him, their state is
impregnable, as we may read here, neither Balak nor Balaam, that was nired to
curse them, could prevail, but the curse returns upon their own head.

These words I have read to you, they are Balaams desire, Balaams acclamation.
Diverse questions might be moved concerning Balaam, which I will not stand
upon, but come directly to the words, wherein are considerable these things.

First that the righteous men die, and have an end as well as others.

Secondly, that the state of the soul continues after death, it was in vain
for him to desire to dye the death of the righteous, but in regard of the
subsistence of the soul.

Thirdly that the estate of righteous men in their end, is a blessed estate,
because here it was the desire of Balaam: oh that I might dye the death of the
righteous!

Fourthly, there is an excellent estate of Gods people, and they desire that
portion: oh let me dye the death of the righteous. These are the four things
I shall unfold, which discover the intendment of Balaam, in these words.

For the first I will touch it briefly, and so go on.

The righteous dye, and in the same manner outwardly Observe. 1. The righteous
die, as well as the wicked.
as the wicked do.

For Christ in his first coming came not to redeem our bodies from death, but
our souls from damnation, his second coming shall be to redeem our bodies
from corruption, into a glorious liberty. Therefore wise men dye as well as
fools: those whose eyes and hands have been lift up to God in prayer, and
whose feet have carried them to the holy place, as well as those whose eyes are
full of adultery, and whose hands are full of blood, they dye all alike, in
manner alike; ofttimes it is the same in the eye of the world; Death comes upon
good and bad, but to the good for their greater glory, for the shell must be
broken, before they come to the pearl; death it fits them for the blessed life
after, the body lying a while in the grave, the soul being in the hands of
God: and death now it makes an end of sin that brought in death: and it makes
us conformable to the son of God, our elder brother that dyed for us. The point
is pregnant, and full of gracious and serious meditations.

It should enforce this excellent duty, that Use. 1. To improove^ the short
time of life.
considering we have no long continuance here, therefore while we are here, to
do that, wherefore we come into the world. As a factor that is sent into a
place, to provide such goods before hand: let us consider that here we are sent
to get into a state of Salvation, to get out of the state of nature, into the
state of grace, to furnish our souls with grace; to fit us for our dissolution
to come: let us not forget the main end of our living here, considering we
cannot be here long, let us do the work that God has put into our hands,
quickly and faithfully with all our might.

And let it enforce moderation to all earthly Use 2. To use the world moderatly.
things, the time is short, therefore let those that use the world, be as if
they used it not, etc. Those friends that have bin joined together will part,
therefore let us use our bodies and souls so, that we may present them both
comfortably to God: Let us beg of God to make a right use of this fading
condition. But I hasten.

The second point is this; that, Observe. 2. The soul continues after death.
The estate of the soul continues after death.

For here he wishes to die the death of the righteous, not for any excellency
in death, but in regard of the subsistence and continuance of the soul after
death.

Scripture, and reason, and nature, enforces this, that the soul has a
subsistence of it self, distinct from the life it communicates to the body.
There is a double life, a life proper to the soul, and the life it
communicates to the Life of the soul double.
body: now when the life it communicates to the body is gone to dissolution, it
self has a life in heaven. And indeed it is in a manner the whole man: for
Abraham, was Abraham when he was dead, when his soul was in heaven, and his
body in the grave, it is the whole man.

And it discovers indeed that it has a distinct life, and excellency in it
self, by reason 1 Reason. It crosses the desires of the body.
that it thwarts the desires of the body when it is in the body. Reason, if
there be no grace in the soul, that crosses the inclination of the body;
grace much more. And we see oft-times when the outward man is weak, as in
sickness, 2 Reason. It operates most in the bodies weakness.
etc. then the Understanding, Will, and affections, the inward man is most
sublime, and rapt unto heaven, and is most wise. Take a man that has been
besotted all his life time, that has been drunk with the pleasures of a
carnal life, that has been a covetous wretch, an earth-worme, that enjoyes
not heaven, but lives as his wealth, and lusts carry him in slavery; yet at the
hour of death, when he considers that he has scraped together, and considers
the way that his lusts have lead him, and that all must leave him; now he
begins to be wi^e, and speaks more discreetly, he can speak of the vanity of
these things, and how little good they can do. Indeed many, way, the most men
are not wise until that time: therefore the soul of it self has a distinct
being, because when the body is lowest, it is most refined, and strong in its
operations.

Likewise it appears by the projects that it 3 Reason. It projects for the
time to come.
has of the time to come: the soul especially of men, that are of more
elevated and refined spirits; it projects for the time to come, what shall
become of the Church and Commonwealth, what shall become of posterity, and of
reputation and credit in the world. Certainly, unless there were a subsistence
of it self, it would never look so much before hand, and lay the grounds of
the prosperity of the Church and Commonwealth, for the time to come: I will
not stand further on it, but rather make some use of it. Use. To use our souls
to the end they were given.


Let us know which is our best part, namely the soul, that has a being after
death, that we do not employ it to base uses, for which it was not made nor
given us: do we think that these souls of ours were made, and given us to
scrape wealth? to travel in our affections to base things worse then our
souls? are they not capable of supernatural and excellent things? are they
not capable of grace and glory? of communion with God, of the blessed stamp of
the Image of God? Let us use them therefore, to the end that God gave them. And
let us not deserve so ill of our souls, as to betray them, to cast them in the
dirt, to lay our Crown in the dust. This is our excellency, what can keep our
bodies from being a deformed loathsome thing, if the soul be taken away? yet
so we abase this excellent part; often times we abase it to serve the base lusts
of the body, which is condemned to rottenesse. What is the life of most men,
but a purveying and prouling for the body? The lusts of the body set the wit,
and affections on work to proule for it self, what a base thing is this? Were
our souls given us for this end? and especially considering this, that our
souls are immortal, that they shall never die, but be for ever: let us not
altogether spend this precious time that is given us to save our souls, and to
get the Image of God stamped upon them, I say, let us not spend this precious
time in things that will leave us when our souls shall live still: let us not
carry the matter so, that our souls shall outlive our happiness. All
worldlings, Worldly men out live their happiness.
and base creatures, they outlive their happiness; for where do they plant
it? in the base things of this life: all their life long they are prouling for
those things that they must leave when they die: whereas their souls shall not
die, but everlastingly subsist.

What a misery is this, that these souls of ours shall have a being, when the
things wherein we placed our happiness, and abused our souls to gain them,
they shall have an end? The souls of such men that seek the things of this
life, shall have a being in eternal misery. Indeed so it is; for these souls
of ours, the same degree they have in excellency, if they be used as they
should, if we do not abase them; the same degree they shall have in baseness.
and misery, if we abuse them, and make them slaves to earthly things. For as
the Devils the same degree they had of excellency when they were Angels; the
same degree they have in misery, now they be Devils. The more excellent the
creature is when it keeps its excellency; the more vile it is when it
degenerates: so these souls of ours that next to Angels are the most excellent
creatures of God; the more excellent it is, if it get the Image of God stamped
upon it, and the new creature, and have the life of grace: the more cursed is
the state of the soul, if it subsist to everlasting misery.

It were happy if the souls of such creatures were mortal, that labor for a
happiness in this life. Oh! that we would think of this. Most men in the
bosom of the Church (which is lamentable to think) they live as if they had
no souls: They overturne the order, that God has set, that has given us our
bodies to serve our souls; they use all the strength, and marrow of their
wits; all the excellencies in their souls, for the base satisfaction of the
lusts of the body, so much for that point.

The third is, that, There is a wide, broad difference between the Observe. 3.
Great difference between the death of the godly, and the wicked.
death of the godly and of the wicked.

The godly are happy in their death; for here we see it is a matter desirable.
This caitiffe, this wretched man Balaam, Oh! (says he) Let me die the death of
the righteaus, and let my last end be like his. It being the object of his
desire, it is therefore certainly precious, the death of the righteous. And
indeed so it is; 1 The godly happy in life.
holy and gracious men, they are happy in their life; while they live they are
the sons of God, the heirs of heaven, they are set at liberty, all things are
theirs, they have access to the Throne of grace, all things work for their
good, they are the care of Angels, the Temples of the Holy Ghost. Glorious
things are spoken of these glorious creatures even while they live.

But they are more happy in their death, and most happy, and blessed after
death.

In their death they are happy in their disposition, 2 In death.
and happy, in condition.

Happy in their disposition; what is the disposition 1 In disposition.
of a holy, and blessed man at his end? His disposition is by faith to give
himself to God, by which faith he dies in obedience: he carries himself
fruitfully, and comfortably in his end. And often times the nearer he is to
happiness, the more he lays about him to be fruitful.

Besides his disposition, he is happy in condition: 2 In condition.
for death is a sweet close: God, and he meet; grace, and glory meet: he is in
heaven (as it were) before his time. What is death to him? The end of all
misery, of all sin, of body and soul, it is the beginning of all true
happiness in both. This I might show at large, but I have spoken somewhat of
this point out of another Text. See the Sermons on Philip. 3. 21.
They are happy in their death, for their death is precious in Gods sight: the
Angels are ready to do their attendance, to carry their souls to the place of
happiness. They are happy in their death, because they are in the Lord: when
death severs soul and body, yet notwithstanding, neither soul nor body are
severed from Christ, They die in the Lord, therefore still they are happy. Much
might be said to this purpose, and to good purpose, but that the point is
ordinary, and I hasten to press things that I think will a little more
confirm it. They are blessed in death.

And blessed after death especially: for then 3 After death:
we know they are in heaven, waiting for the resurrection of the body. There is
a blessed change of all; for after death we have a better place, better
company, better employment, all is for the better.

There are three degrees of life. Three degrees of life.


The life in the womb. this world. heaven.


The life in the womb is a kind of imprisonment; there the child lives for a
time. The life in this world, it is a kind of enlargement; but alas, it is as
much inferior to the blessed, and glorious life in heaven, as the life in the
womb is narrower, and straiter, and and more base then this life wherein we
behold the blessed light, and enjoy all the sweet comforts of this life. They
are happy after death, then the Image of God is perfect in the soul, all
graces are perfected, all wants supplied, all corruptions wrought out, all
enemies subdued, all promises accomplished, waiting their time for the
resurrection of the body, and then body and soul shall sit as Judges, upon the
wretches that have judged them on earth, and they shall be both together for
ever with the Lord. I might enlarge the point much; it is a comfortable
meditation. And before I pass it, let us make some use of it.

If godly men be blessed, and happy, not only before death, in the right, and
title they have to heaven; but in death, because then the^ are invested into
possession, of that, that makes them every way happy.

Therefore this may teach us who are truly wise. A wise man is he that has a
better end Use. Who truly wise.
then another, and works to that end. A true Christian man, he has a better
end then any worldling, his end is to be safe in another world, and he works
and carries his forces to that end. Let my last end be like his, says Balaam:
insinuating that there was a better end, inregard of condition, and state, then
he had aimed at. A gracious man, his end is not to Godly man's end, what.
be happy here; his end is to enjoy everlasting communion with God in the
heavens, and he frames all his courses in this world, to accomplish that end,
and he is never satisfied in the things that make to that end. A worldling he
has no such end; he has a natural desire to be saved (as we shall see
afterward) but a man may know that it is not his end: for he works not to
it. He is not satisfied in prouling for this world, he is not weary of getting
wealth, he is not satisfied with pleasure: so that his end is the things of
this life. Therefore let him be never so wise, he is but a fool: for he has
not the true end, nor works to it. Wicked men are very fools, in the manner
of their reasoning: for they will grant, that there is a happy estate of godly
men in death, and after death better: if it be so, why do they not work, and
frame their lives to it? Herein they are fools, because they grant one thing,
and not another which must needs follow: they do believe there is such a
happiness to Gods children, and yet seek not after it.

If there be such a blessed estate of Gods children in death, and after death;
I beseech Use 2. To labor to partake of this happiness.
you let us carry our selves so, as that we may be partakers of that
happiness; let us labor to be righteous men, labor to be in Christ, to have
the righteousness of Christ to be ours, to be out of our selves in Christ, in
Christ in life, in Christ in death, and at the day of Judgment in Christ, not
having our own righteousness, (as the Apostle says) but his righteousness,
and then the righteousness of grace, and of a good conscience will always go
with the other. For this makes a righteous man to be in Christ, and to have his
righteousness, and Righteous man, who.
to have his spirit, and the beginnings of the new creature in us. Let us
labor to be such as may live and die happily, and blessedly, and be for ever
happy. So much for that third point.

That which I intend mainly to dwell on is the last, and that is this, that,

Even a wicked man, a wretched worldling may see this, he may know this
happiness of Gods A wicked man may know the happy estate of Gods children.
people, in death, and for ever, and yet notwithstanding may continue a cursed
wretch.

Balaam here wishes, Oh that I might die the death of the righteous, and that
my last end might be like his. It was a strange speech of such a man as this
was, that his soul should be rapt up in this manner: but indeed Balaam was
scarce himself, he scarce understood what he said, no more then the beast
that carried him.

But God will sometimes, even stir up the hearts of wicked men, to a sight
and admiration of the excellent estate of Gods children; why? For diverse
reasons; Among the rest for this: that he may convince them the more of their
own rebellion, when they see Reason 1. To justify God in their condemnation.
a more excellent estate then they are in, if they will not take the course to
partake of it: Therefore at the day of Judgment it will justify the sentence
of damnation upon such wretches, and they may pronounce self condemnation upon
themselves. Oh! what a terror will it be when they shall think, I had a
better estate discovered, I heard of it in the ministry of the Word, and Gods
Spirit revealed an excellent estate, and I might have gotten it, if I had
improoved the blessed means that God made me partaker of; and now I am shut
out for ever, and ever from communion in that estate? To convince wretched men
(I say) and to justify the just sentence of damnation upon them, that their
hearts may go with the sentence at the day of Judgment, God thus enlightens
them oftentimes, that they see better courses, if they had grace to take them.

What a thing is this, that a wicked man should see such an estate, and not
take it? And what serves that knowledge for, but to damn them, the more? This
is the estate of many men that live in the bosom of the Church, and partake of
the means of salvation, and yet live in sins against conscience; they get
knowledge by the Ministry, and by good books, and acquaintance, and such
like; they have a savor in the use of good things, something they have, some
little apprehension of the estate of a better life.

Again, for another end, God reveals to Reason 2. To restrain their malice.
them the excellent estate of his children sometimes, to keep them in better
order, to awe them, that they be not open enemies to the Church, but may do
good service; for conceiting that there is such a happiness, and that perhaps
they may partake of it, they will not carry themselves malignantly against
those that are true professors.

There are several degrees of wicked men, Degrees of wicked men.
some are well-willers to good things, though they never come far enough.
Some are open malicious persecutors. Some again are better then so, they have
a hatred to goodness, but they do not openly show themselves as hypocrites,
etc. God reveals these good things to wicked men, to keep them in awe. The
net draws bad fish as well as good: so the net of the Word, it draws wicked
men, it keeps them from violence, and open malice: besides, even the Majesty
of the word, and the convinction of that excellent state that belongs to Gods
Children, it keeps them from open malice and persecution. This is another end
that God aims at: what may we learn hence? Use. Not to refuse all that ill men
say.
Seeing this is so; it should teach us that we refuse not all that ill men say,
they may have good aprehensions, and give good counsel. It had bin good for
Josiah to have followed the counsel of wicked Pharaoh a heathen. God often
enlightens men, that otherwise are reprobates: refuse not Gold from a dirtie
hand, do not refuse directions from wicked men, because they are soandso,
refuse not a pardon from man, a base reature. We ought not therefore to have
such respect of persons, as to refuse excellent things because the person is
wicked. But that which I Use 2. To go beyond wicked men in our desires.
intend to press is this. If this be so, that wicked men may have
illumination, whereby they discover an excellency, and likewise may have
desires raised up, to wish and desire that excellency. It should stir us up to
go beyond wicked men, shall we not go so far as those go that shall never
come to heaven? we see here Balaam pronounces the end of the righteous to be
happy. This should therefore stir us up to labor to be in a different estate
from wicked men. Let us therefore consider a little wherein the difference of
these desires is, the desires that a Balaam may have, and the desires of a
Difference of desires in true Christians, and others.
sound Christian; wherein the desires of a wicked man are failing.

These desires first of all, they were but flashes: for we never read that he
had them long, they 1 They are not^ constant.
were mere flashes; as a sudden light, that rather blinds a man then shows
him the way: so these enlightnings they are not constant. Wicked men often times
have sudden motions, and flashes, and desires, oh! that I might die the death
of the righteous, oh! that I were in such man's estate: but it is but a sudden
flash, and lightning. They are like a torrent, a strong sudden stream, that
comes suddenly and makes a noise, but it has no spring to feed it. The desires
of Gods Children they are fed with a spring, they are constant; they are
streams, and not flashes.

Again this desire of this wretched man, it 2 They are not from an inward
principle.
was not from an inward principle, an inward taste that he had of the good
estate of Gods Children: but from an obiectiue delight, and admiration of
somewhat that was offered to his conceit by the holy ghost at this time. It
was not from any inward taste, and relish in himself that he speaks, but from
somewhat outward, as a man that saw, and heard excellent things, that ravished
him with admiration, though he had not interest in them himself.

Again in the third place, this desire of the happiness of the estate of Gods
children, it was not working and operative, but an uneffectuall desire, it had
only a complacency, and pleasing in the thing desired: but there was not a
desire to work any thing to that end. This wretch therefore would be at his
journeys end, before he had set one step forward to the journey. It was a
desire of the end without the means: It was not an operative effectual, but a
weak transient desire. Where true desires are, they are not only constant, and
proceed from an inward interest, and tastof the thing desired: but they are
effectual and operative, they set the soul and body, the whole man on work,
partly to use the means to attain the thing desired, and partly to remove the
impediments: for where desire is, there will be a removing of the impediments
to the thing desired: as he that intends a journey, he will consider what may
hinder him, and what may help him in it; he that sets not about these things,
he never means it; for a man cannot come to his journeyes end with wishing:
we can attain nothing in this life with wishing. There is a working (I say)
that tends to remove impediments as far as we may, and tending to use all
means to effect and bring the thing to pass. We see then there is a maine
difference between the desires of this wretched man Balaam, and the desires of
the true Church of God. To go on and follow the point a little further.

Where desires are in truth, the party that cherishes those desires, will be
willing to have all help from others to have his desire accomplished. If a man
desire to demolish a place, if any will come and help him down with it, or if
any man desire to weed his ground he that will help him, he will thank him
for his pains. Where there is a true desire, there is a willing closing with
all that offer themselves, that the thing desired may be brought to pass.
Where there is a desire of the happy estate of Gods children, there will be a
willing entertainment of any help. Let a man come to a man that desires grace,
and glory, and discover his especial sins that hinder him, you must weed out
this, and you must pull down this, he will thankfully embrace all admonitions,
because he truly desires the end, therefore he desires the means that tend to
the end, he desires the remooving of the hindrances, he will be thankful
therefore for any help that he may have, and especially that of the ministry,
that it may powerfully enter into his soul, and rip him up, why? because he
desires to please God in all things, and he would not cherish a motion, or
desire, contrary to the spirit of God: therefore the more corruption is
presented, and made odious to him: the more the inward man is discovered, the
more he blesses God, and blesses the blessed instrument, and of all means
he is willing to attend upon such*

Where there is swelling, and rising against the blessed means, either in
private admonitions, or public teaching, let men pretend what they will, there
is no true desire of grace, and to be in the estate of Gods people, for then
they would not be contrary to the means. This wretched man Balaam when the
Angel stood in his way, with his sword drawn, to stop his way: yet
notwithstanding he goes on still, he was so carried with covetousness, and so
blinded, that neither the miracle of the beast speaking, nor of the Angel in
his way, nor God in the way could stop him; alas, where was this desire then?
No, no, the glo ry of earthly things dazeled the glory of the estate of Gods
people; therefore we see he goes against all means that was used to stop him
in his journey.

If a man desire to be good, and to leave his sins, he will not stand against
the means.

Have we not many that stand against the Ministry of Gods Ministers, are Gods
Angels, they stand in the way, and tell people, if you live in this course you
shall not inherit heaven; if you live in oppression, and base lusts, unless
you be changed, you shall all perish. They come to particular reproves, and
hold forth the sword of Gods Spirit; yet men break through all and wreake
their malice upon Gods Messengers. Is here a true desire when they are not
willing to have the hindrances removed? when there is not respect of the
means that should be used?

Again true desires of grace, they are growing desires: though they be little
in the beginning 5 They are not growing desires.
as springs are, yet as the springs grow, so do the waters that come from
them: so these desires, they grow more and more still: They grow sometimes in
Gods children, that they will have no stop, till they come to have their sull
desire, to have perfect union and communion with God in heaven. The desires of
a blessed soul, they are never satisfied, till it come to heaven. Let him
kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, says the Church: oh, let me Cant. 1.
have nearer communion with Christ. It desires in the vord and sacraments to
come nearer and closer to God, and in death then, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. And when the soul is in heaven, there is yet nearer union, a desire
of the bodies resurrection that both may be for ever with the Lord. Till a
Christian be perfect in body and soul, there is desire upon desire, till all
desires be accomplished: they are growing desires, as S. Peter says, As new
born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby. It
is a desire that is never satisfied, because there is always somewhat to be
desired till we be perfectly happy.

And then they are desires that will not be stilled. A child, if it have not
strong desires, it 6 They are not strong:
will be stilled with an apple: but if the desires be strong, nothing will
still it but the dug: so Gods Children, if their desires be strong, it is no
bauble they desire, nothing but grace and inward comfort will quiet the inward
man. It is a desire that is growing, and strong, it will not be staid with any
thing in this world, but will break through all impediments, as a strong stream,
it will never rest, till it have communion with God. And therefore the desires
that men think are good, and earnest enough, that go on plodding in a constant
course, and never labor to grow, they are no desires at all, no sanctified
desires from a supernatural principle of grace. The desires of a Christian
grow, and are never satisfied till he have perfect happiness.

The three worthies of David brake through the host, and got the water of
Bethel for David, oh that I had of the water of Bethel. So where there are
strong desires, they are like David's worthies, they carry the soul through all
impediments, they grow stronger and stronger, and are never satisfied till they
come to the water of life. Let us consider these things, whether we have this
desire or no: if we have but sometimes flashes, inconstant, ineffectuall
desires, desires that grow not, that are soon satisfied, and are stilled with
any thing, alas, these desires the spirit of God never kindled, and bred in the
heart, they are ordinary flashes, that shall serve for our deeper damnation.
Therefore let us take heed, and not rest in a cast-awayes estate, let us not
rest in Balaams state, but labor that the desires of our souls may be as they
should.

Desires (I confess) are the best character to know a Christian: for works
may be hypocritical, desires are natural. Therefore we Desires, the best
character of a christian.
ought to consider our desires, what they are, whether true or no: for the
first thing that issues from the soul are desires and thoghts, thoghts stir up
desires. This inward immediate stirring of of the soul, discovers the truth of
the soul, better then outward things. Let us often therefore examine our
desires: And let me add this one thing to the other: let us examine our
desires 7 They desire happiness, not holiness.
by this, besides the rest, whether we desire holiness, and the restoration
of the Image of God, the new creature, and to have victory against our
corruptions, to be in a state that we may not sin against God, to have the
spirit, to be new born, as well as we desire happiness, and exemption from
misery. Balaam desired happiness, but he desired not the Image of God upon
his Soul, for then he would not have bin carried with a covetous devil
against all means. No, his desire was after a glympse of Gods childrens glory
only.

A wicked man can never desire to be in heaven as he should be: for how should
we desire to Wicked men desire not heaven aright.
be in heaven? to be freed from sin, that we may praise God, and love God,
that there may be no combat between the flesh and the spirit. Can he wish
this? No, his happiness is as a swine to wallow in the mire, and he desires to
enjoy sensible delights: as for spiritual things, especially the Image of God,
and the vision of God, they are not fit objects for him, as far as it is a
freedom from sin, but as he has a conceit, oh, there are goodly things to be
seen, etc. So it corresponds with his disposition, but to be free from Sin,
and from the conflict of the flesh and spirit, and to be set at liberty to
serve God always, he cannot desire it so. Tell him of heaven, he loves it not,
there is no gold, there is not that, that he affects, therefore he cares not for
it, he cannot relish it, he is not changed. Therefore it is a notable Character
of a true Christian to desire heaven, to be freed from sin, to have communion
with God in holiness, other prerogatives will follow this.

Let us therefore consider what our desires are, how they are carried: for
desires discover what the soul is. As a spring is discovered by Simile.
the vapors that are about it; so is this hidden state of the soul,
discovered by the breaking out of desires. They are the breath, and vapor of
the soul. Let us consider what is set highest in our souls, what we desire
most of all. Oh! a Christian soul that has tasted of the loving kindness of
the Lord, accounts it better then life it self. It is not Corn, and wine, and
oil he desires, but Lord show me the light of thy countenance. The desires of
his heart are large to serve God, and to do good, more then for the things of
the world. He desires earthly things, but as instruments for better things; and
this is the desire of every sanctified soul in some measure.

Let us hence make a use of convinction of Conviction of such as come short of
Balaam.
the folly of base men, that live in the Church, and yet come not so far as
Balaam, that come not so far as those that shall go to hell. They turn over
all Religion, to a Lord have mercy upon us, and Christ dyed for us, and we hope
we have souls to God ward, as good as the best, and to a few short broken
things. They turn Religion to compendiums, to a narrow compass, and make the
way to it wide, and broad, and complain of Preachers, that they straiten the
way to heaven.

This is the disposition of worldlings; whereas alas, there must be a
righteousness that must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees:
there must be a righteousness from an inward principle, there must be a
strong, constant desire of righteousness more then of any thing in the world,
before we can be assured of our interest, and part with Gods people. Let us
take heed, that we delude not our selves this way.

But to come to an use of direction. How Directionshow to have holy desires,
may we so carry our selves, as we may have a spring of blessed desires, a
spring of holy desires, that may comfort us, that we may have our interest, and
portion in the state of Gods people? 1 Beg the spirit* of revelation.


That we may have these desires, let us desire of God the spirit of revelation;
desires follow discovery: for desires are the vent of the soul upon the
discovery of some excellency it believes. Therefore let us beg of God, the
spirit of revelation, to discover the excellent estate of Gods people. And
because this is given in the use of means; let us present our selves with all
diligence under such means, as where we may have somewhat of the Kingdom of
God, that the riches of Christ being unfolded; our desires may be carried to
such things; for there is never any discovery of holy, and good, and gracious
things to a Christian soul, but there are new desires stirred up. Our souls
are like a mill that grinds Simile.
what is put into it: so the soul it works upon the things that are put into
it, if it have good desires, and good thoughts put into it by good means used,
and by prayer, it feeds upon them: let us always therefore be under some good
means, that good thoughts may be ministered unto us, that may stir up
gracious desires for the soul to work upon. Let us be in good company. Saul
among the Prophets we see he prophesied: and the heart is kindled and
enflamed, when we are among those that are better then our selves, especially
if their hearts be enlarged to speak of good things: but to come nearer.

That we may have holy, and gracious, and See what hinders good desires.
constant desires, let us take notice and make trial continually of the state
and frame of our souls, which way for the present they are carried, in what
current our desires run. If they run the right way, to heavenly things, it is
well, if not, take notice what draws, and diverts, and turns the streams of
our desires the false way: let us think what the things be, and the condition
of those things that draws our desires down, and make us earthly and worldly,
whether the pleasures, or profits or honors of this life. The way to have
better desires is, to weane our selves from these things, by a constant, holy
meditation of the vanity of these things, that the soul is carried after.
Solomon to weane his heart from these desires, from placing too much happiness
in these things, he sets them before him, and says, they were vanity, and
vexation of spirit. Let us set them before us, as nothing, as they will be ere
long, Heaven and earth will pass away, the world will pass away, and the
concupiscence, and lust of it. Let us consider the baseness, ficklenes and
uncertainety of things that our souls are carried after, and this will be a
means to weane them from them. And the soul being weaned from earthly things,
it will run amain another way. Let us study therefore to mortify our base
affections, and study it to purpose, to cut off the right hand, and to pull out
the right eye, spare nothing, that God may spare all; that God may have mercy
upon us, and spare us, let us spare nothing. These lusts they fight against our
souls.

And as I said before, feed our souls, minister unto them better thoughts
continually. Those that are governors of those that are young, season them
while they be young with good things; for while the soul is not filled with the
world, and while covetousness and ill lusts have not wrought themselves into
the soul, good things, and good desires, are easily rooted, and planted, and
grow up in the soul. As letters graven in the body of a tree, they grow up
with the tree; and the fruit of the tree grows up with the tree, and therefore
the twigs break not with the greatness of the weight of it, because they grow
up together: so plant good things in those that are young, inure them to know
good things, to hate ill ways; plant in them blessed desires, and inure them
to holy exercises and good duties, that good exercises may grow up with them,
as the fruit with the tree. We see what (...) hard matter it is to convert an
old man, to draw the desires of a carnal worldly man to heaven: when we speak
of good things to him, his soul is full of the world: what is in his brain?
the world: what is in his heart? the world. So he is dry and exhausted of all
good things, and that that is in him, is eaten up with the world. It is a great
improvidence in those that govern youth, that they labor not, that their
desires may be strong to the best things.

And let us all, both young and old, labor To ^cherish good motions.
for heavenly wisdom, that when good things are ministered to us from without,
or good motions stirred up by the Spirit of God, to close with them, and not to
quench those motions, and resist the Spirit, but to embrace those motions, and
cherish them, till they come to resolutions, and purposes, and actions. If we
have a motion stirring us up to repentance, let us ripen it till it come to
perfect repentance, till we repent indeed, and have turned from all our evil
ways, and turn to God, with full purpose of heart, that it may be a motion to
purpose. If it be a motion to faith, let us never leave cherishing of it by the
promise, till our hearts be rooted in faith. If it be a motion to any other
good thing, let us cherish and follow them to purpose. And embrace every
motion, as an Angel sent from heaven, from God to a good end, to put us in
mind, to invite us to good, and to drive us from ill.

And because desires are fickle and fading of themselves, unless there be some
art in helping of them: therefore let us add to these things a daily course of
renewing of our covenants To renew our covenants.
with God, that this day as God shall enable, me, I have a constant purpose
against all sin; I will regard no iniquity in my heart, I will have respect
to all good ways discovered. Renew our covenants, and resolutions of old,
says David, I have sw^rne, and will perform it, that I will keep thy
statutes. And as we determine and resolve, so make particular vows sometimes
against particular hindrances to abstain from such things.

What needs all this ado says the wicked athiest, will not less serve the
turn, but there Question.
must be these vows, and purposes, and resolutions?

No, God values us by our resolutions and Answer.
purposes, and not by uneffectuall glances, and wishes, will wishing help us
take a journey, or to do any thing in this world? and can we not do any thing
in this world with wishing, and can we for heaven? No, certainly there must be
resolutions, and covenants, and purposes, etc. What is the difference between
a Christian and another man? A Christian unlooseth his heart from base desires,
nothing shall tie him to the base world; but his conscience tells him, that he
is free from living in sins against conscience, and as for infirmities, he
labors, and resolves against them: therefore he is fit to die, and to resign
his soul. Whenever God shall take him, he is in a good way, in good
purposes, and resolutions. God values us according to our purposes, and
resolutions. David did not build the Temple; Abraham did not offer Isaac, but
they resolved upon it, and it was accounted as done. This is our comfort, that
God takes the resolution for the deed, and the perfection of a Christian is,
that God accepts of these resolutions, when he determines on the best things,
till he bring his heart in some measure to that estate.

What is the reason that many men at the Quest.
hour of death will admit no comfort?

The reason is, their hearts were naught, they Answer. Why men want comfort in
death.
respected some iniquity in their hearts, they were in bad ways, and allowed
some reigning sin, and till these be mortified we can minister no comfort. It
is only the resolved Christian that is a fi^ subject for comfort.

But to answer an ordinary let, or two, that the Devil casts in men's ways, in
these things: But does not God accept the will for the deed? Objection.
put the case I have a good will to do a thing, though I do it not God
accepts that.

I answer, Gods accepts the will for the Answer. When God accepts the will for
the deed.
deed, only where the impediments, and hindrances are impossi^le to be
remooved: as, put the case a poor man would be liberal if he had it, God
accepts the will for the deed, because he wants opportunity. But it never holds
when a man can do it, God accepts not the will for the deed, when a man has a
price in his hand to get wisdom, and yet is a barren plant, and not a tree of
righteousness; it is a sign of a naughty heart.

Oh! says another, God quenches not the smoking Objection.
flax, therefore though I have weak desires, all shall be well.

It is true, God does not quench the smoking Answer. God leaves not good
desires.
flax, but he does not leave it smoking, but blows the spark that in time it
comes to a flame: where there are beginnings of goodness embraced, it will
grow from smoking flax to a flame: they are growing desires as I said before.
Therefore flatter not thy self, that Christ will not quench the smoking flax.
It is true, if there be a desire of growth: for then I must speak comfort to a
poor Christian, that cannot be so good as he would, but desires it, and
complains, oh, that my ways were so direct, that I might keep thy statutes!
with his desires, he complains that he cannot do it, and uses the means to
grow, it is a good sign God will not quench the smoking Flax, till he have
brought corruption into subjection in us. Let every good soul comfort it self
with this, if thou have these blessed desires, God meets with thee: for he
desires thy salvation, and Christ desires thy reconciliation, and it is the
desire of thy heart, and thou usest the means, thou will not live in sins
against conscience, be of good comfort, we that are the ministers of God, and
I at this time bring the news of pardon, Christ's desire and thine meet in one.

Let us enlarge these things in our own deep and serious meditation. Alas, for
want of serious meditation in our hearts of such like truths as these, men
perish, and sink suddenly to hell. There is but a step between ordinary
profane persons, and hell, and yet they never think of renewing their
covenants with God, and entering into the state of grace, but content themselves
with that, which comes short of thousands that are now in hell, that have had
more wishes and desires. Men put all upon empty things, God is merciful, etc.
No, God will not be merciful to such as bless themselves in ill courses, his
wrath shall smoke against such, as I said, for in thus reasoning, they make a
covenant with hell and death, as much as they can. They that do thus, forget
God and good courses, and God will forget them, they treasure up wrath, and God
treasures up wrath against them. Let us take heed of Balaams wishing, and
labor to have such desires, as may be accepted of God, and comfortable to us.

FINIS.
THE FAITHFUL COVENANTER. In two Sermons upon GENESIS 17. 7.

BY The late Learned and Reverend Divine, RICH. SIBBS: Doctor in Divinity, Mr
of KATHERINE Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher to the Honorable
Society of GRAYES-INNE.

NEHE. 1. 5. O Lord God of Heaven, the great and terrible God, that keeps
Covenant and mercy for them that Love him.

LONDON, Printed by E. Purslow, for N. Bourne, at the Royal Exchange, and R.
Harford at the gilt Bible in Queens head Alley, in Paternoster Row. 1639.

THE FAITHFVL COVENANTER.
GENESIS 17. 7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed
after thee in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God to
thee, and to thy seed after thee.
GOD having framed man an understanding creature, has made him fit to have
communion and intercourse with himself, because he can by his understanding
discern, that there is a better good out of himself, in communion and
fellowship with which, happiness consists: other creatures, wanting
understanding to discern a better good out of, then in themselves, their life
being their good, desire only the continuance of their own being, without
society and fellowship with others. But man, having the knowledge of God, the
Creator of heaven and earth, but especially of God the Redeemer, providing for
him a second being, better then his first; understands that his best and
chiefest good depends more in him, then in himself, and because his
happiness stands in acquaintance and fellowship with this God, which is the
chief good, he desires a communion with him, that he may partake of his good.

This communion and fellowship of man with God, was first founded on a Covenant
of works made with Adam in Paradise, if he did obey, and did not eat of the
forbidden fruit, he should have life, both for himself and his posterity; the
which Covenant, because God would not have forgotten, he afterward renewed in
the delivery of the ten Commandments, requiring from man obedience to them in
his own person, exactly at all times, perpetually, promising life on the
obedience, and threatening death, and cursing, if he continued not in every
thing the law required to do: But this fellowship being placed in man's own
freedom, and having so weak a foundation, he lost both himself and it, so
that now by the first Covenant of works, Adam and all his posterity are under
a curse, for we cannot fulfill the law, that requires personal obedience,
perfect obedience, and exact obedience, he that continues not in all is
cursed. The Law then finds us dead, and kills us, it finds us dead
before, and not only leaves us dead still, but makes us more dead.

Now after this fall, man's happiness was, to recover again his communion and
fellowship with God, and therefore we must have a new Covenant, before we can
have life and comfort, God must enter into new conditions with us before we
can have any communion with him.

God therefore, loving man, does after the breach of the first agreement and
Covenant, when Adam had lost himself by his sin, and was in a most miserable
plight as ever creature was in the world, falling from so great a happiness
into wondrous misery: he raised him up, and comforted him, by establishing a
second, a new and better Covenant, laying the foundation of it, in the blessed
seed of the woman, Christ, the Messiah, who is the ground of this new Covenant,
and so of our communion and fellowship with God, without whom there can be no
intercourse between God and us in love; and because this Covenant was almost
forgotten, therefore now in Abraham's time God renewed it to Abraham in this
place, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee, etc.

There are four periods of time, of renevying this Covenant: first, from Adam
to Abraham, and in those first times of the world, those that were under the
Covenant, were called the sons and daughters of God, the children of the
promise, and the covenant of grace was called a promise of the blessed seed.

Secondly, from Abraham to Moses, and then it was called a covenant, and they
the children of the covenant: I will establish my Covenant. A covenant is more
then a promise, and a more solemn thing, because there be Ceremonies.

The third period of renewing the covenant of grace was from Moses to Christ,
and then it was more clear, when as to the covenant made with Abraham, who was
sealed with the Sacrament of Circumcision, the Sacrament of the Pascall Lamb
was added, and all the Sacrifices Leviticall, and then it was called a
Testament; that differs a little from a Covenant: for a Testament is
established by blood, it is established by death: so was that, but it was only
with the blood and death of Cattle sacrificed as a Type.

But now to Christ's time to the end of the world, the covenant of grace is most
clear of all, and it is now usually called the new Testament, being
established by the death of Christ himself: and it differs from a Covenant in
these respects.

First, a Testament indeed is a covenant, but something more, it is a covenant
sealed by death, the Testator must die before it can be of force: so all the
good that is conveyed to us by the Testament, it is by the death of the
Testator Christ: Gods covenant with us now, is such a covenant as is a
Testament, sealed with the death of the Testatour Christ, for without blood
there is no redemption, without the death of Christ there could be no
satisfaction, and without satisfaction there could be no peace with God.

Secondly, a Testament bequeatheth good things merely of love, it gives gifts
freely. A covenant requires some thing to be done, in a Testament there is
nothing but receiving the Legacies given. In covenants ofttimes, it is for the
mutual good one of another, but a Testament is merely for their good, for
whom the Testament is made, to whom the Legacies are bequeathed, for when they
are dead, what can they receive from them? Gods Covenant now is such a
Testament, sealed with the death of Christ, made out of love, merely for our
good, for what can God receive of us? all is legacies from him, and though he
requires conditions, requires faith and obedience, yet he himself fulfilleth
what he asks, gives what he requires, gives it as a Legacy, as we shall
see afterward.

Thus you see that the communion and fellowship of man with God, must either be
by a covenant of works, or by a covenant of grace. And we must distinguish
exactly between these two covenants, and the periods of them.

When the covenant of works was disanuled by ours sins, because we could not
fulfill the Law exactly, and perpetually, God will have a new Covenant, if we
believe in Christ, we shall have everlasting life. Now if we stick to the
one, we must renounce the other, if it be of faith, it is not of works, and if
it be of works, it is not of faith. This was excellently signified by Joshua
and Moses. Joshua brings the people to Canaan and not Moses, Moses does not
bring any to heaven, it must be Joshua, the Type of the true Jesus, that must
bring them through Jordan to Canaan. This was typified also in the Arc: there
was the Law, the Covenant of works in the Arc, but the propitiatory, the
Mercy-seate was above the Arc, above the Law, and from thence, God made all
his Answers, to signify to us, that we can have nothing to do with the Law
without the Propitiatory: Christ is the Propitiatory, the Mercy-seate; in
Christ God hears us, he makes all his Answers in the Propitiatory, Christ.
Therefore when the question is of salvation, how we have title to heaven; Not
by the merit of works, for then we reverse the Covenant of grace, but our
title is merely by Gods mercy in Christ apprehended by faith. The evidence
indeed to prove our faith to be a true faith, is from works, but the title we
have is only by Christ, only by grace. Here we must appeal from Sinai to
Sion: from the Law to the Gospel, from Moses to Christ; we must fly with Ioab
to the homes of the Altar, that must be our refuge; fly to Christ in the
Covenant of grace, and we shall not be pulled from thence as Ioab was from the
Altar, there let us live and die.

Remember (I say) that the Covenant of grace is distinct in the whole kind,
from the Covenant of works, yet this; They are both in the Church, and both
taught one subordinate to the other: As thus. The Covenant of works is taught
to show us our failing, that seeing our own disability to perform what the
Law requires we may be forced to the new Covenant of grace: And therefore
says Gal. 2.
Paul, By the Law I am dead to the Law. It is an excellent speech, by the Law I
am dead to the Law, by the Covenant of works I am dead to the Covenant of
works: that is by the Laws ^acting of me exact and perpetual obedience, in
thought word and deed, I come to see that I cannot fulfill it, and therefore am
dead to the Law, that is, I look for no salvation, for no title to heaven by
that, and therefore he says, the Law was added for transgression: why was the
Law added to the promise of salvation by Christ made here to Abraham, why was
the Covenant of works added in the wilderness afterward? it was for
transgression, to increase the sense of transgression: that we by the Law
might see what we should do, and what we have not done, and that we are by
that come under a curse, and so might fly to the promise of grace in Christ. I
have stood the longer in the clearing of this, because it is a maine point.

But to come to that which I specially intend, the words (as I said before)
contain therenewing of this blessed and gracious agreement, between God and
man, to Abraham the father of the faithful.

I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in
their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be thy God, and the God of
thy seed after thee.

The words (you see) contain a Covenant: and here are all things, all the
Articles and circumstances that agree to any Covenant whatsoever.

Here are the parties, both that makes the Covenant, and that are covenanted
with.

Here is the substance of the Covenant, and the qualities of the Covenant, and
the condition of the Covenant.

The party making the Covenant, is God; I will be thy God.

God is the party covenanting: God indeed is both the party covenanting, and
the substance of the Covenant, I will be a God to thee, they fall both together
in one. It is a most sweet sign of Gods great love, that he will stoop so
low, as to make a Covenant with us, to be our God, to be himself all in all to
us. For consider but both these parties, God and we, the Creator and the
creature, the immortal God and mortal man, the glorious God, and dust and
afhes, the holy God, and sinfullman, the great King of heaven and earth, and
Rebels and traitors as we are. For him to condescend so low, as to make a
Covenant with us, to enter into Terms and Articles of agreement with us, it is
a wondrous sign of his gracious mercy and love; what can we but hope for from
so gracious a God? But I shall have occasion to touch that afterward.

The parties covenanted with, are Abraham ^d his seed, his seed by promise.

The substance of the Covenant is, I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed
after thee.

The qualities of the Covenant are, first, it is a sure Covenant, I will
establish my Covenant.

Secondly, it is an everlasting Covenant, I will establish my Covenant for an
everlasting Covenant.

Thirdly, it is a peculiar Covenant, I will establish my Covenant between me
and thee, and thy seed: that is, only between me and thee and thy seed, not
with the refuse of the world, but only with thy seed by promise, only
believers, whether Jews or Gentiles.

Fourthly, it is a most free Covenant: it was made to Abraham, whom God called
out of Vr, of the Chaldees, out of an idolatrous nation, out of an idolatrous
family. Even as it was at the first most freely made to Adam in Paradise, when
he was in a most desperate estate, when he was as low as hell in a manner,
ready to sink into de spaire, then the Seed of the woman was promised; so
here it was freely made to good Abraham. First, the love of God was free to
him, when he called him being an idolatour, and then it was freely renewed
afterward when he was good, as we shall see anon.

And lastly, It is a Covenant consisting most of spiritual things, it is a
spiritual covenant, I mean especially, promising spiritual favors, although
the other things as appendices of the maine are likewise meant: For after that
the covenant was made to Abraham and his posterity, they endured many
afflictions: after the promise was renewed to Jacob, we know he fled from his
brother Esau to whom the Covenant of grace was not made, and yet of Esau
presently came Duke such a one, and Duke such a one, and poor Jacob was feign
to fly for his life in regard of the promise. So that I say, it must be
specially of spiritual blessings.

These are the qualities of the Covenant, It is a sure, an everlasting, a
peculiar, and a most free Covenant, aiming specially at spiritual things.

And then lastly, you have the condition of the Covenant, and that, though it
is not expressed, yet it is employed: I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed,
therefore thou shall take me for thy God, carry thy self to me as to thy God,
etc. It is usual in other places of Scripture, where mention is made of this
Covenant, to imply the condition required on our parts, sometimes both the
Covenant and condition are mentioned together, as in Zach. 13. Zach. 13.
last: I will say (says God) It is my people, and they shall say, the Lord is
my God, the one springs from the other; when God is a God to any, he makes
the heart to answer; thou shall be my God, and I will be thine always. This is
the condition on our part, that we make with God in this Covenant, to take him
for our God, to be his people, and his pecuilar ones. I will be thy God, and
the God of thy seed.

Though these words, I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed, be the last
words of the Text, yet being the substance of the Covenant, I think it shall
be best to speak of that before I speak of the qualities of the Covenant, or
any thing else. I will be thy God.

This is the Covenant in the Messiah: but first, what is it to be a God?

I answer: To be a God, take it in the general, is to give being to the
creature that had no being of it self, and to protect and preserve the
creature in its being, in a word, to be a Creator; for providence is the
perpetuity and continuance of creation; this is to be a God. The office of God,
as God, is a most glorious function: to be a King is a great matter, but to be
a God, to give being to the creature, to support it when it has a being, to
do all that God should do, this is a most glorious work: but this is but
creation, this is not intended especially here, for thus he is the God of all
his works; thus by creation and preservation, he is the God of all the men in
the world out of the Church.

What is then to be thy God? I will be thy God.

I Answer, to be a God in a more peculiar manner, is to be a God in Covenant,
that is, not only to be a God to preserve and continue this being of ours in a
civil life, but it is to be a God in a higher relation to us, to be a God in a
reference to an eternal, supernatural estate in heaven, to be a God here in
grace, and hereafter in glory: and thus God is a God in a gracious covenant
only by Jesus Christ, and to those that believe in him. I will be thy God:
that is, I will be thy God in Christ, to give thee a better being then this
world can aford, to free thee from the cursed estate thou art in by nature, to
deliver thee from all ill, spiritually and eternally, especially to bestow on
thee all good, spiritually, and eternally, especially as we have it in the
words of the Covenant Genesis 15. 1. I will be thy shield and thy Gen 15. 1.
exceeding great reward, a shield to keep off all ill, and a reward for all
good. So in the 84. God will be a Sun and a shield, etc. a Sun Psalm. Psalm. 84.
for all sweet comfort and good, and a shield, in regard of defense from ill; a
Sun and a shield, till we come to the possession of eternal happiness.
This is to be a God in a peculiar manner, to give all things necessary for
grace and life too, for this life and for a better; to do all things requisite
to bring us to heaven and happiness through Christ, in whom all the promises
are, yea and Amen, to be all in all, to direct the protections and provions of
this life, of our estate here to a supernatural happiness hereafter, to a
state beyond nature: for God directs the favors of this life, so that he takes
them away or he gives them, as he sees them advantageous or hindrances to a
better estate. So is God a God to those that are in convenant with him, to do
all this, and to do all this in opposition of all enemies whatsoever, to do
all this in weakness and in the impotency of the creature, to do all this when
all second causes are contrary as it were, to bring a man to heaven in spite of
the Devil, and of our own corruptions, or all oppositions whatsoever. This is
to be a God indeed.

But why does he say only, I will be thy God; why does he not say, I will give
thee grace and protection, I will give thee heaven and life everlasting?

Because all is one: for all things in the world are in this one promise I will
be thy God. See the wisdom of heaven, how much he speaks in how little,
there cannot be more spoken then thus, I will be thy God, for in saying, I will
be thy God, he implies that, whatsoever he is, or has, or can do, shall be
thine too, I will be thy God, that is, my wisdom shall be thine to watch over
thee, to find out ways to do thee good, my power shall be thine to keep thee
from danger, to defend and rescue thee from all enemies, and to subdue them by
degrees unto thee: my providence shall be thine to turn all things to thy
good: my mercy shall be thine, to forgive thy sins: my love shall be thine, to
bestow on thee all necessary comforts; there is no phrase in the Scripture that
has so much in so little as this here, I will be thy God, if we could unfold
and lay open this excellent promise, all other particular promises in the
covenant of grace are members of this: what is the reason (as Saint Paul says)
all things are yours, because you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, God is the
God of Christ and our God, we are in covenant with the God of Christ, Christ
is the heir of all, and we are members of Christ: God who is the God of all
things is ours. It is a wondrous comprehensive promise. I will be thy God, and
the God of thy seed.

The substance of thy Covenant then is, that God will be a God to us; the point
to be observed is this, That God graciously in the blessed seed, the Messiah,
Christ Jesus, he takes upon him to be a God to all those that are in Covenant
with him; that is, to be All-sufficient to bring us to happiness,
All-sufficient in this world, and in the world to come, to be our portion, to
be all in all.

This is the first and fundamental promise of all other, indeed it is the life
and soul of all the promises, and it is the life and soul of all comfort
whatsoever: for all other relations spoken of God tend to this, that he is our
God, this is before to be a Father, before to be any thing. God first is a God,
and then a Father, and then all in all to us. As he is first, the God of
Christ, and then the Father of Christ, as you have it usually in the beginnings
of the Epistles, God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, first the God, and
then the Father: to be a God then, is the fundamental and principal favor,
from thence comes our Election, his choosing of us to eternal salvation
before all time, his protection and preservation of us in time, unto heaven.

I shall not need to speak more of this, having unfolded it before.

But you will say, how shall we know, that this Covenant belongs to us, that
we are such as we may say, God is our God?

I answer, first, to lay this for a ground, you must know, that to be a God, is
a relation: whosoever God is a God to, he persuades them by his Spirit, that
he is a God to: the same Spirit that persuades them, that there is a God,
that Spirit tells them that, God is their God, and works a qualification and
disposition in them, as that they may know, that they are in covenant with such
a gracious God, the Spirit as it reveals to them the love of God, and that he
is theirs, so the Spirit enableth them to claim him for their God, to give up
themselves to him, as to their God.

And the Spirit does this, because friends cannot be in convenant and
confederate without there be a likeness, or an agreement: there must be more
word: then on to a Covenant, though Gods grace do all, yet we must give our
consent, and therefore the Covenat is expressed under the title of marriage, in
marriage there must be a consent of both parties: In reconciliation between a
King and subjects, that are fallen out when they are Rebels, there must be an
accepting of the pardon, and a promise of new subjection. So then if God be our
God, there will be grace given to take him for our God, to give him homage as
a King, to give him our consent as to our Spouse; thou shall be my God and I
will cleave to thee, as to my Lord and Husband: Can two walk together (says
the Prophet) and not be friends? there can be no friendship with God, except
there be somewhat wrought in us by his Spirit, to make us fit for friendship,
that we may look on him as an object of love and delight: if we look on him
as an object of hatred, what terms of friendship can there be? Now, that we
may look on him as an object of love, fit for converse with him, he must make
us such by consent, and yielding to him, by framing the inward man to his,
likeness that so there may a peace be maintained with him: you see the ground
of it, of necessity it must be so.

Well, to come to the trials, but let me first add this to the former;
whomsoever God is a God to, it is known, specially by spiritual and eternal
favors: a man cannot know certainly that God is his God by outward and common
things, that cast-awayes may have; for a castaway may have Ishmaels blessing,
and Esaus portion, blessings of the left hand, common graces. To know
undoubtedly therefore, that God is our God, must be by peculiar matters; for
those whose God, God is, are a peculiar people, a holy nation, severed from
others. First of all then know, what the Spirit of God says to thy soul, for
they that are Gods have his Spirit, to reveal to their spirits, the secret and
hidden love of God; but if the voice of the Spirit be silent in regard of
testimony, go to the work of the Spirit, but go to the peculiar work of the
Spirit. For though the Spirit may be silent in regard of his testimony, yet
there are some works or other of the Spirit in a man, whereby he may know
that God is his God. As the Spirit of God works in some sort, a proportion in
him unto God; and none can know better what God is to him, then by searching of
his own heart, what he is back again to God; for as God says to him by his
Spirit, thou art mine, so they say to God, thou art mine. Let us then come to
the trial, by our carrying our selves to God. Can we say with David, Whom have
I in heaven but thee, or what is there in earth in comparison of thee? when the
conscience can tell us, that we make God our treasure and our portion above all
earthly things, then we make him our God. A Christian singleth our God, above
all things in the world, for his happiness. Lord, thou art mine, whatsoever
wealth is mine, or riches mine, or friends mine, I stand not upon that, but
thou art mine. A rich man runs to his wealth, and make flesh his arm, he
runs to friends, to bear him out in ill causes, but a true Christian that
has God for his God, he may know it by this, he singleth out God for his
portion, runs to him in all extremities; Lord, thou art mine: this is a sign
that God has said to his soul, first, I am thy salvation. How can the soul
appropriate God to himself? how can he say as Thomas did, My Lord and my God?
except the Lord have spoken peace to the soul before, and have said, I am thy
salvation? It is a sign we have made God our God, when we prize him and value
him above all the world, and when with Saint Paul, Phil. 3. we count all
things dung and dross, in comparison of Jesus Christ our Lord: what we will
do most for, that is our God; if we will do most for God, he is our God; if
we do most for pleasures, they are our God, if we do most for riches, break
o^r rests and crack our consciences for them, that is our God. In a word,
whatsoever we value highest, that is our God.

Examine what affections we have to God: (for it is affection, that makes a
Christian) single out some few that we are most offending in. As first, for
fear, it may shame us all, (indeed a Christian upon his best resolutions is
better) but the ordinary carriage of men is, they fear men more then God, they
fear every thing more then him that they should fear above all. For instance,
is the retired carriage of men to God, such as their carryage is to the eye of
the world? will not they do that in secret ofttimes, that they will not do
openly? in secret they will commit this or that sin, and think, who sees?
there are secret abominations in the closet of their hearts, they will not
fear to do that in the eye of God, that they fear to do in the eye of a
child of six years old, that is of any discretion: Is this to make God our
God, when we fear the eye of a silly mortal creature more then the eye of
God, that is ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, that is our Judge,
is God our God the whiles? undoubtedly, when God is made our God, there is an
awe of the eye of heaven upon a man in all places, therefore this is the
condition of the Covenant, Walk before me, or walk as in my sight; how do
we walk before God as in his sight, when there is such a great deal of
difference in our carriage secretly, and before the eyes of men? when we
labor more to approve our carriage to men, then we make conscience of our
spirits to God? This may shame us, even the best of us who are in Covenant with
God, and have made God our God, we have cause to be abased for this: and surely
one of the best ways to make Gods children abased and humbled, is to compare
the different proportion of their carriage, how they carry themselves to men,
whom they respect, and to outward things in the world, and how they carry
themselves to God: if God be our God, there will be an universal fear and
care to please God in all times and in all places, because he is everywhere,
darkness and light are all one to him.

Try your selves therefore by this affection: if we make God our God, we will
fear him above all; for there being such a distance between God and us, He
the mighty God, and we creatures whose breath is in our nostrils, there can no
other way be a Govenant of peace betwixt us, but with much reverence: therefore
all Christians are reverent creatures, they do all in fear, they pass the
whole time of their conversation here in fear, they make an end of their
salvation with fear^ and trembling, they enjoy their liberties in fear. Saint
Jude makes mention of a number of wretched people in his time, that eat
without fear: you may know a man that has not this grace of God in his heart,
by his unreverent carriage, he never thinks of the presence and All-seeing
eye of God. A Christian that has God to his God, knows that wheresoever he
is, he is in the eye of heaven, therefore he is jealous, even of his own most
secret corruptions, he knows that they are lawless of themselves, and
therefore he always sets himself in the presence of God, he is full of
reverence, full of fear, even in the enjoying of his Christian liberties.

So likewise for the affection of love: if God be thy God, thou have grace
given thee to love him above all things; with whom God is graciously
reconciled, he gives them his Spirit to be reconciled back again to him, He
loves us, and we love him again: for we are by nature enemies to God, as he
is to us, there is no wicked man in the world can love God; indeed as God is a
God, that promises salvation he loves him, he would feign have that, and
therefore would feign be in his favor, but he cannot love God as he is in all
respects, but he hates him, and he hates his children, he trifleth with his
name by oaths and blasphemy, and the like, he scorned God, he wishes that
there were no God; can this man say, that God is his God, when he does not
carry himself back again to him in his affection as his God? no such matter,
he is Gods enemy, and God is his enemy. So if God be our God, if he have set
his love upon us, we cannot but love him again, if he be reconciled to us,
we are reconciled to him. This is a sure sign that God is our God, if we love
him above all.

Now, that may be known, if we be zealous, when God is dishonored any way,
for whatsoever we make our God, we will not endure to have touched; if a man
make his lust his God, if that be touched, he is all in a chafe, when that
which a man loves is touched) experience shows it) he is presently all on a
fire. And here the best Christians have cause to be abased; has God their
love, when they can hear him disgraced, and his name abused, without being
greatly moved, and yet notwithstanding in the mean time, will not endure
their own credit to be touched? but they are (as I said) all on a fire: where
there is no zeal, there is no love: certainly when we can hear Gods
children misused, and Religion endangered, and profession scoffed at, etc. and
yet not be affected, nor cannot take Gods cause to heart, this is great fault
in our love.

And so for joy and delight, we make God our God, when we joy in him above all
things in the world, when we make him our boast all the day long, as it is,
Psalm. 44. 8. when we make him our glory, as he is called our Glory in Ierem.
2. 11. They changed their glory: God is our glory if he be our God, we count
it our chiefest glory, that we are his, and that he is ours: whatsoever our
estates be, we glory in God, and not in our selves: a Christian when he would
joy and glory, he goes out of himself to God, He is his joy. But do not men
joy in the creature and delight in it ofttimes more then in God? It is a great
shame for us, and that for which even the best of us all may be abased, to
consider what a deal of delight and comfort we take in the creature more then
in God. We see Jonah, a good man, when his Gourd was taken from him that God
raised up to be a shelter for him; a poor simple defense it was, and yet we
see how pettish the good man was, all the comfort he had, could not keep him
from anger and fretting when the Gourd was gone, and yet God was his God. So
many men, whereas they should joy in God above all things, yet if God take
outward comforts from them, they are as if there were no God in heaven, no
comfort there, as if there were no providence to rule theworld, as if they ^ad
no Father in covenant with them. I say this is a great shame for us.

Again, if God be our God, we will trust in him, rely and depend upon him
above all things; for whatsoever our trust is most in, that is our God: now if
our conscience tell us, that we trust most in God, more then in wealth, or
friends, and will not to displease God please any man, it is a sign that we
have make God our God, because we trust in him. And surely, if we would examine
our selves, the best of us all, it would bring us on our knees, and make our
faces be confounded, to consider what a deal of Atheism there is in our
hearts (though we are not altogether Atheists, yet what a deal there is) that
must be mortified and subdued. For if an honest man, and that we know is
faithful, should say to us, I will be yours, I will take upon me to provide
for you, to defend you, to protect you, to stand by you against all
adversaries, we believe and hope that he will do it, but do we so to God?
has he our trust and affiance? Alas no; so far forth, I mean, as we are
not subdued to God: a Christian indeed, in some measure is enabled to make God
his trust and confidence, but there remains abundance of Atheism, even in the
best of us. If God be our God, why do we not trust in him, depend upon him for
all things, depend upon him for protection, and deliverance from all ill
(spiritual ill specially) from sin, Satan, hell, and wrath, depend upon him
for all good (the good of grace specially) for the change of our nature, and
the forgiveness of our sins; for spiritual privileges, adoption and
sonneship, for the inheritance of heaven, etc. It is a sign I say, that God is
our God, when we trust in him above all the world, and trust other things
only from him and for him, I will trust man, but man may deceive me, I will
not trust him therefore with an absolute confidence, no, that were to make a
God of him. What is the reason that God confounds proud men at last? David
shows the reason, this man he took not the Lord for his God: when men will in
contempt of Religion, set up themselves, and somewhat else to rely on besides
God, God at the last brings it to pass, that the world shall note them out,
this man trusted in his greatness, he trusted in his policy, in his wit, in
his friends, this man took not the Lord for his God.

Again, if we make God our God, we may know it by our obedience, especially by
the obedience of the inward man; when the inward man is vowed to God, when a
man yields inward obedience to God, it is a sign that God is his God; when a
man can araigne his thoughts and desires before God, and when lusts rise in his
heart contrary to the Spirit, he checks them presently, this becomes not
those that are Gods, it beseems not those that walk after God, that have
Gods Spirit for their leader, therefore he is ashamed presently of base
tentations. A Christian can perform the first and last Commandments, which
are the most spiritual Commandments, he can make God his God in his
affections, his affections are placed upon him alone, (as I have showed before)
he can yield up all his inward affections of fear and love and joy, and such
like unto God, which is the sum of the first Commandment, and he can be
content not to have his lusts rage and range, suppresses his very thoughts and
desires, will not suffer any thing to rise in his heart unchecked and
uncountrouled, which is the sum of the tenth Commandment, I mean he can do
it in some measure. And there is a inward passive obedience too: It is God (as
David and other Saints said) It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good
in his own eyes. I am Gods and he shall dispose of me; the soul that knows
God to be his God, has an inward obedience of contentation with his estate:
God is my portion, and it is large enough, the earth is his and the fullness
thereof, therefore I will be content to be at his disposing whether it be more
or less, and if any murmuring arise in his heart against God, in respect of
his estate or otherwise, he presently suppresseth it, as being contrary to the
blessed government that a Christian is under, that should resign his whole
soul unto God.

Thus by our affections, by the trial of them, we may know whether God be our
God; if we give him the affections of the heart, which Religion most stands
in, when we make the whole inward man stoop and bow, and bend unto him, when
we make him our King, and give him the supremacy, when we set the Crown upon
his head, when he has our fear, our joy and delight, our love, our trust, I
mean, when he has the supreme of all, for we may love man, as God deriveth
good to us by him, and so for the rest, but God must be supreme, others must be
loved and feared, etc. in him and for him, but he chiefly, when we depend
upon him for all deliverance out of ill and for all good, and show our
dependence on him, by our subjection to him in all his ways, by our yielding
to him obedience answerable to all this, and especially when we shall show it
by performing inward worship to him, when we walk before him pefectly and
sincerely, as it is in the beginning of this Chapter, I am God All-sufficient,
walk before me and be perfect: By this we may know, that God is our God. I
need not enlarge it, the practice of the first Commandment will teach us what
is our God, whatsoever we give the supremacy of the inward man to, whatsoever
we love most, whatsoever we trust most, whatsoever we fear most, whatsoever
we joy and delight most, whatsoever we obey most, that is our God. I am the
Lord thy God, (in the first Commandment) there is the ground, what follows?
Thou shall have no other Gods but me, that is, thou shall love nothing in the
world, nor fear nothing, nor trust in nothing, nor joy in nothing more then
me, no, nor with me, but all things else thou shall trust them, and fear them,
etc. in me and for me: otherwise what is our love is our God, what is our trust
is our God, what is our greatest fear is our God: if we fear man, fear him
to do ill, man is our God; if we love the creature, or sin, that is our God;
if we crack our consciences for wealth, the covetous man's wealth is his God;
if we crack our consciences for pleasures, or for our bellies, our pleasures
and our bellies, and our lusts are our God: we make not God our God except we
give him the supremacy of the inward man.

But to proceed, and to come to some few familiar signs more that will try us,
though these may try us, in the intercourse that is between God and us.

Whosoever has God for their God, they have the spirit of supplication and
prayer, to cry unto God, to run unto him, specially in extremity, all Gods
children have the spirit of adoption to cry, Abba Father; they have the spirit
to give them boldness to God, when otherwise their nature, and likewise
trouble joining with nature, and tentations would make them run from God, yet
the Spirit of God in them makes them bold to go to God in Jesus Christ; Gods
children that are in Covenant with him, can at all times pray to God; if they
cannot pray, they can chatter and sigh to God: there is somewhat they can do,
there is a spirit in them that groaneth and sigheth, as Romans 8. and God hears
the voice of his own Spirit, they are cries in his ears: My groans and sighs
are not hid from thee, says the Psalmist. The spirit of supplication will
show God to be our God, because if he were not ours, we could not be bold
to go to him, in the time of extremity especially; this sign you have in the
13. Zach. last, They shall call upon my name, and I will hear them; they shall
be my people, and I will be their God: Invocation and prayer is a sign that
God is our God, when we go to God presently in all our wants and
necessities by prayer. Pharaoh and reprobate spirits, say to Moses, pray you
for me; but as for a spirit of supplication in themselves they have not; they
may speak of prayer, but they cannot pray, whosoever is Gods, he can cry to
God; a child we know the first voice it utters as soon as it is borne, it
cries, so Gods newborn children they can cry unto God. Paul in the 9. Acts,
you shall find him praying as soon as ever he was coverted; and certainly
those that use not to pray morning and evening, and upon all occasions, that
acquaint not themselves with God, God is not their God; if he were their God,
they would seek to him, and be acquainted with him, the Spirit will teach them
to go unto God as to a Father.

Again, we may know that God is our God by this, by our separating from all
others, in our selves, and out of our selves, there is a separation in our
selves, for there is the first separation. God whose God he is, he gives
them his Spirit, and that like fire severeth the dross, and gathered the sold
together, and as heat in the body, that severeth good nourishment, and
separateth that which does not nourish the body, sowhere the Spirit of God is,
he works a separation between the flesh and the spirit, the spirit will know
what is spiritual, and will discern what is in us that is fleshly, and
will join to spiritual things, and the spirit will be one as it were,
there will be a sweet agreement in the word, in the Sacraments, in good
company, in holy meditation and the like, and a separation from the flesh. A
Christian knows, that he is redeemed from himself, (as far as he is
naught) we are redeemed from our selves and our own base nature, as well as
from hell and damnation, therefore there is first a separation in our selves
from our selves, it begins there, we have nothing to do with our
corruptions, we will not own them.

And where this sweet Covenant is, that God is our God, as there is a
separation from our selves and our corruptions, so there is a separation from
all that joyneth with our corruption, a separation in affection, from
delighting in all that is not God, from all such occasions and company, as
strengthens our corruption. A Christian knows what he has of Gods in him,
and what he has of Satan, and that he must weaken, therefore he severeth
himself from that which strengthens the one, and weakeneth the other: this
trial is expressed in 2. Cor. 6. last, Comeout from amongst them, separate your
selves, and I will be your God, and you shall be my people; (he speaks for
direction, especially in our society and acquaintance, for that is the thing
he aymeth at) how shall we know that God will be our God? we must separate
our selves, and touch no unclean thing, nothing that will help rebellion:
therefore those that have an indifferent disposition to all companies, and can
so^ace themselves in any society, though never so corrupt, that bear
themselves plausible to all, and would be thought well of all, and so will
venture upon all occasions, it is an ill sign that they are carnal people,
when in the nearest league in friendship or amity, or in intimate familiarity,
they will join with any, all are alike, it is a sign they have not God for
their God, for then they would have common enemies and common friends with God:
common enemies with God, whom God hated, they would hate: as God in Covenant
blessed them that bless us, and curses them that curse us; so they that are
in Covenant and friendship with God, will hate with a perfect hatred whatsoever
it is that hates God, they will have nothing to do in intimate familiarity
further then their callings press upon them, they will give them their due in
humanity and courtesy, but no more; their love and delight will be in God, and
those that are his, that represent him, that have his Spirit and Image. How often
is this, I am the Lord your God, repeated by Moses as a ground of separation
from Idolatry? it is expressed almost every where, and indeed if the Lord be our
God, there is ground enough of separation from all that is not God, it cannot
be otherwise.

Another sign and evidence that God is our God, is victory over our base
corruptions in some measure: this you have in Rev. 21. 7. He that overcomes
shall inherit all things, I will be his God, and he shall be my son: how
shall I know that God is my God, and that I am his son? if by the power of
his Spirit, I am able to overcome and conquer in some comfortable measure, base
tentations, and my base corruptions and lusts, when I lie not as a beast, or as
a carnal man under sin, but God has given me in some measure spiritual
strength over sin.

Undoubtedly these and such like works of the Spirit together with the
testimony of the Spirit will be wheresoever God is our God.

In a word, to name no more trials but this, whosoever God is a God to, there
will be a transforming unto God, a trans^orming unto Christ, in whom God is our
God: for we must know that we are renewed according to the Image of the second
Adam, our comfort is by God revealed in Christ: If God be our God in Christ, we
will be like to God, and that will be known that we are like to God, if we be
like to God in the flesh, God incarnate: for we are predestined to be like
God incarnate, God first he is Christ's God before he is ours, and as Christ
carried himself to God, so if we be Gods, we must carry our selves like
Christ, be transformed unto him: how did Christ carry himself to God? God was
his God, My God, my God, says Christ upon the Cross. Now the Gospel shows
that be obeyed his Father in all things, in doing and suffering, Not my will,
but thy will be done. You know how full of mercy and compassion he was, how he
prayed all night sometimes, though he knew God would bestow things on him
without prayer, yet he would pray in order to Gods appointment, you know how
full of goodness he was, going about continually doing good, and that in
obedience and conscier ceto Gods command: in a word, look how Christ made God
his God, and carried himself to God, so must we, for we are predestined to
be transformed to the Image of the second Adam, Christ. Especially observe one
thing, (I touched it before) whom we run to and trust to in extremity, is
our God: Christ in extremity, when he felt the anger, and endured the wrath
of God being a surety for our sins, yet My God, my God still, so if we make
God our God, chiefly in the greatest extremity, in the time of desertion as
Christ did, it is a good sign. I do but touch these things, the point you see
is large, I only give you matter of meditation, you may enlarge them your
selves in your own thoughts. These I think sufficient trials, whereby you may
know whether God be your God.

Having now thus unfolded these Terms, let us see what we may draw from
thence for our use and comfort.

First then, if by these trials we find that God be not, or have not been our
God: Alas, let us never rest, till we make it good, that God is our God: For
what if we have all things, if we have not God with all things? all other
things are but streams, God is the Fountain; if we have not the Spring,
what will become of us at last? Achitophel had much wit and policy, but he
had not God for his God, Ahab had power and strength, but he had not God for
his God: Saul had a Kingdom, but he had not God for his God: Herod had
eloquence, but he had not God for his God: Judas was an Apostle, a great
professor, but he had not God for his God; what became of all these? wit
they had, strength they had, honor they had, friends they had, but they had
not God, and therefore a miserable end they made: what miserable creatures are
all such, when they shall say, friends have forsaken me, wealth has forsaken
me, and health has forsaken me; terrors lay hold upon me, the wrath of God
has over-taken me, but they cannot say, God is my God; oh such are in a
miserable case, in a fearful estate indeed: nay suppose they have all these,
suppose they could say, they have a world of riches, they have inheritances,
they have friends, etc. yet if they cannot say, God is my God, all is vanity:
the whole man is this, to have God to be our God: this is the whole man, to
fear God and keep his Commandments, Eccles. 1^. l^st, If a man have all the
world, and have not God for his God, all is but vanity and vexation of spirit:
never rest therefore till we can prove our selves to be in the Covenant of
grace, till we can say, God is my God.

But secondly, when we have found God to be our God, then make this use of it,
a use of resolution: is God my God? then I will resolve to please him, though
all creatures be against me; this was their resolution in the 4. Micah, Every
Nation walks in the name of his God, but we will walk in the name of the
Lord our God for ever and ever: resolve with Ioshuah and others to please God,
whosoever says the contrary, to walk after the Commandments of God,
whatsoever others do or say. In all discouragements from men or Devils, let us
set this as a buckler, God is my God. Arm our selves with resolution against
all fears and threatenings of men, of men of terror, against the Arm of
flesh, they say they will do this, and this; I but God is my God, all that
they do they must do in his strength: Arm our selves with this, against the
power and gates of hell: fear not the Devil, if we fear man or Devil more
then God, fear them so, as to do any thing to displease God, we make them
God: If our conscience rightly tells us, that what is to be done by us, is the
will and command of God, and that herein I serve God, we need not fear any
opposer, but oppose this as an Armor of proof against all creatures, against
all discouragements whatsoever: And certainly experience tells us, and
approoveth it to be true, that nothing can dismay a man that does things in
conscience to God, and knows God will bear him out in it, though not from
danger in this world, (and yet for the most part he does that too, those that
are the stoutest men for God, are oftentimes most safe, always freed from
inward dejection) yet God disposes of it so, as that he that keeps a good
conscience, shall always be a King and rule over the world, and therein he
performs his promise, whatsoever discouragements he endures outwardly, yet
no discouragement can cast down that soul that looks to God; In his
conscience he knows that he takes God to be his, that he serves him, and
that it shall go well with him at last, that God will be Alsufficient to him,
and this rayseth him above all, makes him rule and reign over his enemies, and
be a terror to those that do him hurt.

Again, if God be our God, then let this stop all base and covetous desires
after earthly things, if God be our portion, why should we grapple too much
after the world then? what need we crack our consciences and break our peace
for the mucke of the world? is not God our portion? is he not rich enough? is
not he Lord of heaven and earth? has not he promised that he will not fail
us nor forsake us? I am thy exceeding great reward, says God to Abraham, is
not this enough? what does Satan for us when he gets us to crack our
consciences by griplenesse after earthly things? he promises, thou shall have
this and that, but I will take God from thee, as he did Adam in Paradise, thou
shall have an Apple, but thou shall loose thy God: All his solicitations to
base and earthly courses tend to nothing else but to take God from us: Now when
God is our God, and he has promised to be our portion, let it be sufficient
for us, let us not for the displeasing of him, take any condition from Satan or
the world upon any terms.

Again, if so be we know this for a truth that God is our God, then let it be
a use of exhortation, to stir us up to keep and maintain and cherish
acquaintance and familiarity with him; as it is in Job. 22. Acquaint thy self
with God, if we be acquainted with him now, he will be acquainted with us in
time of sorrow, in the hour of death, therefore cherish acquaintance with him,
wheresoever we may meet with God be there much, be much in aring,
inreceiving the Sacrament, in praying to him and making our suits known to him
in all our necessities, be much in the society of Saints, God has promised to
be there, therefore cherish the society of all that are good: what a friendly
course does God take with us? he seeks for our acquaintance, and therefore
gives us his Ordinances, the Word and Sacraments, sends his messengers, the
good motions of his Spirit to our hearts, to leave the world and vanities of
it, to make us out of love with bad courses, and join with him in friendship
and familiarity, oh let us make use of these blessed means, check not these
good motions, but yield unto them and obey them, grieve them not, the Spirit is
sent to make God and us friends, who were enemies, grieve not the Spirit,
entertain his motions, that we may be acquainted with God. But do we do so?
truly no, indeed if God will be our God to save us, and let us live in our
swearing and lying, and deceiving, and in other base courses, we would be
content with him upon these terms, but to be our God so that we must serve
him and love him, and fear him, and joy in him above all, and have nothing in
the world without his favor, then let him take his favor to himself, we
will have none of it: though men speak it not with their mouths to the world,
yet the inward speech of their hearts, is to this purpose, if we must be the
people of God, upon these terms, to renounce our pleasures and profits, let
him be a God to whom he will for us, if he will save us, then welcome his
favor, we will be glad of his acquaintance, otherwise we will have none of
it, what is the speech of the world but this? these men when they shall at the
day of judgment claim acquaintance with God, and say, Lord, Lord open to us,
we have known thee in the streets etc. what will God say? depart from me,
you workers of iniquity, I know you not, you were acquainted with me indeed
outwardly in the ministry of my word, but you kept not an inward and
spiritual familiarity with me in my ordinances, you used not the society of
the saints, you entertained not the motions of my spirit which I sent to you,
to leave your ill courses, I know you not, this shall be the answer to such
wretched persons.

Lastly, if by these comfortable signs we find God to be our God, then here
is a spring of comfort opened to a Christian: if God be mine, then all that he
has is mine, he is my Father, he is my husband, he is my rock, his
goodness, his wisdom, his providence, his mercy, whatsoever he has is
mine: If we had any man in the world that had all wisdom in him, and all the
strength of the world, and all goodness, and all love in him, and all this for
us, what an excellent creature were this? God has all this, and a Christian
that has God for his God has all this and much more, for whatsoever is in the
creator, is much more in him. Hereupon comes all those styles, and sweet
names, that God has taken upon him in the scripture, because he would have us
to know that all comforts are together in him, the names of all the creatures
that are comfortable, God has bin pleased to take upon him, to show us what a
God he is, he is water to refresh us, a sun to comfort us, a shield to keep
evil from us, a rock to support us, chambers to cover us in the time of
danger, and such like, and in every creature God has left foot steps and
beams of himself, that man being an understanding creature, might find out
God in them: In water there is a beam of his refreshing power, in the sun, a
beam of his cherishing power, and the like, and when we receive comfort from
the creature, which has but a drop, a beam of his goodness, we should
consider how good God himself is, if this be so comfortable, what is God that
is my God, here we use the creatures to refresh us, and God deriveth his
goodness usually to us by them, what will he be to us in heaven, when he will
be all in all: and whatsoever comfort God has, Christ has, because God and
Christ join together for our good, for God is in Christ reconciling the world
to himself, and if God be ours, Christ is ours, and if God and Christ be ours,
all things are ours, because all things are Gods, Angels are ours, Cherubins
are ours, because God is ours. It is a point of wondrous comfort, a poor
christian when he has nothing to trust to, he may perhaps say sometime, that
he has no friend in the world, and he has many enemies: I but he has a
God to go to, if he have not the beam, yet he has the Sun, if he have not
the stream, yet he has the fountain, if we have not particular benefits
that others have, yet he has better, whatsoever portion he have in the
world, he has a rich portion, for God is his portion: God is my portion says
the Church, in the 3. Lumenta. therefore will I hope in him: The poor Church
had nothing else in the world to comfort it, for it was in captivity, in the
midst of enemies, had no wealth nor friends, nor any thing, yea but God is my
portion says my soul, and therefore God being mine, in him I have friends,
and wealth, and pleasure, and all whatsoever, and so has every Christian
soul, and never more then when the creature and the comfort of it is taken
away: he never finds God more his God, then when he is deprived of those
means that usually derive comfort to him, for then God immediately comes to
the soul, and comfort it, and the disposition of a true Christian is at
those times to take advantage by grace to get nearer to God, to cling faster to
him, to solaae himself more in him as his portion. What a spring of comfort is
here arising to a Christian in all estates? If God be his God, then he may
claim him upon all occasions, and at all times, as the saints in the Scripture
have done. David, Iehosaphat, and all the saints what do they allege in their
prayers to God? thou art our God, we are thy people, the sheep of thy pasture,
the vine that thy right hand has planted, the Lord is my shepherd etc. What
made the disciples when they were ready to be drowned to cry out, Master save
us? but because they knew that they were servants in Covenant, that he was
their Master, we should use this as a plea to God in all the Calamities of the
Church, we are thine, thou art ours: doubtless thou art our God (says the
Church) though Abraham have forgotten, and Israel be ignorant of us. It is a
point of spiritual wisdom, when we know we are in Covenant with God, to
improve it as an argument to persuade God to help us in any straight: I am
thine, Lord save me says David, Psalm. 119. Thou art my God, Lord look to me,
protect me, direct me, ease me, recieve my soul, this is a plea that obtains
any thing of God in all extremities whatsoever. I will establish my Covenant
between me and he, and thy seed after thee, etc.

I come now to the qualities of this covenant, and before I speak in particular
of them, I beseech you observe one thing (which I will but touch, to make an
entrance to that which follows) from the manner of setting down the Covenant:
it is not here set down as it is in other places of Scripture, I will be thy
God, and thou shall be my people, but here is only the first part, the maine
of the covenant of grace recyted, I will be thy God, why does he not say too,
thou shall take me for thy God, because where the first is, he ever works the
second, our part depends upon his: all our grace that we have to answer the
Covenant is by reflection from God, he chooses us, and then we choose him: he
knows us, and therefore we come to know him, he loves us first, and then we
love him, he singleth us out to be a peculiar people, and we single out him
above all things to be our portion, whom have I in heaven but thee?

It is therefore (to come to the first quality) called a free Covenant, it
comes from God, merely of grace, it is of grace, that he would enter into any
terms of agreement with us; it is of grace that he would send Christ to dye,
to be the foundation of the covenant; it is of grace that he gives us hearts
to take him for our God, to depend upon him, to love him, to serve him, etc.
All is of grace, and all comes from him.

So you see, that it is a free Covenant, that is the first quality.

Again, secondly it is a sure, a certain Covenant. I will establish my
covenant. But in whom it is established, how comes it to be sure? It is
established in Christ, the Mediator of the covenant, in the Messiah: for in thy
seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. That Is the fundamental
promise, all other promises, the promise, of the Land of Canaan, the promise of
the multiplying his seed, as the stars of Heaven, they were all but
accessory, this is the grand promise, in thy seed, in Christ, shall all the
Nations of the earth be blessed. So it is a sure Covenant, because it is
established in the Messiah, Christ, God-man. And Christ being God and man, is
fit to be the foundation of the Covenant, between God and man, for he is a
friend to both parties: as man, he will do all that is helpefull for man, and
as God, he will do nothing that may derogate from God; and so being God, and
being God and man, he brings God and man together comfortably, and sweetly, and
keeps them together in a sure and firm agreement. For first of all he takes
away the cause of division that was between God and us, because by his
sacrifice and obedience, he did satisfy Gods wrath, and that being satisfied,
God and us are at peace, and friendship: for God till then, though he be a
fountain of goodness, yet he was a fountain sealed, the fountain was
stopped by sin, but when there is a satisfaction made by Christ, and we
believing on him, the satisfaction of Christ is made ours, it is a sure
Covenant, because it is established in Christ, the blessed seed.

And as it is a sure Covenant, so thirdly it is an everlasting Covenant, I will
make an everlasting Covenant with thee, so it is set down here.

Everlasting in these respects. For when we are in Christ, and made one with
him by faith, he having satisfied Gods wrath for us, and made him peaceable,
then God is become our father, and he is an everlasting father, his love to us
in Christ is like himself, immutable. For even as Christ, when he took upon
him our nature, he made an everlasting Covenant with our nature, married our
nature to himself for ever, and never lays aside his human nature, so he
will never lay aside his mystical body, his Church. As Christ is God-man for
ever, so mystical Christ, the Church, is his body for ever. As Christ will not
lose his natural, so he will not lose his mystical body, I will marry thee to
my self for ever (says God in the Prophet) so then it is everlasting in
respect of God, he being Immutable, I am God says he, Mal. 3. 6.) and I
change not, and Christ, the foundation of the covenant, is everlasting.

And then again it is everlasting, in regard of us, because, if we be not
wanting to our selves, we shall be for evermore, in Grace here, and in Glory
for ever: the fruits of Grace in us, that is, the work of the Spirit, it is
everlasting, for howsoever the graces we have, be but the first fruits of the
spirit, yet our inward man grows more and more, till grace end in glory, till
the first fruits end in a harvest, till the foundation be accomplished in the
building, God never takes away his hand from his own work.

Everlasting also in regard of the body of Christians, God makes a covenant
with one, and when they are gone, with others, always God will have some in
Covenant with him, he will have some, to be a God to, when we are gone, so long
as the world continues.

So that we see it is in every respect an everlasting covenant, God is
everlasting, Christ is everlasting, the graces of the spirit are everlasting.
When we are dead, he will be a God unto us, as it is said, I am the God of
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, their God when they were dead: he is the God
of our dust, of our dead bodies; he will raise them up, for they are bodies in
Covenant with him, I am the God of whole Abraham, and not of a piece, therefore
his body shall rise again. It is an everlasting Covenant. That is the third
quality.

Lastly, it is a peculiar Covenant. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed.
All are not the children of Abraham, but they that are of the faith of Abraham,
God is in Covenant only with those that answer him, that take him for their
God, that are a peculiar people: It is not glorying in the flesh, but there
must be somewhat wrought that is peculiar, before we can be assured we are of
Abraham's seed, and in Covenant with God.

And we may know that we are Gods peculiar by some peculiar thing that we can
do: what peculiar thing can thou do? (to speak a little of that by the way)
thou love, and art kind, but says Christ, what peculiar thing can thou
do? A heathen man may be kind and loving, but can thou overcome revenge,
can thou spare, and do good to thine enemies? can thou trust in God when
all means fail? what is the power of the spirit in thee? does it triumph in
thee over thy natural corruption? can thou do as Abrams did? he left all
at Gods command, can thou do that if need should be? can thou leave
children, and wife, and life, and all at Gods command? Can thou sacrifice
Isaac as he did? can thou more trust in the promise of God, then in the
dearest thing in the world, yea, then in thy own feeling of grace? whatsoever
is not God, can thou be content to be without? can thou rely upon God,
when he appears to be an angry God? Abraham knew that there was more comfort
in the promise, than in Isaac, if thou have comfort in the promise more than in
any thing else, then thou art one of Abraham's seed, thou have sacrificed thy
Isaac, never talk of Abraham else, never think that thy portion is great in
God, be what thou will by profession, if there be no particular thing in thee
which is not in a natural man, if thou art covetous, as gripple for the world,
as very a drudge in thy calling; as licentious in thy course as carnal men
are, thou art none of Gods peculiar ones, thou art none of Abraham's seed. Gods
people have somewhat peculiar that the world has not. It is a peculiar
Covenant.

Thus you see the qualities of this Covenant, it is a free Covenant, a sure
Covenant stablished in the blessed seed, the Messiah, it is an Everlasting
Covenant, and it is a peculiar Covenant. To make some use of this in a word.

Here then you see is another Spring of blessed comfort opened to a Christian.
If he finds God (though this assurance be little) to be his God in regard
of peculiar favors, let him remember it is an everlasting favor, his love is
everlasting, the foundation is everlasting, the graces of the spirit are an
everlasting spring, always issuing from Christ our head, grace is never drawn
dry in him. God is our God to death, and in death, and for ever: all things in
the world will fail us, friends will fail us, all comforts will fail us,
life will fail us ere long, but this is an everlasting covenant which will not
fail.

It is a point of comfort in the loss of friends, in the loss of estate in
this world: If I lose friends, yet I cannot lose God, if he be mine, he is
mine for ever, a friend now, and a friend ever, my portion now, and my portion
for ever, whatsoever God takes away, he never takes away himself, and in him
I have all that is taken away, all the comfort that he does still derive to
me by friends, he resumeih to himself, it is not perished with the party, he
can immediately by himself convey whatsoever comfort was derived to me by
others: he is God All-sufficient, that is, put the case all the world were taken
away, not only friends, but the sun, the light, the earth, food and raiment,
all, as it shall be at the day of judgment, if all be taken away, yet I have
him, yet I have him that made all, that supporteth all, cannot he do all in a
more excellent manner, is not he All-sufficient, though I lose all things else?
It is a point of wondrous comfort, God knew it well enough, therefore he
labors to stablish the heart of the father of the faithful, good Abraham,
here with this instead of all. I am God Alsufficient, and I will be thy God.

Again, if this be so, that God will be a God to us for ever, let us comfort
our selves hence in all the unfaithful dealings of men, they are friends to
day, and enemies to morrow, but God is my God, and whom he loves, he loves
to the end. An ingenuous spirit certainly esteems it the greatest cross in
the world, and if any thing will whet a man to heaven, this is one, that those
whom he trusts will prove false, and at length deceive him: Man is but man,
in the balance he is lighter then vanity, but he that is in Covenant with
God, his promise and love, and faithfulness never fails: A Christian in all
the breaches of this world, has this comfort, that he has a sure God to trust
to, he that has not God to trust to, and is unfaithfully dealt withal in the
world, what a wretched man is he? this was David's comfort, when he was beset
with calamities, and miseries, all took from him, and the people were ready to
stone him, he trusted in the Lord his God. I come to the extent of it. To thee
and to thy seed after thee.

Why does he make the Covenant with his seed, as well as with himself?

I answer, we apprehend favors and curses more in our seed ofttimes, then in
our selves; and it will humble a man to see calamities on his posterity, more
then on himself, and a man more rejoices to see the flourishing of his seed,
them of himself. It is said that Josiah did dye in peace, though he dyed a
bloody death, because he saw not the ruin of his house and family, which was
worse then death. God saw how Abraham apprehended and valued seed, when he
said, what will thou give me, since I am childlesse? therefore God intending a
comfortable enlargement of the covenant of Grace to Abraham, extends it to his
seed. I will be the God of thy seed. It is a great blessing for God to be the
God of our seed: it is alluded to by S. Peter in the new Testament, The promise
is made to you and to your Children.

But what if they have not Baptism, the seal of the Covenant?

That does not prejudice their salvation, God has appointed the sacraments to
be seals for us, not for himself, he himself keeps his Covenant, whether
we have the seal or no, so long as we neglect it not, therefore we must not
think if a child dye before the sacrament of baptism, that God will not
keep his Covenant, they have the sanctity, the holiness of the Covenant. You
know what David said of his child, I shall go to it, but it shall not return
to me, and yet it dyed before it was circumcised. You know they were 40 years
in the wilderness and were not circumcised, therefore the sacrament is not of
absolute necessity to salvation. So, he is the God of our children, from the
conception and birth.

But how can God be the God of our children, when they are borne in
corruption, Children of wrath? Can they be Children of wrath, and the Children
of God both at one time?

I answer yes, both as one time, for even as in civil matters, in our city
here, a man may be a freeman of the city, and yet be borne lame or leprous, or
with some contageous disease, this hinders not his freedom: so the children
of a believing father and mother, may be freemen of the city of God, and in
the covenant of grace, and yet be tainted with original sin, that
over-spreadeth the powers of the soul notwithstanding.

Whence we see a ground of baptizing infants, because they are in the Covenant.
To whom the Covenant belongs: the seal of it belongs, but to infants the
Covenant belongs, therefore the seal of it, Baptism, belongs to them: If
circumcision belonged to them, then Baptism does, but circumcision belonged to
them: for the eighth day they were circumcised, therefore Baptism belongs to
them.

Anabaptisticall spirits would not have children baptized, if they believe not:
why then were the Children of the Jews circumcised? They were circumcised,
because they were in Covenant: and is not the Covenant of grace enlarged?
wherein does the new Covenant differ from the old, but (among many other
things) in the enlargement of it? there is now a new people, the Gentiles in
Covenant, that were not before, new Priests, new sacrifices, new sacraments,
all is new in the covenant of grace: if all be enlarged in the covenant, why
should we deny the seal of the covenant to them in the new, that had it in the
old, even children? It is senseless. The Scripture to meet with such,
applies baptism to them, and circumcision to us, to show, that in the
covenant of grace, they are all one in effect, 1 Cor. 10. All they were
baptized under the cloud, and S. Paul says, 1 Colos. We are circumcised with
circumcision, without hands. We are circumcised, and they were baptized: to
show I say that all are one in Christ. Christ is all one, yesterday, to day,
and the same for ever, yesterday to them that were under the law, and to day to
us under the Gospel, and for ever to posterity; and therefore if Children had
interest in Christ then, so they have now. This is clear, and undeniable, God
is the God of our Children.

This should be an encouragement to parents, to be good, if not for love of
themselves, and their own souls, yet for their Children and posterity sake,
that God may do good to their children for them, they cannot deserve worse of
their children, then to be naught themselves.

How many examples are there in Scripture that God plagued and punished the
children for the fathers sins? though in the maine matter he will not do it
sometimes, because he is gracious and good, he will be good to the children,
though their parents be naught, as Joshua, and Caleb came into Canaan, though
their parents were rebels, and died in the wilderness. Yet it is a
discomfortable thing, when parents are naught, they may look that God should
punish their sin in their Children.

There is a great deal of care taken by carnal parents, here in the City,
(and every where too; but in the City especially) by covetousness, a reigning
sin: they will not make God their God, but the wedge of Gold to be their God.
They labor to make their children great, if they can leave them rich men,
great men in a parish, to bear office, to come to honor, that is their maine
endeavor, for this they drudge and neglect heaven and happiness. But, alas,
what is this? Thou may leave them much goods; and the vengeance of God with
them, thou may leave them much wealth, and it may be a snare to them, it were
better thou had left them nothing.

Look into the state of the City, those that are best able in the City, do
they not rise of nothing? and they that have bin the greatest laborers for
these outward things, that they may call their lands after their own names,
God has blown upon them, and all has come to naught in a short time, because
they have not made God their portion. Of all things parents should labor to
leave them God for their God: to leave them in Covenant with him, lay up
prayers in heaven for them, lay the foundation there, sow prayers there, that
may be effectual for them when you are gone.

And this likewise should be a comfort to poor Christians, that have not much
to leave their children. I can leave my child nothing, but I shall leave him
in Covenant with God: for God is my God, and always has bin, and ever will
be, he will be the God of my seed. I shall leave him Gods blessing, and a
little well gotten goods that the righteous has, is better then a great deal
ill gotten, God adds no sorrow with that. There is no fearful expectation
another day, as there is, of that which is ill gotten, when the father and
child shall meet in hell, and curse one another, when the son shall say to
the father, you ensnared your self to make me happy, and that turned to my
ruin: this shall make wicked wretches curse one another one day. A poor
Christian that cannot say he has riches to leave his children, yet he can say,
God is my God, and I am sure he will be their God, though I have but little to
leave them else, I shall leave them Gods blessing. Good parents may hope for a
blessing upon their children, because God is their God, and the God of their
seed. For the sacrament, a word.

The Sacrament is a seal of this Covenant, that God is our God in Christ, and
we are his people. God to his word adds seals, to help our faith: what a
good God is this? how willing is he to have us believe him? one would think
that a word from him, a promise, were enough, but to his promise he adds a
covenant: one would think a covenant were enough, but to that he adds
seals, and to them an oath too. I have sworn to David my servant. Thus he
stoopes to all conditions of men, he condescendeth so far, to use all these
means, that he may secure us. You know that a promise secures us, if it be
from one that is an honest man, we say that we are sure to have it because of
his promise: but when we have his Covenant, then we are assured more because
there is somewhat drawn. Now we have Gods covenant, and his seal, the
sacrament, and then his oath. If we will take him for our God, and renounce our
wicked courses, we shall lose nothing by it, we shall part with nothing for
God, but we shall have it supplied in him. If we lose honor, wealth, or
pleasure, we shall have it abundantly in him*

What do we hear in the sacrament? do we come only to receive his love to
us? No, we make a covenant with God in the Sacrament, that he shall be our
God, and we promise by his grace to lead new lives hence forth, we have made
a Covenant with God at first in Baptism, now we renew it in taking the
Sacrament, and it is fit, for if he renew his covenant often to us in love to be
ours, we should renew ours often with him, to take him to be our God. Seven
times in Genesis he renewed his covenant to Abraham, because he would have him
trust what he said; then we should seven times, that is often, come to the
Sacrament, and renew our Covenant with him, to take him for our God: and
remember what ti^ to sin after the receiving the sacrame^^. Sins against
conscience break off a covenant renewed, sin has an aggravation now, you that
mean to receive, if you sin willingly after, 'twere better you had not
received: what makes adultery worse the^ fornication? says Mal: It Was the wife
of thy covenant: adultery breaks the covenant of marriage, it is worse then
fornication where there is not a covenant. So you have made a covenant with God
in your Baptism, and now you come to renew it; if you sin now, it is an
aggravation of the sin, it is adultery, it is disloyalty against God.

Remember therefore, that we do not only take here Gods kindness sealed in
the Sacrament, but we repromise back again to lead new lives. All must resolve
by his grace to obey him henceforward; and to take him for our God. The way
therefore will be to put this into the condition of your promise now, and
prayer after: Lord, I have promised this, but thou know I cannot perform
the promise I have made, and the condition thou requirest, of my self: but in
the Covenant of grace, thou have said that thou will make good the condition:
thou have promised to give the spirit to them that ask him; thou have promised
to Circumcise my heart, thou have promised to teach me, thou have promised to
delight over me for good, thou have promised to Wash me with clean water, thou
have promised to put thy fear in my heart, thou have promised to write thy Law
in the affections; I would fear thee, and love thee, and trust in thee, and
delight in thee: thou know I cannot fulfill the conditions, thou art able
and willing; thou art as able to make me do these things as to command me to
do them*

Thus we should desire God to give the grace that he requires in the use of the
means; for that must not be neglected, we must attend upon the Ordinances, use
the parts that are given us, and in that, to him that has, shall be given:
thou shall not need any necessary good to bring thee to heaven, if thou will
claim the promise of the covenant in the use of means: we shall want degrees
perhaps, but in the covenant of grace, it is not degrees that brings us to
heaven, but truth.

Now in our renewing the Covenant with God, let us not despair of his
performance, let not that hinder us from coming to the Sacrament, but come
cheerfully, and know, that he that has made the Covenant with thee to be thy
God, and to give thee all particular grace (in the use of all good means) will
perform it: He will perform it, if we come in sincerity of heart. If we
come to daube with God, and after to follow our sinful courses, this is to
mock God. This made David take it to heart so much, that his familiar friend
that eat at his table, lift up his heel against me. May not God complain of
us, that we come to the communion, to his table, with false Judas hearts, and
afterward betray him? he may say, my familiar friends they came, and eat with
me, yet they have lift up the heel against me, they are rebellious, they will
leave no finne, that before they were enthralled to, so instead of a blessing,
we bring a curse upon us, a just reward of our disloyalty. Oh remember that it
is a great aggravation of sin, after the Sacrament.

I speak not this to discourage any, but to encourage us rather, if we come
with sincere hearts, and with resolution to please God, we may look for all
the promises from God, all that he has promised, he is ready to perform, if
we in faith can allege the promise. Lord remember thy promise, wherein thou
have caused thy servant to put his trust.

FINIS.
THE DEMAND OF A GOOD CONSCIENCE. In one Sermon upon 1 PET. 3. 21.

BY The late Learned and Reverend Divine, RICH. SIBBS: Doctor in Divinity, Mr
of KATHERINE Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher to the Honorable
Society of GRAYES-INNE.

2 COR. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, etc.

LONDON, Printed by E. Purslow, for N. Bourne, at the Royal Exchange, and R.
Harford at the gilt Bible in Queens head Alley, in Paternoster Row. 1639.

THE DEMAND OF A good Conscience.
1. PET. 3. 21. The like figure whereunto, even Baptism does also now save us
(not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
Conscience toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
THe dependence of these words upon the former is this. The blessed Apostle had
spoken before of those that were before the flood, and of Noah's saving in the
Arc: whereupon he mentions Baptism. The like figure whereunto is Baptism
which also saves us. Christ was Yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. He
was the same unto them before his Incarnation; and the same to them that lived
in his time, and to us that shall be for ever. All were saved by Christ, and
all had several sacrifices that were types of Christ. As there were two
Cities of the world, from the beginning of the world, figured out in Caine and
Abell the beginners of both, so God has carried himself differently to the
Citizens of both: he always had a care to save his Noah's in the midst of
destruction, he had an Arc always for his Noah's. God knows how to deliver
his, says the Apostle Peter. It is a work that he has practiced a long time
since the beginning of the world: and for the other that are not his, that are
of Caines posterity, God carries himself in a contrary way to them, he
destroys them. But to come to the words. The like figure whereunto even
Baptism does now save us, etc. The saving of Noah in the Arc was a
correspondent, answerable type to Baptism: for as Baptism figures Christ, so
did the saving of Noah in the Arc: they are correspondent in many things.

As all that were without the Arc perished, 1. The Arc, a figure of Baptism,
in diverse respects.
so all that are without Christ, that are not ingrafted into Christ by faith,
(whereof Baptism was a seal) they perish.

And as the same water in the flood, preserved 2.
Noah in the Arc; and destroyed all the old world: so the same blood, and
death of Christ, and his sufferings, it kills all our spiritual enemies: (they
are all drowned in the red Sea of Christ's blood,) but preserves his Children.
There were three maine waters, and deluges which did all typifie out Christ.
The flood that drowned the old world, the passing through the red Sea, and the
waters of Jordan, in all these Gods people were saved, and the ene^ies of Gods
Church destroyed, whereunto Micah the prophet alludes when he says, he s^al
dro^ne ^r sins in the botto^, of the Sea, he alludes to Pharaoh, and his host
drowned in the bottom of the Sea, they ^unck as lead, so all our sins, (which
are our enemie^) if we be in Christ they sink as lead.

As Noah when he went to make the Arc and to get into it, was mocked of the
wretched world, so all that labout to get into Christ, and to be saved, they
are derided.

Yet notwithstanding Noah was thought a wise man when the flood came: so when
destruction comes, then they are wise that get into the Arc that get into
Christ before; many such resemblances there be, I name but a few, because I go
on. The like figure whereunto, baptism also saves us, etc.

Here first of all in a word, is a description of Parts of the Text.
the means of salvation, how we are saved, Baptism saves us.

Then there is a prevention of an objection; not the putting away of the filth
of the flesh: the outward part of Baptism.

Then he sets down how Baptism saves us: But the answer of a good Conscience.

And then the ground of it, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

The former I pass over, that I may come to that which I specially intend. I
come therefore to the prevention of the objection, which I will not speak much
of, but somewhat, because it is a useful point. When he said that Baptism
saves us, he says, not that Baptism which is a putting away the filth of the
flesh, insinuating this, 2. Parts of Baptism.
that Baptism has two parts: there is a double Baptism; the outward, which
is the washing of the body; the inward, which is the washing of the soul: the
outward does not save without the inward. Therefore he prevents them, least
they should think that all are saved by Christ, that are Baptized, that have
their bodies washed outwardly with water. The Apostle knew this, that people
are naturally prone to give too much to outward things. The Devil in people is
in extremes, he labors to bring people to The Devil carries to extremes.
extremes, to make the Sacraments Idols, or Idle: to make the outward
Sacrament a mere Idol, to give all to that, or to make them Idle signs, the
Devil has what he would in both. The Apostle knew the disease of the times,
especially Men prone to give too much to outward* worship.
in his time, they attributed too much to outward things. Saint Paul writing to
the Galathians, he is feign twice to repeat it, Neither Circumcision avails
any thing, or uncircumcision, but a new creature: you stand too much on outward
things; that that God requires especially, is the new creature.

So in the old Testament, when God prescribed both outward and inward worship;
they attributed too much to the outward, and let the inward alone. As in Psalm.
50. God complains Psalm. 50.
how they served him, therefore says he, what have thou to do to take my
Covenant into thy mouth, and hate to be reformed? And so in Isay 1. and Isay
Isay 1. Isay ult.
the last, we see Gods peremptory dealing with them: I will none of your new
Moons, I abhor your offerings. And in Isay ult. It was as the cutting off of
a Dogs neck, the offering of sacrifice and yet they were sacrifices appointed
by God himself. What was the reason of this? They played the hypocrites with
God, and gave him only the shell: they brought him outward performances, they
attributed too much to that, and left the spiritual part, that God most
esteems. So our Savior Christ to the Pharisees, we see how he takes them up,
say not with your selves, we have Abraham to our Father. They boa^ ed too much
of their outward privileges: You see through the current of the Scriptures,
those especially that belong not to God, they are apt to attribute too much to
outward things; It were well if they would join the inward too, which they
neglect. There are 2 parts of Gods service, outward and inward, that is harsh
to flesh and blood. As in Baptism there are 2 parts, outward and inward
washing; and in hearing the Word, is the outward man and inward soul, when it
bows to hear what God says: so in the Lords Supper, there is outward
receiving of Bread and Wine, and inward making of a Covenant with God. Now
people give too much to the outward, and think that God is beholding to them
for it: but now for the inward; because they are conscious of their lusts, they
care not for that.

But more particularly, the reason is in corrupt nature.

First, because the outward part is easy, and glorious to the eye of the
world: every one can Reason, outward performances easy and glorious.
see the Sacrament administered, every one can see when one comes, and attends,
and hears the word of God, they are easy, and glorious in the eye of the
world.

And then again, people rest in them, because 2. They dawbe Conscience.
somewhat is done by it to dawbe conscience, that would c^mour if they should
do nothing, if they were direct Atheists, therefore say they, we will hear the
word, and perform outward things; and being loath to search into the bottom
of their conscience rest in outward things, and satisfy conscience by it:
these and the like reasons there are:

Let us take notice of it, and take heed of the Use. To perform inward service.
corruption of nature in it: Let us know that God regards not the outward,
without the inward, nay he abhors it, he abhors his own worship that he has
appointed himself, if the inward be not there: much more devises, and
ceremonies of men's own devising. Popery is but an outside of Religion, they
labor to put off God with the work done: they have an opinion fit to corrupt
nature: that is, that the Sacrament administered confersgrace, without any
disposing of the party. One of the Chief of them, a great Scholar, he will
have the water it self to be elevated above its own nature to confer grace,
as if grace had any communion with a dead element. And thus they speak, to make
people dote too much upon outward things. I will not stand to confute this
opinion: this very text shows, that the outward part of Baptism, without the
inward, is nothing, not the washing of the body, but the answer of a good
Conscience, says S. Peter.

Let us labor therefore in all our services of God, to bring especially the
spiritual part: The Prophet Hosea finds fault with Ephraim, They loved to
tread out the Corn, but not to wear the Yoke. Now the Ox that wears no
yoke, it is no trouble to tread out the Corn, they fed upon the corn as they
trod it, thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the
Corn: So Christians are like Ephraim, they are content to take the easy part
of Religion: but to take the yoke, that which is hard, that they love not: now
we must labor tob ear the yoke of Religion: What the heart does is done in
Religion, what the heart does not, is not done, and there is a kind of
Divinity, a Divine power in all the parts of Gods worship that is requisite,
besides the bringing of the outward man: As in hearing, there is required a
divine power to make a man hear as he ought to do, to bow the neck of the
inward man of the soul: and so to receive the Sacrament, more is required then
the outward man. There is a form and power in all the parts of Religion. Let
us not rest in the form, but labor for the power: there is a power in hearing
of the Word, to transform us into the obedience of it, and a power in the
Sacrament to renew our Covenants with God for a new life, and to cast our
selves altogether upon Gods Mercy in Jesus Christ (besides the outward
elements, to have further Communion with Christ.

We see what kind of persons those were in 1 Timothy 3. That practiced a form of
Religion without 2 Timothy 3.
the power, he names a Catalogue of sins there, They were Lovers of
pleasures, more then Lovers of God: yet these people will have a form of
Religion notwithstanding, but they deny the power of it. But I hasten to that
that I will more dwell on.

The Ministers likewise are to learn their Use 2. Ministers duty.
duty hence, to observe the dispositions of people, and what bars they lay to
their own salvation: if we see them superstitious, that they swel in outward
performances, and so are deluded by Satan in an ill state, and feed themselves
with husks, then we are to take away such objections as much as we can, as S.
Peter here, when he had said that Baptism answers to the Flood, both show the
deliverance of Gods people by the blood of Christ, I says he, not the outward
Baptism, the washing of the Body, but the answer of a good Conscience.

So Christ takes away a secret objection, say not with your selves, we have
Abraham to our Father. And to feed people in their ill humors, this is not the
way: but to labor to make them spiritual: for God is a spirit, and he loves
that part of his worship that is spiritual and inward. We shall have no man
damned in the Church, if there were not an inward spiritual part of Gods
worship: for the worst men of all will be busiest in outward performances, and
glory most in it of any other. It is a delusion that brings thousands to hell,
and that made me a little dwell upon it. But I go on. Not the washing away the
filth of the body, But the answer of a good Conscience.

Upon the preventing of an objection, and removing their false confidence, he
positively sets down what that is that does save in Baptism, says he, it is
the answer of a good Conscience. The Scope of the words should have moved the
holy Apostle to have said thus, not the putting off the filth of the Body, but
the putting off the filth of the soul: but instead of that he sets down the
act of the soul, which is an answer of a good Conscience to God, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Where first of all, you must know this for a ground (indeed it is a hard place
of Scripture, I will only take that that I think fittest, and raise what
observations I think fit for you, that out of that; you must know for a ground)
that There is a Covenant of Grace.

Since God and Man brake in the Creation, there is a Covenant which we call a
Covenant of Grace. God has stooped so low, he has condescended to enter into
terms of Covenant with us: Now the foundation of this Covenant is, that God
will be our God, and give us grace and glory, and all good in Christ the
Mediator of the new Covenant. Christ is the Christ the foundation of the
Covenant of Grace.
foundation of the Covenant, the Mediator of the Covenant, a friend to both: to
God as God, to man as man, God and man in himself, and by office; such is his
office, as to procure love and agreement between God and man. He being the
foundation of the Covenant, there must be agreement in him. Now Christ is the
foundation of the Covenant, by satisfying Gods justice: else God and we could
never have come to good terms, nor conscience could ever have bin satisfied.
For God must be satisfied before conscience be satisfied: Conscience else
would think God is angry, and he has not received full satisfaction; and
conscience will never be satisfied but with that that God is satisfied with.
God is satisfied with the Death of the Mediator: so conscience being sprinkled
with the blood of Christ, applying the death of Christ, conscience is satisfied
too. Now what does show, that the death of the Mediator is a sufficient
sacrifice, and Satisfaction? The Resurrection of Christ: for Christ our surety
should have lain in the grave to this day, if our sins had not bin fully
satisfied for.

Christ is the foundation of the Covenant of grace, by his humiliation, and by
his exaltation, whereof the resurrection was the first degree. Now in this as
in other covenants, there is the party promising, making the Covenant; and the
parties that answer in the Covenant. God promises life everlasting,
forgiveness of sins through the death of Christ, the Mediator; we answer by
faith, that we rely upon Gods mercy in Christ, this is the answer of
conscience. Now this sound answer of conscience, it does save us, because it
does lay hold on Christ, that does save us, Christ properly saves us, by his
death, and passion. An argument of the sufficiency of his salvation, was his
resurrection, he is now in Heaven triumphing, but because there is somewhat in
us that must lay hold of this salvation, it is attributed to that that is the
instrument of salvation, that is, to the answer of a good conscience. Now this
answer of a good conscience, does afford us this observation, that There must
be something in us before we can Observe. There must be somewhat in us, to
make use of that is in Christ.
make use of what good is in God, or Christ.

In a Covenant, both parties must agree, there must be somewhat wrought in us
that must answer, or else we cannot claim any good by the promises in Christ,
or by any good that Christ has wrought: that is the answer of a good
conscience. Or else Christ should save all, if there were not the answer of a
good conscience required, that only Gods elect children have. But to show the
reasons of this, that there must on our part be this answer.

The reason is partly from the nature of the Reas. 1. From the nature of the
Covenant.
Covenant, there must be consent on both sides, or else the Covenant cannot
hold, there are Indentures drawn between God and us, God promises all good, if
we believe and rest on Christ: we again rest upon Christ, and so have interest
in all that is good. There is a mutual engagement then in the Covenant. God
engages himself to us, and we engage our solves to God in Christ, and where
this mutual engagement is, there the Covenant is perfect, as here, there is
the answer of a good conscience. That is the first reason then, from the nature
of the Covenant, there must be this answer.

The second reason that there must be somewhat in us, is, because when two
agree there Reas. 2. Where agreement is, there is a like disposition.
must be a like disposition. Now there must be a sanctifying of our Nature
(from whence this blessed answer comes, before that God and we can agree:
There must be a correspondency of disposition of necessity, this must be: for
we enter into terms of friendship with God, in the Covenant of Grace. Now
friends must have the same mind, there must be an answering. Now this answer is
especially faith, when we believe, and from Faith, sanctified obedience, that
is called the resti pulation, or engagement of a good conscience to God, when
the promise is made, we engage our selves to believe, and to live as
christians.

Now from this that there must be an answer Use. To search our hearts for the
evidence of our estate.
in us, an engagement on our part; I beseech you let us in general therefore
know, that we must search our own hearts, for the evidence of our good estate
in Religion: let us not so much search what Christ has done, but search our
own hearts how we have engaged our selves to God in Christ, that we believe
and witness our believing, that we lead a life answerable to our Faith:
renounce all but Christ. This mutual engagement is in the form in Baptism,
that was used by the Apostles, and by the ancient Church: for we know that in
the ancient Church, that they that were Baptized, they were questioned, do you
believe? I do believe. Do you renownce the Flesh, and the World, and the
Devil? I do renounce them: These two questions were made, now when they
answered this question from a good conscience, truly, faithfully, and
sincerely, then they had right in all the good things by Christ. Something
always therefore in the Church was required on our part. Not that we answer by
our own strength, for it is the Covenant of grace: why is it a Covenant of
grace? not only because the things promised Covenant of grace why so called.
are promised of grace: but because our part is of grace likewise, we believe
of grace, and live holily of grace: every good thought is from grace, it is by
grace that we are that we are. All is of grace in the new Covenant, merely of
grace, God requires not any answering by our strength: for then he should
require light of darkness, and life of death. There is nothing good in us; he
requires obedience that he may work it when he requires it. For his commands
in the Covenant of grace, they are operative, and working, when he commands us
to believe, and obey, he gives us grace to believe, and obey. It is our selves
that answer, but not from our selves, but from grace; yet notwithstanding, let
us make this use of it, letus search our selves, though it be not from our
selves: that we answer Gods promise by faith, and his command by obedience,
yet we must have this obedience, (though from him) before we can challenge any
thing at Gods hands. It is arrogant presumption, to hope for Heaven and
Salvation: before we have grace to answer all Gods promises and commands, by a
good conscience.

To come more particularly to the words: some will have it, the Questioning,
the Demand of conscience proceeds from the answer of it.
Demand of a good Conscience: but that follows the other. For when we answer
truly the interrogatories in Baptism, when we believe and renounce, then we
may from a good conscience demand of God, all the good in Christ: we may call
upon him, and pray unto him, has not Christ died, and made peace between
thee, and us? And may we not triumph against all enemies when there is the
answer of a good Conscience? If Satan lay any thing to our charge, Christ
died, and rose, and sits at the right hand of God. Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods people? We may (with a heart sprinkled with the blood of
Christ now ascended into heaven) answer all objections; and triumph against
all enemies, we may go boldly to God; and demand the performance of his
promises.

Hence comes all the spirit of boldness, in prayer, from the answer of a good
Conscience: for that draws all other after it. Now to come more particularly
to the words, The answer of a good Conscience: It would take up all the time
to speak of Conscience in general, and it were not to much purpose. I will
Good conscience what.
take it as it serves my purpose at this time. A good conscience in this place,
is a Conscience peaceable and gracious, peace and purity make up a good
Conscience. To make this clearer, there be three degrees of a good Conscience,
(though the last be here meant especially) There is first a good Conscience
that is troubled, a troubled good Conscience, and then Three degrees of a good
conscience.
a pacified good Conscience, and then a gracious good Conscience.

A troubled good Conscience is, when the A troubled good Conscience.
spirit by conviction opens to us what we are in our selves, he opens our sins,
and the danger, and soulnesse of our sins: whereupon our Conscience is
terrified, and affrighted. Therefore this good Conscience, whereby we are
convinced of our estate by nature, in itself it is a good Conscience, and
tends to good; for it tends to drive us to Christ. There is a good Conscience
therefore that has terror with it.

The second degree of a good conscience is that that comes from the other, when
we are 2. A peaceable good Conscience.
convinced of sin, and of the Misery that coms by sin, then that good
conscience speaks peace to us: when God shines upon the conscience by his
spirit (from whence there is peace) that is a peaceable good conscience. For
God takes this course, after he has terrified conscience by his spirit and
word, then he offers in the Gospel, (and not only offers but) commands us to
believe; he offers all good in Christ, and commands us, and not only so, but
invites us: Come unto me all ye that are weary, etc. Nay, he beseeches us: We
beseech you to be reconciled; he takes all courses. Now his spirit going with
these entreaties, he persuades the soul that he is our gracious Father in
Christ Jesus. Christ has suffered such great things, and he is God, and man,
he is willing, and able to save us. Considering, he is anointed of God for
this purpose: hereupon conscience is satisfied, and does willingly yield to
these gracious promises, it yields to this command of believing, to these sweet
invitings. This is a peaceable good Conscience.

Hereupon comes (in the third place) a gracious good conscience, which is a
conscience 3. A gracious good Conscience.
after we have believed, that resolves to please God in all things, as the
Apostle says Heb. 13. We have a good Conscience studying to please God in Heb.
13.
all things: we have a good conscience toward God, and toward men. When the
conscience is appeased, and quieted, then it is fit to serve God, as an
instrument that is in tune. An instrument out of tune, yields nothing but harsh
Music; so when the soul and conscience is distempered, and not set at peace,
it is not gracious. So now you see the order, there is a troubled good
conscience, and a peaceable good conscience, and then a gracious heart:
forwhile conscience is not at peace, by the blood, and resurrection of Jesus
Christ, by considering him, and by application of him, there is no grace nor
service of God with that heart: but the heart shuns God, it hates God, and
murmurs against God; men think why should they do good deeds when they
believe not? when they cast not themselves upon Christ, and when conscience is
not sprinkled with the blood of Christ; they are able to do nothing out of the
love of God, and whatsoever is not of faith and love, it is sin. The heart
cannot but be afraid of God, and wish there were no God, and murmur, and repine
till it be pacified. That is the reason why the Apostles in the latter part of
their Epistles, they press conscience of good duties, when they had taught
Christians before, and stablished them in Christ, because all duties issue from
faith, if they come not thence they are nothing: if there be first faith in
Christ; then there will be a good conscience in our lives and conversations.

And from the gracious conscience comes the increase of a peaceable conscience:
there must be peace, before we can graciously renew our Covenants to please
God: but when we have both these, faith in Christ, and a resolution to please
God in all things, there comes an increase of peace: for then there is an
argument to satisfy conscience, when first of all conscience goes to Christ,
to the foundation. I have answered Gods command, I have believed, and cast my
self upon Christ; I have answered Gods promise, he has promised, if I do so;
he will give me Christ with all his Benefits; I have yielded the obedience of
faith: hereupon comes some comfort, here is the foundation of this obedience:
But then when Conscience likewise from this resolves to please God in all
things, in the duties to God, and man, hereupon comes another increase of
peace, when I look to the life of grace in my own heart. For a working,
careful Christian has a double Double ground of comfort.
ground of comfort. One in the command to believe and in the promise, whether
he has evidences of grace or no; but when he has power by the spirit to lead
a godly life, and to keep a good conscience in all things, then he has
comfort from the evidence of grace in his own heart, from whence an increase
of peace comes. You see what a good conscience is here in this place, the
answer of a good conscience, I will not speak largely of it. To come a little
further to the point. How know we that a man Quest.
has a good conscience, a peaceable good conscience, when it is troubled? For
here is the difficulty, a conscience is never so peaceable, and gracious, but
there is a principle of rebellion in us, the flesh that casts in doubtings, and
stirs up objections: as indeed our flesh is full of objections against Gods
divine truth, there be seeds of infidelity to every promise, and of rebellion
to every command in the word. How shall a man know that he has a peaceable
good Conscience in the midst of this rebellion? Ans. How to know a good
Conscience though troubled.


Let him look if the conscience answer God in the midst of opposition, and
rebellion: my flesh and blood says thus, my sins are great, and Satan lays
it hard to my charge: yet 1. If it answer God in trouble.
notwithstanding, because God has promised, and commanded, I cast my self
upon God. Let us ask our own hearts and consciences what they say to God,
what is the answer to God. We see what Job says, Though he kill me, yet I
will trust in him: flesh and blood would have showed its part in Job, as if God
had neither respected nor loved him: yet when Job recovered himself; Though
he kill me, I will trust in him. So a man may know, though conscience be
somewhat troubled, yet it is a gracious peaceable conscience, if peace get the
upper hand, and grace subdue corruption, when the conscience so far as it is
enlarged by Gods spirit, can check it self. Why art thou disquieted oh my
soul? why art thou troubled? trust in God, trust in God reconciled now in
Christ, when conscience can lay a charge upon it self, and check it self
thus, it is a sign that conscience has made this gracious answer.

Again, one may know, though conscience 2. By allowing Gods truth.
be troubled somewhat, yet it is a gracious peaceable conscience, when it
always allows of the truth of God in the inward man. Whatsoever the flesh
say, the word is good, the commandment is good, the promise is good; as St.
Paul says, I allow the law of God in my inward man, by this a man may know,
(though his peace be somewhat troubled, that yet notwithstanding) there is the
answer of a good conscience.

Again, when a man can break out of trouble, 3. By acknowledging Gods
goodness:
and such an estate, as the Devil weakens our faith by, (for he uses the
troubles of the Church, and our own troubles, to shake our faith, as if God
did not regard us: now) when conscience can rise out of this, as in Psalm. 73.
Psalm. 73.
Yet God is good to Israel; yet my soul keep silence to the Lord: though
things seem to go contrary to a man, as if God were not reconciled, as if he
had not part in Christ, Yet my soul keep silence, and God is good to Israel.
This conflict shows that there is a gracious part in the soul, and that
conscience is a gracious conscience, It is said here, it is the answer of a
good conscience Toward God.

For conscience indeed has reference to God, and that will answer another
question: (for conscience as it performs holy duties, as it is a gracious
conscience, it looks to God) whether Quest.
may a man know, or how shall he know that he does things of conscience?
whether he be in the state of grace and does things graciously? He may, for
why, is conscience set in Ans. A man may know when he does things graciously.
man, but to tell him, what he does, with what mind he does it, in what state
he is; this is a power of the soul, which conscience shows. A man may know
what estate he is in, and whether he perform things graciously or no: Now how
shall a man know whether he does things Ans. How to know what we do from a
good Conscience.
of conscience or no?

First whatsoever the answer of conscience is, it is toward God: if a man do
things from reasons of Religion; if a man be charitable to his neighbor, if he
be just, and good, if it be 1. It answers toward God.
from reasons of Religion, because God commands him, this is a good conscience.
A good conscience respects God, and his command. What we do for company or for
custom, is not from a good conscience: A good conscience does things from God,
with reasons from God, because he commands it, it is Gods deputy in our hearts.

Again, what we do from a good conscience, we do from the inward man, from
an inward principle, from the inward judgment, because 2. From an inward
principle.
we think it is so, and from an inward affection. When we have not a right
judgment of what we do, and do it not out of love, and from the inward man,
we do it not out of a good conscience: what is done out of conscience, is done
from the inner man. Therefore in all our performances let us examine our
selves, not what we do, but upon what ground we do it, in conscience to God,
to obey him in all things. I cannot dwell upon these things.

The answer of a good conscience that saves us, together with Baptism, when
there is the answer of a good conscience, then Baptism seals salvation. To
come more near to the answer of a good conscience in Baptism.

You will object, if the answer of a good conscience, Object.
in Baptism do all, and not the outward washing of the body, why are Children
Baptized then, they cannot make the answer of a good conscience?

I answer, the place must be understood of Ans. Why Children are Baptized.
those of years of discretion; For infants that dye in their infancy, we have
a double ground of comfort concerning them. First they are within the Covenant,
have they not received the seal of the Covenant, which is Baptism? And
how-ever, they actually answer not the Covenant of grace, by actual believing:
yet they have the seed of believing, the spirit of God in them, and God does
comprehend them by his mercy being not able to comprehend him, nay we that are
at years of discretion are saved by Gods comprehending, and embracing us; we
are comprehended of him, as the Child is of the nurse, or of the Mother. The
Child holds Simile.
the nurse, and the nurse the Child, the Child is more safe from falling by the
nurse, and the Mothers holding of it, then by its holding of them. Those that
are at years must claspe and graspe about Christ, but Christ holds and
comprehends them; much more does God comprehend those that are Children, that
are not able to comprehend him. For those that live to years of discretion,
their Baptism is Baptism binds when we come to years.
anngagement, and obligation to them to beleev: because they have undertaken by
those that answered for them to believe when they come to years: and if when
they come to years, they answer not the Covenant of grace, and the answer of a
good conscience, if they do not believe, and renounce Satan, all is
frustrate: their Baptism does them no good, if they make not good their
Covenant by believing and renouncing. It is spoken therefore of those that are
of years of discretion: we leave infants to the mercy of God. Those therefore
that are at years of discretion, must have grace to answer the Covenant of
grace by believing, and renouncing. To come therefore to our selves.

We that will answer to the Covenant made in baptism, must perform it,
especially that that we then Covenanted, what was that? we answered that we
would believe, do thou believe? I Covenant in Baptism.
believe every Article of the faith: and do you renounce the Devil, and all
his works? I do. Therefore unless now we believe in Christ, and renounce the
Devil, we renounce our Baptism, it does us no good. There are diverse kinds
of people that overthrow their own Baptism.

Those that live in sins against conscience they do renounce their baptism
(in some sort) Those that live in sins against Conscience, renounce their
Baptism.
those that feed their corruptions: for in baptism we are consecrated in soul
and body to God, we are given up to him, we are not our own, his name is
called on us, we are called Christians, therefore our eyes are not our own,
our hands are not our own, our thoughts and affections are not our own: there
must be a renouncing, and a denial of all sin: as far as it is contrary to
Christ's spirit. Those therefore that labor to feed their corruptions, what do
they else so far but renounce their baptism, and under the Livery of Christ
serve the enemy of Christ; the Devil, that they should renounce? Those that
feed their eyes with seeing of vanity, and their ^ares with filthy discourse:
those that suffer their feet to carry them to places where they infect their
souls; those that instead of renouncing their corruptions feed them, and their
hearts tell them they cherish those corruptions they should renounce by
baptism, what shall we think of these? and yet they think to be saved by
Christ. God is merciful, and Christ died, when they live in a continual
renouncing of baptism.

For a use therefore of exhortation, if so be that this be the effectual
baptism, the chief Exhortation to get this answer of a good Conscience.
thing that we ought to stand on, this answer of a good conscience; then I
beseech you let us all labor for this echo, for this answer, when God says,
seek ye my face, to answer, thy face Lord will I seek. When he says, I will
be your God, to answer, we will be thy people, when he says, in the Ministry
believe, to answer, Lord I believe, help Mark 9.
my unbelief; let us labor to echo, this holy echo is the answer in the
Covenant of grace.

This answer of our faith, is set down in Scripture, always when it speaks of
the estate of those that are in the Covenant of grace, it is mentioned on our
part, that we take God for our God, and Christ for our Christ; My beloved is
Cant. 6.
mine, and I am my beloveds, there is a mutual owning of both sides. Therefore
if we would answer the Covenant of grace, let us work our hearts to answer,
when we hear in the Ministry, and in the Covenant of grace answer, Lord I
desire to believe this. And when there is any thing commanded, let our hearts
answer; and desire God to bow our inward man to obedience, that we may be
pliable. Let us labor to have that free spirit, that holy David prays for,
Psalm. 51. That was stopped by reason of his sin: Psalm. 51.
for when we renew sins against conscience, we stop the mouth of our prayers,
that we cannot go to God, we stop the mouth of conscience that we cannot go
boldly to God: therefore he had then lost that freedom of spirit. Let us
labor to be pliable to the spirit, ready to answer God, in all that we are
exhorted to, and to yield the obedience of Faith to all the Promises; that is
the state of those that are in the Covenant of Grace, there is the answer of a
good Conscience. Therefore let us resolve to take this course, if How to get
the answer of a good Conscience.
we would attain the answer of a good Conscience.

First of all labor, that our consciences may be convinced of the ill that is
in us, that we may have a good troubled conscience; first, that we may know
thoroughly what our estate by nature is. And then labor (in the second place) to
have prace, and then raise, and renew our purpose to serve God in all things;
and to try the truth of this, let us put interrogatories to our selves, let us
ask our selves, do I believe? do I not daube with my heart? do I obey? do
I willingly cast my self into the mold of Gods word? and willingly obey all
that I hear? do I not deceive my self? let us propound these
interrogatories. God is greater then our conscience, if we answer God with
reservations, I will answer God in this, and not in this, I will yield to
religion as far as it may stand with my own lusts, and advantage: this is
not the answer of a good conscience. What is done to God, must be done all,
what is done zealously and religiously has respect to all Gods Commandments,
and promises to one thing as well as an another. If our hearts tell us, there
are reservations from false grounds, here is not the answer of a good
conscience. Therefore let us search our selves, and propound questions to our
selves, whether we believe, and obey or no, and from what ground we do it. To
make use of our Baptism


And let us make use of our Baptism upon all occasions, as thus, Satan has
two ways of tempting; One is, he tempts to sin, and then 1. Against
temptations to sin.
he tempts for sin, to accuse our consciences to make a breach between God,
and us, that we dare not look upon God: when he tempts us, or our corruptions
move us, or the world by allurements would draw us to any sin, let us think
of our Baptism, and the answer we have made there, and make use of it, is this
agreeable to the promise I made? surely I have renounced this, shall I
overthrow my own promise? I make conscience to make good my promise to men,
and shall I break with God? I have promised to God to renounce the flesh, the
world, and the Devil; to renounce all these corruptions. Let us have these
thoughts when we are solicited to sin, when proud nature would have us set up
the banner of pride. I have renounced these proud affections: I shall overthrow
my baptism if I yield. And so for the enlarging of our estates, or for getting
up to honor to please men's humors, to break the peace of my conscience:
these things we have renounced, the world, and the vanities of it in our
Baptism.

The life of many, is nothing but a breach of their vow, and Covenant in
Baptism. How will they look at the hour of death, and the day of judgment,
that God should keep his promise with them to give them life everlasting, when
they never had grace to keep touch with him; notwithstanding, their
engagements in Baptism and their so often repeating it at the Communion, and
their renewing of their vows when they have been sick? How can we look for
performance on Gods part, when we have not had grace to perform our part, but
our whole life, has been a satisfying of our base lusts? Let us make that use
in temptations to sin, let us fetch arguments against sin from our
Baptism, from the answer that we made then: for we must make good now that
that was made then, or else it is in vain.

Again, when we are solicited by Satan to 2. In temptations to discouragment.
be discouraged, let us consider that we are baptized in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and consider, that the promise
is made whenever we repent, without any expection of time, nay though we have
broke with God: (for Satan will use that as a chief weapon, thou have fallen,
thou have fallen) yet as it is Jeremiah, 3. Though a man will not Ier. 3.
take his wife after a breach; yet God transcends us, he is God, and not man:
therefore after breaches if we yet answer his command and his promise: (for
the command of believing is upon us while we live,) if we believe, and confess
our sins we shall have mercy, if we come, and cast our selves upon Christ.
Therefore after relapses, let not Satan abuse them to make us despair.
Baptism is a seal of our faith, and faith is enjoined us all the days of our
life, all this time of life, is a time of grace, and we are commanded to
repent, and believe. Let not Satan therefore discourage us after sin; let us
go to our Baptism, it is a seal to us of faith, and repentance, whenever
we believe, and repent.

When we are solicited to distrust in God 2. To distrust.
for the things of this life any way, as if God cared not for us, let us
consider, that we have answered, that we believe in God the Father Almighty,
therefore he is our Father, he knows what is good for us, and he loves us: he
is an Almighty God, it is an article of our faith that we have answered to,
let us make it good upon all temptations in that kind. Dothnot God care for us?
he had an Arc for Noah in the worst times, when the flood overwhelmed the
whole World: So if there be the answer of a good Conscience, he will have an
Arc for his Noah's, to save, and protect, and defend us, he is a Father
Almighty. Let us know the grounds of our Religion, the Articles of our Faith,
the grounds and foundation of our Faith: let us consider the good things
promised there; and consider withal, that we have all engaged our selves to
believe those things, and to make use of our faith upon all occasions. Those
that cannot read, if they have no other, let them look on these two Books,
the Book of their Baptism, and the Book of conscience, they would be
sufficient to instruct them: some people pretend Ignorance; consider what thou
art Baptized to, the grounds of Religion: consider there what thou have
renounced, consider in particular whether this thing that thou art moved to, be
Gods, or the Devils command, and answer Satan, and thy lusts by not answering
of them: give them their answer, and tell them, a good conscience must answer
Gods command, and promise: but they must have their answer by denial, by this
answer of a good conscience. Those that cannot read, and are not learned, let
them make use of the learning of their Baptism. There is a world of
instruction, and comfort, a treasury of it in Baptism. I dare be bold to say,
if any Christian when he is tempted to any sin, to despair or
discouragement, if he consider what a sollemne promise he has made to God in
Baptism, it would be a means to strengthen his Faith, and to arm him against
all temptations. There is no man sins, but there is a breach with God first
in wronging the promise he has engaged himself to in Baptism. We all that
are here have been Baptized, let us learn to make more Conscience of this
Blessed Sacrament then we have done, and let us labor to have the answer of a
good conscience at all times.

What a comfort is it when our hearts and Consciences makes a gracious answer
to God, Comfort from the answer of a good Conscience.
in believing and obeying? and in renouncing all Gods and our enemies? What a
comfort is such a Conscience? It will uphold us in sickness, in death, and at
the day of judgment, in all ill times in this life. A Conscience that has
answered God by believing his promises and has renewed the Covenant to obey
God in all things, what a wondrous peace has it? Let the Devil object what he
can, let our unbelieving hearts object what they can, yet notwithstanding if it
be a renewed sanctified Conscience, it can; out of the privity of its own
act, say, I have believed, I have cast my self upon Gods mercy in Christ, I
have renounced these motions and suggestions, and courses: and though I be
overcome with temptations, yet I heartily hate them. What a comfort is this?

Conscience; it is either the greatest friend, or the greatest enemy in the
world. It is the chiefest friend when it is privy to it self of this resolute
answer: that it has obeyed God in all things; then Conscience is our friend,
it speaks to God for us at all times. Then again at the hour of death, what
a comfort it is, that we have this answer of a good conscience, especially at
the day of judgment, when we can look God in the face: a sincere heart, a
Conscience that has labored to obey the Gospel, and to keep Covenant with
God, it can look God in the face: for what in the covenant of grace goes for
perfect obedience, but sincerity, and truth? God requires that: when the heart
can say with Hezekias, Lord thou know that I have walked perfectly before
thee. Lord I have believed, and labored to express it in my life and
conversation, though with much weakness, yet in truth. This sincerity will
make us look God in the face, in the hour of death, and at the day of
judgment, and in all troubles in this life.

A Christian that has the answer of a good Conscience, he has Christ to be
his Arc in all deluges. Christ saves us not only from hell, and damnation, but
in all the miseries of this life. If any thing come upon us for the breach of
Gods Covenant: as God threatens, Levit. 26, to send war and famine etc. For
the breach of his Covenant: what a comfort is it then for Levit. 26.
such as have kept the Covenant? For then God has an arc for such in ill
times: for every deliverance in evil times, it comes from the same ground as
the deliverance from hell does: why does God deliver me from hell and
damnation? because he loves me in Christ, and that moves him to deliver me in
evil times, if I keep a good Conscience: and that love that gives me Heaven,
gives me the comforts of this life, if I labor to have this answer the Apostle
speaks of, what a comfort is this in the worst times?

Those that live in Rebellion, and make no Conscience of their vows and
covenants to God (that they have made and repeated ofttimes, and renewed in
taking of the Lords Supper) but go on still in their sins; alas, what
comfort can such as these have? how can they look for an answer from God: if
any promise that he has made, when their lives are rebellious, their
conscience tells them that their lives do not witness for God, in keeping
covenant with him, but they rebel against him? their hearts tell them they
cannot look to heaven for comfort; they carry a hell in their bosom, a guilty
Conscience, they do not labor to be purged by the blood of Christ, nor labor
for the spirit of God to sanctify them, in renewing them to holy obedience to
God. Those that have their conscience thus stained, especially that purpose to
live in sin, they can look for nothing but vengeance from God. It is not
known now, who are the wisest people: In the times of trouble, and at the
hour of death, at such times it will be known that they are the wisest people
that have made Conscience of keeping their Covenant with God: of renewing their
Covenant with God, first, in all things that they would serve him better, and
then, when they have renewed their Covenants with God, (as we have cause now
indeed, if ever, to renew them, when we are warned by public dangers, or when
we have cause to take occasion to renew our Covenants that we made with God in
Baptism, to bind our Consciences to closer obedience, and those that have
renewed their Covenant, and have grace to keep it, those are wise people. We
see in the current of Scripture, in dangerous times there was still renewing of
their Covenants with God. And those that God delights in, he puts his spirit
into them, that they shall be able by the help of his spirit, to keep their
Covenant in some comfortable measure, and those God will choose and mark out in
the worst times.

FINIS.
THE SWORD OF THE WICKED. In two SERMONS. Being the leading Sermons to that
Treatise called, The SOULS Conflict.

BY The late Learned and Reverend Divine, RICH. SIBBS: Doctor in Divinity, Mr
of KATHERINE Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher to the Honorable
Society of GRAYES-INNE.

PSALM. 57. 4. Their Tongue is a sharp Sword.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for N. B. and R. H. 1639.

THE SWORD OF THE WICKED.
PSALM. 42. 10. As with a Sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me: while
they say unto me daily, where is thy GOD?
THE Psalms are (as it were) the Anatomy of a holy man: they lay the inside of
a true devout man outward, even to the view of others.

If the Scripture be compared to a body, the Psalms may well be the heart,
they are so full of sweet and holy affections, and passions. In other portions
of Scripture, God speaks to us in the Psalms, holy men, especially David (who
was the penman of most of them) speaks to God, wherein we have the passages
of a broken humble soul to God. Among the rest, in this Psalm, David lays
open variety of passions. His condition at this time was such, as that he was
an exiled man, from his own house, and his own friends, and which grieved him
worst of all, from the Tabernacle, the house of God. It was upon the occasion
of Saules persecution, or of Absaloms his son: but I take it rather of Saul's
that hunted him as a partrich in the wilderness. Hereupon you have a discovery,
how this holy man of God stood affected with this case and condition of his.
First he lays open his grief, his grief arises from his desire: he that
loves most, and desires most, he always grieves most: and all other
affections have their scantling from love, which is the first borne affection
of the soul. Therefore before he lays, out his grief, he sets out his desire
to the house of God: the want whereof grieved him most of all. As the Heart
pants after the water brooks; so pants my soul after thee Oh God. As the
chased Heart pants after water, so the soul thirsts for God, for the living
God, ^h when shall I come and appear before God.

Then after his desire, he lays forth his grief, My tears have bin my meat
day and night, while they continually say unto me, where is thy God? Grievances
never come alone, but as Jobs Messengers, they come one after another, even to
Gods Children, when he is disposed to correct them, they are multiplied:
therefore here is not only a grief of want, that he was debarred of those
sweet comforts which he had before in the Tabernacle, but here is likewise a
grief from the reproach of his enemies, that took occasion from his
disconsolate estate, to upbraid him, Where is thy God? My tears have bin my
meat day and night, while they continually say unto me, where is thy God? He
dissolves the cloud of his grief, into the shower of tears: my tears have
bin my meat. They were so plentiful, that they did feed his soul as it were.

Then he sets down another ground of his grief, from the remembrance of his
former happiness: as usually that does make the grief raw, and more sensible:
for f^ix miser, maxim miser, he that has binne happy in former time, and now
is miserable, is most miserable of all, because his former happiness makes him
most sensible: therefore of all men in hell, the torment of great men is most,
because they had most sense of comfort in this world: mighty men shall be
mightily tormented, that is all the privilege they shall have in hell.
Therefore to aggravate his grief, oh (says he) when I remember what comfort I
had formerly in the house of God, I pour out my soul. It was not enough that
he poured out his tears, or words, but I po^re out my soul, for in former
times, I went with the multitude to the house of God, and lead a goodly train
to the house of God. The picture of a good Magistrate, and a good master of a
family, he goes not alone to the house of God, but he leads his train, he is
attended on by his servants. David went not alone into the house of God, but
with the multitude, with the voice of them that kept holiday. Well, he had
grief enough, his heart was full of grief. Now in the next verse he takes
Verse 5.
up his soul, and expostulates with himself, why are thou so sad oh my soul,
and why are thou disquieted in me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him
for the help of his countenance. So you see here, he is not so flat in his
grief, that he gives overlong way to it, but he even falls a chiding of his
soul: why art thou cast down oh my soul, why art thou disquieted within me?
oh! but yet grief will not be so stilled: affliction is not quelled at the
first, nor grief stilled and stayed at the first, therefore it gathers upon
him again in the next verse, Oh my God, my soul is cast down within me, when
I remember thee from the Land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hill
Missar: When I remember thee from these places, my soul is cast down again,
and my afflictions are multiplied. Though he had fallenout with his soul,
before, for his impatience. One deep calls to another, deep calls upon deep at
the noise of the water-spouts. He compares afflictions to water spouts, as it
is in scripture, All thy waves and billows have gone over me; even as one
deep calls to another, so one affliction calls to another. Then when he had
given a little way again to his grief, and complained to God, he takes up his
soul another time: yet (says he) the Lord will command his loving kindness
in the day time, and in the night, his song shall be with me, and I will pray
to the God of my life. He presents to himself the goodness of God, to comfort
his soul. And he presents to him in the next verse, his own resolution. I
will say to God (for the time to come) my rock, why have thou forgotten me?
and why go I mourning, for the oppression of the enemy? So here he stays his
soul once again: he presents to his soul the loving kindness of God, with
renewing his resolution to seek God: an effectual way to stay the soul, by
considering Gods love, and mercy, and by renewing our resolutions and purposes,
to cleave to God. I will say to God, my rock, why have thou forgotten me?

I but here is a third assault of grief again: for there is a spring of
corruption in us, and such a principle in us, as will yield murmurings, and
discontent again and again: therefore in the verse I have read to you, he
comes again to complain, As with a sword in my bones mine enemies reproach
me, while they say unto me daily, where is thy God. He had complained once of
this before, but it had a fresh working with his thoughts again. As with a
sword in my bones etc. Hereupon, he is forced the third time to expostulate,
and to fall out with his soul: Why art thou cast down oh my soul, and why
are thou disquieted? hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the
health of my countenance, and my God. He comes to his former remedy, he had
stilled his grief once before with the same meditation, and upbraiding of his
own soul, and chiding himself: but he comes to it here as a probatum est, as
a tried remedy, he takes up his soul very short, Why art thou so cast down oh
my soul, Why art thou disquieted within me? You see how David's passions here
are interlaced with comforts, and his comforts with passions, til at last he
gets the victory of his own heart. Beloved, neither sin, nor grief for sin
are stilled, and quieted at the first. You have some short spirited Christians,
if all be not quiet at the first, all is lost with them: but it is not so with
a true Christian soul, with the best soul living; it was not so with David,
when he was in distemper, he checks himself: the distemper was not yet
stilled, he checks himself again, then the distemper breaks out again, then
he checks himself again, and all little enough to bring his soul to a holy,
blessed, quiet temper, to that blessed tranquillity and rest that the soul
should be in, before it can enjoy its own happiness, and enjoy sweet
communion with God. As you see in Physic; perhaps one Purge will not carry
away the peccant humor, then a second must be added; perhaps that will not do
it, then there must be a third: so when the soul has been once checked,
perhaps it will not do, we must fall to it again, go to God again: And then
it may be there will be breaking out of the grief and malady again; we must
to it again, and never give over; that is the right temper of a Christian.

Before I come to the words, observe in general this; That a living soul, the
soul that is alive in grace, that has the life of grace quickening it, is most
sensible of all, in the want of spiritual means: As here, the grief of
griefs was (which he begins with) that he was banished from the Tabernacle.

What shall we think therefore of those that excommunicate themselves from
Gods assembly, where there is the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all the
Trinity dispensing their bounty, and where the prayers of Gods people meet
together in one (as it were) and bind God? What shall we think of them that
prefer their private devotions (as they say) before Gods assemblies? Surely,
they are not of David's mind; and it is a shrewd argument, that they never had
the life of grace in them yet: for where life is, there will be hunger and
thirst; Acrius urgent quae ad naturam. It is a true Aphorism, Those things
press upon Nature hardest, that touch upon the necessities of Nature, rather
then those that touch upon delight, We can want delights, but necessities of
Nature we cannot; therefore hunger and thirst they are such passions as will
not be quiet: delicacies and novelties the soul of a hungry man can be content
to want, but not spiritual food for the soul. We see how famine wrought upon
the Patriarchs, it made them go down into Egypt for food. I note it only by
the way, that men may know how to judge of themselves, when they can very well
be content, without a blessed supply of holy means. Holy David, when the
means was but dark and obscure, when the Canon was not enlarged, when all was
in types and clouds; yet he felt that comfort in the Tabernacle, and in the
Ordinances of God, that he could not endure the want of them: but as the Heart
brayeth after the Water-brookes, so his soul panted after God. But to come to
the words themselves. As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me,
when they say unto me daily, Where is thy God?

Here are two things considerable in the words.

The carriage, and disposition, and expression of others to David.

And David's affection toward it, how he was disposed toward it, how he did
bear it.

For their disposition, they were enemies, mine enemies, etc.

The expression of it, They reproach me.

The specialty of that expression, how they reproached him, they said unto him,
Where is thy God? They do reproach him in his religion.

The aggravation of that specialty is, they say, openly to his face, they go
not behind my back, they esteem so slightly of me, they say it to my face.
And continually too, they are never weary, they say daily, where is thy God?
They are enemies, they reproach, they reproach in this, where is thy God? and
they do it impudently, and daily.

How does David entertain this usage? how does he carry himself all this
while? he must needs be sensible of it, and therefore he expresses it in
most significant words. Oh says he, these things were as a sword in my bones.
There be diverse readings of the words: but we will take them as they are laid
down, being very well, as with a sword in my bones, (or as it is in the
margin, As killing in my bones) mine enemies reproach me. It was as killing to
him, it did go to his heart, it cut him to the quick. As a sword is to the
body, and bones, so are their words to my soul: I cannot endure it, it is
death to me. It is a most emphaticall manner of expressing, the enemies
disposition and carriage. Thus you have the words unfolded. I will but touch
some particulars, those that I think most needful for us to take notice of, I
will dwell more upon. Mine enemies (says he) reproach me. Mine enemies.

There has been contrary seeds from the beginning of the World; and will be
while Satan is in the world, till he be cast into the burning Lake, and be
there in perpetual Chains adjudged to torment, he will ray se up men always
that shall be of his side. And as long as that grand enemy is, and as long as
men are that will be subject to his government (as always there will be) he will
have a great faction in the world. And by reason that he has a party in us,
the flesh, he will have the greatest party in the world: the most go the
broad way: so that, Gods children (even David himself) shall not want enemies.

Mine enemies. It is strange that he should have enemies, that was so
harmless a man; that when they were sick, and distressed, he prayed for them,
and put on sackcloth for them, as it is Psalm. 41. This compassionate sweet
natured Psalm. 41.
man, yet notwithstanding you see he had enemies: and enemies that would
discover themselves to reproach him, and that bitterly, in the bitterest
manner, they reproach him in his religion. It is a large point, if I should
give my self liberty in it: I do but touch it.

That we may be armed by this observation, against the scandal of opposition,
that if we meet with enemies in the world, we should not be much offended at
it: grieve we may; but wonder we need not. Was there ever any that did more
good then our Savior Christ? He went about doing good: He did never a miracle
that was harmefull, but only of the Swine that were drowned in the Sea, and
that was their own fault; but he went about doing all the good he could: yet
notwithstanding we see what malicious opposites he had, that that is true of
the head must be true in the members. Therefore we should rejoice in our
conformity to Christ: if it be in a good cause that we find enemies, and
opposition, O, imperator etc. Says he, O, the Emperor is become a Christian;
is was a blessed time: oh! but the Devil is not made a Christian yet, and he
will never be made good: for he is in termino (as we say) he is in his bounds,
his nature is immovable; he is in Hell in regard of his estate, though he be
loose to do mischief: now until the Devil be good; Gods Children shall
never want enemies; and he will never be good. Therefore, though there were
good Kings, and good Governors, over all the world: yet good men shall never
want enemies as long as the Devil is alive, as long as he has any thing to
dee in the world. Enemies therefore we must look for, and such enemies as will
not conceal their malice neither: for that were something, if they would
suffer their malice to boil, and concoct in their own hearts, but that will
not be, but out of the abundance of the heart the mouth will speak: where
there is a bad treasury, there will be a bad vent: therefore we see here, they
reproach him; mine enemies. Reproach me.

It is the proper expression of malice, reproach; and it is that that the
nature of man can least endure of all. The nature of man can endure an outward
wrong, a loss or a cross, but a reproach, especially if it be a scornful
reproach, the nature of man is most impatient of. For, there is no man, but he
thinks himself worthy of some respect: Now a reproachful scorn shows a
disrespect, and when the nature of man sees it self disrespected it grows to
terms of impatience. There is not the meanest man living but he thinks
himself worthy of some regard. Therefore I cannot blame David, even out of the
principle of nature, to be affected here when they reproached him, and gave him
vile terms: Mine enemies reproach me. Their tongues were tipped from Hell, and
they did but utter that that was in their hearts. If the tongues of wicked men,
as St. James says, be a a world of mischeife, what is the whole man? What is
the heart, and tongue, and life, and all of wicked men?

Now this reproach of wicked men, it is a grievous persecution: as Ishmael
persecuted Isaak in that manner, as it is Gal. 4. taken out of the Gal. 4.
story in Genesis. I will not enter into the common place of reproach; it is
but taken by the by here.

Only by the way, let it be a support to us: if we be reproachfully used in
the world; let us not be much cast down: it is no credit for a man to do that
that the Devil and his instruments do; nor it is no discredit for us to
suffer that that David suffered. Let this satisfy thee, there is not the
vilest man living but has this weapon to serve the Devil with, a reproachful
tongue: he that sits upon the Ale bench, that ^akes in the Channel, the basest
wretch in the world has a tongue to serve the Devil with in reproaches. It is
no credit for them to do that that the vilest person in the world can do;
^and it is no shame for thee to suffer, that that the best man that ever lived
did suffer. So much for that; mine enemies reproach me.

But what is the specialtie of this reproach? (to come to that more
particularly) They say unto me? Where is thy God?

They touch him in his Religion. They saw him persecuted by Saul, scorned by
Saul's courtiers; they see him driven up and down, as a Partridge in the
Wilderness: they saw him banished from the Sanctuary, destitute of friends;
they saw him in this disconsolate estate, and they judge by sense and
appearance, that they thought he was a man that God regarded not at all,
therefore say they, where is thy God?

Gods children are impatient as far as they are men, of reproaches, but so
far as they are Christian men, they are impatient of reproaches in Religion,
where is now thy God? They were not such desperate Atheists as to think there
was no God, to call in question whether there were a God or no, (though indeed
they were little better:) but they rather reproach, and upbraid him with his
singularity; where is thy God? You are one of Gods darlings, you are one that
thought no body served God but you, you are one that will go alone, your God.

So this is an ordinary reproach, an ordinary part for wicked men, to cast at
the best people, especially when they are in misery: what is become of your
profession now? what is become of your forwardness, and strictness now? what
is become of your much reading, and hearing now? and your doing such things
now? what is become of your God that you bragged so of, and thought your selves
so happy in, as if he had been no bodies God but yours? We may learn hence
the disposition of wicked men; it is a character of a poysonfull cursed
disposition to upbraid a man with his Religion.

But what is the scope? The scope is worse then the words, where is thy God?
The scope is to shake his faith, and his confidence in God: and this is that
that touched him so nearly, while they upbraided him, where is thy God? Indeed
they had some probability and show of truth; for now God seemed opposite to
him, when he was banished from his house, from that blessed communion with him
that he had. Their purpose was therefore to shake his faith, and affiance in
God, and herein they showed themselves right the Children of the Devil, whose
scope is to shake the faith, and affiance of Gods people, in all his
temptations, and by his instruments. For the Devil knows well enough, that as
long as God, and the soul join together, it is in vain to trouble any man?
therefore he labors to put jealousies to accuse God to man, and man to God. He
knows there is nothing in the world can stand against God; as long as we make
God our confidence, all his enterprises are in vain, his scope is therefore to
shake our affiance in God, where is thy God? So he dealt with the head of the
Church, our blessed Savior himself, when he came to tempt him, If thou be the
Son of God, command these stones to be made bread; he comes with an If, he
labored to shake him in his Sonneship. The Devil since he was divided from
God himself eternally, is become a spirit of division, he labors to divide the
Son from the Father, he labors to divide even God the Father from his own
Son: If thou be the Son of God. So he labors to sever Christians from their
head Christ, subjects from their Princes, and Princes from their subjects,
friends from friends, and one from another: he is a spirit of division, where
is thy God? There was his scope, to breed division, if he could, between his
heart and God, that he might call God into jealousy, as if he had not regarded
him: thou have taken a great deal of pains in serving thy God, thou see how
he regards thee now, where is thy God?

We should labor to make this use of it, to counter-worke Satan; to strengthen
that most of all, that the Devil labors to shake most of all: shall the
Devil labor to shake our faith, and affiance in God above all other things,
and shall we not labor to strengthen that? Above all things, let us look to
our head; as the Serpent winds about, and keeps his head. Keep faith, and
keep all: if faith be safe, all is safe, let us strengthen that, and
strengthen all; weaken that, and we weaken all. What cares Satan for other sins
that we fall into? he aims at our assurance, that we may doubt of Gods love,
whom we have been so bold as to sin against: that is it he aims at, to make
weak faith in the particular acts of sin we commit. He knows that sin
naturally breeds doubts, as flesh breed worms: where sin is, if it be in
never such a little degree, he knows it will breed doubt^, and perplexities,
and where they are, he has that he would have; he labors to hinder that sweet
communion that should be between the soul, and God: where is now thy God? You
see wicked men, are the children of the Devil right in this.

Again, they instance here in matter of Religion against him. You see how
ready wicked, and divelish minded men are, to tread over the hedge where it is
lowest; as the proverb is, to add affliction to affliction, especially in
that that may touch a man nearest: they could not touch him nearer then in
this, Where is thy God. They knew it well enough, where is now your Religion:
this they thought would anger him to the heart: here is a devilish disposition:
you have a terrible Psalm for it, Psalm 109. of those that ad affliction to
the afflicted, Psalm. 109.
They are cursed persons. This is the disposition of wicked men, they have
nomercy, malice we say is unsatiable. One would think that our Savior Christ,
when he was upon the Cross, racked there in all his parts, a man exposed to so
much misery and scorn as he was, that they should have had pity upon him; but
upon the Cross, they reproached him, Aha, he saved others, himself be cannot
save; let him come from the Cross, and we will believe in him. What abitter
Sarchasme was this, that came from hekl it self. Nay when he was dead, one
would have thought their maliee should have been buried with his body. Malice
is ordinarily among men living, not the dead, but when he was dead, This
Impostor said etc. They labored to bury his good name, that nothing tending to
his honor might remain of him. Indeed it is the nature of malice to wish the
not being of the thing it maliceth; no, not the name. Let his name perish from
the earth. It was extremity of malice to work upon this disadvantage: when
they see him thus afflicted, to vex him with that he was most affected with,
where is thy God.

Therefore let those that feel, and feed that divellish disposition in
themselves, to insult over Gods people, especially in matters of Religion to
vex them; and when there is a wound already, to make the affliction greater,
to add affliction to affliction, let them judge of what disposition they are.
They say unto me.

You see here another circumstance, They say unto me. They are so impudent,
that they are not afraid to reproach him to his face, they say to him, as if
they would stand to their reproach. This is one circumstance of aggravation:
indeed malice is very impudent, when it is come to the extremity, I only
observe it, that if we meet with such insolency of malice, not to be
discouraged, it has bin thus before, and thus it will be to the end of the
world.

And then they are not wearied, their malice is unwearied; they say to me.
Daily.

Day by day, their malice is fed with a spring, with a malicious heart. A
malicious heart, and a slanderous tongue always go well together. The Devil
that was the first grand slanderer, has communion with a malicious heart, and
he foments malice, and cherishes that malicious poysonfull disposition: and a
malicious disposition, never wants malicious words. As one says, of anger, and
fury, it ministers weapons; so we may say of malice, and hatred, it
ministers words always, a malicious heart will never want words. They say to
me, daily, these are but circumstances, but yet they are somewhat considerable:
for they tend to the aggravation of the disconsolate estate of this holy man;
that he should meet with such wretched men, that had no pity at all on him,
but say to him daily, Where is now thy God?

You see then from hence, that God is a God (as the Prophet says) often times
hiding himself, that God vayles himself often times to his children. Not only
from the eyes of wicked men, that they think godly men deserted of God: but
sometimes from the very sense, and feeling of Gods children themselves, they
are in such desertions, that they are feign to complain that God has hid
himself, and is as a stranger to them. This is the state of Gods children in
this world; though God love them dearly, as the apple of his eye, and as the
signet on his hand: yet notwithstanding his carriage to them is often times so
strange, that those that look upon their estate in this world, think they are
men (as it were) for lorne, and destitute of God. And this estate must needs be.

Because of necessity, there must be a conformity between us, and our
Savior, it was so with our Savior, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
God was never nearer him in all his life then then; and yet he cries out; my
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And as he spoke, so the rest thought of
him, as if he had been a man forsaken; and so here they say to this holy man,
where is thy God?

Therefore let us lay up this likewise for the strengthening of our faith in
the like case, that we be not overmuch discouraged, if God hide himself: if
others think our estates miserable, and our selves think our selves so, it is
no strange matter; it was thus with David, he was so neglected of God, that
they thought God had clean forsaken him, where is thy God?

Our life is now hid with Christ, as the Apostle says, Colos. 3. We have a
blessed, and glorious life, but it is hid in our head. Even as in winter Colos.
3.
time, the trees have a life, but it is hid in the Simile.
root; so a Christian has a blessed condition at all times, but his glory and
happiness is hid in his head; and there is a cloud between him, and his
happiness:

Therefore let us support our selves with this in all times: was God gone from
David indeed, when they said, Where is thy God? Oh, no, God was as near David
now as ever he was, nay rather nearer. God was never nearer Moses then when he
was sprawling upon the water in that Arc they had made for him. He was never
nearer Daniel, then when he was in the Lions Den; God came between the Lions
teeth, and Daniel; and as I said, he was never nearer our Savior then when he
was on the Cross. And he was never nearer to David, then when they said, where
is thy God? When trouble is near, God is never far off; that is an argument
to make God near, Lord be not far off, for trouble is near. And extremity,
and danger, and trouble, it is Gods best opportunity to be with his children,
how ever he do not help for the present often times. Where is thy God?

David might rather have said to them, where are your eyes? where is your
sight? for God is not only in heaven, but in me. Though David was shut from the
Sanctuary; yet David's soul was a sanctuary for God: for God is not tied to a
sanctuary made with hands. God has two Sanctuaries, he has two heavens: the
heaven of heavens, and a broken spirit, God dwelt in David as in his Temple.
God was with David and in him; and he was never more with him, nor never more
in him, then in his greatest afflictions: they wanted eyes, he wanted not God.
Though sometimes God hide himself, not only from the world, but from his own
children, yet he is there, howsoever their sorrow is such, that it dims their
sight, as we see in Hagar, so that they cannot see him for the present: he
sometimes looks in their face, as we see Mary, she could not see Christ
distinctly, but thought him to be the Gardener. There is a kind of concealment
a while in heavenly wisdom, yet notwithstanding, God is with his children
always, and they know it by faith, though not by feeling always. As we know
what Iacoh said, God was in this place, and I was not aware; when he slept upon
the stone, and had that heavenly vision. So it is with Gods people in their
trouble, God is with his Church, and children, and wicked men are not aware of
it: Christ is in them, and they are not aware of it. Christ was in the Saints,
when Saul persecuted them, and Paul was not aware of it: Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? who art thou Lord? says he; alas, he dreamed not of
Christ. How ever wicked men of the world think, yet God is near his own
children, in the most disconsolate condition that can be. It is (when they say,
where is thy God?) as if a man should ask what is become of the Moon,
between the old, and the new, when the dark side is toward us? when we see
no Moon at all for a time, till the new come: The Moon is near, and more
enlightened with the Sun then, then at other times, and is nearer to him. So
in affictions, how ever, the dark side of Gods children be toward the world
that they cannot see them: yet their light side is toward God, God shines upon
them, and enlightens them more then, at that time with solid comfort that
keeps them from sinking, then at other times: therefore it was an ignorant
question of them to ask, where is thy God? It showed they were Ignorant of the
passages of Gods dealing with his children, as indeed none are greater Atheists
then your scoffers. Where is thy God? As if God had been only a God of
observation, to be observed outwardly in all his passages toward his children,
whereas, as I said, he is a God hiding himself often times; and he shows
himself in contrary conditions most of all, most comfortably: his work is by
contraries. But these carnal men were Ignorant of the mysteries of Religion,
and the mysteries of Divine providence toward Gods children: therefore their
question savours of their disposition, where is now thy God? Thus briefly I
have gone over their disposition, and carriage toward the holy man David. That
they were enemies, of hostile nature, and disposition, and they reproached him,
and daily, and that in his Religion, where is thy God?

I beseech you let us look to it in time, that it may not be truly said to us,
by way of upbraiding, where is now thy God? God may be strange to us indeed,
let us so carry our selves, as that God may own us in the worst times. If they
had said this truly: how grievous had it been to David? but it was more malice
then truth. For David found experience of God; he might rather have upbraided
them, where is your God? and there is no wicked man, but a man may in h^s
greatest extremity upbraid him, and that in truth, where is your God? your
riches, honor, and estate? where is all this that you supproted your self
with, and bore your self so big on, that you despised all others? what is
become of all now? A man cannot stand in a thing that stands not it self. A
man cannot build upon that that has no good foundation: Now all men that are
not truly religious, they have some Idol or other that will deceive them:
therefore a man may truly say to them, that which they falsely, and maliciously
say to Gods people, where is your God?

So much for their disposition, and carriage. Now how stands David affected
with this? that is the second part. At with a sword in my bones.

It was as a sword to his bones. Now that that touches the bones is the most
exquisite grief. That that we call the grief of the teeth, you see what an
exquisite grief, it is, in that little member; when the bones are cut or
touched, it is a most exquisite grief: As with a sword in my bones, my enemies
reproach me. What was the matter that this reproach, where is thy God? touched
him so to the quick? what was the cause!

The causes were diverse?

First of all concerning God: for when they said to him, Where is thy God?

First, it tended to the reproach of God, as if God were so fickle a friend, as
to desert his best friends in the time of misery; this touched upon God, by way
of disparagement, therefore it must needs touch David, who was Gods friend.

Then again it touched God in another thing, in his manner of providence; as
if he had been a God of the Hills, and not of the Valleys, as if he had been a
God for one time, and not for another, where is now thy God? what is become of
him?

Again in the third place, it touched upon him in this, as if he had favored
them (being cursed form all hypocrites) more then David: as if he had favored
their form all, hypocritical, base, dead courses, that were most abominable to
God^ for these persecutors were Saul's courtiers, and other enemies; wicked men,
they thought to justify their own ways by this reproach. You see we are as
good as you: God respects us, we fall not into such miseries, we have
recourse to Saul, though he have cast out you, and others etc. So it tended to
Gods reproach in that; as if God had justified their course: as if they had
been dearer to him, that were most abominable.

And this is to make an Idol of God, to make God justify those courses that
he most abhors; as it is in Psalm. 50. Thou thoughtest I was like unto thee.
Because God lets a wicked man alone, thou thoughtest that I was a companion for
thee, and would take thee by the hand, whereas God will not do so.

In these three respects especially, God was wronged, when they said, where is
thy God? As if thee had n^ been a true and faithful friend to his Children.
And besides, as if he had not a providence over his children in the worst
condition. As if he had allowed, and liked of the base carriage and condition,
and profession of these wretched men, as well as of David's: where is now thy
God? you see God respects us, as well as you; but there was no such matter, he
respected David more then a thousand of them.

Again, this touched upon religion it self, this reproach, where is now thy
God? where is your goodly profession? as if it were in vain to serve God; a
horrible reproach to religion. It is not in vain altogether to serve the
Devil, he bestows somewhat upon his servants: this was a base thought, to
think that God would do no good to them that serve him, that is the fountain
of all good, that does good to his enemies, that suffers his Sun to shine upon
his enemies: for him to desert his friends, for a man to be truly religious,
and to get nothing by it; this tended to the reproach of religion, and through
David's sides they strike at God, and religion, as if it were in vain to serve
God, as they said in Malachies time. And indeed this is in the hearts of men
now a days, if they see a man that makes care and conscience of his ways
under a cloud, or that he does not so prosper in the world as others do: they
begin to have weak concei^s of the profession of religion, as if that were the
cause, as if there were nothing gotten by serving of God: but we may be loose
professors, and go in ^bertine course and please God as well as others. This
is a great grief to Gods children; they know well enough it is not invain to
serve God, God is not a barren wilderness to those that serve him: they are
not barren ground that are careful in his service: so you see upon what ground
he was thus affected, because God and Religion was touched in it.

Take away a godly man's religion, and his God whom he serves in Religion, you
take away his life: touch him in that, you touch him in his best freehold:
Therefore when these malicious enemies say, Where is thy God? they could not
more touch David then so. Profane men of the world, come and tell them of
Religion, and such things, alas they turn it off with scorn; for they would
have the world know, that they are not very religious: they never speak of God
and of religion, but in scorn, or by way of discourse: but a man that is
religious to purpose, and makes it his trade, makes it that whereby he hopes
to be saved; he takes to heart any thing that is spoken against Religion:
their words are as a sword in his bones, while they say unto him, where is thy
God? It is better to be distempered, then not to be moved, when God and
Religion are touched. The Holy Ghost that appeared in the shape of a Dove,
appeared at another time in fiery tongues, to show that the meek spirit of
God, is zealous other whiles in his children. This was another reason he was
thus affected.

And thirdly in this reproach of theirs, thus violent, Where is now thy God?
here was a damping of the spirits of all good men in those times, that should
hear of this reproach. Words affect strangely; they have a strange force with
men, especially in weak fancies, that are not grounded in their judgment and
faith. The spies made a shrewd oration, and brought an ill report on the Land:
oh! it is a land that devours the inhabitants. It was a speech discomfortable,
and it wrought so, that it made them all murmur, and be discouraged. It is not
to be thought what mischief comes from speech, cunningly handled. This
malicious speech, Where is thy God? and what is become of all thy devotion at
the Tabernacle, that thou did frequent so, and drewest others, a great train
with thee, what is become of all now? When weak men, that had the beginnings
of goodness in them, should see a man reproached for this: questionless it
would dampe the beginnings of goodness: oh would not this go to the heart of
David, to see insolent men to quench good things in good men with reproaches.
Well, we see what reason the holy man David had to be so sensible of this
reproach, for they said unto him daily, where is thy God?

Now therefore to make some use of it to our selves: let us enter into our own
souls, and examine with what spirits, and feeling we hear God reproached,
and religion reproached and hindered, and disgraced any kind of way: if we be
not sensible of this, and sensible to the quick, we may suspect we are not of
David's spirit, that was a man after Gods own heart: It was a cutting of his
bones, when they came to disparage his Religion, and profession, and to touch
him in that. Shall a man see men forsake Religion, and go backward, and
desert the cause of God, and see it oppressed, and not be affected with all
thi^ certainly he has a dead soul. That which has no grief, when there is
cause of grief, certainly it is to be accounted but as dead flesh. That heart
is but dead flesh, that is not touched with the sense of religion.

And to come a little nearer to our times, when we can hear of the estate of
the Church abroad, the poor Church in the Palatinate, in Bohemia, and those
places: you see how like a canker, superstition is grown up amongst them: when
we hear of these things, and are not affected, and do not send up a figh to
God, it is a sign we have hollow and dead hearts. No question but if we were
there among those malignant spirits that are there, their speeches are daily
such, as these wicked men's were to David, what is become of your reformation?
what is become of your new Religion? where is that now I pray? You that do
upbraid us with Idolatry, what is become of your Religion? no question but they
have these ^casmes and (...) speeches daily, and those that have the spirit of
God, they are grieved to the heart. If we have the spirit of God and of Christ
in our breasts, and any thing of the spirit of David, and of holy men, we will
grieve at this.

The Apostle St. Paul, when Ely^as labored to stop, when one was to be
converted, he breaks out, Then child of the Devil, and enemy of all good,
why do thou not cease to pervert the right ways of God? A man that is not
fired in this case, has nothing at all in him, when we see-wicked men go
about to pervert Religion, and overturne all, and we are not stirred at it, it
is an ill sign.

Let us therefore take a trial of our selves, how we stand affected in case of
Religion: He that has no zeal in him, has no love: by an Antiperistasis, a
opposition of the contrary, increases the contrary: if a man have any
goodness, if it be environed with opposition, it will intend the goodness
and increase it. Lot showed his goodness in Sodom the more, because of the
wickedness of the Sodomites, when a man is in vile company, and hears
Religion disgraced, and good persons scoffed at, and will not have a word to
justify good causes, and good persons, he has no life at all of Religion;
for if he had, he would then have more Religion then ordinary, the contrary
would then intend, and increase the contrary. There was a blessed mixture of
many affections in this grief of the holy man David, when he said, their
words were as a sword in his bones. There was great grief, not only for
himself, as a man being sensible of reproaches: for men are men, and not out
of corrupt nature, but out of the principles of nature, they are sensible of
reproaches: here was grief in respect of God, and in respect of himself: and
here was the love of God, and the love of Religion in this grief. Here was
zeal in this, and a sweet mixture of blessed affections, a sweet temper in
this, when he says, their words were as a sword in my bones.

Let us make a use of trial; bring our selves to this pattern, and think if
we do come short of this, then we come short of that that should be in us.
But especially let us consider with what hearts we entertain those doleful
and sad reports of foreign Churches, and with what consideration, and view,
we look upon the present estate of the Church, whether we be glad or no.
There are many false spirits, that either are not affected at all, or else they
are inwardly glad of it: they are of the same disposition, that those cursed
Edomites were of, Psalm 137. Down with it, down with it, even unto the
ground: I hope that there are but few such amongst us here, therefore I will
not press that: But if we be dead-hearted, and are not affected with the
cause of the Church, let us suspect our selves, and think all is not well; The
fire from Heaven is not kindled in our hearts, our hearts are not yet the
Altar, where God has kindled that heavenly fire, if we can hear Religion
disgraced, and good causes go backward, and not be affected. Curse ye Meroz:
why? because they went not out to help the Lord. If those be cursed that do
not help, as they can by their prayers, then surely they are cursed that are
dead-hearted, that are not affected at all; that join with the persecutors,,
that cry down with it even to the ground, and say Aha, so we would have it. If
those be cursed that help not forward the cause of the Church, at least by
their prayers, and strive and contend for the faith once given, what shall we
think of those that are not affected at all, nay which is worse of all, that
hinder good causes, that are scorners of Religion, and good causes, what shall
we think of those wretched spirits? how opposite are they to the spirit of
David?

To add one thing more, we may learn hence, the extent of the commandments,
how to enlarge the commandments. Our Savior Christ, when he came to preach
the Gospel, he began with the enlargement of the commandments, showing the
spiritual meaning, and extent of the law: he that calls his Brother Racha,
or fool, is in danger of hell fire: and he that looks on a woman, to lust
after her, has committed adultery with her in his heart. You see here the
Prophet David, when he speaks of their reproach, he speaks of it as if they
had a murderous intention; and in the event and issue, it is a kind of murder.
As with a sword in my bones my enemies reproach me, etc. This sword were but
words, he is a murderer in Gods esteem, (and so it will prove if he repent
not) that wounds another man with his tongue: for what does the Holy Ghost here
in David? does he not set out words by swords? Is it not often in the Psalms,
Their words are as swords; the poison of Aspes is under their lips? There is
an excellent place you have for this in Prove. 12. 18. Prove. 12. 18.
There is that speaks like the piercing of a sword, but the tongue of the wise
is health. A good man has a healing tongue, he has a medicinal salving
tongue, but a wicked man, his words are as swords; and as he ^aith here, their
speaking is as the piercing of a sword. Therefore, hence let us learn, not to
think our selves free from murder, when we have killed no body, or free from
adultery, when we are free from the gross act: this is but a pharisaicall
gloss upon the commandments, but if we will understand the commandments of
God, as they are to be understood, we must enlarge them as the Scripture
inlargeth them: he that prejudiceth the life, and comfort of any man, hec is a
murderer of him in Gods esteem: and he that labors to cut another man to the
heart, with sharp piercing words, in Gods esteem he is a murderer. Those
that, though among men, they cannot say black is their eye, and pride
themselves, as if they were very religious men, yet notwithstanding they are
men that are not wanting of their tongues, men that care not to speak bitterly
and sharply of others: if they did consider of this, it would take them down,
and make them think a little meaner of themselves, when indeed in Gods
construction they are little better their murderers. As with a sword in my
bones mine enemies reproach me, while they say to me daily, where is thy God?
So much for these words.

FINIS.
The TABLE.
A
Acquaintance. ACquaintance with God to be maintained. part 2 p. 143 Affection.
Affections try our estates 1 264 Affections wanting show want of faith. 1 269
To shame our selves in want of Affections. 1 271 To pray for Affections. 1 272
Affections to be kept tender. 1 278 Affections why sometimes dead. 1 285 See
Hatred. Answer see Conscience.
Appearing. Two appearings of Christ. 2 18 Application. Application the ground
of obedience 1 149 Necessity of Application 1 151 Principle of Application. 1
153 To beg the spirit of Application 1 154 Danger in want of Application. 1
156
Arc, (...) Baptism. Assurance. How to know our estate in want of Assurance.
1 240
B
Baptism. Want of baptism no prejudice to salvation; p. a. page 157 Ground of
baptising Infants. 2 158 Aggravation of sins after Baptism. 2 162 The Arc a
figure of Baptism. 2 170 Parts of Baptism. 2 172 Children why Baptized. 2 190
Baptism binds. 2 191 Covenant in Baptism. 2 192 What sins renounce baptism
Ibid. How to make use of our baptism. 2 195
Beast. The Beast who. 1 7 The Beast and Dragon resembled. 1 10 State of Rome
the Beast, why. 1 13 Beasts ill carriage toward Kings. 1 40 To further the
destruction of the Beast. 1 49 The Beast shall fall. 1 51 See Hatred.
Body. Not to satisfy the lusts of the body. 2 44 Our bodies shall be
glorious. 2 51 How to use our bodies. 2 52 Glory of the body in six things. 2
53 To abase our bodies for Christ. 2 57 How to know our bodies shall be
glorious. 2 60 See Vile. God to be sought betimes. 1 187 Blessing, see
Ministers.

C
Man a changeable creature. 2 46 God punishes parents in their children. 1 110
God the God of our children. 2 157 Parents to be good for their childrens
sake. 2 159 Comfort to those that leave little to their children. 2 160 All our
good first in Christ. 2 32, 49 To be thankful for Christ. 2 50 To make use of
what is in Christ. 2 179 To think of Gods love in Christ. 1 278 See covenant.
Difference between Christians and others. 1 92 Come. To think often of the times
to come. 2 66 Comfort. Double ground of comfort. 2 186 See Death, Children.
Communion. Man's happiness in communion with God. 2 108 Communicative. Gods
goodness communicative. 1 142 Confidence. Issue of false confidence dangerous.
1 63 False confidence overturned. 1 66
Conscience. Demand of conscience whence. 2 182 Good conscience what. 2 183 3.
Degrees of a good conscience. 2 184 Conscience good that is troubled. 2 187 How
to know we do things from a good conscience. 2 189 To get the answer of a good
conscience. 2 193 Comfort from the answer of a good conscience. 2 199
Conviction. Conviction double. 1 236 Corruption. How to set against our
corruptions. 1 8^ Corruption why not subdued at once. Ibid. To strengthen faith
in the fall of our corruptions. 1 89 Sight of corruptions help faith. (...) 230
Victory over corruptions. 2 138 How to know nature is corrupted. 1 270 See
Jericho. Country, See Heaven.
Covenant. Covenants to be renewed. 2 ^00 Covenant of works. 2 108 Covenant of
grace. 2 109 Covenant of grace qualities of it 2 115 Covenant of grace,
conditions of it 2 116 Comfort from the covenant of grace. 2 254 God gives us
grace to perform our covenants. 2 164 Christ the foundation of the covenant of
grace. 2 178 Nature of the Covenant. 2 180 Covenant of grace, why so called. 2
182 See Testament, works. Creature insufficient to teach the knowledge of God.
1 139 Not to curse particular persons. 1 105

D
Death, Die. Death terrible. 1 205 Men die as they live. 1 208 A Christian how
dead. 2 2 Comfort in Death. 2 66 Righteous, and wicked die. 2 74 Difference in
their death. 2 80 Why men want comfort in death. 2 101 See firstborn, faith.
Demand, see conscience.
Dependence. Dependence upon God. 1 27 Desire. To out-strippe the wicked in our
desires. 2 87 Difference of desires in men, Ibid. Desires the best character of
a Christian. 2 93 Wicked men desire not heaven aright. 2 94 Directions for holy
desires. 2 96 God leaves not good desires. 2 102 Desire of earthly things how
abated. 2 143
Destruction. How to prevent our own destruction. 1 86 Dragon, see Beast.
Distemper. Distemper hinders not Christians dying in faith. 1 206
E
Enemies. GOD meets with his Enemies. 1 45 GODS Children have Enemies. 1 214
Envy. No Envy in God, 1 144 Everlasting, Covenant of grace everlasting. 2
251 Evil. How GOD has a hand in evil. 1 16 Gods providence in evil. 1 19
God keeps us from doing of evil. 1 25
Extremity. God to be sought in extremity. 1 184 Difference of men in
extremity, Ibid.
Eye. To desire God to open our eyes. 1 229 See Faith.

F
Face. Seeking Gods face, what. 1 174 Directions to seek Gods face. 1 179
Encouragements to seek Gods face. 1 189
Faith. Faith in the use of means. 1 70 Faith said to do that God does. 1 71
Faith enlivens all graces. 1 72 Faith strengthened by experience. 1 90 Faith to
be labored for. 1 94 Faith one from the beginning. 1 196 Perseverance in
Faith. 1 197 Faith carries a Christian through all passages. 1 198 To die in
faith what. 1 199 Faith over comes all that is terrible in death. 1 201 Faith
the eye of it. 1 218 Faith sees afar off how. 1 219 Sight of faith, how to
help it. 1 228 Two branches of faith. 1 262 Faith ^w cherished. 2 65 Faith of
Christians how shaken. 2 218 Faith to be strengthened. 2 220 Far see Faith.
Favor. Favor of God to be sought first. 1 181 Fear. How to know God is
ours by fear. 2 125 Feeling. Christians may want feeling. 1 207 Firstborn.
Death of the firstborn, a great judgment. 1 110 Free. Freedom in sin a
judgment. 1 22 Covenant of grace free. 2 249 See Will.

G
Glory Glorious. God gets glory by weak means. 1 68 Why we shall be
glorious with Christ. 2 19 Wherein that glory shall be 2 21 When the Saints
shall be glorified. 2 23 To think of the glory to come. 2 25 Glory why revealed
beforehand. (...) 28 See Body.
God. Two things wherein we are like God. 1 144 What it is for God to be our
God. 2 117 God ours in the covenant of grace, 2 120 How to know God is our God.
2 121 To labor that God may be our God 2 140 To make use of all in God as
ours. 2 143
Goodness. God is willing to bestow his goodness. 1 143 See Communicative.
Gospel. Punishment of slighting the Gospel. 1. 43 Grace, see Covenant.
Guidance. Guidance of God to be prayed for. 1 24
H
Happiness. Wicked men outlive their happiness, 2 78 Happiness of the godly. 2
80 Wicked men may know the happiness of Gods children. 2 84
Hatred. Affection of hatred due to the beast. 1 47 Heaven. Heaven the country
of a Christian. 1 292 See desire.
Hid, hidden. The life of a Christian hidden. 2 4 God sometimes hides himself.
2 223 Hope, see Faith.

I
Satan's kingdom like the walls of Jericho. 1 73 Our corruptions like the
walls of Jericho. 1 74 Antichrists kingdom like the walls of Jericho. 1 75
Means to east down mystical Jericho. 1 78 How to prevent the building of
spiritual Jericho. 1 80, 120 Jericho why not to be built again. 1 106 How men
build Jericho again. 1 114, 118 Embrace. Faith imbraceth what it has. 1 259
Embracing follows persuasion. 1 260 What affections embrace good things. 1
272 Embracing how wrought. 1 274
Joy. Knowing God ours is our joy. 2 129 Judgment see spiritual.

K
Kings. The ten Kings wherein sinful. 1. 28 Known, knowledge. God, willing
to be known. 1 141 Knowledge of our estate sometime suspended. 1 238

L
Life. Christ our life how. 2 11 To improve the time of life. 2 75 Life 3.
degrees of it. 2 82 See die, hidden, soul.
Love. God known to be ours by our Love 2 127
M
Malice, see reproach. False confidence over-turned by weak means. 1 67 See
Faith. Blessing of Ministers to be regarded. 1 103 Ministers duty. 2 176 God
the only Monarch. 1 26 Good Motions to be cherished. 2 99
N
3. Things in man by Nature. 1 64
O
Quality of obedience. 1 160 Obedience suitable to the command 1 164 To know God
is ours by our obedience. 2 131 God to be sought in his Ordinances 1 186 Men
give too much to Outward worship. 2 172 Why men are prone to Outward
performances. 2 174 Papists work their own overthrow. 1 53 How to set against
Popery. 1 87 Popery how it sprung up. 1 117 Covenant of grace Peculiar. 2 252
Persuasion follows sight. 121 Persuasion what. 1 233 Persuasion degrees of it.
1 235 Persuasion spiritual necessary. 1 236 Persuasion particular sometimes
weak. 1 237 Persuasion how to know it is not supernatural. 2 242 Persuasion
wrought by the spirit. 1 247 How the spirit does persuade. 1 248 The manner of
working persuasion. 1 250 A strong work to persuade the soul. 1 251 To labor
for spiritual persuasion. 1 253 To desire God to persuade us. 1 256 Evidences
that we are persuaded. 1 257 Persons, see Curse. Pilgrims. Difference between
Pilgrims and strangers. 1 289 To resolve to please God. 2 141
Power, see Truth. To know God is ours by our prayer. 2 134 Preaching the force
of it. 1 78 Presence of God how considered. 1 171 Things as present affect us.
1 218 Promises to allege them to God. 1 167 God deals with men by promises. 1
210 Faith looks to God by the Promises. 1 211 Promises often to be thought on. 2
13 Proportion, see Punishment. Providence see Evil. Punishment proportionable
to sin. 1 109
R
Religion disgraced how it affects us. 2 132 Reproach the expression of malice.
2 216 Not to be cast down for reproach. Ibid. David sensible of reproach. 2
228 God does not reveal all things at all times. 1 215 Righteous man who. 2 84
S
See Sight. Things requisite to sight. 1 222 Sight of faith necessary. 1 223 3.
Things in strong sight. 1 224 See Faith, persuasion. Mercies and judgments
apprehended in our seed. 2 156 To seek GOD by his strength. 1 158 Seeking what
it does implie. 1 170 Ground of seeking of God. 1 171 See Strength, betimes,
face. Sensible, see reproach. Sentence of Christ unavoydable. 1 132 Men must
not appoint how to serve God. 1 138 Sin considered in three times. 1 17 Soul
made for heavenly things. 1 267 Love of earthly things abase the Soul. 1 268
Soul how quieted. Ibid. Soul continues after death. 2 74 Life of the Soul
double. Ibid. How to use our Souls. 2 75 Spirit, Spiritual. Spiritual
judgments greatest. 1 22 Order of the Spirits working. 1 217 To beg the
Spirit to persuade us. 1 254
Stranger. Gods people strangers here. 1 290 CHRIST a stranger on earth. 1 294
To have the affections of strangers 1 295 Wicked men, how strangers here. 1 297
Carriage of a stranger. 1 300 See Pilgrim. Strike, see threaten. The covenant
of grace sure. 2 250

T
Covenant of grace a Testament. 2 110 Difference of a covenant and Testament.
Ibid. To be thankful for that we have 1 215 God threatens ^re he strike. 1 108
Wickedness shall nos always thrive. 1 47 To tremble at Gods word. 1 133 Men
naturally trust so^what 1 62 Try all of our trust. 1 65 How to know GOD ours by
trust. 2 129 Truth of God. 1 150 Faith looks to Gods power and truth 1 224
V
The best men's bodies vile in this world. 2 40 God revealed to man (...) (...)
understanding creature. 2 107 Our nature prone to unthankefulnes. 2 116
W
To go to Christ in all wants. 2 15 Degrees of wicked men. 2 86 Will of man
free in sin. 1 20 To be left to our ow^ will, a great judgment. 1 21 Will,
when accepted for the deed. 2 102 Who are truly wise. 2 83 Word, s^ Tremble.
Christians course opposite to the world. 2 39 World how to be used. 2 75 Works
see covenant.
Z
How to know God is our God by our Zeal. 2 128
FINIS.

