THE SOVLES CONFLICT with it self, AND VICTORY over it self by Faith.

A Treatise of the inward disquietments of distressed spirits, with comfortable
remedies to establish them.

Return unto thy rest O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee.

By R. Sibbs D. D. Master of Katherine Hall in Cambridge, and Preacher of
Grayes Inn London.

The Second Edition.

LONDON Printed by M. F. for R. Dawlman at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard. 1635.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIP FVLL
Sir JOHN BANKS Knight, the Kings Majesty's Attorney General,

Sir EDWARD MOSELY Knight, his Majesty's Attorney of the Duchy,

Sir WILLIAM DENNY, Knight, one of the Kings learned Counsel,

Sir DVDLY DIGGES, Knight, one of the Masters of the Chauncery,

And the rest of the Worshipful Readers and Benchers, with the Ancients,
Barresters, Students, and all others belonging to the Honorable Society of
Grayes Inn:

R. SIBBS Dedicateth these Sermons Preached amongst them, in testimony of his
due Observance, and desire of their spiritual and eternal good.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THere be two sorts of people always in the visible Church. One that Satan
keeps under with false peace, whose life is nothing but a diversion to pre
sent contentments, and a running away from God and their own hearts, which
they know can speak no good unto them; these speak peace to themselves, but
God speaks none. Such have nothing to do with this Scripture; the way for
these men to enjoy comfort, is to be soundly troubled. True peace arises from
knowing the worst first, and then our freedom from it. It is a miserable peace
that rises from ignorance of evil. The Angel troubled the waters, and then
cured John (...):
those that stepped in. It is Christ's manner, to trouble our souls first, and
then to come with healing in his wings.

But there is another sort of people, who being drawn out of Satan's kingdom,
and within the Covenant of grace, whom Satan labors to unsettle and disquiet:
being the God of the world, he is vexed to see men in the world, walk above
the world. Since he cannot hinder their estate, he will trouble their peace,
and dampe their spirits, and cut a sunder the sinews of all their endeavors.
These should take themselves to task as David does here, and labor to
maintain their portion, and the glory of a Christian profession. For whatsoever
is in God or comes from God, is for their comfort. Him self is the God of
comfort; his Spirit most known by that office. Our blessed Savior was so
careful that his Disciples should not be too much dejected, that he forgot his
own bitter passion to comfort them, whom yet he knew would all forsake him: Let
not your hearts be troubled says he. And his own soul was troubled to death,
that we should not be troubled: whatsoever is written is written for this end;
every article of faith has a special influence in comforting a believing
soul. They are not only food, but cordials: Yea he put himself to his Oath,
that we might not only have Consolation but strong Consolation. The Sacraments
seal unto us all the comforts we have by the death of Christ; the exercise of
Religion, as Prayer, Hearing, Reading, etc. is that our joy may be full: the
Communion of Saints is chiefly ordained to comfort the feeble minded, and to
strengthen the weak. Gods government of his Church tends to this. Why does he
sweeten our pilgrimage, and let us see so many comfortable days in the world,
but that we should serve him with cheerful and good hearts? As for crosses,
he does but cast us down, to raise us up, and empty us that he may fill us,
and melt us, that we may be vessels of glory, loving us as well in the
furnace, as when we are out, and standing by us all the while. We are troubled,
but not distressed; perplexed, but not in 2 Cor. 4. (...).
despair; persecuted, but not forsaken. If we consider from what fatherly
love afflictions come, how they are not only moderated, but sweetened and
sanctified in the issue to us, how can it but minister matter of comfort in the
greatest seeming disco^forts? How then can we let the reins of our affections
loose to sorrow without being injurious to God and his providence? as if we
would teach him how to govern his Church?

What unthankfulness is it to forget our consolation, and to look only upon
matter of grievance: to think so much upon two or three crosses as to forget a
hundred blessings? To suck poison out of that, from which we should suck honey?
What folly is it to straighten and darken our own spirits? And indispose our
selves for doing or taking good? A limb out of joint can do nothing without
deformity and pain; deiection takes off the wheels of the soul.

Of all other, Satan has most advantage of discontented persons, as most
agreeable to his disposition, being the most discontented creature under
heaven; He hammers all his dark plots in their brains. The coffeehouse of
the Israelires in the wilderness, provoked God to swear, that they Ps. 95.
ult.
should never enter into his rest. There is another spirit in my servant Caleb
says God; the spirit of Gods people is an incourageing spirit. Wisdom teaches
them if they feel any grievances to conceal them from others that are weaker,
least they b^ disheartened. God threatens it as a curse to Deu 28. 65
give a trembling heart and sorrow of mind; whereas on the contrary joy is as
oil to the soul, it makes duties come off cheerfully and sweetly from our
selves, graciously to others, and acceptably to God. A Prince cannot endure it
in his subjects, nor a Father in his children to be lowering at their presence.
Such usually have stolen waters to delight themselves in.

How many are there that upon the disgrace that follows Religion, are frighted
from it? But what are discouragements, to the encouragements Religion brings
with it? which are such as the very Angels themselves admire at. Religion
indeed brings crosses with it, but then it brings comforts above those
crosses. What a dishonor is it to Religion to conceive that God will not
maintain and honor his followers? as if his service were not the best
service; what a shame is it for an heir of heaven to be cast down for every
pety loss and cross: To be afraid of a man whose breath is in his nostrils,
Tua praesentia Domine Laurentio ipsam craticulam dulce^ fecit.
in not standing to a good cause, when we are sure God will stand by us,
assisting and comforting us, whose presence is able to make the greatest
torments sweet.

My discourse tends not to take men off from all grief and mourning; Light for
the righteous is sown in sorrow: Our state of absence from the Lord, and
living here in a vail of tears, our daily infirmities, and our sympathy with
others, requires it; and where most grace is there is most sensibleness, as in
Christ. But we must distinguish between grief and that fullennesse and
deiection of spirit, which is with a repining and taking off from duty; when
Joshua was overmuch cast down at Isreal's turning their backs before their
enemies, God reproves him, Get thee up Joshua, why lie thou Judge. 7. 10.
upon thy face?

Some would have men after the committing of gross sin to be presently
comfortable, and believe without humbling themselves at all; indeed when we ore
once in Christ, we ought not to question our state in him, and if we do, it
comes not from the spirit: But yet a guilty conscience will be clamorous and
full of objections, and God will not speak peace unto it till it be humbled.
God will let his best children know what it is to be too bold with sin, as we
see in David and Peter, who felt no peace till they had renewed their
repentance: The way to rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious, is to stir
up fighs that cannot be uttered. And it is so far, that the knowledge of our
state in grace should not humble us, that very ingenuity considering Gods love
to us, out of the nature of the thing it self works sorrow and shame in us, to
offend his Majesty.

One maine stop that hinders Christians from rejoicing, is, that they give
themselves too much liberty to question their grounds of comfort and interest
in the promises. This is wonderful comfortable say they, but what is it to me?
the promise belo^gs not to me. This arises from want of giving all diligence 2
Pet. 10.
to make their calling sure to themselves. In watchfulness and diligence we
sooner meet with comfort the^ in idle complaining. Our care therefore should be
to get sound evidence of a good estate, and then likewise to keep our evidence
clear; wherein we are not to hearken to our own fears and doubts, or the
suggestion of our enemy, who studies to falsify our evidence: but to the Word,
and our own consciences enlightened by the spirit: and then it is pride and
pettishnesse to stand out against comfort to themselves. Christians should
study to corroberate their title: We are never more in heaven, before we come
thither, then when we can read our evidences: It makes us converse much with
God, it sweetens all conditions, and makes us willing to do and suffer any
thing. It makes us have comfortable and honorable thoughts of our selves, as
too good for the service of any base lust, and brings confidence in God both in
life and death.

But what if our condition be so dark, that we cannot read our evidence at
all?

Here look up to Gods infinite mercy in Christ, as we did at the first when we
found no goodness in our selves, and that is the way to recover whatsoever we
think we have lost. By honoring Gods mercy in Christ, we come to have the
Spirit of Christ; therefore when the waters of sanctification are troubled and
muddy, let us run to the witness of blood. God seems to walk sometimes
contrary to himself; he seems to discourage, when secretly he does encourage,
as the woman of Canaan; but faith can find out these ways of God, and untie
th^se knots, by looking to the free promise and merciful nature of God. Let
our sottish and rebellious flesh murmr as much as it will, who art thou? and
what is thy worth? Yet a Christian knows whom he believes. Faith has learned
to set God against all.

Again, we must go on to add grace to grace. A growing and fruitful
Christian, is always a comfortable Christian; the oil of grace brings forth
the oil of gladness. Christ is first a King of righteousness, and then a
King of peace; the Heb. 7. 2.
righteousness that he works by his Spirit brings a peace of sanctification,
whereby though we are not freed from sin, yet we are enabled to combat with
it, and to get the victory over it. Some degree of comfort follows every good
action, as heat accompanies fire, and as beams and influences issue from the
Sun; which is so true, that very Heathens upon the discharge of a good
conscience, have found comfort and peace answerable; this is a reward before
our reward. Praemium ante praemium.


Another thing that hinders the comfort of Christians is, that they forget what
a gracious and merciful covenant they live under, wherein, the perfection that
is required is to be found in Christ. Perfection in us is sincerity: What is
the end of faith but to bring us to Christ? Now imperfect faith, if sincere,
knits to Christ, in whom our perfection lies.

Gods design in the covenant of grace, is to exalt the riches of his mercy,
above all sin and unworthiness of man; and we yield him more glory of his
mercy by believing, then it would be to his Justice to destroy us. If we were
perfect in our selves, we should not honor him so much, as when we labor to
be found in Christ, having his righteousness upon us.

There is no one portion of Scripture oftener used to fetch up drooping spirits
then this, Why art thou cast down oh my soul? it is figurative, and full of
Rhetorique, and all little enough to persuade the perplexed soul, quietly to
trust in God; which without this retiring into our selves and checking our
hearts, will never be brought to pass. Chrysostom brings in a man laden with
Ho^it in Genesis
troubles, coming into the Church, where when he heard this passage read, he
presently recovered himself, and becomes another man. As David therefore did
acquaint himself with this form of dealing with his soul, so let us,
demanding a reason of our selves Why we are cast down; which will at least
check and put a stop to the distress, and make us fit to consider more
solid grounds of true comfort.

Of necessity the soul must be something calmed and staid before it can be
comforted. Whilst the humors of the body rage in a great distemper, there is
no giving of physic: So when the soul gives way to passion, it is unfit to
entertain any counsel, therefore it must be stilled by degrees, that it may
hear reason; and sometimes it is fitter to be moved with ordinary reason, (as
being more familiar unto it) then with higher reasons fetched from our
supernatural condition in Christ, as from the condition of man's nature subject
to changes, from the uncomelinesse of yielding to passion for that, which it is
not in our power to mend, etc. these and such like reasons have some use to
stay the fit for a while, but they leave the coar untouched which is sin, the
trouble of all troubles. Yet when such considerations are made spiritual by
faith on higher grounds, they have some operation upon the soul, as the
influence of the Moon having the stronger influence of the Sun mingled with
it, becomes more effectual upon these inferior bodies. A candle light being
ready at hand, is sometimes as useful as the Sun it self.

But our maine care should be to have Evangelicall grounds of comfort, near to
us, as Reconciliation with God, whereby all things else are reconciled unto us,
Adoption and Communion with Christ, etc. which is never sweeter then under the
Cross. Philip Lansgrave of Hesse, being a long time prisoner under Charles the
fifth, was demanded what upheld him all that time, Who answered that he felt
the divine comforts of the Martyrs: there be divine comforts which Respondit,
divinas consolationes Martyrum se sensisse.
are felt under the Cross, and not at other times,

Besides personal troubles, there are many much dejected with the present
state of the Church, seeing the blood of so many Saints to be shed, and the
enemies often to prevail; but God has stratagems, as Joshua, at Ay; he seems
sometimes to retire that he may come upon his enemies with the greater
advantage; the end of all these troubles will no doubt be the ruin of the
Antichristian faction; and we shall see the Church in her more perfect beauty;
when the enmies shall be in that place which is fittest for them, the lowest,
that is, the footstool of Christ; the Church as it is highest in the favor of
God, so it shall be highest in it self. The mountain of the Lord shall be
exalted above all mountains. In the worst condition, the Church has two
faces: One toward heaven and Christ, which is always constant and glorious:
Another toward the world, which is in appearance contemptible and changeable.
But God will in the end give her beauty for ashes, and glory double to her
shame: and she shall in the end prevail; in the mean time, the power of the
enemies is in Gods hand: Robur hostium apud Deum.
The Church of God conquers when it is conquered: even as our Head Christ did,
who overcame by patience as well as by power. Christ's victory was upon the
Cross. The Spirit of a Christian conquers, when his person is conquered.

The way is, in stead of discouragement, to search all the promises made to the
Church in these latter times, and to turn them into prayers, and press God
earnestly for the performance of them. Then we shall soon find God both
cursing his enemies, and blessing his people out of Zion, by the faithful
prayers that ascend up from thence.

In all the promises we should have special recourse to God in them. In all
storms there is Sea room enough in the infinite goodness of God, for faith to
be carried with full sail.

And it must be remembered that in all places where God is mentioned, we are to
understand God in the promised Messiah, typified out so many ways unto us. And
to put the more vigor into such places in the reading of them, we in this
latter age of the Church must think of God shining upon us in the face of
Christ, and our Father in him. If they had so much confidence in so little
light, it is a shame for us not to be confident in good things when so strong a
light shines round about us; when we profess we believe a crown of
righteousness is laid up for all those that love his appearing. Presenting
these things to the soul by faith, sets the soul in such a pitch of
resolution, that no discouragements are able to seize upon it. We faint not
says S. Paul, wherefore does he not faint? because these light and short
afflictions procure an exceeding weight of glory.

Luther when he saw Melancthon a godly and learned man too much dejected for
the state of the Church in those times, falls a chiding of him, as David does
here his own soul, I strongly hate those miserable Ego miserrimas curas,
quibus te consumiscribis, vehementer odi. Quod sic regnat in cord tuo, non est
magnitudo causae, sed ma gnitudo in credulitatis nostrae. Si causa salsa est,
revocemus. Si vera, cur facimus illum tantis promissis mendacem; I ucta^ contra
teipsum maximum hostem.
cares, says he, whereby thou writest thou art even spent. It is not the
greatness of the cause, but the greatness of the incredulity. If the cause be
false let us revoke it. If true, why do we make God in his rich promises a
liar? Strive against thy self, the greatest enemy; why do we fear the
conquered world, that have the conqueror himself on our side.

Now to speak something concerning the publishing of this Treatise. I began to
preach on the Text about twelve years since in the City, and afterward
finished the same at Grayes-Inne. After which, some having gotten imperfect
notes, endeavored to publish them without my privity. Therefore to do my
self right, I thought fit to reduce them to this form: There is a pious and
studious gentleman of Grayes-Inne, that has of late published observations
upon the whole psalm; and another upon this very verse very well; and many
others by Treatises of faith and such like, have furthered the spiritual peace
of Christians much. It were to be wished that we would all join to do that
which the Apostle gloried in, to be helpers of the joy of Gods people. By 2
Cor. 1. ult.
reason of my absence, while the work was in printing, some sentences were
mistaken. Some will be ready to deprave the labors of other men; but so good
may be done, let such ill disposed persons be what they are, and what they will
be unless God turn their hearts: and so I commend thee and this poor
Treatise to Gods blessing.

GRAYES INN, July. 1. 1635.

R. SIBBES.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK in the several Chapters.
1 General Observations upon the Text. page 5 2 Of discouragements from
without. 12 3 Of discouragements from within. 21 4 Of casting down our selves.
And specially by sorrow. Evils thereof. 41 5 Remedies of casting down: To
cite the^ soul, and press it to give an account. 51 6 Other observations of
the same nature. 63 7 Difference between good men and others in conflicts with
sin. 83 8 Of unfitting dejection: and when it is excessive. And what is the
right temper of the soul herein. 92 9 Of the souls disquiets, Gods dealings,
and power to contain our selves in order. 108 10 Means not to be
overcharged with forr^. 1^ 11 Signs of victory over our selves, and of a
subdued spirit. 142 12 Of original righteousness, natural corruption, Satan's
joining with it, and our duty thereupon. 153 13 Of imagination, sin of it,
and remedies for it. 176 14 Of help by others, of true comforters, and their
graces. Method. Ill success. 222 15 Of flying to God in disquiets of soul.
Eight observations out of the text. 242 16 Of trust in God: grounds of it:
specially his providence. 263 17 Of Graces to be exercised in respect of
divine providence. 278 18 Other gr^nds of trusting in God: namely the promises.
And twelve directions about the same. 295 19 Faith to be prized, and other
things under valued, at least not to be trusted to as the chief. 317 20 Of the
method of trusting in God: and the try all of that trust. 330 21 Of quieting
the spirit in troubles for sin. And objections answered. 348 22 Of sorrow for
sin, and hatred of sin, when right and sufficient. Helps thereto. 370 23 Other
spiritual causes of the souls trouble, discovered, and removed: and objections
answered. 386 24 Of outward troubles disquieting the spirit: and comforts in
them. 393 25 Of the defects of gifts, disquieting the soul. As also the
afflictions of the Church. 405 26 Of divine reasons in a believer; of his
minding to praise God, more then to be delivered. 414 27 In our worst condition
we have cause to praise God. Still ample cause in these days. 425 28 Diverse
qualities of the praise due to God. With helps therein. And notes of Gods
hearing our prayers. 439 29 Of Gods manifold salvation for his people. And why
open, or expressed in the countenance. 463 30 Of God, our God, and of
particular application. 477 31 Means of proving and evidencing to our souls,
that God is our God. 495 32 Of improving our evidences for comfort in several
passages of our lives. 508 33 Of experience, and Faith, and how to wait on God
comfortably. Helps thereto. 529 34 Of confirming this trust in God. Seek it of
God himself. Sins hinder not: nor Satan. Conclusion and Soliloquite. 548
IN OPUS POSTHVMVM ADMODVM REVERENDI, mihique multis Nominibus colendi,
RICHARDI SIBBS S. T. Professoris, Aulae Stae Cath. Praefecti dignissmi.
VAde Liber, pie Dux Animae, pie Mentis Achates;
Te relegens Fructu ne pereunte legate.
Quam foelix prodis! Prae sacro Codice sordent,
Bartole, sive tui; sive, Galene, tui.
Fidus Praeco DEI, coelestis Cultor Agelli
Affidui Pretium grande Laboris habet:
Quo Mihi nec Vita melior, nec promptior Ore,
Gratior aut Vultu, nec fuit Art prior.
Nil opus ut Nardum Caro combibat uncta Sabaum,
Altave marmoreus Sydera tangat Apex:
Non eget HIC Urna, non Marmore ^empe Volumen
Stats sacrum, vivax Marmor, and Urna, Pro.
Qui CHRISTO vivens incessit Tramite Coeli,
Aethereumque obiit Munus, obire nequit:
Ducit Hic Angelicis equalta saecula Lustris,
Qui VERBO Studium contulit omne suum.
Perlegat Hunc Legum Cultrix Veneranda Senecths,
Et quos plena DEO Men's super Astra vehit:
Venduntur (quanti!) circum Palatia Fumi!
Hic sacer ALTARIS CAREO minoris erit?
Heu! Pietas ubi prisca? prosana o Tempora! Mundi
Faex! Vesper! prope Nox! o Mora! CHRIST veni.
Si valuere Preces unquam, and Custodia CHRISTI,
Nunc Opus est Precibus, nunc Open, CHRIST, tua.
Certat in humanis Vitiorum Infamia rebus.
Hei mihi! nulla novis sufficit Herba Malis?
Probra refer pudet; nec enim decet: Exprobret illa
Qui volet; Est nostrum stere, silendo queri.
Flere? Tonabo tuas, Pietas neglecta, querelas:
Quid non Schisma, Tepor, Fastus, and Astus agunt?
Addo-Sed Historicus TACITUS suit optimus. Immo
Addam -- Sphaerarum at Music a muta placet.
EDVo: BENIOSIO.
Cressingae Templariorum Pride. Call. Febr. M DC XX XV.
On the Work of my learned Friend DOCTOR SIBBS.
Fool that I was! to think my easy Pen
Had strength enough to glorify the fame
Of this known Author, this rare Man of men:
Or give the least advantage to his name. (bright,
Who think, by praise to make his name more
Show the Sunns Glory, by dull Candlelight.
Blessed Saint! thy hallowed Pages do require
No slight preferment from our slender Lays:
We stand amazed, at what we most admire;
Ah, what are Saints the better for our praise!
He that commends this Volume, does no more
Then warm the fire, or gild the massy Ore.
Let me stand silent then. O, may that Spirit,
Which ledd thy hand, direct mine eye, my breast,
That I may read, and do; and so inherit
(What thou enjoy'st, and taught) eternal Rest!
Fool that I was! to think my Lines could give
Life to that work, by which they hope to live.
FRA: QVA:

THE SOVLES CONFLICT with it self.
PSALM. XLII. Why art thou cast down O my soul, and why art thou disquieted
within me? Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of
my countenance, and my God.
THe Psalms are, (as it were,) the Anatomy of a holy man which lay the inside
of a truly devour man outward to the view of others. If the Scriptures be
compared to a body, the Psalms may well be the heart, they are so full of
sweet affections, and passions. For in other portions of Scripture God speaks
to us; but in the Psalms, holy men speak to God and their own hearts: as

In this Psalm, we have the passionate passages of a broken, and a troubled
spirit.

At this time David was a banished man, banished from his own house, from his
friends, and which troubled him most, from the house of God, upon occasion of
Saul's persecution, who hunted him as a Partridge upon the mountains, see how
this works upon him.

1. He lays open his desire springing 1.
from his love. Love being the prime and leading affection of the soul from
whence grief springs, from being crossed in that we love. For the setting out
of which his affection to the full, he borrows an expressio^ from the Heart,
no Heart being chased by the hunters, pants more after the waters, then my
verse 1.
heart does after thee O God, though he found God present with him in exile,
yet there is a sweeter presence of him in his ordinances which now he wanted
and took to heart: places and conditions are happy or miserable, as God
vouchsafes his gracious presence more or less, and therefore; When, O when
shall it be, that I appear before God?

2. Then after his strong desire, he 2.
lays out his grief, which he could not contain, but must needs give a vent
to it in tears: and he had such a spring of grief in him, as fed his tears
day and night, all the ease he found was to dissolve verse 2.
this could of grief into the shower of tears.

But, why gives he this way to his grief? Quest.


Because together with his exiling Answ.
from Gods house, he was upbrayded by his enemies, with his religion: where is
now thy God? Grievances come not alone, verse 3.
but (as Jobs messengers) follow one another. These bitter taunts together with
the remembrance of his former happiness in communion with God in his house,
made deep impressions in his soul, when he remembered how he went with the
multitude into the house of God, verse 4.
and led a goodly train with him, being willing as a good Magistrate, and
Master of a family, not to go to the house of God alone, nor to heaven alone
but to carry as many as he could with him; Oh! the remembrance of this made him
power forth (not his words or his tears only) but his very soul. Former
favors and happiness makes the soul more sensible of all impressions to the
contrary; hereupon finding his soul over sensible, he expostulates with
himself; Why art thou cast down O my souls and why art thou disquieted within
me? etc.

But though the remembrance of the former sweetness of Gods presence did
somewhat stay him, yet his grief would not so be stilled, and therefore it
gathers upon him again; one grief called verse 7.
upon another, as one deep wave follows another without intermission, until
his soul was almost over whelmed under these waters; yet he recovers himself
a little with looking up to God, who he expected would with speed and
authority send forth his loving kindness with command to raise him up and
comfort him, and give him matter of songs in the night. For all this, his
unrulie grief will not be calmed, but renues assaults verse 8.
upon the return of the reproach of his enemies. Their words were as swords
unto him, and his heart being made very Verse. 10
tender and sensible of grief, these sharp words enter too deep; and
thereupon he has recourse to his former remedy (as being the most tried) to
chide his soul and charge it to trust in God.

CAP. I.
General Observations upon the Text.

HEnce in general we may observe; that, Grief gathered to a head will not
Obser. 1.
be quieted at the first. We see here passions intermingled with comforts, and
comforts with passions, and what bustling there is, before David can get the
victory over his own heart: You have some short spirited Christians, that if
they be not comforted at the first, they think all labor with their hearts is
in vain, and thereupon give way to their grief. But we see in David, as
distemper arises upon distemper, so he gives check upon check, and charge upon
charge to his soul, until at length he brought it to a quiet temper. In
Physic if one purge will not carry away the vicious humor, then we add a
second, if that will not do it, we take a third. So should we deal with our
souls, perhaps, one check, one charge will not do it, then fall upon the
soul again; send it to God again, and never give over until our souls be
possessed of our souls again.

Again, In general observe in David's Obser. 2.
spirit, that a gracious and living soul is most sensible of the want of
spiritual means.

The reason is, because spiritual life Reason
has answerable taste, and hunger and thirst after spiritual helps.

We see in nature, that those things press hardest upon it, that touch upon
Acrius urgent quae necessitatis sunt, quam quae spectant ad voluptutem.
the necessities of nature, rather then those that touch upon delights; for
these further only our comfortable being; but necessities uphold our being it
self: we see how famine wrought upon the Patriarks to go into Egypt: Where we
may see what to judge of those who willingly excommunicate themselves from the
assemblies of Gods people, where the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are present,
where the prayers of holy men meet together in one, and as it were bind God
and pull down Gods blessing: No private devotion has that report of
acceptance from heaven.

A third general point is, that a godly Obser. 3.
soul by reason of the life of grace, knows when it is well with it, and when
it is ill, when it is a good day with it, and when a bad; when God shines in
the use of means, then the soul is as it were in heaven, when God withdrawes
himself, then it is in darkness for a time. Where there is but only a
principle of nature without sanctifying grace, there men go plodding on and
keep their rounds, and are at the end where they were at the beginning; not
troubled with changes, because there is nothing within to be troubled; and
therefore, dead means, quick means, or no means, all is one with them, an
argument of a dead soul. And so we come more particularly and directly to the
words. Why art thou cast down O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within
me? etc.

The words imply 1 David's state Parts.
wherein he was, and 2 express his carriage in that state.

His estate was such that in regard of outward condition, he was in variety of
1.
troubles; and that in regard of inward disposition of spirit, he was first
cast down, and then disquieted.

Now for his carriage of himself in this condition, and disposition, he
deals 2.
roundly with himself: David reasons the case with David, and first checketh
himself for being too much cast down, and then for being too much disquieted.

And then lays a charge upon himself to trust in God; wherein we have the
duty he charge upon himself, which is to trust in God, and the grounds of
the duty;

First, from confidence of better times 1.
to come, which would yield him matter of praising God.

And then by a representation of God unto him, as a saving God in all troubles,
2.
nay as salvation it self, an open glorious Savior in the view of all, The
salvation of my countenance, and all this enforced from David's interest in God,
He is my God.

Whence observe, first, from the state Obser. 1.
he was now in, that since guilt and corruption has been derived by the fall
into the nature of man, it has been subjected to misery and sorrow, and that
in all conditions, from the King that sits on the Throne to him that
grindeth on the Mill. None ever has been so good or so great as could raise
themselves so high as to be above the reach of troubles.

And that choice part of mankind, the 1. Christ the Head was a man of many
sorrows.
first fruits and excellency of the rest (which we call the Church) more then
others, which appears by consideration, both of the Head, the Body and members
of the Church. For the Head Christ, he took our flesh as it was subject to
misery after the fall, and was (in regard of that which he endured) both in
life and death, a man of sorrows.

For the Body the Church, It may say from the first to the last as it is Psalm.
129. 2. The Church has been and is full of sorows.
From my youth up they have afflicted me. The Church began in blood, has
grown up by blood, and shall end in blood, as it was redeemed by blood.

For the members, they are all predestinate to a conformity to Christ their 3.
The members of the Church have been and are full of crosses.
Head, as in grace and Glory, so in abasement Romans 8. 29. neither is it a
wonder, for those that are born soldiers to meet with conflicts, for travailers
to meet with hard usage, for seamen to meet with storms, for strangers in a
strange country (especially amongst their enemies) to meet with strange
entertainment.

A Christian is a man of another world, and here from home, which he would
forget (if he were not exercised here) and would take his passage for his
country. But though all Christians agree and meet in this, that through many
afflictions we must enter into heaven: Yet, Acts 14. 22.
according to the diversity of place, parts and grace, there is a different cup
measured to every one.

And therefore it is but a plea of the flesh, to except against the Cross,
Never Use.
was poor creature distressed as I am: this is but self-love, for was it not
the case both of Head, Body and members, as we see here in David a principal
member? When he was brought to this case, thus to reason the matter with
himself, Why art thou cast down (O my soul) and why art thou disquieted
within me?

From the frame of David's spirit under these troubles, we may observe, Obser.
2.
that, as the case is thus with all Gods people, to be exercised with troubles,
so, They are sensible of them oftentimes, even to casting down and
discouraging. And the reason is, they are flesh and Reas. 1.
blood subject to the same passions, and made of the same mould, subject to the
same impressions from without as other men; And their nature is upheld 2.
with the same supports and refreshings as others, the withdrawing and want of
which affects them. And besides those troubles they suffer in Common with
other men, by reason of their new advancement and their new disposition they
have in and from Christ their Head, they are more sensible in a peculiar 3.
manner of those troubles that any way touch upon that blessed condition, from a
new life they have in and from Christ, which will better appear if we come
more particularly to a discovery of the more special causes of this distemper,
some of which are, 1 Without us. 2 Some within us.

CAP. II.
Of discouragements from without. Outward causes of disconragement.


1. GOD himself: who sometimes withdrawes the beams of his 1. God himself.
countenance from his children, whereupon the soul even of the strongest
Christian is disquieted; when together with the cross, God himself seems to
be an enemy unto them. The child of God when he sees that his troubles are
mixed with Gods displeasure, and perhaps his conscience tells him that God has
a just quarrel against him, because he has not renewed his peace with his
God, then this anger of A divine temptation, what.
God puts a sting into all other troubles, and adds to the disquiet. There
were some ingredients of this divine temptation (as we call it) in holy David
at this time: though most properly a divine temptation be, when God appears
unto us as an enemy, without any special guilt of any particular sin, as in
Jobs case.

And no marvel if Christians be from hence disquieted, when as the Son of
God himself having always before enjoyed the sweet communion with his Father,
and now feeling an estrangement, that he might be a curse for us, complained in
all his torments of nothing else; but My God, My God, why have thou forsaken
me? It is with the Mat. 27. 46
godly in this case, as with vapors drawn up by the Sun, which (when the
extracting force of the Sun leaves them) fall down again to the earth from
whence they are drawn. So when the soul, raised up and upheld by the beams of
his countenance, is left of God, it presently begins to sink. We see when the
body of the Sun is partly hid from us (for totally it cannot in an Eclipse by
the body of the Moon) that there is a drouping in the whole frame of nature:
so it is in the soul, when there is any thing that comes between Gods gracious
countenance and it.

Besides, if we look down to inferior causes, the soul is often cast down 2.
In regard of Satan, who is all for casting down.
by Satan, who is all for casting down, and for disquieting. For being a
cursed spirit, cast and tumbled down himself from heaven, where he is never
to come again, is hereupon full of disquiet, carrying a hell about himself,
whereupon all that he labors for, is to cast down and disquiet others, that
they may be (as much as he can procure) in the same cursed condition with
himself. He was not ashamed to set upon Christ himself with this tempration
of casting down, and thinke^ Christ's members never low enough till he can
bring them as low as himself.

By his envy and subtlety, we were The devil envies our happiness first, and
last.
driven out of Paradise at the first, and now he envies us the Paradise of a
good conscience: for that is our Paradise until we come to heaven; into which
no serpent shall ever creep to tempt us. When Satan sees a man strongly and
comfortably walk with God, he cannot endure that a creature of meaner rank by
creation then himself, should enjoy such happiness. Herein, like (some
peevish men which are his instruments) men too contentious, and bred up therein
(as a Salamander in the fire,) who when they know the cause to be naught, and
their adversaries to have the better title; yet (out of malice) they will
follow them with suits and vexations, though they be not able to disable their
opposites title: If their malice have not a vent in hurting some way, they will
burst for anger.

It is just so with the devil, when he sees men will to heaven, and that they
have good title to it, then he follows them with all dejecting and
uncomfortable tentations that he can: it is his continual trade and course to
seek his rest in our disquiet, he is by beaten practice and profession, a
temper in his kind.

Again, what Satan cannot do himself by immediate suggestions, that 3.
Satan's instruments, who are al for casting down.
he labors to work by his instruments, who are all for casting down of those
who stand in their light, as those in the Psalm who cry, down with him, down
with him, even to the ground; a character and stamp of which men's dispositions,
we have in the verse before this text, Mine enemies (says David) reproach me.
As sweet and as compassionate a man as he was, to pray and put on sackcleth
Psa. 35. 13.
for them, yet he had enemies, and such enemies, as did not suffer their malice
only to boil and concoct in their own breasts, but out of the abundance of
their hearts, they reproached him in words. There is nothing the nature of man
is more impatient of, then of reproaches; for there is no man so mean, but
thinks himself worthy of some regard, and a reproachful scorn shows an utter
disrespect, which issues from the very superfluity of malice.

Neither went they behind his back, but were so impudent to say it to his face:
a malicious heart and a slandering tongue go together, and though shame might
have suppressed the uttering of such words, yet their insolent carriage spoke as
much in David's Psalm. 39. 1.
heart: We may see by the language of men's carriage what their heart says, and
what their tongue would vent, if they dared.

And this their malice was unwearied, for they said daily unto him, as if it
had been fed with a continual spring: malice is an unsatiable monster, it
will minister words, as rage ministers weapons. But what was that they said so
reproachfully? and said daily? Where is verse 3.
now thy God? they upbraid him with his singularity, they say not now, where is
God? but, where is thy God, that thou do boast so much on? as if thou had
some special interest in Him. Where we see that the scope of the devil and
wicked men is to shake the godlies Faith and confidence in their God. As Satan
labored to divide betwixt Christ and his Father. If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread. So he labors to Mat. 4.
divide betwixt Father, and Son, and us; they labor to bring God in jealousy
with David, as if God had neglected him, bearing himself so much upon God.
They had some color of this, for God at this time had veiled himself from
David, as he does often from his best children for the better discovery of the
malice of wicked men: And This was preached in the beginning of the troubles of
the Church.
does not Satan tippe the tongues of the enemies of Religion now, to insult
over the Church now lying a bleeding? What becomes of their Reformation, of
their Gospel? Nay, rather what is become of your eyes, we may say unto them? For
God is nearest to his children when he seems furthest off. In the mount of
the Lord it shall be seen, God is Genesis 22. 14.
with them and in them, though the wicked be not aware of it; it is all one, as
if one should say betwixt the space of the new and old Moon, where is now the
Moon? when as it is never nearer the Sun then at that time.

Where is now thy God? Quest.


Answ. In heaven, in earth, in me, every where but in the heart of such as ask
such questions, and yet there they shall find him too in his time, filling
their consciences with his wrath; and then, Where is their God? where are their
great friends, their riches, their honors, which they set up as a god? what can
they avail them now?

But how was David affected with these reproaches? their words were as swords,
as with a sword in my bones, etc. they spoke daggers to him, they cut Verse. 10
him to the quick when they touched him in his God, as if he had neglected his
servants, when as the devil himself regards those who serve his turn; touch a
true godly man in his Religion, and you touch his life and his best freehold,
he lives more in his God then in himself; so that we may see here, there is a
murder of the tongue, a wounding tongue as well as a healing tongue: men think
themselves freed from murder, A murder of the tongue.
if they kill none, or if they shed no blood, whereas they cut others to the
heart with bitter words. It is good to extend the Commandment to awake the
conscience the more, and breed humility, when men see there is a murdering of
the tongue. We see David therefore upon this reproach to be presently so
moved, as to fall out with himself for it, Why art thou so cast down and
disquieted o my soul? This bitter taunt ran so much in his mind, that he
expresses it twice in this Psalm; He was sensible that they struck at God,
through his sides; what they spoke in scorn and lightly, he took heavily.
And indeed, when religion suffers, if there be any heavenly fire in the heart,
it will rather break out, then not discover it self at all. We see by daily
experience, that there is a special force in words uttered from a subtle head,
a false heart, and a smooth tongue, to weaken the hearts of professors, by
bringing an evil report upon the strict profession of religion: as the cunning
and false spies did upon the good land, as if it were not only in vain, but
dangerous 1 Judge. 24.
to appear for Christ in evil times. If the example of such as have saint
spirits will discourage in an army (as we see in Gideons History) then Judges
7.
what will speech enforced both by example and with some show of reason do?

To let others pass, we need not go further then our selves, for to find
causes of discouragement, there is a seminary 4. Discouragement comes from our
selves.
of them within us. Our flesh, an enemy so much the worse, by how much the
nearer, will be ready to upbraide us within us, where is now thy God? why
should thou stand out in a profession that finds no better entertainment?

CAP. III.
Of discouragements from within.

BUt to come to some particular causes within us.

There is cause often in the body of those in whom a melancholy temper
prevails; darkness makes men fearful: Melancholy persons are in a
perpetual darkness, all things seem black and dark unto them, their
spirits as it were dyed black. Now to him that is in darkness, all things
seem black and dark, the sweetest comforts are not lightsome enough unto those
that are deep in melancholy. It is (without great watchfulness) Satan's bath;
which he abuses as his own weapon to hurt the soul, which by reason of its
sympahy with the body is subject to be missed, as we see where Simile
there is a suffusion of the eye by reason of distemper of humors, or where
things are presented through a glass to the eye; things seem to be of the
same color: so, whatsoever is presented to a melancholy person, comes in a
dark way to the soul. From whence it is that their fancy being corrupted,
they 5. A deluded fancy causes disquietnesse.
judge amiss, even of outward things, as that they are sick of such and such
a disease, or subject to such and such a danger, when it is nothing so; how fit
are they then to judge of things removed from sense, as of their spiritual
estate in Christ?

To come to causes more near the 2.
soul it self, as when there is want of that which should be in it, as of
knowledge Causes privative, of discouragement in our selves.
in the understanding; etc. Ignorance (being darkness) is full of false
fears; In the night time men think every bush a thief; our forefathers in 1.
Ignorance in the understanding.
time of ignorance were frighted with every thing, therefore it is the policy
of popish tyrants taught them from the prince of darkness, to keep the people
in darkness, that so they might make them fearful, and then abuse that
fearfulness to superstition: that they might the better rule in their
consciences for their own ends; and that so having entangled them with false
fears, they might heal them again with false cures.

Again, though the soul be not ignorant, 2. Forgetfulness causes
discouragement.
yet if it be forgetful and mindlesse, if, as Heb. 12. the Apostle says, You
have forgot the consolation that speaks unto you, etc. We have no more present
actual comfort, then we have remembrance: help a godly man's memory, and help
his comfort, like unto charcoale which having once been kindled, are the more
easy to take fire. He that has formerly known things, takes ready
acquaintance of them again (as old friends:) things are not strange to him.

And further, want of setting due price upon comforts; as the Israelites were
taxed 3. Not duly prizing of comforts.
for setting nothing by the pleasant land. It is a great fault, when (as they
said to Job) the consolations of the Almighty seem light, and small unto us,
unless Job 15. 11
we have some outward comfort which we linger after.

Add unto this, a childish kind of peevishness, when they have not what 4. A
childish peevishnes.
they would have (like children) they throw away al; which (though it be very
offensive to Gods spirit) yet it seazeth often upon men otherwise gracious.
Abraham himself (wanting children) undervalued all other blessings Genesis 16.
Jonas, because he was crossed of his gourd, was weary of his life. The like
may be said of Elias, flying from Iezebel. This peevishness is increased by a
1 Kings
too much flattering of their grief, (...) far as to justify it. Like
Jonas, I d^ well to be angry even unto death, he would stand to it. Some with
Rachel are so peremptory, Jonah 4. 9.
that they will not be comforted, as if they were in love with their Ier 31. 15.
grievances. Wilful men are most vexed in their crosses: It is not for those
to be wilful that have not a great measure of wisdom to guide their wills;
for God delights to have his will of those that are wedded to their own wills:
as in Pharaob. No men more subject to discontentments, then those who would
have all things after their own way.

Again, one maine ground is, False 5. False reasoning, erroneous discourse.
reasoning, and error in our discourse, as that we have no grace when we
feel none, feeling is not always a fit rule to judge our states by; that God
has rejected us, because we are crossed in outward things, when as this issues
from Gods wisdom and love. How many imagine their failings, to be fallings,
and their fallings, to be fallings away? Infirmities to be Presumptions: every
sin against Conscience, to be the sin against the Holy Ghost^? unto which
misapprehensions, weak and dark spirits are subject. And Satan (as a cunning
Rhetorician) here inlargeth A double cunning of Satan, according to the humor
of his patients.
the fancy, to apprehend things bigger then they are, Satan abuses confident
spirits another contrary way: to apprehend great sins as little; and little
as none. Some also, think that they have no grace, because they have not so
much as grown Christians: whereas, there be several ages in Christ. Some
again, are so desirous and enlarged after what they have not, that they mind
not what they have. Men may be rich, though they have not millions, and be not
Emperors.

Likewise, some are much troubled, because they proceed by a false method 6. A
falls method and order in judging of our estates
and order in judging of their estates. They will begin with Election, which is
the highest step of the ladder, whereas they should begin from (...) work of
grace wrought within their hearts, from Gods calling them by hi^ spirit, and
their answer to his call, and so raise themselves upwards to know their
Election by their answer to God calling. Give all diligence says Peter to make
your calling and election sure: 2 Pet. 1.
your election by your calling. God descends down unto us from election to
calling, and so to sanctification: we must ascend to him beginning where he
ends. Otherwise it is as great folly as in removing of a pile of wood, to begin
at the lowest first, and so (besides the needless trouble,) to be in danger to
have the rest fall upon our heads. Which besides ignorance argues pride,
appearing in this, that they would bring God to their conceits, and be at an
end of their work before they begin.

This great secret of Gods eternal love to us in Christ, is hidden in his
breast, and does not appear to us, un till in the use of means God by his
spirit discovers the same unto us; The spirit lets into the soul so much
life and sense of Gods love in particular to us, as draws the soul to
Christ, from whom it draws so much virtue as changes the frame of it, and
quickneth it to duty, which duties are not grounds of our state in grace, but
issues, springing from a good state before, and thus far they help us, in
judging of our condition, that thoug^ they be not to be rested in, yet a^
streams they lead us to the spring head of grace from whence they arise.

And of signs, some be more apt to deceive us, as being not so certain, as
delight and joy in hearing the word, as appears in the third ground: some are
Mat. 13. 20
more constant and certain, as love to those that are truly good, and to all
such, and because they are such, etc. these as they are wrought by the spirit,
so the same spirit gives evidence to the soul of the truth of them, and
leads us to faith from whence they come, and faith leads us to the discovery
of Gods love made known to us inhearing the word opened. The same spirit
opens the truth to us, and our understandings to conceive of it, and our
hearts to cloze with it by faith, not only as a truth, but as a truth belonging
to us.

Now this faith is manifested, either by it self reflecting upon it self the
light of faith discovering both it self, and other things, or by the cause of
it, or by the effect, or by all; Faith is often more known to us in the fruit of
it, then in it self, as in plants the fruits are more apparent then the sap
and root. But the most settled knowledge is from the cause, as when I know I
believe, because in hearing Gods gracious promises opened and offered unto me,
the spirit of God caryeth my soul to cleave to them as mine own portion. Ephesians.
1. 13.
Yet the most familiar way of knowledge of our estates is from the effects to
gather the cause, the cause being oftentimes more remote and spiritual, the
effects more obvious and visible. All the vigor and beauty in nature which we
see, comes from a secret influence from the heavens which we see not; In a
clear morning we may see the beams of the Sun shining upon the top of hills
and houses before we can see the Sun it self.

Things in the working of them, do issue from the cause, by whose force they
had their being; but our knowing of things arises from the effect, where the
cause ends; we know God must love us before we can love him, and yet we often
first know that we love him; the love of God is the cause why we 1 John 4. 19.
love our brother, and yet we know we love our brother whom we see more
clearly, then God whom we do not see. 1 John 4. 20.


It is a spiritual peevishness that keeps men in a perplexed condition, that
they neglect these helps to judge of their estates by, whereas God takes
liberty to help us sometime to a discovery of our estate by the effects,
sometimes by the cause, etc. And it is a sin to set light by any work of the
spirit, and the comfort we might have by it, and therefore we may well add
this, a^ one cause of disquietnesse in many, that they grieve the spirit, by
quarrelling against themselves, and the work of the spirit in them.

Another cause of disquiet is, the men by a natural kind of Popery fe^
Comfort sought in sanctification.
for their comfort too much in sanctification, neglecting justification,
relyin^ too much upon their own performances; Saint Paul was of another mind,
accounting all but dung and dross, compared Phillip. 3.
to the righteousness of Christ. This is that garment, wherewith being deeked
we please our husband, and wherein we get the blessing. This gives
satisfaction to the conscience, as satisfying God himself, being performed by
God the Son, and approved therefore by God the Father; Hereupon the soul is
quieted, and faith holds out this as a shield against the displeasure of God
and temptations of Satan: why did the Apostles in their Prefaces join grace
and peace together, but that we should seek for our peace in the free grace and
favor of God in Christ.

No wonder why Papists maintain doubting, who hold salvation by works;
because Satan joining together with our consciences, will always find some
flaw even in our best performances; Hereupon the doubting and misgiving soul
comes to make this absurd demand, as, Who shall ascend to heaven? Psalm. 24. 3.
which is all one as to fetch Christ from heaven, and so bring him down to
suffer on the Cross again. Where as if we believe in Christ, we are as sure
to come to heaven as Christ is there: Christ ascending and descending with all
that he has done is ours. So that neither height nor depth can separate us
from Gods love in Christ. Romans 8. 39


But we must remember, though the maine pillar of our comfort be in the To
have and maintain true comfort, we must grow up holiness.
free forgiveness of our sins; yet if there be a neglect in growing in
holiness, the soul will never be soundly quiet, because it will be proane to
question the truth of justification, and it is as proper for sin to raise
doubts and fears in the conscience, as for rotten flesh and wood to breed
worms. And therefore we may well join this as a 8. Want of a clear
conscience raises tumults in the soul.
cause of disquietnesse, the neglect of keeping a clear conscience. Sin,
like Achan, or Jonas in the ship, is that which causes storms within and
without; where there is not a pure conscience there is not a pacified
conscience, and therefore though some thinking to salve themselves whole in
justification, neglect the cleansing of their natures; and ordering of their
lives: yet in time of temptation, they will find it more troublesome then they
think. For a conscience guilty of many neglects and of allowing it self in
any sin to lay claim to Gods mercy, is to do as we see mountebanks sometimes
do, who wound their flesh to try conclusions upon their own bodies how
sovereign the salve is; yet oftentimes they come to feel the smart of their
presumption, by long and desperate wounds. So God will let us see what it is to
make wounds to try the preciousnesse of his Balm, such may go mourning to
their graves. And though (perhaps) with much wrestling with God, they may get
assurance of the pardon of their sins, yet their conscience will be still
trembling (like as David's though Nathan had pronounced unto Psalm. 51.
him the forgiveness of his sin) till God at length speaks further peace,
even as the water of the sea (after a storm) is not presently still, but moves
and trembles a good while after the storm is over. A Christian is a new
creature, and walks by rule, and so far as he walks according to his rule
peace is upon him. Loose walkers that regard not Gal. 6. 16.
their way, must think to meet with sorrows instead of peace. Watchfulness is
the preserver of peace. It is a deep spiritual judgment to find peace in an
ill way.

Some again, reap the fruit of their Ignorance of our Christian liberty.
ignorance of Christian liberty, by unnecessary scruples and doubts. It is both
unthankfulness to God, and wrong to our selves, to be ignorant of the extent
of Christian liberty; It makes melody to Satan, to see Christians troubled with
that Danger of abusing Christian liberty.
they neither should or need. Yet there is danger in stretching Christian
liberty beyond the bounds. For a man may condemn himself in that he approves,
as in not walking circumspectly in regard of circumstances, and so breed his
own disquiet, and give scandal to others.

Sometimes also, God suffers men to 10. Want of employment.
be disquieted for want of employment, who in shunning labor, procure trouble
to themselves; and by not doing that which is needful, they are troubled with
that which is unnecessary. An unimployed life is a burden to it self. God is a
pure Act, always working, always doing: and the nearer our soul comes to
God, the more it is in action, and the freer from disquiet. Men experimentally
feel that comfort in doing that which belongs unto them, which before they
longed for, and went without; a heart not exercised in some honest labor
works trouble out of it self.

Again, Omission of duties and offices 11. Omission of offices and duties of
love.
of love, often troubles the peace of good people; for even in the time of
death when they look for peace and desire it most, then looking back upon
their former failings and seeing opportunity of doing good wanting to their
desire; (the parties perhaps being deceased to whom they owed more respect) are
hereupon much disquieted, and so much the more, because they see now hope of
the like advantages cut off.

A Christian life is full of duties, and the peace of it is not maintained
without much fruitfulness and looking about us: debt is a disquieting thing to
an honest mind, and duty is debt. Hereupon Romans 13 8
the Apostle lays the charge, that we should owe nothing to any man, but love.

Again, one special cause of too 12. Want of resolution in good things.
much disquiet, is, want of firm resolution in good things. The soul cannot
but be disquieted when it knows not what to cleave unto, like a ship tossed
with contrary winds; Halting is a deformed and troublesome gesture; so halting
in religion, is not only troublesome 1 Kings 18. 21.
to others and odious, but also disquiets our selves. If God be God cleave to
him; If the duties of religion be such as will bring peace of conscience at the
length, be religious to purpose, practice them in the particular passages of
life. We should labor to have a clear judgment, and from thence a resolved
purpose; a wavering minded man is inconstant in all his ways. God will James
1. 6.
not speak peace to a staggering spirit that has always its religion, and
its way to choose. Uncertain men are always unquiet men, and giving too much
way to passion makes men in particular consultations unsettled. This is the
reason why in particular cases when the matter concerns our selves, we cannot
judge so clearly as in general truths, because Satan raises a mist between
us and the matter in question. Positive Causes.


May be, 1. When men lay up their When me^ lay up too much comfort in outward
things.
comfort too much on outward things which being subject to much inconstancy and
change, breed disquiet. Vexation always follows vanity, when vanity is not
apprehended to be where it is. In that measure we are cast down in the
disappointing of our hopes, as we were too much lifted up in expectation of
good from them. Whence proceed these complaints; such a friend has failed me:
I never thought to have fallen into this condition; I had settled my joy in this
child, in this friend, etc. but this is to build our comfort upon things that
have no firm foundation, to build castles in the air (as we use to say.)
Therefore it is a good desire of the wiseman Agur, to desire God, to remove
from us vanity and Prove. 30.
lies, that is, a vain and a false apprehension pitching upon things that are
vain and lying, promising a contentment to our selves from the creature, which
it cannot yield; confidence in vain things makes a vain heart, the heart
becoming of the nature of the thing it relies on; we may say of all earthly
things as the Prophet speaks, Here is not our rest. Mich. 2. 10


It is no wonder therefore, that worldly men are often cast down and disquieted,
when they walk in a vain shadow, Psalm. 39.
as likewise that men given much to recreations should be subject to passionate
distempers, because here things fall out otherwise then they looked for^
recreations being about matters that are variable, which especially falls ou^ in
games of hazard, wherein they of^ spare not Divine Providence it self, but
break out into blasphemy.

Likewise men that graspe more businesses then they can discharge, must needs
bear both the blame and the grief of losing or marring many businesses. It
being almost impossible to do many things so well as to give content to
Conscience; Hence it is that covetous and busy men trouble both their hearts
and their houses; though some men from a largeness of parts, and a special
dexterity in affairs may turn over much; yet the most capacious heart has
its measure, and when the cup is full, a little drop may cause the rest to
spill. There is a spiritual surfeit, when the soul is overcharged with
business; it is fit the soul should have its meet burden and no more.

As likewise, those that depend too much upon the opinions of other men; 2. Too
much relying upon the opinions of others. Sic leve sic parvum est animum quod
laudis avarum, subruit aut reficit.
A very light matter will refresh, and then again discourage a mind that
rests too much upon the liking of others. Men that seek themselves too much
abroad, find themselves disquieted at home; even good men many times are too
much troubled with the unjust censures of other men, specially in the day of
their trouble: It was Iob^ case; and it is a heavy thing to have affliction Job.
added to affliction: It was Hannahs case, who being troubled in spirit, 1 Samuel
1. 14.
was censured by Eli, for distemper i^ brain; but for vain men who live mo^ to
reputation then to conscience, i^ cannot be that they should long enjoy settled
quiet, because those in who^ good opinion they desire to dwell a^ ready often
to take up contrary conceits upon slender grounds.

It is also a ground of overmuch trouble, when we look too much and toolong 3.
Too much looking and poring on evils, in our selves and abroad.
upon the ill in our selves and abroad; we may fix our eyes too long even upon
sin it self; considering that we have not only a remedy against the hurt by
sin, but a commandment to rejoice always in the Lord Much more may we err
in poring toomuch Philip. 4. 4
upon our afflictions; wherein we may find always in our selves upon search a
cause to justify God, and always something left to comfort us: Though we
naturally mind more (...) cross then a hundred favors, dwelling overlong
upon the sore.

So likewise, our minds may be too much taken up in consideration of the
miseries of the times at home and abroad, as if Christ did not rule in the
midst of his enemies; and would not help all in due time, or as if the
condition of the Church in this world, were not for the most part in an
afflicted and conflicting condition. Indeed there is a perfect rest both for
the souls and bodies of Gods people, but that is not in this world, but is
kept for hereafter, here we are in a sea, where what can we look for, but
storms?

To insist upon no more, one cause is, that we do usurp upon God, and take
his office upon us, by troubling our selves in forecasting the event of things,
whereas our work is only to do our work and be quiet, as children when they
please their parents take no further thought; our trouble is the fruit of our
folly in this kind.

That which we should observe from Use 1.
all that has been sa^ is, that we be not overhasty in consuring others,
when we see their spirits out of temper, for we see how many things there are
that work strongly upon the weak nature of man. We may sin more by harsh
censure, then they by overmuch distemper: as in Jobs case, it was a matter
rather of just grief and pity, then great wonder or heavy censure.

And, for our selves: If our estate be calm for the present, yet we should
Use 2.
labor to prepare our hearts, not only for an alteration of estate, but of
spirit, unless we be mavelous careful before hand, that our spirits fall
not down with our Condition. And if it befalls us to find it otherwise with our
souls then at other times, we should so far labor to bear it, as that we
do not judge it our own case alone, when we see here David thus to complain
of himself, Why art thou cast down o my soul, etc.

CAP. IV.
Of casting down our selves. And specially by sorrow. Evils thereof.

TO return again to the words, Why art thou cast down o my soul, etc. or,
why do thou cast down thy self? or, art cast down by thy self? Whence we
may Obser. 1.
further observe, That we are prone to cast down our selves, we are
accessory to our own trouble, and weave the web of our own sorrow, and hamper
our selves in the coards of our own twining. God neither loves nor wills that
we should be too much cast down. We see our Savior Christ how careful he
was that his Disciples should not be troubled, and therefore he labors to
prevent that trouble which might arise by his suffering and departure from
them, by a heavenly sermon; Let not your hearts be troubled, etc. He was
troubled himself that we should Joh. 14. 1.
not be troubled: The ground therefore of our disquiet is chiefly from our
selves, though Satan will have a hand in it. We see many like sullen birds in a
cage beat themselves to death. This casting down of our selves, is not from
humility, but from Pride, we must have our will, or God shall not have a good
look from us, but as pertish and peevish children, we hang our heads in our
bosom, because our w^ are crossed.

Therefore in all our troubles we Use.
should look first home to our own hearts, and stop the storm there; for we
may thank our own selves, not only for our troubles, but likewise for
overmuch troubling ourselves in trouble. It was not the troubled condition that
so disquieted David's soul, for if he had had a quiet mind, it would not have
troubled him. But Davis yielded to the discouragements of the flesh, and the
flesh (so far as it is unsubdued) is like the sea that is always casting
mire and dirt of doubts, discouragements and murmurings in the soul; let us
therefore lay the blame where it is to be laid.

Again, we see, it is the nature of sorrow to cast down, as of joy to lift
up. Obser. 2.
Grief is like lead to the soul, heavy and cold; it sinks downwards, and
carries the soul with it. The poor Publican to show that his soul was cast
Luk 18. 13
down under the sight of his sins, hung down his head, the position of his
body was suitable to the disposition of his mind, his heart and head were cast
down alike; And it is Satan's practice to go over the hedge where it is
lowest: he adds more weights to the soul, by his tentations and vexations.
His sin cast him out of heaven, and by his temptations, he cast us out of
our Paradise, and ever since, he labors to cast us deeper into sin, wherein
his scope is, to cast us either into too much trouble for sin, or presumption
in sin, which is but a lifting up, to cast us down into deep despair at
length, and so at last (if Gods mercy stop not his malice) he will cast us as
low as himself, even into hell it self. Reason. How sorrow does weaken the
soul.


The ground hereof is, because as the joy of the Lord does strengthen, so does
sorrow weaken the soul. How does i^ weaken?

1. By weakening the execution o^ the functions thereof, because it drinks 1.
up the spirits, which are the instruments of the soul.

2. Because it contracteth, and draws the soul into it self from comm^nion
2.
of that comfort it might ha^ with God or man. And then the soul being left
alone, if it falls, has no^ to raise it up. Eccles. 4. 10


Therefore, if we will prevent casting Use. How to prevent casting down.
down, let us prevent grief the cause of it, and sin the cause of the
Experience proves that true which the Wiseman says, Heaviness in the he^ of a
man makes it stoop, but a good (...) Pro. 12. 25.
makes it better. It bows down the soul, and therefore our blessed Sav^ our
inviteth such unto him; Come (...) me ye who are heavy laden with the b^den
of your sins. The body bends under Matt. 11.
a heavy burden, so likewise t^ soul has its burden. Why art thou c^ down o
my soul? Why so disquiet^ etc.

Whence, we see 1. that casting down breeds disquieting: Because it Obser. 1.
springs from pride, which is a turbulent Passion, when as men cannot stoop to
Reason.
that condition which God would have them in; this proceeds from
coffeehouse, and that from pride. As we see, a vapor enclosed in a cloud
causes a terrible noise of thunder, whilst it is pent up there, and seeks a
vent; So all the noise within proceeds from a discontented swelling vapor. It
is air enclosed in the bowels of the earth which shakes it, which all the
four winds cannot do.

No creature under heaven so low cast down as Satan, none more lifted up in
pride, none so full of discord; the impurest spirits are the most disquiet and
stormy spirits, troublesome to themselves and others; for when the soul leaves
GOD once, and looks downwards, what is there to stay it from disquiet;
remoove the needle from the pole star, and it is always stirring and
trembling, never quiet till it be right again. So displace the soul by taking
it from God, and it will never be quiet. The devil cast out of heaven and out
of the Church, keeps a do, so do unruly spirits led by him.

Now I come to the Remedies, Remedies against casting down and disquieting


1. By expostulation with himself. 2. By laying a charge on himself, (trust
in God.)
It is supposed here, that there is no reason (which the wisdom from above
allows to be a reason) why men should be discouraged, although the wisdom
from beneath which takes part with our corruption will seldom want a plea. Nay
there is not only no reason for it, but there are strong Reasons against
discouragement.
reasons against it, there being a world of evil in it.

For, 1. It indisposes a man to all good duties, it makes him like an
instrument 1. It indisposes to all good duties.
out of tune, and like a body out of joint, that moves both uncomly and
painfully. It unfits to duties to God, who loves a cheerful giver, and
especially a thanksgiver. Whereup^ the Apostle joines them both together in all
things be thankful, and rejoice evermore. In our communion with God in 1 Thessalonians. 5.
the Sacraments, joy is a chief ingredient. So in duties to men, if the spirit
be dejected, they are unwelcome, and lose the greatest part of their life and
grace; A cheerful and a free spirit in duty is that which is most accepted in
duty. We observe not so much what, as from what affection a thing is done.

2. It is a great wrong to God himself, 2. It Wrongs God, making us think
amiss of him.
and it makes us conceive black thoughts of him, as if He were an enemy. What
an injury is it to a gracious father, that such whom he has followed with many
gracious evidences of his favor and love, should be in so ill a frame, as once
to call it into question?

3. So, it makes a man forgetful of 3. It makes a manforget former blessings,
etc.
all former blessings, and stops the influence of Gods grace, for the time
present, and for that to come.

4. So again, For receiving of good: It makes us unfit to receive mercies; a
4. It makes us unfit to receive good.
quiet soul is the seat of wisdom. Therefore, Meekness is required for the
receiving of that ingrafted word which i^ able to save our souls. Till the
Spirit o^ James 1. 21.
God meekens the soul, (say what yo^ will) it minds nothing, the soul i^ not
empty and quiet enough to receive the seed of the word. It is ill sowing i^ a
storm, so a stormy spirit will no^ suffer the word to take place, Men (...)
deceived when they think a dejected spi^ to be an humble spirit. Indeed it is
so when we are cast down in the sens^ of our own unworthiness, and then as
much raised up in the confidence o^ Gods mercy. But when we cast o^ selves
down sullenly, and neglect ou^ comforts, or undervalue them, it proceeds from
pride, for it controules (a^ much as in us lies) the wisdom and justice of
God, when we think with our selves, why should it be so with us* as if we were
wiser to dispose of ourselves then God is. It disposes us for entertaining any
temptation. Satan has never more advantage then upon 5. It hinders beginners
coming into Gods ways.
discontent.

5. Besides, it keeps off beginne^ from coming in, and entering into the ways
of God, bringing an ill report upon religion, causing men to charge it falsely
for an unco^fortable way, whenas men never feel what true comfort means,
till they give up themselves to God. And it dampes likewise the spirits of
those that walk the same way with us, when as we should (as good travelers)
cheer up one another both by word and example. In such a case, the wheels of
the soul are taken off, or else, (as it were) want oil, whereby the soul
passes on very heavily and no good action comes off from it as it should,
which breeds not only uncomfortablenesse, but unsettlednesse in good courses.
For a man will never go on comfortably and constantly in that which he heavily
undertakes. That's the reason why uncheerefull spirits seldom hold out as they
should. Saint Peter knew this well, and therefore he wills that there should
be quietness and peace betwixt husband and wife, that their prayers be not
hindered; Insinuating 1 Pet. 3.
that their prayers are hindered by family breaches. For by that means, those
two (that should be one flesh and spirit) are divided, and so made two, and
when they should mind duty, their mind is taken up with wrongs done by the
one to the other.

There is nothing more required for the performing of holy duties then uniting
of spirits, and therefore God would not have the sacrifice brought to the
altar, before reconciliation with Mat. 5. 24.
our brother. He esteems peace so highly, that he will have his own service
stay for it. We see when Moses came to Exodus 9.
deliver the Israelites out of bondage, their mind was so taken up with their
grief, that there was no body within to give Moses an answer, their souls
went altogether after their ill usage.

Therefore we should all endeavor Use.
and labor for a calmed spirit, that we may the better serve God in praying to
him, and praising of him; and serve one another in love, that we may be fitted
to do and receive good: that we may make our passage to heaven more easy and
cheerful, without drooping and hanging the wing. So much as we are quiet and
cheerful upon good grounds, so much we live, and are as it were in heaven. So
much as we yield to discouragement, we lose so much of our life and happiness,
cheerfulness being (as it were) that life of our lives, and the spirit of our
spirits by which they are more enlarged to receive happiness and to express
it.

CAP. V.
Remedies of casting down: To cite the soul: and press it to give an account.

BUt to come to some helps.

First, in that he expostulates with himself, we may observe, that, One way
to raise a dejected soul is, to cite it before it self, and as it were to
reason Obser. 1.
the case. God has set up a court in man's heart, wherein, the conscience has
the office, both of Informer, accuser, witness, and judge; And if matters The
court of conscience in man.
were well carried within our selves, this prejudging would be a prevention of
future judging. It is a great mercy of God, that the credit and comfort of man
are so provided for, that he may take up matters in himself, and so prevent
public disgrace. But if there be not a fair dispatch and transaction in this
inferior court within us, there will be a review in a higher court. Therefore
by slubbering over our matters, Judgment must pass first or last without or
within upon us.
we put God and our selves to more trouble then needs. For a judgment must
pass first, or last, either within us or without us, upon all unwarrantable
distempers. We must not only be ready to give an account of our faith, upon
what Grounds we believe, but of all our actions, upon what grounds we do what
we do, and of our Passions, upon what ground we are passionate, as in a well
governed state, uprore and sedition is never stirred, but account must be
given. Now in a mutiny the presence and speech of a venerable man, composeth
the minds of the disordered multitude, so likewise in a mutiny of the spirit,
the authority that God has put into reason (as a beam of himself) commands
silence, and puts all in order again.

And there is good reason for it, for man is an understanding creature, and
Reason
has a rule given him to live by, and therefore is to be countable of every
thought, word, action, passion. Therefore the first way to quiet the soul, is,
to Distempers fall down, when they are arraigned before Reason.
ask a reason of the tumult raised, and then many of our distempers for shame
will not appear, because (though they rage in silent darkness) yet they can
say nothing for themselves, being summoned before strength of judgment and
reason. Which is the reason why passionate men are loath that any court should
be kept within them; but labor to stop judgment all they can. If men would
but give themselves leave to Want of consideration, raises and maintains our
distempers
consider better of it, they would never yield to such unreasonable motions of
the soul: If they could but gain so much of their unruly passions, as to
reason the matter within themselves, to hear what their consciences can tell
them in secret, there would not be such offensive breakings out. And therefore,
if we be ashamed to hear others upbraidingus, let us for shame hear our
selves; And if no reason can be given, what an unreasonable thing is it for a
man endowed with reason to contrary his own principles? and to be carried as a
beast without reason; or if there be In discouragement, we cross our own
principles.
any reason to be given, then, this is the way to scanne it, see whether it
will hold water or not. We shall find some reasons (if they may be so called)
to be so corrupt and foul, that (if the judgment be not corrupted by them)
they dare not be brought to light, but always appear under some color and
pretext, for sin (like the devil) is afraid to appear in its own likeness,
and men seek out fair glosses, for foul intentions. The hidden secret reason
is one, the open is another: the heart being corrupt sets the wit a work, to
Corruption of the heart sets the wit a work. 1 King. 22
satisfy corrupt will; such kind of men are afraid of their own consciences
(as Ahab of Michaiah) because they fear it would deal truly with them: and
therefore they take either present order for their consciences, or else (as
Felix put off Paul) they adjorne the Acts 24. 25
court for another time. Such men are strangers at home, afraid of nothing more
then of themselves, and therefore in a fearful condition, because they are
reserved for the judgment of the great day, if God does not before that set
upon them in this world. If men carried away with their own lusts, would give
but a little check, and stop themselves in their posting to hell, and ask,
What have I done? What am I now The souls expostulation.
about? Whither will this course tend? How will it end? etc. Undoubtedly men
would begin to be wise; Would the blasphemer give away his soul for nothing
(for there is no engagement of profit or pleasure in this, as in other sins,
but it issues merely out of irreverence, Blaspheming whence.
and a superfluity of profaneness;) would he (I say) draw so heavy a guilt upon
himself for nothing, if he would but make use of his reason? Would an old man
(when he is very near his journies end) make longer provision for a short way
if he would ask himself a Reason? But indeed Covetousness is an unreasonable
vice.

If those also of the younger sort, would ask of themselves, Why God should
(...) A lesson for young men.
have the flower and marrow of their age^ and why they should give their
strength t^ the devil? It might a little take them off from the devils
service. But sin^ is a work of darkness, and therefore shunnes not only the
light of grace, b^ even the light of reason. Yet sin s^dome wants a seeming
reason, Men wi^ not go to hell without a show of reason. B^ Sin is
unreasonable so much the more, as without reason, it pretends reasons.
such be sophistical fallacies, not reasons; and therefore sinners are said to
play the sophisters with themselv^ Satan could not deceive us, unless we
deceived our selves first, and are willingly deceived: wilful sinners are
blind, because they put out the light of reason and so think God (like
themselves) blind too; and therefore they are deservedly Psalm. 50.
termed mad men and fools for, did they but make use of that spa^ of reason,
it would teach them to reason thus; I cannot give an account of (...) ways to
my self: what account shall I, (...) can I give then, to the judge of all
flesh (...) it be long?

And as it is a ground of repentance in stopping our course to ask what have I
done? So likewise of faith and new obedience, to ask what shall I do for the
time to come? and then upon settling, the soul in way of thanks, will be ready
to ask of it self, What shall I return to the Lord? etc. So that the soul
by this dealing with it self promoteth it self to all holy duties till it
come to heaven.

The reason why we are thus backward Reas. 1. Why we are so backward to keep
court in our selves. Proverbs
to the keeping of this court in our selves, is self-love: we love to flatter
our own affections, but this self-love, is but selfe-hatred in the end; (as
the wiseman says) he that regards not this part of wisdom, hates his own
soul, and shall eat the fruits of his own ways.

2. As likewise it issues from an irksomeness 2. Irksomenesse of labor.
of labor, which makes us rather willing to seem base and vile to our selves
and others, then to take pains with our own hearts to be better, as those
that are weary of holding the reins, give them up unto the horse neck, and so
are driven whither the rage of the horse caryeth them: sparing a little trouble
at first, doubles it in the end, as he who will not take the pains to cast up
his books, his books will cast up him in the end. It is a blessed trouble
that brings sound and long peace: The 1 Cor. 11. 31.
labor saves God a labor, for therefore he judges us, because we would not
take pains with our selves before.

3. And Pride also, with a desire of liberty, makes men think it to be a
diminishing 3. Pride.
of greatness and freedom, either to be curbed, or to curb o^ selves: We
love to be absolute, and independent; but this, as it brought rui^ upon our
nature in Adam; so it will upon our persons. Men (as Luther w^ wont to say) are
borne with a Pope i^ their belly, they are loath to give (...) account,
although it be to themselves their wills are instead of a kingdom (...) Men's
mihi pro regne.
them.

Let us therefore (when any lawle^ passions begin to stir) deal with o^ souls
as God did with Jonah; Do the well to be angry? to fret thus? This w^ Jonah
4.
be a means to make us quiet. For, al^ what weak reasons have we often of
strong motions; such a man gave me no respect, such another looked more kindly
upon another man then upon me, etc. You have some of Hamans spirit, Esther 5.
that for a little neglect, would ruin a whole nation. Passion presents Fa^it
ira nocentes.
men that are innocent as guilty to us, and because we will not seem to be
mad without reason, Pride commands the wit, to justify anger, and so one
Passion maintains and feeds another.

Neither is it sufficient to cite the soul Obser. 2.
before it self; but, it must be pressed to give an account, as we see here,
David doubles, and trebles the expostulation; as often as any distemper did
arise, so often did he labor to keep it down. If passions grow too insolent,
Elies mildness will do no good. It would prevent 1 Samuel 2. 24.
much trouble in this kind, to subdue betimes (in our selves and others) the
first beginnings of any unruly passions and affections; which (if they be not
well tutord and disciplined at the first) prove as headstrong, unruly and ill
nurtured, children, who (being not chastened in time) take such a head, the it
is (often) above the power of paren^ to bring them in order. A child set (...)
liberty (says Solomon) breeds shame ((...) length) to his parents. Adonizeths
example Pro. 29. 15.
shows this. The like may be sa^ of the affections set at liberty; It is
dangerous to redeem a little quiet by yielding to our affections which is
never safely gotten but by mortificatio^ of them.

Those that are in great place, (...) most in danger, by yielding to
themselves, to loose themselves; for they (...) so taken up with the person for
a ti^ put upon them, that they, both in lo^ and speech, and carriage, often she
that they forget both their natu^ condition as men, and much more the
supernatural as Christians; and the^ fore are scarce counsellable by oth^ or
themselves, in those things that concern their severed condition that
concerns another world. Whereas i^ were most wisdom so to think of the place
they bear, whereby they are (...) led gods, as not to forget they must (...)
Psalm. 82. 6, 7.
their person aside, and die like men: David himself that in this afflicted
condition 2 Samuel 24. 4.
could advise with himself, and check himself, yet in his free and
flourishing estate neglected the counsel of his friends. Agur was in jealousy
of a full condition, and lest instead of saying, what have I done; why am I
thus cast down, etc? he should say, Who is the Lord? Prove. 30. 9.


Meaner men in their lesser sphaere, often show what their spirits would be, if
their compass were enlarged.

It is a great fault in breeding youth, for feared of taking down of their
spirits, not to take down their pride, and get victory of their affections;
whereas a proud unbroken heart raises us more trouble often then all the world
beside. Of all troubles; the trouble of a proud heart is the greatest; It was a
great trouble to Haman to lead Mordecaies horse, which another man would Esther
6. 1.
not have thought so; the moving of a straw is troublesome to proud flesh. And
therefore it is good to hear the yoke from our youth, It is better to be
Lam. 3. 27.
taken down in youth, then to be broken in pieces by great crosses in age.
First or last, self-denial and victory over our selves is absolutely
necessary; otherwise faith which is a grace that requires self-denial, will
never b^ brought into the soul, and bear ru^ there.

But, what if pressing upon our soul^ will not help? Quest.


Then speak to God, to Jesus Chri^ Answ.
by prayer, that as he rebuked the winds and the waves, and went up^ the Sea,
so he would walk upon o^ souls and command a calm there. (...) is no less
power to settle a peace in the soul, then to command the seas to (...) quiet.
It is Gods prerogative to rule (...) the heart, as likewise to give it up to^
self, which (next to hell) is the great^ judgment; which should draw us (...)
Domine libera me a male homine meipso.
the greater reverence and fear of (...) pleasing God. It was no ill wish of
hi^ that desired God, to free him from (...) ill man, himself.

CAP. VI.
Other Observations of the same nature.

MOreover we see that a godly man Obser. 3.
can cast a restraint upon himself, as David here stays himself in falling.
There is a principle of grace, that stops the heart, and pulls in the reins
again when the affections are loose. A carnal man, when he begins to be cast
down, sinkes lower and lower, until he sinks into despair, as lead sinkes
into the bottom of the sea. They sunk, they Exodus 15. 5
sunk, like lead in the mighty waters. A carnal man sinkes as a heavy body
to the center of the earth, and stays not, if it be not stopped: There is
nothing in him to stay him in falling, as we see in Achitophel, and Saul: who
(wanting 2 Samuel 17. 23.
a support) found no other stay, but the swords point. And the greater their
parts and places are, the more they entangle themselves; and no wonder, for
they are to encounter with God and his deputy conscience, who is King of Kings
and Lord of Lords When Cain was cast out of his father house, his heart and
countenance w^ always cast down, for, he had nothing in him to lift it
upwards. But a godly man, though he may give a little w^ to passion, yet (as
David) he recover himself. Therefore as we would have any good evidence, that
we have a ^ter spirit in us then our own, great then the flesh or the world,
Let us ((...) all troubles we meet with) gather (...) our selves, that the
stream of our (...) affections carry us not away too far.

There is an art or skill of bear^ There is an art of bearing troubles.
troubles, (If we could learn it) with out overmuch troubling of our selves.
As in bearing of a burden there is a way so to poize it, that it weighs (...)
over heavy: If it hanges all in one side it poizes the body down. The greater
part of our troubles we pull upon our selves; by not parting our care (...) as
to take upon us only the care (...) duty, and leave the rest to God; a^ by
mingling our passions with o^ crosses; and (like a foolish patient) ch^ing the
pills which we should swallow down. We dwell too much upon the grief, when
we should remove the soul higher. We are nearest neighbors unto our selves;
when we suffer grief (like a canker) to eat into the soul; and (like a fire
in the bones) to consume the marrow and drink up the spirits: we are accessory
to the wrong done both to our bodies and souls: we wast our own candle, and
put out our light.

We see here again, that a godly man Obser. 4.
can make a good use of Privacy. When he is forced to be alone, he can talk
with his God and himself; one reason whereof is, that his heart is a treasury
and storehouse of divine truths, whence he can speak to himself, by way of
check, or encouragement of himself: he has a spirit over his own spirit, to
teach him to make use of that store he has laid up in his heart, the spirit is
never nearer him then when by The cause why wicked men cannot endure
solitariness.
way of witness to his spirit he is thus comforted; wherein the child of God
differs from another man, who cannot endure solitariness, because his heart is
empty; he was a stranger to God before, and God is a stranger to him now. So
that he cannot go to God as a friend; And for his conscience, that is ready
to speak to him, that which he is loath to hear: and therefore, he counts
himself a torment to himself, especially in privacy.

We read of great Princes who after As Charles the ninth after the Mas^cre in
France. Thuanus li. 57. Somn^ post casum San^tholomaeum nocturni horrores
plerumque interrumpebant and rursus adhibiti sympl oniaci expergefacto
conciliabant.
some bloody designs, were as terrible to themselves as they were formerly to
others, and therefore could never endure to be awaked in the night, without
Music, or some like diversion. It may be, we may be cast into such a
condition, (where we have none in the world to comfort us) as in contagio^
sickness, when none may come near us, we may be in such an estate wherein no
friend will own us. And therefore let us labor now to be acquainted with God
and our own hearts; an^ acquaint our hearts with the comfor^ of the holy
Ghost, then, though we have not so much as a book to look on, or a friend to
talk with, yet we^ may look with comfort into the book of our own heart, and
read what God has written there by the finger of his Ideo scribantur omnes
libri ut emendetur unus.
spirit: all books are written to amend this one book of our heart and
conscience; by this means we shall neverwant a Divine to comfort us, a
Physician to cure us, a Counselor to direct us, a Musician to cheer us, a
Controller to check us, because (by help of the word and spirit) we can be all
these to our selves.

Another thing we see here, that God has made every man a Governor over
Obser. 5.
himself. The poor man that has none to govern him, yet may be a King in
himself. It is the natural ambition of man's heart to desire government, as
we see in the Braemble; Well Judges 9.
then, let us make use of this disposition, to rule our selves. Absalom had
high thoughts; O, If I were a King, I would do so and so. So our hearts are
ready to promise, if I were as such and such a man, in such and such a place, I
would do this and that.

But how do thou manage thine own affections? how do thou rule in thine
own house? in thy self? do not passions get the upper hand, and keep reason
under foot? When we have learned to rule over our ow^ spirits well, then we
may be fit to rule over others. He that is faithful in a little, Mat. 25. 21
shall be set over more. He that c^ govern himself (In the Wiseman
judgment) is better then he that can govern Pro. 16. 32.
a City. He that cannot, is like a City without a wall, where those that are
in may go out, and the enemies without, may come in at their pleasure. So
where there is not a governme^ set up, there finne breaks out, and Setan breaks
in without control.

See again, the excellency of the soul, that can reflect upon it self, (...)
Obser. 6.
judge of whatsoever comes from it: (...) godly man's care and trouble is
especially about his soul, as David he^ looks principally to that, because
(...) All outward troubles are for to help the soul.
outward troubles are for to help the when God touches our bodies, our
estates, or our friends, he aims at (...) soul in all. God will never remove
(...) hand, till something be wrought upon the soul, as David's moisture was as
the drought in Summer, so that he roared, Psalm. 32.
and carried himself unseemely (for so great and holy a man) till his heart
was subdued to deal without all guile with God in confessing his sin, and
then GOD forgave him the iniquity thereof, and healed his body too. In
sickness, or in any other trouble, It is best the Divine should be before the
Physician: and that men begin where God begins. In great fires men look first
to their Jewels, and then to their lumber; so our soul is our best Jewel: A
carnal worldly man, is called, (and well called) a fleshly man, because his
very soul is flesh, and there is nothing but the world in him. And therefore,
when all is not well within, he cries out, My Body is troubled, my state is
broken, my friends fail me, etc. but all this while, there is no care for the
poor soul to settle a peace in that.

The possession of the soul is the richest possession, no jewel so precious;
the account for our own souls, and the souls of others, is the greatest
account, and therefore the care of souls should be the greatest care: What an
indignity is it that we should forget such souls to satisfy our lusts? to
have our wills? to be vexed with any, who by their judgment, example, or
authority, stopp as we suppose our courses. Is it not the greatest pl^ of the
world; First to have their lu^ satisfied: Secondly, to remove either by fraud
or violence whatsoever stands in their way: And thirdly, to put colors and
pretenses upon this to delude the world and themselves, employing all their
carnal wit and worldly strength for their carnal aims, and fighting for that
which-fights against their own souls? For what will be^ the issue of this but
certain destruction?

Of this mind are not only t^ dregs of people, but many of the m^ refined
sort, who desire to be emine^ in the world; And to have their ow^ desires
herein, give up the liberty o^ their own judgments and consciences, to the
desires and lusts of others; to be above others they will be beneath
themselves; having those men's persons in admiration for hope of advantage, whom
otherwise they despise, and so substituting in their spirits, man in the place
of GOD, lose heaven for earth, and bury that divine spark (their souls)
capable of the Divine nature, and fitter to be a sanctuary and temple for God
to dwell in, then by clozing with baser things to become base it self. We need
not wonder that others seem base to carnal men, who are base both in and to
themselves. It is no wonder they should be cruel to the souls of others, who
are cruel to their own souls, that they should neglect and starve others,
that give away their own souls in a manner for nothing. Alas upon what poor
terms do they hazard that, the nature and worth whereof is beyond man's reach
to comprehend. Many are so careless in this kind, that if they were thoroughly
persuaded that they had souls that should live for ever, (either in bliss or
torment) we might the more easily work upon them. But as they live by sense,
as beasts, so they have no mo^ thoughts of future times then (...), except at
such times as conscience is awaked by some sudden judgment, whereby Gods
wrath is revealed from heaven against them. But happy were it for them, if they
might die like beasts, whose misery dies with them.

To such an estate has sin brought the soul, that it willingly drowneth it
self in the senses, and becomes in some sort incarna^e with the flesh.

We should therefore set our sel^ to have most care of that, which Go^ cares
most for: which he breathed i^to us at first, set his own image upon, gave so
great a price for, and values above all the world besides. Shall all our study
be to satisfy the desires (...) the flesh, and neglect this?

Is it not a vanity to prefer the casket before the jewel, the shell before
the pearl, the gilded potsheard before the treasure? and is it not much more
vanity to prefer the outward condition before the inward? The soul is that
which Satan and his has most spite at, for in troubling our bodies or estates,
he aims at the vexation of our souls. As in Job, his aim was to abuse that
power God had given Job 1.
him over His children, body and goods, to make him out of a disquieted spirit
blaspheme God. It is an ill method to begin our care in other things, and
neglect the soul, as Achitophel, 2. Sam. 17. 23.
who set his house in order, We should set the soul first in order.
when he should have set his soul in order first. Wisdom begins at the
right end. If all be well at home, it comforts a man though he meets with
troubles abroad. Oh (says he) I shall have rest at home, I have a loving wife
and dutiful children; so whatsoever we meet withal abroad, if the soul be
quiet, thither we can retire with comfort. See that all be well within, and
then all troubles from without cannot much annoy us.

Grace will teach us to reason thus, God has given mine enemies power over my
liberty and condition, but shall they have power and liberty over my spirit? It
is that which Satan and they most seek for, but never yield, Oh my soul. And
thus a godly man will become more then a conqueror; when in appearance he is
conquered, the cause prevails, his spirit prevails and is undaunted. A
Christian is not subdued till his spirit be subdued. The Job prevailed over
Satan and all his troubles at length. This tormente^ proud persons to see
godly men enjoy a calm and resolute frame of mind^ in the midst of troubles;
when the enemies are more troubled in troubling them then they are in being
troubled by them.

We see likewise here, how to fra^ our complaints: David complains n^ Obser.
7.
of God, nor of his troubles, nor of others, but of his own soul, he
complains of himself, to himself. A^ (...) he should say; Though all things
else be out of order, yet O my soul thou should not trouble me too: thou
should not betray thy self unto troubles, but rule o^ them. A godly man
complains to Go^ yet not of God, but of himself; a carnal man is ready to
justify himself, and complain of God. He complains not to God, but of God
(at the least) in secret murmuring: he complains of others that are but Gods
violls; he complains of the grievance that lies upon him, but never regards
what is amiss in himself within: Openly he cries out upon fortune, yet
secretly he strike that God, under that Idol of fortune, by whose guidance all
things comes to pass, whilst he quarrels with that which is nothing he
wounds him that is the cause of all things: like a gouty man that complains of
his shoe, and of his bed; or an aguish man, of his drink, when the cause is
from within. So men are disquieted with others, when they should rather be
disquieted and angry with their own hearts.

We condemn Jonas for contending with God, and justifying his unjust anger,
but yet the same risings are in men naturally, if shame would suffer them to
give vent to their secret discontent; their heart speaks what Jonas tong^
spoke. Oh, but here we should lay o^ hand upon our mouth and adore God and
command silence to our souls.

No man is hurt but by himself first We are drawn to evil, and allur^ from
a true good to a false by our ow^ lusts, God tempts no man. Satan has (...)
power over us further then we willingly Jam 1. 13.
lie open to him, Satan wor^ upon our affections, and then our affections work
upon our will. He do^ not work immediately upon the wi^ we may thank our
selves in willing yielding to our own passions, for that ill Satan or his
instruments draw us unto; Saul was not vexed with evil spirit, till he gave
way to his ow^ 1. Sam. 16.
evil spirit of envy first. The devil (...) tred not into Judas until his
cove^ Matt. 27. 3.
heart made way for him. The Apo^ strengthens his conceit against (...) and
lasting anger from hence, the this we give way to the devil. I^ dangerous
thing to pass from G^ Ephesians. 4. (...)
government, and come under Satan

Satan mingleth himself with (...) own passions, therefore we should blame
our selves first, be ashamed of our selves most, and judge our selves most
severely. But self-love teaches us a contrary method; to translate all upon
others; it robs us of a right judgment of our selves. Though we desire to know
all diseases of the body by their proper names, yet we will conceive of
sinful passions of the soul under milder terms; as lust under love, rage
under just anger, murmuring under just displeasure, etc. thus whilst we
flatter our grief, what hope of cure! Thus sin has not only made all the
creatures enemies to us, but our selves the greatest enemies to our selves, and
therefore we should begin our complaints against our selves, and discuss our
selves thoroughly; how else shall we judge truly of other things without us,
above us, or beneath us? The Sun when it rises enlightens first the nearest
places, and then the more remote; So where true light is set up, it discovers
what is amiss within first.

Hence also we see, that as in all discouragements Obser. 8.
a godly man has most tr^ble with his own heart, so he knows (...) to carry
himself therein, as David (...) here.

For the better clearing of this, we must know there be diverse kinds (...)
Obser. 8.
degrees of conflicts in the soul (...) man, whilst it is united to the body.

First, between one corrupt Pa^ and another, as between Covetousn^ 1.
and Pride; Pride calls for expense, Covetousness for restraint; often Pass^
fight not only against God and re^ to which they owe a homage, but (...)
against another; Sin fights aga^ sin, and a lesser sin is oftenti^
overcome by a greater. The soul^ this case, is like the Sea tossed (...)
contrary winds; and like a kingdom divided, wherein the subjects fig^ both
against their Prince, and on^ against another.

Secondly, there is a natural con^ in the Affections whereby Nature see^ 2.
to preserve it self, as betwixt a^ and fear; Anger calls for revenge, (...)
of the law binds the soul to be qui^ We see in the creatures, fear makes
them abstain from that which their appetites carry them unto. A Wolf comes to
a flock with an eagerness to prey upon it, but seeing the Shepherd standing
in defense of his sheep, returns and does no harm, and yet for all this as
he came a wolf, so he returns a wolf.

A natural man may oppose some sin from an obstinate resolution against it,
not from any love of God, or hatred of sin, as sin, but because he conceives it
a brave thing to have his will. As one hard weapon may strike at another, as a
stone wall may beat back an arrow; but this opposition is not from a
contrariety of nature, as is betwixt fire and water.

Thirdly, there is a conflict of a higher nature, as between some sins and 3.
the light of reason helped by a natural conscience. The Heathen could reason
Major sum, and ad majora natus quam ut corporis mei fim mancipium. Senec.
from the dignity of the soul, to count it a base thing to prostitute
themselves to beastly lusts, so as it were degrading and unmanning themselves.
Natural men desirous to maintain a great opinion of themselves, and to awe
the inferior sort by gravity of deportme^ in carriage, will abstain from that
which otherwise their hearts (...) them unto, lest yielding should rend^ them
despised, by laying themselves too much open; as because passion discovers a
fool as he is, and mak^ wise man thought meaner then he is, therefore a
prudent man will conc^ his passion. Reason refined and rais^ by education,
example, and custom, does break in some degree the for of natural
corruption, and brings i^ the soul, as it were, another nature and yet no true
change; as we see (...) such as have been inured to goo^ courses, they feel
conscience chec^ ing them upon the first discontinuan^ and alteration of their
former goo^ ways, but this is usually from a for^ impression of their
breeding, as (...) boat moves some little time upon (...) water by virtue of
the former stro^ yet at length we see corruption prevailing over education, as
in Ioas, (...) was awed by the reverent respect he bare to his uncle Iehojoda,
he was good all his uncles days: And in Nero, in 2. Kings 12. 2.
whom the goodness of his education prevailed over the fierceness of his
nature, for the first five years.

Fourthly, but in the Church, where there shines a light above nature, as 4.
there is a discovery of more sins, and some strength, with the light, to
perform more duty; So there is a further conflict then in a man that has no
better then nature in him. By a discovery of the excellent things of the
Gospel, there may be some kind of joy stirred up, and some degree of
obedience: whence there may be some degree of resistance against the sins of
the Gospel, as obstinate unbeleefe, desperation, profaneness, etc. A man in
the Church may do more then another out of the Church, by reason of the
enlargement of his knowledge; whereupon such cannot sin at so easy a rate as
others that know less, and (therefore) meet with less opposition from
conscience.

Fifthly, there is yet a further degree of conflict betwixt the sanctified
powers of the soul, and the flesh, not only 5.
as it is seated in the baser parts, but even in the best faculties of the
soul, and as it mingles it self with every gracious performance; (as in David)
There is not only a conflict betwixt sin and conscience, enlightened by a
common work of the Spirit; but between the commanding powers of the soul
sanctified, and it self unsanctified, between reasons of the flesh and reasons
of the spirit, between faith and distrust, between the true light of
knowledge, and false light. For it is no question but the flesh would play its
part in David, and muster up all the strength of reason it had. And usually
flesh, as it is more ancient then the Spirit, (we being first natural, then
spiritual) so it will put it self first forward in devising shifts, as Esau
comes out of the womb first before Jacob; yet hereby the Spirit is stirred up
to a present examination and resistance, and in resisting (as we see here) at
length the godly gets the victory. As in the conflict between the higher parts
of the soul with the lower, it clearly appears, that the soul does not rise
out of the temper of the body, but is a more noble substance, commanding the
body by reasons fetched from its own worth; so in this spiritual conflict, it
appears there is something better then the soul it self, that has
superiority over it.

CAP. VII.
Difference between good men and others in conflicts with sin.

BUt how does it appear that this combat in David was a spiritual Quest.
combat?

1. Answ. First, A natural conscience is troubled for sins against the light
of nature only, but David for inward and secret corruptions, as discouragement
and disquietnesse arising from faint trusting in God.

David's conflict was not only with the sensual lower part of his soul, which
is carried to ease and quiet, and love of present things, but he was troubled
with a mutiny in his understanding, between faith and distrust; and therefore
he was forced to rouse up his soul so often to trust in God; which shows that
carnal reason did solicit him to discontent, and had many colorable reasons
for it.

Secondly, a man endued with common 2.
grace, is rather a patient then an agent in conflicts; the light troubles him
against his will, as discovering and reproving him, and hindering his sinful
contentments; his heart is more byased another way if the light would let him;
but a godly man labors to help the light, and to work his heart to an
opposition against sin; he is an agent as well as a patient. As David here
does not suffer disquieting, but is disquieted with himself for being so. A
godly man is an agent in opposing his corruption, and a patient in enduring of
it: whereas a natural man is a secret agent in and for his corruptions, and a
patient in regard of any help against them; A good man suffers evil and does
good, a natural man suffers good and does evil.

Thirdly, A conscience guided by 3.
common light, withstands distempers most by outward means, but David here
fetches help from the Spirit of God in him, and from trust in God. Nature
works from within, so does the new nature; David is not only something
disquieted, and something troubled for being disquieted, but sets himself
thoroughly against his distempers; he complains, and expostulates, he
censures, and charge his soul. The other, if he does any thing at all, yet
it is faintly; he seeks out his corruption as a coward does his enemy, loath to
find him, and more loath to encounter with him.

Fourthly, David withstands sin 4.
constantly and gets ground. We see here, he gives not over at the first, but
presses again and again. Nature works constantly, so does the new nature.
The conflict in the other is something forced, as taking part with the worser
side in himself, good things have a weak, or rather no party in him, bad
things a strong; and therefore he soon gives over in this holy quarrel.

Fifthly, David is not discouraged by his foiles, but sets himself afresh
against 5.
his corruptions, with confidence to bring them under. Whereas he that has but
a common work of the Spirit, after some foiles, lets his enemy prevail more
and more, and so despaires of victory, and thinks it better to fit still, then
to rise and take a new fall; by which means his later end is worse then his
beginning, for beginning in the Spirit, he ends in the flesh. A godly man,
although upon some foil, he may for a time be discouraged, yet by holy
indignation against sin, he renues his force, and sets afresh upon his
corruptions, and gathers more strength by his falls, and grows into more
acquaintance with his own heart, and Satan's malice, and Gods strange ways in
bringing light out of darkness.

Sixthly, An ordinary Christian may 6.
be disquieted for being disquieted, as David was, but then it is only as
disquiet has vexation in it; but David here striveth against the unquietness
of his spirit, not only as it brought vexation with it, but as it hindered
communion with his God.

In sin there is not only a guilt binding over the soul to Gods judgment,
and thereupon filling the soul with inward fears and terrors; but in Evils of
sin.
sin likewise there is, 1. a contrariety 1.
to Gods holy nature; and, 2. a contrariety 2.
to the Divine nature and image stamped upon our selves; 3. a 3.
weakening and disabling of the soul from good; and, 4. a hindering of our
former communion with GOD, sin 4.
being in its nature a leaving of God the fountain of all strength and
comfort, and cleaving to the creature; hereupon the soul having tasted the
sweetness of GOD before, is now grieved, and this grief is not only for the
guilt and trouble that sin draws after it, but from an inward Antipathy and
contrariety betwixt the sanctified soul and sin. It hates sin as sin, as
the only bane and poison of renewed nature, and the only thing that breeds
strangeness betwixt God and the soul. And this hatred, is not so much from
discourse and strength of reason, as from nature it self rising presently
against its enemy; The Lamb presently shuns the Wolf from a contrariety;
Antipathies wait not for any strong reason, but are exercised upon the first
presence of a contrary object.

Seventhly, hereupon arises the last difference; that because the soul hates
7
sin as sin, therefore it opposes it universally and eternally, in all the
powers of the soul, and in all actions inward and outward issuing from those
powers, David regarded no iniquity in his heart, but hated every evil Psalm. 66.
18
way. The desires of his soul were, that it might be so directed, that he
might keep^ Gods law. And if there had been no Psalm. 119. 5
binding law, yet there was such a sweet sympathy and agreement betwixt his
soul and Gods truth, that he delighted in it above all natural sweetness;
Hence it is that Saint John says, He that is bor^ 1 Ioh. 3. 9.
of God cannot sin, that is so far forth as he is borne of God; his new
nature will not suffer him, he cannot lie, he cannot deceive, he cannot be
earthly minded, he cannot but love and delight in the persons and things that
are good. There is not only a light in the understanding, but a new life in
the will, and all other faculties of a godly man; what good his knowledge
discovers, that his will makes choice of, and his heart loves; What ill his
understanding discovers, that his will hates and abstaines from. But in a man
not thoroughly converted, the will and affections are bent otherwise, he loves
not the good he does, nor hates the evil he does not.

Therefore let us make a narrow search into our souls upon what Use.
grounds we oppose sin, and fight Gods battles. A common Christian is not
cast down, because he is disquieted in Gods service, or for his inward
failings, that he cannot serve God with that liberty and freedom he desires,
etc: But a godly man is troubled for his distempers, because they hinder the
comfortable intercourse betwixt God and his soul, and that spiritual
composedness, and Sabbath of spirit which he enjoyed before, and desires to
enjoy again. He is troubled that the waters of his soul are troubled so,
that the image of Christ shines not in him as it did before. It grieves him to
find an abatement in affection, in love to God, a distraction or coldness in
performing duties, any doubting of Gods favor, any discouragement from duty,
etc. A godly man's comforts and grievances are hid from the world; natural men
are strangers to them. Let this be a rule of discerning our estates, how we
stand affected to the distempers of our hearts; If we find them troublesome,
it is a ground of comfort unto us that our Spirits are ruled by a higher
spirit; and that there is a principle of that life in us, which cannot brook
the most secret corruption, but rather casts it out by a holy complaint, as
strength of nature does poison, which seeks its destruction. And let us be in
love with that work of grace in us, which makes us out of love with the least
stirrings that hinder our best condition.

Se^ again, We may be sinfully disquieted Obser. 9.
for that which is not a sin to be disquieted for. David had sinned if he had
not been somewhat troubled for the banishment from Gods house, and the
blasphemy of the enemies of the Church; But yet (we see) he stops himself,
and sharply takes up his soul for being disquieted: He did well in being
disquieted, and in checking himself for the same; there were good grounds for
both: He had wanted spiritual life if he had not been disquieted. He abated
the vigor and liveliness of his life, by being overmuch disquieted.

CAP. VIII.
Of unfitting dejection: and when it is excessive. And what is the right temper
of the soul herein.

. 1.
THen, how shall we know when a man is Quest.
cast down and disquieted, otherwise then is befitting?

There is a 3. fold miscarriage of inward Answ.
trouble.

1. When the soul is troubled for that (...) should not be vexed for, as Ahab,
when 1
he was crossed in his will for Nab^ vineyard.

2. In the ground, as when we grieve 2.
for that which is good, and for that which we should grieve for; but it is
with too much reflecting upon o^ own particular.

As in the troubles of the state (...) Church, we ought to be affected; b^ not
because these troubles hinder any liberties of the flesh, and restrain pride of
life, but from higher respects: A^ that by these troubles God is dishonored,
the public exercises of Religion hindered, and the gathering of souls thereby
stopped: As, the States and Commonwealths which should be harbors of the
Church, are disturbed; as lawless courses and persons prevail; as Religion
and Justice is triumphed over, and trodden under. Men usually are grieved for
public miseries from a spirit of self-love only, because their own private
is imbarqued in the public. There is a depth of deceit of the heart in this
matter.

3. So for the measure, when we trouble our selves (though not without 3
cause) yet without bounds.

The spirit of man is like unto moist elements, as air and water, which have
no bounds of their own to contain them in, but those of the vessel that
keeps them: water is spilt and lost without something to hold it; so it is
with the spirit of man, unless it be bounded with the Spirit of God. Put the
case a man be disquieted for sin (for which not to be disquieted is a sin)
yet we may look too much, and too long upon it, for the soul has a double
eye, one to look to sin, another to look up to Gods mercy in Christ. Having
two objects to look on, we may sin in looking too much on the one, with
neglect of the other.

. 2.
Seeing then, disquieting and dejectin Quest.
for sin is necessary, how shall we k^ when it exceeds measure?

First, when it hinders us from holy duties, Answ. 1
or in the performance of them, by distraction or otherwise; whereas they are
given to carry us to that which is pleasing to GOD, and good to our selves.

Grief is ill when it takes off the soul from minding that it should, and so
indisposeth us to the duties of o^ callings. Christ upon the Cross was grieved
to the utmost, yet it did not take away his care for his mother; so the good
thief in the midst of his pangs labored to gain his fellow, and Luke 23. 42
to save his own soul, and to glorify Christ. If this be so in grief of
body which takes away the free use of reason, and exercise of grace more then
any other grief, then much more in grief from more remote causes, for in
extremity of body the sickness may be such, as all that we can perform to
God is a quiet submission, and a desire to be carried unto Christ by the
prayers of others; we should so mind our grief as not to forget Gods mercy,
or our own duty.

Secondly, when we forget the 2
grounds of comfort, and suffer our mind to run only upon the present
grievance, it is a sin to dwell on sin and turmoile our thoughts about it,
when we are called to thankfulness. A Physician in good discretion forbids a
dish at sometimes to prevent the nourishment of some disease, which another
time he gives way unto. So we may and ought to abstain from too much feeding
our thoughts upon our corruptions in case of discouragement, which at other
times is very necessary. It should be our wisdom in such cases to change the
object, and labor to take off our minds, and give them to that which calls
more for them; Grief often presses unseasonably upon us, when there is cause of
joy, and when we are called to joy; as Ioab justly found fault with David for
grieving too much, when GOD had given him the victory, and rid him and the
State of a traitorous son. GOD has made some days for joy, and joy is the
proper work of those days. This is the Psalm. 118. 24.
day which the Lord has made. Some in a sick distemper, desire that which
increases their sickness; so some that are deeply cast down, desire a
wakening ministry, and what ever may cast them down more; whereas they should
meditate upon comforts, and get some sweet assurance of Gods love. Joy is the
constant temper which the soul should be in, Rejoice evermore, 1. These. 5. 16.
(says the Apostle.) If a sink be stirred, we stir it not more, but go into
a sweeter room. So we should think of that which is comfortable, and of such
trueths as may raise up the soul, and sweeten the spirit.

Thirdly, Grief is too much, when it inclines the soul to any inconvenient 3.
courses: (for if it be not looked to it is an ill counselor) when either it
hurts the health of our bodies, or draws the soul (for to ease it self) to
some unlawful liberty. When grief keeps such a noise in the soul, that it
will not hear what the messengers of God, or the still voice of the Spirit
says, as in combustions, loud cries are scarce heard: so in such cases the
soul will neither hear it self, nor others. The fruit of this overmuch
trouble of spirit, is increase of trouble.

. 3.
3. Another question may be, Quest.
What that sweet and holy temper is, the soul should be in, that it may
neither be faulty in the defect, nor too much abound in grief and sorrow.

1. The soul must be raised to a Answ.
right grief.

2. The grief that is raised, though it be right yet it must be bounded.
Before we speak of raising grief in the godly, we must know there are some
who are altogether strangers to any kind of spiritual grief, or trouble at
all; such must consider, that the way to prevent everlasting trouble, i^ to
desire to be troubled with a preventing trouble. Let those that are not in the
way of grace think with themselves what cause they have, not to take a minutes
rest while they are i^ that estate. For a man to be in debt both body and
soul, subject every minute to be arrested and carried prisoner to Hell, and not
to be moved: For man to have the wrath of GOD ready to be powered out upon
him, and Hell gape for him, nay to carry a hell about him in conscience (if it
were awake) and to have all his comfort here hanging upon a weak thread of
this li^e ready to be cut and broken off every moment, and to be cursed in
all those blessings that he enjoyes: and yet not to be disquieted, but
continually treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, by running deeper
into God^ books: for a man to be thus, and not to be disquieted, is but the
Devils peace, whilst the strong man holds possession: A burning Ague is more
hopeful than a Lethargy; The best service that can be done to such men, is to
startle and rouse them, and so with violence to pull them out of the fire (as
Jude speaks) or else they will another day curse that cruel mercy that lets
Jude 23.
them alone now. In all their jollity in this world, they are but as a Book
fairly bound, which when it is opened is full of nothing but Tragedies. So
when the book of their consciences shall be once opened, there is nothing to
be read but lamentations and woes. Such men were in a way of hope, if they had
but so much apprehension of their estates, as to ask themselves, What have I
done? If this be true that there are such fearful things prepared for
sinners, why am I not cast down? Why am I no more troubled and discouraged for
my wicked courses? Despair to such is the beginning of comfort; and trouble
the beginning of peace. A storm is the way to a calm, and hell the way to
heaven.

But for raising of a right grief in the 1. Right grief, how raised.
soul of a holy man, look what is the state of the soul in it self, in wh^
terms it is with God; whether there be any sin hanging on the fyle
unrepented of. If all be not well with in us, then here is place for inward
trouble, whereby the soul may afflict it self.

God saw this grief so needful for his people, that he appointed certain
days for afflicting them; because it is Levit. 16. 29.
fit that sin contracted by joy should be dissolved by grief; and sin is
so deeply invested into the soul, that (...) separation betwixt the soul and
it cannot be wrought without much grief; when the soul has smarted for
sin, it sets then the right price upon reconciliation with God in Christ, and
it fe^leth what a bitter thing sin is, and therefore it will be afraid to
be (...) bold with it afterward; it likewise aweth the heart so, that it will
not be so loose toward GOD as it was before; and certainly that soul that
has (...) the sweetness of keeping peace wit^ God, cannot but take deeply to
heart, that there should be any thing in us that should divide betwixt us and
the fountain of our comfort, that should stop the passage of our prayers, and
the current of Gods favors both toward our selves and others; it is such an
ill as is the cause of all other ill, and damps all our comforts.

2. We should look out of our 2.
selves also, considering whether for troubles at home and abroad God calls not
to mourning or troubling of our selves; grief of compassion is as well
required as grief of contrition.

It is a dead member that is not sensible of the state of the body. Jeremy for
fear he should not weep enough for the distressed estate of the Church,
desired of God, that his eyes might be Ierem. 9. 1.
made a fountain of tears. A Christian, as he must not be proud flesh, so
neither must he be dead flesh; none more truly sensible either of sin or of
misery (so far as misery carries with it any sign of Gods displeasure) then
a true Christian: which issues from the life of Grace, which (where it is in
(...) measure) is lively, and therefore sensible: for God gives motion and
sense for the preservation of life. As God bowels are tender toward us, so God
people have tender bowels toward him, his cause, his people, and his Church
The fruit of this sensiblenesse, is earn^ prayer to God. (as Melanchton (...)
well) If I cared for nothing, I would pr^ Si nil curarem, nil orarem.
for nothing.

2. Grief being thus raised, must, 2. Grief to be bounded.
as we said before, be bounded a^ guided.

1. God has framed the soul a^ planted such affections in it, as may answer
1. When our affections are pliable
all his dealing toward his children; that when he enlarges himself toward
them, then the soul sho^ enlarge it self to him again; when (...) opens his
hand we ought to open o^ hearts; when he shows any token^ displeasure we
should grieve; when (...) troubles us, we should trouble a^ grieve our selves.
As God any (...) discovers himself, so the soul sho^ be in a suitable
pliablenesse. Then (...) soul is as it should be when it is ready to meet GOD
at every turn, to joy when he calls for it, to mourn when he calls for that,
to labor to know Gods meaning in every thing.

Again GOD has made the soul 2. When fit to have communion with God.
for a communion with himself, which communion is especially placed in the
affections, which are the springs of all spiritual worship. Then the
affections are well ordered, when we are fit to have communion with God, to
love, joy, trust, to delight in him above all things. The affections are the
inward movings of the soul, which then move best when they move us to God, not
from him. They are the feet of the soul, whereby we walk with, and before
God. When we have our affections at such command, that we can take them off
from any thing in the world at such times as we are to have more near
communion with God in hearing or prayer, etc. As Abraham when he Genesis 22. 5.
was to sacrifice, left whatsoever might hinder him at the bottom of the
Mount. When we let our affections so far into the things of the world, as we
can^ take them off when we are to de^ with God; it is a sign of spiritual i^
temperancie. It is said of the Israelites that they brought Egypt with the^
into the wilderness; so many bring the world in their hearts with them, wh^
they come before God.

But because our affections are ne^ well ordered without judgment, (...) 3.
When our affections are suber* dinate.
being to follow, not to lead; It is (...) evidence that the soul is in a fit
temper, when there is such a harmony (...) it, as that we judge of things as
they are, and affect as we judge, and exec^ as we affect. This harmony with
breeds uniformity and constancy (...) our resolutions, so that there is ((...)
were) an even thread drawn through the whole course and tenor of (...) lives,
when we are not off and on, (...) and down. It argues an ill state of body,
when it is very hot, or very col^ or hot in one part, and cold in anoth^ so
unevenness of spirit argues a distemper; a wise man's life is of one color
like it self. The soul bred from heaven, so far as it is heavenly minded,
desires to be (like heaven) above all storms uniforme, constant; not as things
under the Sun, which are always in changes, constant only in inconstancy.
Affections are as it were the wind of the soul, and then the soul is carried
as it should be, when it is neither so becalmed that it moves not when it
should, nor yet tossed with tempests to move disorderly. When it is so well
balaced that it is neither lift up, nor cast down too much, but keeps a
steady course. Our affections must not rise to become unruly passions, for then
as a river that overfloweth the banks, they carry much slime and soil with
them. Though affections be the wind of the soul, yet unruly passions are the
storms of the soul, and will overturne all, if they be not suppressed. The
best (as we see in David here) if they do not steare their hearts aright, are
in danger of sudden gusts. A Christian must neither be a dead sea, nor a raging
sea.

Our affections are then in best temper, 4.
when they become so many graces of the Spirit; as when love is turned to When
our affections become graces.
a love of God; joy, to a delight in the best things; fear, to a fear of
offending him more then any creature; sorrow, to a sorrow for sin, etc.

They are likewise in good temper, when they move us to all duties of love 5
When fit to perform duties.
and mercy toward others; when they are not shut, where they should be open,
nor open where they should be shut.

Yet there is one case wherein exceeding In case of Gods dishonor, exceeding
affection is no excess.
affection is not over exceeding, As in an ecstasy of zeal upon a sudd^
apprehension of Gods dishonor, and his cause trodden under foot. It is better
in this case, rather scarce to be (...) own men then to be calm or quiet. It
is said of Christ and David, that their hearts were eaten up with a holy zeal
for Gods house. In such a case Moses unparalleld for meekness, was turned
into an holy rage. The greatness (...) the provocation, the excellency of the
object, and the weight of the occasion, bears out the soul, not only without
blame, but with great praise, in such seeming distempers. It is the glory of a
Christian to be carried with full sail, and as it were with a spring tide of
affection. So long as the stream of affection runs in the due channel, and
if there be great occasions for great motions, then it is fit the affections
should rise higher, as to burn with zeal, to be sick of love, to be more
vile Cant. 25. 1 Samuel 6. 12
for the Lord, as David; to be counted out of our wits with Saint Paul to
further the cause of Christ and the good of souls.

Thus we may see, the life of a poor The life of a Christi^ an is a life of
trouble.
Christian in this world, 1. he is in great danger if he be not troubled at
all. 2. when he is troubled, he is in danger to be over troubled. 3. when he
has brought his soul in tune again, he is subject to new troubles. Betwixt
this ebbing and flowing there is very little quiet. Now because this cannot be
done without a great measure of Gods Spirit, our help is to make use of that
promise of giving the holy Ghost to them Ioh. 11. 13.
that ask it. To teach us when, how long, and how much to grieve: and when,
and how long, and how much to rejoice; the Spirit must teach the heart this,
who as he moved upon the waters before the Creation, so he must move upon the
waters of our souls, for we have not the command of our own hearts. Every
natural man is carried away with his flesh and humors, upon which the devil
rides, and carries him whither he list; he has no better comsellors then flesh
and blood, and Satan counselling with them. But a godly m^n is not a slave to
his carnal affections, but (as David here) labors to bring into captivity the
first moti^ of sin in his heart.

CAP. IX.
Of the souls disquiets, Gods dealings, (...) power to contain our selves in
order.

MOreover we see, that the soul (...) disquiets proper to it self, besides
the Obser. 1.
griefs of Sympathy that arise from the body; for here the soul complains
(...) the soul it self, as when it is out of the body it has torments and
joys of its own. And if these troubles of the soul be not well cured, then
by way of fellowship and redundance they will affect the outward man, and so
the whole man shall be inwrapt in misery.

From whence we further see, that God, when he will humble a man, needs not
Obser. 2.
fetch forces from without, if he let but our own hearts loose, we shall
have trouble and work enough, though we were as holy as David, God did not
only exercise him with a rebellious son out of his own loins, but with
rebellious risings out of his own heart. If there were no enemy in the world,
nor devil in hell, we carry that within us, that if it be let loose will
trouble us more then all the world besides. Oh that the proud creature should
exalt himself against God, and run into a voluntary course of provoking him,
who cannot only raise the humors of our bodies against us, but the passions
of our minds also to torment us! Therefore it is the best wisdom not to
provoke the great God, for are we 1 Cor. 10. 22.
stronger then he, that can raise our selves against our selves? and work
wonders not only in the great world, but also in the little world, our souls
and bodies when he pleases?

We see likewise hence a necessity of having something in the soul above it
Obser. 3.
self, it must be partaker of a diviner nature then it self; otherwise, when
the most refined part of our souls, the very spirit of our minds is out of
frame, what shall bring it in again? Therefore we must conceive in a godly
man, a double self, one which must be denied, the other which must deny; one
that breeds all the disquiet, and another that stilleth what the other has
raised. The way to still the soul, as it is under our corrupt self, is not to
parlee with it, and divide government for peace sake, as if we should gratify
the flesh in something, to redeem liberty to the spirit in other things; for
we shall find the flesh will be too encroching. We must strive against it,
not with subtilty and discourse, so much, as with peremptory violence silence
it and vex it: An enemy that parlees will yield at length. Grace is nothing
else but that blessed power, whereby as spiritual, we gain upon our selves
as carnal. Holy love is that which we gain of self-love; and so joy, and
delight, etc. Grace labors to win ground of the old man, until at length it
be all in all; Indeed we are never our selves perfectly, till we have wholly
put off our selves. Nothing should be at a greater distance to us then our
selves. This is the reason why carnal men that have nothing above themselves
but their corrupt self, sink in great troubles, having nothing within to
uphold them, whereas a good man is wiser then himself, holier then himself,
stronger then himself, there is something in him more then a man. There be
evils that the spirit of man alone out of the goodness of nature cannot
bear, but the spirit of man assisted with an higher spirit, will support and
carry him through. It is a good trial of a man's condition to know what he
esteems to be himself. A godly man counts the inner man, the sanctified part,
to be himself, whereby he stands in relation to Christ and a better life.
Another man esteems his contentment in the world, the satisfaction of his
carnal desires, the respect he finds from men by reason of his parts, or
something without him, that he is master of, this he counts himself, and by
this he values himself, and to this he makes his best thoughts and endeavors
serviceable; And of crosses in these things he is most sensible, and so
sensible, that he thinks himself undone if he sees not a present issue out of
them.

That which most troubles a good man in all troubles, is himself, so far as
he is unsubdued; he is more disquieted with himself, than with all troubles
out of himself; when he has gotten the better once of himself, whatsoever
falls from without, is light; where the spirit is enlarged, it cares not much
for outward bondage; where the spirit is lightsome, it cares not much for
outward darkness; where the spirit is settled, it cares not much for outward
changes; where the spirit is one with it self, it can bear outward breaches;
where the spirit is sound, it can bear outward sickness. Nothing can be very
ill with us, when all is well within. This is the comfort of a holy man, that
though he be troubled with himself, yet by reason of the spirit in him which
is his better self, he works out by degrees, what ever is contrary. As
Spring Water being clear of it self, works it self clean, though it be
troubled by something cast in; as the Sea will endure no poysonfull thing, but
casts it upon the shore. But a carnal man is like a Spring corrupted, that
cannot work it self clear, because it is wholly tainted; his eye and light
is darkness, and therefore no wonder if he sees nothing. Sin lies upon
his understanding, and hinders the knowledge of it self; it lies close upon
the will, and hinders the striving against it self.

True self that is worth the owning, is when a man is taken into a higher
condition and made one with Christ, and esteems neither of himself nor
others, as happy for any thing according to the flesh. 1. He is under the law
and government of the Spirit, and so far as he is himself, works according
to that principle: 2. He labors more and more to be transformed into the
likeness of Christ, in whom he esteems that he has his best being. 3. He
esteems of all things that befall him, to be good or ill, as they further or
hinder his best condition. If all be well for that, he counts himself well,
whatsoever else befalls him.

Another man when he does any thing that is good, acts not his own part; but
a godly man when he does good, is in his proper element; what another man does
for by ends and reasons, that he does from a new nature; which if there were
no Law to compel, yet would moove him to that which is pleasing to Christ. If
he be drawn aside by passion or temptation, that he judges not to be
himself, but takes a holy revenge on himself for it, as being redeemed and
taken out from himself; he thinks himself no debtor, nor to owe any service
to his corrupt self. That which he plots and projects and works for is, that
Christ may rule every where, and especially in himself, for he is not his own
but Christ's, and therefore desires to be more and more emptied of himself,
that Christ might be all in all in him.

Thus we see, what great use there is of dealing with our selves, for the
better composing and settling of our souls. Which though it be a course without
glory and ostentation in the world, as causing a man to retire inwardly into
his own breast, having no other witness but God and himself; and though it
be likewise irksome to the flesh, as calling the soul home to it self, being
desirous naturally to wander abroad, and be a stranger at home: Yet it is a
course both good in it self, and makes the soul good.

For by this means the judgment is exercised and rectified, the will and
affections ordered, the whole man put into an holy frame fit for every good
action. By this the tree is made good, and the fruit cannot but be answerable;
by this the soul it self is set in tune, whence there is a pleasant harmony
in our whole conversation. Without this, we may do that which is outwardly
good to others, but we can never be good our selves. The first justice begins
within, when there is a due subjection of all the powers of the soul to the
spirit, as sanctified and guided by Gods Spirit; when justice and order is
first established in the soul, it will appear from thence in all o^ dealings.
He that is at peace in himself, will be peaceable to others, peaceable in
his family, peaceable in the Church, peaceable in the State; The soul of a
wicked man is in perpetual sedition; being always troubled in it self, it is
no wonder if it be troublesome to others. Unity in our selves is before union
with others. Vnitas ^te unionem.


To conclude this first part, concerning intercourse with our selves. As we
desire to enjoy our selves, and to live the life of men, and of Christians,
which is, to understand our ways: as we desire to live comfortably, and not to
be accessory of yielding to that sorrow which causes death: As we desire to
answer GOD and our selves, when we are to give an account of the inward
tumults of our souls: As we desire to be vessels prepared for every good
work, and to have strength to undergo any cross: As we desire to have
healthy souls, and to keep a Sabbath within our selves: As we desire not
only to do good, but to be good in our selves: So let us labor to quiet our
souls, and often ask a reason of our selves, Why we should not be quiet?

CAP. X.
Means not to be overcharged (...) sorrow.

TO help us further herein, besid^ that which has been formerly spoken,

1. We must take heed of building an ungrounded confidence of happiness 1.
Changes must be forethought of
for time to come: which man us when changes come, 1. Unacquainted with them;
2. takes away expectation of them; 3. and preparati^ for them. When any thing
is strange and sudden, and lights upon us unfurnished and unfenced, it must
needs p^ our spirits out of frame. It is good therefore to make all kind of
troubles familiar to us, in our thoughts at least, and this will break the
force of them. It is good to fence our souls beforehand against all assaults,
as men use to keep out the Sea, by raising banks; and if a breach be made,
to repair (...) presently.

We had need to maintain a strong Garrison of holy Reasons against the
assaults of strong passions; we may hope for the best, but fear the worst,
and prepare to bear whatsoever. We say that a set diet is dangerous, because
variety of occasions will force us upon breaking of it: So in this world of
changes, we cannot resolve upon any certain condition of life, for upon
alteration the mind is out of frame. We cannot say this or that trouble shall
not befall, yet we may by help of the Spirit, say, nothing that does befall,
shall make me do that which is unworthy of a Christian:

That which others make easy by Quae alii diu patiendo levia faciu^t, sapiens
levia facit diu cogitando.
suffering, that a wise man makes easy by thinking of beforehand. If we
expect the worst: when it comes, it is no more than we thought of. If better
befalls us, than it is the sweeter to us, the less we expected it. Our Savior
foretells the worst: In the world you shall have tribulation, therefore look
for it, but then he will not leave us. Ioh. 16. 33.
Satan deludes with fair promises: but when the contrary falls out, he leave
his followers in their distresses. We desire peace and rest, but we seek i^
not in its own place; there is a rest for Gods people, but that is not here,
nor yet, Heb. 4. 9.
but it remains for them; they rest fr^ their labors, but that is after they
are dead in the Lord. There is no sound rest till then. Yet this caution must
be remembered, Rev. 14. 13.
that we shape not in o^ Caution.
fancies such troubles as are never likely to fall out, It comes either from
weakness or guiltiness, to fear shadows. We shall not need to make
crosses, they will (as we say of foul weather) come before they be sent for.
How many evils do people fear, from which they have no further hurt, then w^
is bred only by their causeless fea^. Nor yet if they be probable, must we
think of them so, as to be altogether so affected, as if undoubtedly they
would come, for so we give certain strength to an uncertain cross, and
usurp upon God, by anticipating the which may never come to pass. It was
rashness in David to say, I she 1 Samuel 27. 1
one day perish by the hand of Saul.

If they be such troubles, as will certainly come to pass, as parting with
friends and contentments (at least) by death; than I think of them so, as not
to be much dismayed, but furnish thy heart with strength beforehand that they
may fall the lighter. 2. Think of them so, as not to give up the bucklers to
passion, and lie open as a fair mark for any uncomfortable accident to strike
to the heart; nor yet so think of them as to despise them, but to consider of
Gods meaning in them, and how to take good by them. 3. Think of the things we
enjoy, so as to moderate our enjoying of them, by considering there must be a
parting, and therefore how we shall be able to bear it when it comes.

2. If we desire not to be overcharged 2.
with sorrow, when that which we fear is fallen upon us, we must then
beforehand look that our love to any thing in this world, shoot not so far,
as that, when the time of severing comes, we part with so much of our hearts
by that rent. Those that love too (...) will always grieve too much. It is t^
greatness of our affections which c^ seth the sharpness of our afflictions.
(...) that cannot abound without pride a^ high-mindednesse, will not want wi^
out-too-much dejectedness. Love (...) planted for such things as can retu^
love: and make us better by loving them, wherein we shall satisfy our lo^ to
the full. It is pity so sweet an affection should be lost: So sorrow is (...)
sin, and for other things as they m^ sin the more bitter to us. The (...)
of a Christian should be a meditati^ how to unloose his affections from
inferior things; he will easily die that (...) dead before in affection. But
this will never be unless the soul sees some thing better than al things in
the world, upon which is may bestow it self. In that measure our affections
die in the^ excessive motion to things below, (...) they are taken up with the
love and admiration of the best things. He that (...) much in heaven in his
thoughts, is free from being tossed with tempest here below; the top of those
mountains that are above the middle Region, are so quiet, as that the lightest
things (as ashes) lie still and are not moved. The way to mortify earthly
members that bestirre Col. 3. 1. and 5.
themselves in us, is to mind things above, The more the ways of wisdom lead
us on high, the more we avoid the snares below.

In the uncertainty of all events here, labor to frame that contentment in and
from our own selves, which the things themselves will not yield; frame peace by
freeing our hearts from too much fear, and riches by freeing our hearts from
covetous desires. Frame a sufficiency out of contentedness; If the soul it
self be out of tune, outward things will do no more good than a fair shoe to
a gouty foot.

And seek not our selves abroad out of our selves in the conceits of other
men. A man shall never live quietly, that has not learned to be set light by
of others. He that is little in his own eyes, will not be troubled to be
little in the eyes of others. Men that set too high a price upon themselves,
when others will not come to their price, are discontent. Those whose condition
i^ above their worth, and their pride above their condition, shall never want
sorrow; yet we must maintain our authority and the Image of God in our
places, for that is Gods and not ours, and we ought so to carry our selves as
we approve our selves to their consciences, though we have not their good
words; Let none despise thy youth, says Saint Paul to Timothy, that is, Walk
s^ before them as they shall have no cause. It is not in our own power what
other men think or speak, but it is in o^ power (by Gods grace) to live so,
the none can think ill of us, but by slandering, and none believe ill but by
too much credulity.

3. When any thing seiseth upon us, we must take heed we mingle not o^ 3
own passions with it; we must (...) there bring sin to, nor mingle (...)
with the suffering: for that will trouble the spirit, more than the trouble it
(...) We are more to deal with our ow^ hearts, than with the trouble it self.
We are not hurt till our souls be hurt. God will not have it in the power of
any creature to hurt our souls, but by our own treason against our selves.

Therefore we should have our hearts in continual jealousy, for they are ready
to deceive the best. In sudden encounters, some sin does many times
discover it self, the seed whereoflyeth hid in our natures, which we think
our selves very free from. Who would have thought the seeds of murmuring had
lurked in the meek nature of Moses? That the seeds of murder had lurked in
the pitiful heart of David? 2 Samuel 12. 9
That the seeds of denial of Christ had lain hid in the zealous affection of
Mat, 26. 72.
Peter toward Christ? If passions break out from us, which we are not
naturally inclined unto, and over which by grace we have got a great conquest;
how watchful need we be over our selves in those things, which by temper,
custom, and company, we are carried unto? and what cause have we to fear
continually that we are worse than we take our selves to be?

There are many unruly passions lie hid in us, until they be drawn out by
something that meets with them; either I by way of opposition, as when the
truth of God spiritually unfolded, meets with some beloved corruption, it
swells bigger; the force of Gunpowder is not known until some spark light
on it; and oftentimes the stillest natures (if crossed) discover the deepest
corruptions. Sometimes it is drawn out by dealing with the opposite spirits of
other men. Oftentimes retired men know not what lies hid in themselves.

2. Sometimes by crosses, as many people whilst the freshness and vigor of
their spirits lasts, and while the flower of age, and a full supply of all
things continues, seem to be of^ pleasing and calm disposition; b^
afterward when changes come, like Jobs wife, they are discovered. The that
which in nature is unsubdued, openly appears.

3. Temptations likewise have a searching power to bring that to light in us
which was hidden before. Satan has been a winnower, and a sister, of Luke
22. 3.
old: he thought if Job had been but Job 1.
touched in his body, he would have cursed God to his face.

Some men out of policy conceal their passion, until they see some Aperta
perdunt odia vindictae locum.
advantage to let it out; as Esau smoothered his hatred until his fathers
death. When the restraint is taken away, Men (as we say) show themselves in
their Solve Le^nem and senties.
pure naturalls; unloose a Tiger or a Lion, and you know what he is.

4. Further, let us see more every day into the state of our own souls; what
4.
a shame is it that so nimble and swift a spirit as the soul is, that can
mount up to heaven, and from thence come down into the earth in an instant,
should whilst it looks over all other things over-looke it self? that it
should be skillful in the story (almost) of all times and places, and yet
ignorant of the story of it self? that we should know what is done in the
Court and Country, and beyond the Seas, and be ignorant of what is done at
home in our own hearts? that we should live known to others, and yet die
unknown to our selves? that we should be able to give account of any thing
better then of our selves to our selves? This is the cause why we stand in our
own light; why we think better of our selves than, others, and better then
is cause. This is that which hinders all reformation, for how can we reform
that which we are not willing to see, and so we lose one of the surest
evidences of our sincerity, which is, a willingness to search into our hearts,
and to be searched by others. A sincere heart will offer it self to trial.

And therefore let us sift our actions, and our passions, and see what is flesh
in them, and what is spirit, and so separate the precious from the vile. It is
good likewise to consider what sin we were guilty of before, which moved GOD
to give us up to excess in any passion, and wherein we have grieved his
Spirit; Passion will be (...) moderate, when thus it knows, it must come to
the trial and censure. This course will either make us weary of passion, or
else passion will make us weary of this strict course. We shall find it the
safest way to give our hearts no rest, till we have wrought on them to purpose,
and gotten the mastery over them.

When the soul is invred to this dealing with it self, it will learn the
skill to command, and passions will be soon commanded, as being invred to be
examined and checked; As we see dogs, and such like domestical creatures,
that will not regard a stranger, yet will be quieted in brawles presently, by
the voice of their Master, to which they are accustomed. This fits us for
service. Unbroken spirits are like unbroken horses, unfit for any use, until
they be thoroughly subdued.

5. And it were best to prevent 5. We must crush the first motions of sin.
(as much as in us lies) the very first risings, before the soul be
overcast; Passions are but little motions at the first, but grow as Rivers do,
greater and greater, the further they are carried from their Spring. The first
risings are the more to be looked unto, because there is most danger in them,
and we have least care over them. Si^ like rust, or a Canker, will by little a^
little eat out all the graces of the soul There is no staying when we are
once down the hill till we come to the bottom. No sin but is easier kept out,
t^ driven out. If we cannot prevent wicked thoughts, yet we may deny them
lodging in our hearts. It is our giving willing entertainment to sinful
motions, that increases guilt, and hinder^ our peace. It is that which moves
God to give us up to a further degree of evil affections. Therefore what we
are afraid to do before men, we should be afraid to think before God. It
would much further our peace to keep our judgments clear, as being the eye of
the soul, whereby we may discern in every action and passion, what is good,
and what is evil: as likewise to preserve rendernesse of heart, that may
check us at the first, and not brook the least evil being discovered. When
the heart begins once to be kindled, it is easy to smother the smoke of
passion, which otherwise will fume up into the head, and gather into so thick
a cloud, as we shall lose the sight of our selves, and what is best to be
done. And therefore David here labors to take up his heart at the first; his
care was to crush the very first insurrections of his soul, before they came
to break forth into open rebellion; storms we know rise out of little gusts.
Little risings neglectd, cover the soul before we are aware. If we would
check these risings and stifle them in their birth, they would not break out
afterward to the reproach of Religion, to the scandal of the weak, to the
offense of the strong, to the grief of Gods Spirit in us, to the disturbance
of our own spirits in doing good, and to the disheartning of us in troubling
of our inward peace, and thereby weakening our assurance. Therefore let us stop
beginnings as much as may be; and so soon as they begin to rise, let us begin
to examine what raised them, and whither they are about to carry us. The way to
be still, is to examine o^ Psalm. 4.
selves first. And then censure what stands not with reason. As David does,
when he had given way to unbefitting thoughts of Gods providence, So foolish,
says he, was I, and as a (...) Psalm. 73. 22.
before thee.

Especially, then look to these sinful stirrings, when thou art to deal with
God. I am to have communion with a God of peace; What then do turbulent
thoughts and affections i^ my heart? I am to deal with a patie^ God, why
should I cherish reveng^ thoughts? Abraham drove away t^ birds from the
sacrifice, Genesis 15. 11. Troublesome thoughts like birds (...) come before they
be sent for, but they should find entertainment accordingly.

6. In all our grievances, let us lo^ to something that may comfort us, (...) 6.
well as discourage: look to that we enjoy, as well as that we want. As i^
prosperity God mingles some crosses to diet us; so in all crosses there (...)
something to comfort us. As there is a vanity lies hid in the best worldly
good: So there is a blessing lies hid in the worst worldly evil. GOD usually
makes up that with some advantage in another kind, wherein we are inferior
to others. Others are in greater place, So they are in greater danger. Others
be richer, so their cares and s^res be greater; the poor in the world may be
richer in faith than they. The Iam. 2. 5.
soul can better digest and master a low estate than a prosperous, and is
under some abasement i^ is in a less distance from God. Others are not so
afflicted as we, than they have less experience of Gods gracious power than
we. Others may have more healthy bodies, but souls less weaned from the
world. We would not change conditions with them, so as to have their spirits
with their condition? For one half of our lives, the meanest are as happy and
free from cares, as the greatest Monarch: that is, whilst both sleep; and
usually the sleep of the one, is sweeter than the sleep of the other. What is
all that the earth ca^ afford us, if God deny health? and this a man in the
meanest condition may enjoy. That wherein one man diff^ from another, is but
title, and but for a little time; Death levelleth all.

There is scarce any man, but the good he receives from God is more than the
ill he feels, if our unthankful hearts would suffer us to think (...) Is
not our health more than our sickness? do we not enjoy more than we want, I
mean, of the things that are necessary? Are not our good days more than our
evil? but we would go to heaven upon Roses, and usually o^ cross is more
taken to heart, than (...) hundred blessings. So unkindly (...) deal with God.
Is God indebted to us, does he owe us any thing? those that deserve nothing,
should be cont^ with any thing.

We should look to others as good as our selves (as well as to our selves)
and than we shall see it is not our own case only; who are we that we should
look for an exempted condition from those troubles which Gods dearest children
are addicted unto.

Thus when we are surprised contrary to our looking for and liking, we should
study rather how to exercise some grace, than give way to any passion. Think,
now is a time to exercise our patience, our wisdom, and other graces. By this
means we shall turn that to our greatest advantage, which Satan intends
greatest hurt to us by. Thus we shall not only master every condition, but
make it serviceable to our good. If nature teach Bees, not only to gather honey
out of sweet flowers, but out of bitter: Shall not grace teach us to draw even
out of the bitterest condition, something to better our souls? We learn to
tame all creatures, even the wildest, that we may bring them to our use; and
why should we glve way to our own unruly passions?

7. It were good to have in our eye, the beauty of a well ordered soul, and 7.
we should think that nothing in this world is of sufficient worth to put us
out of frame. The sanctified so^ should be like the Sun in this, whi^ though
it works upon all these in^ riour bodies, and cherishes them (...) light and
influence; yet is not mov^ nor wrought upon by them again, b^ keeps its own
luster and distance^* So our spirits being of a heaven breed, should rule other
things bene^ them, and not be ruled by them. It (...) a holy state of soul to
be under t^ power of nothing beneath it self; A^ we stirred? than consider,
It this m^ter worth the loss of my quiet? Wh^ we esteem, that we love, what
we love, we labor for; And therefore (...) us esteem highly of a clear calm
temper, whereby we both enjoy our God, and our selves, and know how to ra^ all
things else. It is against nature f^ inferior things to rule that, which the
wise Disposer of all things has set above them. We owe the flesh neither suit
nor service, we are no debt^ to it,

The more we set before the so^ that quiet estate in heaven, which t^ souls
of perfect men now enjoy, and it self ere long shall enjoy there, The more it
will be in love with it, and endeavor to attain unto it. And because the soul
never works better, than when it is raised up by some strong and Anima
nunquam melius agit, qua^ ex imperio alicujus insignis affectus.
sweet affection; let us look upon our nature, as it is in Christ, in whom it
is pure, sweet, calm, meek, every way lovely. This sight is a changing sight,
love is an affection of imitation, we affect a likeness to him we love. Let us
learn of Christ to be humble and meek, and then we shall find rest to our
souls. Math. 11. 29.
The setting of an excellent idea and platform before us, will raise and draw
up our souls higher, and ^ke us sensible of the least movings of spirit, that
shall be contrary to that, the attainement whereof we have in our desires. He
will hardly attain to mean things, that sets not before him higher
perfection. Naturally we love to see symetry and proportion, even in a dead
picture, and are much taken with some curious piece. But why should we not
rather labor to keep the affections of the soul in due proportion? Seeing a
me^ and well ordered soul is not on^ lovely in the sight of men and Ang^ but
is much set by, by the great Go^ himself. But now the greatest care^ those
that set highest price upon the^ selves is, how to compose their o^ ward
carriage in some graceful m^ner, never studying how to compose their spirits;
and rather how to (...) the deformity of their passions then (...) cure them.
Whence it is that the fou^ inward vices are covered with the fairest vizards,
and to make this the worse, all this is counted the b^ breeding.

The He^wes placed all their happiness in peace, and when they wo^ comprise
much in one word, they would wish peace. This was that the Angels brought news
of from heav^ at the birth of Christ. Now peace (...) seth out of quietness
and order, a^ God that is the God of peace, is the God (...) 1 Cor. 14. 33.
order first. What is health, but when (...) the members are in their due
posit^ and all the humors in a settled quie^ Whence arises the beauty of the
world, but from that comely order wherein every creature is placed; the more
glorious and excellent creatures above, and the less below? So it is in There
must be an uniformity in the lives of Christians.
the soul; the best constitution of it is when by the Spirit of God it is so
ordered, as that all be in subjection to the Law of the mind. What a sight
were it for the feet to be where the head is, and the earth to be where the
heaven is, to see all turned upside down? And to a spiritual eye it seems as
great a deformity, to see the soul to be under the rule of sinful passions.

Comeliness rises out of the fit proportion of diverse members to make up one
body, when every member has a beauty in it self, and is likewise well suited
to other parts; A fair face and a crooked body, comely upper parts, and the
lower parts uncomely, suit not well; because comeliness stands in oneness, in
a fit agreement of many parts to one; when there is the head of a man, and the
body of a beast, it is a monster in nature; And is it not as monstrous for to
have an understanding head, and a fierce untame^ heart? It cannot but raise up
a holy indignation in us against these risings, when we consider how
unbeseeming they are; What do these base pass^ in a heart dedicated to God,
and given up to the government of his Spirit? what an indignity is it for
Princes to go a foot, and servants on horse-ba^ for those to rule, whose place
is to (...) ruled? as being good attendants, b^ bad guides. It was Chams curse
to be^ sevant of servants.

8. This must be strengthened with a strong selfe-denial, without which there 8
can be no good done in Religion.

There be two things that most trouble us in the way to heaven; corruption
within us, and the cross without (...), that which is within us must be deni^,
that that which is without us may b^ endured. Otherwise we cannot follow him by
whom we look to be saved Christians must deny themselves
The gate, the entrance of Religion, (...) narrow, we must strip our selves of
o^ selves before we can enter; if we bring any ruling lust to Religion, it will
prove a bitter root of some gross sin, or of apostacy and final
desperation.

Those that sought the praise of men, Ioh. 12. 43.
more than the praise of God, could not believe, because that lust of ambition,
would, when it should be crossed, draw them away. The young man thought it
better for Christ to lose a Disciple, than that he should lose his possession,
Mat. 19. 22
and therefore went away as he came: The third ground came to nothing, because
the Plough had not gone deep Mat. 13 22.
enough to break up the roots, whereby their hearts were fastened to earthly
contentments. This self-denial we must carry with us through all the parts
of Religion, both in our active and passive obedience; for in obedience there
must be a subjection to a superior, but corrupt self, neither is subject,
Romans 8.
nor can be, it will have an oar in every thing, and makes every thing, yea,
Religion serviceable to it self. It is the Idol of the world, or rather the god
that is set highest of all in the soul; and so God himself is made but an
Idol. It is hard to deny a friend who is another self, harder to deny a wife
that lies in the bosom, but most hard to deny our selves. Nothing so near us
as our selves to our selves, and yet nothing so far off. Nothing so dear,
and yet nothing so malicious and troublesome. Hypocrites would part with the
fruit of their body, Mic. 6.
sooner than the sin of their souls.

CAP. XI.
Signs of victory over our selves, and of (...) subdued spirit.

But how shall we know, whether we have by grace got the victory over our
selves Quest.
or not?

I answer, if in good actions we stand not so much upon the credit of the Answ.
1.
action, as upon the good that is done. What we do as unto God, we look for
acceptance from God. It was Ion^ his fault to stand more upon his own
reputation, than the glory of Gods mercy. It is a prevailing sign, when though
there be no outward encouragements, Nay, though there be discouragements, yet
we can rest in the comfort of a good intention. For usually inward comfort is
a note of inward sincerity. Iehu must be seen, or else all 2 Kings 10. 16.
is lost.

2. It is a good evidence of some prevailing, when upon Religious 2.
grounds we can cross our selves in those things unto which our hearts stand
most affected, this shows we reserve GOD his own place in our hearts.

3. When being privy to our own inclination and temper, we have gotten 3.
such a supply of spirit, as that the grace which is contrary to our temper
appears in us. As often we see, none more patient, than those that are
naturally inclined to intemperancie of passion, because natural pronenesse
makes them jealous over themselves. Some, out of fear of being overmuch
moved, are not moved so much as they should be: This jealousy stirs us up
to a careful use of all helps; Where grace is helped by nature, there a little
grace will go far; but where there is much untowardnesse of nature, there
much grace is not so well discerned. Sour wines need much sweetning. And that
is most spiritual which has least help from nature, and is won by prayer
and pains.

4. When we are not partial when the things concern our selves. Da^ 4.
could allow himself another m^ wife, and yet judges another m^ worthy of
death for taking away a p^ man's lamb. Men usually favor themselves 2. Sam.
12. 4.
too much, when they are Chancellors in their own cause, and measure all
things by their private interest. He has taken a good degree in Christ's
School, that has learned to forget himself here.

5. It is a good sign, when upon discovery of selfe-feeking we can gain upon
5.
our corruption; and are willing to search and to be searched, what our
inclination is, and where it fails. The which we favor, we are tender of,
(...) must not be touched. A good heart, when any corruption is discovered by a
searching Ministry, is affected as if it had found out a deadly enemy.
Touchinesse and passion argues guilt.

6. This is a sign of a man's victory 6.
over himself, when he loves health and peace of body and mind, with a
supply of all needful things, chiefly for this end, that he may with more
freedom of spirit serve God in doing good to others. So soon as grace enters
into the heart, it frames the heart to be in some measure public: and thinks
it has not its end, in the bare enjoying of any thing, until it can improve
what it has for a further end. Thus to seek our selves, is to deny our
selves, and thus to deny our selves, is truly to seek our selves. It is no
selfe-seeking, when we care for no more then that, without which we cannot
comfortably serve God. When the soul can say unto GOD, Lord as thou would
have me serve thee in my place; so grant me such a measure of health and
strength, wherein I may serve thee.

But what if God thinks it good, that Object.
I shall serve him in weakness, and in want, and suffering.

Then, it is a comfortable sign of Answ.
gaining over our own wills, when we can yield our selves to be disposed of
by God, as knowing best what is good for us. There is no condition but therein
we may exercise some grace, and honor GOD in some measure. Yet because some
enlargement of conditi^ is ordinarily that estate wherein we are best able to
do good in; we may in the use of means desire it, and upon that, resign up
our selves wholly unto GOD, and make his will our will, without exception or
reservation, and care for nothing more than we can have with his leave and
love. This I^ had exercised his heart unto; where* upon in that great change of
condition, he sinned not, that is, fell not into Job (...).
the sins incident to that dejected and miserable state; into sins of
rebellion and discontent. He carried his crosses comely, with that stayednesse
and resignednesse, which became a holy man.

7. It is further a clear evidence of a spirit subdued, when we will discover
7.
the truth of our affection toward God and his people, though with censure of
others. David was content to endure the censure of neglecting the state and
Majesty of a King, out of joy for settling the Arc. Nehemiah could Neh. 2. 3.
not dissemble his grief for the ruins of the Church, though in the Kings
presence: It is a comfortable sign of the wasting of self-love, when we can
be at a point what becomes of our selves, so it go well with the cause of God
and the Church.

Now the way to prevail still more over our selves, (as when we are to do or
suffer any thing, or withstand any person in a good cause, etc.) is, not to
think that we are to deal with men, How to get the mastery of our selves.
yea, or with Devils so much as with our selves. The Saints resisted their
enemies to death, by resisting their own corruptions first: if we once get the
victory over our selves, all other things are conquered to our ease. All the
hurt Satan and the world do us, is, by correspondency with our selves. A^
things are so far under us, as we a^ Te vince and mundus tibi victus est,
etc.
above our selves.

For the further subduing of our selves, it is good to follow sin to the
first Hold and Castle, which is corrup^ nature; The streams will lead us to
the Spring head: Indeed the most apparent discovery of sin is in the outward
carriage; we see it in the fr^ before in the root; as we see grace in the
expression before in the affection: But yet we shall never hate sin
thoroughly, until we consider it in the poisoned root from whence it arises.

That which least troubles a natural man, does most of all trouble a tr^
Christian; A natural man is sometimes troubled with the fruit of his
corruption, and the consequents of guilt and punishment that attend it; but a
true hearted Christian, with corruption it self; this drives him (...)
complain with St. Paul, O wr^ man that I am, who shall deliver me, (...) Romans
7.
from the members only, but from (...) body of death? Which is as noysom^ to
my soul, as a dead carrion is to my senses; which together with the members,
is marvellously nimble and active; and has no days, or hours, or minuits of
rest; always laying about it to enlarge it self, and like spring water, which
the more it issues out, the more it may.

It is a good way, upon any particular breach of our inward peace, presently to
have recourse to that which breeds and foments all our disquiet. Lord, what do
I complain of this my unruly passion? I carry a nature about me subject to
break out continually opon any occasion; Lord, strike at the root, and dry up
the fountain in me. Thus David does arise from the guilt of those two foul
sins, of Murder Psalm. 51.
and Adultery; to the sin of his nature, the root it self; As if he should
say, Lord, it is not these actual sins that defile me only; but if I look
back to my first conception, I was tainted in the spring of my nature.

This is that here which put David's soul so much out of frame; For from whence
was this contradiction? An^ whence was this contradiction so unwearied, in
making head again and again against the checks of the spirit, in him? Whence
was it that Corruption would not be said Nay? Whence were these sudden and
unlookt for objections of the flesh? But from the remainder of old Adam in him,
which like a Michel within us is either scofing (...) the ways of God; or as
Jobs wife, fretting and thwarting the motions of Gods spirit in us; which
prevails the more, because it is homebred in (...): whereas holy motions are
strangers to most of our souls. Corruption is loath that a new commer in should
take so much upon him as to control: As the Sodomites thought much that Lot
being a stranger should intermeddle amongst Genesis 19. 9.
them. If God once leave us as heedid Hezekiah to try what is in us, what
should he find but darkness, rebellion, unrulinesse, doubtings, etc. in the
best of us? This flesh of ours has principles against all Gods principles, and
laws against all Gods laws, and reasons against all GODS reasons. Oh! if we
could but one whole hour seriously think of the impure issue of our hearts, it
would bring us down upon our knees in humiliation before God. But we can
never whilst we live, so thoroughly as we should, see into the depth of our
deceitful hearts, nor yet be humbled enough for what we see; For though we
speak of it and confess it, yet we are not so sharpened against this corrupt
flesh of ours, as we should. How should it humble us, that the seeds of the
vilest sin, even of the Sin against the holy Ghost is in us? and no thank
to us that they break not out. It should humble us to hear of any great
enormous sin in another man, considering what our own nature would proceed
unto if it were not restrained. We may see our own nature in them as face
answering face; If God should take his Spirit from us, there is enough in us to
defile a whole world; And although we be ingrafted into Christ, yet we carry
about us a relish of the old stock still. David was a man of a good natural
constitution; and for grace, a man after Gods ow^ heart, and had got the better
of himself in a great measure, and had learned to overcome himself in matter
of revenge, as in Saul's case: yet now we see the vessel is shaken a little,
and the 1 Samuel 24. 6
dregs appear that were in the bottom before. Alas, we know not our o^
hearts, till we plow with Gods hei^ till his Spirit brings a light into our
souls. It is good to consider how this impure spring breaks out diversely, in
the diverse conditions we are in; there is no estate of life, nor no action we
undertake, wherein it will not put forth it self to defile us: It is so full
of poison that it taints whatsoever we do, both our natures, conditions, and
actions. In a prosperous condition (like D^vid) we think we shall never be
(...) Psalm. 30. 6.
Under the Cross the soul is troubled (...) drawn to murmur, and to be
sulle^ and sink down in discouragement, (...) be in a heat almost to
blasphemy, (...) weary of our callings, and to qua^ with every thing in our
way. See (...) folly and fury of most men in this, for ^s silly worms to
contradict the great God: And to whose peril is it? Is it not our own? Let us
gather our selves, with all our wit and strength together, Alas, what can we
do but provoke him, and get more stripes? We may be sure he will deal with
us, as we deal with our children, if they be froward and unquiet for lesser
matters, we will make them cry and be sullen for something: Refractory
stubborn horses are the more spurred, and yet shake not off the rider.

CAP. XII.
Of original righteousness, natural corruption, Satan's joining with it, and
our duty thereupon.

. 1.
But here mark a plot of spiritual treason; Satan joining with our
corruption, sets the wit on work to persuade the soul, that this inward
rebellion is not so bad, because it is natural to us, as a condition of
nature, rising out of the first principles in our Most of the most dangerous
opinions of Popery, as Justification by works, state of perfection, merit,
satisfaction, supererogation, etc. spring from hence that they have slight
co^ceits of concupiscence as a condition of nature; Yet some of them as Michael
Bayns professor at Lovane, etc. are sound in the point.
creation, and was curbed in by the bridle of original righteousness, which
they would have accessory and supernatural, and therefore allege that
concupiscence is less odious and more excusable in us, and so, no great danger
in yielding and betraying our Soule^ unto it, and by that means persuading us,
that that which is our deadliest enemy, has no harm in it, nor means any
to us.

This rebellion of lusts against the understanding, is not natural, as our
nature came out of Gods hands at the first: For this being evil and the ca^ of
evil, could not come from God wh^ is Good, and the cause of all good, and
nothing but good: who upon the creation of all things pronounced them good, and
after the creation of man pronounced of all things that they were very good.
Now that which is ill and very ill, cannot be seated at the same Answ.
time in that which is good and very Genesis 1.
good: God created man at the first, right, he of himself sought out many
inventions. As God beautified the heaven with stars, and decked the earth
with variety of plants, and herbs, and flowers, So he adorned man his prime
creature here below, with all those endowments that were fit for a happy
condition, and original righteousness was fit and due to an original and
happy condition. Therefore as the Angels were created with all Angelical
perfections, and as our bodies were created in an absolute temper of all the
humors; so the soul was created in that sweet harmony wherein there was no
discord, as an instrument in tune fit to be moved to any duty; as a clean neat
glass the soul represented Gods image and holiness.

. 2.
Therefore it is so far, that concupiscence should be natural, that the
contrary to it, namely, Righteousness, wherein Adam was created, was natural
to him; though it were planted in man's nature by God, and so in regard of the
cause of it, was supernatural, yet because it was agreeable to that happy
condition, without which he could not subsist, in that respect i^ was natural,
and should have been derived (if he had stood) together with his nature, to
his posterity. As hear i^ the air, though it has its first impression from
the heat of the Sun, yet is natural, because it agrees (...) the nature of
that element: and though man be compounded of a spiritual and earthly
substance, yet it is natural that the baser earthly part should be subject to
the Superior, because where the is different degrees of worthiness, it is fit
there should be a subordination of the meaner to that which is in ord^ higher.
The body naturally de^ food and bodily contentments, yet i^ a man endued with
reason, this desire i^ governed so as it becomes not inor^nate: A beast sins
not in its appet^ because it has no power above to order it. A man that lives
in a soli^ place far remote from company, may take his liberty to live as it
pleas^ him; but if he comes to live under the government of some well ordered
City; then he is bound to submit to the ^wes, and customs of that City,
under penalty, upon any breach of order: So the risings of the soul, howsoever
in other creatures they are not blameable, having no commander in themselves
above them, yet in man they are to be ordered by reason and judgment.

Therefore it cannot be, that concupiscence should be natural, in regard of
the state of creation; It was Adams sin which had many sins in the womb of
it, that brought this disorder upon the Soul; Adams person first corrupted our
nature, and nature being corrupted, corrupts our persons, and our persons being
corrupted, increase the corruption of our nature, by custom of sinning, which
is another nature in us; as a stream the farther it runs from the spring
head, the more it enlarges its channel, by the running of lesser rivers unto
it, until it empties it self into the Sea; So corruption, till it be
overpowred by grace, swells bigger and bigger, so that though this disorder
was not natural, in regard of the first creation, yet since the fall it is
become natural, even as we call that which is common to the whole kind, and
propagated from parents to their children, to be natural; So that it is both
natural and against nature, natural now, but against nature in its first
perfection.

And because corruption is natural to us, therefore 1. we delight in it,
whence it comes to pass, that our souls are 1
carried along in an easy current, to the committing of any sin without
opposition. 2. Because it is natural, therefore it is unwearied and restless,
(...) 2.
light bodies are not wearied in the motion upwards, nor heavy bodies i^ their
motion downwards, nor a stream in its running to the Sea, because it (...)
natural: Hence it is that the old man (...) never tired in the works of the
flesh, (...) never drawn dry. When men cannot act sin, yet they will love
sin, and act it over again by pleasing though^ of it, and by sinful
speculation suck out the delight of sin; and are grieved, not for their
sin, but because they want strength and opportunity to commit it; If sin
would not leave them, they would never leave sin. This corruption of our
nature is not wrought in us by reason and persuasions, for then it might be
satisfied with reasons, but it is in us by way of a natural inclination, as
iron is carried to the Loadstone; And till our natures be altered, no reason
will long prevail, but our sinful disposition as a stream stopped for a little
while, will break out with greater violence. 3. Being natural it needs no
help, as the earth needs no tillage 3.
to bring forth weeds. When our corrupt nature is carried contrary to that
which is good, it is carried of it self. As when Satan lies or murders, it
comes from his own cursed nature; and though Satan joyneth with our corrupt
nature, yet the pronenesse to sin and the consent unto it, is of our selves.

. 3.
But how shall we know, that Satan Quest.
joins with our nature, in those actions unto which nature it self is pro^?
Then Satan adds his help, when (...) Answ.
nature is carried more eagerly then ordinary to sin; as when a stream
runs violently, we may know t^ there is not only the tide, but the wind
that carries it.

So in sudden and violent rebellious it is Satan that pusheth on nature (...)
to it self of God. A stone falls downward by its own weight, but if it (...)
very swiftly, we know it is thro^ down by an outward mover. Though there were
no Devil, yet our corrupt nature would act Satan's part against (...) self, it
would have a supply of wickedness, Nemo se palpet de suo, Satan est, etc. Aug,
(as a Serpent has poison) from it self, it has a spring to feed (...).

But that man whilst he lives here (...) not altogether excluded from hope
(...) happiness, and has a nature not (...) large and capable of sin as
Sat^ whereupon he is not so obstinate (...) hating God, and working mischief
as he, etc. Otherwise there is for kind the same cursed disposition, and
malice of nature against true goodness in man, which is in the devils and damned
spirits themselves.

It is no mitigation of sin, to plead it is natural, for natural diseases
(as leprosies) that are derived from Parents, are most dangerous, and least
curable; Neither is this any excuse, for because as it is natural, so it is
voluntary, not only in Adam, in whose loins we were, and therefore sinned;
but likewise in regard of our selves, who are so far from stopping the course
of sin either in our selves or others, that we feed and strengthen it, or at
least give more way to it, and provide less against it then we should, until
we come under the government of grace; and by that means, we justify Adams
sin, and that corrupt estate that follows upon it, and show, that if we had
been in Adams condition our selves, we would have made that ill choice which
he made. And though this corruption of our nature be necessary to us, yet it
is no violent necessity from an outward cause, but a necessity that we
willingly pull upon our selves, and therefore ought the more to humble us; for
the more necessarily we sin, Suspira^a ligatus, non ferro aliqu^, sed mea
ferreavolu^tate, velle^ meum tenebet ini^icus and inde mihi catenam secerit,
Aug. Confess.
the more voluntarily, and the more voluntarily, the more necessarily; the will
putting it self voluntarily into these fetters of sin. Necessity is no
plea, when the will is the immediate cause of any action: Men's hearts tell them
they might rule their desires if they would; For tell a man of any dish which
he likes, that there is poison in it, and he will not meddle with it; So tell
him Quicquid si^ imperavit animus, (...). Seneca.
that death is in that sin which he is about to commit, and he will abstain
if he believe it be so; if he believe it not, it is his voluntary unbeleefe
and atheism.

If the will would use that soveraigntie it should, and could at the first, we
should be altogether freed from this necessity. Men are not damned because
they cannot do better, but because they will do no better; If there were no
will there would be no hell; For men willingly submit to the rule and law of
sin, C^sset voluntas propria and non erit infernus
they plead for it, and like it so well, as they hate nothing so much as that
which any way withstandeth those lawless laws.

Those that think it their happiness to do what they will, that they might
be free, cross their own desires, for this is the way to make them most
perfect slaves. When our will is the next immediate cause of sin, and our
consciences bear witness to us that it is so; then conscience is ready to
take Gods part in accusing our selves: Our consciences tell us to our faces,
that we might do more then we do to hinder sin; and that when we sin,
it is not through weakness, but out of the wickedness of our nature:

Our Consciences tell us that we sin not only willingly, but often with
delight, (so far forth as we are not subdued by grace, or awed by something
above us,) and that we esteem any restraint to be our misery. And where by
grace the will is strengthened, so, that it yields not a full consent, yet a
gracious soul is humbled even for the sudden risings of corruption that
prevent deliberation. As here David, though he withstood the risings of his
heart, yet he was troubled, that he had so vile a heart that would rise up
against God, and therefore takes it down. Who is there that has not cause to
be humbled, not only for his corruption, but that he do^ not resist it with
that strength, nor labor to prevent it with that diligence, which his heart
tells him he might?

We cannot have too deep apprehensions of this breeding sin, the ^ther and
nurse of all abominations, for the more we consider the height, the depth, the
breadth, and length of it, the more shall we be humbled in our selves, and
magnify the height, the Ephesians. 3. 18
depth, the breadth, and the length of Gods mercy in CHRIST. The favorers of
nature are always the enemies of grace; This which some think and speak so
weakly and faintly of, is a worse enemy to us then the devil himself; a more
near, a more restless, a more traitorous enemy, for by intelligence with it
the Devil does us all the hurt he does, and by it maintains ^orts in us
against goodness. This is that which either by discouragement or contrariety
hinders us from good; or else by deadness, tediousness, distractions, or
corrupt aims hinders us in doing good, this puts us on to evil, and
abuses what is good i^ us, or from us, to cover or color sin; and furnishes
us with reasons either to maintain what is evil, or shifts to translate it
upon false causes, or senses to arm us against whatsoever shall oppose us in
our wicked ways: Though it neither can nor will be good, yet it would be
thought to be so by others, and enforces a conceit upon it self that it is
good. It imprisons and keeps down all light that may discover it, both within
it self, and without it self, if it lie in its power: It flatters it self,
and would have all the world flatter it too, which if it does not, it frets;
especially if it be once discovered and crossed: hence comes all the plotting
against goodness, that sin may reign without control. Is it not a
lamentable case that man, who out of the very principles of nature cannot but
desire happiness and abhor misery, yet should be in love with eternal
misery in the causes of it, and abhor happiness in the ways that lead unto
it? This shows us what a wonderful deordination and disorder is brought upon
man's nature; For every other creature is naturally carried to that which is
helpful unto it, and shunneth that which is any way hurtful and offensive;
Only man is in love with his own bane, and fights for those lusts that fight
against his soul.

. 4.
Our duty is, 1. to labor to see this sinful disposition of ours not only as
Sixefold duty in respect of natural corruption.
it is discovered in the Scriptures, but as it discovers it self in our own
hearts; this must must be done by the 1.
light and teaching of Gods Spirit, who knows us and all the turnings and
windings and by-ways of our souls, better then we know our selves. We must
see it as the most odious and loathsome thing in the world, making our natures
contrary to Gods pure nature, and of all other duties making us most indisposed
to spiritual duties, wherein we should have nearest communion with God;
because it seizes on the very spirits of our minds.

2. We should look upon it, as worse then any of those filthy streams 2.
that come from it, nay then all the impure issues of our lives together; there
is more fire in the furnace then in the sparkles; There is more poison in the
root then in all the branches; for if the stream were stopped, and the branches
cut off, and the sparkles quenched, yet there would be a perpetual supply; as
in good things, the cause is better then the effect, so in ill things the cause
is worse. Every fruit should make this poysonfull root more hateful to us, and
the root should make us hate the fruit more, as coming from so bad a root, as
being worse in the cause, then in it self; the affection is worse then the
action, which may be forced or counterfeited. We cry out upon partic^r Evils
of not bewailing our corrupt nature.
sins, but are not humbled as we should be for our impure dispositions;
Without the sight of which there (...) be no sound repentance arising from the 1
deep and through consideration of sin; no desire to be new molded, without
which we can never enter into so holy 2.
a place as heaven; no self denial till 3.
we see the best things in us are enmity against God; no high prizing of
Christ, 4.
without who^ our natures, our person, and our actions are abominable in Go^ 5.
sight; nor any solid peace settled in the soul which peace arises not from
the ignorance of our corruption, or compounding with it, but from sight and
hatred of it, and strength against it.

3. Consider the spiritualnesse and large extent of the law of God, together 3.
with the curse annexed, which forbids not only particular sins, but all the
kinds, degrees, occasions, and furtherances of sin in the whole breadth and
depth of it, and our very nature it self so far as it is corrupted; For want
of which, we see many alive without the law, joviall and merry from ignorance
Romans 7. 9.
of their misery, who if they did but once see their natures and lives in that
glass, it would take away that liveliness and courage from them, and make
them vile in their own eyes; Men usually look themselves in the laws of the
State wherein they live, and think themselves good enough, if they are free
from the danger of penal statutes; this glass discovers only foul spots,
gross scandalls, and breakings out: Or else they judge of themselves by parts
of nature, or common grace, or by outward conformity to Religion, or else by
that light they have to guide themselves in the affairs of this life, by their
fair and civil carriage, etc. and thereupon live and die without any sense of
the power of godliness, which begins in the right knowledge of our selves, and
ends in the right knowledge of God. The spiritualnesse and purity of the law
should teach us to consider the purity and holiness of God; the bringing of
our souls into whose presence will make us to abhor our selves Job 42. 6.
(with Job) in dust and ashes; contraries are best seen by setting one near
the other; Whilst we look only on o^ selves, and upon others amongst whom we
live, we think our selves to be some body. It is an evidence of some sincerity
wrought in the soul, not to shun that light which may let us see the soul
corners of our hearts and lives.

4. The consideration of this likewise 4.
should enforce us to carry a double guard over our souls, David was very
watchful, yet we see here he was surprised unawares by the sudden rebellion of
his heart; we should observe our hearts as governors do rebels and mutinous
persons: Observation awes the heart; We see to what an excess sin grows in
those that deny themselves nothing, nor will be denied in any thing; who if
they may do what they will, will do what they may; who turn liberty into
license, and make all their abilities and advantages to do good, contributary
to the commands of overruling and unruly lusts.

Were it not that God partly by his power suppresseth, and partly by his grace
subdueth the disorders of man's nature for the good of society, and the
gathering of a Church upon earth; Corruption would swell to that excess, that
it would overturne and confound all things together with it self. Although
there be a common corruption that cleaves to the nature of all men in
general, as men, (as distrust in GOD, self-love, a carnal and worldly
disposition, etc.) yet God so orders it, that in some there is an ebb and
decrease, in others (God justly leaving them to themselves) a flow and increase
of sinfulness, even beyond the bounds of ordinary corruption, whereby they
become worse then themselves, either like beasts in sensuality, or like devils
in spiritual wickedness; though all be blind in spiritual things, yet some
are more blinded: though all be hard hearted, yet some are more hardened:
though all be corrupt in evil courses, yet some are more corrupted: and sink
deeper into rebellion then others.

Sometimes God suffers this corruption to break out in civil men, ye^ even in
his own children, that they may know themselves the better, and because
sometimes corruption is weckned not only by smothering, but by having a vent,
whereupon grace sti^ up in the soul a fresh hatred and r^venge against it; and
lets us see a necessity of having whole Christ, not only to pardon sin, but
to purge and cleanse our sinful natures. But yet that which is ill in it
self, must not be done for the good that comes by it by accident; Caution.
this must be a comfort after (...) surprisalls, not an encouragement before.

5. And because the divine nat^, wrought in us by divine truth together 5.
with the Spirit of God, is the only counter-poyson against all sin, and
whatsoever is contrary to God in us, therefore we should labor that the truth
of God may be grafted in (...) hearts, that so all the powers of our souls
may relish of it; that there may be a sweet agreement betwixt the soul and
all things that are spiritual, that truth being ingrafted in our hearts, we
may be ingrafted into Christ, and grow up in him, and put him on more and more,
and be changed into his likeness. Nothing in heaven or earth will work out
corruption and change our dispositions but the spirit of Christ, clothing
divine truths, with a divine power to this purpose.

6. When corruption rises pray it 6.
down, as S. Paul did, and to strengthen 2 Cor. 12. 8
thy prayer, claim the promise of the new covenant that God would circumcise
our hearts, and wash us with clean water, Ezekiel. 36. 25. 27.
that he would write his law in our hearts and give us his holy spirit when we
beg it; And look upon Christ as a public fountain open for Judah and
Zach. 13.
Jerusalem to wash in.

Herein consists our comfort, 1. that 1.
Christ has all fullness for us, and that our nature is perfect in him; 2.
That 2.
Christ in our nature has satisfied divine justice, not only for the sin of
our lives, but for the sin of our nature. And 3. that he will never give
over until by his spirit he has made 3.
our nature holy and pure as his own, till he has taken away not only the
reign, but the very life and being of sin out of our hearts. 4. That to this
end he leaves his Spirit and truth in the 4.
Church to the end of the world, that the seed of the Spirit may subdue the
seed of the serpent in us, and that the Spirit may be a never-failing spring of
all holy thoughts, desires, and endeavo^ in us, and dry up the contrary issue
and spring of corrupt nature.

And Christians must remember when they are much annoyed with their
corruptions, that it is not their particular case alone, but the condition of
all Gods people, least they be discouraged by looking on the ugly deformed
visage of old Adam: which affrighteth some so far, that it makes them think,
No man's nature is so vile (...) theirs; which were well if it tended to
humiliation only; but Satan often abuses it toward discouragement and
desperation. Many out of a misconceit think that corruption is greatest when
they feel it most, whereas indeed, the less we see it and lament it, the
more it is. Sighs and groans of the soul are like the pores of the body, out
of which in diseased persons sick humors break forth, and so become less.
The more we see and grieve for pride, which is as immediate issue of our
corrupted nature, the less it is, because we see it by a contrary grace; the
more sight the more hatred, the more hatred of sin the more love of grace,
and the more love the more life, which the more lively it is, the more it is
sensible of the contrary: upon every discovery and conflict corruption loses
some ground, and grace gains upon it.

CAP. XIII.
Of imagination, sin of it, and remedies for it.

. 1.
ANd amongst all the faculties of the soul Most of the disquiet and (...)
necessary Sinfulnes and vanity seated in the imagination is a cause of much
disquiet.
trouble of our lives arises from the vanity and ill government of that power
of the soul which we (...) imagination and opinion, bordering between the
senses and our understanding; which is nothing else but a shallow apprehension
of good or evil ^en from the senses: Now because (...) good or evil things
agree or disagree to the senses, and the life of sense is (...) us before the
use of reason, and the delights of sense are present, and pleasing, and suitable
to our natures: thereup^ the imagination sets a great price upon sensible
good things; and the judgment it self since the fall, until it has an
higher light and strength, yields to our imagination; hence it co^ to pass
that the best things, if they be attended with sensible inconveniences, as
want, disgrace in the world, and such like, are misjudged for evil things; and
the very worst things, if they be attended with respect in the world and
sensible contentments, are imagined to be the greatest good: which appears not
so much in men's words (because they are ashamed to discover their hidden folly
and a theisme) but the lives of people speak as much, in that particular
choice which they make; Many there are who think it not only a vain but a
dangerous thing to serve God, and a base thing to be awed with religious
respects, they count the ways that Gods people take no better then madness,
and that course which GOD takes in bringing men to heaven by a plain
publishing of heavenly truths to be nothing but foolishness, and those people
that regard it, are esteemed (as the Pharisees esteemed them that heard Christ)
ignorant, base, and despicable pers^; Hence arise all those false pre^dice
against the ways of holiness, as they in the Acts were shy in entertaining
the truth, because it was a way every where spoken against. The doctrine of
Act. 28. 22
the Cross, has the cross always following it, which imagination counte^
the most odious and bitter thing in the world.

This imagination of ours is become the seat of vanity, and thereupon of
vexation to us, because it apprehend^ greater happiness in outward go^d things
then there is, and a greater misery in outward evil things then indeed there
is, and when experience shows us that there is not that good in those things
which we imagine to be, but contrarily, we find much evil in them which we
never expected, hereupon the soul cannot but be troubled. The life of many
men, and those not the meanest, is almost nothing else but a fancy; that which
chiefly sets their wits a work, and takes up most of their time, is how to
please their own imagination, which sets up an excellency within it self,
in comparison of which it despises all true excellency, and those things that
are of most necessary consequence indeed. Hence springs ambition, and the vain
of being great in the world; hence comes an unmeasurable desire of abounding in
those things which the world esteems highly of, there is in us naturally a
competition and desire of being equal or above others, in that which is
generally thought to make us happy and esteemed amongst men; if we be not the
only men yet we will be somebody in the world, some thing we will have to
be highly esteemed for, wherein if we be crossed we count it the greatest
misery that can befall us.

And which is worse, a corrupt desire of being great in the opinion of others,
creepes into the profession of religion, if we live in those places wherein it
brings credit or gain; men will sacrifice their very lives for vain glory: It
is an evidence a man lives more to opinion and reputation of others, then to
Conscience, when his grief is more for being disappointed of that approbation
which he expects from men, then for his miscarriage toward GOD. It marres all
in religion, when we go about heavenly things with earthly affections, and
seek not CHRIST i^ Christ, but the world: What is Popery but an artificial
frame of me^ brain to please men's imaginations by outward state and pomp of
Cere^nies, like that golden image of Nebuch^nezar, wherein he pleased himself
so, that to have uniformity in worshipping the same, he compelled all ^der
pain of death to fall down before it; Dan. 36.
this makes superstitious persons always cruel, because superstitious devises
a^ the brats of our own imagination, which we strive for more, then for the
purity of Gods worship; hence it is likewise that superstitious persons a^
restless (as the woman of Samaria) i^ their own spirits, as having no
bottom, but fancy in stead of faith.

. 2.
Now the reason why imagi^ How sinful imaginatio^s work upon the soul.
works so upon the soul, is, he arise^ stirs up the affections answerable
(...) the good or ill which it apprehends, and our affections stir the humors
of the body, so that oftentimes both our souls and bodies are troubled hereby.

Things work upon the soul in this order. 1. Some object is presented. 2.
Then it is apprehended by imagination as good and pleasing, or as evil and
hurtful. 3. If good, the desire is ^ried to it with delight: if evil, it is
rejected with distaste, and so our affections are stirred up sutably to our
apprehension of the object. 4. Affections sti^ up the spirits. 5. The spirits
raise the humors, and so the whole man becomes moved and oftentimes ^pered;
this falls out by reason of ^e Sympathy between the soul and body whereby
what offends one re^deth to the hurt of the other.

And we see conceived troubles have the same effect upon us, as true. Jacob was
as much troubled with the imagination of his sons death, as if he had been
dead indeed; imagination though it be an empty windy thing, yet it has real
effects. Supertious persons are as much troubled for negle^ing any voluntary
service of man i^vention, as if they had offended again the direct commandment
of God: (...) superstition breeds false fears, and (...) fear brings true
vexation; it tr^ forms God to an Idol, imagining li^ to be pleased with
whatsoever ple^ our selves, when as we take it ill (...) those who are under
us should take ^rection from themselves, and not fr^ us, in that which may
content us. ^perstition is very busy, but all in v^ in vain they worship me
says God, (...) how can it choose but vex and (...) Matt. 15. 9
quiet men, when they shall take a gr^ deal of pains in vain, and whi^
worse, to displease most in that wh^ in they think to please most. Go^
blasteth all devised service with (...) demand, Who required these things Esaias
1. 12.
your hands? It were better for (...) ask our selves this question be^ hand,
Who acquired this? Why do (...) trouble our selves about that which we (...)
have no thank for? We should not bring God down to our own imag^nations,
but raise our imaginations up to God.

Now imagination hurts us, 1. By false representations. 2. By preventing
reason, and so usurping a censure of things, before our judgments try them,
whereas the office of imaginati^ is to minister matter to our understanding to
work upon, and not to lead it, much less misleade it in any thing. 3. By
forging matter out of it self without ground; the imaginary grievances of our
lives are more then the real. 4. As it is an ill instrument of the
understanding to devise vanity and mischief.

. 3.
The way to cure this malady in us, The 1. remedy for hurtful imaginations.
is 1. To labor to bring these risings of our souls into the obedience of
Gods truth and Spirit; for imagination of it self, if ungoverned, is a wild,
and a ranging thing; it wrongs not only 2. Cor. 10. 5.
the frame of Gods work in us, setting the baser part of a man above the
high^r, but it wrongs likewise the work of God in the creatures and every
thing else, for it shapes things as it self pleases, it makes evil good, if
it pleases the senses, and good evil, if it be d^ gerous and distasteful to
the out^ man; which cannot but breed an ^quiet and an unsettled soul. As if
(...) were a god, it can tell good and evil at its pleasure, it sets up and
pulls do^ the price of what it lists: By rea^ of the distemper of
imagination, the life of many is little else but a dream; Many good men are in
a long dream of (...) sery, and many bad men in as long^ dream of happiness,
till the ti^ awaking come, and all because they (...) too much led by
appearances; and as i^ a dream men are deluded with (...) joys, and false
fears: So here; wi^ cannot but breed an unquiet and (...) unsettled soul,
therefore it is neces^ that God by his word and spirit she erect a government
in our hea^ (...) captivate and order this licentious (...) culty.

2. Likewise it is good to pre^ 2
real things to the soul, as the (...) riches, and true misery of a
Christian, the true honor and dishonor, true beauty and deformity, the true
nobleness and debasement of the soul; What ever is in the world, are but
Shadows of things in comparison of those true realties which Religion affords;
and why should we vex our selves about a vain shadow? Psalm. 39. 6.


The Holy Ghost to prevent further mischief by these outward things, gives a
dangerous report of them, calling them vanity, unrighteous Mammon, Luke 15. 9.
Pro. 23. 5.
entertain riches, thorns, yea nothing; because though they be not so in
themselves, yet, our imagination over-valuing them, they prove so to us upon
trial; Now knowledge that is bought by trial is often dear bought, and
therefore God would have us prevent this by a right conceit of things before
hand, least trusting to vanity we vanish our selves, and trusting to nothing
we become nothing our selves, and which is worse, worse then nothing.

3. Oppose serious consideration, against 3
vain imagination, and because our imagination is prone to raise false
objects, and thereby false conceits, and discourses in us; Our best way herein
is to propound true objects for the mind to work upon; as, 1. to consider the
greatness and goodness of Almighty God, and his love to us in Christ. 2, the
joys of heaven, and the torments of hell. 3. the last and strict day of
accou^. 4. The vanity of all earthly things. 5. The uncertainty of our lives,
etc. From the meditation of these truths, the soul will be prepared to have
rig^ conceits of things, and to discourse upon true grounds of them, and think
with it self, that if these things be so i^deed, then I must frame my life
suitable to these principles; hence arise true affections in the soul, true
fear of God, true love and desire after the best things, etc. The way to
expel ^ind o^ of our bodies, is to take some wholesome nourishment, and the
way to expel windy fancies from the soul, is (...) feed upon serious truths.

4. Moreover, to the well ordering of this unruly faculty, it is necessary that
our nature it self should be changed, for as men are so they imagine, as the
treasure of the heart is, such is that Mat. 12. 35. Ma'a men's, maltis animus.
which comes from it; An evil heart cannot think well: before the heart be
changed our judgment is depraved in regard of our last end, we seek our
happiness where it is not to be found. Wickedness 1 Samuel 24. 13.
comes from the wicked as the Proverb is. If we had as large and as quick
apprehensions as Satan himself, yet if the relish of our will and affections
be not changed, they will set the imagination a work, to devise satisfaction
to themselves. For there is a mutual working and refluxe betwixt the will and
the imagination; the imagination stirs up the will, and as the will is
affected so imagination works.

When the law of God by the Spirit is so written in our hearts, that the law
and our hearts become agreeable one to the other, then the soul is inclined
and made pliable to every good thought: When the heart is once taught of God to
love, it is the nature of this sweet affection (as the Apostle says) to think
no evil either of God or man, and not only so, but it carries the bent of 1
Cor. 13. 5
the whole soul with it to good, so that we love God not only with all our
heart, Mat. 22. 27
but with all our mind, that is, both with our understanding and imagination.
Love is an affection full of inventions, and sets the wit a work to devise
good things; therefore our chief care should be, that our hearts may be
circumcised and purified so, as they may be filled with the love of God, and
then we shall find this duty not only easy but delightful unto us. The
Prophet healed the waters 2 Kings 2. 20.
by casting salt into the spring, so the seasoning of the spring of our actions
seasons all. And indeed what can be expected from man whilst he is vanity
but vain imaginations? What can w^ look for from a Viper but poison? A man
naturally is either weaving spid^ Esaias 59. 5.
webbs or hatching Cockatrices eggs, the is, his heart is exercised either in
va^ or mischief, for not only the frame (...) the heart, but what the heart
frames i^ evil continually. A wicked man that i^ Genesis 6. 5.
besotted with false conceits, will ad^ of no good thoughts to enter.

5. Even when we are good and devise 5.
good things, yet there is still some sickness of fancy remaining in the best
of us, whereby we work trouble to our selves, and therefore it is necessary
we should labor to restrain and limit our fancy, and stop these waters at
the beginning, giving no not the least way thereunto. If it begins to grow
wanton, tame the wildness of it by fastening it to the cross of Christ, whom
we have Zach. 12. 10.
pierced with our sins, and amongst other, with these sins of our spirits,
who has redeemed us from our vain 1 Pet. 18.
thoughts and conversations; set before it the consideration of the wrath of
God, of death, and judgment, and the woeful estate of the damned, etc. and
take it not off till thy heart be taken off from straying from God; When it
begins once to run out to impertinencies, confine it to some certain thing,
and then upon examination we shall find it bring home some honey with it;
otherwise it will bring us nothing but a sting from the bitter remembrance of
our former misspent thoughts and time, which we should redeem and fill up,
with things that most belong to our peace. Idleness is the hour of
temptation, Luke 19. 47
wherein Satan joins with our imagination, and sets it about his own work,
to grind his greese, for the soul as a Mill either grinds that which is put
into it, or else works upon it self. Imagination is the first wheel of the
soul, and if that move amiss, it stirs all the inferior wheels amiss
with it; It stirs it self, and other powers of the soul are stirred by its
motion: and therefore the well ordering of this is of the greater consequence;
For as the imagination conceives, so usually the judgment concludes, the
will chooses, the affections are carried, and the members execute.

If it break loose (as it will soon run riot) yet give no consent of the
will to it; though it has defiled the memory, yet let it not defile the will,
though it be the first borne of the soul, yet let it not as Ruben ascend unto
the fathers bed, that is, our will, and defile Bernard.
that which should be kept pure for the spirit of Christ; resolve to act
nothing upon it, but cross it before it moves to the execution and practice of
any thing: As in sickness, many times we imagine (by reason of the corruption
of our taste) Physic to be ill for us, and those meats which nourish the
disease to be good, yet care of health makes us cross our own conceits, and
take that which fancy abhorres: So if we would preserve sound spirits, we
must conclude against groundless imagination, and resolve that whatsoever it
suggests cannot be so, because it crosses the grounds both of religion and
reason: And when we find imagination to deceive us in sensible things (as
Melancholy persons are subject to mistake) we may well gather, that it will
much more deceive us in our spiritual condition; And indeed such is the
incoherence, impertinencie, and unreasonablenesse of imagination, that men are
often ashamed and angry with themselves afterward for giving the least way to
such thoughts; and it is good to chastise the soul for the same, that it may
be more wary for time to come; whilst men are led with imagination, they
work not according to right rules prescribed to men, but as other baser
creatures, in whom fantasy is the chief ruling power, and therefore those
whose will is guided by their fancies live more like beasts then men.

We allow a horse to praunce and skip in a pasture, which if he does when he
is once backed by the rider, we count him an unruly and an unbroken jade, so
howsoever in other creatures we allow liberty of fancy, yet, we allow it not
in man to frisk and rove at its pleasure, because in him it is to be bridled
with reason.

6. Especially take heed of those cursed imaginations out of which as of mother
6.
roots others spring forth; as questioning Gods Providence, and care of his
children, his justice, his disregarding of what is done here below, etc.
thoughts of putting off our amendment for time to come, and so blessing ^r
selves in an evil way; thoughts against the necessity of exact and circumspect
walking with God, etc. When these Ephesians. 5. 15
and such like principles of Satan's and the fleshes divinity take place in our
hearts, they block up the soul against the entrance of soule-saving truths,
and taint our whole conversation, which is either good or evil, as the
principles are by which we are guided, and as our imagination is, which lets
in all to the soul.

The Jews in Ieremies time were fore-stalled with vain imaginations against
sound repentance, and therefore Ier. 4. 14.
his counsel is, Wash thine heart O Jerusalem, how long shall vain thoughts
lodge within thee?

7. Fancy will the better be kept within its due bounds, if we consider 7.
the principal use thereof; Sense and imagination is properly to judge what is
comfortable or uncomfortable, what is pleasing or displeasing to the outward
man, (not what is morally or spiritually good or ill) and thus far by the
laws of nature and civility we are bound to give fancy contentment both in
our selves and others, as not to speak or do any thing uncomely, which may
occasion a loathing or distaste in our converse with men: and it is a matter of
conscience to make our lives as comfortable as may be; as we are bound to
love, so we are bound to use all helps that may make us lovely, and indeare us
into the good affections of others: As we are bound to give no offense to the
conscience of another, so to no power or faculty either of the outward or
inward man of another: Some are taken off in their affection by a fancy,
whereof they can give but little reason; and some are more careless in giving
offense in this kind, then stands with that Christian circumspection and
mutual respect which we owe one to another; The Apostles rule is of large
extent, Whatsoever things are not only true, and honest, and just, but
whatsoever Phil. 4. 8.
things are lovely, and of good report, etc. think of these things. Yet our
maine care should be to manifest our selves rather to men's consciences then to
their imaginations.

8. It should be our wisdom likewise to place our selves in the best
convenience 8.
of all outward helps which may have a kind working upon our fancy; and to
take heed of the contrary, as time, place, and objects, etc. There be good
hours, and good messengers of Gods sending, golden opportunities, wherein God
uses to give a meeting to his children, and breathes good thoughts into them.
Even the wisest and holiest men, (as David and Solomon, etc.) had no further
safety then they were careful of well using all good advantages, and
sequestring themselves from such objects as had a working power upon them; by
suffering their souls to be led by their fancies, and their hearts to run
after their eyes, they betrayed and robbed themselves of much grace and
comfort, thereupon Solomon cries out with grief and shame from his own
experience, Vanity of vanities, etc. Eccles. 1. 2.
Fancy will take fire before we be aware. Little things are seeds of great
matters; Job knew this, and therefore made a covenant with his eyes. But a
fools Job 31. 1.
eyes are in the corners of the earth, says Solomon. Pro. 17. 24.


Sometimes the ministering of some Praeclara cogitatio.
excellent thought from what we hear or see, proves a great advantage of
spiritual good to the soul: Whilst Saint Austen out of curiosity delighted
to hear the eloquence of St. Ambrose, he was taken with the matter it self,
sweetly sliding together with the words into his heart. Of later times, whilst
Galeaceus Caracciolus an Italian Marquess, and Nephew to Pope Paul 5. Beza in
his life.
was hearing Peter Martyr reading upon 1. Corinths and showing the
deceiveablenesse of man's judgment in spiritual things, and the efficacy of
divine truth in those that belong unto God, and further using a similitude to
this purpose; If a man be walking afar off, and see people dancing together,
and hear no noise of the music, he judges them fools and out of the wits;
but when he comes nearer and hears the music, and sees that e^rie motion is
exactly done by art; Now he changes his mind, and is (...) taken up with the
sweet agreement of the gesture, and the music, that he is not only delighted
therewith, but desirous to join himself in the number; so it falls out (says
he) with men; Whilst they look upon the outward carriage and conversation of
Gods people, and see it differing from others, they think them fools, but
when they look more narrowly into their courses, and see a gracious harmony
betwixt their lives and the word of God, then they begin to be in love with
the beauty of holiness, and join in conformity of holy obedience with those
they scorned before. This Similitude wrought so with this Nobleman, that he
began from that time forward to set his mind to the study of heavenly things.

One seasonable truth falling upon a prepared heart, has oftentimes a sweet
and strong operation; Luther confesses that having heard a grave Divine
Staupicius say, that that is kind repentance which begins from the love of
God, ever after that time the practice of repentance was sweeter to him. This
speech of his likewise took well with Luther, that in doubts of
predestination, we should begin from the wounds Doctrinae praedestinationis
incipit a vulneribus Christi.
of Christ, that is, from the sense of Gods love to us in Christ, we should
arise to the grace given us in election before the world was. 2. Tim. 1. 9


The putting of lively colors upon common truths has often a strong working
both upon the fancy, and our will and affections: the spirit is refreshed with
fresh things, or old truths refreshed; this made the Preacher seek to Eccles.
12. 10.
find out pleasing and acceptable words; and our Savior CHRIST'S manner of
teaching was, by a lively representati^ to men's fancies, to teach them heavenly
truths in an earthly sensible manner; and indeed what do we see or hear but
will yield matter to a holy heart to raise it self higher?

We should make our fancy serviceable to us in spiritual things, and take
advantage by any pleasure, or profit, or honor which it presents our thoughts
withal, to think thus with our selves, What is this to the true honor, and
to those enduring pleasures, etc. And seeing God has condescended to represent
heavenly things to us under earthly terms, we should follow Gods dealing
herein: God represents heaven to us, under the term of a banquet, and Luke 10.
32
of a kingdom, etc. our union with Christ under the term of a marriage, yea
Christ himself, under the name of whatsoever is lovely or comfortable in
heaven or earth. So the Lord sets out Hell to us by whatsoever is terrible or
tormenting. Here is a large field for our imagination to walk in, not only
without hurt, but with a great deal of spiritual gain; If the wrath of a
King be as the roaring of a Lion, what is the wrath of the King of Kings? If
fire be so terrible, what is hell fire? If a dark dungeon be so loathsome,
what is that eternal dungeon of darkness? If a feast be so pleasing, what
is the continual feast of a good conscience? If the meeting of friends be so
comfortable, Pro. 15. 15
what will our meeting together in heaven be? The Scripture by such like terms
would help our faith and fancy both at once; a sanctified fancy will make
every creature a ladder to heaven. And because childhood and youth are ages of
fancy, therefore it is a good way to instill into the hearts of children
betimes, the loving of good, and the sh^ning of evil, by such like
representations as agree with their fancies, as to have hell under the
representation of fire and darkness, etc. Whilst the soul is joined with the
body, it has not only a necessary but a holy use of imagination, and of
sensible things whereupon our imagination works; what is the ^e of the
Sacraments, but to help our s^les by our senses, and our faith by imagination;
as the soul receives much ^rt from imagination, so it may have much good
thereby.

But yet it ought not to invent or devise what is good and true in religion,
here fancy must yield to faith, and faith to divine revelation; the things we
believe are such, as neither eye has se^e 1 Cor. 2. 9.
nor ear heard, neither came into the heart of man by imagination stirred up
from any thing which we have seen or heard; they are above not only
imagination, but reason it self, in men and Angels: But after God has
revealed spiritual truths, and faith has apprehended them, then imagination
has use while the soul is joined with the body, to color divine truths, and
make lightsome what faith believes; for instance, it does not devise either
heaven or hell, but when God has revealed them to us, our fancy has a
fitness of enlarging our conceits of them, even by resemblance from things in
nature, and that without danger; because the joys of heaven, and the torments
of hell are so great, that all the representations which nature affords us,
fall short of them.

Imagination has likewise some use in religion, by putting cases to the soul,
as when we are tempted to any unruly action, we should think with our selves,
what would I do if some holy grave person whom I much reverence should behold
me? Whereupon the soul may easily ascend higher; God sees me, and my own
conscience is ready to witness against me, etc.

It helps us also in taking benefit by the example of other men; Good things
are best learned, by others expressing of them to our view; the very sight
often, (nay the very thought) of Est atiquid quod ex magno viro vel tacente
proficias.
a good man does good, as representing to our souls some good thing which we
affect; which makes Histories and the lively Characters and expressions of
virtues and vices useful to us. The sight, yea the very reading of the
suffering of the Martyrs has wrought such a hatred of that persecuting Church,
as has done mavelous good; the sight of justice executed upon malefactors,
works a greater hatred of sin in men then naked precepts can do; So outward
pomp and state in the world, does further that awefull respect due to
authority, etc.

Lastly, it would much avail for the well ordering of our thoughts, to set 9.
our souls in order every morning, and to strengthen and perfume our spirits
with some gracious meditations, especially of the chief end and scope
wherefore we live here, and how every thing we do, or befalls us, may be
reduced and ordered to further the maine. The end of a Christian is glorious,
and the often thoughts of it will raise and enlarge the soul, and set it on
work to study how to make all things serviceable thereunto. It is a thing to
be lamented that a Christian borne for heaven, having the price of his high
calling set before him, and matters of that weight and excellency to exercise
his heart upon, should be taken up with trifles, and fill both his head and
heart with vanity and nothing, as all earthly things will prove ere long; and
yet if many men's thoughts and discourses were distilled, they are so fr^thy
that they would hardly yield one drop of true comfort.

. 4.
Oh but (say some) thoughts and imaginations are free, and we shall not be
Object.
accountable for them.

This is a false plea, for God has a Answ. Imaginations and thoughts not free.
sovereignty over the whole soul, and his law binds the whole inward and
outward man; as we desire our whole man should be saved by Christ, so we must
yield up the whole man to be governed by him; and it is the effect of the
dispensation of the Gospel, accompanied with the Spirit, to captivate
whatsoever is in man unto Christ, and to bring down all high towering
imaginations 2 Cor. 10. 5
that exalt themselves against Gods Spirit. There is a divinity in the word of
God powerfully unfolded, which will convince our souls of the sinfulne sof
natural imaginations, as we see in the Idiot, Corinth. 14. who seeing himself
laid open before himself, cried out, that God was in the speaker. 1 Cor. 14.
25.


There ought to be in man a conformity to the truth and goodness of things, or
else 1. we shall wrong o^ own souls with false apprehensions, 1.
and 2. the creature, by putting a fashion upon it otherwise then God has 2.
made, and 3. we shall wrong God himself the Author of goodness, who cannot 3
have his true glory but from a right apprehension of things as they art; what
a wrong is it to men when we shall take up false prejudices against them
without ground? and so suffer our conceits to be invenomed against them by
unjust suspicions, and by this means deprive our selves of all that good which
we might receive by them; for our nature is apt to judge, and accept of things
as the persons are, and not of persons according to the things themselves: this
faculty exercises a tyranny in the soul, setting up and pulling down whom it
will. Job judged his friends altogether vain, because they Job 27. 12.
went upon a vain imagination and discourse judging him to be an hypocrite,
which could not but add much to his affliction: when men take a toy in their
head against a person or place, they are ready to reason as he did, Can any
good Ioh 6. 46.
come out of Nazareth?

It is an indignity for men to be led with ^urmizes and probabilities, and so
to pass a rash judgment upon persons and things: Oftentimes falsehood has a
fairer gloss of probability then truth, ^d vices go masqued under the
appearance of virtue, whereupon seeming likeness breeds a mistake of one thing
Similitude matter errorum.
for another; and Satan oftentimes casts a mist before our imagination, that
so we might have a misshapen conceit of things; by a spirit of elusion he makes
worldly things appear bigger to us, and spiritual things lesser then indeed
they are; and so by sophisticating of things our affections come to be missed.
Imagination is the womb, and Satan the father of all monstrous conceptions
and disordered lusts, which are well called deceitful lusts, and lusts of
ignorance, foolish Ephesians. 4. 22. 1 Timothy 6. 9.
and noisome lusts, because they both spring from error and folly, and lead
unto it.

We see even in Religion it self, how the world (together with the help of
the God of the world) is led away, if not to worship images, yet to worship the
image of their own fancy; And where the truth is most professed, yet people
are prone to fancy to themselves such a breadth of Religion, as will
altogether leave them comfortless, when things shall appear in their true
colors; they will conceit to embrace truth without hatred of the world, and
Christ without his cross, and a godly life without persecution, they would
pull a rose without pricks; Which though it may stand with their own base ends
for a while, yet will not hold out in times of change, when sickness of body
and trouble of mind shall come; Empty conceits are too weak to encounter with
real griefs.

Some think Orthodoxe and right opinions to be a plea for a loose life,
whereas there is no ill course of life but springs from some false opinion. God
will not only call us to an account how we have believed, disputed and
reasoned, etc. but how we have lived. Our care therefore should be to build our
profession not on seeming appearances, but upon sound grounds, that the gates
of hell cannot prevail against. The hearts of many are so vain, that they
delight to be blown up with flattery, because they would have their
imagination pleased (yea even when they cannot but know themselves abused,) and
are grieved to have their windy bladder pricked, and so to be put out of their
conceited happiness. Others out of a tediousness in serious and settled
thoughts entertain every thing as it is offered to them at the first blush,
and suffer their imaginations to carry them presently thereunto without further
judging of it: the will naturally loves variety and change, and our imagination
does it service herein, as not delighting to fix long upon any thing; hereupon
men are contented both in religion, and in common life to be misled with
prejudices upon shallow grounds. Whence it is that the best things and persons
suffer much in the world, the power and practice of Religion is hated under
odious names, and so condemned before it is understood; Whence we see a
necessity of getting spiritual Eye salve, for without true knowledge the heart
cannot be good. Prove. 19. 2.


It is just with God that those who take liberty in their thoughts should be
given up to their own imaginations, to delight in them, and to be out of
conceit with the best things, and so to reap the fruit of their own ways;
Nay, even the best of Gods people, if they take liberty herein, God will let
loose their imagination upon themselves, and suffer them to be entangled and
vexed with their own hearts; Those that give way to their imaginations, show
what their actions should be, if they dared; for if they forbear doing evil
out of conscience, they should as well forbear imagining evil; for both are
alike open to God and hateful to him; and therefore often where there is no
conscience of the thought, God gives men up to the deed. The greatest, and
hardest work of a Christian is least in sight, which is the well ordering of
his heart; some buildings have most workmanship under ground; it is our spirits
that God who is a Spirit has most Ioh. 4. 24.
communion withal; and the less freedom we take to sin here, the more
argument of our sincerity, because there is no laws to bind the inner man but
the law of the spirit of grace, whereby we are a law to our selves. A good
Christian begins his repentance where his sin begins, in his thoughts, which
are the next issue of his heart. God counts it an honor when we regard his
all-seeing eye so much, as that we will not take liberty to our selves in that
which is offensive to him, no not in our hearts, wherein no creature can hinder
us; It is an argument that the Spirit has set up a kingdom and order in our
hearts, when our spirits rise within us against any thing that lifts it self
up against goodness.

. 5.
Many flatter themselves, from an impossibility of ruling their imaginations,
Object.
and are ready to lay all upon infirmity and natural weakness, etc.

But such must know that if we be sound Christians, the Spirit of GOD Answ.
Not impossible to ^ule the imagination, and how.
will enable us to do all things (Evangelically) that we are called unto, if
we give way without check to the motions thereof; where the Spirit is, it is
such a light, as discovers not only dunghills, but motes themselves, even
light and flying imaginations, and abaseth the soul for them, and by degrees
purges them out; and if they press (as they are as busy as flies in Summer)
yet a good heart will not own them, nor allow himself in them, but casts them
off, as hot water does the scumme, or as the stomach does that which is
noisome unto it, they find not that entertainment here which they have in
carnal hearts, where the scumme soakes in; which are stews of unclean
thoughts, shambles of cruel and bloody thoughts, Exchanges and shops of vain
thoughts, a very forge and mynt of false, politic, and undermining thoughts,
yea often a little hell of confused and black imaginations. There is nothing
that more moves a godly man to renew his interest every day in the perfect
righteousness and obedience of his Savior, then these sinful stirrings of
his soul, when he finds something in himself always enticing and drawing
away his heart from God, and intermingling it self with his best performances.
Even good thoughts are troublesome if they come unseasonably, and weaken our
exact performance of duty.

. 6.
But here some misconceits must be Misconceits about imagination, to be avoided.
taken heed of.

1. As we must take heed that we account not our imaginations to be religion;
So we must not account true religion, 1.
and the power of godliness to be a matter of imagination only; as if holy
men troubled themselves more then needs, when they stand upon religion and
conscience, seeking to approve themselves to God in all things, and
endeavoring (so far as frailty will permit) to avoid all appearances of
evil. Many men 1 Thessalonians. 5 22.
are so serious in vanities, and real in trifles, that they count all, which
dote not upon such outward excellencies as they do (because the Spirit of GOD
has revealed to them things of a higher nature) to be fantasticks and humorous
people, and so impute the work of the spirit to the flesh, Gods work to
Satan, which comes near unto blasphemy: they imagine good men to be led with
vain conceits, but good men know them to be so led. Not only St. Paul, but
CHRIST himself, were counted besides Act. 26. 24.
themselves, when they were earnest for God and the souls of his people. But
there is enough in Religion to bear up the soul against all imputations laid
upon it: the true children of Mat. 11. 19
wisdom are always able to justify their Mother, and the conscionable
practice of holy duties is founded upon such solid grounds as shall hold out
when heaven and earth shall vanish.

2. We must know that as there is 2.
great danger in false conceits of the way to heaven, when we make it broader
than it is, (for by this means we are like men going over a bridge, who
think it broader then it is, but being deceived by some shadow, sinck down,
and are suddenly drowned; So men mistaking the strait way to life, and trusting
to the shadow of their own imagination, fall into the bottomless pit of hell
before they are aware. In like manner the danger is great in making the way to
heaven narrower then indeed it is, by weak and superstitious imaginations,
making more sins than God has made. The Wisemans counsel is that we should
not make our selves over wicked, nor be foolisher than Eccles. 7. 17.
we are, by devising more sins in our imagination, than we are guilty of.

It is good in this respect, to know our Christian liberty, which being one of
the fruits of Christ's death, we cannot neglect the same, without much wrong not
only to our selves, but to the rich bounty and goodness of God. So that the
due rules of limitation be observed, from authority, piety, sobriety,
needless offense of others, etc. we may with better leave use all those
comforts which God has given to refresh us in the way to heaven, then refuse
them; the care of the outward man binds conscience so far, as that we
should neglect nothing which may help us in a cheerful serving of GOD, in
our places, and tend to the due honor of our bodies which are the temples of
the Holy Ghost, and companions with our 1. Cor. 3. 16, 17.
souls in all performances. So that under this pretense we take not too much
liberty to satisfy the lusts of the body. Intemperate use of the creatures is
the nurse of all passions: because our spirits which are the souls
instruments, are hereby inflamed and disturbed; it is no wonder to see an
intemperate man transported into any passion.

3. Some out of their high and ayery 3.
imaginations (and out of their iron and flintie Philosophy) will needs think
outward good and ill, together with the affections of grief and delight
stirred up thereby, to be but opinions and conceits of good and evil only,
not true and really so founded in nature, but taken up of our selves: But
though our fancy be ready to conceit a greater hurt in outward evils then
indeed there is (as in poverty, pain of body, death of friends, etc.) yet we
must not deny them to be evils: that wormwood is bitter, it is not a conceit
only, but the nature of the thing it self, yet to abstain from it altogether
for the bitterness thereof is a hurtful conceit. That honey is sweet, it is
not a conceit only, but the natural quality of it is so, yet out of a taste
of the sweetness, to think we cannot take too much of it, is a mis^ceit paid
home with loathsome bitterness. Outward good and outward evil and the
affections of delight and sorr^ rising thence, are naturally so, and depend not
upon our opinion. This were to offer violence to nature, and to take man out of
man, as if he were not flesh but steel; Universal experience from the
sensiblenesse of our nature in any outward grievance, is sufficient to dam^
this conceit.

The way to comfort a man in grief, is not to tell him that it is only a
conceit of evil, and no evil indeed that he suffers; this kind of learning
will not down with him, as being contrary to his present feeling; but the way
is, to yield unto him that there is cause of grieving, though not of
ever-grieving, and to show him grounds of comfort stronger then the grief he
suffers. We should weigh the degrees of evil in a right balance, and not
suffer fancy to make them greater then they are; So as that for obtaining the
greatest outward good, or avoiding the greatest outward ill of suffering, we
should give way to the least evil of sin. This is but a policy of the flesh
to take away the sensiblenesse of evil, that so those cheeks of conscience and
repentance for Sin, which is often occasioned thereby, might be taken away;
that so men may go on enjoying a stupid happiness, never laying any thing to
heart, nor afflicting their souls, until their consciences awaken in the
place of the damned, and then they feel that grief re^ne upon them for ever,
which they labored to put away when it might have been seasonable to them.

. 7.
I have stood the longer upon this, This a very pertinent doctrine, and why.
because Satan and his instruments by bewitching the imagination with false
appearances, misleadeth not only the world, but troubles the peace of men
taken out of the world, whose estate is laid up safe in Christ, who
(notwithstanding) pass their few days here in an uncomfortable, wearisome,
and unnecessary sadness of spirit, being kept in ignorance of their happy
condition by Satan's juggling and their own mistakes, and so come to heaven
before they are aware. Some again pass their days in a golden dream, and
drop into hell before they think of it; but it is far better to dream of
ill, and when we awake to find it but a dream, then to dream of some great
good, and when we awake to find the contrary.

As the distemper of the fancy disturbing Laesa phantasia.
the act of reason, oftentimes breeds madness in regard of civil
conversation; So it breeds likewise spiritual madness, carrying men to those
things, which if they were in their right wits they would utterly abhor;
therefore we cannot have too much care upon what we fix our thoughts; And
what a glorious discovery is there of the excellencies of Religion that would
even ravish an Angel, which may raise up, exercise, and fill our hearts? We
see our fancy has so great a force in natural conceptions, that it often sets
a mark and impression upon that which is conceived in the womb. So likewise
strong and holy conceits of things (having a divine virtue accompanying of
them,) transform the soul, and breed spiritual impressions answerable to our
spiritual apprehensions. It would prevent many crosses, if we would conceive
of things as they are; When trouble of mind, or sickness of body, and death
it self comes, what will remain of all that greatness which filled our
fancies before? then we can judge soberly, and speak gravely of things. The
best way of happiness, is not to multiply honors or riches, etc. but to cure
our conceits of things, and then we cannot be very much cast down with any
thing befalls us here.

Therefore when any thing is presented to our souls, which we see is ready to
work upon us; we should ask of our selves, upon what ground we entertain
such a conceit, whether we shall have the same judgment after we have yielded
to it as now we have? and whether we will have the same judgment of it in
sickness and death, and at the day of reckoning as we have for the present?
That which is of it self evil, is always so at one time as well as another;
if the time will come, when we shall think those things to be vain, which
now we are so eagerly set upon, as if there were some great good in them; Why
should we not think so of them now, when as the reforming of our judgment
may do us good, rather then to be led on with a pleasing error until that
time, wherein the sight of our error will fill our hearts with horror and
shame, without hope of ever changing our condition.

Here therefore is a special use of these Soliloquies, to awake the soul, and
to stir up reason cast asleep by Satan's charms, that so scattering the
clouds through which things seem otherwise then they are, we may discern and
judge of things according to their true and constant nature; Demand of thy
soul, Shall I always be of this mind? Will not the time come when this will
prove bitterness in the end? Shall I redeem a short contentment, with lasting
sorrow? Is my judge of my mind? Will not a time come when all things shall
appear as they are? Is this according to the rule, etc?

To conclude therefore, whereas there Diverse principles of man's actions.
be diverse principles of men's actions, as 1. natural inclination, inclining us
to some courses more then others, 2. custom, 1.
which is another nature in us, 2.
3. imagination, apprehending things upon 3.
shallow grounds; from whence springs affectation, whereby we desire glory in
things above our own strength and measure, and make show of that, the truth
whereof is wanting in us, 4. true judgment, discerning the true reasons 4.
of things. 5. Faith, which is a spiritual 5.
principle planted in the soul, apprehending things above reason, and raising
us up to conceive of all things as GOD has discovered them. Now a sound
Christian should not be lightly led with those first common grounds of
natural inclination, custom, opinion, etc. but by judgment enlightened,
advanced, and guided by faith. And we must take heed we suffer not things to
pass suddenly from imagination to affection, without asking advice of our
judgment, and faith in the way, whose office is, to weigh things in Gods
balance, and thereupon to accept, or refuse them.

CAP. XIV.
Of help by others. Of true comforters, and their graces. Method. Ill success.

. 1.
But because we are subject to favor There is a help for us against
troublesin others
and flatter our selves, it is wisdom to take the benefit of a second self,
(that is) a well chosen friend living or dead, (books I mean,) which will speak
truly without flattery of our estates. A friend is made for the time of
Adversity Pro. 17. 17.
and two are better than one; for by this means our troubles are divided, and
so more easily borne. The very presence of a true hearted friend yields often
ease to our grief. Of all friends, those that by office are to speak a word
to a weary soul, are most to be regarded, as speaking to us in Christ's stead.
Oftentimes, (especially in our own case) we are blinded and benighted with
passion, and then the judgment of a friend is clearer. Living friends have a
threefold privilege. 1, their advice 1.
is suitable, and fit to our present occasion, they can meet with our grievance,
so cannot books so well. 2, what comes 2.
from a living friend, comes lively, as helped by his spirit. 3, in regard of
our selves, what they say is apprehended 3.
with more ease, and less plodding and bent of mind; There is scarce any
thing wherein we see God more in favor toward us, then in our friends, and
their seasonable speeches; our hearts being naturally very false and willingly
deceived. God often gives us up to be mislead by men, not according to his, but
our own naughty hearts. As men are, such are their Counselors, for such they
will have, and such God lets them have. Men whose wills are stronger then their
wits, who are wedded to their own ways, are more pleased to hear that which
complies with their inclinations, then a harsh truth which crosses them; this
presages ruin, because they are not counsellable: wherefore GOD suffers them
to be led through a fools paradise to a true prison, as men that will
neither hear themselves nor others who would do them good against their
wills; It was a sign God would destroy Elies sons 1. Sam. 2. 25.
when they would hear no counsel; God fills such men with their own Pro. 14.
14.
ways. Men in great place often in the abundance of all things else, want the
Ideo amicus deest quia nihildeest.
benefit of a true friend, because under pretense of service of them men carry
their own ends, as they flatter themselves, so they are flattered by others,
and so robbed of the true judgment of themselves. Of all spiritual judgments
this is the heaviest, for men to be given up to such a measure of
selfewillnesse, and to refuse spiritual bal^ to heal them, usually such
perish without Prove. 29. 1.
remedy, because to be wilfully miserable is to be doubly miserable, for it
adds to our misery, that we brought it willingly upon our selves.

It is a course that will have a blessing attending it, for friends to join in
league one to watch over another, and observe each others ways. It is an
usual course for Christians to join together in other holy duties, as
hearing, receiving of the Sacrament, prayer, etc. but this fruit of holy
communion which arises from a mutual observing one another is much wanting;
whence it is that so many droope, so many are so unchearfull in the ways of
God, and lie groaning under the burden of many cares, and are battered with so
many temptations, etc. because they are left only to their own spirits. What
an unworthy thing is it, that we should pity a beast overloaden, and yet take
no pity of a brother? whereas there is no living member of Christ but has
spiritual love infused into him, and some ability to comfort others. Dead
stones in an Arch uphold one another, and shall not living? It is the work of
an Angel to comfort, nay, it is the office of the Holy Ghost to be a
Comforter, not only immediately, but by breathing comfort into our hearts
together with the comfortable words of others; thus one friend becomes an
Angel, nay a God to another, and there is a sweet fight of God in the face of
a friend; for though the comfort given by Gods Messengers be ordinarily most
effectual, as the blessing of Parents (who are in Gods room) is more
effectual than the blessing of others upon their children: yet God has
promised a blessing to the offices of Communion of Saints performed by one
private man toward another. Can we have a greater encouragement then under God
to be gainer of a soul, which is as much in Gods esteem as if we should gain
a world? Spiritual alms are the best alms; mercy showed to the souls of men
is the greatest mercy; and wisdom in winning of souls is the greatest
wisdom in the world, because the soul is especially the man, upon the
goodness of which, the happiness of the whole man depends: What shining and
flourishing Christians should we have if these duties were performed? As we
have a portion in the communion of Saints, so we should labor to have
humility to take good, and wisdom and love to do good. A Christian should
have feeding lips, and a healing tongue; the leaves the very words of the tree
of righteousness have a curing virtue in them.

Some will show a great deal of humanity in comforting others, but little
Christianity; for as kind men they will utter some cheerful words, but as
Christians they want wisdom from above to speak a gracious word in season:
Nay some there are, who hinder the saving working of any affliction upon the
hearts of others, by unseasonable and unsavory discourses, either by
suggesting false remedies, or else diverting men to false contentments, and so
become spiritual traitors rather then friends, taking part with their worst
enemies their lusts and wills. Happy is he that in his way to heaven meets
with a cheerful and skillful guide and fellow-travellor, that carries
cordials with him against all faintings of spirit: It is a part of our wisdom
to salvation to make choice of such a one as may further us in our way; An
indifferency for any company shows a dead heart; where the life of grace is,
it is sensible of all advantages and disadvantages: How many have been
refreshed by one short, apt, savoury speech? which has begotten, as it were,
new spirits in them.

In ancient times (as we see in the Job 2. 12.
Story of Job) it was the custom of friends to meet together, to comfort those
that were in misery, and Job takes it for granted, that to him that is Job 6.
14.
afflicted pity should be showed from his friends: for besides the presence of
a friend which has some influence of comfort in it. 1. The discovery of 1.
his loving affection has a cherishing sweetness in it. 2. The expression of
2.
love in real comforts and services by supplying any outward want of the patry
troubled, prevails much; the Christ made way for his comforts to the souls of
men, by showing outward kindness to their bodies: Love with the sensible
fruits of it, prepares for any wholesome counsel. 3. After 3
this, wholesome words carry a special cordial virtue with them, especially
when the Spirit of God in the affectionate speaker joines with the word of
comfort, and thereby closes with the heart of a troubled patient: when all
these concenter and meet together in one, then is comfort sealed up to the
soul. The child in Elizabeth's womb sprang at the presence and salutation of
Luke 1. 41.
Mary; the speech of one hearty friend cannot but revive the spirits of
another; Sympathy has a strange force, as we see in the strings of an
Instrument, which being played upon (as they say) the strings of another
instrument are also moved with it. After love has once kindled love, then the
heart being melted, is fit to receive any impression; unless both pieces of
the iron be red hot they will not join together; two spirits warmed with the
^ne heat will easily so^der together.

. 2.
In him that shall stay the mind of Graces necessary in dealing with another.
another there had need to be an excellent temper of many graces; as, 1.
Knowledge of the grievance together with wisdom to speak a word 1.
in season, and to conceal that which may set the cure backwards. 2.
Faithfulness with liberty, not to conceal^ 2.
any thing which may be for his good, though against present liking. The very
life and soul of friendship stands in freedom, tempered with wisdom and
faithfulness. 3. Love with compassion and patience to bear all, and 3.
hope all, and not to be easily provoked by 1. Cor. 13. 6.
the way wardnesse of him we deal with. Short spirited men are not the best
comforters: God himself is said Act. 13 18.
to bear with the manners of his people in (...)
the wilderness: It is one thing to bear with a wise sweet moderation that
Non est i would ^re, si quid ferendam est, and probare si quid probanduns non est.
which may be borne, and another thing to allow or approve that which is not to
be approved at all. Where these graces are in the speaker, and apprehended so
to be by the person distempered, his heart will soon embrace whatsoever shall
be spoken to rectify his judgment or affection. A good conceit of the spirit
of the speaker is of as much force to prevail as his words. Words especially
prevail, when they are uttered more from the bowels then the brain, and from
our own experience, which made even Christ himself a more compassionate high
Priest. When men come to themselves again, they will be the deepest censurers
of their own miscariage.

. 3.
Moreover, to the right comforting Further directions.
of an afflicted person, special care must be had of discerning the true
ground of his grievance, the coare must be searched out; if the grief arises
from outward causes, then it must be carried into the right channel, the
course of it must be turned another way, as in staying of blood; we should
grieve for sin in the first place, as being the evil of all evils: If the
ground be sin, then it must be drawn to a head, from a confused grief to
some more particular sin, that so we may strike the right vein; but if we
find the spirit much cast down for particular sins, then comfort is
presently to be applied; But if the grief be not fully 3.
ripe, then, as we use to help nature in its offers to purge, by Physic, till
the sick matter be carried away; so when conscience, moved by the spirit,
begins to ease it self by confession, it is good to help forward the work of
it, till we find the heart low enough for comfort to be laid upon. When Paul
found the Iaylor cast down almost as low as hell, he stands not now upon
further hammering, and preparing of him for mercy, (that work was done
already,) but presently stirs him up to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ;
here being a fit place Acts 16. 31
for an interpreter to declare unto man his righteousness, and his mercy that
belongs unto him after he has acknowledged his personal and particular sins,
which the natural guile of the heart is extremely backward to do, and yet
cannot receive any sound peace till it be done: If signs of grace be
discerned, here likewise is a fit place to declare unto man the saving work of
grace in his heart, which Satan labors to hide from him. Men often are not able
to read their own evidences without help.

In case of stiffness and standing out, it is fit the Man of God should take
some authority upon him, and lay a charge upon the souls of men in the name of
Christ, to give way to the truth of Christ, and to forbear putting off that
mercy which is so kindly offered, when we judge it to be their portion; which
course will be succesfull in hearts awed with a reverend fear of grieving Gods
spirit. Sometimes men must be dealt roundly withal, as David here deals with
his own soul, that so whilst we ask a reason of their dejection, they may
plainly see they have no reason to be so cast down; for oftentimes grievances
are irrational, rising from mistakes; and counsel, bringing into the soul a
fresh light, dissolves those gross fogges, and sets the soul at liberty.
What grief is contracted by false reason, is by true reason altered. Thus it
pleases God to humble men by letting them see in what need they stand one of
another, that so the communion of Saints may be indeared; every relation
wherein we stand toward others, are so many bonds and sinews whereby one
member is fitted to derive comfort to another, through love the bond of
perfection: All must be done in this sweet Col. 3. 14.
affection. A member out of joint must be tenderly set in again, and bound up,
which only men guided by the spirit of love seasoned with discretion are fit
to do, they are taught of God to do what they should. The more of Christ is
in any man, the more willingness and fitness to this duty; to which this
should encourage us, that in strengthening others we strengthen our selves, and
derive upon our selves the blessing pronounced on those that consider the
needy, which will be our comfort here, Psalm. 41. 1.
and crown hereafter, that God has honored us, to be instruments of
spiritual good to others. It is an injunction to comfort the feeble minded,
and there is an heavy imputatio^ on those that comforted 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
not the weaks: when men will not own men in trouble, but as the herd of Dear
forsake and push away the wounded Dear Ezekiel. 34 4
from them: And those that are any ways cast down, must stoop to those ways
which God has sanctified to convey comfort; for though sometimes the Spirit of
God immediately comforts the soul, which is the sweetest, yet for the most part
the Sun of righteousness that has healing in his wings, conveyeth the beams
of his comfort by the help of others, in whom he will have much of our
comfort to lie hid, and for this very end it pleases God to exercise his
children (and Ministers especially) with trials and afflictions, that so they
having felt what a troubled spirit is in themselves, might be able to comfort
others, in their Si illatas molestias lingua dicat, a conscientia dolor emanat,
vulnera enim clausa plus cruciant. Greg.
distresses with the same comfort wherewith they have been comforted: God often
suspends comfort from us to drive us to make use of our Christian friends, by
whom he purposes to do us good. Oftentimes the very opening of men's
grievances, brings ease without any further working upon them; the very
opening of a vein cooles the blood. If God in the state of innocence thought
it fit man should have a helper, if God thought it fit to send an Angel to
comfort Christ in his agonies, shall any man think the comfort of another more
than needs? Satan makes every affliction, by reason of our corruption, a
temptation to us, whereupon we are to encounter not only with our own
corruptions, but with spiritual wickednesses, and need we not then that others
should join forces with us to discover the temptation, and to confirm and
comfort us against it? for so reason joining with reason, and affection with
affection, we come by uniting of strength, to be impregnable. Satan has
most advantage in solitariness, and thereupon sets upon Christ in the
wilderness, and upon Eve single, and it added Mat. 4. Genesis 3.
to the glory of Christ's victory, that he overcame him in a single combat, and
in a place of such disadvantage. Those that will be alone (at such times) do
as much as in them lies to tempt the tempter himself to tempt them. The
Preacher gives three reasons why two Eccles. 4. 9.
are better than one. 1. Because if one fall, the other may lift him up: as
that 1.
which is stronger shoreth up that which is weaker, so feeble minds are raised
and kept up by the stronger: Nay, oftentimes he that is weaker in one grace, is
stronger in another; one may help by his experience and meekness of love,
that needs the help of another for knowledge. 2. If two lie together, one may
warm another by kindling one another spirits; 2.
Where two meet together upon such holy grounds and aims, there Christ by his
spirit makes up another, and this threefold cable who shall break? While I^as
lived, Iehoiada stood upright; While Latymer and Ridley lived, they kept up
Granmer by intercourse of letters and otherwise, from entertai ning counsels
of Revolt. The Disciples presently upon Christ's apprehension fainted, not
withstanding he labored by his heavenly doctrine to put courage and comfort
into them. 3. If any give an onset upon them, there is two to withstand it,
Spirit joining with Spirit; 3.
and because there is an acquaintance of spirits as well as of persons, those
are Solatium vitae, haeere cuipectus aperias. Ambros.
fittest to lay open our minds unto, in whom upon experience of their
fidelity, our hearts may most safely rely. We lose much of our strength in
the loss of a true friend; which made David bemoane the loss of his friend
Jonathan, Woe is me for thee my brother Jonathan. 2. Sam. 1. 20.
He lost a piece of himself, by losing him whom his heart so clave unto;
Saint. Paul accounted that God had showed especial mercy to him, in the Phil.
2. 27.
recovery of Epaphroditus.

. 4.
But there are diverse miscarriages in Miscarriages in the party that needs to
be comforted.
those that are troubled, which make the comfort of others of none effect.

1. When the troubled party, deals not directly, but doubleth with him that is
to help him. Some are ashamed to 1.
acknowledge the true ground of their grievance, pretending sorrow for one
thing, when their hearts tell them it arises from another; Like the Lap^ings
which make greatest noise furthest from their neast, because they would not
have it discovered: This deceit moved our blessed Savior (who knew what was in
the hearts of men,) to fit his answers many times, rather to the man then to
the matter.

2. Some rely too much upon particular men, Oh if they had such a one they
should do well, and mislike others, (fitter perhaps to deal with them, as
having more thorough knowledge of their estates,) because they would have their
disease rather covered then cured; or if cured, yet with soft words, whereas no
plaster works better then that which causes smart. Some out of mere
humorous fondness must have that which can hardly be got, or else nothing
pleases them: David must needs have the waters of Bethlem when others were
nearer hand: And oftentimes 2. Sam. 23. 15.
when men have not only whom they desire, but such also who are fit and
dexterous in dealing with a troubled spirit, yet their souls feel no comfort,
because they make idols of men; Whereas men at the best are but conduits of
comfort, and such as God freely conueyeth comfort by, taking liberty often to
deny comfort by them, that so he may be acknowledged the God of all comfort.

3. Some delude themselves, by thinking it sufficient to have a few 3.
good words spoken to them, as if that could cure them; not regarding to
apprehend the same, and mingle it with faith, without which, good words lose
their working, even as wholesome Physic in a dead stomach.

Besides miscarriages in comforting; times will often fall out in our lives,
that we shall have none either to comfort us, or to be comforted by us, and
then what will become of us unless we can comfort our selves? Men must not
think always to live upon alms, but lay up something in store for
themselves, and provide oil for their own lamps, and be able to draw out
something from the treasury of their own hearts. We must not go to the
Surgeon for every scratch. No wise traveller but will have some refreshing
waters about him. Again, we are often driven to retire home to our own
hearts, by uncharitable imputations of other men; even friends sometimes become
miserable comfortens: it was Jobs case, his friends had honest intentions Job 2.
to comfort him, but erred in their manner of dealing; if he had found no more
comfort by reflecting upon his own sincerity, then he received from them, who
labored to take it from him, he had been doubly miserable. We are most privy
to our own intentions and aims, whence comfort must be fetched; Let others
speak what they can to us, if our own hearts speak not with them, we shall
receive no satisfaction. Sometimes it may fall out, that those which should
unloose our spirits when they are bound up, mistake, the key ^isses the right
wards, and so we l^e bound still. Opening of our estate to another is not good,
but when it is necessary, and it is not necessary, when we can fetch supply
from our own store; God would have us tender of our reputations, except in
some special cases, wherein we are to give glory to God by a free and full
confession. Needless discovery of our selves to others, makes us fear the
conscience of another man, as privy to that which we are ashamed he should
be privy unto: and it is neither wisdom nor mercy, to put men upon the rack
of confession, further then they can have no ease any other way, for by this
means we raise in them a jealousy toward us, and often without cause; which
weakneth and tainteth that love which should unite hearts in one.

CAP. XV.
Of flying to God in disquiets of soul. Eight observations out of the text.

WHat if neither the speech of others Quest.
to us, nor the rebuke of our own hearts will quiet the soul; Is there no
other remedy left?

Yes, then look up to God, the Father and fountain of comfort, as David does
here; For the more special means whereby he sought to recover himself, was
by laying a charge upon his soul to trust in God; for having let his soul
run out too much, he begins to recollect himself again; and resign up all
to God.

. 1.
But, how came David to have the command of his own soul, so, as to Quest.
take it off from grief, and to place it upon God, could he dispose of his
own heart himself?

The child of God has something Answ.
in him above a man, he has the Spirit of God to guide his spirit: this
command of David to his soul was under the command of the Great Commander: God
commands David to trust in him, and at the same time infuseth strength into his
soul by thinking of Gods command, and trusting to Gods power, to command it
self to trust in God: so that this command is not only by authority, but by
virtue likewise of Gods command: As the inferior orbs move as they are moved
by a higher; So David's spirit here, moves as it is moved by Gods Spirit, which
inwardly spoke to him to speak to himself.

David in speaking thus to his own soul, was, as every true Christian is, a
Prophet, and an instructor to himself: It is but as if inferior officers
should charge in the name and power of the King. Gods children have a principle
of life in them from the Spirit of God, by which they command themselves. To
give charge belongs to a Superior; David had a double Superior above him, his
own spirit as sanctified, and Gods Spirit guiding that. Our spirits are the
Spirits agents, and the Holy Spirit is Gods agent, maintaining his right in us.
As God has made man a free agent, So he guides him, and preserves that free
manner of working which is agreeable to man's nature.

By this it appears, that David's moving of himself, did not hinder the
Spirits moving of him, neither did the Spirits moving of him, hinder him from
moving himself in a free manner; for the Spirit of God moves according to our
principles, it opens our understandings to see that it is best to trust in
God; It moves so sweetly, as if it were an inbred principle, and all one with
our own spirits; If we should hold our will to move it self, and not to be
moved by the Spirit, we should make a God of it, whose property is to move
other things, and not to be moved by any.

We are in some sort Lords over our Ergone it a liberi esse volunt, ut nec Deum
volunt habere Dominum? Aug. de Spir. and Lit.
own speeches and actions, but yet, under a higher Lord. David was willing to
trust in God, but God wrought that will in him: he first makes our will good,
and then works by it. It is a sacrilegious liberty that will acknowledge no
dependence upon God. We are wise in his wisdom, and strong in his strength,
who says, without me ye can do nothing. Both the budde of a John 15.
good desire, and the blossom of a good resolution, and the fruit of a good
action, all comes from GOD. Indeed the understanding is ours whereby we know
what to do, and the will is ours whereby we make choice of what is Certum
est, nos velle cu^ volumus, sed ille facit ut velimus. Aug.
best to be done; but the light whereby we know, and the guidance whereby we
choose, that is from a higher agent, which is ready to flow into us with
present fresh supply, when by virtue of former strength we put our selves
forward in obedience to God. Let but David say to his soul being charged of
God to trust, I charge thee my soul to trust in him, and he finds a present
Duties.
strength inabling to it. Therefore we must both depend upon God as the 1.
first Mover, and withal set all the inferior wheels of our souls a going 2.
according as the Spirit of God ministers motion unto us. So shall we be free
from selfe-confidence, and likewise from neglecting that order of working which
God has established. David hearkened what the Lord said, before he said any
thing to himself, so should we. Gods Commands tend to this, that we should
command our selves. God, and the Minister under God, bid us trust in him, but
all is to no purpose till grace be wrought in the soul, whereby it bids it
self; Our speaking to others does no good, till they by entertaining what we
say, speak the same to their own souls.

In this charge of David upon his own soul, we may see diverse passages and
privileges of a gracious heart in trouble.

. 2.
As, 1. That a Christian when he is beaten out of all other comforts, yet has
a Obser. 1.
God to run unto. A wicked man beaten out of earthly comforts, is as a naked
man in a storm, and an unarmed-man in the field, or as a ship tossed in the
Sea without an anchor, which presently dashes upon rocks, or falls upon
quicksands; but a Christian when he is driven out of all comforts below, nay,
when God seems to be angry with him, he can appeal from God angry to God
appeased, he can wrestle and strive with God by Gods own strength, fight with
him with his own weapons, and plead with God by his own arguments. What a
happy estate is this? who would not be a Christian, if it were but for this, to
have something to rely on when all things else fail? The confusion and
unquietness which troubles raise in the soul, may drive it from resting in it
self, but there can never be any true peace settled, until it sees and
resolves what to stay upon.

. 3.
2. We see here, that there is a sanctified use of all troubles to Gods
children; 2.
first they drive them out of themselves, and then draw them nearer to GOD.
Crosses indeed of themselves estrange us more from God, but by an overruling
work of the spirit they bring (...) nearer to him; The soul of it self is
ready to misgive, as if God had too many controversies with it, to show any
favor toward it; and Satan helped^; because he knows nothing can stand and
prevail against God, or a soul that relyeth on him, therefore he labors to
breed and increase an everlasting divisi^ betwixt God and the soul; but let
not Christians muse so much upon their trouble, but see whether it carries
them, whether it brings them nearer unto God, or not; It is a never failing
rule of discerning a man to be in the state of grace, when he finds every
condition draw him nearer to God; for thus it appears that such love God, and
are called of him, unto whom all things work together for Romans 8. 28.
the best.

. 4.
3. Again, hence we see, that the spirit of God by these inward speeches 3.
does awake the soul, and keep it in a holy exercise, by stirring up the
grace of faith to its proper function. It is not so much the having of grace,
as grace in exercise, that p^eserves the soul; therefore we should by this
and the like means stir up the grace of God in us, that so it may be kept a
working and in vigor and strength. It was David's manner to awake himself, by
bidding both heart and harp to awake. It is the waking Christian (that ha^h
his wit and his grace ready about him) who is the safe Christian; grace dormant
without the exercise does not secure us. It is almost all one (in regard of
present exigence) for grace not to be and not to work. The soul without
action, is like an instrument not played upon, or like a ship always in the
Haven. Motion is a preservative of the purity of things. Even life it self is
made more lively by action. The spirit of GOD whereby his children are led, is
compared to things of the quickest and strongest actions, as fire and wind,
etc. God himself is a pure act, always in acting; and every thing the nearer
it comes to God, the more it has its perfection in working. The happiness of
man consists chiefly in a gracious frame of spirit, and actions suitable sweetly
issuing therefrom: the very rest of heavenly bodies is in motion in their
proper places. By this stirring up the grace of God in us, sparkles come to be
flames, and all graces are kept bright. Troubles stir up David, and David
being stirred stirs up himself.

. 5.
4. We see likewise here a further use of Soliloquies or speeches to our own
hearts; 4.
when the soul by entering into it self sees it self put out of order, then
it injoynes this duty of trusting in God upon it: if we look only on our
selves and not turn to God, the work of the soul is imperfect: then the
soul works as it should, when as by reflecting on it self, it gathers some
profitable conclusion, and leaves it self with God. David upon reflecting on
himself found nothing but discouragement, but when he looks upward to GOD,
there he finds rest. This is one end, why God suffers the soul to tire and
beat it self, that finding no rest in it self, it might seek to him. David
yields not so much to his passion as that it should keep him from God.
Therefore let no man truly religious pretend (for an excuse) his temper or
provoking occasions, etc. for grace does raise the soul above nature; Grace
does not only stop the soul in an evil way, but carries it to a contrary
good, and raises it up to God. Though holy men be subject to like passions
with others (as it is said Iam. 5. 17.
of Elias) yet they are not so inthralled to them, as that they carry them
wholly away from their God, but they hear a voice of the spirit within them,
calling them back again to their former communion with God; and so grace
takes occasion, (even from sin) to exercise it self.

. 6.
5. Observe further, that distrust is the cause of all disquiet: the soul
suffers 5.
it self by something here below to be drawn away from God, but can find no
rest till it return to him again. As Noah's Dove had no place to set her Genesis
8. 11.
foot upon, till it was received into the Arc from whence it came. And it is
Gods mercy to us, that when we have let go our hold of God, we should find
nothing but trouble and unquietness in any thing else, that so we might
remember from whence we are fallen and return home again. That is a good
trouble which frees us from the greatest trouble, and brings with it the most
comfortable rest; It is but an unquiet quiet, and a restless rest which is out
of God. It is a deep spiritual judgment for a man to find too much rest in
the creature: The soul that has had a saving work upon it, will be always
impatient until it recovers its former sweetness in God: After Gods spirit
has once touched the soul, it will never be quiet until it stands pointed
Godward.

But conscience may object, upon any Object.
offense God is offended, and therefore not to be trusted.

It is true, where faith is not above natural conscience; but a conscience
Answ. Trust in God, tho an offended God.
sprinkled with the blood of Christ, is not scared from God by its infirmities
and failiags, but as David here, is rather stirred up to run unto God by his
distemper; and it had been a greater sin then his distemper not to have gone
unto God. Those that have the spirit of sons in their hearts, run not
further from God after they have a little strayed from him, but though it be
the nature of sinful passions to breed grief and shame, yet they will repair
to God again, and their confidence overcomes their guilt; So well are they
acquainted with Gods gracious disposition.

Yet we see here, David thinks not of trusting in God, till first he had done
justice upon his own soul, in rebuking the unruly motions thereof; Censure
for sin goes before favor in pardoning sin, or boldness to ask pardon
of God; those that love God must hate ill: If our consciences condemn Psalm.
97. 10
us of allowing any sin, we cannot have boldness with God who is (light and
can abide no darkness and) greater then our consciences.

. 7.
6. Moreover, hence we see it is no 6.
easy thing to bring God and the heart together: David here as he often
checkes his heart, so he does often charge his heart; Doubts and troubles are
still gathering upon him, and his faith still gathering upon them. As one
striving to get the haven, is driven back by the waves, but recovering himself
again, gets forward still, and after often beating back, at length obtaines
the wished haven, and then is at rest. So much ado there is to bring the soul
unto God, the harbor of true comfort. It were an easy thing to be a
Christian, if Religion stood only in a few outward works and duties, but to
take the soul to task, and to deal roundly with our own hearts, and to let
conscience have its full work, and to bring the soul into spiritual
subjection unto God; this is not so easy a matter, because the soul out of
self-love is loath to enter into it self, least it should have other thoughts
of it self then it would have; David must bid his soul trust and trust, and
trust again before it will yield. One maine ground of this difficulty, is that
contrariety which is in the soul by reason of contrary principles: The soul
so far as it is gracious commands, so far as it is rebellious, resists;
which drew holy Austen to Vnde hoc montrum, and quare istud? Aug. Confess.
a kind of astonishment; The soul commands the body and it yields (says he)
it commands it self, and is resisted by it self; it commands the hand to move
and it moves with such an unperceiveable quickness that you can discern no
distance betwixt the command and the motion: Whence comes this? but because the
soul perfectly wills not and perfectly injoynes not that which is good, and so
Non ex toto vult non ex toto imperat, in tantum non sit quod imperat, in
quantum non vult.
far forth as it fully wills not, so far it holds back. There should be no
need of commanding the soul if it were perfect, for then it would be of it
self, what it now commands. If David had gotten his soul at perfect
freedom at the first, he needed not have repeated his charge so often upon
it. But the soul naturally sinks downward, and therefore had need often to be
wound up.

. 8.
7. We should therefore labor to bring our souls (as David does here) 7.
to a firm and peremptory resolution, and not stand wavering and as it were
equally balanced betwixt God and other things; but enforce our souls, we
shall get little ground of infidelity else; drive your souls therefore to this
issue, either to rely upon God, or else to yield up it self to the present
grievance; if by yielding it resolves to be miserable there is an end, but if it
desires rest, then let it resolve upon this only way to trust in God; and well
may the soul so resolve, because in God there are grounds of quieting the
soul, above all that may unsettle it; In him there is both worth to satisfy,
and strength to support the soul. The best way to maintain inward peace, is
to settle and fix our thoughts upon that which will make us better till we
find our hearts warmed and wrought upon thereby, and then (as the Prophet
speaks) God will keep us in peace, peace, Esaias 26. 3.
that is, in perfect and abundant peace. This resolution stayed Job, that
though God should kill him yet he resolved to trust in him; Answerable to our
resolution is our peace: the more resolution the more peace; Irresolution of it
self without any grievance is full of disquiet; It is an unsafe thing always
to begin to live; to be always cheapning and paltering with God: Come to this
point once, Trust God I ought, therefore trust God I will, come what may or
will.

And it is good to renew our resolutions again and again: for every new
resolution brings the soul closer to God, and gets further in him, and brings
fresh strength from him; which if we neglect, our corruption joining with
outward hindrances will carry us further and further backward, and this will
double yea multiply our trouble and grief to recover our selves again; we
have both wind and tide against us: We are going up the hill, and therefore
had need to arm our selves with resolution. Since the fall, the motion of the
soul upward (as of heavy bodies) is violent, in regard of corruption which
weighes it downward, and therefore all enforcement is little enough; Oppose
therefore with David an invincible resolution, and then doubt not of
prevailing; If we resolve in Gods power and not our own, and be strong in
the Lord, and not in our selves, Ephesians. 6. 10.
then it matters not what our troubles or temptations be either from within,
or without, for trust in God at length will triumph.

Here is a great mercy, that when David had (a little) let go his hold of God,
yet God would not let go his hold of him, but by a spirit of faith draws him
back again to himself; God turns us unto him and then we return. Turn us
again (says the Psalmist) cause thy face to shine upon us, Psalm. 80. 19
and we shall be saved. When the soul leaves God once, it loses its way, and
it self; and never returns till God recalls it again. If moral principles
Animus aeger semper errat.
cherished and strengthened by good education, will enable the soul against
vicious inclinations, so that though some influence of the heavens work upon
the air, and the air upon the spirits, and the spirits upon the humors, and
these incline the temper, and that inclines the soul of a man such and such
ways, yet breeding in the refineder sort of civil persons, will much prevail
to draw them another way? What then may we think of this powerful grace of
faith which is altogether supernatural? Will not this carry the soul above
all natural inclinations whatsoever (though strengthened by outward occasions)
if we resolve to put it to it? David was a King of other men but here he
shows that he was a King of himself; What benefit is it (for a man) to be
Ruler over all the world, and yet remain a slave to himself?

. 9.
8. Again, David here does not only resolve, but presently takes up his 8.
soul before it strayed too far from God; the further and the longer the
soul wanders from God, the more it intangles it self and the thicker
darkness will cover the soul, yea the loather it is to come to God again,
being ashamed to look God in the face after discontinuing of acquaintance with
him; Nay the stronger the league grows betwixt sin and the soul, and the
more there grows a kind of sutablenesse betwixt the soul and sin; Too
long giving way to base thoughts and affections, discovers too much
complacencie and liking of sin. If we once give way, a little grief will
turn into bitter sorrow, and that into a settled pensiveness and heaviness of
spirit; fear will grow into astonishment, and discouragement into despair; If
ever we mean to trust God, Why not now? How many are taken away in their
offers and essays, before they have prepared their hearts to cleave unto God.
The sooner we give up our selves to the Lord, the sooner we know upon what
terms we stand, and the sooner we provide for our best security, and have not
our grounds of comfort to seek when we shall stand most in need of them. Time
will salve up grief in the meanest of men, Reason in those that will suffer
themselves to be ruled thereby, will cure (or at least stay the fits of it)
sooner: but Faith if we stir it up, will give our souls no rest, until it
has brought us to our true rest (that is) to God: therefore we should press
the heart forward to God presently that Satan make not the rent greater.

Lastly, here we see, that though the soul be overborne by passion for a time,
yet if grace has once truly seasoned it, it will work it self into freedom
again; grace as oil will be above. The eye when any dust falls into it, is
not more tender and unquiet, till it be wrought out again, then a gracious
soul is being once troubled: the spirit as a spring will be cleansing of it
self more and more. Whereas the heart of a carnal man, is like a standing
poole, whatsoever is cast into it, there it rests; trouble and disquietnesse in
him are in their proper place; It is proper for the Sea to rage and cast up
dirt: God has set it down for an eternal rule, that vexation and sin shall
be inseparable. Happiness and rest were severed from Jussisti Domine and sic
est, ut omnis inordinatus affectus sibi sit poena. Aug.
sin in heaven when the Angels fell, and in Paradise when Adam fell, and will
remain for ever separated, until the breach be made up by faith in Christ.
Genesis 3.


CAP. XVI.
Of trust in God: grounds of it: specially his providence.

BUt to come nearer to the unfolding of this trusting in God, which David uses
here as a remedy against all distempers. Howsoever confidence and trust be an
affection of nature, yet by the spirits sanctifying and carrying it to the
right object, it becomes a grace of wonderful use. In the things of this life
usually he that hopes most is the most unwise man; he being most deceived that
hopes most, because he trusts in that which is uncertain, and therefore
deceitful hope is counted but the dream of a waking man. But in Religion it
is far otherwise, here, hope is the maine supporting grace of the soul,
springing from faith in the promises of God.

Trust and hope are often taken in the same sense, though a distinction betwixt
them has sometimes its use: faith looks to the word promising, hope to the
thing promised in the word, faith looks to the authority of the promiser, hope
(especially) to the goodness of the promise; faith looks upon things as
present, hope as to come hereafter. God as the first truth is that which faith
relyes on, but God as the chief good, is that which hope rests on, trust or
confidence is nothing else, but the strength of hope; if the thing hoped for be
deferred, then of necessity it ensorces waiting, and waiting is nothing else
but hope and trust lengthened.

Howsoever, there may be use of these and such like distinctions, yet usually
they are taken promiscuously, especially in the old Testament. The nature and
use of faith is set out by terms of staying, resting, leaning, rolling our
selves upon God, etc. which come all to one, and therefore we forbear any
further curious distinction.

Now seeing trusting in God, is a remedy God and the Soul must be brought
together by trust.
against all distempers, it is necessary that we should bring the object and
the act (God and the Soul) together; for effecting of which, it is good to
know something concerning God, and something concerning trust. God is only the
fit object of trust, he has all the properties of that which should be
trusted on; A man can be in no condition wherein God is at a loss and cannot
help him; if comforts be wanting he can create comforts, not only out of
nothing, but out of discomforts; He made the Whale that swallowed up Jonah 1. 17
Jonas, a means to bring him to the Shore: The Sea was a wall to the
Israelites on both sides: The devouring flames were a great refreshing to the
Dan. 3.
three children, in the fiery furnace; That trouble which we think will
swallow us up, may be a means to bring us to our haven; So mighty is God in
power, and so excellent in working. God Esa. 28. 29.
then, and God only is a fit foundation for the soul to build it self upon,
for the firmer the foundation is, the stronger will the building be, therefore
those that will build high must dig deep: the higher the tree rises, the
deeper the root spreads and fastneth it self below. So it is in faith, if
the foundation thereof be not firm, the soul cannot build it self strongly
upon it; Faith has a double principle to build on, either a principle of
being, or a principle of knowing, the principle of being is God himself, the
principle of knowing is Gods word, whereby God comes forth (out of that
hidden light which none can attain unto) and discovers his meaning toward
us for our good.

This then must 1. be supposed for a ground, that there is a God, and that God
1.
is, (that is) has a full and eternal being, and gives a Being, and an order
of Being, to all things else; some things have only a Being, some things life
and being, some things sense, etc. and some things have a more excellent being
including all the former, as the being of creatures endued with reason; If God
had a not being, nothing else could be; In things subordinate one to another,
take away the first, and you take away (...) the rest: Therefore this
proposition (God is) is the first truth of all, and if this were not, nothing
else should be: as we see if the heavenly bodies do not move, there is no
motion here below.

2. In the divine nature or being, 2.
there is a subsisting of three persons, every one so set out unto us, as
fitted for us to trust in: the Father as a Creator, the Son as a Redeemer,
the Holy Ghost as a Comforter, and all this in reference to us: God in the
first person has decreed the great work of our salvation, and all things
tending to the accomplishment of it: God in the second person has exactly and
fully answered that decree and plot, in the work of our redemption; God in the
third person, discovers and applies all unto us, and fits us for communion with
the Father and the Son from whom he proceeds;

3. GOD cannot be comfortably 3.
thought upon out of Christ our mediator in whom he was reconciling the 1 Cor.
5. 19.
world to himself, as being a friend both to God and us, and therefore fit to
bring God and the soul together, being a middle person in the trinity; In
Christ Gods nature becomes lovely to us, and ours to God: otherwise there is an
utter enmity betwixt his pure and our impure nature: Christ has made up the
vaste gulf between God and us; there is nothing more terrible to think on,
then an absolute God out of Christ.

4. Therefore for the better drawing of us to trust in God, we must conceive 4.
of him under the sweet relation of a Father; Gods nature is Fatherly now unto
us, and therefore lovely.

5. And for further strengthening our faith, it is needful to consider 5.
what excellencies the Scripture gives unto God, answerable to all our
necessities; what sweet Names God is pleased to be known unto us by sor our
comfort, as a merciful, gracious, long suffering Exo. 34. 6.
God, etc.

When Moses desired to see the glory of God, God thus manifested himself, in
the way of goodness, I will m^ all my goodness pass before thee. Exodus 33.
16.


Whatsoever is good in the creature, is first in God as in a fountain and it
is in God in a more emi^ manner and fuller measure. All grace and holiness,
all sweetness of affection, all power and wisdom, etc. as it is in him, so it
is from him, and we come to conceive these properties to be in God, 1. by
feeling the comfort and power of 1.
them in our selves; 2. by observing 2.
these things in their measure to be in the best of the creatures, whence we
arise to take notice of what grace and what love, what strength and wisdom
etc. is in God, by the beams of these which we see in his creature, with
adding in our thoughts fullness peculiar to God, and abstracting imperfections,
incident to the creature; for that is in God in the highest degree, the
sparkles whereof is but in us.

6. Therefore it is fit that unto all 6.
other eminencies in God, we should strengthen our faith by considering those
glorious singularities, which are altogether incommunicable to the creature,
and which gives strength to his other properties, as that God is not only
gracious and loving, powerful, wise, etc. but that he is infinitely, (...),
and unchangeably so. All which are comprised in and drawn from that one name
Jehovah as being of himself, and giving a being to all things else, of
nothing, and able when it pleases him to turn all things to nothing again.

As God is thus, so he makes it good by answerable actions and dealing toward
7. What God is, he makes good by providence.
us, by his continual providence; the consideration whereof is a great stay to
our faith, for by this providence God makes use of all his former excellencies
for his peoples good; for the more comfortable apprehension of which, it is
good to know that Gods providence is extended as far as his creation. Every
creature (in every element and place whatsoever) receives a powerful
influence from God, who does what pleases him, both in heaven, and earth, in
the sea, and all places; But we must know, God does not put things into a
frame, and then leave them to their own motion, as we do clocks, after we
have once set them right, and ships after we have once built them, commit them
to wind and waves; but as he made all things, and knows all things, so (by a
continued kind of creation) he preserves all things in their being and working,
and governes them to their ends: He is the first mover that sets all the
wheels of the creature a working: One wheel may move another, but all are
moved by the first. If God moves not, the clock of the creature stands. If God
should not uphold things, they would presently fall (to nothing) from whence
they came. If God should not guide things, Satan's malice, and man's weakness,
would soon bring all to a confusion. If God did not rule the great family of
the world, all would break and fall to pieces, whereas the wise providence of
God, keeps every thing on its right hinges. All things stand in obedience to
this providence of God, and nothing can withdraw it self from under it; If the
creature withdraw it self from one order of providence, it falls into another;
If man (the most unruly and disordered creature of all) withdraw himself from
Gods gracious government of him to happiness, he will soon fall under Gods
just government of him to deserved misery; If he shakes off Gods sweet yoke,
he puts himself under Satan's heavy yoke, who (as Gods executioner) hardens
him to destruction; and so whiles he rushes against Gods will, he fulfils it.
And whilst he will not willingly do Gods will, Gods will is done upon him
against his will.

The most casual things fall under providence, yea (the most disordered thing
in the world, (sin) and (of sins the most horrible that ever the Sun
beheld) the crucifying of the Lord of life, was guided by a hand of providence
to the greatest good. For that which is ca suall in regard of a second cause,
is not so in regard of the first, whose providence is most clearly seen in
casual events that fall out by accident, for in these the effect cannot be
ascribed to the next cause, God is said to kill him, Deuteronomy. 19. 5
who was unwarily slain by the falling of an axe or some instrument of death.

And though man has a freedom in working, and (of all men) the Hearts of
Kings are most free, yet even these are guided by an over ruling power, as the
rivers of water are carried in their channels, whither skillful men list to
Prove. 21. 1.
derive them.

For settling of our faith the more, God takes liberty in using weak means to
great purposes, and sets aside more likely and able means, yea sometimes he
altogether disableth the greatest means, and works often by no means at
all. It is not from want of power in God, but from abundance and multiplying of
his goodness, that he uses any means at all: there is nothing that he does
by means, but he is able to do without means.

Nay, God often brings his will to pass by crossing the course and stream of
means, to show his own sovereignty, and to exercise our dependence; and makes
his very enemies, the accomplishers of his own will, and so, to bring about
that which they oppose most. Hence it is that we believe under hope against
hope. Ps. 135. 6.


But we must know, Gods manner of guiding things is without prejudice of the
proper working of the things themselves; he guides them sweetly according to
the instincts he has put into them; for,

1. He furnishes creatures with a virtue and power to work, and likewise 1.
with a manner of working suitable to their own nature, as it is proper for a
man (when he works) to work with freedom, and other creatures by natural
instinct, etc. 2. God maintains both the power and manner of working, 2.
and perfecteth and accomplisheth the same by acting of it, being nearer to us
in all we do, then we are to Intimior intimo nostro.
our selves. 3. He applies and stirs up our abilities and actions, to this or
that 3.
particular as he sees best. 4. He suspends or removes the hindrances of 4.
all actions, and so powerfully, wisely, and sweetly orders them to his own
ends. When any evil is intended, God either puts bars and letts to the
execution of it, or else limiteth and boundeth the same both in regard of time
and measure, so that our enemies either shall not do the evil at all, or else
not so long a time, or not in such a height of mischief, as their malice would
carry them to: The rod of the wicked may light upon the back of the righteous,
but Psalm. 125. 3
it shall not rest there. God knows how to take our enemies off, sometimes by
changing, or stopping their wills, by offering considerations of some good or
ill, danger or profit to them; sometimes by taking away, and weakening all their
strength, or else by opposing an equal or greater strength against it. All the
strength our enemies have rests in God; who if he denies concourse and
influence, the arm of their power, (as Ieroboams when he stretched it out
against the Prophet) shrinkes up presently.

God is not only the cause of things and actions, but the cause likewise of
the cessation of them, why they fall not out at all. God is the cause why Deus
est prima causa cujuscunque non esse.
things are not as well as why they are; The cause why men favor us not, or
(when they do favor us) want present wisdom and ability to help us, is from
Gods withdrawing the concurrence of his light and strength from them. If a
skillful Physician does us no good, it is because it pleases God to hide the
right way of curing at that time from him. Which should move us to see God in
all that befalls us, who has sufficient reason, as to do what he does, so not
to do what he does not, to hinder, as well as to give way.

The God of spirits has an influence into the spirits of men, into the
principles and springs of all actions; Otherwise he could not so certainly
foretell things to come. God had a work in Absaloms heart in that he refused
the best counsel; there is nothing independent of him, who is the mover of all
things, and himself unmovable.

Nothing so high, that is above his providence; Nothing so low, that is beneath
it; Nothing so large, but is bounded by it; Nothing so confused, but God can
order it; Nothing so bad, but he can draw good out of it. Nothing so wisely
plotted, but God can disappoint it, as Achitophells counsel; Nothing so simply
and unpolitiquely carried, but he can give a prevailing issue unto it: Nothing
so freely carried, in regard of the next cause, but God can make it necessary in
regard of the event: Nothing so natural, but he can suspend in regard of
operation, as heavy bodies from sinking, fire from burning, etc.

It cannot but bring strong security to the soul, to know that in all variety
of changes, and intercourse of good and bad events, God and Our God, has such
a disposing hand. Whatsoever befalls us, all serves to bring Gods electing
love, and our glorification together. Gods providence serves his purpose to
save us. All sufferings, all blessings, all ordinanoes, all graces, all common
gifts, nay our very falls, yea Satan himself, with all his instruments, as
over-mastered, and ruled by God, have this injunction upon them, to further
Gods good intendment to us, and a prohibition to do us no harm. Augustus
taxed the world for civil ends, but Gods providence used this as a means for
Christ to be borne at Bethieem. Ahashueresh could not sleep, and thereupon
calls for Esther 6. 1.
the Chronicles, the reading of which occasioned the Jews delivery. God often
Divinum consilium dum devitatur impletur, humana sapientia dum reluctatur
comprehenditur. Greg.
disposes little occasions, to great purposes. And by those very ways whereby
proud men have gone about to withstand Gods counsels, they have fulfilled
them, as we see in the story of Joseph and Moses, in the thing wherein they
dealt proudly, He was above them. Ex. 10. 11.


CAP. XVII.
Of Graces to be exercised in respect of divine Providence.

WE are under a providence that is above our own; which should be a ground
unto us, of exercising those graces that tend to settle the soul in all
events. As,

1. Hence to lay our hand upon our mouths, and command the soul an holy
silence, not daring to yield to the least rising of our hearts against God. I
was dumb, and opened not my mouth, Psalm. 39. 9.
because thou did it, says David. Thus Aaron when he had lost his two
sons, both at once, and that by fire, and by fire from heaven, which carried
an evidence of Gods great displeasure with it, yet Lev. 10. 1, 2.
held his peace. In this silence and hope is our strength. Flesh and blood is
proane to expostulate with God, and to question his dealing, as we see in
Gedeon, Jeremy, Asaph, Habacuck, and others. If the Lord be with us, why then
is all this befallen us? but after some struggling between the flesh and the
spirit the conclusion will be, yet howsoever matters go, God is good to
Israel. Where a fearful Psalm. 73. 1.
spirit, and a melancholy temper, a weak judgment, and a scrupulous and raw
conscience meet in one, there Satan and his, together with men's own hearts,
which like Sophisters are continually cavilling against themselves, breed much
disquiet, and makes the life uncomfortable. Such therefore should have a
special care as to grow in knowledge, so to stick close to sure and certain
grounds, and bring their consciences to the rule. Darkness causes fears. The
more light, the more confidence. When we yield up our selves to God, we should
resolve upon quietness, and if the heart stirs, presently use this check of
David, Why art thou disquieted?

Gods ways seem often to us full of contradictions, because his course is to
bring things to pass by contrary means. There is a mystery not only in Gods
decree concerning man's eternal estate, but likewise in his providence, as why
he should deal unequally with men, otherwise equal. His judgments are a
great depth, which we cannot fadome, but they will swallow up our thoughts and
understandings. God often wraps himself in a cloud, and will not be seen till
afterward. Where we cannot trace him, we ought with S. Paul to admire and
adore him. When we are in heaven, it will be one part of our happiness, to see
the harmony of those things, that seem now confused unto us. All Gods dealings
will appear beautiful in their due seasons, though we for the present see not
the contiguity and linking together of one thing with another.

2. Hence likewise proceeds a holy resigning of our selves to God, who does 2.
all things according to the counsel of his own will. His will is a wise
will, it is Voluntas Dei, necessitas rei.
guided by counsel, a sovereign prevailing will. The only way to have our
will, is to bring it to Gods will. If we could delight in him, we should have
our hearts desire. Thus David yeeldes up 2 Samuel 15. 26.
himself unto God; Here I am, let the Lord deal with me as seems good unto
him. And thus Elie when God foretold by Samuel the ruin of his house, quiets
himself, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. Thus our 1 Samuel 3.
18.
blessed Savior stays himself, Not my will, but thy will be done. And thus
the people of God, when Paul was resolved to go to Jerusalem, submitted,
saying, The will of the Lord be done; a speech fit Acts 21. 14
to proceed out of the heart and mouth Vox vere Christianorum.
of a Christian.

We may desire and long after a change of our condition, when we look upon
the greevance it self, but yet rembember still that it be with reservation,
when we look upon the will of God, as How long Lord, holy and Rev. 6. 10.
true, etc. Out of inferior reasons we may with our Savior desire a removal
of the cup, but when we look to the supreme reason of reasons, the will of
God, here we must stoop, and kiss the rod. Thus humbling our selves under his
mighty hand, which by murmuring and fretting we may make more heavy, but not
take off, still adding new guilt and pulling on new judgments.

3. The way patiently to suffer Gods will, is to inure our selves first to do
it. 3.
Passive obedience springs from active. He that endures any thing, will endure
it quietly, when he knows it is the will of God, and considers that what ever
befalls him, comes from his good pleasure. Those that have not inured
themselves to the yoke of obedience, will never endure the yoke of suffering,
they fume and rage as a wild Bull in a net, as the Prophet speaks. It is
worth the confidering, to see two men of equal parts under the same cross,
how quietly and calmely the one that establish eth his soul on Christ, will
bear his afflictions, whereas the other rages as a fool, and is more beaten.

Nothing should displease us, that pleases God; neither should any thing be
pleasing to us, that displeases him. This conformity is the ground of com
fort. Our own will takes away God, Propria voluntas Deu^ quantum in ipsa
eximit.
as much as in it lies. If we acknowledge God in all our ways, he will direct
our paths, and lead us the way that we should Prove. 3. 6. Esa. 48. 10.
go. The quarrel betwixt God and us is taken up, when his will, and our will
are one; when we have sacrificed our selves, and our wills unto God; when, as
he is highest in himself, so his will has the highest place in our hearts.
We find by experience, that when our wills are so subdued, that we delight
to do, what God would have us do, and to be what God would have us be, that
then sweet peace presently rises to the soul.

When we can say, Lord, if thou will have me poor and disgraced, I am content
to be so. If thou will have me serve thee in this condition I am in, I will
gladly do so. It is enough to me that thou would have it so. I desire to
yield readily, humbly, and cheerfully, to thy disposing providence. Thus a
godly man says Amen, to Gods Amen, and puts his fiat and placet to Gods. As
the Sea turns all rivers into its own relish; so he turns all to his own
spirit, and makes whatsoever befalls him, an exercise of some virtue. A Heathen
could say, that calamities did rule over men, but a wise man has a spirit
overruling allcalamities, much more a Christian. For a man to be in this
estate, is to enjoy heaven in the world under heaven; Gods Kingdom comes where
his will^ thus done and suffered.

None feel more sweet experience of Gods providence, then those that are most
resolute in their obedience. After we have given glory to God in relying upon
his wisdom, power, and truth, we shall find him employing these for o^
direction, assistance, and bringing above of things to o^r desired issue, yea
above what ever we looked for, or thought of.

In all cases that fall out, or that we can put to our selves, as in case of
extremity, 4.
opposition, strange accidents, desertion and damps of spirit, etc. here we may
take Sanctuary, that we are in covenant with him, who sits at the stern and
rules all, and has committed the government of all things to his Son, our
Brother, our Joseph, the second person in heaven. We may be sure no hurt
shall befall us, that he can hinder; and what cannot he hinder that has the
^yes of hell and of death? unto whom ^e are so near, that he caries our names
in his breast, and on his shoulders, as the ^igh Priests did those of the
twelve Tribes. Though his Church seems a ^iddow neglected, yet he will make
the world know, that she has a Husband will right her in his good time.

But it may be demanded, what course is Quest.
to be taken, for guidance of our lives in particular actions, wherein doubts
may arise, what is most agreeable to the will of God.

1. We must not put all carelessly upon 1. Answ.
a providence, but first consider what is our part, and so far as God
prevents us with light, and affords us helps and means, we must not be
failing in our duty. We should neither out-runne, nor be wanting to
providence. But in perplexed cases, where the reasons on both sides seem to
be equally balanced, see whether part makes more for the maine end the glory
of God, the service Summa ratio quae pro religione sacit.
of others, and advancement of our own spiritual good. Some things are so
clear and even, that there is not a best between them, but one may be done as
well as the other, as when two ways equally tend to one and the same place.

2. We are not our owns, and therefore 2.
must not set up our selves. We must not consult with flesh and blood either
in our selves or others, for self-love will deprave all our actions, by setting
before us corrupt ends. It considers not what is best, but what is safest.
By-respects sway the balance the wrong way.

3. When things are clear, and God 3.
will is manifest, further deliberation is dangerous, and for the most part
argues a false heart, as we see in Balaam, who though he knew Gods mind, yet
would be still consulting, till God in judgment gave him up to what his
covetous heart led him unto. A man is not fit to deliberate, till his heart be
purged of false aims, for else God will give him up to the darkness of his
own spirit, and he will be always warping unfit for any byas. Where the
aims are good, there God delights to reveal his good pleasure. Such a soul
is level and suitable to any good counsel, that shall be given; and prepared
to entertain it. In what measure any last is favored, in that measure the
soul is darkened. Even wise Solomon, whilst he gave way to his lust, had like
to have lost his wisdom.

We must look to our place wherein God has set us; if we be in subjection to
others, their authority ought to sway with us. Neither is it the calling of
those that are subjects, to enquire over-curiously into the mysteries of
government, for that, both in peace and war breeds much disturbance, and would
trouble all designs.

The laws under which we live, are particular determinations of the law of God
in some duties of the second table. For example; The Law of God says, Exact no
more then what is thy due. But what in particular is thy due, and what another
man's, the laws of men determine, and therefore ought to be a rule unto us so
far as they reach; though it be too narrow a rule to be good only Nimis
angusta innocentia ^st ad legem bonam esse.
so far as man's law guides unto. Yet law being the joint reason and consent
of many men for public good, has an use for guidance of all actions that
fall under the same. Where it dashes not against Gods law, what is agreeable to
law, is agreeable to conscience.

The law of God in the due enlargement of it, to the least beginning and
occasions is exceeding broad, and allows of whatsoever stands with the light
of reason, or the bonds of humanity, civility, etc. and whatsoever is against
these, is so far against Gods law. So that higher rules be looked to in the
first place, there is nothing lovely, or praiseworthy among men, but ought to
be seriously thought on.

Nature of it self is wild and untamed, and impatient of the yoke; but as
beasts that cannot endure the yoke at first, after they are enured a while unto
it, bear it willingly, and carry their work more easily by it: So the yoke of
obedience, makes the life regular and quiet. The meeting of authority, and
obedience together, maintains the order and peace of the world.

So of that Question.

Though blindfold obedience, such as our Adversaries would have, be such 5.
as will never stand with sound peace of conscience, which always looks to
have light to direct it; (for else a blind conscience would breed blind
fears) yet in such doubtful cases wherein we cannot wind out our selves, we
ought to light our candles at others, whom we have cause to think by their
place and parts should see further then we. In matters of outward estate, we
will have men skillful, of our counsel; and Christians would find more sound
peace, if they would advise with their godly and learned Pastors and friends.
Where there is not a direct word, there is place for the counsel of a prudent
man. And it is a happiness for them Sententia boni viri.
whose business is much, and parts not large, to have the benefit of those
that can give aim, and see further then themselves. The meanest Christian
understands his own way, and knows how to do things with better advantage to
his soul, then a graceless though learned man; yet is still glad of further
discovery. In counsel there is peace, the thoughts being thus established.

When we have advised and served Gods providence in the use of means, then if
it fall out otherwise then we look for, we may confidently conclude, that
God would not have it so, otherwise to our grief we may say, it was the fruit
of our own rashness.

Where we have cause to think that we have used better means in the search
of grounds, and are more free from partial affections then others, there we
may use our own advise more safely. Otherwise what we do by consent from
others, is more secure and less offensive, as being more countenanced.

In advice with others, it is not sufficient to be generally wise, but
experienced and knowing in that we ask, which is an honor to Gods gifts
where we find them in any kind. When we set about things in passion, we work
not as men or Christians, but in a bestiall manner. The more passion, the less
discretion; because passion hinders the sight of what is to be done. It clouds
the soul, and puts it on to action without advisement. Where passions are
subdued, and the soul purged and cleared, there is nothing to hinder the
impression of Gods spirit; the soul is fitted as a clean glass to receive
light from above. And that is the reason why mortified men are fittest to
advise with in the particular cases incident to a Christian life.

After all advise, extract what is fittest, 6.
and what our spirits do most bend unto: For in things that concern our
selves, God affords a light to discern out of what is spoken, what best suteth
us. And every man is to follow most what his own conscience, (after
information) dictates unto him; because conscience is Gods deputy in us, and
under God most to be regarded, and whosoever sins against it, in his own
construction sins against God. God vouchsafes every Christian in some
degree, the grace of spiritual prudence, whereby they are enabled to discern
what is fittest to be done in things that fall within their compass.

It is good to observe the particular becks of providence, how things join 7.
and meet together: fit occasions and suting of things are intimations of Gods
will. Providence has a language, which is well understood by those that have a
familiar acquaintance with Gods dealing; they see a train of providence,
leading one way more then to another.

Take especial heed of not grieving 8.
the Spirit, when he offers to be our guide, by studying evasions, and wishing
the case were otherwise. This is to be Lawgivers to our selves, thinking that
we are wiser than God. The use of discretion is not to direct us about the end,
whether we should do well or ill, (for a single heart always aims at good:)
but when we resolve upon doing well, and yet doubt of the manner how to
perform it: discretion looks not so much to what is lawful, (for that is
taken for granted,) but what is most expedient. A discreet man looks not to
what is best, so much as what is fittest, in such and such respects, by eying
circumstances, which if they sort not, do vary the nature of the thing it
self.

And because it is not in man to know his own ways, we should look up unto
Christ, the great Counselor of his Church, to vouchsafe the spirit of
counsel and direction to us: that may make our way plain before us, by
suggesting unto us, this is the way, walk in it. We owe God this respect, to
depend upon him for direction in the particular passages of our lives, in
regard that he is our Sovereign, and his will is the rule, and we are to be
accountable to him, as our Judge. It is God only that can see through
businesses, and all helps and lets that stand about,

After we have rolled our selves upon God, we should immediately take that
course he enclines our hearts unto, without further distracting fear.
Otherwise it is a sign we commit not our way unto him, when we do not quietly
trust him, but remain still as thoughtfull, as if we did not trust him. After
Phil. 2. 4.
prayer and trust follows the peace of God, and a heart void of further
dividing care. We should therefore presently question our hearts, for
questioning his care, and not regard what fear will be ready to suggest, for
that is apt to raise conclusions against our selves, out of selfe-conceited
grounds, whereby we usurp upon GOD, and wrong our selves.

It was a good resolution of the three young men in Daniel, We are not careful
Dan. 3.
to answer thee O King. We know our duty, let God do with us as he pleases.
If Abraham had hearkened to the voice of nature, he would never have resolved
to sacrifice Isaac, but because he cast himself upon Gods providing, God in
the Mount provided a Ram in stead of his Son.

CHAP. XVIII.
Other grounds of trusting in God: namely the Promises. And twelve directions
about the same.

1.
BUt for the better settling of our trust There must be a discovery of the mind
of God, as well as of his nature.
in God, a further discovery is necessary then of the nature and providence of
God; for though the nature of God be written in the book of the Creatures in so
great letters, as he that runs may read; and though the providence of God
appears in the order and use of things; yet there is another book whereby to
know the will of God toward us, and our duty toward him: We must therefore
have a knowledge of the promises of God, as well as of his providence; for
though God has discovered himself most graciously in Christ unto us, yet had
we not a word of promise, we could not have the boldness to build upon Christ
himself; therefore from the same grounds (that there is a God) there must be a
revealing of the will of God, for else we can never have any firm trust in him
further then he offers himself to be trusted; Therefore has God opened his
heart to us in his word, and reached out so many sweet promises for us to lay
hold on, and stooped so low, (by gracious condescending mixed with authority)
as to enter into a covenant with us to perform all things for our good: for
Promises are (as it were) the stay of the soul in an imperfect condition, and
so is faith in them, until all promises shall end in performance, and faith in
sight, and hope in possession.

Now these promises are 1. for their 1.
spring from whence they proceed, fre^ ing agements of God; for if he had not
bound himself, who could? and 2. they are for their value precious, and 3. for
2.
their extent large, even of all things that conduce to happiness; and 4. for
their 3.
virtue quickening and strengthening the 4.
soul, as coming from the love of God, and conveying that love unto us by his
Spirit in the best fruits thereof: and 5. for their certainty, they are as sure
as the Love of God in Christ is, upon 5.
which they are founded, and from which nothing can separate us. For all
promises are either Christ himself, Rom 8. 39.
(the promised seed) or else they are of good things made to us in him and for
him, and accomplished for his sake; they are all made first to him as heir of
the promise, as Angel of the covenant, as head of his body, and as our Elder
brother, etc. for promises being the fruits of Gods love, and Gods love being
founded first on Christ, it must needs follow that all the promises are both
made, and made good to us in and through him, who is yesterday and to day, and
for ever the same. Heb. 13. 8.


That we should not call Gods love into question, he not only gives us his
word, but a binding word his promise, 1.
and not only a naked promise, but has 2.
entered into Covenant with us, founded upon full satisfaction by the blood of 3.
Christ, and unto this Covenant sealed by the blood of the Lord JESUS, he has
added the seals of Sacraments, and unto this he has added his oath, that
there 4.
might be no place left of doubting to 5.
the distrustful heart of man; there is no way of securing promises amongst
men, but God has taken the same to himself, and all to this end, that we
might not only know his mind toward us, but be fully persuaded of it, that as
verily as he lives, he will make good what ever he has promised for the
comfort of his Children. What greater assurance can there be, then for Being it
self ^o lay his being to pawn? and for life it self to lay life to pawn,
and all to comfort a poor soul?

The boundless and restless desire of man's spirit will never be stayed
without some discovery of the chief good, and the way to attain the same: men
would have been in darkness about their final condition, and the way to
please God and to pacify and purge their consciences, had not the word of God
set down the spring and cause of all evil, together with the cure of it, and
directed us how to have communion with God, and to raise our selves above all
the evil which we meet withal betwixt us and happiness, and to make us every
way wise to salvation. Hence it is that the Psalmist preferres the
manifestation of God by his ^d, before the manifestation of him, Psalm. 19. 7.
in his most glorious works.

And thus we see the necessity of a double principle for faith to rely on, 1.
God, and 2. the word of God revealing his will unto us, and directing us to
make use of all his Attributes, Relations, and providence for our good; and
this ^rd has its strength from him who gives a being and an accomplishment
unto it; for words are as the authority of him that utters them is; When we
look upon a Grant in the word of a King, it stays our minds, because we
know he is able to make it good; and why should it not satisfy our souls to
look upon promises in the word of a God? whose words, as they come from his
truth and express his goodness, so they are all made good by his power and
wisdom.

By the bare word of God it is that the heavens continue, and the earth
(without any other foundation) hangs in the mids of the world; therefore well
may the soul stay it self on that, even when it has nothing else in sight to
rely upon; By his word it is that the covenant of day and night, and the
preservation of the world from any further overflowing of waters continues;
which if it should fail, yet his covenant with his people shall abide firm
for ever, though the whole frame of nature were dissolved.

When we have thus gotten a fit foundation for the soul to lay it self upon,
Trust must answer the truth of God.
Our next care must be (by Trusting) to build on the same; All our misery's
either in having a false foundation, or else in loose building upon a true;
therefore having so strong a ground as Gods Nature, his providence, his
promise, etc. to build upon, the only way for establishing our souls is (by
trust) to rely firmly on him.

Now the reason why Trust is so much required, is because 1. it emptyeth Why
says so requisite in Christians.
the soul, and 2. by emptying enlarges it, and 3. seasoneth and fitteth the
soul to join with so gracious an object, and 1.
4. fills it by carrying it out of it self 2.
unto God, who presently (so soon as 3.
he is trusted in) conveyes himself and 4.
his goodness to the soul; and thus we come to have the comfort, and God the
glory of all his excellencies. Thus salvation comes to be sure unto us, whilst
faith looking to the promises (and to God freely offering grace therein)
resigns up it self to God, making no further question from any unworthiness
of its own.

And thus we return to God by cleaving to him, from whom we fell by distrust,
living under a new covenant Iere. 31. 3.
merely of grace; And no grace fitter then that which gives all to Christ,
considering the fountain of all our good is (out of our selves) in him, it
being safest for us (who were so ill husbands at the first) that it should be
so, therefore it is fit we should have use of such a grace that will carry us
out of our selves to the spring head.

The way then whereby faith quieteth the soul, is, by raising it above all
discontentments and storms here below, and pitching it upon God, thereby
uniting it to him, whence it draws virtue to oppose and bring under whatsoever
troubles its peace. For the soul is made for God, and never finds rest till,
it returns to him again; when God and the soul meet, there will follow
contentment; God (simply considered) is not all our happiness, but God as
trusted in; and Christ as we are made one with him; The soul cannot so much
as touch the hemme of Christ's garment, Mat. 9. 20.
but it shall find virtue coming from him to sanctify and settle it; God in
Christ is full of all that is good; when the soul is emptyed, enlarged and
opened by faith to receive goodness offered, there must needs follow sweet
satisfaction.

. 2.
For the better strengthening of our Directio^s about trusting.
trust, it is not sufficient that we trust in God and his truth revealed, but
we must do it by light and strength from him: Many believe in the truth by
humane 1. It must be by divine light.
arguments, but no arguments will convince the soul but such as are fetched
from the inward nature, and powerful work of truth it self; No man can know
God, but by God; None can know the Sun, but by its own light; None can know
the truth of God (so as to build upon it) but by the truth it self and the
Spirit revealing it by its own light to the soul; that soul which has felt
the power of truth in casting it down, and raising it up again, will easily
be brought to rest upon it; It is neither education, nor the authority of
others that profess the same truth, or that we have been so taught by men of
great parts, etc. will settle the heart, until we find an inward power and
authority in the truth it self shining in our hearts by its own beams; hence
comes unsetlednesse in time of troubles, because we have not a spiritual
discerning of spiritual things. Supernatural truths must have a supernatural
power to apprehend them, therefore God creates a spiritual eye and hand of
the soul which is faith.

In those that are truly converted, all saving truths are transcribed out of
the Scripture into their hearts, they are Esa. 54. 13
taught of God; So as they find all truths both concerning the sinful estate,
and the gracious and happy estate of man in themselves; they carry a divinity in
them and about them, so as from a saving feeling they can speak of conversion,
of sin, of grace, and the comforts of the spirit, etc. and from this
acquaintance are ready to yield and give up themselves to truth revealed and to
God speaking by it. Trust is never sound but upon a spiritual conviction of
the truth and goodness we rely upon, for the effecting of which the Spirit of
God must likewise subdue the rebellion and ma^e of our will, that so it may be
suitable and level to divine things, and relish them 2. By subduing and
changing the will.
as they are; we must apprehend the love of God and the fruits of it as better
then life it self, and then choosing and cleaving to the same will soon
follow; for as there is a fitness in divine truths to all the necessities of
the soul, so the Soul must be fitted by them to savor and apply them to it
self; and then from an harmony between the soul and that which it applies it
self unto, there will follow not only peace in the soul, but joy and delight
surpassing any contentment in the world besides.

As there is in God to satisfy the 3. By carrying the whole soul to God.
whole soul, so trust caries the whole soul to God; this makes trust not so
easy a matter, because there must be an exercise of every faculty of the
soul or else our trust is imperfect and lame; there must be a knowledge of him
whom we trust, and why we trust, an affiance and love, etc. Only they that
know God will trust in him; not that knowledge alone is sufficient, but because
the sweetness of Gods love is let into the soul thereby, which draws the
whole soul to him; We are bidden to trust perfectly in God; therefore seeing
we have a God so full of perfection to trust in; we should labor to trust
perfectly in him.

And it is good for the exercise of trust to put cases to our selves of things
4. By putting cases to our selves.
that probably may fall out, and then return to our souls to search what
strength we have if such things should come to pass; thus David puts cases;
Psalm. 3. 6. Psalm. 46. 3. Psalm. 27. 3.
perfect faith dares put the hardest cases to its soul, and then set God
against all that may befall it.

Again, labor to fit the promise to 5. By fitting the promise to every
condition of our lives.
every condition thou art in; there is no condition but has a promise suitable,
therefore no condition but wherein God may be trusted, because his truth and
goodness is always the same; And in the promise, look both to the good
promised, and to the faithfulness and love of the promiser; It is not good to
look upon the difficulty of the thing we have a promise against, but who
promises it, and for whose sake, and so see all good things in Christ made
over to us.

We should labor likewise for a single heart to trust in God only; there is
6. By trusting in God alone.
no readier way to fall then to trust equally to two stays, whereof one is
rotten, and the other sound; therefore as in point of doctrine we are to rely
upon Christ only, and to make the Scriptures our rule only; So in life and
conversation, what ever we make use of, yet we should enjoy and rely upon God
only; for either God is trusted alone or not at all, those that trust to other
things with God, trust not him but upon pretense to carry their double minds
with less check.

Again, labor that thy soul may answer all the Relations wherein it 7.
stands to God, by eleaving to him 1. as 1.
a Father by trusting on his care, 2. as a 2.
teacher, by following his direction, 3. as 3.
a Creator by dependence on him, 4. as a husband by inseparable affection of
love 4.
to him, 5. as a Lord by obedience, etc. And then we may with comfort expect 5.
whatsoever good these Relations can yield: All which, God regarding more our
wants, and weaknesses, then his own greatness, has taken upon him. Shall
these Relations yield comfort 8. By trusting God for all things in all times.
from the creature, and not from God himself, in whom they are in their
highest perfection? Shall God make other fathers and husbands faithful, and
not be faithful Himself? All our comfort depends upon laboring to make these
Relations good to our souls.

And as we must wholly and only trust in God, so likewise we must trust him in
all conditions and times, for all things that we stand in need of, until that
time comes, wherein we shall stand in need of nothing: for as the same care of
God moved him to save us, and to preserve us in the world till we be put in
possession of salvation; So the same faith relyes upon God for heaven and all
necessary provision till we come thither; It is the office of Faith to quiet
our souls in all the necessities of this life, and we have continual use of
trusting while we are here: For even when we have things, yet God still keeps
the blessing of them in his own hands, to hold us in a continual dependence
upon him: God trains us up this way, by exercising our trust in lesser
matters, to fit us for greater; thus it pleases God to keep us in a depending
condition, until he see his own ^me; but so good is God that as he intends to
give us what we wait for, so will he give us the grace and spirit of faith, to
sustain our souls in waiting till we enjoy the same. The unrulinesse of a
natural spirit is never discovered more, then when God deferres, therefore we
should labor the more not to withdraw our attendance from God.

Further we must know that the condition of a Christian in this life, is not 9.
By trusting God when it sees no help.
to see what he trusts God for, (he lives by faith and not by sight) and yet
that there is such a virtue in faith, which makes evident and present things to
2 Cor. 5. 7.
come and unseene: Because God where he gives an eye of faith, gives also a
glass of the word to see things in, and by seeing of them in the truth and
power of him that promises, they become present, not only to the understa^ding
to apprehe^d the^, but to the will to rest upon the^, and to the affections to
joy in the^: It is the nature of faith to work, whe^it seethnothing, and
oftentimes best of all then, because God shows himself more clearly in his
power, wisdom, and goodness, at such times; and so his glory shines most, and
faith has nothing else to look upon then, whereupon it gathers all the forces
of the soul together, to fasten upon God.

It should therefore be the chief care of a Christian to strengthen his faith,
Why God suffers his children to fall into great extremities.
that so it may answer Gods manner of dealing with him in the worst times; for
God usually (1. that he might perfectly mortify our confidence in the 1.
creature, and 2. that he might the more indeere his favors and make them
fres^ 2.
and new unto us, and 3. that the glory of deliverance may be entirely hi^, 3.
without the creatures sharing with him; and 4. that our faith and obedience
may be tried to the uttermost, and discovered) 4.
suffers his children to fall into great extremities before he will reach forth
his hand to help them, as in Jobs case, etc. Therefore Christians should much
labor their hearts to trust in God in the deepest extremities that may be fall
Christians should trust God most in the worst times.
them, even when no light of comfort appears either from within, or without,
yea, then (especially) when all other comforts fail; despair is often the
ground of hope; when the darkness of the Esa. 50. 10
night is thickest, then the morning begins to dawne; that which (to a man
unacquainted with Gods dealings) is a ground of utter despair, the same (to a
man acquainted with the ways of God) is a rise of exceeding comfort; for
infinite power, and goodness can never be at a loss, neither can faith which
looks to that ever be at a stand, whence it is that both God and Faith work
best alone; In a hopeless estate a Christian will see some door of hope
opened, 1. because God 1.
shows himself nearest to us, when we stand most in need of him; help Lord,
for vain is the help of man: God is never more seen then in the Mount; He
knows Psalm. 31. 7.
our souls best, and our souls know him best in adversity; the^ heis most
wonderful in his Saints. 2 because our prayers the^ are (strong 2.
cries) fervent and frequent; God is sure to hear of us at such a time, which
pleases him well, as delighting to hear the voice of his Beloved.

For our better encouragement in these sad times, and to help our trust 10. By
calling to mind former experiences of Gods love.
in God the more, we should often call to mind the former experiences, which
either our selves or others have had of Gods goodness, and make use of the
same for our spiritual good; Our Fathers trusted in thee, (says the head of
Psalm. 22. 4.
the Church) and were not confounded; Gods truth and goodness is unchangeable,
he never leaves those that trust in him; so likewise in our own experiences,
Psalm. 9. 10.
we should take notice of Gods dealing^ with us in sundry kinds, how many
ways he has refreshed us, and how good we have found him in our worst times;
After we have once tried him and his truth, we may safely trust him; God will
stand upon his credit, he never failed any yet, and he will not begin to break
with us; If his nature and his word, and his former dealing has been sure and
square, why should our hearts be wavering? thy word (says the Psalmist) is
very pure (or tried) therefore Psalm. 119. 140. Psalm. 12. 6.
thy servant loves it; the word of God is as silver tried in the furnace,
purified seven times; It is good therefore to observe and lay up Gods dealings;
Experience is nothing else, but a multiplied remembrance of former blessings,
which will help to multiply our faith; tried truth and tried faith unto it,
sweetly agree and answer one another; It were a course much tending to the
quickening of the faith of Christians, if they would communicate one to
Christians should communicate their experiences.
another their mutual experiences; this has formerly been the custom of
Gods people. Come and hear all ye that Psalm. 66. 19
^re God, and I will declare what he has done for my soul; And David urges
this as a reason to God for deliverance, Ps. 142. 7.
that then the righteous would compass him about, as rejoicing in the
experience of Gods goodness to him; The want of this makes us upon any new
trial to call Gods care and love into question, as if he had never formerly
been good unto us; whereas every experiment of Gods love should refresh our
faith upon any fresh onset; God is so good to his children even in this world,
that he trains them up by daily renewed experiences of his fatherly care; for
besides those many promises of good things to come, he gives us some evidence
and taste of what we believe here; that by that which we feel we might be
strengthened in that we look for, that so in both (1. sense of what we feel,
and 2. certainty of what we look for) we might have full support.

But yet we must trust God, as he will be trusted, (namely, in doing good;) o^
11. By walking in the ways of God.
else we do not trust him but tempt him; Our commanding of our souls to trust
in God, is but an Echo of what God commands us first; and therefore in the
same manner he commands us, we should command our selves. As God commands us to
trust him in doing good, so should we commit our souls to him in well doing,
and trust him when we are about his own works, and not in the works of
darkness; we may safely expect God in his ways of mercy, when we are in his
ways of obedience; For Religion as it is a doctrine of what is to be believed,
so it is a doctrine according to godliness; and the mysteries of faith are
mysteries of godliness; because they cannot be believed, but they will enforce
a godly conversation; where my true impression of them is, there is holiness
always bred in that soul; therefore a study of holiness must go jointly
together with a study of trusting in God; faith looks not only to promises,
but to directions to duty, and ^eds in the soul a liking of whatsoever
pleases God; There is a mutual strengthening in things that are good; trusting
stirs to duty, and duty strengthens trusting, by increasing our liberty and
boldness with God.

Again, we must maintain in our souls, a high esteem of the grace of 12.
By setting a high price upon Faith.
^aith; the very try all whereof is more ^ious then gold, what then is the
grace of faith it self, and the promises 1 Pet. 1. 7.
which it lays hold on? certainly they transcend in worth whatever may draw
us from God; whence it is that the soul sets a high price upon them, and on
faith that believes them; It is impossible that any thing in the world should
come betwixt the heart and those things (if once we truly lay hold on them) to
undermine faith or the comfort we have by it; the heart is never drawn to any
sinful vanity, (...) frighted with any terror of trouble, till faith first
loses the sight and estimation of divine things, and forgets the necessity and
excellency of them. Our Savior Christ when he would stir up a desire of
faith in his Disciples, showed Luke 17. 6
them the power and excellency of the same; great things stir up faith and
keep it above, and faith keeps the soul that nothing else can take place of
abode in it; when the great things of Hos. 8. 12.
God are brought into the heart by faith, what is there in the whole world the
can out bid them? Assurance of these things upon spiritual grounds, overrules
both sense and reason, or what ever else prevails with carnal hearts.

CAP. XIX.
Faith to be prized, and other things undervalued, at least not to be trusted
to as the chief.

THat faith may take the better place The means to get an high esteem of
Faith, is to undervalue all things else
in the soul, and the soul in God, the heart must continually be taught of
what little worth all things else are, as reputation, riches, and pleasures,
etc. and to see their nothingnesse in the word of God, and in experience of our
selves and others, that so our heart being ^ed from these things, may open it
self to God, and embrace things of a higher nature; otherwise baser things
will be nearer the soul then faith, and keep possession against it, so that
faith will not be suffered to set up a throne in the heart; There must be an
unloosing of the heart, as well as a fastening of it, and God helps us in both:
for (besides the word discovering the vanity of all things else out of God) the
maine scope of Gods dealing with his children in any danger or affliction
whatsoever is to imbitter all other things but himself unto them; Indeed it is
the power of God properly which makes the heart to trust, but yet the Spirit of
God uses this way to bring all things else out of request with us in
comparison of those inestimable good things, which the soul is created,
redeemed, and sanctified for; God is very jealous of our trust, and can endure
no Idol of jealousy to be set up in our hearts. Therefore it behooves us to
take notice, not only of the deceitfulness of things, but of the
deceitfulness of our hearts in the use of them; Our hearts naturally hang
loose from God, and are soon ready to join with the creature; Now the more we
observe our hearts in this, the more we take them off, and labor to set them
where they should be placed; for the more we know these things, the less we
shall trust them.

But may we not trust in riches, and friends, and other outward helps at all?
Object.


Yes, so far as they are subordinace to God our chief stay, with reservation
Answ.
and submission to the Lord, only so far, and so long as it shall please him
to use them for our good. Because God ordinarily conveyes his help and
goodness to us by some creature; we must trust in God to bless every mercy
we in joy, and to make all helps serviceable to his love toward us. In a
word, we must trust and use them in and under God, and so as if all were taken
away, yet to think God (being all-sufficient) can do without them, whatsoever
he does by them for our good. Faith preserves the chastity of the soul, and
cleaving to God is a spiritual debt which it owes to him, whereas cleaving to
the creature, is spiritual adultery.

It is an error in the foundation to substitute false objects either in
Religion, or in Christian Conversation; for 1. in religion 1.
trusting in false objects as Saints, and works, etc. breeds false worship,
and false worship breeds Idolatry and so Gods jealousy, and hatred. 2. In
Christian Co^versation 2.
false objects of trust breeds false Comforts, and true fears; for in what
measure we trust in any thing that is uncertain, in the same measure will our
grief be when it fails us; the more men rely upon deceitful Crutches the
greater is their fall; God can neither endure false objects, nor a double
object, (as has been showed) for a man to rely upon any thing equally in the
same rank with himself; for the propounding of a double object, argues a
double heart, and a double heart is always James 1. 8.
unsettled, for it will regard God no longer then it can enjoy that which it
joins together with him; Therefore it is said you cannot serve two Masters,
Luke 16. 13
not subordinate one to another; whence it was that our Savior told those
worldly men which followed him, that they could not believe in him, because
Ioh. 5. 44.
they sought honor one of another; and in case of competition, if their honor
and reputation should come into question, they would be sure to be falls to
Christ, and rather part with him then their (...) vne credit and esteem in the
world.

David (here) by charging his soul to trust in God, saw there was nothing else
that could bring true rest and quiet unto him; for whatsoever is besides God,
is but a creature; and what ever is in the creature, is but borrowed, and at
Gods disposing, and changeable, or else it were not a creature; David saw his
error soon, for the ground of his disquiet was trusting something else besides
God, therefore when he began to say, My hill is strong, I shall not be moved,
etc. then presently his soul was troubled. Psalm. 30. 6.
Out of God there is nothing fit for the soul to stay it self upon; for

1. Outward things are not fitted to 1.
the spiritual nature of the soul; they are dead things and cannot touch it
being a lively spirit, unless by way of ^aint.

2. They are beneath the worth of the 2.
soul, and therefore debase the soul, and draw it lower then it self. As a
Noble woman, by matching with a mean person much injures her self, especially
when higher matches are offered. Earthly things are not given for Stays wholly
to rest on, but for Comforts in our way to Heaven; they are no more fit for the
soul, then that which has many angles is fit to fill up that which is round,
which it cannot do, because of the unevenness and void places that will
remain; Outward things are never so well fitted for the soul, but that the
soul will presently see some voidnesse and emptiness in them, and in it self
in cleaving to them; for that which shall be a fit object for the soul, must
be 1. for the nature of it spiritual; (as the soul it self is) 2. constant,
3. full, and satisfying, 4. of equal continuance with it, and 5. always
yielding fresh contents: we cast away flowers, after once we have had the
sweetness of the^, because there is not still a fresh supply of sweetness.
What ever comfort is in the creature, the soul will spend quickly, and look
still for more; whereas the comfort we have in God is undefiled and fades not
away; How can we trust to that for comfort, which by very trusting proves
uncomfortable to us? Outward things are only so far forth good, as we do not
trust in them; thorns may be touched, but not rested on, for then they will
pierce; we must not set our hearts upon those things which are never evil to
us, but when we set our hearts upon them. Psa. 62. 10


By trusting any thing but God, we make it 1. an Idol, 2. a curse and not a
Jere. 17. 5.
blessing, 3. it will prove a lying vanity, not yielding that good which we
look for, and 4. a vexation bringing that evil upon us we look not for.

Of all men Solomon was the fittest to judge of this, because 1. he had a
large heart able to comprehend the variety of things, and 2. (being a mighty
King) had advantages of procuring all outward things that might give him
satisfaction, and 3. he had a desire answerable, to search out and extract what
ever good the creature could yield; and yet upon the trial of all, he passes
this verdict upon all, that they are but vanity; Eccles. 1. 2.
whilst he labored to find that which he sought for in them, he had like to
have lost himself; and seeking too much to strengthen himself by foreign
combination, he weakened himself the more thereby, until he came to know
where the whole of man consists. Eccles. 12. 13.
So that now we need not try further conclusions after the peremptory sentence
of so wise a man.

But our nature is still apt to think there is some secret good in the
forbidden fruit, and to buy wisdom dearly, when we might have it at a
cheaper rate, even from former universal experience.

It is a matter both to be wondered at and pittyed, that the soul having God in
Christ set before it, alluring it unto him, that he might raise it, enlarge
it, and fill it, and so make it above all other things, should yet debase and
make it self narrower and weaker by leaning to things meaner then it self.

The Kingdom, Sovereignty, and large command of Man, continues while he rests
upon God, in whom he reigns (in some sort) over all things under him; but so
soon as he removes from God to any thing else, he becomes weak and narrow
and slavish presently; for,

The soul is as that which it relyes upon; if on vanity it self becomes vain;
for that which contents the soul must satisfy all the wants and desires of
it, which no particular thing can do, and the soul is more sensible of a
little thing that it wants, then of all other things which it injoyes.

But see the insufficiency of all other things (out of God) to support the
soul, in their several degrees. First, All outward things can make a man no
happier, 1.
then outward things can do, they cannot reach beyond their proper sphere:
but our greatest grievances are spiritual. And as for inward things, whether 2.
gifts or graces, they cannot be a sufficient stay for the mind; for 1. gifts
as policy, and wisdom, etc. they are at the best very defective, especially
when we trust in them; for wisdom Esa. 47. 10
makes men often to rebel and thereupon God delights to blast their
projects: None miscarry oftener then men of the greatest parts; as none are
oftener drowned then those that are most skillful in swimming, because it makes
them confident.

And for grace though it be the beginning of a new creature in us, yet it is
but a creature, and therefore not to be trusted in, nay by trusting in it we
imbase it, and make it more imperfect; so far as there is truth of grace, it
breeds distrust of our selves, and carries the soul out of it self to the
fountain of strength.

And for any works that proceed from grace, by trusting thereunto they 3.
prove like the reed of Egypt, which not only deceives us, but hurts us with
the splinters: Good works are good, but confidence in them is hurtful; and
there is more of our own in them (for the most part) to humble us, then of
Gods spirit to embolden us so far as to trust in them. Alas they have nothing
from us, but weakness and defilement, and therefore since the fall, GOD would
have the object of our trust to be (out of our selves) in him; and to that
purpose he uses all means to take us out of our selves, and from the
creature, that he only might be our trust.

Yea we must not trust trust it self, but God whom it relyes on, who is 4.
therefore called our trust. All the glorious things that are spoken of trust
are only made good by God in Christ, who (as trusted) does all for us.

God has prescribed trust, as the way to carry our souls to himself, in whom
we should only rely, and not in our imperfect trust which has its ebbing and
flowing; Neither will trust in God himself for the present suffice us for
future strength and grace, as if trusting in God to day, would suffice to
strengthen us for tomorrow; but we must renew our trust for fresh supply, upon
every fresh occasion. So that we see God alone must be the object of our trust.

There is still left in man's nature a desire of pleasure profit, and of what
ever the creature presents as good, but the desire of gracious good is
altogether lost, the soul being wholly infected with a contrary taste. Man has
a nature capable of excellency, and desirous of it, and the Spirit of God in
and by the word reveals where true excellency is to be had; but corrupt
nature leaving God, seeks it elsewhere, and so crosses its own desires,
till the Spirit of God discovers where these things are to be had, and so
nature is brought to its right frame again, by turning the stream into the
right current, Grace, and sinful nature, have the same general object of
comfort; only sinful nature seeks it in broken Cisterns, and grace in the
fountain; the beginning of our true happiness is from the discovery of true
and false objects, so as the soul may clearly see what is best and safest,
and then steadfastly rely upon it.

It were an happy way to make the We should labor to subdue the first
inclination of our souls to the creatures.
soul better acquainted with trusting in God, to labor to subdue at the first
all unruly inclinations of the soul to earthly things, and to take ad^antage
of the first tenderness of the soul, to weed out that which is ill, and to
plant knowledge and love of the best things in it; otherwise where affections
to any thing below get much strength in the soul, it will by little and little
be so overgrowne, that there will be no place left in it, either for (object or
act) God or trust; God cannot come to take his place in the heart by trust, but
where the powers of the soul are brought under to regard him and those great
things he brings with him, above all things else in the world beside.

In these glorious times wherein so great a light shines, whereby so great
things are discovered, what a shame is it to be so narrow hearted as to fix
upon present things; Our aims and affections should be suitable to the things
themselves set before us; Our hearts should be more and more enlarged, as
things are more and more revealed to ^s; We see in the things of this life, as
wisdom and experience increases, so our aims and desires increase likewise;
A young beginner thinks it a great matter if he have a little to begin
withal, but as he grows in trading, and sees further ways of getting, his
thoughts and desires are raised higher; Children think as Children, but riper
1 Cor. 13. 11.
age puts away childishness, when their understandings are enlarged to see,
what they did not see before; we should never rest till our hearts according to
the measure of revelation of those excellent things which God has for us, have
answerable apprehension of the same. Oh if we had but faith to answer those
glorious truths which God has revealed, what manner of lives should we lead?

CHAP. XX.
Of the method of trusting in God: and the trial of that trust.

LAstly, (to add no more) our trusting in God, should follow Gods order 13. Our
trusting should follow Gods order of promising.
in promising. The first promise is of forgiveness of sin to repentant
believers: next 2. of healing and sanctifying grace: then 3. the inheritance of
the Kingdom of Heaven to them that are sanctified: 4. and then the promises of
all things needful in our way to the Kingdom, etc. Now answerably, the soul
being enlightened to see its danger, should look first to Gods mercy in Christ
pardoning sin, because sin only divides betwixt God and the soul; next,
to the promises of grace for the leading of a Christian life, for true faith
desires hea ling mercy, as well as pardoning mercy, and then to Heaven and all
things that may bring us thither.

By all this we see that it is not so easy a matter as the world takes it, to
bring God and the soul together by trusting on him; It must be effected by the
mighty power of God, raising up the Ephesians. 1. 20.
soul to himself, to lay hold upon the glorious power, goodness, and other
excellencies that are in him; God is not only the object, but the working
cause of our trust; for such is our pronenesse to live by sense, and natural
reason, and such is the strangeness and height of divine things, such our
inclination to a self sufficiency and contentment in the creature, and so hard
a matter is it to take off the soul from false bottomes, by reason of our
unacquaintance with God and his ways; besides such guilt still remains upon
our souls for our rebellion and unkindnesse toward God: that it makes us
afraid to entertain serious thoughts of him; and so great is the distance
betwixt his infinite Majesty, (before whom the very Angels do cover their
faces) and us, by reason of the unspiritualnesse of our nature, being opposite
to his most absolute purity, that we cannot be brought to any familiarity with
the Lord (so as to come into his holy presence with confidence to rely upon
him, or any comfort to have communion with him,) till our hearts be sanctified
and lifted up by divine vigor infused into them.

Though there be some inclination by reason of the remainder of the image of
God in us, to an outward moral obedience of the Law, yet alas, we have not
only no seeds of Evangelicall truths and of faith to believe them, but an
utter contrariety in our natures (as corrupted) either to this, or any other
good. When our conscience is once awaked; we meditate nothing but fears and
terrors, and dare not so much as think of an angry God, but rather how we may
escape and fly from him. Therefore together with a deep consideration of the
grounds we have of trusting God, it is necessary we should think of the
indisposition of our hearts unto it, especially when there is greatest need
thereof, that so our hearts may be forced to put up that petition of the
Disciples to God; Lord increase our faith, Lord help us against our
unbeleeving hearts, etc. By prayer and holy thoughts stirred up in the use of
the means, we shall feel divine strength infused and conveyed into our souls
to trust.

The more care we ought to have to maintain our trust in God, because (besides
the hardness of it) it is a radical and fundamental grace; it is as it were
the mother root and great vein whence the exercise of all graces have their
beginning and strength. The decay of a plant though it appears first Defects
in life rise from defects in trust.
from the withering of the twigs and branches, yet it arises chiefly from a
decay in the root; So the decay of grace may appear to the view first in our
company, carryage, and speeches, etc. but the primitive and original ground of
the same, is weakness of faith in the heart; therefore it should be our
wisdom (especially) to look to the feeding of the root; we must 1. look
that our principles and foundation be good, and 2. build strongly upon them,
and 3. repair our building every day as continual breaches shall be made upon
us; either by corruptions and temptations from within or without; And we shall
find that the maine breaches of our lives arise either from false principles,
or doubts, or mindlesnesse of those that are true; All sin is a turning of the
soul from God to some other seeming good, but this proceeds from a former
turning of the soul from God by distrust. As faith is the first return of the
soul to God, so the first degree of departing from God is by infidelity, and
from thence comes a departure by other sins, by which (as sin is of a winding
nature) our unbelief more increases, and so the rent and breach betwixt our
souls and God is made greater still (which is that Satan would have) till at
length by departing further and further from him, we come to have that
peremptory sentence of everlasting departure pronounced against us; so that our
departure from God now is a degree to separation for ever from him. Therefore
it is Satan's maine care to come between God and the Soul, that so unloosing
us from God, we might more easily be drawn to other things; and if he draws
us to other things, it Satan's study is to unloose our hearts from God.
is but only to unloose our hearts from God the more; for he well knows
whilst our souls cleave close to God, there is no prevailing against us by
any created policy or power.

It was the cursed policy of Balaam to advise Balak to draw the people from God
(by fornication) that so GOD might be drawn from them: the sin of their base
affections crept into the very spirits of their mind, and drew them from God
to Idolatry: Bodily adultery makes way for spiritual; An unbeleeving heart is
an ill heart, and a treacherous heart, because it makes us to depart from God,
the living God, etc. Heb. 3. 12.
Therefore we should especially take heed of it as we love our lives, yea our
best life which arises from the union of our souls with God.

None so opposed as a Christian, and in a Christian nothing so opposed as his
faith, because it opposes whatsoever opposes God, both within and without us:
it captivates and brings under whatsoever rises up against GOD in the heart,
and sets it self against whatsoever makes head against the soul.

And because mistake is very dangerous, and we are prone to conceive that to
trust in God is an easy matter, therefore it is needful that we should have a
right conceit of this trust what it is, and how it may be discerned, lest we
trust to an untrusty trust, and to an unsteady stay.

We may by what has been said before, What trust in God is.
partly discern the nature of it, to be nothing else* but an exercise of
faith, whereby looking to God in Christ through the promises, we take off our
souls from all other supports, and lay them upon God for deliverance and
upholding in all ill, present or future, felt or feared, and the obtaining of
all good, which GOD sees expedient for us.

Now that we may discern the truth The trial of trust.
of our trust in God the better, we must know that true trust, is willing to
be 1. It can and is willing to endure trial.
tried and searched, and can say to God as David, Now Lord what wait I for, my
hope is in thee; and as it is willing to come to trial, so it is able to
endure trial, Psalm. 39. 7.
and to hold out in opposition, as appears in David; If faith has a promise,
it will rely and rest upon it, say flesh and blood what it can to the contrary;
true faith is as large as the promise, and will take Gods part against
whatsoever opposes it.

And as faith singles not out one part 2. It looks to all the promises.
of divine truth to believe and rejects another, so it relyes upon God for
every good thing one as well as another; the ground whereof is this, The same
love of God that intends us heaven, intends us a supply of all necessaries that
may bring us thither.

A child that believes his father will Fides non eligit objectum.
make him Heir, doubts not but he will provide him food and nourishment, and
give him breeding suitable to his future condition; It is a vain pretense to
believe that God will give us heaven, and yet leave us to shift for our selves
in the way.

Where trust is rightly planted, it gives boldness to the soul in going to 3.
It makes the soul bold,
God, for it is grounded upon the discovery of Gods love first to us, and sees
a warrant from him for whatsoever it 1.
trusts him for; though the things themselves be never so great, yet they are
no greater then God is willing to bestow; again, trust is bold because it is
grounded upon the worthiness of a Mediator who has made way to Gods favor
for us, and appears now in heaven to maintain it toward us.

Yet this boldness is with humility, which carries the soul out of it self;
4. yet humble.
and that boldness which the soul by trust has with God, is from God
himself; it has nothing to allege from it self but its own emptiness and
Gods fullness, its own sinfulness and Gods mercy, its own humble obedience,
and Gods command; hence it is that the true believers heart is not lifted up,
nor swells with self confidence; as trust comes in that goes out; trust is
never planted and grows but in an humble and low soul; trust is a holy motion
of the soul to God, and motion arises from want; those (and those only) seek
out abroad that want succor at home; Motus ex indigentia*
Plants move not from place to place because they find nourishment where they
stand; but living creatures seek abroad for their food, and for that end have
a power of mooving from place to place; and this is the reason why trust is
expressed by going to God.

Hereupon trust is a dependant grace answerable to our dependant condition; 5.
Trust is dependant
it looks upon all things it has or desires to have, as coming from God and
his free grace and power; it desires not only wisdom, but to be wise in his
wisdom, to see in his light, to be strong in his strength, the thing it self
contents not this grace of trust, but Gods blessing and love in the thing, it
cares not for any thing further then it can have it with Gods favor and good
liking.

Hence it is that trust is an obsequions and an observing grace, stirring up
the 6. and obsequions.
soul to a desire of pleasing God in all things, and to a fear of displeasing
him; He that pretends to trust the Lord in a course of offending, may trust to
this that God will meet him in another way then he looks for: He that is a
tenant at courtesy will not offend his Lord; hence it is that the Apostle
inforceth that exhortation to work out our salvation with fear and trembling,
Phil. 2. 12, 13.
because it is God that works the will and the deed, and according to his
good pleasure not ours; Therefore faith is an effectual working grace, it
works in Heaven with God, it works within us commanding all the powers of the
soul, it works without us conquering whatsoever is in the world on the right
hand to draw us from God, or ^n the left hand to discourage us; it works
against Hell and the powers of darkness; and all by virtue of trusting as it
draws strength from God; It stirs up all other graces and keeps them in
exercise, and thereupon the acts of other graces are attributed to faith as
Heb. 11. It breeds a holy jealousy over our selves, lest we give God just
cause (...) stop the influence of his grace to^ds us, so to let us see that we
stand ^ot by our own strength: Those that take liberty in things they either
know (...) doubt will displease God, show they want the fear of God, and this
want of fear shows their want of dependancy, and therefore want of trust;
dependancy is always very respective, it studieth contentment and care to
comply; this was it made Enoch walk with God, Heb. 12. 5.
^d study how to please him; when we know nothing can do us good or hurt but
God, it draws our chief care to approve our selves to him. Obedience of faith
and obedience of life will go together; and therefore he that commits his
soul to God to save, will commit his soul to God to sanctify and guide in a
way of well pleasing: Not 1 Pet. 4.
only the tame, but the most savage creatures, will be at the beck of those
that seed them, though they are ready to fall violently upon others;
disobedience therefore is against the principles of nature.

This dependancy is either in the use of means, or else when means fails 7.
It serves Gods providence in the use of means.
us; true dependancy is exactly careful of all means. When God has set down
a course of means, we must not expect that God should alter his ordinary
course of providence for us; deserved disappointment is the fruit of this
presumptuous confidence; the more we depend on a wise Physician, the more we
will observe his directions, and be careful to use what he prescribes; yet
we must use the means (...) means, and not set them in Gods room, for that is
the way to blast our hopes; The way to have any thing taken away and not blessed,
is to set our heart too much upon it. Too much grief in parting with any
thing, shows too much trust in the enjoying of it; And therefore he that uses
the means in faith will always join prayer unto God, from whom as every good
thing comes, so likewise does the blessing and success thereof; where much
endeavor is and little seeking to God, it shows there is little trust; the
Widow that trusted in God, continued likewise in prayers day and Tim. 5. 5.
right.

The best discovery of our not relying too much on means, is, when all means
fail, if we can still rely upon God, as being still where he was, and has
ways of his own for helping of us, either immediately from himself, or by
setting a work other means (and those perhaps very unlikely) such as we
think not of. God has ways of his ^ne. Abraham never honored God more, then
when he trusted in God for ^son against the course of nature, and when he had a
son, was ready to sacrifice him, upon confidence that God Genesis 2. 2.
would raise him from the dead again. This was the ground upon which Daniell
with such great authority reprooved Baltbazar that he had not a care to
glorify God, in whose hand his breath was, Dan. 5. 23.
and all his ways. The greatest honor we can do unto God, is when we see
nothing but rather all contrary to that we look for, then to shut our eyes to
inferior things below and look altogether upon his Al sufficiency; God can
convey himself more comfortably to us when he pleases without means then by
means. True trust as it sets God highest in the soul, so in danger and wants
it has present recourse to him, as the Conyes to the Rocks.

And because Gods times and seasons Pro. 30. 25
are the best, it is an evidence of true 8. It runs not before God.
trust when we can wait Gods leisure, and not make have and so run before
God; for else the more have the worse speed; God seldom makes any promise to
his Children, but he exercises their trust in waiting long before, as David
for a Kingdom, Abraham for a son, the whole world for Christ's coming, etc.

One maine evidence of true trust in God is here in the text, we see here it
9. It stills and quiets the soul upon good grounds.
has a quieting and stilling virtue, for it stays the soul upon the fullness
of Gods love joined with his ability to supply our wants and releeve our
necessities, though faith does not (at the first especially) so stay the soul,
as to take away all suspicious fears of the contrary: There be so many things
in trouble that press upon the soul, as hinder the joining of God and it
together, yet the prevailing of our unbelief is taken away, the reign of it
is broken. If the touch of Christ in his abasement on earth drew virtue from
him, certain it is that faith cannot touch Christ in heaven, but it will draw a
quieting and sanctifying virtue from him, which will in some measure stop the
issues of an unquiet spirit; the Needle in the Compass will stand North,
though with some trembling.

A Ship that lies at Anchor may be something tossed, but yet it still remains
so fastened, that it cannot be carried away by wind or weather; the soul after
it has cast anchor upon God, may (as we see here in David) be disquieted a
while, but this unsetling tends to a deeper settling; the more we believe, the
more we are established; faith is an establishing grace, by faith we stand, and
stand fast, and are able to withstand whatsoever opposes us. For what can
stand against God, upon whose truth and power faith relyes? The devil fears
not us, but him whom we fly unto for succor; It is the ground we stand on
secures us, not our selves.

As it is our happiness, so it must be our endeavor to bring the soul close
to God, that nothing get between, for then the soul has no sure footing. When
we step from God, Satan steps in by some temptation or other presently. It
requires a great deal of self denial to bring a soul either swelling with
carnal confidence, or sinking by fear and distrust, to lie level upon God,
and cleave fast to him; Square will lie fast upon Square; but our hearts are so
full of unevenness, that God has much ado to square our hearts fit for him,
notwithstanding the soul has no rest without this.

The use of trust is best known i^ the worst times, for naturally in sickness
we trust to the Physician, in want to our wit and shifts, in danger to policy
and the arm of flesh, in plenty to our present supply, etc. but when we have
nothing in view, then indeed should God be God unto us. In times of distress,
when he shows himself in the ways of his mercy and goodness, then we
should especially magnify his name, which will move him to discover his
excellencies the more, the more we take notice of them. And therefore David
strengthens himself in these words that he hoped for better times, wherein God
would show himself more gracious to him, because (...) resolved to praise him.

This trusting joints the soul again, and sets it in its own true resting
place, and sets God in his own place in the ^le, that is, the highest; and the
crea^re in its place which is to be under God, as in its own nature, so in
our hearts. This is to ascribe honor due un^ God, the only way to bring peace
Psalm. 29. 2.
^o the soul: Thus if we can bring (...) hope and trust to the God of hope,
(...) trust, we shall stand impregnable ^n all assaults, as will best appear
in ^ese particulars.

CHAP. XXI.
Of quieting the spirit in troubles for sin. And objections answered.

TO begin with troubles of the spirit, which indeed are the spirit of troubles,
as disabling that which should uphold a man in all his troubles. A spirit set
in tune, and assisted by a higher spirit, will stand out against ordinary
assaults, but when God, (the God of the spirits of all flesh) shall seem
contrary to our spirits, whence then shall we find relief?

Here all is spiritual, God a spirit, the soul a spirit, the terrors
spiritual, the devil who joins with these a spirit; yea, that which the
soul fears for the time to come, is spiritual, and not only spiritual, but
eternal, unless it pleases God at length to break out of the thick cloud,
wherewith he covers himself, and shine upon the soul, as in his own time he
will.

In this estate, comforts themselves are uncomfortable to the soul; i^
quarrels with every thing, the better things it hears of, the more it is
vexed. Oh what is this to me, what have I to ^e with these comforts, the more
happiness may be had, the more is my grief; As for comforts from Gods
inferior blessings, as friends, children, estate, etc. the soul is ready to
misconstrue Gods end in all, as not intending any good to him thereby.

In this condition God does not appear in his own shape to the soul, but in
the shape of an enemy; and when God seems against us, who shall stand for us?
Our blessed Savior in his agony had the Angels to comfort him; but had he
been a mere man, and not assisted by the Godhead, it was not the comfort (no
not) of Angels that could have upheld him, in the sense of his fathers Nihil
est tentatio vel universi mundi and totius inferni in unum conflata, ad eam qua
Deus contrarius homini ponitur. Luther
withdrawing his countenance from him. Alas then what will become of us in such
a case if we be not supported by a spirit of power, and the power of ^n
almighty spirit?

If all the temptations of the whole world, and hell it self were mustered
together, they were nothing to this, whereby the great God sets himself
contrary to his poor creature. None can conceive so, but those that have felt
it. If the hiding of his face will so trouble the soul, what will his frown
and angry look do? Needs must the soul be in a woeful plight, when as God
seems not only to be absent from it, but an enemy to it. When a man sees no
comfort from above, and looks inward and sees less, when he looks about
him, and sees nothing but evidences of Gods displeasure; beneath him, and sees
nothing but desperation, clouds without, and clouds within, nothing but clouds
in his condition here, he had need of faith to break through all, and see
Sun through the thickest cloud.

Upon this, the distressed soul is in danger to be set upon by a temptation,
called the temptation of blasphemy, that Tentatio blasphemiarum.
is, to entertain bitter thoughts against God, and especially against the grace
and goodness of God, wherein he desires to make himself most known to his
creature. In those that have wilfully resisted divine truths made known unto
them, and after taste, despised them, a persuasion that God has for saken
them, set on strongly by Satan, has a worse effect, it stirs up a hellish
hatred against God, carrying them to a revengefull desire of opposing whatsoever
is Gods, though not always openly (for then they should lose the advantage of
doing hurt,) yet secretly and subtly, and under pretense of the contrary. To
this degree of blasphemy Gods children never fall, yet they may feel the
venom of corruption stirring in their hearts, against God and his ways which
he takes with them; and this adds greatly to the depth of their affliction,
when afterward they think with themselves what hellish stuff they carry in
their souls. This is not so much discerned in the temptation, but after the
fit is somewhat remitted.

In this kind of desertion, seconded with this kind of temptation, the way is
to call home the soul, and to check it, and charge it to trust in God, even
though he shows himself an enemy, for it is but a show, he does but put on a
mask with a purpose to reveal himself the more graciously afterward; his
manner is to work by contraries. In this condition God lets-in some few beams
of light, whereby the soul casts a longing look upon God, even when he seems
to forsake it; it will with Jonas in the belly of hell, look back to Ion. 2. 4.
the holy Temple of God, it will steal a look unto Christ. Nothing more
comfortable in this condition, then to fly to him, that by experience knew
what this kind of forsaking meant, for this very end that he might be the
fitter to succor us in the like distress.

Learn therefore to appeal from God to God, oppose his gracious nature, his
sweet promises to such as are in darkness, and see no light, inviting Isay 50.
10
them to trust in him, though thereappeare to the eye of sense and reason
nothing but darkness: Here make use of that sweet Relation of God in Christ,
becoming a Father to us: Doubtless thou art our Father: flesh would make a
doubt of it, and thou seem to hide Esa. 63. 16
thy face from us, yet doubtless thou art our Father, and have in former time
showed thy self to be so, we will not leave thee till we have a blessing from
thee, till we have a kinder look from thee: This wrestling will prevail at
length, and we shall have such a sight of him, as shall be an encouragement
for the time to come, when we shall be able to comfort others, with those
comforts 2 Cor. 1. 4.
whereby we have been refreshed our selves. With the Saints case remember the
Saints course, which is to trust in God. So Christ the Head of the Church
commits himself to that God, whose favor for the present he felt not; So Job
resolves upon trust though God should kill him.

But these holy persons were not troubled Object.
with the guilt of any particular sin, but I feel the just displeasure of God
kindled against me for many and great offenses.

True it is, that sin is not so sweet Answ.
in the committing, as it is heavy and ^itter in the reckoning. When Adam had
once offended God, Paradise it self was not Paradise to him. The presence of
God which was most comfortable before, was now his greatest terror, had not
God out of his free infinite and preventing mercy come betwixt him and hell, by
the promise of the blessed seed. This seed was made sin to satisfy for sin;
sin passive in himself 2 Cor. 5. 21
to satisfy for sin active in us.

When God once charges sin upon the soul, Alas who shall take it off? When
the great God shall frown, the smiles of the creature cannot refresh us. Sin
makes us afraid of that which should be our greatest comfort; it puts a sting
into every other evil; upon the seazing of any evil, either of body, soul,
or condition, the guilty soul is imbittered and enraged; for from that which
it feels, it fore-speakes to it self worse to come. It interprets all that
befalls, as the messengers of an angry God, sent in displeasure to take revenge
upon it. This weakneth the courage, wastes the spirits, and blasteth Psalm. 38.
the beauty even of Gods dearest ones. There is not the stoutest man breathing,
but if God sets his conscience against him, it will pull him down, and lay him
flat, and fill him with such inward terrors, as he shall be more afraid of
himself, then of all the world beside. This were a doleful case, if God had
not provided in Christ a remedy for this great evil of evils, and if the holy
Spirit were not above the conscience, able as well to pacify it by the sense
of Gods love in Christ, as to convince it of sin, and the just desert thereby.

But my sins are not the sins of an ordinary Object.
man, my spots are not as the spots of the rest of Gods children.

Conceive of Gods mercy as no ordinary Answ.
mercy, and Christ's obedience as no ordinary obedience. There is something in
the very greatness of sin, that may encourage us to go to God, for the
greater our sins are, the greater the glory of his powerful mercy in
pardoning, and his powerful grace in healing will appear. The great God
delights to show his greatness in the greatest things; Even men glory, when
they are put upon that, which may set forth their worth in any kind. God
delights in mercy, it pleases him (nothing Mic. 7. 18.
so well) as being his chief Name, which then we take in vain, when we are
not moved by it to come unto him.

That which Satan would use as an argument to drive us from God, we should
use as a strong plea with him. Lord the greater my sins are, the greater will
be the glory of thy pardoning mercy. David after his heinous sins, cries not
for mercy, but for abundance of mercy, according to the multitude of thy
mercies, do away nine offenses: his mercy Psalm. 51.
is not only above his own works, but above ours too. If we could sin more then
he could pardon, then we might have some reason to despair. Despair is a
high point of Atheism, it takes away God and Christ both at once. Judas in
betraying our Savior, was an occasion of his death as man, but in despairing
he did what lay in him to take away his life as God.

When therefore Conscience joining with Satan, sets out thy sin in its
^ours, labor thou by faith to set out God in his colors, infinite in mercy
and loving kindness. Here lies the art of a Christian; It is divine Rhetoric
thus to persuade and set down the soul. Thy sins are great, but Adams was
greater, who being so newly advanced above all the creatures, and taken into so
near an acquaintance with God, and having ability to persist in that condition
if he would, yet willingly overthrew himself and all his whole posterity, by
yielding to a temptation, which though high (as being promised to be like unto
God,) yet such as he should and might have resisted; No sin we can commit,
can be a sin of so tainting and spreading a nature, yet as he fell by
distrust, so he was recovered by trusting, and so must we by relying on a
second Adam, whose obedience and righteousness from thence Romans 5. 17
reigns, to the taking away not only of that one sin of Adam, and ours in
him, but of all, and not only to the pardon of all sin, but to a right of
everlasting life. The Lord thinks himself disparaged, when we have no higher
Gods mercy not to be limited.
thoughts of his mercy, then of our sins, when we bring God down to our Model,
when as, the heavens are not so much higher then the earth, then his thoughts
of Isay 55. 8.
love and goodness, are above the thoughts of our unworthiness. It is a kind
of taking away the Almighty, to limit his boundless mercy in Christ, within
the narrow scantling of our apprehension; yet infidelity does this, which
should stir up in us a loathing of it above all other sins. But this is
Satan's fetch, when once he has brought us into sins against the Law, then to
bring us into sins of a higher nature, and deeper danger, even against the
blessed Gospel, that so there may be no remedy, but that mercy it self might
condemn us.

All the aggravations, that conscience and Satan helping it, are able to raise
sin unto, cannot rise to that degree of infiniteness, that Gods mercy in
Christ is of. If there be a spring of sin in us, there is a spring of mercy in
him, and a fountain opened daily to wash our selves in. If we sin often, let us
do as S. Paul, who prayed often against the prick Zac. 13. 1.
of the flesh. If it be a devil of long continuance, yet fasting and prayer
will drive him out at length.

Nothing keeps the soul more down, then sins of long continuance, because
corruption of nature has gotten such strength in them, as nature Isay 55. 8.
is added to nature, and custom does so Sins of continuance dangerous.
determine and sway the soul one way, that men think it impossible to recover
themselves, they see one link of sin draw on another, all making a chain to
fasten them to destruction, they think of necessity they must be damned
because custom has bred a necessity of sinning in them, and conceive of the
promise of mercy, as only made to such as turn from their sinful courses, in
which they see themselves so hardened, that they cannot repent.

Certain it is, the condition is most lamentable, that yielding unto sin
brings men unto. Men are careful to prevent dangerous sicknesses of body, and
the danger of law concerning their estates; but seldom consider into what a
miserable plight their sins which they so willingly give themselves up unto,
will bring them in. If they do not perish in their sins, yet their yielding
will bring them into such a doleful condition, that they would give the whole
world, if they were possessours of it, to have their spirits at freedom from
this bondage and fear.

To such as bless themselves in an ill way upon hope of mercy, we dare not
speak a word of comfort; because God does not, but threatens his wrath, shall
burn to hell against them. Yet How to deal with such, as have lived long in
sin.
because while life continues there may be as a space, so a place, and grace
for repentance, these must be dealt withal in such a manner, as they may be
stayed and stopped in their dangerous courses, there must be a stop before a
turn.

And when their consciences are thoroughly awaked with sense of their danger,
let them seriously consider whither sin, and Satan by sin is carrying of them,
and lay to heart the justice of God, standing before them as an Angel with a
drawn sword, ready to fall upon them if they post on still.

Yet to keep them from utter sinking, let them consider withal, the unlimited
mercy of God, as not limited to any person, or any sin, so not to any time;
there is no prescription of time can bind God, his mercy has no certain date
that will expire, so as those that fly unto it, shall have no benefit.
Invincible mercy will never be conquered, Bonitas invicti non vincitur, and
infinita miserecordia non finitur. Fulgent.
and endless goodness never admits of bounds or end.

What kind of people were those that followed Christ, were they not such as
had lived long in their sinful courses? He did not only raise them that were
newly dead, but Lazarus that had lain four days in the grave. They thought
Christ's power in raising the dead, had reached to a short time only, but he
would let them know, that he could as well raise those that had been long as
lately dead. If Christ be the Physician, it is no matter of how long
continuance the disease be. He is good at all kind of diseases, and will not
endure the reproach of disability to cure any. Some diseases are the reproaches
of other Physicians, as being above their skill to help, but no conceit more
dangerous when we are to deal with Christ.

The blessed Martyr Bilney was much offended when he heard an eloquent Preacher
enveighing against sin, saying thus. Behold, thou have lain rotten in thy own
lusts, by the space of sixty years, even as a beast in his own dung, and will thou presume in one year to go forward toward heaven, and that in thine old
age, as much as thou wentest backward from heaven to hell in sixty years? Is
not this a goodly argument (says Bilney?) Is this preaching of repentance in
the name of Jesus? It is as if Christ had dyed in vain for such a man, and
that he must make satisfaction for himself. If I had heard (says he) such
preaching of repentance in times past, I had utterly despaired of mercy: We
must never think the door of hope to be shut against us, if we have a
purpose to ^e unto God. As there is nothing more injurious to Christ, so
nothing more foolish and groundless then to distrust, it being the chief
scope of God in his word to draw our trust to him in Christ, in whom is always
open a breast of mercy for humbled sinners to fly unto.

But thus far the consideration of our long time spent in the devils service
should prevail with us, as to take more shame to our selves, so to resolve
more strongly for God and his ways, and to account it more then sufficient
that we have spent already, so much precious time to so ill purposes, and the
less time we have, to make the more ^st, to work for God, and bring all the
honor we can to Religion in so little a space. Oh how does it grieve those
that have felt the gracious power of Christ in converting their souls, that
ever they should spend the strength of their parts in the work of his and
their enemy. And might they live longer, it is their full purpose for ever to
renounce their former ways. There is bred in them an eternal desire of
pleasing God, as in the wicked there is an eternal desire of offending him,
which eternity of desires God looks to in both of them, and rewards them
accordingly, though he cuts off the thread of their lives.

But God in wisdom will have the conversions of such as have gone on in a
course of sinning (especially after light revealed) to be rare and difficult.
Birthes in those that are ancienter, are with greater danger then in the
younger sort. God will take a course, that his Cavendu^ est vulnus, quod dolor
curatur.
grace shall not be turned into wantonness. He often holds such upon the rack of
a troubled conscience, that they and others may fear to buy the pleasure of
sin at such a rate. Indeed where sin abounds, there grace superabounds, but
then it is where sin that abounded in the life, abounds in the conscience in
grief and detestation of it, as the greatest evil. Christ groaned at the
raising of Lazarus, which he did not at others, because that though to an
Almighty power all things are alike easy, yet he will show that there be
degrees of difficulties in the things themselves, and make it appear to us
that it is so. Therefore those that have enjoyed long the sweet of sin, may
expect the bitterest sorrow and repentance for sin.

Yet never give place to thoughts of despair, as coming from him that would
overturne the end of the Gospel, which lays open the riches of Gods mercy in
Christ, which riches none set out more then those that have been the greatest
of sinners, as we see in Paul. We cannot exalt God more then by taking notice,
and making use of that great design of infinite wisdom in reconciling justice
and mercy together, so as now he is not only merciful, but just in pardoning
sins. Our Savior Romans 3. 26.
as he came toward the latter age of the world, when all things seemed
desperate, so he comes to some men in the latter part of their days. The
mercy showed to Zacheus, and the good thief was personal, but the comfort
intended by Christ was public, therefore still still trust in God.

In this case we must go to God, with whom all things are possible, to put
forth his Almighty power, not only in the pardoning, but in subduing our
iniquities. He that can make a Camel go through a needles eye, can make a
high conceited man lowly, a rich man humble. Therefore never question his
power, much less his willingness, when he is not only ready to receive us
when we return, but persuades and intreates us to come in unto him, yea after
backsliding and false dealing with Ier. 3. 2.
him, wherein he allows no mercy to be showed by man, yet he will take liberty
to show mercy himself.

But I have often relapsed and fallen into Object.
the same sin again and again.

If Christ will have us pardon our brother seaventy seven times, can we Answ.
think that he will enjoyne us more, then he will be ready to do himself,
when in case of showing mercy he would have us think his thoughts to be far
above ours. Adam lost all by once sinning, but we are under a better covenant,
a covenant of mercy, and are encouraged by the Son to go to the Father every
day for the sins of that day.

Where the work of grace is begun, sin loses strength by every new fall; for
hence issues deeper humility, stronger hatred, fresh indignation against our
selves, more experience of the deceitfulness of our hearts, renewed
resolutions until sin be brought under. That should not drive us from God,
which God would have us make use of, to fly the rather to him, since there is
a throne of grace set up in Jesus Christ, we may boldly make use of, and let us
be ashamed to sin, and not ashamed to glorify Gods mercy in begging pardon
for sin. Nothing will make us more ashamed to sin, then thoughts of so free and
large mercy. It will grieve an ingenuous spirit to offend so good a God. Ah
that there should be such an heart in me, as to tire the patience of God, and
damme up his goodness, as much as in me lies; but this is our comfort, that
the plea of mercy from a broken spirit to a gracious Father, will ever hold
good. When we are at the lowest in this world, yet there are these three
grounds of comfort still remaining. 1. That we are not yet in the place of the
damned, whose estate is unalterable. 2. That whilst we live, there is time and
space for recovering of our selves. 3. That there is grace offered, if we will
not shut our hearts against it.

O, but every one has his time, my good Object.
hour may be past.

That is counsel to thee, it is not past Answ.
if thou can raise up thy heart to God, and embrace his goodness. Show by
thy yielding unto mercy, that thy time of mercy is not yet out, rather then by
concluding uncomfortably, willingly betray thy self to thy greatest enemy,
enforcing that upon thy self, which God labors to draw thee from. As in the
sin against the Holy Ghost, fear shows that we have not committed it: So
in this, a tender heart fearing least our time be past, shows plainly that
it is not past.

Look upon examples, when the Prodigal in his forlorn condition was going to
his Father, his Father stayed not for him, but meets him in the way, Luke 15.
he did not only go, but ran to meet him. God is more willing to entertain
us, then we are to cast our selves upon him. As there is a fountain opened for
sin, and for uncleanness, so it is a living fountain of living water, that
runs for ever, and can never be drawn dry.

Here remember, that I build not a Caution
shelter for the presumptuous, but only open an harbor for the truly humbled
soul, to put himself into,

CHAP. XXII.
Of sorrow for sin, and hatred of sin, when right and sufficient. Helps
thereto.

AH, there is my misery. If I could be Object.
humbled for sin, I might hope for mercy, but I never yet knew what a broken
heart meant, this soul of mine was never as yet sensible of the grief and
smart of sin, how then can I expect any comfort?

It is one of Satan's policies, to hold Answ. 1.
us in a dead and barren condition, by following us with conceits, that we
have not sorowed in proportion to our offenses. True it is, we should labor
that our sorrow might in some measure answer to the haynousnesse of our sins:
but we must know sorrow is not required Sorrow not required for it self: as
sorrow.
for it self in that degree as faith is; If we could trust in God without much
sorrow for our sins, then it would not be required, for God delights not in our
sorrow as sorrow, God in mercy both requires it and works it, as thereby making
us capable vessels of mercy, fit to acknowledge, value, and walk worthy of
Christ; he requres it as it is a means to imbitter sin, and the delightful
pleasures thereof unto us, and by that means bring us to a right judgment of
our selves, and the creature, with which sin commits spiritual adultery,
that so we may recover our taste before lost. And then, when with the Prodigal
we return unto our selves (having lost our selves before) we are fit to judge
of the baseness of sin, and of the worth of mercy; and so upon grounds of
right reason, be willing to alter our condition, and embrace mercy upon any
terms it shall please Christ to injoyne.

Secondly, if we could grieve and cast Ans. 2. The greatest sorrow can make no
satisfaction for sin.
down our selves beneath the earth, as low as the nethermost pit, yet this
would be no satisfaction to God for sin; of it self, it is rather an
entrance, and beginning of hell.

Thirdly, we must search what is the Ans. 3.
cause of this want of grief which we complain of; whether it be not a
secret cleaving to the creature, and too much contentment in it, which often
steals away the heart from God, and brings in such contentment, as is subject
to fail and deceive us, whereupon from coffeehouse, we grieve, which
grief (being carnal) hinders grief of a better kind.

Usually the causes of our want of Causes of our want of grief for sin.
grief for sin are these. First, a want of serious consideration, and dwelling
long enough upon the cause of grief, 1. Want of consideration.
which springs either from an unsetlednesse of Nature, or distractions from
things without. Moveable dispositions, are not long affected with any thing.
One maine use of crosses, is to Use of crosses.
take off the soul from that it is dangerously set upon, and to fix our
running spirits. For though grief for crosses hinder spiritual grief, yet
worldly delights hinder more. That grief is less distant from true grief,
and therefore nearer to be turned into it.

And put case we could call off our 2. Want of a divine work.
minds from other things, and set them on grief for our sins, yet it is
only Gods spirit that can work our hearts to this grief, and for this end,
perhaps God holds us off from it, to ^each us, that he is the teacher of the
heart to grieve. And thereupon it is our duty to wait, till he reveal our
selves so far to our selves, as to stir up this affection in us.

Another cause may be a kind of doubleness of heart, whereby we 3. A kind
of doublenes of heart.
would bring two things together that cannot suite. We would grieve for sin so
far as we think it an evidence of a good condition: but then, because it is an
irksome task, and because it cannot be wrought without severing our heart from
those sweet delights it is set upon: hence we are loath God should take that
course to work grief, which crosses our disposition. The soul must
therefore by self-denial be Self-denial.
brought to such a degree of sincerity and simplicity, as to be willing to give
God leave to work this sorrow, not to be 2 Cor. 7. 10.
sorrowed for, by what way he himself pleases. But here we must remember
again, that this self-denial, is not of our selves, but of God, who only
can take us out of our selves, and if our hearts were brought to a sto^ping
herein to his work, it would stop many a cross, and continue many a blessing
which God is forced to take from us, that he may work that grief in us, which
he sees would not otherwise be kindly wrought.

God gives some larger spirits, and so their sorrows become larger. Some 4.
upon quickness of apprehension, and the ready passages betwixt the brain and
the heart, are quickly moved: where the apprehension is deeper, and the
passages slower, there sorrow is long in working, and long in removing. The
deepest waters have the stillest motion. Iron takes fire more slowly then
stubble, but then it holds it longer.

Again, God that searches and knows our hearts (better then our selves) knows
5. Because God sees not grief so fit for one disposition as another.
when and in what measure it is fit for to grieve: He sees it fitter for some
dispositions, to go on in a constant grief. We must give that honor to the
wisdom of the great Physician of souls, to know best how to mingle and
minister his potions. And we must not be so unkind to take it ill at Gods
hands, when he, (out of gentleness and forhearance) ministers not to us that
chur^sh Physic he does to others; but cheerfully embrace any potion that he
thinks fit to give us.

Some holy men have desired to see Earnest desire of too much sorrow for sin
dangerous.
their sin in the most ugly colors, and God has heard them in their
requests. But yet his hand was so heavy upon them, that they went always
mourning to their very graves; and thought it fitter to leave it to Gods Mr.
Leaver.
wisdom to mingle the potion of sorrow, then to be their own choosers. For a
conclusion then of this point, If we grieve that we cannot grieve, and so far
as it is sin, make it our grief: then put it amongst the rest of our sins,
which we beg pardon of, and help against, and let it not hinder us from going
to Christ, but drive us to him. For, herein lies the danger of this temptation,
that those who complain in this kind, think it should be presumption to go
to Christ: when as he especially calls the weary and heavy laden sinner to
come unto him, and therefore such (...) are sensible that they are not sen^
enough of their sin; must know, though want of feeling be quite opposite to the
life of Grace: yet sensiblenes of the want of feeling* shows some degree of the
life of Grace. The safest way in this case is, from that life and light that
God has wrought in o^ souls, to see and feel this want of feeling, to cast
our selves and this our indisposition, upon the pardoning and healing mercy of
God in Christ.

We speak only of those that are Caution
so far displeased with themselves for their ill temper, as they do not
favor themselves in it, but are willing to yield to Gods way in redressing it,
and do not cross the Spirit, moving them thus with David to check themselves,
and to trust in God. Otherwise, an unfeeling and careless state of Spirit will
breed a secret shame of going to God, for removing of that we are not hearty
in laboring against, so far as The most constant state of the soul, in
regard of sin.
our conscience tells us we are enabled.

The most constant state the soul can be in, in regard of sin, is, upon
judgment to condemn it upon right ^nds, and to resolve against it. Thereupon
Repentance is called an af^isdome and change of the mind. And ^s disposition
is in Gods children at (...) times. And for affections, love of that ^ich is
good, and hatred of that which (...) evil; these likewise, have a settled
^tinuance in the soul. But, grief (...) sorrow rise and fall as fresh
occasions ^re offered, and are more lively stirred (...) upon some lively
representation, to (...) soul of some hurt we receive by ^e, and wrong we
do to God in it. ^e reason hereof is, because till the ^e be separated from
the body, these ^ctions have more communion with (...) body, and therefore they
carry more ^ward expressions, then dislike, or ^omination in the mind does. We
(...) to judge of our selves more by that ^ich is constant, then by that which
is ^ing and flowing.

But, what is the reason that the affecti^s Quest.
do not always follow the judgment, (...) the choice or refusal of the will?

Our soul being a finite substance, is Answ. 1.
carried with strength but one way at one time.

2. Sometime God calls us to joy as well as to grieve: and then no wonder 2.
if grief be somewhat to seek.

3. Sometimes when God calls ^o grief, and the judgment and will goes 3.
along with God, Yet the heart is not always ready, because (it may be) it
has run out so far, that it cannot presently be called in again.

4. Or, the spirits (which are the instruments of the soul) may be so wasted,
4.
that they cannot hold out to feed a strong grief: in which case, the
conscience must rest in our settled judgment and hatred of ill; which is the A
neverfailing character of a good soul.
surest and never-failing Character of a good soul.

5. Often times God in mercy takes us off 5.
from grief and sorrow, by refreshing occasions: because sorrow and grief are
affections very much afflicting both of body and soul.

When is godly sorrow in that degre^ Quest.
wherein the soul may stay it self from uncomfortable thoughts about its
condition (...)

Ans. 1. When we find strength against that sin ^ich formerly we fell into,
and ability to ^e in a contrary way: for this answers 1. When the soul is
sufficiently humbled.
Gods end in grief, one of which, is a prevention from falling for the time
(...) come. For God has that affection (...) him which he puts into Parents,
which is by smart to prevent their childrens boldness of offending for the
time to come.

2. When that which is wanting in 2.
gri^fe, is made up in fear. Here there is (...) great cause of complaint of
the ^nt of grief, for this holy affection is Fear is the awba^d of the soul
(...) ^band of the soul, whereby it is ^pt from starting from God and his
^yes.

3. When after grief we find in 3.
^rd peace; for true grief being Gods ^orke in us, he knows best how to
^easure it. Therefore, whatsoever ^e God brings my soul into, I am (...) rest
in his goodness, and not except against his dealing. That peace and joy, ^ich
rises from grief in the use of ^eanes, and makes the soul more ^ble and
thankful to God, and less censorious and more pitiful to others: is no
illusion, nor false light.

The maine end of grief and sorrow is, t^ make us value the grace and mercy of
God 4.
in Christ, above all the contentments which sin feeds on. Which where it is
found, we may know that grief for sin, has enough possessed the soul before.
The sufficiency of things is to be judged by an answerablenesse to their use
and ends: God makes sin bitter, that Christ may be sweet: that measure of
grief and sorrow is sufficient, which brings us, and holds us to Christ.

Hatred, being the strongest, deepest, and steadiest affection of the soul
against 5.
that which is evil; Grief for sin is then right, when it springs from
hatred, and increases further hatred against it.

Now the soul may be known to hate sin, when it seeks the utter ^lishing
How to know that we hate sin rightly.
of it, for hatred is an imp^ble, and irreconcilable affection.

True hatred is carried against (...) 1.
whole kind of sin, without respect (...) 2.
any wrong done to us, but only out of mere Antipathie, and contrariety of
^sposition to it. As the Lamb hates ^he whole kind of Wolves, and man ^eth
the whole kind of Serpents. A load does us no harm, but yet we ^e it.

That which is hateful to us, the ^earer it is, the more we shun and ab^orre
3.
it, as venomous Serpents, and ^full creatures, because the neerenesse of the
object affects us more deeply. Therefore, if our grief spring ^om true hatred
of sin, it will make ^o new league with it, but grieve, for (...) sin,
especially for our own particular sins, as being contrary to the work of
Gods grace in us, then is grief (...) affection of the new creature, and every
way of the right breed.

But for fuller satisfaction in this case, 4.
^e must know there is sometimes grief (...) sin in us, when we think there
is none: (...) wants but stirring up by some quickening word; the remembrance of
Gods ^avours and our unkindnesse, or the a^ ^aking of our consciences by some
^osse, will raise up this affection feelingly in us. As in the affection of
love, many think that they have no love to God at all: yet let God be
dishonored in his name, truth, or children, and their love will soon stir
and appear in just anger.

In want of grief for sin, we must remember, 1. That we must have this What
we must do in want of grief for sin.
affection from God, before we can bring it unto God.

And therefore, in the second place, Our chief care should be, not to harden 1.
our hearts against the motions of 2.
the spirit, stirring us to seasonable grief, for that may cause a judicial
hardness from God. God often inflicteth some spiritual judgment (as a
correction upon men) for not yielding to his spirit at the first, they feel a
hardness of heart growing upon them: This made the Church complain, Why have
thou hardened our hearts from thy Isay 63.
fear? which if Christians did well consider, they would more carefully
entertain such impressions of sorrow, as the spirit in the use of the means,
and observation of Gods dealing toward tselves or others, shall work in ^m,
then they do. It is a saying of (...), Let a man grieve for his sin, and
(...) for his grief. Though we can nei^er love, nor grieve, nor joy of our
^es, as we should, yet our hearts tell (...), we are often guilty of giving a
^ck to the spirit, stirring these affecti^ in us, which is a maine cause of the
^y sharp afflictions we endure in ^is life, though Gods love in the main ^er
of salvation be most firm unto (...)

We must not think to have all this ^fe at first, and at once, for oftentimes
3.
^n deeper after a sight and feeling of Gods love then it was before. God is a
(...) Agent, and knows every man's se^ll mould, and the several services ^is
to use them in, and often takes liber^ afterward to humble men more ^en he has
enabled them better to ^e it) then in their first entrance in^ Al a Christians
grief is not at first.
Religion: Grief before springs ^monly from self-love, and fear ^ger. Let no
man suspect his estate ^se God spares him in the beginning. For Christians many
times meet with greater trials after their conversion then ever they thought
on. When men take little fines, they means to take the greater rent. God will
have his children first or last to feel what sin is, and how much they are
beholding to him for Christ.

This grief does not always arise fr^ Grief arises not always from our
poring on sin.
poring on sin, but by often considering of the infinite goodness of God in
Christ, and thereby reflecting on our own unworthiness, not only in regard
of sin past, but like wise of the sin that hangs upon us, and issues daily
from (...) The more holy a man is, the more he sees the holiness of Gods
nature, with whom he desires to have, communion, the more he is grieved that
there shoul be any thing found in him, displeasing to so pure a Majesty.

And as all our grief comes no^ (...) first, so God will not have it come
(...) once, but to be a stream always ^ning, fed with a spring, yet withiin
(...) banks, though sometimes deep^ sometimes shallower. Grief for s^ i^ like
a constant stream; grief for ^her things is like a torrent, or swelling
waters, which are soon up, soon down, what it wants in greatness, is made
up in continuance.

Again, If we watch not our nature, 4. That there may be a spice of Popery in
this our earnest desire of much grief.
there will be a spice of Popery, (which is a natural Religion) in this great
desire of ^re griefe^ as if we had that, then we had something to satisfy God
withal, and so, our minds will run too much upon works. This grief must not
^ly be wrought by God revealing (...) sin, and his mercy unto us in Christ:
But when it is wrought, we ^st altogether rest (in a sense of our ^e
emptiness) upon the full satisfa^on and worthiness of Christ our Sa^.

All this that has been said, tends The scope of this discourse of grief.
(...) to the abating of our desire to have (...) tender and bleeding heart for
sin: (...) that in the pursuit of this desire, we (...) not cast down so as
to question our ^es, if we feel not that measure of ^se which we desire and
endeavor (...): Or, to refuse our portion of joy which God offers us in
Christ. Considering, grief is no further good, then it makes way for joy:
which caused our Savior to join them together: Blessed are the mourners, for
they shall be Mat. 5.
comforted. Being thus disposed, we may commit our souls to God in peace,
notwithstanding Satan's troubling of us in the hour of temptation.

CHAP. XXIII.
Other spiritual causes of the souls trouble, discovered, and removed: and
object^ons answered.

ANother thing that disquiets and That the great conflict in us betwixt grace
and corruption does also much cast us down. Proximorum odiae sunt acerbissima.
casts down the soul very much, is, that inward conflict betwixt gr^ and
corruption: this makes us most work, and puts us to most disquietment. It is
the trouble of troubles, (...) have two inhabitants so near in one soul, and
these to strive one against another, in every action, and at (...) times in
every part and power in ^e the one carrying us upward, higher ^d higher still,
till we come to God: the ^er, pulling us lower and lower, fur^r from him. This
cannot but breed a ^t disquiet, when a Christian shall be Romans 7.
(...) on to that which he would not, and hin^d from that which he would do,
or ^led in the performance of it. The ^re light there is to discern, and life
^f Orace to be sensible hereof; and the ^re love of Christ, and desire from
love to be like to him, the more irksome will this be: no wonder then that
(...) Apostle cried out, O wretched man Romans 7.
(...) lam, etc.

Here is a special use of Trust, in the That the sight and sense of this
sharp conflict, should cause us to trust the more in God.
^e mercy of God in justification, (con^ing all is stained that comes from
(...)) it is one maine end of Gods leaving (...) in this conflicting condition,
that (...) may live and die by faith in the per^st righteousness of Christ,
whereby (...) God more, then if we had (...) righteousness of our own. (...)
by likewise, we are driven to ^e use of all the promises of Grace, ^d to trust
in God for the perfor^ce of them, in strengthening his own party in us, and
not only to trus^ in God for particular graces, but for hi^ Spirit which is the
spring of all grace which we have through and fr^ Christ: who will help us in
this fight, until he has made us like himself. We are under the government
of Grace, sin is deposed from the rule it had; and shall never recover the
right it had again; It is left in (...) for matter of exeroise, and ground of
triumph.

Oh (say some) I shall never hold out, as good give over at first as at last, I
(...) Object. Of pe^severance to the end, answered.
such strong inclinations to sin in me, and such weakness to resist
temptation, that I fear) I shall but shame the cause; I (...) one day perish
by the hand of Satan, stre^ thening my corruption.

Why art thou thus troubled? Trust Answ.
in God, Grace will be above Nature, God above the devil, the Spirit (...) the
flesh. Be strong in the Lord, the battle is his, and the victory ou^ before
hand. If we fought in our (...) cause and strength; and with our weapons, it
were something: but as (...) fight in the power of God, so are (...) (...) by
that mighty power through faith (...) salvation. It lies upon the faithful^e
Pet. 2.
of Christ, to put us into that pos^on of glory which he has purcha^ for us:
therefore charge the soul ^ake use of the promises, and rely ^n God for
perfecting the good ^ke that he has begun in thee.

Corruptions be strong, but stronger (...) that is in us, then that corruption
(...) is in us. When we are weak in ^owne sense, then are we strong in (...),
who perfecteth strength in our ^nesse fel^ and acknowledged. Our ^ptions are
Gods enemies as well ^rs, and therefore in trusting to (...) and fighting
against them, we (...) be sure he will take our part a^st them.

But I have great impediments, and man discouragements in my Christian course.
Object.


What is our impediments be Moun^s, faith is able to remove them; Who Answ.
^hou O Mountain (says the Pro^t.) What a world of impediments Zach. 4. 7.
^t there betwixt Egypt and the land (...) Canaan, betwixt the return out of
Babylon and Jerusalem, yet faith removed all, by looking to Gods power and
truth in his promise. The looking too much to the Anakims and Grants, and too
little to Gods omnipotency, s^ the Israelites out of Canaan, and p^ God to his
oath, that they should never enter into his rest, and it will exclude o^ Psalm
95.
souls from happiness at length, if looking too much upon these Anakims
within us and without us, we basely despair and give over the field,
considering all our enemies are not only conquered for us by our Head, but
shall be conquered in us, so that in strength of assistance we fight against
them. God gave the Israelites enemies into their hands, but yet they must fight
it o^r, and what coward will not fight wh^ he is sure of help and victory.

But I carry continually about me a (...) Object.
rupt heart, if that were once changed, I could have some comfort.

A new heart is Gods creature, a^ Answ.
he has promised to create it in us. A creating power cannot only bring
something out of nothing, but contrary (...) of contrary. Where we are sure of
Gods ^h, let us never question that power (...) which all things are possible.
If our ^rts were as ill, as God is powerful ^d good, there were some ground of
^scouragement. In what measure we ^e up our hearts to God, in that mea^ we are
sure to receive them bet^. That Grace which inlargeth the ^art to desire good,
is therefore given, that God may increase it, being both a ^rt and a pledge of
further grace. There is a promise of pouring clean ^er upon us, which faith
must sue out. Christ has taken upon him to purge his ^se, and make her fit for
himself. Ephesians. 5.


But I have many wants and defects to Object.
^supplyed.

It pleases him, that in Christ all ful^sse Answ.
shall dwell, from whose fullness ^ce sufficient is dispensed to us, an^erable
to the measure of our faith, ^hereby we fetch it from the fountain. The more we
trust, the more we have. When we look therefore to our own ^nt, we should
look withal to Christ's ^nesse, and his neernesse to us, and take advantage
from our misery, to re^ upon his al sufficiency, whose fullness ours, as
himself is. Our fullness wi^ our life is hid in Christ, and distille^ into us,
in such measure as his wisdom thinks fit, and as shows him to b^ a free
agent, and yet so as the blame f^ want of grace lies upon us, seeing h^ is
before hand with us in his offers o^ grace, and our own consciences will tell
us, that our failings are more from cherishing of some lust, then from
unwillingnesse in him to supply us with grace.

But God is of pure eyes, and cannot endure such sinful services as I
perform. Object.


Though God be of pure eyes, y^ he looks upon us in him, who is blame Answ.
less and without spot, who by virtue of his sweet smelling sacrifice, appear^
for us in heaven, and mingles his o^ with our services, and in him will God be
known to us by the name of a kind^ Father, not only in pardoning our defects,
but accepting our endeavou^ We offer our services to God, not (...) our own
name, but in the name of o^ high Priest, who takes them from us, and ^ents them
to his Father, as stirred (...) by his spirit, and perfumed by his ^dience.
Jonas his prayer was min^d with a great deal of passion and ^perfection, yet
God could discern ^ething of his own in it, and pity (...) pardon the rest.

CHAP. XXIV.
^utward troubles disquieting the spirit: and comforts in them.

AS for the outward evils that we meet withal in this life; they are either
(...), 1. As deprive us of the comforts our 1.
^e is supported withal; or else, 2. they 2.
^g such misery upon our nature or condi^n that hinders our well-being in this
^d.

For the first, Trust in God, and take 1. For outward evils.
^t of his al-sufficiency whatsoever we ^t. Sure we are by his promise, that ^e
shall want nothing that is good. that he takes away one way, he can ^e
another, what he takes away in Amaziah.
one hand, he can give in another, wha^ he withholds one way, he can supply in
a better. Whatsoever comfort we have in goods, friends, health, or any other
blessings, it is all conveyed by him, who still remains though these be taken
from us. And we have him bound in many promises for all that is needful for
us. We may sue him upon his own bond; can we think that he who will give us a
Kingdom, will fa^ us in necessary provision to bring us thither, who himself
is our portion?

As for those miseries which our weak nature is subject to, they are all 2.
For the miseries of this life, of our nature and condition.
under Christ, they come and go at his command, they are his messengers sent
for our good, and called back again when they have done what they came for.
Therefore look not so much upon them, as to him for strength and comfort in
them, mitigation of them, and grace to profit by them.

To strengthen our faith the more in God, he calls himself, a Buckler for
defense from ill, and an exceeding great reward for a supply of all good. A
sun for the one, and a shield for the other. ^st him then with health,
wealth, ^od name, all that thou have. It is not ^an to take away that from us
which ^d will give us, and keep for us. It ^ot in man's power to make others
^ceive what they please of us.

Among crosses, this is that which ^quieteth not the mind least, to be
^ceived in matter of trust, when as if ^e had not trusted, we had not been
deceived. The very fear of being dis^pointed, made David in his have ^ke all
men were liars. But as it is a Psalm. 116.
^pe cross, so nothing will drive us ^er unto God, who never fails his.

Friends often prove as the reed of E^t, Job 6. 15.
as a broken staff, and as a deceitful ^ke, that fails the weary passenger
(...) Summer time, when there is most ^ed of refreshing; and it is the
unhap^esse of men otherwise happy in the ^rld, that during their prosperous
^dition, they know not who be their ^nds, for when their condition de^es, it
plainly appears, that many ^e friends of their estates, and not of their
persons: But when men will know us least, God will know us most, he knows our
souls in adversity, and knows them, so as to support and comfort them, and
that from the spring head of comfort, whereby the sweetest comforts are fetched.
What God conveyed before by friends, that he does now instill immediately from
himself. The immediate comforts are the strongest comforts. Our Savior Christ
told his Disciples, that they would leave him alone, yet (says he) I am not
alone, but Joh. 16. 32.
the Father is with me. At S. Paul's first Solus non est cui Christus comes est.
Cypr.
appealing, all forsook him, but the Lord stood by him. He wants no company,
that has Christ for his companion. I Tim. 17.
looked for some to take pity (says David) but there was none. This
unfaithfulness Ps. 69. 120
of man, is a foil to set out Gods truth, who is never nearer then when
trouble is nearest. There is not so much as a shadow of change in him or his
love.

It is just with God, when we lay too much weight of confidence upon any
creature, to let us have the greater fal^ Man may fail us, and yet be a good
man, but God cannot fail us and be God, because he is truth it self. Shall
God be so true to us, and shall not we be true to him and his truth?

The like may be said in the departure Comfort in departure of friends.
of our friends. Our life is often too much in the life of others, which God
takes unkindly: How many friends have we in him alone? who rather then we shall
want friends, can make our enemies our friends. A true believer ^to Christ as
his Mother, Brother, and Mat. 12. 50
Sister, because he caries that affection ^o them, as if they were Mother,
Brother, and Sister to him indeed. As Christ makes us all to him, so should we
make him all in all to our selves. If all comforts in the world were dead, we
have them still in the living Lord.

Sicknesses are harbingers of death, Comfort in sickness.
and in the apprehension of many they be the greatest troubles, and tame great
spirits, that nothing else could ^me, herein we are more to deal with God
then with men, which is one comfort sickness yields above other troubles. It
is better to be troubled with the distempers of our own bodies, then with the
distempers of other men's souls; In which we have not only to deal with men,
but with the devil himself, that rules in the humors of men.

The example of Asa teaches us in this case, not to lay too much trust upon
Means not to be relied on.
the Physician, but with Hezekich first, look up to God, and then use the
means. If God will give us a quietus est, and take us off from business by
sickness, then we have a time of serving God by patient subjection to his
will. If he means to use our service any further, he will restore our health
and strength to do that work he sets us about. Health is at his command, and
sickness stays at his rebuke. In the mean, the time of sickness is a time
of purging from that defilement we gathered in our health, till we come purer
out, which should move us the rather willingly to abide Gods time. Blessed is
that sickness that proves the Optimi sumus dum infirmi sumus.
health of the soul. We are best, for the most part, when we are weakest.
Then it appears what good profici^s we have been in time of health.

Carnal men are often led along by ^lse hopes suggested by others, and cherished
by themselves, that they shall ^ye still, and do well, till death comes, and
cuts off their vain confidence, and their life both at once, before ever they
are acquainted what it is to trust in God aright, in the use of means. We
should labor to learn of S. Paul in desperate cases, to receive the sentence
of ^h, and not to trust in our selves, but in God that raises the dead. He
that 2 Cor. 1. 9.
raises our dead bodies out of the ^ave, can raise our diseased bodies out of
the bed of sickness, if he has a plea^e to serve himself by us.

In all kind of troubles, it is not the ingredients that God puts into the C^p
so much afflicts us, as the ingredi^ts of our distempered passions mingled with
them. The sting and coare Sin the greatest trouble.
of them all is sin: when that is not ^ely pardoned, but in some measure
^led, and the proud flesh eaten out, ^n a healthy soul will ^eare any thing.
After repentance, that trouble that before was a correction, becomes now a
trial and exercise of grace. Strike Lord (says Luther) I'beare any thing
willingly, because my sins are forgiven. We should not be cast down so much
about outward troubles, as about sin, that both procures them, and invenomes
them. We see by experience, when conscience is once set at liberty, how
chearefully men will go under any burden: therefore labor to keep out sin,
and then let come what will come.

It is the foolish wisdom of the Avoid not trouble by finne.
world to prevent trouble by sin, which is the way indeed to pull the greatest
trouble upon us. For sin dividing betwixt God and us, moves him to leave the
soul to entangle it self in ^s own ways. When the conscience is clear,
then there is nothing between God and us to hinder our trust. Outward troubles
rather drive us nearer unto God, and stand with his love. But sin defiles the
soul, and sets it further from God. It is well doing that inables 1 Pet. 4. 3.
21.
us to commit our souls cheerfully ^to him. Whatsoever our outward condition
be, if our hearts condemn us (...), we may have boldness with God. In John 1.
my trouble our care should be, not to avoid the trouble, but sinful miscari
age in and about the trouble, and so trust God. It is a heavy condition to be
under the burden of trouble, and under the burden of a guilty conscience both
at once. When men will walk in the light of their own fire, and the sparks
which they have kindled themselves, it is just with God, that they should lie
down Esaias 50. ^lt
in sorrow.

Whatsoever injuries we suffer from those that are ill affected to us, let us
commit our cause to the God of vengeance, and not meddle with his prerogative.
He will revenge our cause better then we can, and more perhaps then we desire.
The wronged side, is the ^er side, Me^or est tristitia, iniqua patientis, quam
^titia, iniqua facientis. Aug.
If in stead of meditating revenge, we can so overcome ourselves, (...) to pray
for our enemies, and deserve well of them, we shall both sweeten our own
spirits, and prevent a sharp temptation which we are prone unto, and have an
undoubted argument, that we are sons of that Father that does good to his
enemies, and members of that Savior that prayed for his persecutors. And
withal by heaping coals upon Luke ^3. 34
our enemies, shall melt them either to conversion, or to confusion.

But the greatest trial of trust, is in our last encounter with death, wherein
we shall find not only a deprivation of all comforts in this life, but a
confluence Comfort in the hour of death.
of all ill at once, but we must know, God will be the God of his unto death,
and not only unto death, but in death. We may trust God the Father with our
bodies and souls which he has created; and God the Son, with the bodies and
souls which he has redeemed; and the holy Spirit, with those bodies and
souls that he has sanctified. We are not disquieted when we put off our
clothes and go to bed, because we trust Gods ordinary providence to raise us
up again. And why should we be disquieted when we put off our bodies, and
sleep our last sleep, considering we are more sure to rise out of (...) graves,
then out of our beds. Nay, we are raised up already in Christ our ^d: who is
the resurrection and the life, Ioh. 11. 25
in whom we may triumph over death, that triumphs over the greatest Mo^chs,
as a disarmed and conquered enemy. Death is the death of it self, and not of
us. If we would have faith ready to die by, we must exercise it well in living
by it, and then it will no more fail us, then the good things we lay hold on
by it, until it has brought (...) into heaven, where that office of it is
said aside: here is the prerogative of a true Christian above an hypocrite and
a worldling, when as their trust, and the thing they trust in, fails them,
then a true believers trust stands him in greatest stead.

In regard of our state after death, a Comfort from the state after death.
Christian need not be disquieted, for the Angels are ready to do their
office in carrying his soul to Paradise, those ^ansions prepared for him. His
Savior John 14. 2.
will be his Judge, and the Head will ^t condemn the members: then he is to
receive the fruit and end of his Faith, the reward of his Hope; which is so
great and so sure, that our trusting in God for that, strengthens the heart
to trust him for all other things in our passage; so that the refreshing of our
faith in these great things, refreshes its dependence upon God for all things
here below. And how strong helps have we to uphold our Faith, in those great
things which we are not able to conceive of, till we come to possess them?
Is not our husband there? and has he not taken possession for us? does he not
keep our place for us? Is not our flesh there in him? and his spirit below with
us? have we not some first fruits and earnest of it before hand? Is not Christ
now a fitting and preparing of us daily, for what he has prepared and keeps
for us? Whither tends all we meet with in this world, that comes betwixt us
and heaven, as desertions, inward conflicts, outward troubles, and death at
last, but to fit us for a better condition hereafter, and ^y Faith therein, to
stir up a strong desire after it? Comfort one another with ^se things, says
the Apostle? these be 1 These. (...).
(...) things will comfort the soul.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the defects of gifts, disquieting the ^le. As also the afflictions of the
Church.

AMong other things, there is nothing more disquiets a Christian, ^at is called
to the fellowship of Christ and his Church here, and to ^ory hereafter, then
that he sees himself unfurnished, with those gifts that (...) fit for the
calling of a Saint, As ^ewise for that particular standing ^d place wherein God
has set him in (...) world, by being a member of a bo^ politic.

For our Christian calling, we must Comfort in regard of our general calling.
^ow that Christianity is a matter ra^er of grace then of gifts, of obedience
then of parts. Gifts may come from a more common work of the spirit, they are
common to castawayes, and are more for others then for our selves. Grace comes
from a peculiar favor of God, and especially for our own good. In the same
duty, where there is required both gifts and grace, (as in prayer) one may
perform it with evidence of greater grace, then another of greater parts.
Moses (a man not of the best speech) was chosen before Exodus 7. 11
Aaron, to speak to God, and to strive with him by Prayer, whilst Israel fought
with Amaleck, with the sword. It is a business more of the heart then of the
tongue, more of groans then of words, which groans and sighs, the Spirit
will always stir up even in the worst condition. Yet for parts there is no
member, but it is fitted with some abilities, to do service in the body, and
by faith may grow up to a greater measure. For God calls none to that high
condition, but whom in some measure he fits to be an useful member, and
endues with a public spirit.

But that is the measure which Christ thinks fit; who will make up that in the
body, which is wanting in any par^lar member. God will increase the ^asure of
our gifts, as occasion shall (...) offered to draw them forth: for there is not
the greatest, but may have (...) both of the parts, and graces of the ^nest in
the Church. And here the ^le may by a spirit of faith go to God in this manner.
Lord, the estate of Christianity unto which thy love in Christ has called, and
advanced me, is an high condition; and there is need of a great measure of
grace, to uphold the credit and comfort of it. Whom thou call unto it, thou
do in some ^asure furnish, to walk worthy of it. Let this be an evide^ce to
my soul of the ^th of thy call, that I am enabled by the Spirit for those
duties that are required; in confidence of which assistance, I will set upon
the work: Thou have promised to give wisdom to the^ that ask it, and to ^id
none with their unworthiness. Iam. 1. 5.
Nay, thou have promised the spirit of all grace to those that beg it; it is
that which I need, and it is no more then thou have promised.

Only it must be remembered, that we do not walk above our parts and Caution
graces, the issue whereof will be discouragement in our selves, and disgrace
from others.

The like may be said for our particular calling, wherein we are to express
Directions for a comfortable use of our particular calling.
the graces of our Christian calling, and serve one another in love, as members
of the State as well as of the Church, therefore every one must have 1. a
calling, Gal. 5. 13.
2. a lawful, 3. a useful calling, 4. a calling fitted for his parts, that he
may be Par^s negoti^.
even for his business, 5. a lawful entrance, and calling thereunto, 6. and
(...) lawful demeanor in the same. Though the Orb and Sphere we wal^ in be
little, yet we must keep within the bounds of it, because for our carriage in
that, we must give a strict account, and there is no calling so mean, but a
man shall find enough to give a good account for. Our care must be to know our
work, and then to do it, and so to do it, as if it were unto God, with
conscience of moderate diligence; for over-doing, and overworking any thing,
comes either from ostentation, (...) distrust in God: And negligence is (...)
far from getting any blessing, that ^rings us under a curse for doing Gods
Ier. 48. 10.
(...) negligently. For we must think (...) callings to be services of God who
(...) appointed us our standing there^

That which belongs to us in our cal^ng, is care of discharging our duty, (...)
which God takes upon him, is assi^ce and good success in it. Let us ^e our
work, and leave God to do (...) own. Diligence and trust in him (...) only
ours, the rest of the burden is (...). In a Family the Fathers and the ^sters
care is the greatest, the child's (...) is only to obey, and the servants (...)
do his work, care of provision and ^ection does not trouble them. Most of our
disquietnesse in our calling, (...) that we trouble our selves about (...)
work. Trust God and be doing, (...) let him alone with the rest. He ^nds upon
his credit so much, that it ^ll appear we have not trusted him ^vaine, even
when we see no appearance of doing any good. Peter fish^ all night and catched
nothing, yet up on Christ's word he casts in his net again, and caught so many
fish as brak^ his net. Covetousness (when men wi^ Luke 5. 6.
be richer then God would have them troubles all, it troubles the house, the
whole family, and the house within u^ our precious soul, which should be
(...) quiet house for Gods spirit to dwell in, whose seat is a quiet spirit. If
me^ would follow Christ's method, and seek first the Kingdom of heaven, all
other things would be cast upon them. Mat. 6. 33.
If thoughts of insufficiency in our places discourage us, remember what God
says to Moses, when he pretended disability to speak, Who has made (...)
mouth, have not I the Lord? All o^ Exodus 4. 11
sufficiency for every calling is from God.

But you will say, Though by Gods blessing my particular condition be
comfortable, Object.
yet the state of Gods people abroad, (...) the miseries of the times disquiet
me.

We complain of the times, but let Answ.
us take heed we be not a part of the misery of the times: that they be not
(...) worse for us. Indeed he is a dead ^mber, that takes not to heart the ill
Hab. 3.
(...) the times, yet here is place for that ^plaint, Help Lord. In these tem^
Psalm. 12.
do as the Disciples did, Cry to ^ist to rebuke the tempests and ^mes. This is
the day of Jacobs trou^, let it also be the day of Jacobs trust; (...) the body
do as the head did in the Comfort in regard of the afflictions of the Church.
(...) case, and in time it shall be with (...) body as it is with the head.

In this case it is good to lay before (...) all the promises made to his ^rch,
with the examples of his pre^ in it, and deliverance of the same ^rmer times.
God is never nearer (...) Church then when trouble is near: ^en in earth they
conclude an utter ^throw, God is in heaven conclude^ a glorious deliverance:
usually af^ the lowest ebb, follows the high^ spring tide. Christ stands upon
(...) Zion. There is a Counsel in ^aven, that will dash the mould of all
^trary Counsels on earth; and ^ich is more, God will work the raising of the
Church, by that very means by which his enemies seek to ruin it. Let us stand
still and behold the salvation of the Lord. God gave too dear a price for his
Church, to suffer it long in the hands of merciless enemies.

As for the seeming flourishing of the enemies of Gods Church, it is but for a
time, and that a short time, and a measured time, The wicked plot against the
Psalm. 37. 12
just, they are plotters and plowers of mischief; they are skillful and
industrious Job 4. 8.
in it, but they reap their own ruin. Their day is a coming, and their pi^
is in digging: take heed therefore of fretting, Psalm. 37. 12 Psalm. 94. 13
because of the man that brings wicked devices to pass; for the arms of
Psalm. 37. 7. Psalm. 37. 17 Read Psalms 10. 37. 94. 129. etc.
the wicked shall be broken. We should help our faith by observing Gods
executing of judgment in this kind. It cannot but vex the enemies of the
Church, to see at length a disappointing of their projects, but then to see the
mould of all their devices turned upon their own heads, will more torment them.

In this case, it will much comfort to go into the Sanctuary, for there we
shall be able to say, Yet God is good to (...). Psalm. 73.
God has an Arc for his, there is no condition so ill, but there is Balm in
Gilead, comfort in Israel. The depths ^f misery, are never beyond the depths of
mercy. God often for this very end, strips his Church of all helps below, that
it may only rely upon him: and that it may appear that the Church is ruled by
an higher power then it is opposed by. And then is the time when we may ex^ct
great deliverances of the Church, when there is a great faith in the great God.

From all that has been said, we see, that the only way to quiet the soul
is, to lay a charge upon it to trust God, ^d that unquietness and impatiency,
me symtomes and discoveries of an un^ leeving heart.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of divine reasons in a believer. Of his minding to praise God, more then to
be delivered.

TO go on. [I shall yet praise him.]

In these words David expresses the reasons and grounds of his trust, namely
from the interest he had in God by experience and special covenant, wherein
in general we may observe, that those who truly trust in God, Back faith with
strong reason.
labor to back their faith with sound arguments; faith is an understanding
grace, it knows whom it trusts, and for what, and upon what grounds it trusts:
Reason of it self cannot find what we should believe, yet when God has
discovered the same, faith tells us there is great reason to believe it; faith
uses reason (though not as a ground yet) as a sanctified instrument to find
out Gods grounds, that it may rely upon them. He believes best, that knows
best why he should believe; Confidence, and love, and other affections of the
soul, though they have no reason grafted in them, yet thus far they are
reasonable, as that they are in a wise man raised up, guided, and laid down
with reason, or else men were neither to be blamed nor praised for ordering
their affections a right; whereas not only civil virtue, but grace it self is
especially conversant in ruling the affections by sanctified reason.

The soul guides the will and affections, otherwise then it does the outward
members of the body. It swayes the affections of confidence, love, joy, etc. as
a Prince does his wiser subjects, and as Counselors do a well ordered State
(...) ministering reasons to them, but the ^le governes the outward members by
command, as a master does a slave, ^his will is enough. The hand and foot *
Stat pro ratione volunt^.
^ve upon command, without regarding any reason, but we will not trust (...)
rejoice in God without reason, or a (...) of reason at the least.

Sin it self never wanted a reason, Sin has its reason.
(...) as it is, but we call it unreasonable, ^use it has no good reason for
it; for reason being a beam of God, cannot strengthen any work of darkness.
God having made man an understanding creature, guides him by a way suitable to
such a condition, and that is the reason why God in mercy yields so far to us
in his word, as to give us so many reasons of our affiance in him. What is
encouragement and comfort, but a demonstration to us of greater reasons to
raise us up, then there are to cast us down.

David's reasons (here) are drawn partly from some promise of deliverance, and
partly from Gods nature and dealing with him, whom, as he had formerly found an
healing, and a saving God, so he expects to find him still; and partly from
the covenant of grace he is my God.

The chief of his reasons are fetched from God, what he is in himself, and
what he is and will be to his children, and what to him in particular; though
godly men have reasons for their trst, yet those reasons be divine and
spiritual as faith it self is: for as naturally as beams come from the
Sun, and branches from the root, even so by divine A godly man's reasons are
divine.
discourse one truth issues from another. And as the beams and the Sun, as
the root and branches are all of one nature, so the grounds of comfortable
truths, and reasons taken from those grounds, are both of same divinity and
authority, though in time of temptation discourse is often so troubled, that it
cannot see how one truth rises from another; this is one privilege of heaven,
that our knowledge there shall not be so much discoursive, proving one thing by
another, as definitive, seeing things in their grounds with a more present
view: the soul being then raised and enlarged to a present conceiving of
things, and there being no flesh and blood in us, to raise objections that must
be satisfied with reasoning.

Sometimes in a clearer state of the soul, faith has not so much use of
reasons, but upon near and sweet communion with God, and by reason of some
likeness between the soul that has a divine nature stamped upon it, and
God, it presently without any long discourse, runs to God as it were by a
supernatural instinct, as by a natural instinct a child runs to his
Father in any distress. Yea, and from that common light of nature, which
discovers there is a God, even natural men in extremities will run to God,
and God as the Author of nature will sometimes hear them, as he does the young
Ravens that cry unto him; but comfortably, and with assurance only those have
a familiar recourse unto him, that have a sanctified suitable disposition unto
God, as being well acquainted with him.

Sometimes again faith is put to it to use reasons to strengthen it self, and
therefore the soul studieth arguments to help it self by, either from inward
store laid up in the soul, or else it hearkeneth, and yields to reasons
suggested by others; and there is no gracious heart, but has a frame suitable
and agreeable to any holy and comfortable truth that shall be brought and
enforced upon it; there is something in his spirit that answers what ever comes
from the spirit of God: though perhaps it never heard of it before, yet it
presently claims kindred of it, as coming from the same blessed Spring, the
^ly Spirit; and therefore a gracious heart sooner takes comfort then another,
as being prepared to close with it.

The reasons here brought by David, are not so much arguments to convince his
judgment, as motives and inducements to incline his will to trust in God, for
trusting being a holy relying upon God, carries especially the will to him; now
the will is led with the goodness of things, as the understanding is led with
truth; the heart must be sweetened with consideration of love and mercy in him
whom we trust, as well as convinced of his ability to do us good, the cords
that draw the heart to trust, are the cords of love, and the cords of love are
especially the love of him to us whom we love; and therefore the most
prevailing reasons that carry the whole heart, are such as are drawn from the
sweetness of God, whereby the heart is opened and enlarged to expect all good,
and nothing but good from him.

But we must remember that neither reasons from the truth and power of God, nor
inducements or allurements from the goodness of God, will further prevail
with the soul, then it has a fresh light and relish brought into it by the
spirit of God, to discern of those reasons, and answer the contrary.

[I will praise him.] David here minds praising of God more then his own
delivery, because he knew his own delivery was intended on Gods part, that he
might be glorified; It is an argument of an excellent spirit, when all
selfe-respects are drowned in the glory of God; and there is nothing lost
therein, for our best being is in God; A Christian begins with loving God for
himself; but he ends in loving himself in and for God, and so his end, and
Gods end, and the end of all things else, concenter and agree in one; We may
aim at our own good, so we bring our hearts to refer it to the chief
good, as ^sse circle may well be contained in greater, so that the lines drawn
from both circles, meet in one middle point. it is an excellent ground of
sincerity, to desire the favor of God, not so much out of self aims, as that
God may have the more free and full praise from us, considering the soul is
never more f^ for that blessed duty, then when it is in a cheerful plight.

It rejoiced David more, that he should have a large heart to serve God, then
that he should have enlargement of condition. Holy dispositions think not so
much of the time to come, that it will be sweet to them, as that it will
further Gods praise. True grace raises the soul, above selfe-respects, and
rests not till it comes to the ^efe end, wherein its happiness con^ts.

God is glorified in making us happy, and we (enjoying happiness) must
glorify God. Although God condescend so low unto us, as not only to allow us,
but to enjoyne us to look to our own freedom from misery, and enjoyment of
happiness, yet a soul thoroughly seasoned with grace, mounteth higher, and is
carried with pure respects to advance Gods glory; yea sometimes so far, as to
forget it own happiness, it respects it self for God, rather then God for it
self. A heavenly soul is never satisfied, until it be as near God as is
attaineable. And the nearer a creature comes to God, the more it is emptied of
it self, and all selfe-aymes. Our happiness is more in him, then in our
selves. We seek our selves most, when we deny our selves most. And the more
we labor to advance God, the more we advance our own condition in him.

[I will praise.] David thinks of his own duty in praising God, more then of
Gods work in delivering him: Let us think of what is our duty, and God will
think of what shall be for our comfort; we shall feelse God answering what we
look for from him, in doing what he expects from us. Can we have so mean
thoughts of him, as that we should intend his glory, and ^e not much more
intend our good?

This should be a strong plea unto us (...) our prayers, to prevail with God,
when we engage our selves upon the revelation of his mercy to us, to yield him
all the praises. Lord as the benefit ^d comfort shall be mine, so the praises
shall be thine.

It is little less then blasphemy, to We ought not to praise God in doing
evil.
praise God for that which by unlawful shifts we have procured; for be^des the
bypocrisie of it (in seeming to sacrifice to him, when we sacrifice in^ed to
our own wits and carnal helps) we make him a Patron of those ways which he
most abhorres; and it is Idolatry in the highest degree, to transform God so
in our thoughts, as ^o think he is pleased with that which comes from his
greatest enemy. And there is a gross mistake to take Gods curse for a
blessing; to thrive in an ill way, is a spiritual judgment, ex^eamly
hardening the heart.

It is an argument of David's sincerity here, that he meant not to take any
indirect course for delivering himself, because he intended to praise God,
which as no guilty conscience can offer, (being afraid to look God in the
face,) so God would abhor such a sacrifice, were it offered to him. S. Paul
was stirred up to praise God, but withal he was assured God would preserve
him from every evil work. 2 Timothy 4. 18.


Sometimes indeed where there is no malicious intention, God pardons some
breakings out of flesh and blood, endeavoring to help our selves in danger,
so far as not to take advantage of them to desert us in trouble, as in David
who escaped from Achis by counterfeiting; and this yields a double 1 Samuel 27.
10.
ground of thankfulness, partly for Gods overlooking our miscariage, and
partly for the deliverance it self. Yet this indulgence of God, will make the
soul more ashamed afterward s^ these sinful shifts, therefore it must be no
president to us. There can neither be grace nor wisdom in setting upon a
course, wherein we can neither pray to God for success in, nor bless God when
he gives it. In this case God most ^sseth, where he most crosses, and ^st
curses where the deluded heart ^nkes he blesses most.

CHAP. XXVII.
^our worst condition we have cause to praise God. Still ample cause in these
days.

[Shall yet praise him.] Or, yet I will praise God; that is, however it goes
^ith me, yet as I have a cause, so I ^ve a spirit to praise God; when we ^e at
the lowest, yet it is a mercy that ^e are not consumed, we are never so ill, ^t
it might be worse with us; whatsoever is less then hell is undeserved. (...)
is a matter of praise, that yet we have ^e and opportunity to get into a ^essed
condition. The Lord has afflicted Psalm. 18. 18
me sore, but he has not delivered me (...) death, says David.

Is the worst times there is a presence (...) God with his children.

1. In moderating the measure of 1.
the cross, that it be not above their strength.

2. In moderating the time of it, The rod of the wicked shall not rest long
upon the 2.
lot of the righteous. God limits both measure Psalm. 125. 3.
and time.

3. He is present in mixing some comfort, and so allaying the bitterness 3.
of a cross.

4. Yea, and he supports the soul by inward strength; so as though it faint, 4.
yet it shall not utterly fail.

5. God is present in sanctifying a cross for good, and at length when he 5.
has perfected his own work in his, he is present for a final deliverance
of them. A sound hearted Christian has always a God to go to, a promise to
go to, former experience to go to, besides some present experience of Gods
goodness which he enjoyes: for the present he is a child of God, a member of
Christ, an heir of heaven, he dwells in the love of God in the cross, as
well as out of it, he may be cast out of his happy condition in the world,
but never out of Gods favor.

If Gods children have cause to praise God in their worst condition, what
diffe^ce Object.
is there betwixt their best estate and their worst?

Howsoever Gods children have con^uall Answ.
occasion to praise God, yet ^ere be some more especial seasons of praising
God then others, there be days of Gods own making, of purpose to ^joyce in,
wherein we may say; This is the day which the Lord has made, let us Psalm. 118.
24.
rejoice therein. And this I think is ^iefly intended here. David comforts
^imselfe with this, that however it was ^w with him, yet God would deal so
^iously with him hereafter, that he ^uld have cause to bless his name.

Though in evil times we have cause (...) praise God, yet so we are, and such
(...) our spirits (for the most part) that ^ction straitens our hearts.
There^re the Apostle thought it the fittest ^y in affliction to pray, Is any
afflicted Iam. 5. 13.
(...) him pray; says James, Is any joyful, let (...) sing Psalms, showing
that the day ^ejoycing is the fittest day of prai^ God. Every work of a
Christian is beautiful in its own time, the graces of Christianity have their
several offices at several seasons, in trouble, prayer is in its season, in
the evil day Psalm. 51. 15
call upon me, says God: In better times praises should appear and show
themselves. When God manifests his goodness to his, he gives them grace with
it, to manifest their thankfulness Praise is most comely in prosperity.
to him. Praising of God is then most comely (though never out of season) when
God seems to call for it, by renewing the sense of his mercies i^ some fresh
favor toward us. If a bird will sing in Winter, much more in the Spring. If
the heart be prepared in the Winter time of adversity to praise God, how ready
will it be when it i^ warmed with the glorious sunshine of his favor.

Our life is nothing, but as it were a web woven with interminglings (...)
wants and favors, crosses and blessings, standings and failings, combat and
victory, therefore there should be a perpetual intercourse of praying and pr^
sing in our hearts. There is always ground of communion with God in ^e of
these kinds, till we come to Christians have continual ground of communion
with God.
^at condition wherein all wants shall be supplied, where indeed is only matter
of praise. Yet praising God in this ^fe, has this prerogative, that here we
praise him in the midst of his enemies. In heaven all will be in consort
with us. God esteems it an honor in the midst of devils, and wicked men
(whose life is nothing but a dishonor a^ him) to have those that will make his
^e (as it is in it self, so) great in the ^ld.

David comforts himself in this, that he should praise God; which shows he
had inured himself well before to this holy exercise, in which he found ^ch
comfort, that he could not but joy in the fore-thoughts of that time, where
Thoughts of praise should be precious to us.
he should have fresh occasion of his ^mer acquaintance with GOD. Thoughts of
this nature enter not into ^eart that is strange to God.

It is a special Art in time of misery, (...) think of matter of joy, if not
for the ^sent, yet for the time to come; for joy disposes to praise, and
praise again stirs up joy; these mutually breed one another, even as the seed
brings forth the tree, and the tree brings forth the seed. It is wisdom
therefore to set faith on work, to take as much comfort as we can from future
promises, that we may have comfort and strength for the present, before we
have the full possession of them. It is the nature of faith to antidate
blessings, by making them that are to be performed hereafter, as present now,
because we have them in the promise. If God had not allowed us to take many
things in trust for the time to come, both for his glory, and our good, he
would never have left such rich promises to us. For faith does not only give
glory to God for the present (in a present believing of his truth, and relying
upon him) but as it looks forward, it sees an everlasting ground of praising
God, and is stirred up to praise him now, for that future matter of praise,
which it is sure to have hereafter. The very hopes of future good, made David
praise God for the present. If the happy condition we look for were present,
we would embrace it with present praises. Now faith is the evidence of things
not Heb. 11. 1.
s^ene, and gives a being to that, which is not; whereupon a true believing
soul cannot but be a praising soul. For this end God reveals before hand
what we shall have, that before hand we should praise him, as if we possessed
it. For that is a great honor to his ^uth, when we esteem of what he
speaks, as done, and what he promises, as already performed. Had we not a
perpetual confidence in the perpetuity of his love to us, how is it possible
we should praise him?

But we want those grounds for the time Object.
is come which David had, he had particular promises which we want.

Though we want Vrim and Thum^; and the Prophets to foretell us Answ.
what the times to come shall be, yet we have the Canon of Scripture enlarged,
^e live under a more glorious manifestation 1.
of Christ, and under a more plentiful shedding of the Spirit, whereby that
want is abundantly supplied; we have general promises for the time to come,
that God will never fail nor forsake us, that he will be with us in fire Deuteronomy.
31. 6.
and in water, that he will give an issue to the temptation, and that the issue
of all Heb. 12. 11
things shall be for our good, that we shall reap the quiet fruit of
righteousness, and no good thing will he withhold from them that tend a godly
life, etc. If we had a Psalm. 84. 11
spirit of faith to apply these generals. we should see much of Gods goodness
in particular.

Besides general promises, we have some particular ones for the time to 2.
come; of the confusion of Antichrist, of the conversion of the Jews, and
fullness of the Gentiles, etc. which though we perhaps shall never live to see,
yet we are members of that body, which hereafter shall see the same, which
should stir up our hearts to praise God, as if we did enjoy the present
fulfilling of them our selves, for faith can present them to the soul, as if
they were now present.

Some that have a more near communion 3.
with God, may have a particular faith of some particular deliverances,
whereupon they may ground particular prayer. Luther praying for a sick friend,
who was very comfortable and useful to him, had a particular Fred. Myco.
answer for his recovery, whereupon he was so confident, that he sent word to
his friend, that he should certainly recover. Latimer prayed with great zeal,
for three things, 1. That Queen Elizabeth might come 1.
to the Crown. 2. That he might 2.
seal the truth with his heart blood. 3. And that the Gospel might be
restored 3.
once again, once again, which he expressed with great vehemence of spirit.
All which three God heard him in. But the privileges of a few must not be made
a general rule for all. Privileges go not out of the persons, but rest
there. Yet if men would maintain a nearer communion with God, there is no
doubt but he would reveal himself in more familiar manner to them, in many
particulars then usually he does. Those particular promises in the 91. Psalm,
and other places, are made good to such as have a particular faith, and to all
others (with those limitations annexed to promises of that nature) so far forth
as God sees it will induce to their good and his own glory, and so far
forth as they depend upon him in the use of means; And is not this sufficient
to stay a gracious heart?

But not to insist upon particular promises and revelations, (the performance
whereof we enjoy here in this present life) we have rich and precious promises
of final and full deliverance from all evil, and perfect enjoying of all good
in that life which is to come; yet not so to come, but that we have the earnest
and first fruits of it here; All is not kept for heaven; We may say with
David, Oh how great is thy goodness, Psalm. 31. 19
which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, and (not only so, but) how
great is that goodness which thou have wrought in them that trust in thee,
even before the sons of men; God treasures not up all his goodness for the
time to come, but lays much of it out daily before such as have eyes to behold
it.

Now Gods maine end in revealing ^ch glorious promises of the life to come, is,
that they might be a ground of comfort to us, and of praise to him even in this
life; And indeed what can be grievous in this world to him that has heaven in
his eye? What made our blessed Savior endure the ^osse and despise shame, but
the joy of Heb. 12. 2.
glory to come set before him?

The duty that David brought his heart to before he had a full enjoyment of
what he looked for, was patient waiting, it being Gods use to put a long date
often times to the peformance of his promises; David after h^ had the promise
of a Kingdom, was p^t off a long time ere he was invested to it; Abraham was
an old man before he enjoyed his son of the Promise; Waiting upon God a
necessary duty.
Joseph stayed a long time before he was exalted; Our blessed Savior himself
was thirty four years old before he was exalted up into glory.

God deferres, but his deferring is no empty space, wherein no good is done,
but there is in that space a fitting for promises. Whilst the seed lies hid
in the earth, time is not lost, for Winter fits for Spring, yea the harder the
Winter, the more hopeful the Spring; yet were it a mere empty space we
should hold out, because of the great things to come, but being only a
preparing time, we should pass it with the less discouragement. Let this
support us in all the thwartings of our desire; it is a folly to think, that
we should have Physic and health both at once; we must endure the working of
Gods Physic; when the sick humor is carried away and purged, then we shall
enjoy desired health. God promises forgiveness of sin, but thou find the
burden of it daily on thee. Cheer up thy self, when the morning is darkest,
then comes day; after a weary week comes a Sabbath, and after a fight victory
will appear. Gods time is best, therefore resolve upon waiting his leisure.
For the better demeaning of our selves herein, we must know we must so wait,
that we provoke not in ^e mean time his patience on whom ^e depend, by putting
forth our hand to any evil, which indeed is a crossing of our hopes. Therefore
waiting upon What it is to wait upon God
God, is always joined with doing good. There is an influence in the thing
hoped for, in the spirit of him that truly hopes, stirring him up to a suitable
conformity, by purging himself of whatso ever will not stand with the holiness
of that condition. Waiting implies all graces, as Patience, Perseverance, Long
suffering in holding out, notwithstanding the tediousness of time deferred,
Courage, and breaking through all difficulties that stand between. For what is
waiting indeed, but a continuing in a gracious inoffensive course, till the
accomplishment of our desires?

Whence we may discern a maine difference betwixt a Christian, and a carnal
man, who is short-spirited, and all for the present; he will have his good
here, whereas a Saint of God continues still waiting, though all things seem
contrary to what he expects. The presence of things to come is such to faith,
as it makes it despise the pleasure of sin for a season. What evidence Heb.
11. 25
of goodness is it, for a man to be good only upon the apprehension of
something that contents him? Here is the glory of faith, that it can upon Gods
bare promise, cross it self in things pleasing to nature, and raise up the
soul to a disposition, some ways answerable to that blessed estate, which
(though yet it enjoyes not, yet) it is undoubtedly persuaded of, and looks
for. What can encourage us more to wait, then this, that the good we wait
for, is greater then we are able to conceive, yea greater then we can desire
or hope for?

This was no presumptuous resolution of David's own strength, but it issued
from his present truth of heart, (so far as he knew the same;) together with
an humble dependence upon God, both for deliverance, and a heart to praise him
for it; because Gods benefits are usually entire, and are sweetened with such a
sense of his love, as causes a thankful heart, which (to a ^e Christian) is a
greater blessing then ^e deliverance it self, as making the ^ule better. David
does acknowledge with humble admiration, that a heart ^larged comes from God,
Who am I (says he) and who are my people?

He mentions here praising God, in ^ead of deliverance, because a heart
enlarged to praise God, is indeed the greatest part of the deliverance; for by
it the soul is delivered out of its own straits and discontent.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Diverse qualities of the praise due to God. With helps therein. And notes of
Gods hearing our prayers.

THough this be Gods due and our duty, No easy matter to praise God aright.
and in it self a delightful thing, yet it is not so easy a matter to praise
God, as many imagine: Music is sweet, but the setting of the strings in tune
is ^pleasing; our souls will not be long (...) ^e, and it is harsh to us to go
about the setting them in order; like curious Clocks, a little thing will
hinder the motion; especially passion, which disturbs not only the frame of
grace in us, but the very frame of nature, putting man out of the power and
possession of himself; and therefore David here, when he had thoughts of
praising God, was feign to take up the quarrel betwixt him and his soul
first; Praising sets all the parts and graces of the soul aworke; and
therefore the soul had need gather it self and its strength together to this
duty.

It requires especially selfe-denyall, from a conscience of our own wants, Self
denial requisite in praising God.
weaknesses, and unworthiness; it requires a giving up of our selves, and all
ours to be at Gods dispose; the very ground and the fruit which it yields are
both Gods; and they never gave themselves truly up to God, that are not ready
to give all they have to him whenever he calls for it; thankfulness is a
sacrifice, and in sacrifices there must be killing before offering, otherwise
the sacrifice will be as the offering up of some unclean creature;
thanksgiving is (...) Incense, and there must be fire to ^rne that Incense;
thanksgiving requires not only affections, but the heat of affections; there
must be some assu^ce of the benefit we praise God ^or; and it is no easy
matter to maintain assurance of our interest in the best things.

Yet in this case if we feel not sense What a Christian should do in want of
assurance.
of assorance, it is good we should praise God for what we have; we cannot deny
but God offers himself in mercy to us, and that he intends our good thereby,
for so we ought to construe his merciful dealing toward us, and not have him
in jealousy without ground; if we being our hearts to be willing to praise
God, for that we cannot but acknowledge comes from him, he will be ready in
his time to show himself more clearly to us; we taste of his goodness any
ways, and it is accompanied with much patience, and these in their natures
lead us not only to repentance, Romans 2. 4.
but likewise to thankful acknowledgement; and we ought to follow that which
God leads us unto, though he has not yet acquainted us with his secrets.

It is good in this case to help the Resolution necessary in Christianity.
soul with a firm resolution, and to back resolution with a vow, not only in
general that we will praise, but particularly of something within our own
power, (provided it prove no snare to us.) For by this means the heart is
perfectly gained, and the thing is as good as done in regard of Gods
acceptance, and our comfort; because strong resolutions discover sincerity
without any hypocritical reservation and hollownesse. Always so much
sincerity as a man has, so much will his inward peace be. Resolution as a
strong stream bears down all before it; little good is done in Religion
without this, and with it all is as good as done.

So soon as we set upon this work, we shall feel our spirits to rise higher
and higher as the waters in the Sanctuary, as the soul grows more and more
heated; see how David rises by degrees, Be glad in the Lord, and then, rejoice
Psalm. 32. 11.
ye righteous, and then, showt for joy (...) ye that are upright in heart, the
spirit of God will delight to carry us along ^n this duty, until it leaves our
spirits in heaven, praising God with the Saints ^d glorious Angels there; to
him that ^h and uses it shall be given; he that Mat. 25. 19.
^weth God aright, will honor him by trusting of him; he that honors ^m by
trusting him, will honor him by praying; and he that honors him by prayer,
shall honor him by praises; he ^at honors him by praises here, shall perfect
his praises in heaven; and this will quit the labor of setting and kee^ing the
soul in tune; this trading with God is the richest trade in the world; when we
return praises to him, (...) returns new favors to us, and so an everlasting
ever-encreasing intercourse betwixt God and the soul is maintained; David here
resolved to praise God, ^use he had assurance of such a de^rance, as would
yield him a ^ound of praising him.

Praising of God may well be called Praise, a sweet Incense.
^ense, because as it is sweet in it self, and sweet to God, so it sweetens
all that comes from us. Love and Joy are sweet in themselves, though those whom
we love and joy in, should not know of our affection, nor return the like;
but we cannot love and joy in God, but he will delight in us; when we neglect
the praising of God, we lose both the comforts of Gods love, and our own too;
It is a spiritual judgment to want o^ lose the sight or sense of Gods
favors, for it is a sign of want of spiritual life, or at least liveliness;
it shows we are not yet in the state of those whom God has chosen, to set
forth the riches of his glory upon.

When we consider that if we answer not kindness, and favor showed unto us by
men, we are esteemed unworthy of respect (as having sinned against the bond of
humane society and love) we cannot but much more take shame to our selves,
when we consider the disproportion of our carriage, and unkind behavior
toward God; when in stead of being temples of his praise, we become graves of
his benefits; what a vanity is this in our nature, to stand upon exactness of
justice, in answering petty courtesies of men, and yet to pass by the
Unthankfulness most heinous toward God.
substantial favors of God, without scarce taking notice of them? the best
breeding is to acknowledge greatest respects where they are most due; and to
think, that if unkindnesse and rudeness be a sin in civility, it is much
more in Religion; the greatest danger of unthankfulness, is in the greatest
matter of all; if we arrogate any spiritual strength to our selves in
spiritual actions, we commit either sacrilege in robbing God of his due; or
mockery, by praising him for that which we hold to be of our selves; if
injustice be to be condemned in man, much more in denying God his due, Religion
being the first due. It takes much from thankfulness, when we have common
conceits of peculiar favors, praise is not comely in the mouth of fools,
Godloves no Mal. 1. 8.
blind sacrifice.

We should therefore have wisdom and judgment, not only to know upon what
grounds to be thankful, but in what order, by discerning what be the best and
first favors whence the rest proceed, and which add a worthiness to all the
rest; it is good to see blessings, as they issue from grace and mercy. It much
commends any blessing, to see Gods love in every mercy chiefly to be looked at.
the love and favor of God in it, which is more to be valued then the blessing
it self; as it much commends any thing that comes from us, when we put a
respect of thankfulness, and love to God upon it; and if we observe we shall
find the unkindnesse of others to us, is but a correction of our unkindnesse to
God.

In praising God, it is not good to delay, but take advantage of the freshness
Not to delay our praises.
of the blessing; what we add to delay, we take from thankfulness, and
withal, lose the prime and first fruits of our affections; It is a wise
redeeming of time, to observe the best seasons of thankfulness; a cheerful
heart will best close with a cheerful duty; and therefore it is not good to
waste so fit a temper in frivolous things, but after some contentment given to
nature, let God have the fruit of his own planting; otherwise it is even no
better then the refreshing of him that stands by a good fire, and cries Ah,
ah, I (...) warm. Isa. 44. 16.


David does not say, I will thank God, but I shall priase him; (though he
intends that) Thanks is then best when it tends to praising, and there ends;
for thanks alone shows respect to our (...) good only, praises to Gods
glory, and in particular to the glory of such excellencies whence the benefit
comes; and from thence the soul is enlarged to think highly of all Gods
excellenties.

Hanna upon particular thanks for 1 Samuel 2. 1.
hearing her about a child, takes occasion to set out Gods other excellencies,
and rises higher and higher, from one to many, from the present time, to that
which was to come, from particular favors to her self, she stirs up others
to praise God for his mercy to them; So David, Deliver me, O God, and my tongue
shall sing of thy praises; He propounds Psalm. 51.
this as an engagement to the Lord to help him, because it should tend to the
enlargement of his glory; he was resolved to improve Gods favor this way.

The Spirit of God works like new ^ine, enlarging the spirit from one degree
Our thanks should be large.
of praising God to another; and because it foresees the eternity of Gods love,
(as far as it can) it endeavors an eternity of Gods praise; a gracious heart
upon taste of favor showed to it self, is presently warmed to spread the
praise of God to others, and the more it sees the fruit of trusting God, and
his truth in performing promise, the more it still honors that trusting, as
knowing that it lies upon Gods honor, to honor those that honor him;
blessing will 2 Samuel 30.
procure blessing; the soul has never such freedom from sin, as when it is
in a thankful frame; for thankfulness issues from a heart truly humbled, and
emptied of it self, truly loving and rejoicing in God; and upon any sin the
spirit is grieved and straightened, and the lips sealed up in such a heart; for
the conscience upon any sin, looks upon it not only as disobedience against
Gods will and authority, but as un^ankfulnesse to his goodness, and this
^elteth a godly heart most of all; When Nathan told David God had done this, 2 Samuel 12 8.
^d this for him, and was ready to do nore, he could not hold in the confessi^
of his sin, but relented and gave in presently.

We ought not only to give thanks, We should study Gods praises.
but ^o be thankful, to meditate and study the praises of God. Our whole life
should be nothing else but a continual ^lessing of his holy name, endeavoring
to bring in all we have, and to lay i^ out for God and his people, to see where
he has any receivers; our goodness is nothing to God, we need bring Psalm.
16. 2.
(...) water to the fountain, nor light to the Sun. Thankfulness is full of
invention, it devises liberal things; though it be our duty to be good
Stewards of our talents, yet thankfulness adds a luster, and a more gracious
acceptance, as having more of that which God calls for.

Our praising God should not be as Praise should be free.
sparks out of a flint, but as water out of a spring, natural, ready, free,
as Gods love to us is; mercy pleases him, so Mic. 7. 8.
should praises please us; It is our happiness when the best part in us, is
exercised about the best and highest work; it was a good speech of him that
said, If God had made me a Nightingale, I would have sung as a Nightingale, but
now God has made me a man, I will sing forth the praises of God, which is the
work of a Saint only; All thy works bless thee, and thy Saints praise thee;
All things are either blessings in Ps. 145. 10.
their nature, or so blessed, as they are made blessings to us by the
overruling coming of him, who makes all things serviceable to his, even the
worst things in this sense are made spiritual to Gods people against their
own nature; how great is that goodness which makes even the worst things good?

Little favors come from no small love, but even from the same love that The
least mercy to be prized.
God intends the greatest things to us, and are pledges of it; the godly are
more thankful for the least favors, then worldly men for the greatest; the
affection of the giver inhaunces the (...).

O then let us labor to improve, ^oth what we have, and what we are ^o his
glory: It discovers that we love God, (not only with all our understanding,
heart, and affection, but) when with all our might and power, so far as we
have advantage by any part, relati^, or calling whatsoever we endeavor ^o do
him service, we cannot have a ^eater honor in the world, then to be honored
of God, to be abundant in this kind.

Our time here is short, and we shall Our praise should be real.
(...) ere long be called to a reckoning, ^refore let us study real praises.
Gods blessing of us is in deed, and so should ours be of him. Thanks in words
is good, but in deeds is better; leaves are good, but fruit is better, and of
fruit, that which costs us most. True praise requires our whole man, the
judgment to esteem, the memory to treasure up, the will to resolve, the
affections to de^ght, the tongue to speak of, and the ^e to express the rich
favors of God: what can we think of? what can we call to mind? what can we
resolve upon? what can we speak? what can we express in our whole course,
better then the praises of him, of whom, and through whom, and to whom we and
all Romans 11. 36.
things are.

Our whole life should speak nothing but thankfulness; every condition and
place we are in, should be a witness of our thankfulness; this will make the
times and places we live in, the better for us; when we our selves are
monuments of Gods mercy, it is fit we should be patterns of his praises, and
leave monuments to others; We should think life is given us, to do something
better then life in: we live not to live; our life is not the end of it self,
but the praise of the giver; God has joined his glory and our happiness
together; it is fit that we should refer all that is good to his glory, that
has joined his glory to our best good, in being glorified in our salvation.

David concludes, that he should certainly praise God, because he had prayed
^to him. Prayers be the seeds of prai^, I have sown, therefore I will reap;
^at we receive as a fruit of our pray^, is more sweet then what we have (...)
a general providence.

But how do we know that God hears Object.
(...) prayers?

1. If we regard them our selves, and Answ.
^ect an issue; prayer is a sure adven^re, 1.
we may well look for a return.

2. It is a sign God has heard our 2.
prayers, when he stirs up thankful^e aforehand upon assurance;
thankfulness cannot be without either the ^ce of God, by which we are
thank^ll, or some taste of the things we are thankful for. God often accepts
the prayer, when he does not grant the thing, and will give us thereby
occasion of thanksgiving for his wise care, in changing one blessing for
another fitter for us. God regards my prayers, when (...) prayer my heart is
wrought to that frame which he requires, that is, an humble subjection to him,
from an acknowledgement of my wants, and his fullness. There is nothing stirred
up in our hearts by the Spirit, no, not so much as a gracious desire, but God
will answer it, if we have a spirit to wait.

3. We may know God has accepted our prayer, when he makes the way 3.
easy and plain after prayer by a gracious providence; when the course of
things begin to change, and we meet with comforts in stead of former crosses,
and find our hearts quieted and encouraged against what we most feared.

4. Likewise earnestness in prayer is a sign God hears our prayers, as fire
4.
kindled from heaven shows God accepts the sacrifice; the ground of
prevailing by our prayer, is, that they are put up in a gracious name, and for
persons in favor, and dictated by Gods own spirit; they work in the strength
of the blessed Trinity not their own, giving God the glory of all his
excellencies.

It is Gods direction to call upon him in trouble, and it is his promise to
deliver; Psalm. 50. 15
and then both his direction and promise that we shall glorify him; When
troubles stir up prayer, Gods answer to them will stir up praises. David
when (...) says, I shall praise God, presupposes ^d would deliver him, that he
might ^ve ground of praising his name. And (...) knew God would deliver him,
be^use as from faith he had prayed for deliverance, so he knew it was the
order of Gods dealing, to revive after drooping, and refresh after fainting.
God knows otherwise that our spirits would fail before him.

A thankful disposition, is a special ^lp in an afflicted condition, for
thankfulness springs from love, and love rejoy^ in suffering. Thankfulness
raises Acts. 15. 21
^e soul higher then it self, it is a tra^g with God, whereby as we by him,
^o be gains by us. Therefore the Saints ^d this as a motive to God, that he
would grant their desires, because the ^ing praise him, and not the dead. If
Isay 38. 19
God expect praise from us, sure he will ^t us into a condition of praise.

Unthankfulness is a sin detestable ^th to God and men, and the less
pu^hment it receives from humane laws, the more it is punished inward^ by
secret shame, and outwardly by public hatred, if once it prove notorious.
When Gods arrests come forth for denying him his tribute, he chiefly eye^ an
unthankful heart, and hates all sin the worse, as there is more
unthankfulness in it: the neglect of kindness is taken most unkindly. Why
should we load God with injuries, that loadeth u^ with his blessings? who would
requi^e good with evil? Such men's mercies will prove at last so many
inditements against them.

I beseech you therefore labor to be men of praises. If in any duty we Use
may expect assistance, we may in this, that altogether concerns Gods glory:
the more we praise God, the more we shall praise him. When God by grace
enlarges the will, he intends to give the deed. Gods children wherein their
will are conformable to Gods will, are sure to have them fulfilled. In a
fruitful ground, a man will sow his best seed. God intends his own glory in
every mercy, and he that praises him, glorifies Psalm. 50. 23.
him. When our wills therefore carry us (...) that which God wills above all,
we ^y well expect he will satisfy our de^es. The living God is a living
foun^ine never drawn dry, he has never ^one so much for us, but he can and
will do more. If there be no end of our praises, there shall be no end of his
goodness: no way of thriving like to (...). By this means we are sure never
(...) be very miserable; how can he be dejected, that by a sweet communion
with God sets himself in heaven? nay ^keth his heart a kind of heaven, A 2
Cor. 6. 16
Temple, a holy of holies, wherein Incense (...) offered unto God. It is the
sweetest ^anch of our Priestly office, to offer ^p these daily sacrifices; It
is not only ^e beginning, but a further entrance (...) our heaven upon earth,
and shall be ^e day our whole employment for e^r.

Praise is a just and due tribute for all Praise is a just and due debt.
^s blessings; for what else especially ^e the best favors of God call for at
^r hands? How do all creatures ^aise God, but by our mouths? It is a debt
always owing, and always paying; and the more we pay, the more we shall owe;
upon the due discharge of this debt, the soul will find much peace. A
thankful heart to God for his blessings, is the greatest blessing of all. Were
it not for a few gracious souls, what honor should God have of the rest of
the unthankful world? which should stir us up the more to be trumpets of
Gods praises in the midst of his enemies, because this (in some sort) has a
prerogative above our praising God in heaven, for there God has no enemies to
dishonor him.

This is a duty that none can except Praising of God, A duty without exception.
against, because it is especially a work of the heart. All cannot show their
thankfulness in giving or doing great matters, but all may express the
willingness of their hearts. All within (...) may praise his holy name, though
we Psalm. 103.
have little or nothing without us; and that within us is the thing God chiefly
requires. Our heart is the Altar on which we offer this Incense; God looks
not to quantity, but to propor^ion; he accepts a mite where there is ^o more to
be had.

But how shall we be enabled to this great Quest.
^y?

Enter into a deep consideration of Gods Answ.
^rs, past, present, and to come; think How we may attain to praise God in
some acceptable manner.
of the greatness and suteablenesse of them (...) our condition, the
seasonablenesse ^d necessity of them every way unto (...) Consider how
miserable our life ^re without them, even without 1. A deep consideration of
favors.
^mon favors; but as for spiritual ^ours, that make both our natural ^d
civil condition comfortable, our ^y life were death, our light were ^nesse
without these. In all favors ^ke not of them so much, as Gods ^cy and love in
Christ which swee^ them. Think of the freeness of (...) love, and the
smallness of thy own ^rts. How many blessings does God ^tow upon us, above our
deserts, yea, ^e our desires, nay, above our very ^ghts? He had thoughts of
love to (...) when we had no thoughts of our ^es. What had we been if God had
not been good unto us? How many blessings has God bestowed upon us, that we
never prayed for? and yet we are not so ready to praise God, as to pray unto
him; this more desire of what we want, then esteeming of what we have, shows
too much prevailing of self-love. But

Secondly, comparing also our selves 2. By comparing our selves with others.
with others, will add a great luster to Gods favor, considering we are all
hewed out of one Rock, and differ nothing from the meanest, but in Gods free
love. Who are we that God should single us out for the glory of his rich mercy?

Considering likewise, that the blessings 3. That Gods blessings to us are, as
if we only were cared for.
of God to us, are such as if none but we ^d them, and God cares for us, as if
he (...) none else to care for in the world besides. These things well
pondered, should set the greater price upon Gods blessings, what are we in
nature and grace, b^ Gods blessings? What is in us, about us, above us? What
see we, taste we, enjoy we, but blessings? All we have or hope to have, are
but dead favou^ to us, unless we put life into them by (...) spirit of
Thankfulness. And shall we ^e as dead as the earth, as the stones ^ee tread
on? Shall we live as if we were resolved God should have no praise by us?
Shall we make our selves God, ascribing all to our selves? Nay, shall we (as
many do) fight against God with his own favors, and turn Gods blessings
against himself? Shall we abuse peace to security? Plenty to ease, promises to
presumption, gifts to pride? How can we please the devil better then thus
doing? Oh! the wonderful patience of God, to continue ^e to those whose life
is nothing else, (...) a warring against him the giver of ^e.

As God has thoughts of love to us, so should our thoughts be of praises to
^m, and of doing good in our places ^o others for his sake. Think with thy
self. Is there any I may honor God by releeving, comforting, counselling?
(...) there any of Ionat hans race? Is there 2 Samuel 9. 1.
^y of Christ's dear ones? I will do good to them, that they together with
Psalm. 118. 1
me, and for me may praise God. As David here checks himself for the failing
and disquietnesse of his Spirit, and as a cure thereof, thinks of praising
God. So let us (in the like case) stir up our souls as he did, and say, Praise
the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, Psalm. 103. 1
set forth his holy name. We never use our spirits to better purpose, then
when by that light we have from God, we stir them up to look back again to
him.

By this it will appear to what good purposes we had a being here in the The
excellent use of Thanksgiving.
world, and were brought into communion with Christ by the Gospel. The carriage
of all things to the right end, shows, whose we are, and whither we tend. It
abundantly appears by God^ revealing of himself many ways to us, as by
Promises, Sacraments, Sabbaths, etc. that he intended to raise up our hearts
to this heavenly duty. The whole gracious dispensation of God in Christ tends
to this, that our carriage should be nothing else, but an expression of
Thankfulness to him; that by a free cheerful and gracious disposition, we
might show we are the people of Gods free grace, set at liberty from the spirit
of bondage, to serve him without Luke 1. 74.
fear, with a voluntary child-like service, all the days of our lives.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Gods manifold salvation for his people. And why open, or expressed in the
countenance.

Proceed.

[Hee is the salvation of my countenance.]

As David strengthens his trust in God, by reason fetched from the future
goodness of God apprehended by faith, so he strengthens that reason with
another reason fetched from God, whom he apprehends here as the salvation of his
countenance. We need reason against reason, and reason upon reason, to steel
and strengthen the soul against the onset of contrary reasons.

He is the salvation of my countenance, that is, He will so save as I shall
see, and my enemies shall see it; and upon seeing, my countenance shall be
cheared and lifted up; Gods saving kindness shall be read in my countenance,
so that all who look on me, shall say, God has spoken peace to my soul, as
well as brought peace to my condition.

He says not salvation, but salvations: That God is not only salvation, but
salvations to his people.
because as our life is subject to many miseries, in soul, body, and state,
public and private, etc. so God has ma ny salvations: If we have a thousand
troubles, he has a thousand ways of Mill mali species, mill salutis erunt
help; as he has more blessings then one, so he has more salvations then
one. He saves our souls from sin, our bodies from danger, and our estates from
trouble. He is the redeemer of his people, and not only so, but with him is
plenteous redemption of all persons, of Psalm. 130. 7
all parts both of body and soul, from all ill, both of sin and misery, for
all times, both now and hereafter. He is an everlasting salvation.

David does not say, God will save me; but God is salvation it self, and
nothing but salvation. Our sins only stop the current of his mercy, but it
being above all our sins, will soon scatter that cloud, remove that stop,
and then we shall see and feel nothing but salvation from the Lord. All his
Psalm. 25. 10
vayes are mercy and peace to a repentant soul that casts it self upon him.

Christ himself is nothing else but salvation clothed in our flesh. So old
Luke 2. 29.
Simeon conceived of him, when he had him in his arms, and was willing
thereupon to yield up his spirit to God, having seen Christ the salvation of
God: when we embrace Christ in the arms of our Faith, we embrace nothing but
salvation. He makes up that sweet name given him by his Father, and brought
from heaven by an Angel to Luke 2. 14
the full: a name in the Faith of which, it is impossible for any believing
soul to sink.

The devil in trouble presents God to us, as a revenging destroyer, and
unbeleefe presents him under a false vizard; but the skill of faith is, to
present him as a Savior clothed with salvation. We should not so much look
Think of God as a Savior in trouble.
what destruction the devil and his threaten, as what salvation God promises.
To God belongs the issues of death, and of all other troubles which Psalm. 68.
20.
are lesser deaths. Cannot he that has vouchsafed an issue in Christ from
eternal death, vouchsafe an issue from all temporal evils? If he will raise
our bodies, can he not raise our conditions? He that brought us into trouble,
can easily make a way out of it when he pleases. This should be a ground of
resolute and absolute obedience, even in our greatest extremities, considering
God will either deliver us (from death, or by death, and) at length out of
death.

So then, when we are in any danger, we see whither to go for salvation, even
Whither to fly in our troubles.
to him that is nothing else but salvation; but then we must trust in him (as
David does) and conceive of him as salvation, that we may trust in him. If we
will not trust in salvation, what will we trust in? and if salvation it self
cannot save us, what can? out of salvation there is nothing but destruction,
which those that seek it any where out of God, are sure to meet with. How
pitiful then is their case, who go to a destroyer for salvation? that seek
for help from hell?

Here also we see to whom to return Whom to return Praise to in all our
deliverances.
praise in all our deliverances, even to the God of our salvation. The virgin
Mary was stirred up to magnify the Lord, but why? Her spirit rejoiced in God
her Savior. Whosoever is the instrument Luke 1.
of any good, yet salvation is of the Lord; whatsoever brings it, he sends it.
Hence in their holy feasts for any deliverance, the cup they drank of, was
called the Cup of salvation: and therefore David when he summons his thoughts,
what to render unto God? he Ps. 116. 13.
resolves upon this, to take the Cup of salvation. But always remember this,
that when we think of God as salvation, we must think of him as he is in
Christ to his. For, so every thing in God is saving, even his most terrible
attributes of justice and power: out of Christ, the sweetest things in God are
terrible. Salvation it self will not save out of Christ; who is the only way
of salvation, called the way, the truth, John 14. 6.
and the life.

David adds (He is the salvations of God first cheeres the heart, and then
the outward man.
my countenance) that is, he will first speak salvation to my soul, and say,
I am thy salvation; and when the heart is cheered (which is as it were the S^
of this little world) the beams of that joy will shine in the countenance.
True joy begins (...) the center, and so passes to the circumference the
outward man. The countenance is as the glass of the soul, wherein you may see
the naked face of the soul, according as the several affections thereof
stand. In the coutenance of an understanding creature, you may see more then a
bare countenance. The spirit of one man may see the countenance of another
inner man in his outward countenance: which has a speech of its own, and
declares what the heart says, and how it is affected.

But how comes God to be the salvation Quest.
of our countenance?

Answ. I answer: God only graciously ^nes in the face of Jesus Christ, which
(...) with the eye of faith beholding, receive those beams of his grace, and
re^ct them back again. God shines ^on us first, and we shine in that light
^f his countenance upon us. The joy of Psalm. 51. 12
salvation, (especially of spiritual and ^all salvation) is the only true
joy: all other salvations end at last in destruction, and are no further
comfortable then they issue from Gods saving love.

God will have the body partake with 1. Why God will have the salvation of his
people appear openly.
the soul; as in matter of grief, so in matter of joy, the lantern shines
in the light of the Candle within.

Again, God brings forth the joy of the heart into the countenance, for the
further ^eading and multiplying of joy to others. 2.
Next unto the sight of the sweet countenance of God, is the beholding of the
cheerful countenance of a Christian friend, rejoicing from true grounds.
Whence it is that the joy of one becomes the joy of man, and the joy of many
meet in one; by which means, as many lights together make the greater light,
so many lightsome spirits make the greater light of spirit: and so God
receives the more praise, which makes him so much to delight in the prosperity
of his children. Hence it is, that in any deliverance of Gods people, the
righteous do compass them about, to Psalm. 142. 7
know what God has done for their souls; and keep a spiritual Feast with
them in partaking of their joy. And the godly have cause to joy in the
deliverance of other Christians, because they suffered in their afflictions,
and it may be in their sins the cause of them, which made them somewhat
ashamed. Whence it is, that David's great desire was; that those who feared God
might not Psalm. 69. 6
be ashamed because of him: insinuating that those who fear Gods name, are
ashamed of the falls of Gods people. Now when God delivers them, this reproach
is removed, and those that had part in their sorrow, have part in their joy.

Again, God will have salvation so open, that it shall appear in the
countenance 3.
of his people, the more to daunt and vex the enemies. Cainish hypocrites hang
down their heads, when God lifts up the countenance of their brethren; when
the countenance of Gods children cleares up, then their enemies hearts and
looks are cloudy. Ierusalems joy is Babylons sorrow. It it with the Church and
her enemies as it is with a balance, the scales whereof when one is up the
other is down. Whilst Gods people are under a cloud, carnal people insult
over them, as if they were men deserted of God. Whereupon they hang down their
heads, and the rather, because they think that by reason of their sins, Christ
and his Religion will suffer with them. Hence David's care was, that the 2 Samuel
1. 20.
miseries of Gods people should not be told in Gath. The chief reason why the
enemies of the Church gnash their teeth at the sight of Gods gracious dealing,
is, that they take the rising of the Church, to be a presage of their ruin. A
lesson which Hamans wife had Esth. 6. 13.
learned.

This is a comfort to us in these times of Jacobs trouble and Zions sorrow: The
captivity of the Church shall return, as rivers in the South. Therefore the
Church may say, Rejoice not over me O Psa. 126. 1.
my enemy, though I am fallen, I shall rise Micah. 7. 8.
again. Though Christ's Spouse be now as black as the Pots, yet she shall be
white as the Dove. If there were not great dangers, where were the glory of
Gods great deliverance? The Church at length will be as a Cup of trembling, and
as a burdensome stone. The blood of Zach. 12. 2
the Saints cry, their enemies violence cries, the prayers of the Church cry
for deliverance, and vengeance upon the enemies of the Church: and (as that
importunate widow) will at length prevail. Shall the importunity of one Luke
18. 5.
poor woman prevail with an unrighteous Judge? and shall not the prayers of
many that cry unto the righteous God take effect? If there were Armies of
Prayers, as there are Armies of men, we should see the stream of things
turned another way. A few Moses^ the Mount, would do more good then many
soldiers in the valley. If we would lift up our hearts and hands to God, he
would lift up our countenance. But alas, we either pray not, or cross our
own prayers for want of love to the truth of God and his people.

It is we that keep Antichrist and his faction alive, to plague the
unthankful world. The strength he has is not from his own cause, but from
our want of zeal; we hinder those Hal^luiahs by private brabbles, coldness
and indifferency in Religion. The Church begins at this time a little to lift
up her head again: Now is the time to follow God with prayers, that he would
perfect his own work, and plead his own cause; that he would be revenged not
only of ours, but his enemies: that he would wholly free his Church from that
miserable bondage. These beginnings give our faith some ^old to be encouraged
to go to God, for the fulfilling of his gracious promise, that the Church may
rejoice in the salvation of the Lord. God does but look for some to seek unto
him: Christ does but stay until he is awaked by our prayers. But it is to be
feared, that God has not yet perfected his work in Zion. The Church is not
yet fully prepared for a full and glorious deliverance. If God had once his
ends in the humiliation of the Church for sins past, with resolution of
reformation for the time to come, then this age perhaps might see the salvation
of the Lord, which the generations to come shall be witness of: we should see
Zion in her perfect beauty. The generations of those that came out of Egypt,
saw and enjoyed the pleasant land which their progenitors were shut out of: who
by reason of their murmuring, and looking back to Egypt, and forgetfulness of
the wonders which God had done for, and before them, perished in the
wilderness.

There is little cause therefore of envying the present flourishing of the Use
enemies of the Church, and of joining and colluding with them; for it will
prove the wisest resolution to resolve to fall and rise with the Church of
Christ, considering the enemies themselves shall say, God has done great
things for them: Kings shall lay their Crowns at Christ's feet, and bring all
their Rev. 21. 24
glory to the Church.

And for every Christian, this may be a comfort, that though their light for a
time may be eclipsed, yet it shall break forth. David at this time was
accounted (...) enemy of the State, and had a world of false imputations laid
upon him, which he was very sensible of; yet (we see here) he knew at length
God would be the salvation of his countenance.

But some (as Gideon) may object, if Object.
(...) intend to be so gracious, why is it thus with us?

The answer is, Salvation is Gods own Answ.
work, humbling and casting down is his strange work, whereby he comes to
his own work. For, when he intends to save, he will seem to destroy first:
and when he will justify, he will condemn first: whom he will revive, he
will kill first. Grace and goodness countenanced by God, have a native ^red
Majesty in them, which makes ^e face to shine, and borrows not its luster
from without, which God at length will have to appear in its own likeness,
howsoever malice may cast a veil thereon, and disguise it for a time. And
though wickedness (as it is base borne, and a child of darkness) may shelter
it self under authority a while, yet it shall hide it self and run into
corners. The comfort of comforts is, that at that great day, (the day of all
days) that day of the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God; the
rightous shall then shine as the Sun in the Dan. 12.
firmament, then Christ will come to be glorious in his Saints, and will be the
salvation of the countenance of all (...). Then all the works of darkness
shall be driven out of countenance, and adjudged to the place from whence they
came. In the mean time let us (with David) support our selves with the hopes
of these times.

CHAP. XXX.
Of God, our God, and of particular application.

[MY God.]
These words imply a special That David's interest in God, was a special
foundation of his trusting in God.
interest that the holy man had in God, (as his God) being the ground of all
which was said before; both of the duty of trusting, and of praising, and of
the salvation that he expected from God. He is my God, therefore be not
disqui^d but trust him. He is my God, therefore he will give me matter to
praise him, and will be the salvation of my countenance; God has some special
ones in the world, to whom he does as it were ^e over himself, and whose God
he (...) by virtue of a more special covenant; whence we have these excellent
expressions. I will be your God, and you Ier. 31. 3^. 2 Cor. 6. 18.
shall be my people: I will be your Father, and you shall be my sons and
daughters. Since the fall we having lost our communion with God the chief
good, our happiness stands in recovering again fellowship with him. For this
end we were created, and for this redeemed, and for effecting of this, the
Word and Sacraments are sanctified to us, yea, and for this end God himself
(out of the bowels of his compassion) vouchsafed to enter into a gracious
covenant with us, founded upon Jesus Christ, and his satisfaction to divine
justice; so that by Faith we become one with him, and receive him, as offered
of his Father to be all in all to us.

Hence it is, that CHRIST has his name Immanuel, God with us. Not only Why
Christ has his name Immanuel.
because he is God, and man too, (both natures meeting in one person) but
because being God in our nature, he has undertook this office to bring God
and us together. The maine end of Christ's coming and suffering, was to
reconcile, and to gather together in one; and (as Peter expresses it) to bring
man again to God. Immanuel is the bond 1 Pet. 3. 18
of this happy agreement, and appears for ever in heaven to make it good. As
the comfort hereof is great, so the foundation of it is sure and everlasting,
God will be our God, so long as he is Christ's God; and because he is Christ's
God. Ioh. 20. 10.
Thus the Father of the faithful, and all other holy men before Christ,
apprehended God to be their God in the Messiah to come. Christ was the ground
of their interest. He was yesterday to them as well as to day to us. Hence it
is that God is called the portion of his people, Heb. 13. Psa. 73. 26. Mal. 3.
25. Psalm. 71.
and they his jewels: he their only rock and strong Tower, and they his
peculiar ones.

Well may we wonder that the great Use
God should stoop so low, to enter into such a covenant of grace and peace,
founded upon such a Mediator, with such utter enemies, base creatures, sinful
dust and ashes as we are. This is the wonderment of Angels, a torment of
devils, and glory of our nature and persons; and will be matter of admiration,
That there must be on our part an appropriating of God, as he tenders himself
to be our God.
and praising God unto us for all eternity.

As God offers himself to be ours in Christ (else durst we lay no claim to
him) so there must be in us an appropriating grace of faith, to lay hold of
this offer. David says here, My God. But by what spirit? by a spirit of faith,
which looking to Gods offer, makes it his own whatsoever it lays hold of God
offers himself in covenant, and Faith catches hold thereon presently. With
a gracious offer of God, there goes a gracious touch of his spirit to the
soul, giving it sight and strength, whereby (being aided by the same spirit)
it lays hold on God showing himself in love. God says to the soul, I am
thy salvation, and the soul says again, Thou art my God. Faith is nothing
else, but a spiritual echo, returning that voice bark again, which God first
speaks to the soul. For what acquaintance could the soul claim with so
glorious a Majesty, if he should not first condescend so low, as to speak
peace, and whisper secretly to the soul, that he is our loving God and Father,
and we his peculiar ones in Christ, that our sins are all pardoned, his
justice fully satisfied, and our persons freely accepted in his dear Son.

But to come more particularly to the words [My God] The words are pregnant; in
the womb of them, all that is graciously and comfortably good is contained;
they are the spring head of all particular blessings. All particular Relations
and Titles that it pleases God to take upon him, have their strength from
hence, that God is our God. More cannot be said, and less will not serve the
turn. Whatsoever else we have, if we have not God; it will prove but an empty
Cisterne at last. He is our proper element, every thing desires to live in its
own element, fishes in the Sea, Birds in the air; in this they are best
preserved.

There is a greater strength in this [My God] then in any other Title, it is
more then if he had said My King, or My Lord; these are words of sovereignty
and wisdom; but this implies not only infinite power, sovereignty, and
wisdom, but likewise infinite bounty and provident care; so that when we are
said to be Gods people, the meaning is, that we are not only such over whom
God has a power and command, but such as toward whom he shows a loving and
peculiar respect.

In the words is implied, 1. A propriety and interest in God. 2. An improvement
1.
of the same for the quieting 2.
of the soul.

David (here) lays a particular claim, Particular faith necessary, and why.
by a particular faith unto God. The reason, is, 1. The virtue of faith is as
to lay hold, so to appropriate to it self, 1.
and make its own whatever it lays hold on, and it does no more in this, then
God gives it leave by his gracious promises to do.

2. As God offers, so faith receives, but God offers himself in particular to
the 2.
believing soul by his spirit, therefore our faith must be particular. That
which the Sacraments seal, is a peculiar interest in Christ; This is that
which has always upheld the Saints of God, and that which is ever joined with
the life of Christ in us. The life that I live (says Paul) is by the faith of
the Son of Gal. 2. 20.
God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. The spirit of faith is a spirit
of application.

This is employed in all the Articles of our faith; we believe God to be our
father, and Christ to be borne for us, that he dyed for us, and rose again for
our good, and now sits at the right hand of God, making requests for us in
particular.

3. This is that which distinguishes the faith of a true Christian, from all 3.
hypocrites and cast-awayes whatsoever. Were it not for this word of possession
[Mine] the devil might say the Creed to as good purpose as we; He believes
there is a God and a Christ, but that which torments him is this, he can say
[My] to never an Article of ^aith.

4. A general apprehension of Gods goodness and mercy may stand with 4.
desperation. Take away My from God, Toll meum toll Deum.
and take away God himself in regard of comfort; what comfort was it for Adam,
when he was shut out of Paradise to look upon it after he had lost ^t? The
more excellencies are in God, (...) more our grief if we have not our ^rt in
them: the very life blood of the Gospel, lies in a special application of
particular mercy to our selves. All relations that God and Christ have taken
upon them, imply a necessity of application; What if God be a rock of salvation
if we do not rest upon him? What if he be a foundation, and we do not build
on him? What if he offers himself as a husband, if we will not accept of him,
what availes it us? How can we rejoice in the salvation of our souls, unless
we can in particular say, I rejoice in God my Savior.

5. Without particular application, we can neither entertain the love of 5.
God, nor return love again, by which means we lose all the comfort God
intends us in his word, which of purpose was written for our solace and
refreshment; Take away particular faith, and we let out all the spirits of
cheerful and thankful obedience.

This possessive particle [My] has place in all the golden chain of our
salvation. The first spring of all Gods claim to us as his is in his election
of (...) we were by grace his before we were, those that are his from that
eternal love, (...) gives to Christ; this is hid in the breast (...) God, till
he calls us out of the rest of (...) world into Communion with Christ, (...)
answering of which call (by faith) (...) become one with Christ, and so (...)
with him. Afterward in justifica^ we feel God experimentally to (...)
reconciled unto us, whence arises (...) and inward peace. And then upon ^her
sanctification God delights in us (...) his, bearing his own image, and we ^om
a likeness to God, delight in him (...) ^rs in his Christ, and so this mutu^
interest betwixt God and us, conti^ until at last God becomes all in all ^o us.

But how can a man that is not yet in the Object.
(...) of grace say with any comfort, [My God?]

Whilst a man regards iniquity in his Answ.
(...) without any remorse or dislike of ^e same, if he says my God, his heart
^ll give his tongue the lie, however in (...) outward profession, and opinion
(...) others, he may bear himself as if (...) were his, upon false grounds.
For there can be no more in a conclusion then it has from the principle an^
premises out of which it is drawn. The principle (here) is, that God is the
God of all that trust in him. Now if we ca^ make it good, that we truly trust
in God, we may safely conclude of comfort from him; for the more certain
clearing of which, try your selves by the signs of trust delivered.

It is no easy matter to say in truth of heart [My God] the flesh will still
labor for supremacy, God should be all in all unto us, but this will not be
till these bodies of flesh (together with the body of sin) be laid aside.
He that says God is [my God] and does not yield up himself unto God, raises
a building without a foundation, lays a claim without a title, and claims a
title without an evidence, reckoning upon a bargain, without consent of the
party with whom he would contract.

But if a man shall out of the sight and sense of sin, thirst after mercy in
Christ, and call unto God for pardon, then God who (is a God hearing prayer
and) delights Psalm. 65. 2.
to be known by the name of ^cifall, will be ready to close and ^t with the
desire of such a soul, so ^re as to give it leave to rely upon (...) for
mercy, (and that without pre^ption) until he further discovers ^selfe
graciously unto it; upon sense (...) which grace, the soul may be en^aged to
lay a farther claim unto ^od, having further acquaintance with (...). Hence
are those exhortations so (...) in the Prophets, to turn unto the Zach. 1. 3.
^dour God, because upon our first re^ion to turn unto God, we shall ^de him
always ready to answer ^se desires, that he stirs up by his (...) spirit in
us.

We are not therefore to stay our ^ing unto God, till we feel him, ^ing to
our hearts, I am thy God, but ^hen he prevents us by ^s grace, ina^ng us to
desire grace, let us follow (...) work begun, in the strength of ^at grace we
have, and then God will ^ther manifest himself in mercy to us

Yet God before we can make any ^ng toward him, lets into our hearts some few
beams of mercy thereby drawing us unto him, and reaching us out a hint to lay
hold upon.

And as sin causes a distance betwixt God and us, so the guilt of sin in
the conscience, causes further strangeness, insomuch that we dare not loo^ up
to heaven, till God open a little crevise to let in a little light of comfor^
(at least) into our souls, whereby we are by little and little drawn nearer
to him. But this light at the first is so little, that in regard of the greater
Ien^ of sin, and a larger desire of grace, the soul reckons the same as no
light at all, in comparison of what it desires and seeks after. Yet the
comfort is, that this dawning light will at length clear up to a perfect day.

Thus we see how this claim of God to be our God, is still in growth until
full assurance, and that there is a great distance betwixt the first act of
faith in cleaving to God, offering himself in Christ to be ours, and between
the last fruit of faith, the clear and comfortable feeling, that God is our
God indeed. We first by faith apply our selves to (...), and then apply God to
us, to be (...); The first is the conflicting exercise (...) faith, the last is
the triumph of faith; ^refore faith properly is not assu^ce. And to comfort us
the more, the ^ises are specially made to the act of ^th, suller assurance is
the reward of (...).

If God has not chosen me in Christ Object.
^e his, what ground have I to trust in (...)? I may cast away my self upon a
vain ^ence.

We have no ground (at first) to trou^ Answ.
our selves about Gods election. Se^ things belong to God; Gods re^led will is,
That all that believe in ^ist shall not perish. It is my duty Ioh. 3. 15.
^refore knowing this, to believe, by ^ing whereof, I put that question, ^ther
God be mine or no? out of all ^estion; for all that believe in Christ, (...)
Christ's, and all that are Christ's are (...). It is not my duty to look to Gods
secret counsel, but to his open offer, in^ation, and command, and thereupon to
adventure my soul. And this adventure of faith will bring at length a rich
return unto us. In war men will adventure their lives, because they think
Quis pollicetur sere^ti proventum; naviganti portum; militanti victoriam? Jdeo
Navigantes vitam ven it is credunt, etc. Salvian. Ideo terris (...) credimus ut
cum usuris credita recipi^us.
some will escape, and why not they? In traffic beyond the Seas many
adventure great estates, because some grow rich by a good return, though many
miscarry. The husbandman adventures his seed, though sometime the year proves
so bad, that he never sees it more. And shall not we make a spiritual
adventure in casting our selves upon God, when we have so good a warrant as
his command, and so good an encouragement as his promise, that he will not
fail those that rely on him? God bids us draw near to him, and he will draw
near to us. Whilst we in Gods own ways draw near to him, and labor to
entertain good thoughts of him, he will delight to show himself favorably
unto us. Whilst we are striving against an unbeleeving heart, he will come in
and help us, and so fresh light will come in.

Pretend not thy unworthiness and inability, to keep thee off from God, for
this is the way to keep thee so still, ^f any thing help us, it must be God,
and (...) ever he help us, it must be by cast^g our selves upon him, for then
he will reach out himself unto us in the promise of mercy to pardon our
sin, ^d in the promise of grace to sanctify ^r natures. It was a good
resolution ^f the Lepers, If we enter into the City, the 2 Reg. 7. 4.
^ine is there, and we shall dye, (say they) ^f we sit still, we shall die
also: Let us there^e fall into the host of Assyrians, if they Omnia in rebus
humanis spes futurorum agunt.
^ve us, we shall live; if they kill us, we shall (...) dye; So we should
reason, if we sit ^ll under the load of our sin we shall (...), if we put our
selves into the hands ^f Christ, if he save us we shall live, if (...) save us
not, we shall but die. Nay ^ely, he will not suffer us to die. Did ^er Christ
thrust any back from him, ^at put themselves upon him? Unless (...) were by
that means to draw them (...) nearer unto him, as we see in the (...) of
Canaan. His denial was but (...) increase her importunity. We should ^refore
do as she did, gather all ar^ments to help our faith. Suppose I am a dog
(says she) yet I am one of the family, and therefore have right to the
crummes that fall. So Lord, I have been a sinner, yet I am thy creature; and
not only so, but such a creature as thou have set over the rest of the works
of thy hands; and not only so, but one whom thou have admitted into thy Church
by Baptism, whereby thou would bind me to give my self unto thee before
hand, and more then this thou have brought me under the means, and therein have
showed thy will concerning my turning toward thee. Thou have not only offered
me conditions of peace, but wooed me by thy Ministers to give up my self unto
thee, as thine in thy Christ. Therefore I dare not suspect thy good meaning
toward me, or question thy intendment, but resolve to take thy counsel, and
put my self upon thy mercy. I cannot think if thou had meant to cast me
away, and not to own me for thine, thou would ever have kindled these
desires in me. But it is not this state I rest in, my purpose is to wait upon
thee, until thou do manifest thy self far^er unto me. It is not common
fa^ours that will content me (though I (...) unworthy of these) because I hear
(...) choice blessings toward thy chosen people, that thou entrest into a
peculiar ^venant withal, sure mercies, and such Isay 55. 3.
(...) accompany salvation. These be the ^vours I wait for at thy hand. O
visit Ps. 106 4, 5
(...) with the salvation of thy chosen. O remember me with the favor of thy
people, that I may see the good of thy ^sen. Whilst the soul is thus
exerci^d, more sweetness falls upon the will (...) affections, whereby they
are drawn ^ll nearer unto God. The soul is in a ^ting and a thriving
condition: For ^d delights to show himself gracious (...) those that strive to
be well perswa^d of him, concerning his readiness (...) show mercy to all that
look toward (...) in Christ. In worldly things, how (...) we cherish hopes
upon little ^ounds? if there shines never so little ^pe of gain or
preforment, we make ^er it. Why then should we forsake ^owne mercy, (which God
offers to be our own if we will embrace it) having such certain grounds for
our hope to rest on?

It was the policy of the servants of Benhadad, to watch if any word of
comfort fell from the King of Israel, and when he named Benhadad his brother,
they catched presently at that, and cheered 1 Reg. 20. 33.
themselves. Faith has a catching quality at whatsoever is near to lay hold
on. Like the branches of the vine, it windeth about that which is next, and
stays it self upon it, spreading further and further still. If nature taught
Benhadads servants to lay hold upon any word of comfort, that fell from the
mouth of a cruel King: Shall not grace teach Gods children to lie in wait for
any token that he shall show for good to them? How should we stretch forth the
arms of our faith to him, that stretches out his arms all the day long to a
rebellious people: God will never shut Esaias 65. 2.
his bosom against those that in an humble obedience fly unto him: we cannot
conceive too graciously of God. Can we have a fairer offer, then for God in
Christ to make over himself ^to us? which is more then if he should make over
a thousand worlds; Therefore our chief care should be, first by faith to make
this good, and ^hen to make it useful unto us, by li^ing upon it as our
chiefest portion; which we shall do, 1. By proving God to be our God in
particular; 2. By improving of it in all the passages of our lives.

CHAP. XXXI.
Means of proving and evidencing to our souls, that God is our God.

NOw we prove it to our souls, that 1.
God is ours, when we take him at his offer; when we bring nothing but a sense
of our own emptiness with us, and a good conceit of his faithfulness and
ability to do us good; when we answer God in the particular passages of
salvation, which we cannot do, till ^e begins first unto us. Therefore if ^e
be Gods, it is a certain sign that God is ours. If we choose him, we may
conclude he has chosen us first. If we love him, we may know that he has
loved 1 Ioh. 4. 19
us first. If we apprehend him, it is because he has apprehended us first.
Whatsoever affection we show to God, it is but a reflection of his first to us.
If cold and dark bodies have light and heat in them, it is because the Sun has
shined upon them first. Mary answers not Rabboni, till Christ said Mary to 1
John 20. 16.
her. If we say to God I am thine, it is because he has first said unto us,
thou Dicat anima, secura dicat, Deus meus es ^u, qui dicit ani^ nostra Salus
tua ego sum. Aug. in Psalm. 132. Cant. 6. 3.
art mine; after which, the voice of the faithful soul is, I am my beloveds,
and my beloved is mine. We may know Gods mind to us in heaven, by the return
of our hearts upwards again to him: Only as the reflected beams are weaker
then the direct, so our affections in their return to God, are far weaker
then his love falling upon us. God will be to us whatsoever we make him by our
faith to be; when by grace we answer his condition of trusting, then he becomes
ours to use for our good.

2. We may know God to be [(...) 2.
God] when we pitch and plant all our happiness in him, when the desires of
our souls are toward him, and we place all our contentment in him. As this
word [my] is a term of appropriati^ springing from a special faith, so it is
a word of love and peculiar affection, showing that the soul does repose and
rest it self quietly and securely upon God. Thus David proves God to be his
God, by early seeking of him, by thirsting, Psalm 63. 1, 2, 3. etc.
and longing after his presence, and that upon good reason, because Gods loving
kindness was better to him then life; This he knew would satisfy his soul as
^ith marrow and fatness. So S. Paul proved Christ to be his Lord, by
accounting Phil. 3. 8.
all things else as dung and dross in ^parison of him.

Then we make God our God, and set a Crown of Majesty upon his head, when we
set up a Throne for him in our hearts, where self-love before had set up the
creature above him; when the heart is so unloosed from the world, that it is
ready to part with any thing for Gods sake, giving him now the supremacy in our
hearts, and bringing down every high thought in captivity to him; making him
our trust, our love, our joy, our delight, our fear, our all; and whatsoever
we esteem or affect else, to esteem and affect it under him, in him, and for
him; When we cleave to him above all, depending upon him as our chief good,
and contenting our selves in him, as all-sufficient to give our souls fit and
full satisfaction. When we resign up our selves to his gracious government, to
do and suffer what he will, offering our selves and all our spiritual
services as sacrifices to him. When faith brings God into the soul as ours, we
not only love him, but love him dearly, making it appear, that when we are
at good terms with God, we are at a point for other things. How many are
there that will adventure the loss of the love of God, for a thing of nothing?
and redeem the favor of men with the loss of Gods. Certain it is whatsoever
we esteem, or affect most, that whatsoever it be in Amor tuus, Deus tuus.
it self, yet we make it our God. The best of us all may take shame to our
selves herein, in that we do not give God his due place in us, but set up some
Idol or other in our hearts above him.

When the soul can without hypocrisy say [My God] it ingageth us to
universal 3.
and unlimited obedience, we shall be ambitious of doing that which may be
acceptable and well pleasing to him; and therefore this is prefixed as a ground
before the Commandments, enforcing obedience; I am the Lord thy Exodus 20.
God, therefore thou shall have no other Gods before me; whomsoever else we
they, it must be in the Lord, because we see a beam of Gods authority in them;
and it is no prejudice to any inferior authority, to prefer Gods authority
before it, in case of difference one from Nemini fit injuria cui praeponitur
Deus.
the other.

When we know we are a peculiar people, we cannot but be Zealous of good Tit.
2. 14.
works. If I be a Father, where is mine bo^r? Special relations are special
enforcements Mal. 1. 6.
to duty.

4. The spirit of God which knows the deep things of God, and the depths 4.
of our hearts, does reveal this mutual interest betwixt God, and those that
are his, it being a principal work of the spirit to seal this unto the
soul, by discovering such a clear and particular light in the use of means,
as swaieth the soul to yield up it self wholly to God. When we truly trust,
we may say with S. Paul, I know whom I 2 Timothy 1. 12.
have trusted, he knew both that he trusted, and whom he trusted. The spirit of
God that reveals God to be ours, and stirs up faith in him, both reveals
this trust to our souls, and the interest we have in God thereby. The Lord is
my portion, says my soul: but God said so Lam. 3. 24
to it first. If instinct of nature teaches dammes to know their young ones,
and their young ones them, in the midst of those that are alike; shall not the
spirit of God much more teach the soul to know its own father? As none knows
what is in man, but the spirit of man, so none knows what love God bears to
those that are his, but the spirit of God in his: All the light in the world
cannot discover the Sun unto us, only it discovers it self by its own
^eames. So all the Angels and Saints (...) heaven cannot discover to our souls
^he love that is in the breast of God toward us, but only the spirit of God,
which sheds it into our hearts. The spirit Romans 5. 5.
only teaches this language to say my God. It is infused only into sanctified
hearts, and therefore oft-times mean Mat. 11. 25
men enjoy it, when great, wise, and learned persons are strangers to it.

5. The spirit when it witnesses 5.
this to us, is called the spirit of adoption, and has always accompanying of
it a spirit of supplication, whereby with a familiar, yet reverent boldness,
we lay open our hearts to God as to a dear Father; All others are strangers
to this heavenly intercourse. In straits they run to their friends and carnal
shifts, whereas an heir of heaven runs to his Father and tells him of all.

6. Those that are Gods, are known 6. Special favors show God to be our God.
to be his, by special love tokens, that ^e bestows upon them. As 1. the
special graces of his spirit. Princes children are known by their costly
jewels, 1.
and rich ornaments. It is not common gifts, and glorious parts that set a
character upon us to be Gods, but grace to use those gifts, in humility and
love, to the glory of the giver.

2. There is in them a sutablenesse and connaturalnesse of heart to all that 2.
is spiritual, to whatsoever has Gods stamp upon it, as his truth and his
children, and that because they are his. By this likeness of disposition, we
are fashioned to a communion with him: Can two walk together and not be
agreed? It is a certain evidence that we are Gods in Christ, if the spirit of
God has wrought in us any impression like unto Christ, who is the image of his
Father; both Christ's looking upon us, and our looking upon Christ by faith (as
ours) has a transforming and conforming power.

3. Spiritual comforts in distress, such as the world can neither give, nor 3.
take away, show that God looks upon the souls of his with another eye, then
he beholds others. He sends a secret messenger that reports his peculiar love
to their hearts. He knows their souls, and feeds them with his hidden Manna;
the inward peace they feel, is not in freedom from trouble, but in freeness
with God in the midst of trouble.

4. Seasonable and sanctified corrections 4.
whereby we are kept from being led away by the error of the wicked, show Gods
fatherly care over us as his. Who will trouble himself in correcting another
man's child? yet we oftener complain of the smart we feel, then think of the
tender heart and hand that smites us, until our spirits be subdued, and then
we reap the quiet fruit of righteousness. Where crosses work together for
the best, we may know Romans 8. 28.
that we love God, and are loved of him. Thriving in a sinful course, is a
black mark of one that is not Gods.

7. Then we make it appear that 7.
God is our God, when we side with him, and are for him and his cause in ill
times. When God seems to cry out unto us, who is on my side, who? Then if we
can say as those in Esaias, whereof one 2 Reg 9. 32
says, I am the Lords, and another calls himself by the name of Jacob, and
another subscribes with his hand unto the Esaias 44. 6.
Lord, its a blessed sign. Thus the Patriarchs, and Prophets, Apostles, and
Martyrs, were not ashamed of God, and God was not ashamed to own the^. Provided
Heb. 11. 16
that this boldness for God proceed not only from a conviction of the
judgment, but from spiritual experience of the goodness of the cause,
whereby we can justify in heart what we justify in words. Otherwise men may
contend for that with others, which they have no interest in themselves. The
life must witness for God, as well as the tongue; it is often easier for corrupt
nature to part with life, then with lust.

This siding with God, is with a separation from whatsoever is contrary. God
uses this as an argument to come out of Babylon, because we are his people,
Come out of her My people. Religion is Rev. 18. 4.
nothing else, but a gathering and a binding of the soul close to God; that
fire which gathers together the gold, separates the dross. Nature draws out
that which is wholesome in meats, and severs the contrary. The good that is to
be had by God, is by clea^ing to him and him only. God loves (...) ingenuous
and full protestation, if ^alled to it. It shows the coldness of ^he times
when there is not heat enough ^f zeal to separate from a contrary ^ith. God is
a jealous God; and so we ^all find him at last. When the day of severing
comes, then they that have ^ood for him, shall not only be his, but his
treasure and his jewels. Mal. 3. 17.


There is none of us all, but may some time or other fall into such a great
extremity, that when we look about us, we shall find none to help ^s: at
which time we shall thoroughly ^now, what it is to have comfort from heaven, and
a God to go unto. If there be any thing in the world worth laboring for, it
is the getting sound evidence to our souls that God is ours. What madness is
it to spend all our labor, to possess our selves of the Cisterne, when the
fountain is offered to ^s? O beloved, the whole world cannot weigh against
this one comfort, that God is ours. All things laid in the other balance,
would be too light. A Moath may corrupt, a thief may take away that we have
here, but who can take our God away? Though God does convey some comfort to us
by these things, yet when they are gone, he reserves the comfort in himself
still, and can convey that, and more in a purer and sweeter way, where he
plants the grace of faith to fetch it from him. Why then should we weaken our
interest in God, for any thing this earth affords? What unworthy wretches are
those, that to please a sinful man, or to feed a base lust, or to yield to a
wicked custom, will (as much as in them lies) lose their interest in God?
Such little consider what an excellent privilege it is to have a sure refuge
to fly unto in time of trouble. God wants not ways to maintain his, without
being beholding to the devil. He has all help hid in himself, and will then
most show it, when it shall make most for his own glory. If God be ours, it is
a shame to be beholding to the devil, that ever it should be said Satan by
base courses has made us rich. God thinks any outward thing too mean for his
children, severed from himself, therefore he gives his Son the express ^age
of himself unto them. For which cause David when he had even studied to reckon
up the number of Gods choice blessings, concludes with advancing of this above
all, yea rather happy Ps. 144. 15.
^e they whose God is the Lord. If this will not satisfy the soul, what can?
Labor therefore to bring thy soul to this point with God, Lord if thou see
it ^t, take away all from me, so thou leavest ^e thy self, whom have I in
heaven but thee, and there is none on earth that I de^re Psalm. 73. 25.
in comparison of thee.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of improving our evidences for comfort in several passages of our lives.

THat we lose not any measure of comfort in this so sweet a privilege, We
ought to branch out the several excellencies in God for our special uses.
we must labor for skill to improve, and implead the same in the several
passages and occasions of our lives, and let it appear in the retaile, that
whatsoever is in God is mine: If I am in a perplexed condition, his wisdom is
mine: If in great danger, his power is mine; If I lie sighing under the burden
of sin, his grace is mine: If in any want, his all sufficiency is mine. My
God (says S. Paul) will supply all your Phil. 4. 19.
wants. If in any danger, I am thine Lord, save me, I am thine, the price of
thy Sons blood, let me not be lost, thou have given me the earnest of thy
Spirit, and set thy seal upon me, for thy own, let me neither lose my
bargain, nor thou thine. What is Religion it self but a spiritual bond?
whereby the soul is tied to God as its own, and then singles out of God
whatsoever is ^eedfull for any occasion: and so binds God with his own
covenant and pro^ise. Lord thou have made thy self to be ^ine, therefore now
show thy self so, and (...) exalted in thy wisdom, goodness, and ^er, for my
defense. Towalke comforta^ly in my Christian course, I need much ^race, supply
me out of thy rich store. I ^d wisdom to go in and out inoffensively ^fore
others, furnish me with thy spirit. I ^ed patience and comfort, thou that art
(...) God of all consolation, bestow it on me.

In time of desertion put Christ be^ixt God and thy soul, and learn to ^peale
from God out of Christ, to God in Christ. Lord look upon my ^aviour, that is
near unto thee as thy ^nne, near to me as my Brother, and ^ow intercedes at
thy right hand for ^e; though I have sinned, yet he has ^ffered, and shed his
precious blood to ^ake my peace. When we are in any ^ouble, let us still wait
on him, and lie (...) his feet, and never let him go, till ^e cast a gracious
look upon us.

So, if we be to deal with God, for the Church abroad, we may allege unto
him that whatsoever provocations are therein, and deformity in regard of abuses
and scandals: yet it is his Church, his people, his inheritance, his name is
called upon in it, and the enemies of it are his enemies. God has engaged
himself to the friends of the Church, that they shall prosper that love it,
and Psalm. 122. 6
therefore we may with a holy boldness press him, for a blessing upon the
same.

So for our children and posterity, we may incline God to respect them, because
they are under his covenant, who has promised to be our God, and the God of
our seed; Thine they were, thou gave them me; all that I have is thine, these
John 17.
are those children which thou of thy rich grace have given me. They are thine,
more then mine. I am but a means under thee to bring them into the world, and
to be a Nurse unto thy children; Take care therefore of thine own children I
beseech thee (especially) when I can take no care of them my self, thou
slumberest not, thou dyest not, I must.

Flesh and blood think nothing is cared for, but what it sees cared for by
itself. It has no eyes to see a guard of Providence, a guard of Angels. It
takes no knowledge that that is best cared for, that God cares for. Those that
have God for their God, have enlarged hearts as they have enlarged comforts.
They have an everlasting spring that supplies them in all wants, refreshes them
in all troubles, and then runs most clearly and freshly, when all other
streams in the world, are dried and stopped up. Were we skillful in the ^t of
faith, to improve so great an interest, what in the world could much dismay us?
faith will set God against all.

It should fill our hearts with an holy indignation against our selves, if
either we rest in a condition, wherein we cannot truly say God is [Our God] or
(if when we can in some sincerity of heart say this) that we make no better
advantage thereby, and maintain not our selves answerable to such a condition.
What a shame is it for a Noble man's son to live like a beggar? for a great
rich man, to live like a poor peasant? to famish at a banquet? to fall when we
have so many stays to lay hold on? Whereas if we could make this clear to our
souls, that God is ours, and then take up our thoughts, with the great riches
we have in him, laid open in Christ, and in the promises, we need trouble our
selves about nothing, but only get a large vessel of faith, to receive what
is offered, nay enforced upon us.

When we can say, God is our God, it is more then if we could say, heaven is
mine; or whatever good the creature affords, is mine. Alas, what is all this,
to be able to say, God is mine, who has in him the sweetness of all these
things, and infinite more? If God be ours, goodness it self is ours. If he
be not ours, though we had all things else, yet ere long nothing would be ours.
What a wondrous comfort is this, that God has put himself over to be ours?
That a believing soul may say with as great confidence (and greater too) that
God is his, then he can say his house is his, ^is treasure is his, his friends
are his? Nothing is so much ours as God is ours, because by his being ours in
covenant, all other things become ours: And if God be once ours, well may we
trust in him. God and ours joined together, make up the full comfort of a
Christian. [God] there is all to be had; but what is that to me, unless he be
my God? Al-sufficiency with propriety, fully stay^h the soul.

David was now banished from the Sanctuary, from his friends, habitation, and
former comforts; but was he banished from his God? No, God was his God still.
When riches, and friends, and life it self, cease to be ours, yet God never
loses his right in us, nor we our interest in him. This comfort that God is
ours, reaches unto the resurrection of our bodies, and to life everlasting.
God is the God of Abraham, (and so of every true believer) even when his body
is turned into dust. Hence it is that the loving kindness of the Lord, is
better then life, because when life departs, yet we live for ever in him. When
Moses saw the people drop away so fast in the wilderness, and wither like
grass, thou art our foundation (says he) from one generation to another: thou
art God from everlasting to everlasting. When we leave the world, and are no
more seen here, yet we have a dwelling place in God for ever. God is ours from
everlasting in election, and to everlasting in glory, protecting us here, and
glorifying us hereafter. David that claimed God to be his God is gone, but
David's God is alive. And David himself (though his flesh see corruption yet)
is alive in his God still.

That which is said of wily persons that are full of fetches, and windings, and
turnings in the world, that such will never break, may much more truly be
said of a right godly man, that has but one grand policy, to secure him in
all dangers, which is to run to his God, as to his tower of offense and
defense: such a one will never be at a desperate loss so long as God has any
credit, because he never fails those that fly unto him, and that because ^s
mercy and truth never fayles. The ^ry lame and the blind, the most shift^e
creatures when they had gotten ^e strong hold of Syon, thought then 2 Samuel 5.
6, 7.
^ey might securely scorn David and (...) host, because though they were ^eak
in themselves, yet their hold was ^rong; but we see their hold failed ^em at
length, which a Christians will ^ever do.

But God seems to have small care of Object.
^se that are his in the world, those who ^leeve themselves to be his jewels,
are ^nted the offscouring of the world, and most despised.

We must know that such have a glo^ious Answ.
life in God, but it is hidden with Coloss. 3.
Christ in God, from the eyes of the ^orld, and sometimes from their own; ^ere
they are hidden under infirmi^ies, afflictions, and disgraces, but yet ^ever so
hidden, but that God some^imes lets down a beam of comfort and strength,
which they would not ^ose to be freed from their present con^ition, though
never so grievous. God comes more immediately to them now* then formerly he was
used; nay, even when God seems to forsake them (and to be their enemy) yet they
are supported with such inward strength, that they are able to make good their
claim with Christ their head, and cry my God still; God never so departs, but
he always leaves somewhat behind him, which draws and keeps the heart to
him. We are like poor Hagar, who when the bottle of water was spent, fell a
Genesis 21. 19
crying, when there was a fountain close by, but her tears hindered her from
seeing it; When things go ill with us in our trades and callings, and all is
spent, then our spirits droope, and we are at our wits end, as if God were not
where he was. Oh consider, if we had all and had not God, we had nothing: If
we have nothing, and have God, we have enough, for we have him that has all,
and more then all at his command. If we had all other comforts that our hearts
can desire, yet if God withdraw himself, what remains but a curse and
emptiness? What makes heaven but the presence of God? And that makes hell but
the absence of God? ^t God be in any condition, though ^ver so ill, yet it is
comfortable, and ^lly we find more of God in trou^e, then when we are out of
trouble; ^e comforts of Religion never come ^l other fail. Cordials are kept
for ^tings. When a curtain and a veil ^drawne betwixt us and the creature,
^en our eyes are only upward to ^d and he is more clearly seen (...) us.

In the divis^on of things, GOD be^eaths God, the Saints portion.
himself to those that are his, for their portion, as the best portion he can
give them. There are many goodly things in the world, but none of these are a
Christians portion, there is in him to supply all good, and remove all (...),
until the time come that we stand in need of no other good. It is our chief
wisdom to know him, our holiness to love him, our happiness to enjoy him.
There is in him to be had, whatsoever can truly make us happy. We go to our
treasure, and our portion in all our wants, we live by it, and value our selves
by it. God is such a portion, that the more we spend on him, the more we may*
Our strength may fail, and our heart Psalm. 73. 26.
may fail, but God is our portion for ever. Every thing else teaches us by the
vanity and vexation we find in them, that our happiness is not in them, they
send us to God; they may make us worse, but better they cannot. Our nature is
above them, and ordained for a greater good; they can go but along with us for
a while, and their end swallows up all the comfort of their beginnings, as
Pharaohes lean Kine swallowed up the fat. If we have no better portion here
then these things, we are like to have hell for our portion hereafter. What a
shame will it be hereafter when we are stripped of all, that it should be said,
Lo this is the man, that took not God for his portion. If God be once ours,
he goes for ever along with us, and when earth will hold us no longer, heaven
shall. Who that has his senses about him, would perish for want of water, when
there is a fountain by him? or for hunger that is at a feast? ^od alone is a
rich portion: O then let (...) labor for a large faith, as we have a ^rge
object; If we had a thousand times ^ore faith, we should have a thousand ^mes
more increase of Gods blessings. When the Prophet came to the wid^es house, as
many vessels as she had ^re filled with oil; we are straightened in ^or own
faith, but not straightened in our 1 Reg. 17. 14.
God. It falls out often in this world, that Gods people are like Israel at the
red ^ea, environed with dangers on all ^des: What course have we then to ^ake,
but only to look up and wait for ^he salvation of our God? This is a breast
full of consolation, let us teach our hearts to suck, and draw comfort from
^ence.

Is God our God, and will he suffer any thing to befall us for our hurt? Will
he lay any more upon us, then he gives us strength to bear? Will he suffer
any wind to blow upon us, but for good? Does he not set us before his face?
Will a Father or Mother suffer a child to be wronged in their presence, if they
can help it? Will a friend suffer his friend to be injured, if he may redress
him? And will God that has put these affections into Parents and friends,
neglect the care of those he has taken so near unto himself? No surely, his
eyes are open to look upon their condition; his ears are open to their
prayers; a book of remembrance is written of all their good desires, speeches,
and actions; Mal. 3. 16.
he has bottles for all their tears, their very sighs are not hid from him,
he has written them upon the palms of his hands, and cannot but continually
Isay 46. 16
look upon them. Oh let us prize the favor of so good a God, who though he
dwells on high, yet will regard things so low, and not neglect the mean estate
of any; Nay, especially, delights to be called the comforter of his Elect, and
the God of those that are in misery, and have none to fly unto but himself.

But we must know that God only thus graciously visits his own children, he
visits with his choysest favors those only that fear his name. As for those
that either secretly undermine, or openly oppose the cause, and Church (...)
God, and join with his enemies; ^ch as savor not the things of God, ^t commit
spiritual Idolatry, and A^ltery with Gods enemies, the world, ^d the devil;
God will answer these, (...) once he did the Israelites, (when in ^eir
necessity they would have forced ^cquaintance upon him) Go to the gods ^m you
have served, to the great men Judges 10. 14.
those persons you have obeyed for ad^antage? to your riches, to your plea^re,
which you have loved more then God or goodness? you would not lose (...) base
custom, an oath, a superfluity, a thing of nothing for me, therefore I will
not own you now. Such men are more impudent then the devil himself, that will
claim acquaintance with God (...) last, when they have carried themselves as his
enemies all their days. ^athan could tell Paul and Sylas, they ^ere the
servants of the living God, but ^e would not make that plea for himself, Act.
16. 17
knowing that he was a cursed creature.

Miserable then is their condition who live in the world, (nay in the Church)
without God. Such are in (...) worse estate then Pagans and Jews; for living in
the house of God, they are strangers from God, and from the covenant of grace;
usurping the name of Christians, having indeed nothing to do with Christ.

Some of these like spiritual vagabonds, as Cain, excommunicate themselves
from Gods presence in the use of the means; or rather like devils, that will
have nothing to do with God, because they are loath to be tormented before
their time; they think every good Sermon, an arraigning of them, and therefore
keep out of reach.

Others will present themselves under the means, and carry some savor away
with them of what they hear, but it is only till they meet with the next
temptation, unto which they yield themselves presently slaves. These shroud
themselves under a general profession, as they did, who called themselves
Jews, and were nothing less. But alas, an empty title, will bring an empty
comfort at last. It was ^old comfort to the rich man in flames, Luke 16.
that Abraham called him son. Or to (...), that Christ called him friend. Or
^o the rebellious Jews, that God styles ^em his people. Such as our profession
(...), such will our comfort be. True profession of Religion, is another thing,
then most men take it to be; it is made (...) of the outward duty, and the
inward (...) too, which is indeed the life and ^ule of all. What the heart does
not (...) Religion, is not done. Quod cor non facit non fit.


God cares for no retainers, that will ^ely we are his livery, but serve
themselves. What have thou to do to take his (...) into thy mouth, and hate
to be refor^d? Psalm. 50.
Saul lived in the bosom of the Church, yet (being a cruel Tyrant) ^hen he
was in a desperate plunge, his ^tward profession did him no good. ^d therefore
when he was environed ^ith his enemies, he uttered this dole^ complaint, God
has sorsaken me, 1 Samuel 2^. 15.
(...) the Philistims are upon me: A pitti^ case; yet so will it be with all
those (...) rest in an outward profession, thinking it enough to complement
with God, when their hearts are not right within them. Such will at length be
forced to cry, Sickness is upon me, death is upon me, hell is before me, and
God has forsaken me. I would none of God heretofore, Now God will have none of
me. When David himself had offended God by numbering the people, then God
counted him but plain David, Go and say to David, etc. whereas 2 Samuel 24. 12.
before when he purposed to build a Temple, then go tell my servant David. 2 Samuel 7. 5
When the Israelites had set up an Idol, then God Fathers them on Moses, THY
people which thou have brought out of Egypt, Exodus 32. 7
he would not own them as at other times, then; they are MY people still
whilst they keep covenant. No care, no present comfort in this near relation.

The price of the Pearl is not known till all else be sold, and we see the
necessary use of it. So the worth of God in Christ is never discerned, till we
see our lost and undone condition without him, till conscience flies in our
faces, and dragge us to the brink of hell; then ^ver we taste how good the Lord
is, we (...) say, Blessed is the people whose God is (...) Lord. Heretofore I
have heard of (...) loving kindness, but that is not a ^sand part of what I
see and feel. ^e joy I now appreheud is unuttera^, unconceiveable.

Oh then when we have gotten our ^les possessed of God, let our study be, (...)
preserve our selves in his love, to ^ke close with him, that he may de^t to
abide with us, and never for^e us. How basely does the Scripture ^ak of
whatsoever stands in our way? (...) makes nothing of them. What is (...), but
vanity, and less then vanity? (...) nations, but as a drop of the bucket, as
Isay 40. 15
(...) dust of a balance; things not at all ^siderable. Flesh looks upon them
(...) through a multiplying glass, making ^m greater then they are; but faith
(...) God does) sees them as nothing.

This is such a blessed condition, as What preserves the sense of Gods favor.
(...) well challenge all our diligence in ^ouring to be assured of it; neither
is (...) to be attained or maintained without the strength and prime of our
care. I speak especially of, and in regard of the sense and comfort of it.
For, the sense of Gods favor will not be kept, without keeping him in our
best affections above all things in the world, without keeping of our hearts
always close and near to him, which cannot be without keeping a most narrow
watch over our loose and unsettled hearts, that are ready to stray from God, and
fall to the creature. It cannot be kept without exact and circumspect walking,
without constant self-denial, without a continual preparation of spirit, to
want and forsake any thing that God sees fit to take from us.

But what of all this? Can we cross our selves, or spend our labors to better
Our pains cannot be spent to better purpose, then in crossing of our selves
for God.
purpose? one sweet beam of Gods countenance will requite all this. We beat not
the air, we plow not in the sand, neither sow in a barren soil, God is no
barren wilderness. Nay, he never shows so much of himself, as in suffering,
and parting with any thing for him, and denying our selves of that, which we
think stands not with his will. Great persons require great observance. We can
deny our selves, and have men's persons in great admiration, for hope of some
advantage; and is any more willing and more able to advance ^s then the great
all-sufficient God? A Christian indeed, undergoes more troubles, takes more
pains (especially with his own heart) then others do. But what are these to
his gains? What return so rich, as trading with God? What comforts so great,
as these that ^re fetched from the fountain? One day spent in enjoying the
light of Gods countenance, is sweeter then a thousand without it. We see here,
when David was not only shut out from all comforts, but lay under many
grievances, what a fruitful use he makes of this, that God was his God. It
uphold^h his dejected, it stilleth his unquiet soul: it leads him to the
rock that was higher then he, and there stays him. It ^eth him with
comfortable hopes of better times to come. It sets him above himself, and all
troubles and fears whatsoever.

Therefore wait still in the use of means till God shine upon thee; yea,
though we know our sins in Christ are pardoned, yet there is something more
that a gracious heart waits for, that is, a good look from God, a further
enlargement of heart, and an establishing in grace. It was not enough for David
to have his sins pardoned, but to recover the joy of salvation, and freedom
of spirit. Therefore the soul should Psalm. 51.
always be in a waiting condition, even until it be filled with the fullness
of God, as much as it is capable of. Neither is it quiet alone, or comfort
alone, that the soul longs after, no, nor the favor of God alone, but a
gracious heart to walk worthy of God. It rests not whilst any thing remains,
that may breed the least strangeness betwixt God and us.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of experience, and Faith, and how to wait on God comfortably. Helps thereto.

[My God.]
THese words further imply a special experience, that David's soul had felt
of the goodness of God, he had found God distilling the comfort of his
goodness and truth through the promises, and he knew he should find God
again the same he was, if he put him in mind of his former gracious dealing.
His soul knew right well, how good God was, and he could seal to those truths
he had found comfort by, therefore he thus speaks to his soul, My soul, what
my soul, that have found God so good, so often, so many ways, thou My soul to
be discouraged, having God, and My God, with whom I have taken so much sweet
counsel, and felt so much comfort from, and found always heretofore to stick
so close unto me? Why should thou now be in such a case, as if God and thou
ha^ been strangers one to another. If we could treasure up experiments, the
former part of our life, would come in to help the latter, and the longer we
live, the richer in faith we should be. Even as in victories, every former
overthrow of an enemy, helps to obraine a succeeding victory. The use of a
sanctified memory, is to lose nothing that may help in time of need. He had
need be a well tried, and a known friend, upon whom we lay all our salvation
and comfort.

We ought to trust God upon other God to be trusted though never tried.
grounds, though we had never tried him: but when he helps our faith by
former experience, this should strengthen our confidence, and shore up our
spirits, and put us on to go more cheerfully to God, as to a tried friend. If
we were well read in the story of our own lives, we might have a divinity of
our own, drawn out of the observation of Gods particular dealing toward us;
we might say this and this truth, I dare venture upon, I have found it true, I
dare build all my happiness up^ it. As Paul, I know whom I have trust^d, I
have tried him, he never yet failed ^e, I am not now to learn how faithful ^e
is to those that are his. Every new experience is a new knowledge of God, and
should fit us for new encounters. If we have been good in former times, God
remembers the kindness of our Ier. 2. (...).
^uth: we should therefore remember the kindness of God even from our youth.
Evidence of what we have felt, helps our faith in that, which for the present
we feel not.

Though it be one thing to live by says and another thing to live by sight,
yet the more we see, and feel, and ^aste of God, the more we shall be led ^o
rely on him, for that which as yet we neither see nor feel: Because thou have
Psalm. 63. 7.
^een my helper (says David) therefore in ^be shadow of thy wings will I
rejoice. The time was Lord, when thou shewedst thy self a gracious Father to
me, and thou art unchangeable in thy nature, in ^hy love, and in thy gifts.

Yea, when there is no present evidence, but God shows himself (...) contrary
to us, yet a former taste (...) Gods goodness will enable to lay claim unto
him still. Gods concealing of himself is but a wise discipline for a time,
until we be enabled to bear the full revealing of himself unto us for ever.
In the mean time, though we have some sight and feeling of God, yet our
constant living is not by it: the evidence of that we see not, is that which
more constantly upholds the soul, then the evidence of any thing we see or
feel.

Yea, though our experience by reason of our not minding of it in trouble,
seems many times to stand us in no stead, but we fare as if God had never
looked in mercy upon us: Yet (even here) some virtue remains of former sense,
which with the present spirit of faith, helps us to look upon God as ours. As
we have a present strength from food received, and digested before; vessels
are something the better for that liquor they keep not, but runs through them.

But if experience should wholly fail, ^ere is such a divine power in faith, as
Faith alo^ a sufficient support.
(...) very little beam of it, having no other help then a naked promise, will
uphold the soul; howsoever we must neglect no help, for God often suspends his
comfort, till we have searched all our helps. Though we see no light, yet we
ought to search alcrevises for light, and rejoice in the least beam of light,
Cum omnium incertus sit eventus, ad ^a accedimus de quibus (...) sperandum esse
credimus. Sen.
that we may see day by. It is the nature of true faith, to search and pry into
every corner; and if after all nothing appears, then it casts it self upon
God, as in the first conversion, when it had nothing to look upon, but the
offer of free mercy. If at that time without former experience, we did trust
God, Why not now, when we have forgotten our experience? the chief grounds of
trusting God, are always the same, whether we feel, or feel not; nay, though
for the present we feel the contrary, faith will never leave wrestling, till
it has gotten a blessing. When faith is driven to work alone, having nothing
but God, and his bare promise to rely upon, then God thinks it lies upon his
credit to show himself as a God unto us. Gods power in creating light out of
darkness, is never more exalted, then when a guilty soul is lifted up by God to
look for mercy, even when he seems armed with justice, to execute vengeance
upon him; then the The conformity of the soul to Christ.
soul is brought to a near conformity unto Christ, who 1. when he had the
guilt of the sins of the whole world upon 1.
him. 2. When he was forsaken, and 2.
that after he had enjoyed the sweetest communion with his Father that ever
creature could do. And not only so, but 3. felt the weight of Gods just
displeasure against sin; and 4. was abased lower 3.
then ever any creature was, yet still he 4.
held fast God, as his God.

In earthly matters, if we have a Title to any thing by gift, contract,
inheritance, or howsoever, we will not be wrangled out of our right. And
shall we not maintain our right in God, against all the tricks and cavils of
Satan, and our own hearts? We must labor to have something, that we may show
that we are within the covenant. If we be never (...) little entered into the
covenant, we are ^e. And herein lies the special comfort (...) sincerity, that
though our grace be ^ttle, yet it is of the right stamp, and ^hews us, that
we are servants, and sons, though unworthy to be so. Here a little ^uth will
go far. Hence it is that the ^aints in all their extremities, still alledg
something, that shows that they are within the covenant, We are thy children,
thy people, and thy servants, etc. God is mindful of his covenant, but is well
pleased, that we should mind him of it too; and mind it our selves to make use
of it, as David does here. He knew if he could bring His soul to His God, all
would be quiet.

God is so ready to mercy, that he delights in it, and delights in Christ,
through whom he may show mercy notwithstanding his justice, as being fully
satisfied in Christ. Mercy is his name that he will be known by. It is his
glory which we behold in the face of Christ, who is nothing but grace and mercy
it self. Nay, he plead^ reasons for mercy, even from the sinfulness and
misery of his creature, and maintains his own mercy against all the wrangling
cavills of flesh and blood, that would put mercy from them, and hearken more
willingly to Satan's objections, then Gods arguments, till at length God
subdues their spirits so far, as they become ashamed for standing out so long
against him. How ready will God be to show mercy to us when we seek it, that
thus presses upon us, when we seem to refuse it? If God should take advantage
of our way wardnesse, what would become of us? Satan's course is to discourage
those that God would have encouraged, and to encourage those whom God never
speaks peace unto, and he thinks to gain both ways. Our care therefore
should be, when we resolve upon Gods ways, to labor that no discouragement
fasten upon us, seeing God and his word speak all comfort to us.

And because the best of a Christian is to come, we should raise up our spirits
to wait upon God, for that mercy which is yet to come. All inferior waitings
for good things here, do but ^aine us up in the comfortable expe^ation of the
maine.

This waiting on God, requires a great Waiting difficult.
strength of grace, by reason not only (...) of the excellency of the things
wai^ed 1.
for, (which are far beyond any thing we can hope for in the world.) ^ut 2.
in regard of the long day which 2.
God takes before he performs his promise, and 3. from thence the
tediousness 3.
of delay. 4. The many troubles 4.
of life in our way. 5. The great 5.
apposition we meet with in the world. (...). and scandalls often times even from
6.
them that are in great esteem for Religion. 7. together with the
untoward^esse of our nature in being ready to be 7.
put off by the least discouragement. In these respects there must be more then
(...) humane spirit to hold up the soul, ^d carry it along to the end of that
which we wait for.

But if God be our God, that love which engaged him to bind himself to us in
precious promises; will furnish (...) likewise with grace needful, till we be
possessed of them. He will give us leave to depend upon him both for
happiness, and all sanctifying and quieting graces, which may support the
soul, till it come to its perfect rest in God. For God so quiets the hearts of
his children, as withal, he makes them better, and fitter for that which he
provides for them, grace and peace go together; Our God is the God of grace
and peace, of such graces as breed peace.

1. As he is a God of love, nay love it self to us, so a taste of his love,
raising 1.
up our love is better then wine, full of nothing but encouragement; it will
fetch up a soul from the deepest discouragement: this grace quickneth all
other graces, it has so much spirits in it as will sweeten all conditions.
Love inables to wait, as Jacob for Lea seven Genesis 39.
years. Nothing is hard to love; it caries all the powers of the soul with it.

2. As he is a God of hope, so by this grace as an anchor fastened in heaven 2.
within the veil, he stays the soul; that though as a Ship at Anchor, it
may be tossed and moved, yet not removed from its station. This hope as cork,
will ^eep the soul (though in some heaviness) from sinking, and as an Helmet
Ephesians. 6.
^eare off the blows that they endanger not our life.

3. As God is a God of hope, so by 3.
hope of patience, which is a grace wher^y the soul resigneth up it self to
God ^n humble submission to his will, because he is our God, as David in
extremity comforted himself in the Lord his God. Patience breeds comfort,
because it brings experience with it of Gods ow^ing of us to be His. The soul
shod and Ephesians. 6.
^enced with this, is prepared against all ^bs and thorns in our way, so as
we ^e kept from taking offense. All troubles we suffer, do but help patience
to its perfect work, by subduing the unbroken Romans 53.
sturdinesse of our spirits, when we feel by experience, we get but more
blows, by standing out against God.

4. The Spirit of God (likewise) is a spirit of meekness, whereby though the 4.
^ul be sensible of evil, yet it mode^tes such distempers, as would otherwise
rob a man of himself; and together with patience keeps the soul in
possession of it self. It stays murmurings and frettings against God or man.
It sets and keeps the soul in tune. It is that which God (as he works so
he) much delights in, and sets a price upon it, as the chief ornament of the
soul. The Zeph. 2. 3.
meek of the earth seek God, and are hid in the day of his wrath: whereas high
spirits that compass themselves with pride as with a chain, thinking to set
out Psalm. 73. 6.
themselves by that which is their shame, are looked upon by God a far off.
Meek persons will bow, when others break; they are raised when others are
plucked down, and stand when others that mount upon the wings of vanity fall;
these prevail by yielding, and are Lords of themselves, and other things Mat.
5. 5.
else, more then other unquiet spirited men: the blessings of heaven and earth
attend on these.

5. So likewise contentedness with our estate, is needful for a waiting
condition, 5.
and this we have in Our God being able to give the soul full satisfaction. For
outward things God knows ^ow to diet us; If our condition be not (...) our
mind, he will bring our mind (...) our condition. If the spirit be too ^gge
for the condition, it is never qui^, therefore God will level both. Those
wants be well supplied that are made up with contentedness, and with ^hes of a
higher kind. If the Lord ^e our Shepherd, we can want nothing Psalm. 23.
This lifts the weary hands and feeble Heb. 12. 12
^ees, even under chastisement, wherein though the soul mourns in the sense
of Gods displeasure, yet it rejoices in his Fatherly care.

6. But patience and contentment are ^o low a condition for the soul to rest 6.
(...), therefore the spirit of God raises it up to a spiritual enlargement
of joy. So much joy, so much light, and so much hight, so much scattering of
darkness of spirit. We see in nature how a little light will prevail over the
thickest clouds of darkness, a little fire wastes a great ^eale of dross. The
knowledge of God to be our God, brings such a light of joy into the soul, as
drives out^ dark uncomfortable conceits; this light makes lightsome. If the
light of knowledge alone makes bold, much more the light of joy arising from
our communion and interest in God. How can we enjoy God, and not joy in him? A
soul truly cheerful rejoices that God whom it loves, should think it
worthy to endure any thing for him. This joy often arises to a spirit of
glory, even in matter of outward abasement; if the trouble accompanied with
disgrace continue, the spirit of glory rests upon us, and it will rest so long,
until it make us more then Conquerours, even then when we seem conquered: for
not only the cause, but the spirit rises higher, the more the enemies labor
to keep it under, as we see in Stephen. Acts 7.


With this joy goes a spirit of courage and confidence. What can daunt that
soul, which in the greatest troubles has made the great God to be its own?
Such a spirit dares bid defiance to all opposite power, setting the soul above
the world, having a spirit larger and higher then the world, and seeing all
(but God) beneath it, as being in heaven already in its head. After Moses and
Micah had seen God in his favor to them, how little did they regard the angry
countenances of those mighty Princes that were in their times, the terrors of
the world? The courage of a Christian is not only against sensible danger, and
of flesh and blood, but against principalities, and powers of darkness,
against the whole kingdom of Satan, the god of the world, whom he knows
shortly shall be trodden under his feet. Satan and his may for a time exercise
Romans 16. 20.
us, but they cannot hurt us. True believers are so many Kings and Queens, so
many Conquerours over that which others are slaves to: they can overcome
themselves in revenge, they can despise those things that the world admires,
and see an excellency in that which the world sets light by, they can set upon
spiritual duties, which the world cannot tell how to go about, and endure
that which others tremble to think of, and that upon wise reasons, and a sound
foundation, they can put off themselves, and be content to be nothing, so their
God may appear the greater, and dare undertake and undergo any thing for the
glory of their God. This courage of Christians among the Heathens Tertul^in
Apologet.
was counted obstinacy, but they knew not the power of the spirit of Christ in
his, which is ever strongest, when they are weakest in themselves, they knew
not the privy armor of proof that Christians had about their hearts, and
thereupon counted their courage to be obstinacy.

Some think the Martyrs were too prodigal of their blood, and that they might
have been better advised; but such are unacquainted with the force of the love
of God kindled in the heart of his child, which makes him set such a high
price upon Christ and his truth, that he counts not his life dear unto him;
Act. 20. 24.
He knows he is not his own, but has given up himself to Christ, and
therefore all that is his, yea if he had more lives to give for Christ, he
should have them. He knows he shall be no looser by it. He knows it is not a
loss of his life, but an exchange for a better.

We see the creatures that are under us, will be courageous in the eye of their
Masters, that are of a superior nature above them, and shall not a Christian
be courageous in the presence of his great Lord and Master, who is present with
him, about him, and in him? undoubtedly he that has seen God once in the
face of Christ, dares look the grimmest creature in the face, yea death it
self under any shape. The fear of all things flies before such a soul. Only
a Christian is not ashamed of his confidence. Why should not a Christian be as
bold for his God, as others are for the base gods they make to themselves?

7. Besides a spirit of courage (for 7.
establishing the soul) is required a spirit of constancy, whereby the soul
is steeled and preserved immovable in all conditions, whether present or to
come, and is not changed in changes. And why? but because the spirit knows that
God on whom it rests is unchangeable. We our selves are as quicksilver
unsettled and moveable, till the spirit of constancy fix us. We see David sets
out God in glorious terms, borrowed from all that is strong in the creature,
to show that he had great reason to be constant, and cleaving to him, He is my
Psalm. 18.
rock, my Buckler, the horn of my salvation, my high Tower, etc. God is a rock
so deep, that no floods can undermine, so high, that no waves can reach though
they rise never so high, and rage never so much. When we stand upon this rock
that is higher then we, we may over-looke all waves, swelling, and foaming,
and breaking themselves, but not hurting us. And thereupon may triumphantly
conclude with the Apostle, That neither height, nor depth shall ever Romans 8. 39
separate us from the love of God. Whatsoever is in the creature he found in
his God, and more abundant; the soul cannot with an eye of faith look upon
God in Christ, but it will be in its degree as God is quiet and constant, the
spirit aims at such a condition, as it beholds in God toward it self.

This constancy is upheld by endeavoring to keep a constant sight of God, for
want of which it often fares with us, like men, that having a City or Tower in
their eye, passing through uneven grounds, hills and dales, sometimes get the
sight thereof, sometimes lose it, and sometimes recover it again, though the
Tower be still where it was, and they nearer to it the^ they were at first. So
it is often with our uneven spirits; when once we have a sight of God, upon any
present discouragement, we let fall our spirits, and lose the sight of him,
until by an eye of faith we recover it again, and see him still to be where
he was at first. The cherishing of passions take away the sight of God, as
clouds take away the sight of the Sun, though the Sun be still where it was,
and shines as much as ever it did. We use to say, when the body of the Moon is
betwixt the Sun and us, that the Sun is eclipsed, when indeed not the Sun
but the earth is darkened, the Sun loses not one of its glorious beams. God is
often near us, as he was unto Jacob, and we are not aware of it. God was near
the holy man Asaph, when he thought him far off. I am continually Psalm. 73. 27
with thee (says he) thou hold me by my right hand. Mary in her weeping
passion could not see Christ before her, he seemed a stranger unto her. So
long as we can keep our eye upon God, we are above the reach of sin or any
spiritual danger.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of confirming this trust in God. Seek it of God himself. Sins hinder not:
nor Satan. Conclusion and Soliloquie.

1.
BUt to return to the drawing out of our trust by waiting. Our estate in this
world is still to wait, and happy it is that we have so great things to wait
for; but our comfort is, that we have not only a furniture of graces, one 2
Pet. 1. 5.
strengthening another as stones in an arch, but likewise GOD vouchsafes some
drops of the sweetness of the things we wait for, both to increase our
desire of those good things, as likewise to enable us more comfortably to wait
for them. And though we should die waiting, only cleaving to the promise with
little or no taste of the good promised; yet this might comfort us, that there
is a life to come, that is a life of sight and sense, and not only of taste
but of fullness, and that for evermore. Psalm. 16. ult.
Our condition here is to live by faith and not by sight, only to make our
living by faith more lively, it pleases God when he sees fit, to increase our
earnest of that we look for. Even here God waytes to be gracious to those that
wait for him. And in heaven Christ Esaias 30. 18
waytes for us, we art part of his fullness; Ephesians. 1. 23. Joh. 17. 24.
it is part of his joy that we shall be where he is, he will not therefore be
long without us. The blessed Angels and Saints in heaven wait for us.
Therefore let us be content as strangers, to wait a while till we come home,
and then we shall be for ever with the Lord; there is our eternal rest, where
we shall enjoy both our God and our selves in perfect happiness, being as
without need, so without desire of the least change. When the time of our
departure thither comes, then we may say as David, Enter now my soul into thy
rest. This is the rest which remains for Gods Psalm. 116. Heb. 49.
people, that is worth the waiting for, when we shall rest from all labor of
sin and sorrow, and lay our heads in the bosom of Christ for ever. Rev. 14.


It stands us therefore upon to get this great Charter more and more confirmed
to us (that God is our God) for it is of everlasting use unto us. It first
begins at our entering into covenant with God, and continues not only unto
death, but enters into heaven with us. As it is our heaven upon earth to enjoy
God as ours, so it is the very heaven of heaven, that there we shall for ever
behold him, and have communion with him.

The degrees of manifesting this propriety in God are diverse, rising one upon
Degrees of our propriety in God. Pro. 4. 18.
another, as the light cleares up by little and little till it comes to a
perfect day. 1. As the ground of all the rest, we apprehend 1.
God to be a God of some peculiar persons, as favorites above others. 2. From
hence is stirred up in the soul 2.
a restless desire, that God would discover himself so to it, as he does to
those that are his, that he would visit our souls with the salvation of his
chosen. 3. Hence follows a putting of the soul 3.
upon God, an adventuring it self on his mercy. 4. Upon this, God when he
sees fit, discovers by his spirit that he 4.
is Ours; 5. Whence follows a dependence 5.
on him as ours, for all things that may carry us on in the way to heaven. 6.
Courage and boldness in setting 6.
our selves against whatsoever may oppose us in the way, As the three young men
in Daniel, Our God can deliver Dan. 3. So Psa. 115. 3.
us if he will. Our God is in heaven, etc. 7. After which springs a sweet
spiritual security, whereby the soul is freed 7.
from slavish fears, and glories in God as Ours in all conditions. And this
is termed by the Apostle, not only assurance, but the riches of assurance. Yet
Col. 2. 2.
this is not so clear, and full as it shall be in heaven, because some clouds
may after arise out of the remainder of corruption, which may something
over-cast this assurance, until the light of Gods countenance in heaven for
ever scatters all.

There being so great happiness in this neerenesse betwixt God and us, no
wonder if Satan labor to hinder the same, by interposing the guilt and
heinousness of our sins, which he knows of themselves will work a
separation: But these upon our first serious thought of returning, will be
removed. As they could not hinder our meeting with God, so they may cause a
strangeness for a time but not a parting, a hiding of Gods countenance, but
not a banishing of us from it. Peter had denied Christ, and the rest of the
Apostles had left him all alone. Yet our Savior after his Resurrection forgets
all former unkindnesses, he did not so much as object it to them, but sends
Mary, who her self had been a great sinner, as an Apostle John 20.
to the Apostles, and that presently to tell them that he was risen, his care
would have no delay. He knew they were in great heaviness for their
unkindnesse. Though he was now entered into the first degree of his glory, yet
we see his glory made him not forget his poor Disciples. Above all he was most
careful of Peter, as deeper in sin then the rest, and therefore deeper in
sorrow. Go tell Peter, he needs most comfort. But what is the message? that I
ascend not to my Father alone, but to your Father, not to my God only, but to
Your God.

And shall not we be bold to say so after Christ has taught us, and put this
claim into our mouths? If once we let this hold go, then Satan has us
where he would, every little cross then dejects us. Satan may darken the joy
of our salvation, but not take away the God of our salvation. David after his
crying sin of murder prays, Restore unto me the Joy of thy salvation, this
he had lost; but yet in the same Psalm he Psalm. 51.
prays, Deliver me from blood O God, thou God of my salvation; therefore
whatsoever sense, reason, temptation, the law, or guilt upon conscience shall
say, Nay however God himself, by his strange carriage to us may seem to be,
yet let us cast our selves upon him, and not suffer this plea to be wrung from
us, but shut our eyes to all, and look upon God All-gracious and
All-sufficient, who is the Father, the begetter of comfort, the God the Creator
of consolation, not only of things that may comfort, but 2 Cor. 1. 3.
of the comfort it self conveied through these unto us. Who is a God like unto
our God, that passes by the sins of the remnant Mic. 7. 18.
of his people. This should not be thought on without admiration, and indeed
there is nothing so much deserves our wonderment as such mercy, of such a God,
to such as we.

Since God has avouched us to be his peculiar people, let us avouch him; and
Deu. 26. 18
since he has past his word for us, let us pass our words for him that we
will be his, and stand for him, and to our power advance his cause. Thus David
out of an enlarged spirit says, Thou art my God, and I will praise thee, thou
art MY Ps. 119. 28
God, and I will exalt thee. Whatsoever we engage for God, we are sure to be
gainers by. The true Christian is the wisest Merchant, and makes the best
adventure. He may stay long, but is sure of a safe and a rich return. A godly
man is most wise for himself. We enter on Religion, upon these terms to part
with our selves, and all, when God shall call for it.

. 2.
God much rejoices in sinners converted, as monuments of his mercy, and
because the remembrance of their Ex ipso dolor suo co^puncti, inardescunt in
amore dei. Damna praecedentia lucris sequentibus compensant. Greg.
former sins, whers them on to be more earnest in his service, especially
after they have felt the sense of Gods love, they even burn with a holy desire
of honoring him, whom before they dishonored, and stand not upon doing or
suffering any thing for him, but cheerfully embrace all occasions of
expressing obedience. God has more work from them then from others; why then
should any be discouraged?

Neither is it sins after our conversion, that nullify this claim of God to
be Ours. For this is the grand difference betwixt the two covenants, that now
God will be merciful to our sins, if our hearts by faith be sprinkled with
the Heb. 10. 22.
blood of Christ. Though one sin was enough to bring condemnation, yet the
free gift of grace in Christ, is of many offenses unto justification. And we
have a sure ground for this; for the righteousness of Christ is Gods
righteousness, and God will thus glorify it, that it shall stand good to
those that by faith apply it against their daily sins, even till at once we
cease both to live, and sin. For this very end was the Son of God willingly
made sin, that we might be freed from the same. And if all our sins laid upon
Christ could not take away Gods love from him, shall they take away Gods love
from us, when by Christ's blood our souls are purged from them?

O mercy of all mercies, that when we were once his, and gave away our selves
for nothing, and so became neither his, nor our own, that then he would
vouchsafe to become ours, and make us his by such a way, as all the Angels in
heaven stand wondering at, even his Sons not only taking our nature and
miserable condition, but our (...) upon him, that that being done away, we
might through Christ have boldness with God as ours, who is now in heaven
appearing there for us, until he brings us home to himself, and presents us
to his Father for his for ever.

Think not then only that we are Gods and he Ours, but from what love and by
what glorious means this was brought to pass; What can possibly disable this
claim, when God for this end has founded a covenant of peace so strongly in
Christ, that sin it self cannot disanull it? Christ was therefore manifest,
that he might destroy this greatest 1 Ioh. 3. 5. 8.
work of the devil. Forgiveness of sins now is one chief part of our
portion in God. It is good therefore not to pore and plod so much upon sin
and vileness by it, as to forget that mercy that rejoices over judgment. If
we once be Gods, though we drink this deadly poison, it shall not hurt us.
God will Mar. 16. 18
make a medicine, an antidote of it; and for all other evils the fruit of them
is by Gods sanctifying the same, the taking away sin out of our natures; so
that lesser evils are sent to take away the greater. If God could not overruled
evils to his own ends, he would never suffer them.

. 3.
I have stood the longer upon this, because it is the one thing needful, the
one thing we should desire, that this one God, in whom, and from whom is all
good, should be ours. All promises of all good in the new covenant, spring
first from this, that God will be ours, and we shall be his. What can we have
more? Ier. 32.
and what is in the world less that will content us long, or stand us in any
stead, especially at that time when all must be taken from us? Let us put up
all our desires for all things we stand in need of, in this right we have to
God in Christ; who has brought God and us together; he can deny us nothing,
that has not denied us himself. If he be moved from hence to do us good,
that we are his, Let us be moved to fetch all good from him, on the same right
that he is ours.

The persuasion of this will free us from all pusillanimity, lowliness, and
narrowness of spirit, when we shall think that nothing can hurt us, but it
must break through God first. If God give quietness, who shall make trouble?
Job 34. 29
If God be with us, who can be against us? This is that which puts comfort into
all other comforts, that makes any burden light: This is always ready for
all purposes: Our God is a present, and a seasonable help. All evils are at
his command to be gone, and all comforts at his command to come. It is but go
comfort, go peace to such a man's heart, cheer him, raise him; Go salvation,
rescue such and such a soul in distress. So said and so done presently. Nay,
with reverence be it spoken, so far does God pass over himself unto us,
that he is content himself to be commanded by us. Concerning the work of my
hands command you me: lay Isay 45. 11
the care and charge of that upon me. He is content to be out-wrastled, and
over-powred by a spirit of says, as in Jacob, and the woman of Canaan, to be
as it were at our service. He would not have us want any thing wherein he is
able to help us. And what is there wherein God cannot help us? If Christians
knew the power they have in heaven and earth, what were able to stand against
them? What wonder is it if faith overcome the world, if it overcomes him that
made the world? that faith should be Almighty, that has the Almighty
himself, ready to use all his power for the good of them to whom he has given
the power of himself unto? Having therefore such a living fountain to draw
from, such a center to rest in, having all in one, and that one Ours; why
should we knock Tutius and jucundius loquor ad meum Jesum quam ad aliquem
sanctorum dei, etc. Quod ego sum fieri dignatus est Deus, (...)
at any other door? we may go boldly to God now, as made ours, being bone of
our bone, and flesh of our flesh. We may go more comfortably to God, then to
any Angel or Saint. God in the second person has vouchsafed to take our
nature upon him, but not that of Angels. Our God, and our Man, our God-Man is
ascended into the high Court of heaven factus est quod angeli. Ad c^riam Dei
sui Dei tui, praecessit Deus tuns homo tuns, tunica tua indutus illic assidue
pro nobis interpellet. Aug. Heb. 5. 1.
to his and our God, clothed with our nature. Is there any more able and
willing to plead our cause, or to whom we may trust businesses with then he,
who is in heaven for all things for us, appertaining to God.

It should therefore be the chief care of a Christian, upon knowledge of what
he stands in need of, to know where to supply all. It should raise up a holy
shame and indignation in us, that there should be so much in God, who is so
near unto us in Christ, and we make so little use of him. What good can any
thing do us if we use it not? God is ours to use, and yet men will rather use
shifts and unhallowed policies, then be beholding to God, who thinks himself
never more honored by us, then when we make use of him. If we believe any
thing will do us good, we naturally make out for the obtaining of it, If we
believe any thing will hurt us, we study to decline it. And certain it is if
we believed that so much good were in God, we would then apply our selves to
him, and him to our selves; whatsoever virtue is in any thing, it is conveyed
by application and touching of it; that whereby we touch God, is our faith,
which never touches him, but it draws virtue from him; upon the first touch
of faith, spiritual life is begun. Its a bastard in nature, to believe any
thing can work upon another without spiritual or bodily touch. And it is a
Monster in Religion, to believe that any saving good will issue from God, if we
turn from him, and shut him out, and our hearts be unwilling. Where unbeleefe
is, it binds up his power. Where faith is, there it is between the soul and
God, (as betwixt the iron and the Loadstone) a present closing and drawing of
one to the other. This is the beginning of eternal life, so to know God the
Father, and his Son Christ, as thereby to embrace John 17. 4.
him with the arms of faith and love, as Ours, by the best title he can make
us, who is truth it self.

Since then our happiness lies (out of our selves) in God, we should go out
of our selves for it, and first get into Christ, and so unto God in him; and
then labor by the spirit of the Father and the Son, to maintain
acquaintance with both, that so God may be Ours, not only in covenant, but in
Com^anion, harkening what he will say to us, and opening our spirits,
disclosing our wants, consulting and advising in all our distresses with him.
By keeping this acquaintance with God, peace, and Job 22. 21
all good is conveyed to us.

Thereafter as we maintain this communion further with him, we out of love
study to please him, by exact walking according to his commands; then we shall
feel increase of peace as our care increases, then he will come, and s^p with
us, and be free in his refreshing of us. Then he will show himself more and
more to us, and manifest still a further degree of presence in joy and
strength, until communion in grace, ends in communion in glory.

But we must remember (as David does here) to desire and delight in God
himself, more then in any thing that is Gods: It was a sign of S. Paul's pure
love to the Corinthians, when he said, I seek not yours, but you. We should
seek for no blessing of God so much as for himself.

What is there in the world of equal goodness to draw us away from our God? If
to preserve the dearest thing we have in the world, we break with God, God
will take away the comfort we look to have by it, and it will prove but a dead
contentment, if not a torment to us. Whereas if we care to preserve communion
with God, we shall be sure to find in him whatsoever we deny for him, honor,
riches, pleasures, friends, all; so much the sweeter, by how much we have them
more immediately from the spring head. We shall never find God to be our God
more, then when for making of him to be so, we suffer any thing for his sake.
We enjoy never more of him then then.

At the first we may seek to him, as rich to supply our wants, as a Physician
to cure our souls and bodies, but here we must not rest till we come to
rejoice in him as our friend, and from thence rise to an admiration of him for
his own excellencies, that being so high in himself, out of his goodness
would stoop low to us. And we should delight in the meditation of him, not
only as good to us, but as good in himself; because goodness of bounty
springs from goodness of disposition, he does good because he is good.

A natural man delights more in Gods gifts, then in his grace. If he desires
grace, it is to grace himself, not as grace, making him like unto God, and
issuing from the first grace the free favor of God; by which means men Dona
Dei sine Deo.
come to have the gifts of God without God himself. But alas, what are all
other goods without the chief good? they are but as flowers, which are long in
planting, in cherishing and growing, but short in enjoying the sweetness of
them. David here joys in God himself, he cares for nothing in the world, but
what he may have with his favor, and what ever else he desires, he desires
only that he may have the better ground from thence to praise his God.

. 4.
The sum of all is this, The state of Gods dear children in this world, is
to be cast into variety of conditions, wherein they consisting of nature,
flesh, and spirit, every principle has its own and proper working. They are
sensible as flesh and blood, they are sensible to discouragement as sinful
flesh and blood; but they recover themselves as having a higher principle (Gods
spirit) above flesh and blood in them.

In this conflicting state, every principle laboring to maintain it self, at
length by help of the spirit, backing and strengthening his own work, grace
gets the better, keeping nature within bounds, and suppressing corruption. And
this the soul (so far as it is spiritual) does by gathering it self to it
self, and by reasoning the case so far, till it concludes, and joins upon
this issue, that the only way to attain sound peace, is (when all other
means fail) to trust in God. And thereupon he lays a charge upon his soul
so to do, is being a course grounded upon the highest reason, even the
unchangeable goodness of God, who out of the riches of his mercy, having
chosen a people in this world, which should be to the glory of his mercy, will
give them matter of setting forth his praise, in showing some token of good
upon them, as being those on whom he has fixed his love, and to whom he will
appear not only a Savior, but salvation it self. Nothing but salvation; as
the Sun is nothing but light, so whatsoever proceeds from him to them, tends
to further salvation. All his ways toward them lead to that; which ways of
his, though for a time they are secret, and not easily found out, yet at length
God will be wonderful in them to the admiration of his enemies themselves, who
shall be forced to say, God has done great things for them; and all from this
ground, that God is our God in covenant. Which words are a stearne that rule
and guide the whole text.

For why should we not be disquieted when we are disquieted? Why should we not
be cast down when we are cast down? Why should we trust in God as a Savior?
but that he is [our God,] making himself so to us in his choicest favors:
doing that for us, which none else can do, and which he does to none else that
are not his in a gracious manner. This blessed interest and intercourse betwixt
Gods spirit and our spirits, is the hindge upon which all turns: without this,
no comfort is comfortable; with this, no trouble can be very trouble some.

Without this assurance there is little comfort in Soliloquies; unless, when
we speak to our selves, we can speak to God as ours. For in desperate cases,
our soul can say nothing to it self, to still it self, unless it be
suggested by God; Discouragements will appear greater to the soul then any
comfort, unless God comes in as ours.

See therefore David's art, he demands of himself why he was so cast down?
The cause was apparent, because there was troubles without, and terrors
within, and none to comfort, Well, grant this says the spirit of God
Soliloquie.
in him (as the worst must be granted) yet says the Spirit, Trust in God.

So I have.

Why then, wait in trusting? Light is sown for the righteous, it comes not
upon the sudden, we must not think to sow and reap both at once. If trouble
be lengthened, lengthen thy patience.

What good will come of this?

God will wait to do thee that good, for which thou shall praise him; he will
deal so graciously with thee, as he will deserve thy praise, he will show thee
his salvation. And new favors will stir thee up to sing new songs: every new
recovery of our selves or friends, is as it were a new life, and ministers new
matter of praise. And upon offering this sacrifice of praise, the heart is
further enlarged to pray for fresh blessings. We are never fitter to pray,
then after praise.

But in the mean time I hang down my head, whilst mine enemies carry
themselves highly, and my friends stand aloof.

God in his own time (which is best for thee) will be the salvation of thy
countenance; he will compass thee about with songs of deliverance, and make it
appear at last, that he has care of thee.

But why then does God appear as a stranger to me?

That thou should follow after him with the stronger faith and prayer, he
withdrawes himself, that thou should be the more earnest in seeking after
him. God speaks the sweetest comfort to the heart in the wilderness. Happily
thou art not yet low enough, nor purged enough. Thy affections are not
thoroughly crucified to the world, and therefore it will not yet appear that it
is Gods good will to deliver thee. Were thou a fit subject of mercy, God would
bestow it on thee.

But what ground have thou to build thy self so strongly upon God?

He has offered, and made himself to be [My God,] and so has showed himself
in former times; And I have made him My God, by yielding him his Sovereignty in
my heart. Besides the present evidence of his blessed spirit, clearing the
same, and many peculiar tokens of his love, which I daily do enjoy; though
sometimes the beams of his favor are eclipsed. Those that are Gods, besides
their interest and right in him, have often a sense of the same even in this
life, as a fore-taste of that which is to come. To the seal of grace stamped
upon their hearts, God super-adds a fresh seal of joy and comfort, by the
presence and witness of his Spirit. And shows likewise some outward token for
good upon them, whereby he makes it appear, that he has set a part him that
is godly for himself, Psalm. 4. 3.
as his own.

Thus we see that discussing of objections in the consistory of the soul,
settles the soul at last. Faith at length silencing all risings to the
contrary. All motion tends to rest, and ends in it; God is the center and
resting place of the soul, and here David takes up his rest, and so let us.
Then whatsoever times come, we are sure of a hiding place and Sanctuary.

FINIS.
HAB. 3. 17. Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be
in the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield
no meat, etc. yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation. PSALM. 91. 1. 2. He that dwells in the secret place of the most
high, shall lodge under the shadow of the Almighty. I will say of the Lord, He
is my refuge, and my fortress; My God in him will I trust. PSALM. 73. 26. My
strength and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever. An Alphabeticall Table of chief things in the foregoing
Treatise.
A.
ACtions of man: what are the principles of them. Page 221 Admire Gods love.
479 Adventure of faith makes a rich return. 490 Affections their conflict one
with another. 79. How to be ordered, 104. In case of Gods dishonor no
affection is excessive. 106 Affections, why they do not always follow the
judgment, 377. God most to be affected. 498 Appearance of salvation in the
countenance: whence, and why. 469 Application of mercy in particular;
necessary: reasons, 482. In the wicked it is a lie, 485. It is no easy matter
to say, My God, 486. When it is right, 495. A shame not to improve it. 511
Arguments for faith to come to God. 418 Art in bearing of troubles. 64 Art in
misery to think of matter of joy. 429 Assurance of Gods favor: what we should
do in the want thereof. 441
B
Back faith with strong reasons and arguments. 414 Beauty of a well-ordered
soul. 135 Beauty of Christians works performed in season. 428 Bilneyes offense
at a Preacher. 362 Blasphemy: temptations of blasphemy, and how checked. 350
Breach of inward peace: still look at thy self therein. 149 Books all
written to amend the book of conscience. 67
C
Casting down, disquiets: why, 44. Remedies against casting down. 46 Censure
not Christians distempered: dangerous so to do. 40 Change of nature, changes
all. 187 Changes must be forethought of. 128 Caution in fore-casting such
changes. 120. Direrections for this fore-thinking of troubles. 121 Character of
a good soul. 378 Christ is salvation clothed in man's flesh. 465 Christian
Calling: what is the true ability to it: grace, not gifts only. 405.
Particular Calling: directions for it. 408 Combats spiritual, how discerned
from that of common grace and light. 83 Comfort in the Churches troubles, 411.
and 471. Comfort amiss sought in sanctification, 28. Yet to have and hold
comfort, grow up in holiness. 30 Comforters in way of humanity, many, few in
way of Christianity, 227. Graces necessary in a good Comforter, 230. Method of
comforting. 231. A sin, not to comfort the afflicted, 235. How comfort
tendered does no good: miscarriages therein. 238 Communion with God to be
sought, and how Christians have continual ground of it. 429 Communion of
friends, in watching over one another. 2^5. In comforting one another. 218
Complain of thy self, not of God, nor others. 74 Concupiscence not severely
censured by Papists. 153 Condition of life: none wherein we may not exercise
some grace. 146 A man can be in no condition, wherein God is at a loss and
cannot help him. 265 Confidence in our selves, how chased away. 243 Confidence
for mercies: warranted to us as well as to David, or others. 431 Conflict of
grace and corruption much cast us down: 386. Should make us trust in God the
more. 387 Conflicts in man's soul: kinds and degrees of them. 78 Conscience
not clear brings disquietnesse. 30 Constancy, how it quiets the spirit.
Consideration: the best objects of it. 186 Contentment, to be framed to our
selves, and how. 123. It is a special means of quieting the soul. Ibid.
Continuance of sin: or sins of continuance dangerous. 359. And how to be
dealt withal. 360 Corruption how far curbed or repressed by God. 171
Corruptions remaining in an holy heart are natural, they would not be
controlled. 150, And what follows. 157 Courage, a means to stablish the
soul. Court of conscience in man, 51. Why we are so backward to keep this
Court. 57
D
Deal with thy self in all afflictions, to get quietness. 115 Death: comfort
in the hour of it. 402. In the estate after death. 403 Delay not the praising
of God. 446 Defects in life rise from defects in trust. 333 There is a supply
for all our defects. 391 Deordination of nature to be looked upon, and how. 166.
Most needful so to do. 168 Denial of our selves necessary; wherein. 140.
Notes of it. 142 Desertion; then Christ should be put between God and us. 509
Despair of mercy; no cause of it. 565 Desperation may be, where is only a
general apprehension of mercy. 483 Difference between a carnal Christian and
another. 437 Discouragement in affliction, incident to Gods own people. 11.
Causes hereof in our selves; privative. 21. Positive. 23. We are apt to cast
down our selves. 41. Reasons against discouragement; the hurt that comes by
it. 46. It crosses our own principles. 54. In case of discouragement we
should not think too much on our corruptions. 95. A godly man knows how to
carry himself in discouragements. 78 Disquieted we may be for that, which it
is not a sin to be disquieted for. 91 Disquietnesse; three notes of that
which is not befitting. 92 Disquietnesse for sin; when it exceeds measure. 94
Disquietments proper to the soul, beside those of the body. 108 Distrust, the
cause of all disquiet. 252 Distempers fall, if arraigned before reason: 53
Doubting arises of Popish doctrine of works. 29 Duty more to be thought of,
then comfort. 422 Duties to be don with united forces, or spirits 30
E
Eloquence of Ambrose converted Austine. 196 Election, not known, no
hinderance to our trust in God. 489 Enemies of the Church: comfort against
them. 412 Envy not their prosperity. 474 Estate of a Christian, how to be
judged. 26 Event of things not to be too much forecasted. 39 Evidence of faith
more constantly upholds the soul, then evidence of sight. 532 Evil in an holy
Christian, not to be too much looked upon. 38. Nor evils of the time. 39 Evils
of sin. 87 Excellencies of God to be branched out for our several uses. 508
Exercise of grace preserves the soul. 249 Experiments of God, treasured up in
the heart, would much help faith. 529 Experiences to be called to mind. 312.
And communicated to others. 313 Extremities whereinto the godly are suffered to
fall: and why? 310 Evils that are outward, how remedied. 593
F
Faith must own God specially. 480. And why. 482. It relyes on a double
principle. 299. Why so requisite in Christians. 301. It is still shaked by the
devil and wicked ones. 17. It must have price set on it: and how this may be.
315. 317. In us no seeds of faith, as of obedience. 332 Fancy to be quickly
limited and restrained. 189. The proper use of it. 193 Favor of God: how to
preserve the sense of it. 525 Failings pardoned, where is no malicious
intention. 424 Former favors make the soul more sensible of contrary
impressions. 4 Friends living, spiritual privileges by them, 221 Friends
departure: comfort in it. 408
G
Galeacius Caracciolus, how converted. 196 God makes every man a governor over
himself. 67 God still left to a good heart for comfort, when all others fail.
247 God only is the fit object of trust. 264 God cannot (out of Christ) be
thought on comfortably. 267 God is some men's God specially. 477. Hence is the
spring of all good 481. When we prove this to our souls. 495. Tokens of it,
501. Comfort by it in extremities. 505 Gods presence sweetneth all places and
estates. 2 Gods glory more to be regarded then our own good. 420 God is many
salvations to his people. 464. A Rock not to be undermined. 464 Godly men, when
best disposed. 114. They can cast restraint on themselves in distempers. 63.
Can make a good use of privacy. 65 Great ones, in most danger. 60. And why. 224
Greatness of finne may encourage us to go to God 355 Grief gathered to a
head, will not be quieted at the first, 5. It casts down, as joy lifts up.
50. How to be mitigated, 216. Grief faulty, when. 94. Even godly grief is to
be bounded: 97. How it is to be ordered aright. 100 Grief for sin: why we
want it so much, 372. What we must do in the want of it, 382. It is not all at
first. 383 Grief of contrition, and of compassion. 101 Growth in laying claim
to God. 488 Guard over the soul to be kept. 170
H
Hatred of sin, a good sign of grace: notes of it. 380 Heart of man not
easily brought unto God. 254 Heart to be most watched, and kept in temper. 42
Heart, though vile, shall be fitted for God, comfort, and glory. 390 A Heart
enlarged to praise God, is the chief deliverance. 439 Heart of Christians
first cheared by God, then their countenance. 468 Help by others in discerning
our estates. 287 Help: where none is, yet trust in God. Ibid. Holiness of God
no discouragement to true Christians, in their many infirmities. 392 Hope, the
maine support of a Christian, 263. The difference of it from faith, Ibid. It
quieteth the soul. Hope most in a hopeless estate: two grounds. 301. and 491.
Hour of mercy not yet past, if yielded unto. 368 Humbled persons comforted.
370 To humble us, God need not go without us to fetch forces. 109. And we
need go no surther then our selves. 151
I
Idle life is ever a burden to it self. 32 Idleness is the hour of
temptation. 190 Imagination and opinion, the cause of much disquiet. 176. How
it hurts us. 183. How sinful imaginations work upon the soul. 181. The
remedy and cure of this evil. 183. Opportunities of helping it to be sought
and taken. 195. How it may be made serviceable in spiritual things. 198. Not
impossible to rule our imaginations, 210. Misconceits about them 212 Immanuel:
a name of nature, and of office. 478 Impediments should not discourage
Christians. 389 Impudency in wicked men, more then in devils. 522
Inclinations of soul to the creature should be at first subdued. 328 Instinct
supernatural leads the godly unto God. 418 Interest in God, the ground of
trusting in him. 477 Joy and praise help each other. 430 Joy stilleth the
soul. Jbid. Judgment and reason well employed, will raise up a dejected
spirit. 51
L
Large faith, and large object should be shaped together. 519 Latimers three
prayers, all granted. 433 Law of God (extent and spiritualnesse of it) to be
considered. 168 Least mercy of God must be prized. 450 Liberty Christian may
not be unknown, nor yet abused. 32. 114. Life of a Christian, a life of
trouble. 107 Life of Christians, a mixture of good and evil. 428. Hid. 515 We
Lose our selves most, by yielding most to our selves. 60 Love such things, as
can return love. 122 Love of God to be looked at, in every mercy. 446
Love Tokens from God, arguing he is ours. 501 Love of God, not to be
questioned: grounds. 298 Luther assured of a particular mercy in prayer. 433
M
Massacre of France terrible afterward to the King. 66 Means, whether relied
on, or no. 343 Mercy of God must not be limited by man's sins. 358. It is
Gods name, he pleads for it. 535 Moon in the change, nearest the Sun: so we
to God, in greatest dejection. 18 Motions of sin to be at first crushed. 129
Murder of the tongue. 19
N
Nature of man, since sin came in, subject to misery and sorrow. 9. proved. 10.
applied. 11 Natures favorers, enemies of grace. 164 Nature divine, the only
counter-poyson of sin. 172 Natural righteousness in Adam. 155 Natural sins
in us, voluntary too. 161
O
Objects of Religion or conversation, not to be substituted. 319 Offense
against God, takes not away trust in God. 253 Omission of duties breeds trouble
to the soul. 34 Opinions of others not to be too much heeded. 37. 124
Opposition to sin, in the godly is universal. 88 Over-joying in outward
comforts, breeds trouble. 35 Outward things, no fit stays for the soul. 321.
325
P
Passions conflict one with another. 78 Passions not to be put to our troubles.
124 Passions hid till drawn out: and how this is, 126 Peace the Epitome of all
good. 138 Perseverance in grace warranted, and how. 388 Portion of the godly is
God alone. 517 Power that we have over our selves, is of God. 243 Prayer
needful to keep our selves in temper. 62 Prayer heard: signs of it. 453
Prayer and praise depend each on other. 422. 455 Praise in trouble more minded
by the godly then their delivery. 420. Special times to praise God 425. No
easy matter to praise God aright. 439. conditions. 448. motives. 459. means
of performing it. 459 Prepare for an alteration of thy estate, and spirit. 40
Presence of God with his in worst times, what it does for them. 426 Pride must
ever be taken down, though the spirit be dejected. 61 Pride and passion,
mischievous. 58 Promises of God, what they are in diverse respects. 296 Promises
are not all reserved for heaven, but partly verified on earth. 434 Propriety in
God chiefly to be labored for. 483 Providence of God makes all good to us, as
himself is good. 267 It is a special stay of our faith. 270. What God is, he
makes good by providence. Ibid. Graces to be exercised in observing divine
providence. 278
R
Real praises of God, necessary. 451 Real things put out troublesome thoughts.
185 Reason for sin: none at all. 415 Reasons of a godly man, are divine. 417
Relations wherein we stand to God, must be all answered: and how. 307 Relapses
pardonable and curable. 366 Repentance begins in the love of God. 197
Resolution necessary in Christianity. 442 Want of it breeds much disquiet. 34
Resolution firm and peremptory, to be assumed. 256. renew it. 258. and that
quickly. 260
S
Salvations of God, plentiful and manifold. 464. To be thought upon in
trouble. 466. The golden chain of it. 484 Satan and his instruments, still
casting-down the godly. 14 Satan's cunning in diverse humors of Christians. 26.
To discourage those whom God encourages. 536 Satan's study to unloose the heart
from God. 335 And to divide betwixt God and us. Self-denial requisite to
praise God. 440 Self, what in the godly: and what in others. 110 Signs of a
good estate. 28 Sickness: comfort in it. 397 Sin ever unreasonable, amidst
seeming reasons 56 Sin is the greatest trouble. 400. Avoid not trouble by
sin. Ibid. Sin sweet in committing, bitter in the reckoning. 353 Side with
God in evil times. 503 Sight of God not always alike. Reasons of it. 532
Soliloquies of special use. 220 Solitariness ill for afflicted ones. 236.
Intolerable to the wicked: why. 66 Sorrow weakens the heart. 44 Sorrow not
required for it self, as sorrow. 370. No sorrow can make satisfaction. 371.
Dangerous to desire it overmuch. 375. Popery in it. Comfortable degree of
sorrow for sin, when. 378 Souls most constant estate in respect of sin.
577 Soul to be cited, and pressed to give accounts. 59 Souls excellency, in
reflecting on it self, and judging all its issues. 68 Soul debased by wicked
men 70 Soul should be first set in order. 73 Soul needs something beside it
self to uphold it. 110 Souls temper when right. 97 Soul, though over-borne a
while, gets free again. 262 Soul, if gracious, most sensible of the want of
spiritual means. 6. Knows when it is well with it, when ill. 7 Superstition:
the force of it. 182 Symmetrie of soul most lovely, 137
T
Temptation divine, what it is. 13 Thanks then best, when it tends to praising.
447 Thanks should be large. 448 Thankfulness never without some taste of
mercy. 453. It is a special help in an afflicted condition. 453. Excellent
use of it. 462 Thoughts to be set in order every morning. 202. Are not free.
203. Danger of that opinion. 208 Thoughts of praise should be precious to us.
430 Titles: empty titles of goodness bring but empty comfort at last. 523 Our
Title in God to be maintained against all cavills. 530 Trade of conversing with
God, the richest in the world. 443 Trial of trust, whether it be right. 337
Troubles outward, appointed to help the soul inwardly. 68 Trouble inward:
threefold miscarriage of it, 92 Trust is the means to bring God and the soul
together. 264. To settle trust, know the mind as well as the nature of God.
295. Trust must answer the truth of God. 300. Directions about trusting. 303.
Whether we may trust to friends, riches, or helps. 318. A sin so to do. 323
Trust it self not to be trusted in. 326 Trusting should follow Gods order of
promising. 330 Trial of our selves exceeding necessary. 127
V
Victory over our selves: signs of it. 142. How it may be obtained. 147
Uniformity necessary in the lives of Christians. 139 Unthankfulness to God,
most sinful. 445. Detestable to God and man. 455 Unworthiness may not keep
from God. 489 There is a sanctified use of all troubles to Gods children. 250
W.
Waiting on God, a necessary duty. 435. What it is to wait. 437. Be ever in a
waiting condition. 529 Waiting difficult. Helps to wait on God. Will of man
has a sovereignty. 162 Will of the godly, conformable to Gods will 421 Worldly
good has some evil, and worldly evil has some good. 132
Y.
Yet not in hell, not at worst, a mercy, and undeserved. 425 Youth to be
curbed quickly. 61
FINIS.

