THE CHRISTIANS END. OR, The sweet Sovereignty of CHRIST over his members in
life and death.

Wherein is contained the whole scope of the godly MAN'S life, with diverse
Rules, Motives and Encouragements, to live and die to JESUS CHRIST.

Being the substance of five SERMONS preached to the Honorable Society of
Grayes Inn, by that Learned and faithful Minister of Gods Word, RICHARD
SIBBES D. D. and sometimes Preacher to that Honorable Society.

1. COR. 6. 20. Ye are bought with a price, etc. HEB. 11. 4. He being dead,
yet speaks. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Lawrence Chapman, and are
to be sold at his shop at Chancery lane end next Holborne, 1639.

THE FIRST SERMON.
ROMANS 14. 7, 8. None of us lives to himself, and none of us dies to himself,
for whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we die, we die unto the
Lord: Whether we live, therefore, or die, we are the Lords.
THe sc^pe of the Chapter in ^he former part of it, is to discover to the
Romans, and in them, to us all; how to carry our selves to others in matters of
indifferency. As there is difference of things in the world, some good, some
ill, and some of a middle nature; so there are different affections in men,
about these things of a middle nature, some are strong, and they are prone to
despise the weaker; for they know their liberty. Some more weak, and they are
prone to censure, and complain of them that be strong: as all weakness is full
of impatience. Thus it was with the Romans, the strong despised the weaker, as
ignorant; the weaker censured, and in their hearts condemned the strong, as too
adventurous

The Apostle shows here an excellent peaceable spirit, hating contention, as
an evil thing in a Church. In a Fa^ily, when children fall together by the
ears, the father takes up the quarrel, by beating them both, So in a Church
while people fall a contending, and breaking the bonds of love, God takes them
in hand. And therefore the Apostle takes them off from this danger, of
despising one another; and presses it by a reason in the fourth Verse drawn.

First, from their relations. Who art thou that judge another man's servant?

Secondly, from their aims. They do it both out of religious respects. He
that eats, eats to the Lord, he that eats not, eats not to the Lord;
he that regards not a day, regards it not to the Lord; he that does it,
does it to the Lord. And therefore if both have a Religious respect, censure may
be forborne.

There is that force in a good aim, that in some actions of an indifferent
nature, they may be done, or not be done, and God may bear with both, though
he allow not of eithers carelessness in searching out the truth; Till the ^ime
of growth, God bears with them, so their aims be gracious, their fault being
simple ignorance, not malicious pertinacy. When S. Paul saw the hypocritical
aims of the Galathians, in things of indifferent natures, he would not yield a
whit to them. But the defect of the Romans was in their knowledge, not in their
wills: they did it with respect to the Lord. And therefore as in Acts 13. 18.
God is said (...) (an excellent word) to bear with their manners in the
Wilderness, dispencing with many things, as putting away of wives, etc. not
that he liked that course, but he would set up a meek kind of government,
not taking advantage to cast them off. So he dealt with the Romans. Now shall
God be merciful, and indulgent, and man severe?





Secondly, there is a general affirmative, when he has taken them off from
themselves, he assigns them to a true Lord. Whether we live, we live to the
Lord whether we die, we die to the Lord. And this is set down with a
disjunction, we neither live to our selves, nor die to our selves.

And, thirdly, a general ground that Whether we live or die, we are the Lords.
And therefore in reason we should live to him, and die to him.

Fourthly, there is the ground of all, in For to this end Christ died, and rose
again, that be might be Lord of life and death. So here is reason upon
reason, and ground upon ground.

The sum of all is, Conclusion.
we cannot certainly conclude of life or death: For we live but for a while,
and when we have acted our part upon the Stage, we die, and go to another
world. Of life and death we can make no reckoning. As Soon as we begin to
live, we begin to die. For some part of our life is taken away daily, as it is
with sum, the more you take away, the less remains. But certain it is,
living and dying, we are the Lords. We ought therefore to have a conjunctive
consideration. I now live, yet that is not my comfort, but sure I am, Whether I
live or die, I am the Lords.

He rises from a general to a particular, which may teach us this point of
wisdom.

First, The first general observation, or doctrine.
that to have good general truths is an excellent point of wisdom, for they
have affluence into all particulars. A comprehension of principles is the
ground of prudence for direction in particular cases. There is no art, but has
some general maxims, as in Law, in Physic, and in the Mathematics. There be
canons or principles (call them what you will) that have influence into all
particulars. So Religion has general rules, which should be deposited in
memory at all times; that on all occasions we may see how particulars spring
from, and agree to the generals. Therefore we should labor to treasure up in
our memory good principles, for men work in all things according to their
principles. If they have good principles, or general truths, they work
answerably. And the reason of any error in a Christians life, is from false
principles.

Men of a bad conscience, whose synteresis (being the part of the soul that
preserves principles) is corrupt, they think they do God good service in
killing of men, from an abominable principle. As in Popery which is grounded
upon false principles, making men's traditions a rule of faith.

Therefore it is good to have general true grounds: Mark how the Scripture is
frequent this way. What an excellent general rule is that of Christ? Seek the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all other things shall be cast upon
you. Carry that along, and what a light does it give into all our actions.
What need we by indirect courses seek to be great in the world, if we take
Christ's method*

Again, our Savior Christ in his ordinary speech delivered it, a general
rule, It is better to give, then to receive. Which contains a direction to
men to be public and liberal, Saint Paul's ordinary course was so, Knowing
therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, etc. What an influence
has this into our conversations, That I must do, as I must give account at the
day of judgment. And so what use made he of the glorious state to come in that
house, and building of God, not made with hands, not seen but apprehended only
by faith. It enabled him to do, and suffer all things that became a Christian
to do and suffer. If a man have that principle, and minds it, that all things
work together for the best, to them that love God, what can discourage him? he
knows in the issue all sh^^l be for the best, and God will not fail him, nor
forsake him in his way, but gives his Angels^ charge over him So Christ's
direction. One thing is necessary, how may it rectify us? when we trouble our
selves about many impertinencies. If these generalists were always present,
upon solicitations to sin, or discomfort. It shall go well with the
righteous, and it shall not go well with the wicked, if we take good courses
it shall be well, if ill courses, sin will be bitter: it would be a
marvailous help and advantage in all particulars of our lives.

The second general observation is this. The second general observation.
That as we must get good principles, laid up in store upon all occasions; so
we must specially have gracious aims. Men are as their aims are; Noble
spirits have noble aims: Christians are of an higher rank then ordinary men,
and therefore they have higher aims. Religion gives command to all other
particulars, and prescribes to them a general end; it takes a man off from a
false end, and pitcheth him upon a true end. It takes him from himself, the
great Idol that Man naturally sette^h up above God; and above Christ* and
above Heaven and Happiness, and tells him that the true end of all, is to
live to Christ, and that on good grounds, for we are his, and his by good
title, he died for us, that he might be Lord both of quick and dead. As in
state Policy, those that are Governors in a state, they prescribe ends of
Trades, and reduce them to a serviceablenesse of state. If they find any thing
hurtful, they look to it, as it stands in reference to the common good: So
Religion considers of all particulars as they have reference to Christ, and
the mayn end, taking us off from false ends, and prescribing the last, and best
end, and directing all particulars to that end. But we shall see this better
in the unfolding of the words.

The first thing he begins in the general is, to take us off from false ends,
None of us lives to himself.

First, to live to our selves, is not altogether to be taken in a civil sense.
A man lives to himself, when he lives privately, or retiredly, Been vixit, qui
bone latuit. So a man may do in some things, especially in times of
persecution, but this ordinarily is not good. A man is a creature for
communion, and God has fitted him for communion by speech and other
endowm^nts, that there may be preserved a communion of Saints. But because a
retired life is sometimes good, it is not here maynly aimed at.

Again, secondly, We live to our selves, when we mind our selves altogether,
and not one another. When we have more respect to our selves, then to God, or
to our Christian brother. And this is even contrary to nature, we see in
nature, that a particular nature will in some cases yield to a general, and
thwart it self. The fire is a light body, and in the natural motion of it,
mounteth upward, yet this body will go downwards to preserve whole the uniuersal
nature from a vacuum from emptiness, that the fullness and solidity in nature
may not be disturbed. And we see heavy bodies go upward for the same end. As a
man will venture the hand to save his head, and to save his body; so it should
be in society and government, particular men should venture themselves for the
Prince or State, for the head or for the body.

Terminus reductivus to reduce all to himself: and make Religion and every
thing serviceable to himself. When a man will serve himself of God for base
ends, because his service will advance him. As the Sichemites were circumcised
for Dinah.

And to die to our selves is much like it.

A man dies to himself, when he regards himself in death, and is regarded
much of no body else. Persons that have an absolute being of themselves, that
have no kindred, not much acquaintance, or have been little fruitful in their
lives, die to themselves in a civil sense. That is, no man mourns for them,
saying, Ah my brother, They were of little use in their lives, and so little
mist in their deaths.

And usually they that live thus to themselves, they die to themselves, little
regarded, little lamented. Only this often times, they do most good when they
die, as we say of Swine, They are never good till dead.

But this is meant in a theological higher sense, No Christian dies to
himself, that is dies unregarded of God, and of good men. As he lives not
to himself but to Christ, so he dies not to himself, Precious to the Lord is
the death of all his Saints. He is not Despotos, without Lord and Master, but
whether he lives or dies he is the Lords* So much for the negative part which
we see may be taken both actively and passively.

But this clause w^l be better understood by adding the other. Whether we
live, we live to the Lord: Or whether we die, we die to the Lord.

What is it to live to the Lord? Quaest.


First, Answ.
to acknowledge the Lord in all our ways, to be our Lord, to whom we owe our
selves.

secondly, Thereupon to resign our selves to the Lord in our whole carriage, so
as to obey him, to give up our selves to be disposed of him, and directed by
him, as he pleases.

Thirdly, to refer all things to his glory as our last end, and to endeavor
that God and Christ may be known, and magnified in the World. When we labor
to practice what we pray for, according to that first Petition, ( hallowed be
thy name) his Religion and truth; and whatsoever else is Gods, may be advanced,
set high, published and enlarged, that he may be known and worshipped, that he
may be to us, what he is in himself, the great God, Lord of quick and dead. So
by our giving respect to him, suitable to our knowledge of him.

Fourthly, and lastly, He that lives to the Lord, comfor^eth himself, in this,
that the Lord takes notice of him in every thing. For it is a phrase impor^ing
a direction to a duty. And likewise to confirm, and comfort us in this, that
we do our duty. We do not serve a dead Master, but one that takes notice of
us, living and dying.

So to die to the Lord, is to acknowledge to be the Lord of life, and the Lord
of death of death, Revel. 1. 18
as well as of life. He has the keys of Hell and of Death, and the disposing
of both. Therefore we must resign up our selves to him in death.

And then study to honor him by Religion with blood.

And then to acknowledge him to be living. And so the words are a privilege, as
well as a duty. As it is sealed up in the last words. Whether we live or die,
we are the Lords. Thus I have unfolded the text.

He first promises the general negative. No man lives to himself, no man
dies to himself. You must apply this to Christians only, that are true
Professors, and members of Christ. For other men that are not in Christ, and
have not the spirit of Christ, they live to themselves, and die to themselves,
and aim at themselves in all things, and therefore they are not the Lords.
Therefore it is a fearful condition to live, and die to our selves.

Yet you have some kind of men, not only in their particular persons, but in
their callings are all for themselves, but why should I call it, calling? for
there is no calling, but it is for public good. As an Usurer, (for whose good
is he?) Let all sink or swim, what cares he, so times hold, and months, and
years continue, he will have his returns. And such are they, that live in a
cours^ of oppression, that live by the ruin and spoil of others.

But there is a more subtle living to a man's self, The actions of wicked men
end in self.
as all men do, that have not the spirit of Christ, they live within that
circle self* the Devil keeps them that they go not out of it: so that self
does run through all their actions, their civil a and ions, yea, their
religious actions; which are all tainted with self-respects.

Ever since the fall, it is so Man withdraws himself from Gods government,
and sets up himself instead of God; and thought to have a secured happiness
from God, in eating the forbidden fruit, and therefore would not depend upon God
to be happy. He saw another way to be like God. God has highest place in our
heart, by order of Creation, and according to the degrees of excellency in
things, should our esteem of them be, every thing being beautiful in his
place. But where God is put down, (as he is in all men, till they be in Christ)
something self-love sets up in the heart above God. Hence comes the necessity
of this method of taking us off from our selves, before we can live to Christ,
because self-love is an impediment, and block in the way between us and
Christ, heaven end happiness. And therefore Christ begins the Gospel with
self-denial. Whosoever will be my Disciple, let him take up his Cross, and
follow me.

Now there be four degrees of self. There is
1. Natural 2. Civil 3. Sinful 4. Religious Self.


natural self, is the state we are in, as men.

Civil, as we are poor, or rich, or honorable, according to our several
places in the Commonwealth.

sinful self is, as we are carried to sinful lusts, and the Cr^ature.

Religious self is our Condition in Christ, when we are ingreaffed into him,
and made new Creatures.

Now we must not live to our selves.

First, not to our natural self. We must not live, only, to live. For as
all other Creatures are to serve us, so we are to serve something else, that
is better. For that, that is not of it self, cannot be for it self. Now we
have not beings from our selves, but from God; he gives us beings, and a being
in that rank of Creatures, wherein we are. Therefore our natural self must be
to a higher end. A man is not the end of things, there is another end then he;
and that is God, who is of himself, and has made all other things for
himself.

And therefore riches and honors, and the like: we should not live to our
civil self. Nature teaches us that having spirits, we are not for any thing
meaner then our selves. We do not live here to be rich, to be great, to command
others; for these things do not answer the soul of man.

First, Nothing that has an end, can ^inem consummatum, cannot be finis
consummans. That, that has an end, consuming it self, cannot be an end,
perfecting it self. We have a journey beyond all things* and that cannot be our
end, that leaves us in the way. Riches and honor are determined in death. Let
our preferments be never so great, though to the Monarchy of the whole World:
yet we have a being beyond them They have consumptions in themselves.

inferior. No truth in them, can fill up the understanding, no good in them,
can fill up the will. But the understanding can pierce through them. And the
will in rellishing, and tasting the good of them, can look on them as cast
commodities. It can quickly suck out all the sweet that is in them. Therefore
they cannot be a man's end: because he has larger parts then they can fill.

command many things, but not al things Men consider what they can do, and
therefore desire them. But they consider not what they cannot do, and therefore
they rest in them. That which is a man's last end, must be a satisfying general,
universal good, an immortal good, of equal co^tinu^ance with hi^; as nothing in
the world is.

It must be such a good, as he cannot offend, or be defiled with all. Such as
he cannot misuse. And what is there in the World, but Christ, and the best
things, but a man is prone to defile himself in? Knowledge is the best thing,
but that works like leaven, it swells as the Apostle says, Knowledge puffs
up. Therefore we must live to no worldly thing.

And much less must we live to sinful self. Some things are to be denied in
way of competition, and in opposition, but somthings are to be denied
absolutely. Absolutely, a man must not own, or live to a base lust, pride, or
sensuality. He ow^th nothing to these, but mortification. We are not debtors
to the slesh; says the Apostle. Therefore when a proud vindictive motion
arises, say I owe no suite, or service to the flesh. What should these do in
a heart dedicated to God, consecrated to Christ? I am not mine own, much less
Satan's, or lusts: which be objects of mortification, but no way worthy of my
service. Absolute denial is required here.

Of other things, Denial for Christ.
a denial is required only as they stand in competition with Christ. In that
case, a man must sacrifice Isaac, not only his sinful self, but natural self
also, his life, and bodily liberty, the dearest thing in the world, and
whatsoever is sweet for Christ.

He having taken us off from our selves, assigns us to a true Lord. We live
to the Lord, and die to the Lord. It had not been enough to say, We ought not
to live to our selves, or die to our selves, if he had not told, whom we must
live to, and die to. For naturally man will never leave any thing; though but
an apparent good, til he knows something better. A man will not part with a
bad Master, til he has a better service. Therefore he shows where to bestow
our selves: namely, upon Christ, who has care of us both in life and death.

This is to be laid down for a ground; Our condition in Christ is better then
in our selves.
had we not a better being in Christ, then in our selves, he would never take
us from our selves; for God never bids us to our loss. We have a better
condition in Christ, then we can have in the World. It is our gain, and
advantage to live, and die to Christ: though it be to the loss of natural
self, of civil self, and whatsoever else; yet it is our advantage. It is
Mercatorium, not a loss, but a trading. We have a better for worse. No man
ever parted with any thing for Religion, or a public good, but God made it up
in a better kind. Though God should not make it up in this world, in the same
kind: yet in Religion, there be all things better then in the world. If we
lose honor here, we have honor from God. If we lose riches, All our loss
is made up in Cheist.
we have them made up in grace here, in glory hereafter. If we lose liberty,
we have it in the inlargment of a good conscience. If we lose friends, we get
a God for a friend, who can make our enemies fried^s. If we lose life, we are
put into possession of eternal life, and therefore we need not stand at the
bargain. We have a better being in Christ, then in our selves. Water is not
lost, when it emptieth it self into the Sea; for there it is in its proper
element. A Christian is not lost, when he loses himself, in his God, in his
Savior. For in him he has a better being, then in himself. He is brought
nearer the fountain, I desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is the
best of all, says the Apostle, Religion is a most excellent condition; for as
he that saves his life, shall lose it, so he that loses his life, shall
save it.

All our comforts have a better being in Christ, Tobe in Christ is better then
in our selves.
then in^ our selves: and therefore we should labor to have communion with
him, and to strengthen our faith in Christ, and be in love with our happy
condition in him; which yields comfort in life and death. And all by virtue
of the death of Christ, and the resurrection of Christ. As he says afterward,
Christ both died and rose again, that he might be Lord both of the dead and of
the living.

The resurrection of Christ is the consummation of all. Christ's resurrection is
our only comfort.
If Christ had not risen again, where had our comfort bin? But the very thought
of it that we are ingraffed in one, who has not only purchased us by his death
( for we are the price of his blood) but to make it clear that it is so, is now
in heaven as our head, having overcome death, and intending to bring al his
body where he is; as it was his will, That where he is, we should be also; is
a glorious thought. The glory of Christian Religion is in the resurrection of
Christ, and to consider that we that are creeping here on earth, shall be members
of him, that is glorious in Heaven, Lord of heaven and earth, who not only
died for us, but is risen again; and will make us all (both in body and soul)
conformable to his glorious self; (as the Apostle says to the Philippians)
cannot but infuse life and vigor into all our actions, estates, and
conditions, be they never so mean. And have a wonderful influence into the
whole life of a Christian.

THE SECOND SERMON.
ROMANS 14. 7, 8. None of us lives to himself, and none of us dies to himself,
for whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we die, we die unto the
Lord: Whether we live, therefore, or die, we are the Lords.
FIrst, the general scope of Apostle is, to take us off from our false ends,
None of us lives to himself, etc.

Secondly, to assign us to the Lord.

Thirdly, the ground of all, Whether we live or die, we are the Lords.

fourthly, the spring of all; Christ both died, and rose again, that he might
be Lord both of quick and dead.

There is a conca^enation, and knitting together of divine truths. They
following one another by a necessity of consequence. As from the body of the
Sun, there is a natural issue of beams. And as in plants derivation from
the root into the branch, so there is from Christ into all truths. Grant him to
be the second Adam, and grant him Lord of the Living, and of the Dead, and it
will follow, we ought to live to him. If we grant, we ought to live to Christ,
then we must grant, we ought not to live to our selves. For we ought to live
to Christ. Why to Christ? because he is Lord both of life and death. Why is he
Lord? because he has purchased it by his blood. How do we know he has
purchased it by his death satisfactorily? because he is risen again, and
sits at the right hand of God to make all good for us. Things are best to
us, when they are digested and made our own, by the presence of good
principles. But here is the mischief. Sin is ready, and good principles are not
ingraffed into us; but if divine truths were as near as corruption is, then
we could withstand, and repel all temptations.

As Travelers have the end of their journey in their thoughts habitually,
Simile.
though not actually, for every step they take is in virtue of their end. So
we should consider that we are all Travelers in the way to Heaven, and every
step of our life should be to that end.

The ignorance of this makes the life of most men, to be but a digression from
the main. As if they were brought into the world, only to satisfy base
lusts, and to seek themselves, to serve Satan and sin, the professed enemies of
God, which are not only digressions, but motives to hell, and eternal
destruction. What a pitiful thing is it, that Creatures should come into the
world and live, some twenty, some forty, some more years, and go out of the
world again, not knowing wherefore they lived.

Good reason it is we should live to Christ, acknowledge him in all our ways,
live answerable to our knowledge, resign up our selves to his government, and
seek his glory in all things; that we may make Christ known in the World.
That all, that see us may see Christ in us, and perceive our love to him, That
has called us out of darkness, into his mavelous light.

And also to acknowledge him to be Lord of our life, and in death to resign
our selves to him, as a faithful Creator; knowing that he takes care of us
in life and death.

We are bought with a price, as the Apostle says.

enemies. ^here is no such flatterer, as the bosom flatterer. That enemy,
self, that we have in our bosoms betrayeth us to Satan; else all the Devils
in hell could not hurt us. Self is our own enemy, and Gods enemy. Nay, enemy is
too easy, too good a word; the best thing in us, is enmity it self against God.

By woeful experiment we find that Self-will breeds our misery.
that the world ever felt, has been self-will. Men will be turned upside
down, rather than their wills shall be crossed; but does not this provoke God?
Shall a piece of earth strive against him? and will not he break it to powder?
Surely God will set us as a mark to shoot at, and will triumph and get himself
victory and glory over those creatures, that will have their wills. Hell is fit
for such, God will be sure to have his will of them: when the creature shall
set his will against Gods will; when an earthen pot shall set it self against a
mace of brass; which will have the worst, think you?

If we live to our selves, we lie open to motions whatsoever they be. He is
fit for God, and a blessed communion of Saints.



Now to show the nature of this living to Christ.

Religion; but these tha^ truly live to God and Christ, they have an inward
instinct that enclines them to holiness.

Secondly, there is intyrenesse in a Christian Every thing is to be improved to
our last end.
As to bestow our selves upon him, in all the civil relations we have in the
World, by being obedient to him, and to others in him, and for him, and in
whatsoever callings we are, not only in our natural life, but also in our
civil life; to go on in a constant tenor all the whole course of our lives
aiming at Christ; not to set our selves in our callings to get riches, (for
those shall be cast in by the way) God allows us riches, but not to be our
ends) but that we may serve him and honor him. There is no time to sin, but
a time for every thing else.

Thirdly, In our living to Christ there Christ for a fit, but constantly not to
do, now and then a good action, but to make it our course, our trade to live
to Christ entirely, constantly, uniformly.

Fourthly, and then living to the Lord implye^h, The whole life of a Christian
is to Christ.
that all Christians counsel and advice is how to live to Christ. Heaven is
always before him, because his way is to God, and to Christ. Other men will
rage, and swel, though the know well enough, they are out of the way, when they
be put in mind of it. But a gracious man is glad to have any Scripture opened
that may give him more light either by a discovery of a sin or duty, because
he now knows an enemy and friend, which before he knew not* and has
learned a duty which before he was ignorant of, for it is his scope and
endeavor to set himself in the way of living to Christ.

Firftly, He that lives to Christ, has likewise this quality. He is not
carried on his course by false winds, he does not sail by a false compass.
Though the world incourageth or discourageth him, He regards not the
encouragement or discouragement of the world.
all is one, he regards it not; his care is wholly taken up in the service of
his God. And with Ioshuah, think the world what it will, He and his house will
serve the Lord, and with holy David will resolve to be yet more vile for Gods
glory. And though he gets disgrace in the world, he regards it not, but
is willing to suffer it, so that his God may be honored, knowing, he shall not
be a looser by the bargain.

Other men if so be they are disgraced, they are so shallow in Religion, that
they are quickly taken off, because the truth has no root in them, like the
bad and naughty ground: and not only so, but they will speak contrary to the
truth in their consciences; b^t, alas, one day they shall know, that God
accounts them as his enemies:

Sixthly, again, a true Christian will live A true Christian lives to the
Church of the Christ.
for we are members of Christ, we ought to labor for the advancement of the
truth of his Religion, the Kingdom of Christ, and to be of the same spirit
with good Nehemiah, that all may be well with us, when the Church of God
prospers, and grows up in the world, getting victory over all her enemies.

Now carnal men live not at all to Christ, Carnal men live not at all to
Christ.
they care not whether Religion sinketh or swimmeth. Tell them of heavenly
matters, tush, they are not for them, but God does hate such persons, for as
they regard not to serve God, or to own Christ in their lives: so he will not
own them at their deaths. As in prosperity they are not on his side, neither
will own his part, (which one day will prove the best) so in times of trouble,
they cannot expect or look for any favor, or mercy from him.

And to add one thing more, Christ's glory and our salvation is joined together.
though it must be our chief aim to look to Christ, yet God allows us to look
also to our own salvation, how to be saved, and happy in another world God has
joined these two together, as one chief end and good. The one, that he might be
glorified, the other that we might be happy, and both these are attained by
honoring and serving him. And this is no self-love, for we cannot seek our
salvation, but in honoring God, and yielding the means that he has sanctified
for us, which is to cast our selves on him for our salvation in his way. Thus
our happiness and Gods chief end agree together. Simile.
As when there be two lines a^bout a Center, one drawn within the other, a
third Line cannot be drawn from the utmost Line to the Center without cutting
the Line within; because it is included within the other. So our salvation and
happiness is within the glory of God, and we live to Christ, not only in
serving him, but in seeking our own souls; and what a sweetness is this in
God, that in seeking our own good, we should glorify him?

This likewise teaches us to live to Christ in a way of humility and
self-denial. God will not deny to teach the humble and lowly soul his ways.
And thus a gracious man is fit for all the counsel^ of God, They find
themselves with joy, that lose themselves in God.
as a carnal heart is fit for all the services of the Devil. Therefore le^us
dedicate our selves and services to God, for happy are they that can lose
themselves in God, and be swallowed up in the love of Christ. Certainly, there
is never better finding of our selves, then when we are thus lost. And
therefore I beseech you, whatsoever our corruptions have been heretofore; let us
now know it is heavenly wisdom to seek Christ's glory in the use of the
blessed means fanctified for that end.

Surely, we have all been baptized, and what is our baptism, but the
renouncing of the world, the flesh and the Devit. Our life is for nothing, but
to live unto God. And having entered into covenant in Baptism, in the name of
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, that we intend seriously to lead a new
life. We must not trifle with God, he will not be dallied with. It is not only
sufficient that we have spent our precious time amiss, but more then
sufficient: For time will come, if we belong to Christ, in which we shall lament
for spending our time in the pursuit of our own vanities.

For if we live according to our own lusts, we are but Rebels under Gods
livery. We are but traitors fighting under his Banner. And how can we give
account at the day of judgment of our lives, that have been nothing else but a
constant service for Christ's enemies under the color of Religion. This would
seriously be thought upon.

Therefore, as we know a great deal, and are beholding to God for living in
times, and places where there is abundance of the truth revealed, so we ought
to make it our life and course to honor him, to be vigorous in his service,
and to stir up the grace of God in us, to awaken our selves, and to live to
Christ, and to put this quaere to our souls; whom do I serve? my self? or
Christ? him? or his enemies?

Out of the Text you may see that a Christian will learn how to carry
himself, A Christian learneth how to carry himself not only to himself, but
to Christ.
not only to himself but to Christ. His carriage to himself is to live as a
Christian exercised in his duty and calling. His carriage to Christ is, to live
to him, and die to him. And for this end he takes this course, to search out
himself, what is unsound, and corrupt in him; and when he has found himself,
then he abhors himself, and judges himself. And having found out
corruption in his heart, he not only loatheth it, but crucifieth it, and this
is the course that a Christian takes with himself, in the searching and
^iscovery of his sins.

And this being done, he sets up Christ in the place of self, (which
rules in all men, till they be Christians indeed, either by way of admission,
or covenant.) But when Grace has once taken place in the heart, then the soul
begins to live to Christ; and that conscionably, intyrely, and uniformly;
consulting with all things how to help, and further that life. Other men
consult how they may keep their honors and reputations in the World. But a
Christian having other aims, devises not only ways to live to Christ, but
how to be better, more and more, how to get into Christ, and how to grow up in
him; knowing that by living to Christ here, he shall live with him for ever
hereafter. This is the course of a true Christian, that looks to have benefit
by Christ.

THE THIRD SERMON.
ROMANS 14. 7, 8. None of us lives to himself, and none of us dies to himself,
for whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we die, we die unto the
Lord: Whether we live, therefore, or die, we are the Lords.
WE have heard from the Apostles general negative, that self must be removed
out of the way, before we can live, or die to Christ. Self indeed will come in
every thing till the spirit of Christ be all in all in us. It is lke Esau that
came first out of the womb, it will appear first in all consultations. And
therefore it is the method of our blessed Savior. Whosoever will be my
Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up my cross. And it will be easy so
to do, when we have denied our selves.

From the Apostles general affirmative we have showed that to live to the
Lord, To live to Christ is to seek his ho. nour in all things.
is to acknowledge our selves to be his, and him to be ours, and answerably to
do him service; to resign up our selves to him, to seek his glory and
honor, and credit in all things, and to be well persuaded, that he will stick
to us. So that it is a comfort, as well as a duty.

To die to the Lord, is to be willing to give up our selves to him, when the
time commeth^, and to submit to him for the manner of our death, whether he
will call us home to himself by a quiet, or troublesome death, by a bloody or
dry death, with confidence that he will receive our souls.

That we may be directed to pitch upon a right end. We may know by the
principles of nature. A man is neither for, or to himself.
A man is not for himself, and from the order that God has placed him in: all
things below are for him, but he is for something above himself: he is not of
himself, and therefore not to himself. God only is of himself, by himself,
and to himself. Every thing under God is of God, and by God, and therefore to
God. As Saint Augustine says, The heart is not quiet till it rests in God
its Center.
Thou have made us for thee, and our hearts rest not till we come to thee. As
the Rivers never r^st till they discharge themselves into the Ocean.

And being not his own end, it is his wisdom and understanding to look
principally, to that which is his last and best, and mayn end which is GOD and
Union, and Communion with God in Christ, who is God in our nature; God-man, the
best of all, and therefore it is fit he should be the last. He communicates
all good to them, that be his, and preserves all the good he communicates.
He is for ever with them, and cannot fail to do them good, as long as he
fails not to be good. He is the original caus^, and the communicating cause,
and the maynt^yning cause of all good.

Now it is the nature of the utmost, and farthest end to stir up to every
action, leading to that end; for every deliberate rational action that is done
with advertisement, and observation and is not an action of fancy, or common
nature, must fall under the consideration of an end; or else we cannot give
account for it, as we must for every word, desire, and thought.

Now the end stirs us up to all means leading to that end, either immediately
as they are the services of God properly, or else remotely. As things that help
reason, and furtherances thereunto, as the Apostle wills that whether we eat
or drink, 1. Cor. 10. 31.
or whatsoever we do, all should be done to the glory of God because these
mayntayn us in health, and strength, and that health, and strength enable us to
Gods service. And in this sense every action, a Christian does, is a service of
God, for the end does advance it and raise it above it self: and make it
spiritual, as recreation to cheer him to diligence in his calling, God looks
not at parts but holiness in duties.
the serving of his brother, and the like. Some actions are holy in the stuff,
and matter of them, others are such for the end to which they are directed, for
the meanest action becomes holy, if an holy end be put upon it.

And therefore the actions of the second Table, are the service of God, as well
as the first, as they do all agree in the end. No man violateth a Magistrate
in the second Table, but he wrongeth God in the first. No man steals or
commits adultery, or disgraceth his neighbor by false witness, which is
prohibited in the second, but it is for want of fear of God commanded in the
first.

Duties of the second, rightly performed are in virtue of the Commandments of
the first. When they are done, not only from humane and lower grounds, as
things good in themselves, but also because God and Christ have commanded them,
and that is included in the general words of living to the Lord, for to live
is comprehensive, and includes all our actions, from the beginning to the end,
and closing up of our days. Whatsoever actions fall within the term of life,
ought to be referred to God as the last end.

The Reason is Christ has redeemed, 1. Reason.
our persons, and our times, and all that we are, or have, or can do, all our
ability, our whole posse, is Christ's, and not our own. I must be filled up
with actions suitable to Christ, therefore if I could do a thousand times more
then I do, it were all due to him, my self, my time, my advantages, my calling,
and all are his.

Again, as the end stirs up to actions of suitable to that end. So he that
has an aim to live to Christ, will use all things here as may serve that
turn. He will use the world, as if he used it not, will buy as if he
possessed not, will marry, as if he married not. Not that he will be slight,
or superficial in these things. But he will do them no further then may be
advantageous to the enjoying of Christ here, as comfortably as he can, and for
ever hereafter.

Indeed no man can set measures to his desire of happiness, that being a vast
Ocean: his mayn end cannot be desired too much. For as it is his good and
happiness, it is larger then himself, yea his thoughts, and desires are too
short to reach it. But though a man desires not health too much, yet he may
desire too much physic. Christians aims end in Christ.
The measure must be in our pursuit of inferiou^ things, because therein we are
apt to exceed. And that advantage a Christian has in setting a right end. He
will not be drowned in the world, nor live to recreations, but to a farther
aim, and which prescribes a measure and duration to all things else.

The end likewise makes every thing that tends to the end lovely. It makes
the Cross lovely, for by it we grow better, and get more in large communion
with Christ. Welcome is poverty or disgrace, or whatsoever that makes a man
live more to Christ, and die to himself. Men call for Physic, Simile.
though in it self distasteful, as it is in order to health, an end, which we
desire without end. So it is the disposition of a gracious soul, it Christ
bestow himself on him, communicated his gracious spirit, peace of conscience,
joy in the holy Ghost, increase of the Image of God. Let God lay upon us what
he will, yet it will appear lovely.

It prescribes likewise a right order to Seek first seek the kingdom of God
and his righteousness, Mat. 6. 33.
and all other things shall be cast upon you. Some indeed love to be all in
byworks, and in the mean time neglect and slight the mayn. But our care should
be so to use the world, that we may not lose Christ, or communion with him in
better things. So to look to things temporal, as that we lose not things
eternal. For as things are in themselves, so they should be to us. Now as some
thing is better then another, so we should conceive of them, and affect them
as better, then another, and labor to do them before another, as deserving the
first place. And that is the reason the Saints have so prized and entertained
communion with God and Christ, one thing I desire says the Prophet, Psalm. 27.
4.
That is, to dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. And one thing is
necessary, Luke 10. 4^
says Christ, other things be necessary in their order, but to have communion
with God, is the mayn thing necessary.

Use.
Let us therefore often consider of the end of our life in this world. And take
shame to our selves, that we have let so much water run besides the Mill. That
we have let so much precious time and strength, and dear advantages be lost,
too much strength has been spent in the service of sin and our base lusts
which we can give no account of. How many scandalous, blasphemous words are
many guilty of, which help only to advantage their destruction, if God be not
merciful.

Now a little to show the guise of the world, and the difference of it from the
actions of Gods children, for these words employ a restraint to Gods people, as
well as an extension.

The Christians whole life is only to Christ, Object.
but what is the life of a man out of Christ?

His first aims being corrupt, Answ.
God is not in all his thoughts (as the Psalmist speaks) neither to have
communion with him here in grace, nor in glory hereafter. Therefore whatsoever
good he does, a false end poysoneth it. If a man misunderstanding of a thing
be from a false principle, he misunderstands it grossly. As if an house be built
upon a weak foundation, such is all the fabrick^: though otherwise never so
costly, if the principles be naught, the conclusions drawn from thence must
needs be naught also, Simile.
As in Physic if the first concoction be naught, the second can never be good.
So if a man's ends are naught, if he seek himself, or does things only from
foreign motives out of terror of conscience, or for vain glory, or to be
seen of men, his corrupt aim spoyleth all his actions; Self ends hinders
duty.
yea, he reduces Religion to himself, because he will enjoy his pleasures
the better, he will act some part of Religion, lest conscience should bark, and
clamor against him. This self will moderate Religion, and restrain it to such
a measure, as may stand with his lusts and sinful customs.

If he loves others it is in order to himself, because he has use of them,
as they comply with him in wicked courses, and so help to bear him out the
better.

And if any man stands in the ways of his ends of honor, or riches, he
removes them by disgrace, though it amounts to slandering, as undermyning,
and rising by others ruins, because self his Idol, and mayn end must not be
crossed. He desires to be some body in the flesh, all things must be measured
by that; yea, Religion and acquaintaince, and all, and whatsoever stands in the
way, it cries down with them, but however it kills them in the esteem of
others, that they themselves might be thought something, and thus all is turned
clean contrary, upside down.

But a gracious man's end and aim is to get out of himself, and his corrupt
nature, and to order all his actions in reference to that and all his
acquaintance, and communion with others, as may help his communion with God.
And whatsoever is an impediment to that, he labors to remove.

But to give you some directions, how to live not to our selves, but to live
and die to the Lord.

life is but the issue of life.

We must live by faith, from union with Christ by faith, and then live to
Christ.

And again, we must do it constantly, and uniformly, no part of our lives
must be alienated from Christ, all must be done in order to him, even our
recreations must have some good aims in them.

Now do but consider we are his, Motives.
we are not our own but his, and therefore we ought to live to him, bringing
in all our strength, all our advantages, our callings, that we may do service
to him in our places, we are redeemed even from our selves. A world of people
think they be redeemed to live as they list. But because God is merciful, and
Christ a Savior, may you therefore live like libertines? No, you are redeemed
from your selves, not to your selves.

And to former rules delivered let me add, that this living to Christ, (though
naturally we count it bondage, because it is the acknowledging of a superior)
is the most perfect liberty, Deo servire, est regnare. For he that serves that
which is better and larger then himself, that has more goodness and ability
then himself, he does advance himself by his service, and freeth himself
from the service of all inferiors. For the more dependant any man is on CHRIST
in his service, and in expectation of reward from him, the more independent is
he, upon the World. And indeed who is free in his thoughts, and desires from
base engagements to the creature, but he that sets up Christ highest in his
soul. And suffers him to prescribe rules to him in his life, which is freer in
the world, then they that have hearts freed from overmuch love of earthly
things, overmuch fear of earthly things, overmuch delight in earthly things.
He uses them as helps to the main, but is not engaged, or inthralled to any,
Quanto subjectior, tanto liberior. The more subject, the more free, is Saint
Augustines rule. And it is undoubtedly so, you shall find by experience that
the soul is never at a more gracious liberty, then when Christ is all in all.
We see it in the example of Zacheus, when once he believed in Christ,
presently, Half my goods I give to the poor. Saint Paul, that was all for the
world and vain glory, can say now, My life is not dear to me, so I may finish
my course with joy. In comparison of Christ all is dounge. When Moses had seen
God that was invisible, he was freed from all base dependence on the favor of
Pharaob: nay, he esteemed the reproaches of Christ, better then all the riches
of Egypt. And that makes men's stomachs inwardly to rise against Christians,
because they be not men to serve times and turns, they will not prostitute
their consciences and Religion for any man's pleasure, whereas other men, though
naturally never so stout and strong in parts, yet having base aims, and hearts
fastened to the world, will debase their very natures. And when their end
comes in competition with honesty, they love it more then goodness. As Christ
tells the Pharisees, You cannot believe, that seek honor one of another.

This is it, that makes a Christian better then his neighbor, because he has
a better aim. All other men have narrow spirits, whose hearts are not filled,
with the enlarging spirit of grace, and of Christ. But the course of the
Children of God, is a course contrary to the stream of the World. Let others
take what course they will, it matters not; they will look to themselves. It
is good for them to draw near to God; and to be guided by his spirit. A
Christian seeks communion with him that is all in all, with an infinite good
with God in Christ, and Christ God Man, and happiness. Another man is
straightned in his affections to some particular good, that is meaner then
himself, which mamaketh him a base spirited man. He that inlargeth his heart
to seek out a condition, that is larger and better then himself, is both wise
and happy. One would require no more to Christianity, but to have sanctified
judgments, that God is God, and Christ is Christ, and the Word is the Word,
and rules, that cannot be denied, are true, unless he will be an atheistical
beast below himself. And therefore Lactantius says well, Religion is the true
wisdom. Let a man be judicious, and he must needs be a Christian; the
necessity and excellency of it standing upon such undeniable grounds.

O but I shall ^ose my reputation, says the doubtful heart of man, Object.
and be counted a fool. I shall lose my friends and contentment, if I come to
be religious and serious indeed.

These be idle objections, as if there were not in this kind better in
Religion, Answ.
then in the world, as if God did bid us to our loss, as if Christ should bid
us follow him, to our disadvantage, surely, no He is Lord of Heaven and earth,
and can recompense us in this world. But what is all ple^sure here, to the
pleasure of a good conscience? What is friendship here to communion with God,
and friendship with Christ, and the protection of Angels? What are riches to
him, that is the fountain of all riches? Did not Moses know what he did, when
he forsook Pharoahs Court? or Paul, when he said, to be with Christ is best of
all? Did not Abraham know what he did, when he left his fathers house, and
followed God, though to the giving up of Isaak, whom he knew God could raise up
again, he being alsufficient? Perhaps I love a friend, or pettypleasure, or
contentment, but that was but a particular good, serving for a particular turn
only, but in stead thereof I have God that is alsufficient for all turns, that
is near to me, and never nearer then when I deny any thing for his sake. A man
has never more of GOD then when he denies himself most for God, for in what
measure we empty our selves of love to any creature, in that measure God fills
the soul with contentments of an higher kind. We have within that particular
good, which we parted with, and we have peace and grace, which is
incomparably above it. Think of that, and it will be an infinite encouragement
to live to Christ.

And therefore take these rules. Seek the end in the means? I can have Christ
my end, in riches, pleasures, friends, it is well. But if I cannot have my end
with these things, away with them. When they be gone, the end will remain:
Christ will continue, though they leave us. We may enjoy any thing here* if
the mayn end can be enjoyed with them, if not let us be willingly stripped of all
(for we shall be stripped of them by death) God has enough, he has all things
at command, and has wisdom enough a thousand ways to provide, that we shall
not be losers by him, no, not in this life.

Consider then what it is to give our selves to the Lord. When we give our
selves, we give all things else with our selves. They gave themselves to the
Lord, and then they would easily part with their goods, as the Apostle says.

But we will never give our selves to the Lord, till we consider what he has
done for us. He has given himself wholly for us, left heaven for us, denied
himself for us, made himself of no reputation for us, became a worm and no
man, a curse for us. And in way of requital we should answer him, with giving
our selves and all we have to him, this is to be a Christian to purpose.
Christ has given himself to me, and therefore I will give my goods, my self,
my life to Christ, that is in affection and preparation of spirit, though not
in action. And in action too, when he calls for them, I am not mine own, he
has my self: And fructus sequ^tur fundum. He shall have whatsoever is mine.
If he call me to suffer losses, crosses* disgrace, or death it self, welcome
all, I am his, and therefore whatsoever is mine, is his. And it is no more then
he has done for me. He went so low, that he could not be lower, and be God.
He has advanced my nature as high as my nature could be advanced by union with
his person, and he will advance my person to heaven. And therefore the Martyrs
were willing to part with their lives. They loved not their lives to death, as
Christ's phrase is: He that loves his life, shall lose his life, My life is
not dear to me, says Saint Paul, so ready was he to resign all for Christ.

The reason is (which I desire may not he forgotten) we have a better being in
God then in our selves. Reason.
If we lose our natural life, we have in him a better life. If we lose our
riches, we have them in heavenly treasures. The water is not lost that runs
into the Sea, it is in the Ocean still, its better receptacle.

It was Saint Paul's desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best
of all. But if he will have me to serve the Church here, and enjoy my life
longer, his will be done. So he lives to the Lord, and dies to the Lord, and
whatsoever comes, He is in (...) paratus, Whether he lives and dies, he
is the Lords.

THE FOVRTH SERMON.
ROMANS 14. 7. 8. 7 For none of us lives to himself, and no man dies to
himself. 8 For whether we live, we live unto the Lord: and whether we dye, we
dye unto the Lord: whether we live therefore, or dye, we are the Lords.
IN these words the Apostle takes us off from our selves, and assigns us to
a true end. As the first thing that grace does, is to set God and Christ in his
own place, the Heart: so in the second place it begets a regard of our selves,
such as may stand with the love of Christ. For till Christ has a place in the
heart, by our coming to some degrees of self-denial, self hinders us in
all our whole course both of believing and doing. For we have naturally
contrary principles to all articles of faith, and contrary motions to all the
commands of God. It hinders us in the duties to God, to others, to our selves.
And therefore to what I formerly said, I may add this consideration, Doctrine.
That it is no easy thing to be a Christian. If we were required to renounce
any thing else, we might obtain it of our selves, sooner than deny our selves:
for what is nearer to our selves, than our selves? Thousand Rivers of Oil,
Micha. 6. 7.
the first fruits of the body, would be given for the sin of the soul. That
outward mortification so much magnified in Popery, is nothing to the renouncing
of a lust. But if we would be Christians to purpose, we must be stripped of our
selves, (as they say of the serpent, he must part with the old Slough) we must
have an higher principle than our selves, before we can do it. A Christian is
above himself, and better than himself, and stronger than himself, because
he has a better self than himself. And by virtue of that better self,
which is grace in his heart, he is able to bring under all his other self,
not only his sinful self, but his natural self; neither his life, nor any
thing is dear unto him, in comparison of Christ.

Therefore we must not have conceits of religion, as easy: indeed if we had
sanctified judgments, and hearts set at liberty, it were an easy thing: if we
had judgments to see, that we are never more our selves, than when we are not
our selves; that we have a better being in Christ than in our selves, that our
selves are our worst enemies: If the judgment were thus posse^t, and the will,
and affections made answerable to this judgment, it were easy to deny
ourselves. But self hinders the knowledge of it self all it can. Peccatum
impedit sui cognitionem: sin naturally hinders the knowledge of its own
foulness. Sin cloudeth the eye of the Soul.
That which should discern sin is clouded, and that which should hate sin
is engaged to sin. So that under the use of means we must labor to know our
condition, and the foulness and danger of that condition. And that is the
excellency of Gods ordinances and divine truths, that by them we come to know
our selves: But I will not enlarge my self in that.

What it is to live, How to live to Christ.
and di^ to the Lord we have declared. That it is to make Christ his chief
aim, and end, and do all in virtue of that end. Then is a Christian in his
right temper, when Gods end, Christ's end, and his end have the same center. A
qualification very excellent.

That, that makes God delight in his children so much, is that they have the
same end, the same God, the same spirit with Christ. It is so excellent to
prefixe a right end to ail our actions, that it spirituallizeth common actions.
As Saint Paul says of servants. Common actions by the spirit are made holy.
They serve the Lord in serving their masters. Whatsoever the stuff of our
actions be, yet in that aim, and spirit, in which they be done, they may be
services of the Lord.

Now life implies the whole course of our actions, all our actions should be
to the Lord immediately, and directly, or mediately, and reductively, as they
are quickened by the Spirit of God. And that is the excellency of a christian*
he considers of every thing, as it helps his last end. As on the other side,
a base worldling, considers Religion, and all things else, as they suit to his
worldly aims, but to speak of the next point.

Whether we live or dye, we are the Lords. This is the inference drawn from
the former two generals, Inference.
negative and affirmative. None of us lives to our selves, or dies to our
selves. And from thence it is inferred: whether we live, or dye, we are the
Lords.

And as it is an inference raised from the former; So we may consider it, as a
cause, why we must live to the Lord, and dye to the Lord: for whether we live,
or dye, we are the Lords.

The words are a certain bottom, and foundation for a christians comfort in
the uncertainty of his condition here, being between life, and death. Sure he
is of death, as of life: but when to dye, and how long to live, he is
uncertain. But be that as it will be, this is certain, living and dying, he
is the Lords.

So that take the whole condition of a christian, take him in all estates of
life or death, (which two divide the whole condition of man, for all men may be
ranked into these two orders of quick and dead. A Christian is Christ's in life
and death.
) I say consider a christian in either of them, Christ is Lord of both; take
him in a condition of life, while he lives, he is the Lords. When he gives
up his breath, he is the Lords. So that come of him what will, in this
uncertain condition, this is certain, and sure, he is the Lords.

Now a Lord is he, that has Dominium in rem and personam, right to persons and
things, and the disposing of them, pro arbitrio, as it pleases himself, and
so Christ is Lord both of life and death.

First in general, as he is Lord of all creatures Creation, (God having given
all power into his hands both in heaven and in earth.

Secondly in a more particular manner and right, He is Lord of all those that
be his, by a peculiar gift from all eternity, God has given us to Christ in
his eternal electing love. Thine they were, and thou gave them me, John 17.
says Christ.

Thirdly, and then we are Christ's by his purchase, we are the price of his
blood, we are bought with a price, not of Gold, or Silver, but with his
precious blood, by that price Gods justice is satisfied. God so gave us to
Christ, that he gave him to redeem, and shed his blood for us, that his justice
might be no looser.

Conquest: For he being so excellent a person, as Godman, has rescued us from
all our enemies, Sin, Satan, Death, Hell, and whatsoever else; what have they
to do with us, when Gods justice is once satisfied?

peculiar interest between him and them. They give themselves over to him by a
contract of marriage, We are Christ's by Covenant.
and covenant, and therefore he is Lord of them, by their yielding of
themselves to him, as a Lord: they take him for a Lord, as well as for a
Savior, and that is the foundation of the spiritual marriage, and the
covenant of grace on both sides. Christ gives himself to us, and we by the
spirit of Christ have grace to give our selves back again to him.

By our own voluntary Contract, we have given up our selves to him in our
effectual calling, which is our answer to Gods call, when he calls on us to
be^lieve, to take him, and the soul answers, Lord, Belief the answer of a
good consciscience.
I believe, and accept thee. This by S. Peter, is termed the answer of a good
conscience, 1 Pet. 3. and is, when we can say, I am thine, thou art mine, and I
yield my self to thee, to be disposed of by thee. No Christian can claim
Christ, hi Lord, but this contract has passed between his soul, and Christ.

So that if ^ou look to God the Father, we are Christ's by donation: if you
re^gard Christ himself, we are his by purchase: if we regard the enemies we
have, we are Christ's by conquest: if we regard our selves, we are his by
voluntary acceptance of the covenant of grace, and by contract past between him
and us: yea, and Christ is so our Lord, as that he is our Husband; our Lord,
as our King; our Lord, as our Head. We owe to him a subjection, as subjects; a
subjection, as his Spouse; a subjection, as his disciples, to be taught by him
our Lord and Master.

Now the term of Lord, is usually given to Christ, rather than to God the
Father, both in the new testament, and the old too.

And if there were no other reason for it, Reason.
it is enough that God so styles him.

Lord, more than the Father, or holy Ghost: For he in the second person has
taken our nature, and died and rose again for us, and has conquered all our
enemies. He has in the second person made us his Spouse, his Members, and in
all degrees of nearness to him. And because God in the second person has done
all, therefore in the second person he ismore termed Lord, than God the Father,
or the holy Ghost. And therefore Acts 2. 36. God the father has made him Lord
and Christ.

This is a point of wonderful comfort, It is our comfort to have Christ our
Lord.
and not only a comfort, but a direction how to carry ourselves It is not
only a point of dignity and prerogative, but a duty.

First, it is agrand comfort, we are the Lords, Lords in a peculiar manner, as
before. The Devil is the Lords; the Earth is the Lords, All is the Lords; but
we are the Lords by eternal donatio^, by purchase, by conquest, by voluntary
yielding to him. And therefore it is a most excellent condition.

What is the Lord? Question.


If we be Christ's, Answer.
we have him for Lord, that is, Lord of life, Lord of glory, Lord of grace,
that is, Lord of Lords, King of Kings. He is an independent Lord, none is above
him, the Father and he agreeing together: if you know one, you know both. He
is an absolute Lord, a free Lord, he has no dependence at all upon any
creature whatsoever. An eternal Lord, we have an eternal being in him; for
we are, when we are dead. Christ ^ur Lord before and after death.
And therefore the Apostle divides it, Whether we live or dye, we are the
Lords. We have a substance when we be dead: and a Lord of equal continuance
with our selves: a king for ever. Therefore it is a point of wonderful comfort.

But you will say, Obj^ct.
Freedom is a sweet thing, especially freedom from government, so as to have
no Lord to control us: therefore how can this be so excellent estate to have
Christ our Lord?

Answer.
nor by our selves, nor ^or ourselves.

inferior to be in subjection to be the superior. It is the happiness of beasts
to be under man, that they may be kept from destruction. It is the happiness of
the the weak to have tutors and governers It is the perfection of inferiors to
yield a gracious subjection to that that is better than themselves. For every
thing is perfected by being subject to that which is better. And therefore we
especially in our lapsed condition, seeing we are our own greatest enemies.

God in love will not trust us with our God in our nature, an excellent Lord:
and therefore an excellent Lord, because (besides what I spoke before) Christ
has all the authority in heaven and earth committed to him, not only over us,
but over our enemies, that they shall not do us harm. And indeed he cannot
be Lord of the Chruch, but he must be Lord of all creatures in heaven and
earth, that no creature may prejudice his Church. He has universal
authority over all things, and all for the Chruches cause.

And then he has all the good qualities of a Lord, not only authority, but
wisdom, and strength, and power, and bounty, and goodness, and whatsoever may
make him a gracious Lord. And therefore it is our perfection to be in
subjection to this Lord.

To set forth a little the excellency of this Lord.

He has the sweetness of all superiors whatsoever; as he has taken the name
of all superiority, that is sweet, and lovely, so he has the affections of
all, and eminently more than all; he is a Lord, as a Husband; he loves more
than any husband can do. He is a Lord, as a King, he can do more for us than
any king, He has all power in heaven, and earth, and hell, over the devils
themselves. All knees bow to him, Phil. 2. 10.
of things in heaven and in earth, and under the earth. And he is Lord, as an
Head. Whatsoever Superiority is near and dear, that he is to his Church.

He requires service. I but he is such a Lord as enableth us to serve him,
helps our infirmities by his Spirit: without him we can do nothing, but in
him we can do all.

And as he enableth us to perform service, so does he reward every service,
every good thought, nothing is lost that is done for Christ^, sake, not a cup
of cold water. He gives strength to per^orme, accepts it as a work of his
Spirit, and then rewards it. He is so a Lord, as he stands for his; so a
Lord, as he appears for us now in heaven, against all accusations of Satan.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods people? for Christ makes
intercession for them. Christ answers all Satan's accusations in defense of
his children.
He stood for his Disciples here on earth, and upon any occasion was ready to
defend them; and he is as ready in heaven to stand for his subjects and
servants, and will answer all accusations of a malicious world, against his
Chruch and children, and will bring forth their righteousness to light, as the
noone day; he stands for their credit, and ingageth himself for the defense
and protection of his Mount Sion, his Church.

And to add one thing more out of the text, concerning the excellency of this
Lord, Chr^sts love (...) and eternal.
he is an unchangeable Lord, his love is as himself, and his care as himself,
Eternal: For whether we live or dye, we are his. What other people that are
under a government, can say so? For all their governors love and care ends
in death. In the mean time their minds are variable, their affections may dye
before themselves: as how many have been cast off in their old days? But God
will not do so. Forsake me not in my gray hairs, says David. He is our Lord
while we live, and he leaves us not when we leave to live; but is our God to
death, in death, and after death, and for ever. It is a relation that holds for
eternity. As our Savior Christ says of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. He is the
God of Abraham. Abraham is dead, Isaac and Jacob rotten in their graves. I but
their souls are in heaven: and because he is their whole God, their bodies
shall be raised again, and united with their souls, and be for ever with the
Lord.

In all the vicissitude and intercourse of things in this world, we need
something to stick to: and this the Christian has to stick to, that never
fails him, He is the Lords, Christ is ours, and we are his.
and the Lord is his: he is Christ's, and Christ is his. Christ has a love
that is as himself, unchangeable, Whom the Lord loves, he loves to the end.
The promises made in Christ, are as Christ, the promises of grace here, and
glory hereafter certain: as his nature and love is unchangeable, so the fruit
of his love in his gracious promises, is always certain. They are the
everlasting portion of the Church.

The good things promised, are everlasting likewise, we may build upon them;
we cannot build on riches here, or life here, but we may build on eternal
life, eternal glory and happiness.

So that cast a Christian into what condition you will, A Christian is happy in
all condition,
he has God and Christ in covenant with him, and the love of Christ, and all
the gracious promises, and the things promised. And these do not vary, life
varieth. We may live now, dye to morrow; but whether we live or dye, these
four things mentioned, are certainly ours.

A Christian cannot say of any thing here, that it will be his long; his estate
is his now, and many ways there are to take it away: his friends are his now,
but their friendship may decline: any thing in the world may be so ours to
day, as not ours to morrow. And therefore were it not that in this variety of
conditions we had something that is afterward, ^here were our comfort? we may
outlive all com^orts here, Our happiness in Christ is everlasting.
but we cannot outlive our happiness in Christ, For whether we live or dye,
we are the Lords.

To speak of this a little, as it yields comfort in death; Ground of^
comfort.
we are the Lords not only while we live, but when we dye. Why? because we
have a being in Christ when we dye. Christ is a living root; because I live,
you shall live also. This Lord is the Lord of life: and therefore whosoever is
one with the Lord of life, he can indeed never dye. Death is only a change of
a natural graccious life here, to a glorious life in another world: from the
Church warfaring here, to the Church triumphant in heaven*

It is not properly death; A Christian dies not.
for misery dies, Death it self dies, we do not dye; Death overthrows it
self, but a Christians life is hid with Christ, and when he dies, he dies to
live, and is found in Christ at the day of judgment, and shall be for ever
with Christ. Therefore it is no great matter what kind of death a Christian
dies, because he dies in the Lord. Blessed are they that dye in the Lord. He
says not, them that dye a fair death: A wretch, an opposer, an hypocrite may
do so, and go to hell. But blessed are they that dye in the Lord, because
Christ is their Lord in death, and so says the Apostle, Heb. 11. All these
dyed in faith. He says not, they all dyed a fair death, for they did not,
but many of them dyed a bloody death; yet they all dyed in faith, and so they
dyed in the Lord.

And therefore when we read in the Histories of the Church, that some were
torn in pieces with wild beasts, that they gave the bodies of the Saints to
the Fowls of Heaven, as David has it (which may discourage some to be
Christians) let us not think that any matter, they died in faith. And as the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 116.
Precious to the Lord is the death of all his Saints. For he takes notice of
them in their lives, not only in their lives, but the hairs of their head,
they being all numbered. He takes notice of the tears* that fall from their
eyes, God notes every thing done to his children.
and will not he take notice of their blood? He takes notice of their
persons, their hairs, their tears, and will he part with their lives for
nothing? No, he will be paid for the lives of his children, when he parts
with them, his enemies shall be sure to pay for it. He will be avenged on
them for it, as the blood of Naboth was on Ahab: so he will be revenged on
all the persecutours of his Church, and take a strict account of every drop
of blood that has been shed: for their persons are precious, God takes
special notice of them, they are his members, his Spouse, and near unto him.

And then he will not have them dye, They shall do their work for which they
came.
till they have done their work. He takes special notice of them all their
life: And when they have done what they came for (as Christ says of himself,
I have done the work thou gave me to do: Then he sends for them home.
They dye not at adventure, but under the care of one, that knows them well
both in life and death.

And therefore it is that God so revenged the Persecutors of his Church, for the
blood of his Saints, from the blood of Abel unto this day.

And as the death of his Saints are precious, so are all the things the Saints
have, Whatsoever they have, is precious to the Lord.
their credit is precious, their goods are precious: God takes notice of
every thing they part with for his sake. As he, and all his, is ours,
himself, his happiness, his spirit, his privileges: so when we are his, all
ours are his; he takes care of our lives, of our deaths, of our credits, of
our riches, of our estates: we part with nothing for him, but he considers it,
and will reward it abundantly.

He that dies in the Lord, is a blessed man, so says the spirit, the flesh
will not say so, but rather will infer, who would be so religious? for such
venture their lives* and are counted as the offscowring of the world. The
Devil will teach this Lesson, and the world. As they have lived in the flesh,
and will sell all to be some body in the World, though they go to hell when
they have done. But says the Spirit, blessed are they who not only die for
the Lord, as Martyrs, but that die in the Lord, whether to seal the truth of
God with their blood, or other wise, they die happily* and so this is a ground
of special comfort.

And as it is a ground of special comfort; Of direction to give our selves to
Christ.
so it is a ground of direction. Whether we live, or die, we are the Lords*
Therefore it may be a foundation of living to the Lord. If we be the Lords,
surely we ought to live to him. I^ we be his, all our endeavors, whatsoever is
ours, are his. Fructus and Fundus, go together, the fruit and the soil, and
therefore if we be the Lords in life and death, we must not live to our selves,
as our own: but give our selves to him, and not to anything else: we are not our
own, nor man's, but the Lords. And therefore we ought not to yield up our
selves to our selfe-wils, selfe-wit, self-love, to be at or own disposing* and
to live as we list. We are redeemed from our selves, yea from all our vain
conversations.

Some think Christ dyed, and therefore they may be vain, especially at the
solemn time of Christ's nativitie. The devil has so prevailed with the world,
and will, till there be a new face of the Church: they never honor the Devil
more, than when they seem to honor Christ. For say they, Christ came to set
us at liberty. Object.
Did he so? But it was to deliver us from wickedness; Answer.
yea, from vain conversations, and not to purchase us liberty to live as we
list. Psalm. 12. 4.
Our tongues are our own, say they in the Psalms. I but Christ says, they
are not your own, they are his. And if they be not Christ's, they are the
Devils. Our thoughts are not our own, but all should be dedicated to Christ.
Therefore we should be content that Christ should set up a regiment in our
souls, that he may rule our thoughts, ^desires, our language, and members,
that they may be all weapons of righteousness.

We have nothing our own, Nothing our^.
much less ^inne, from which we are redeemed. And not only from gross
sins, but from such conversations as are vain in themselves, and will be
vain to thee.

And when we are redeemed from sin, and from vain conversations, we are
redeemed from our selves, from the world, from the Devil, whom now has a man
to serve? none but this Lord. We have renounced all other in Baptism: and we
are revolters, and rebels, and renounce out covenant in baptism, if we
renounce not the world, and the lusts of it in our lives.

Our selves we must not serve: for we are redeemed from our selves; and not
only from our carnal selves, but natural selves: Christ is Lord of our
natures. And a Christian ought to say, Lord, of thee I had this body, of thee I
had this life of mine, these goods of mine, this credit of mine, this
reputation and place in the world. As I had all from thee, so I return all to
thee again.

And as we are not our own, we must not be other men's, We must not be
regulated by others opions in religion without ground.
we are not servants of men, as the Apostle says: we must not take upon trust
the opinions* that others would put upon us, or what we list our selves in
religion; we must not have men's pesons in admiration, for advantage, we must
not Idol^ze any creature; for as we are not our own, so we are not any others,
but we are the Lords.

The happiness of a Christian is to be independent on the creatures; he may
use them as subordinate helps, but he is to depend only on this Lord, what
to believe, what to speak; and not to take up this or that opinion, to please
this or that man, thereby to rise to greatness.

It is a base thing to say, I believe as my pa^ents believe: are you your
parents* your parents are the servants of this great Lord, whose you are, and
to whom it is your duty to yield your selves.

Use.
And therefore in solicitation to any sin, make that use of it, that the holy
Apostle does in that gross sin, that reigns ^o much in the world, and brings
many to h^ll, Defile^ent of body. Says he, Our bodies are bought with a
price, And shall I take the members of Christ, and make them members of an
(...)? So when we are tempted by corruption, and Satan joining with it; reason
thus: Shall I de^^le this body of mine? my body is not mi^e, Nothing our own.
it is the Lords; my members are not mine, they be dedicated and consecrated
to him. What should such base abominable (...) to Christ? I am his, my
thoughts his, my desires should be his.

Let those that be given to swea^ing, and blasphe^ing, and idle ^alke,
consider that their tongues are not their own: and yet for whom do they
employ their tongues as an instrument, but for Sa^^^?

So when we come to dye, 2 Use.
make use of it, not only for comfort, but for duty; We are Christ's, and
therefore if he does call us by any kind of death, if he sends for us by a
bloody death, go to Christ that way, because he is Lord, and disposes of
whatsoever befalls us, and determines by what death we shall glorify him.
Be of Saint Paul's resolution, to glorify God both living and dying. Phil. 3.
He knew God should be glorified, by his death, as well as by his life. So we
may glorify Christ by any death; be content to yield our selves any kind of
way to him.

There be two virtues we ought specially to exercise in the hour of death,
Assurance of faith that we are Christ's. And a resignation to his will; that in
faith, and in obedience, we may commit our selves to him, as to a faithful
Creator and Redeemer. This is our duty.

And it is no easy a matter to do this. Many bequeath themselves to God; but
alas, they have alienated themselves before to the world They have given their
bodies to wine, to women, as the Scripture phrase is. Or they have given their
spirits to the world. As we use to say in our common speech, of some men, They
are given to the world. But when they have given their strength to the flesh
before, and do at time of death bequeath their spirits to the Lord, will he
own them? Alas, they are alienated before, and so put out of their own
disposing. And therefore ordinarily (unless the Lord work a miracle) it is
impossible to dye in the Lord If a man have not lived to the Lord before;
which may teach us to give our selves really to him in our life time; that our
lives being a service to Christ, we may comfortably die to him, and have our
souls to dispose of.

The like subjection must be showed in all conditions whatsoever. We must be
subject to God in all conditions.
If God will have me to honor him in a mean calling, I am not mine own, I
am his, my life, and all my condition of life, are only to him. My calling, my
estate, it may be is low, that my pride may be humbled. But God has set me
in my calling, he will have me to honor him in it. In the meanest calling, a
man shall have enough to give an account of, and therefore there is no reason to
be ashamed of our calling. I am the Lords, in my life, in all the passages of
it, in my calling, in all the troubles of it, I am to look for support, and
protection, and provision, and direction from God. I am here by his
appointment. And therefore he that has set me in this place, will provide for
me, protect me, guide me by his Spirit, what to do in my place. And so it is
a ground of contentation in all conditions.

You see then there is great reason why we should not live to our selves, but
to the Lord: that we should not dye to our selves, but to the Lord. For it is
a great comfort, and a special duty: and therefore in a word* We cannot have a
more comfortable experiment in all divine truths* It is our chiefest comfort
that God is ours, and we are his, and to improve it.
than this, That God in Christ has passed over himself to be ours, and we
have passed over our selves to him, i^ we have grace to do i^. And then to
plead, and improve it, when it is done* there is not a comfort of greater
comprehension: and therefore the Apostle dwells on the point. No man lives
to himself, no man dies to ^^^selfe; but we live to the Lord, and dye to the
Lord. To what end is all this? but that we should settle it as a bottom, and
ground of comfort and contentment, and happiness, that we are not our own,
but the Lords.

Think therefore of this one thing, that we are his, that has a command in
heaven and earth, to whom all knees bow with subjection; his, that is Lord of
Lords, King of Kings, that is Lord Paramount, who will not suffer any thing to
befall his Church, or any particular Christian, that shall not be for their
good: for he has all power in heaven and earth for that purpose, and for ever.
What a comfort is it in life, and death, in the midst of oppositions here, or
from the powers of hell, that we have a Lord, that is commander of all, Lord of
life or death? He has the keys of hell and death. Himself has conquered
all, and he will conquer all in us by little and little. What happiness is
it, Isay, to be under such a Lord?

The end of the fourth Sermon*
THE FIFTH SERMON.
ROMANS 14. 7. 8. 7 For none of us lives to himself, and no man dies to
himself. 8 For whether we live, we live unto the Lord: and whether we dye, we
dye unto the Lord: whether we live therefore, or dye, we are the Lords.
THere is nothing more availeable to the living of a Christians life, then to
have the eye of the soul on his maine end, and scope. And then, to be
furnished with some maxims, and principles, to direct our lives to that scope.
Where the parts are most noble, and large, there the aim, and scope, is most
excellent. Now a true Christian being raised above others, has an end and
scope above other men; And that indeed makes him a Christian in good earnest.
When God by his Spirit discovers an higher excellency, then the world can
afford, and sets our hearts toward it.

Now the Apostle sets down the scope of out whole condition both of life,
Negative.
and death* First Negatively* No man lives to himself. No man dies to
himself.

Then Affirmatively, Affirmative.
We live to the Lord, and dye to the Lord.

And he gives the ground of both, Whether we live, Ground of both.
or dye, we are the Lords.

If we live to the Lord, we shall have a being after life. A Christian is, when
he is not; when he is not here, he has a being in heaven; and ^uitably to his
several conditions he has a Lord to own him in all. Now he lives, yet
cannot build on life, nor any thing below, because life is short and
uncertain. But this he may build on. Whether he lives, or dies, he is the
Lords.

Now Christ is said in Scripture, to be Lord oftener then God, Christ our Lord
as the second person.
because God in the second person has appeared in our Nature, overcome all our
enemies, has triumphed, and is now in heaven in our Nature. and because Lord
is a word of authority and sovereignty. And God has made him governor of
quick and dead.

He is a Lord in regard of God the father, by Donation, Lord by donation.
God has given the elect to him before all worlds.

He is a Lord in regard of himself, Lord by conquest.
by conquest over the enemies of our salvation.

And then by Ransom. Lord by ransom.
He has paid a price to divine justice for us. For though God gave Christ to
us from all eternity, and us to Christ, yet on these terms, that he should
ransom us. God will not have his justice a looser, therefore Christ must pay a
price to divine justice, such was his mercy, and the glory of his mercy to find
out such a way to satisfy justice, that God should dye.

No attribute of God must be a looser, Lord by satisfaction to divine justice.
he must have the honor of all his attributes; and therefore of his justice,
and here is the glory of his wisdom, in contriving a way that mercy may
triumph, and justice may be satisfied.

And then he is Lord, Lord by our submission to him.
by our voluntary submission to him; for we set a crown upon his head, when
we subject our s^lves to him.

He is our Lord in all estates, Lord in all conditions.
living, or dying. At all times, without limitation. In all conditions, whether
it be a life of prosperity, or adversity, let us die by what manner of death
soever.

And so I showed, we are the Lords in a double sense, In regard of our
carriage to him, Lord by his care over us.
and in regard of his care over us, both must be included. We are not the
Lords only for that he takes care of us, and without our service, nor that
we do him service without his care of us; but he is so our Lord, that we
have grace to acknowledge him, and he has grace, and love, and mercy to
protect, and acknowledge us both in life and death.

It is no prejudice to a Christians estate, that he is another, it is the
happiness of the weak, to be under a stronger; of those that be deficient,
to be under fullness. Now there is all-sufficiencie in Christ, therefore to
be under him is our happiness.

Give me leave to illustrate this; Illustration.
Every thing is beautiful in its own place: things that are highest, it is
fit they should be highest; things that are lowest, it is fit they should be
lowest. If the head were not in its own place, there would be deformity in
the body. And so it is fit Christ should be our Lord, being God-man, and the
glory of our nature. And it is our happiness, our beauty and comelines, our
safety and perfection, to be under Christ, and to be only under him.

He is only larger than the soul, he is of equal continuance with the
soul; he is only suitable to the soul, being a Spirit, he only is eternal:
and therefore being every way so abundantly satisfactory to the soul, it is
the happiness of the soul to have him for its Lord; especially considering
what a Lord he is: a Lord independent, Lord of Lords, that has all other Lords
at command, a bountiful and gracious Lord.

And we are not only the Lords while we live, but when we come to dye:
therefore we should be willing to dye, when our time comes, The last end of a
Christian is most fruitful.
yea to dye any kind of death, because he is Lord of quick and dead. We
should be like David, and Moses, who were very fruitful toward their ends. And
as we are not ashamed to live so so good a Lord, so we should not be afraid to
dye to him, as one said of himself.

This word Lord, implies, there be some dut^^s owing by us: we are the Lords
in our souls, in our bodies, in our conditions; and therefore we should
wholly give up our selves to him, and (...) no thoughts to dishonor him, give
way to no ^isings, no desires, which become not the subjects and servants of
the Lord: believe nothing that we ^ake up of our selves, keep the chasti^y of
our ^aith, and underst^^ding, not to believe lies, and untruths. But submit our
very understandings, and faith to God. We must not be servants of men, in our
judgments, or souls, no ma^cipium alien^ (...), as the Philosopher ^ayth. But
consider what Christ has revealed, and let us submit to that.

And therefore it is a grand error in the Church of Rome, who would have
people to belie^e as ^he Church believes, which is (...), Primum mendacium.
the first lie that leads them into all those erro^^s, ^o believe Christ and
Scripture, no further than the Church discovers (...). And so they overturne
all. For they believe God because men say so. It is a dangerous error that
runs into practice. Popish error.
If the Church say, treason must be done, we must be traitors. It is no
matter what the Scripture says, the Pope he is the head of the Church, and
he can dispense with what he pleases. But my sheep, says Christ, hear my
voice. And it is our duty to hear what the Lord of our ^aith says, which is
only Christ. If he be our Lord, then let our wills be brought into subjection
to his will: nothing is more out of order than this will of ours; if that were
once subject to Christ, Will, the ground of controversy between God and us.
all controversy between God and us were taken away. All the st^ife is,
whether we shall have our wills, or he his will. The Spouse has no will of her
own, but it is resigned to her Husband. So must we submit our wills to
Christ's desire.

And then again, we ought not in any thing to regard the humors of men.
Christ is Lord of our affections, we must hate what he will have us hate, and
love what he loves: our whole souls must be conformable to Christ.

And our bodies are wholly his too, and therefore we must be content that our
bodies should be used as they used his body. He gave his body for us, he took
our nature, and in that nature went about doing good, suffering hardship, he
was hungry and thirsty, he was crucified in our nature, suffered in our
nature: and so should we be content our natures should be used as he would have
them, to take much pains in doing good, to suffer hunger, thirst, restraint,
yea death it self for Christ, because we are Christ's? it is no more than he
did for us; he being our Lord, was abased for us in his blessed body, and
flesh, and therefore shall not we suffer for him?

So our conditions are his, suffer him therefore to cut us out a portion, to
allot us any condition.

The word implies more particularly an application to our selves, we are the
Lords, and the Lord is ours.

And likewise a renunciation and severing from all others, we are the Lords,
and none else: the Lords, and none but the Lords: if we are any bodies else, it
is in the Lord, and for the Lord.

Here is likewise a resignation, we are the Lords, and therefore we will give
up our selves to him, with a resting in him, and high estimation of him, and
glorying in our condition through him.

And then here is an improvement of this employed, we are the Lords, therefore
we ought to improve it on our parts, by serving him; and on his part, by
believing that he will have care of us.

We are the Lords first by particular application, which is wrought by degrees.

We are the Lords by particular application.
not fully, but by letting in so much light into the soul, as may carry the
soul to him, and makes us yield to him, trust in him, and cast our selves upon
him, and by doing so, we grow into farther acquaintance with him; and he
honors our faith with a farther sense and assurance, that he is ours, and we
are his.

There is a great deal of distance and breadth between the first act of faith,
by which we cast our selves on Christ, and a confident persuasion that Christ
is ours, Assurance a fruit of faith.
and we are his, that is a fruit of faith, and there needs a great deal of
growth before we come to that.

And therefore if you ask, what does the soul first to make Christ his own?
How the soul makes Christ his, and the course it is to take.
It is this, In the use of means (wherewith God pleases to be effectual) a
light is by the Spirit let into the soul, whereby the heart is persuaded, that
he has a good meaning toward it: that he is a gracious Lord, and will forgive
the sins of all that rely upon him. And with the acknowledging of these
truths, together with the offer of mercy in Christ, there is so much
sweetness let into the soul, as carries the soul back again to Christ, to
rest upon him. For unless Christ begin in some degree to make love to the
soul, and gives a taste of his sweetness, we cannot rely upon him, nor
love him, not only because we are creatures, and he is first, and must begin
to us; but, because it is the nature of a guilty soul, when it is under
terror, and awakened, to forecast such doubts, that till Christ lets in
some glimpse of his love, the soul dare not look Christ in the face.

Now in the unfolding of these divine truths of the Gospel, some intimations
are given, That Christ is mine, and I am Christ's, which afterward becomes the
claim of an experienced Christian. This therefore directs what course they
shall take, to get Christ, that want him. They must attend upon the blessed
means of salvation, and then consider how far forth they may lay claim to
Christ.

Christ's in some degree. God has prevented men with his love, in admitting
them to the visible Church: and there is an ob^igation on them to think well
of Christ for that, because he had care of them, before they had care of
themselves, by vouchsafing them the seal of Baptism, and making them members
of the visible Church.

Secondly, unless they labor, being come to years of discretion, to feel a
farther assurance, that Christ is theirs, they disanull and deny their
baptism: and therefore it is good for such souls as are touched with sight of
sin, to gather upon Christ, and to wind about all helps they can, to work
on Christ; as the vine gathers on the tree, it windeth about. I am born in
the Church, I have been baptized, lived in times of the Gospel, have
opportunities to hear the blessed truths, and therefore I will have good
conceits o^ Christ, that he means well to my soul.

Indeed a company of wretches, Ungodly men deny their baptism.
that rest in their baptism, being profane swearers, vile persons, abusers of
their calling, or any thing, can say, are not we baptized? and do not we
come to Church? but they forget that this is an obligation on them to be good,
and no excuse for them to be evil. It tieth thee to renounce that thou live
in, else thou deniest thy baptism.

We must know, beloved, that Christ loved us, not as we love a goodly Pillar,
or other curious piece of Art, that cannot love us again: but the intercourse
between God and man, is mutual. If he say, he is ours, we say again, I am
thine Lord, and give my self to thee, and the claim is mutual. He claims
us for his, and we claim him for ours: for he deals with reasonable
creatures, that can enter into covenant with him as friends. We must therefore
give up all to God. If God be God, All assigned to God.
let us own him. And as we cannot serve Christ and sin, We cannot serve
Christ and Antichrist, we cannot comply with Christ and his enemies. Those that
have the mark of the beast, absolutely cannot be Christ's, nor have communion
with him, but are enemies to Christ, though under pretense of religion. But
where a man is truly Christ's, he is none but Christ's; Satan is content with
any part, but Christ must have the whole heart.

Gods children have something in them, Sin in the children of God is as a
rebel; in the wicked as a Lord.
that usurpeth, some corruption in them, which is not absolutely removed; but
it is but a rebel, and they have an enemies mind to it, all that is contrary
to Christ, is renounced, whereas in them that be carnal, sin is as a Lord;
but in Gods children, it is as a thief, he is there, yet they own him not,
but get strength against him: he rules not there, but as a Tyrant; there is a
renunciation of Lordship, and dominion of sin: though they have inclinations to
this and that sin; yet they have no liking to that liking, no inclinations as
spiritual, to that inclination, as carnal: but make it an object of
mortification. They renounce all other Lords, when all other men (that have not
the spirit of Christ) are under the dominion of some reigning lusts.

And as it implies a possession, so likewise an estimation: as God esteems
us, so we esteem him above all: And therefore God calls his Church, his
Portion, his Jewel, Phil. 3. 8.
and we call Christ our portion, our treasure, our pearl, our all. S. Paul
counts all dung and dross in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Christ.
And all that belongs to Christ, he esteems. And therefore the Church
glories that God is their God, and makes claim to him as S. Paul, I live by
the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. And as
Thomas, My Lord and my God. This is the best evidence of a true Christian,
whose estate is no way known better, than by his estimation. Whom have I in
heaven but thee, or in ^arth in comparison of thee? says David.

It implies likewise a duty of resignation to Christ in life and death,
because we are not our own, and therefore are in all things to be at his
disposing, to be led what way he pleases, and to pursue his directions,
though to the crossing of our corrupt nature, to be content to go to heaven,
as he will lead us, by fair ways, or foul ways; by fair death, or bloody
death, if by any means we may attain to the resurrection of the dead, as S.
Paul says it.

Besides this, we must have a care to implead this, and to improve it, as the
Apostle does here, Whether we live or dye, we are the Lords. He will have care
of us, and therefore we ought to serve him.

It is a special after-part to be able to make it good to God, in all
troubles and conditions whatsoever, I am thine, Lord save me; I am thine, Lord
teach me; I am thine, Lord protect me.

Avouch and make it good against the temptations of Satan, (urging thee to
distrust) I am not my own, I am Gods, and Christ's; and therefore, if thou have
any thing to say to me, go to him that has paid my debt. Thus plead the
goodness and graciousnesse of God.

Plead it against temptation to sin. I am not mine own, I am bought with a
price. My body is not for uncleanness, but for the Lord.

Plead it against our own Consciences in times of desertion, search narrowly
wha^ we have of Christ's in us, and do not cavil against our selves too much
in times of temptation. If we have but desires of the soul to God, lose not
any thing that is good: if I renounce my interest in Christ, I am where the
Devil would have me; then he can do any thing with us. And therefore plead
it against our own distasteful hearts, in times of darkness. I give my self
to him, and my desires are to him, my faith is little, but yet something, my
love is little, but yet I love the Lord, I believe, help my unbeli^f. We must
take notice of any thing Christ has wrought in our spirits, that we may
implead our interest on all occasions: for if we yield to despairing hearts in
times of temptations, we are gone. A Christians duty in time of desertion.
Therefore say with Ioh, If thou kill me, I will trust thee. Lie at Christ's
feet; if thou will damn me, so it is, I will lie here, and wait here. For if I
have not present audience, I shall have it, God wai^eth to do them good that
wait for him. He will try our spirits whether we will take a seeming repulse:
therefore we must (as the woman of Samaria) grow on Christ, and catch at his
words. And as the servants of Benhadad, who retorted on Ahab presently, Thy
servant Benhadad. 1 King^ 20^ 33.


And as we must implead our interest, so we must improve it in the whole course
of our life, and in all conditions what soever, if we have any loss, or
crosses, yet the soul can say, Christ is mine, and I am Christ's. Though a man
taking a journey lose things of less value, yet if he has a pearl left him,
he is content: for he has that that will make him a man.

And therefore be not much disconsolate for any crosses. Grieve for nothing but
the loss of Christ.
They cannot take away my Christ, my promises, the comforts of the Spirit, I
have a Christ, and in him all that shall be for my good.

Improve it in all opposition of flesh and blood: hell, and the instruments of
hell, Satan and wicked men, they are mine e^nemies; but it Christ be my friend,
it matters not, Christ can make our enemies our friends.

And all things are ours, He that has Christ has all things.
if we be Christ's, we have a general charter; things to come are ours, life
ours, death ours: and therefore if we be Christ's, make use of him.

As it is baseness of spirit, to rest in any thing in the world but Christ, so
it is baseness of spirit for us that are Christ's, to be dejected for any
thing in the world: we have the treasure, we have the Mine, we have the
Sun, what if we lose a beam? we have a spring, what if the stream be dried
up? It Christ gives us himself, it is no matter what we lose. But we are sure
of him, For in life and death, we are the Lords.

And therefore let us hence answer all objections. Oh that we should have such
grounds of comfort and stabilitie, and yet make no more use of them! I^ these
things were fresh in our thoughts, nothing would ^iscourage us.

If you ask^, Question.
how shall we know in particular, that it is so indeed, that we are Ch^^st^?

I answer, Answer.
if we have given our selves to him by a contract of our own, How to know our
selves to be in Christ.
if we be married to him, you know marriage must have consent of both parties.
Those that give not themselves up to Christ, to be his, they are not his. They
that live under the power of any sin against conscience, as their Lord, that
love any thing better than Christ, and will not part with it for Christ's sake,
Christ is not theirs, for they be engaged another away.

Again, if we live to Christ, we are sure we be Christ's, what is the scope of
our lives? what is our aim? if so be that Christ may be glorified by me, I am
content to part with any thing, with life it self, I may know that I am
Christ's. He that will not deny all, that hates not father and mother for my
sake, is not worthy of me, says Christ. Self-denial argues the subjection
of our hearts to Christ.
Self-denial, and ha^red of all things in comparison of Christ, argues an
interest in him. Therefore it is a great deal of grace, and the soul is much
subdued, before it can say, I am Christ's, and Christ is mine.

For when sin, and other withdrawings from Christ, are to be di^^erted, first
there is much ado in the understanding, with reason.

Have I reason to do this? well if my judgment say it is good, yet my will
says it is better to have my will, than to yield to God, though I hazard the
ruin of my self. Oh this is a fatal naughty disposition, and a sign of
ruin: yet the reputed happiness of many men, consists in their chief
misery.

Again, good things first coming to the judgment, are there repulsed. But if
they come to the will, there they be more opposed. And then the affections make
a stir, and bu^sle, love and hatred, and engagements to worldly things, and
all to hinder our claim and interest to Christ. But he must be set up in
place of self-love, before he can say, Christ is mine, and I am Christ's, and
that is an hard matter. Therefore let us consider what our aim and scope is.

In a word, if we be Christ's, undoubtedly we will side with Christ, 2 Kings 9.
32.
Who is on my side, who? says Iehu? In ill, and doubtful times, Christ's calls
are for a party, and calls our, where is my party? who stands for me? who
owneth Christ and his truth, and doctrine, and good ways, honesty and
religion? who is on my side, says Christ? Why I am for the Lord (as in the
Prophet Isaia^, says the soul, that can own Christ. It Christ will own us,
we shall own him: Who denies Christ here, shall be denied by him in heaven.
if we be ashamed of him, he will be ashamed of us, at the day of judgment.

They that for hope of preferment, and to be some body in the world, can cross
their own consciences, and Christ in their consciences, by doing that which by
his spirit he tells them is naught; are they Christ's, when they set up self
as an Idol above Christ, and side with the world, and the flesh against Christ?

Again, A note of a true Christian.
he that can say in truth of heart, Christ is his, and he is Christ's, he will
solace himself, delight himself, and live upon this comfort: it is a rich
claim, and there will be spiritual wisdom, where there is this interest to
implead and improve it: it is not given to lie dormant, but grace is given with
it, to improve it, and live upon it. All that is Christ's, will please him that
has Christ, his truth is sweet to him, the Lords day, the Lords work, the
Lords servants, the Lords ordinances, whatsoever has the stamp of the Lord,
it is sweet to him; because he is the Lords, and the Lord is his.

This is contrary to the disposition of that generation that can cunningly
despi^e persons, and causes, if they see any thing in them opposite to their
own base courses and lusts.

But above all, where Christ is any man's in truth, the Spirit of Christ is in
that man's heart, a witnessing Spirit, and a sancti^ying Spirit. The Spirit will
witness an interest, The Spirit witnesses our interest in Christ.
and fit and sanctify the soul, as a gracious vessel for Christ's service
here, and for glory hereafter. And though the Spirit witness not so loud, that
he is Christ's, yet he may know by the work of the Spirit, that Christ is his:
for the spirit frames him (...) a connaturall disposition to Christ, and all
that is Christ's. They love his ways, and government. A gracious man would not
be under another government than Christ's, if he were to choose. He has made
his choice indecd; but if he were to choose, he would have Christ's
government, because he finds a sweetness in it, and a suitableness to the
dignity of it. A gracious man most of all enjoys himself.
A man never finds himsel^e more himself, than when he is most gracious.

Carnal men, though they submit to ourward means, yet they cast away the bond
of Christ, Psalm. 2.
they cannot endure the yoke; but they that are Christ's, have a connaturall
disposition to the government of Christ. And they complain to Christ of other
Lords. Other Lords rule me: this lust reigns in me, Lord subdue it, Though sin
be in a Christian, yet it reigns not.
claim thine own interest, let nothing rule in me, but thy Spirit. I am weary
of my inclinations to this and that lust. And so there is a conflict ever
maintained.

To stir us up in a word to labor to be more under the government of Christ,
and to get assurance of it, let us consider if we be not Christ's, who^e are we?
There is but two kingdoms, if Christ rules us not, the Devil and the world
must rule us.

And what kind of subjection is it, to be subject to our own lusts? to a
damned world, and to Satan? is it not to be ruled by our enemies? and base
enemies. Our lusts are baser than the devil himself. For the Devil is a
substance, and rules by them. The Devil rules by sin.
Now who would be willing to serve an enemy? nay to be aservant of servants,
to be under these tyrannical enemies, restless enemies, that do incroach
upon us more and more: and all the fruits we have by their service, is shame,
and grief, at the best, and shall we serve those that will pay no better
wages? yet this is the condition of all that have not Christ for their Lord:
they serve some base lust, and Satan, a tyrannical Lord, that in stead of
better rewards, punishes them with eternal destruction* so that they serve
him with the price of their own souls.

I beseech you seriously consider of it, and put this qu^re to your souls; I
have lived in such and such a sin, but what is the fruit of it? The best is
shame, if I am not ashamed here, it will end in eternal shame. So that it is a
sweet thing to be under the government of Christ. It is utile dominium, a
dominion for our good.

And lest we should be discouraged, Caveat to avoid temptation.
take heed of all temp^ations, that withdraw us from the love of Christ's
government, because our nature is opposite to this yoke. If they seize upon us,
we shall be great losers by them in our reputation, and in much of that
comfort, which otherwise we might have gotten.

Beloved, you shall lose nothing by Christ. What we lose for his sake, we shall
gain in peace of conscience, in grace, and in this world too, if he sees it
good. No man ever lost by the service of Christ. let a man lay beginning and
end together, and tell me, if he has gotten any thing by serving his lusts:
for God pays him home here, in much terror of conscience and crosses, and
losses at the end, besides hell hereafter, though at first he enjoy some
seeming comfort.

And therefore lay it as a Principle, That Gods service is the best and most
profitable service.

I but it appears to the view of the world, Object.
that they that stick close to Christ, and will disclaim all for a good
conscience, fall into this and that misery,

First, the reason is, because they be not Answer.
it may be they be negligent in the service of Christ, Complaints arise from
our own negligence.
and therefore God will purge them, and make them better, and will try their
graces, that they may know themselves the better,

Secondly, one maine end is, indeed

Thirdly, if we serve Christ, he will out in the world* Christ's government is
mystical.
I confess there is a mystery in Christ's government, which we must take notice
of; we can give no reason why his enemies should so reign, and his church be
put under hatches. Only in general we know, that all this in conclusion shall
serve for the Churches good. And all shall work for the best to them that love
God. God is all this while a working the Churches good, and the enemies ruin,
though we see not the mystery of Christ's kingdom.

I beseech you labor to make a good use of this, Use of exhortation to get
under Christ's government.
get under Christ's government, and when flesh and blood shall put up a
pe^ition, or suggest any thing, give it a Non-placet, deny the petition, say I
am Christ's, and I owe n^thing to any but to Christ; therefore not to sin, or
my self. All my debt is to the Spirit, and to Christ, therefore I will sow to
the Spirit, not to the flesh. I am bought with a price, my liberty cost Christ
dear, therefore I will dye honorably, rather than prostitute my self to any
base courses. Thus we should have high thoughts of our selves. And upon all
temptations suggested to us, make use of this consideration, That we are not
our own, but Christ's.

FINIS.

