THE EXCELLENCY OF THE GOSPEL above the LAW.

Wherein the Liberty of the Sons of God is showed.

With the Image of their Graces here, and Glory hereafter.

Which affords much Comfort and great Encouragement, to all such as Begin
Timely, and Continue Constantly in the ways of God.

By R. Sibbs, D. D. Mr. of Katherin Hall Cambridge, and Preacher of
Grayes-Inne, London.

Begun in his life time, and published by T. G. and P. N.

LONDON Printed by Tho. Cotes, and are to be sold b^ John Bartlet, at his shop,
at the Sign of the gui^^ Cup, near S. Austins gate. 1639.

The Contents.
What Is meant by Spirit. 15. Christ.. 1. Has the Spirit. 16. 1. In himself.
ib. 2. In greater measure than any other. 17. Quest. When was the fullest
measure of the Spirit in Christ? 24.. 2. Gives the Spirit. 25. 1. To
Ordinances. 25. 2. To Persons. 27. He works all by the Spirit. 28. He
communicates the Spirit to us diverse ways. 34. Influence. ib. Merit. 35.
Example. 37. Quest. Why the Spirit was given in greatest abundance after the
resurrection. 38. Use 1. How to recon^ile Scriptures. 44. Use 2. Why the
Ordinances are no more effectual. 45. Use 3. Of comfort from the exaltation of
our nature in Christ. Formality is the sin of this age. 50 Use 4. Comfort
that Christ has fullness of the Spirit. 52. Why Christians are so dark
spirited. 54 Use. 5. We must labor to be in Christ that we may get the Spirit.
57. Motives to get it. 57. 58. etc. The Spirit is the Soul of the Soul. 63.
How to know if we have the Spirit. ib. etc. The Spirit compared to fire. 65. 66
It convinces and what it is to convince. 67. 68 It makes us like unto Christ.
69 Directions how to get the Spirit. 70. 71, etc. 1. The knowledge of Christ
makes all things comfortable. 73, 74 2. We must not trust to any performance
without Christ. 75 3. We must be careful of the means. 76, 77 The Spirit
works Liberty. 78 And Liberty is desired of all men. 79 There is Liberty 1.
Christian. 81 2. Evangelicall. 82 We are in bondage without the Spirit. 89 The
more Liberty without Christ the more Slavery. 85 Liberty wrought by Christ,
applied by the Spirit. 89 How the Spirit works Liberty. 89, 90 As 1. By
Correction. 90 2. By Faith. ib. 3. By Love. ib.
Christ redeemeth a ways, 1. By Price. 91 2. By strong hand. 92 All that
Christ redeemes, he frees by his Spirit. 93 The reasons are four. 1. Because
we are saved as Men. 91 2. We are freed to be friends with God. 93 3. Else we
cannot love God. 95 4. Else we cannot be fitted for heaven. 96.
The Spirit sets us at liberty in all the course of Salvation, from the
beginning to the end. 96 Instances hereof 1. In our Vocation. 97 2. In our
justification. 102 3. In our Sanctification. 110 4. In our Glorification.
No benefit by Christ without Union. 103 The heart is full of fears without
the Spirit. 106 Why men of great parts, without the Spirit are in great fears.
108, 109. Sanctification springs from Justification. 110 Sanctified Christians
esteem basely of all things but Christ. 113. The Liberty of Sanctification is
not a liberty of freedom from all conflicts. 116 Comforts against the
dullness of flesh. 117. Christians are Kings over their lusts. 122 As appears
1. By their freedom from the consequents of sin. 124 2. By their freedom in
good 4. Witness. 236
Pretty short, but sweet uses of these. 237, etc. Why men are enemies to Gods
free grace. 240, etc. The glory of God greater in the Gospel then in 1. Adam.
242, 243, etc. 2. It is above that in Creation. 244 3. Than to Angels. 245 The
Uses of it. 249, 250, etc. 257, etc 262, etc. How to think of mercy in
temptation. 264 Often offenses exclude not mercy. 266 The Gospel discovers
Christ's mind to us. 271. and his love. 274, 275 We cannot see divine things but
in a glass, that is darkely. 280 How our souls are helped by our senses. 289
The Sacraments are Gods glasses to see Gods love in Christ. 290, 291, etc. We
see God diverse ways: 1. In his creatures. 297 2. In his word. ibid. 3. In
Christ in the flesh. 298 4. By faith. 299 Faith compared to sight four ways.
1. As the noblest sense. 301 2. As the largest. ibid. 3. As the surest. 302 4.
As the most working. 303
How to keep the eye of the Soul cle^re. 305 What the vai^es are, that hinder
our beholding of Christ. 314, 315 A twofold use of a Veil. 1. Of subjection;
2. Of obscurity. 316 We have boldness in the Gospel. 319, etc. 321, etc. How
to recover boldness with God. 326, 327 The Church enlarged by Christ's coming.
332 A necessity of our change. 338, etc. And why? 340, 341, etc. This change
twofold, 1. Real, ^. Graduall. 345 Christ the pattern of this change. 358 And
why? 362, etc. Christians musts study Christ 372, etc. How to read the life of
Christ in the Gospel. 38^ The more we are like Christ, the more we are
beloved of God. 389 How to become like Christ. 391 Three things comfortable to
us in Christ's death. 395 How to know that we are changed to Christ's Image 401,
etc. Motives to stir us up to get Christ's Image. 406, 407 Christ in this change
is all in all. 414, 415 Every good thing in man, is in Christ first. 418 The
excellency of the glass of the Gospel. Three sights most efficacious and
comfortable. 1. To see God in Christ. 2. Christ to see us in God. 3. We to see
our selves in Christ. 430, etc. How to know that we see the glory of God as we
ought. 434 Love works imitation. 436 No saving knowledge without a change. 440
The glory of a Christian very large. 444 Four degrees of it. 445 Christ's Image
is grace and glory. 452 The glorious condition of a Christian enlarged. 451.
460. 472. 476 Why the world despises those that are gracious. 465, 466, etc,
We must labor for grace, that we may be glorious. 474 Why men malign those
that are good. 479, 480, etc. We must not blemish our grace by sinning against
conscience. 481 Grace will cheer us against the disparagements of the world.
483, etc. The esteem of grace, a note of grace. 486 Grace and Glory go both
under one name. 490, etc. Grace is of a growing condition. 498, 499. 503. 518.
No change in Heaven. 531 etc. There be degrees in the glory of a Christian. 536
It Is a part of Heaven to know the glory of it. 541 Growth in grace notes the
truth of grace. 542 Its growth insensible. 548 Christians compared to the best
things. 558 A wicked man cannot desire heaven. 560 Comforts against death and
reproaches. 559. 565 Christians must thank God for glory to come. 568, 569,
etc. All good in us by the Spirit. 574, etc. Notes whereby we may know that we
have the Spirit. 609, 6^0, etc. All good in us from the Spirit. 624 Hence
learn to give the Spirit his due. 633, 634, etc.
FINIS.
Excellency of the GOSPEL above the LAW.
2 COR. 3. 17, 18. Now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the
Lord is, there is liberty.

But we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the
Lord.


THe Apostle begins this Chapter with the commendation of his Ministry,
having been put upon it by their undervaluing of him; yet so, as together with
himself he commends them as his best and only Testimoni^l, and Letters of
commendation, verse. 2. and so makes way for himself to fall into a more set
and large commendation of the glorious Gospel it self, whereof God has made
him so able a Minister to them, verse. 6. And because the excellency of any
thing is best commended by comparing and setting by it something else that
excels, in it self, and yet is exceeded by it; therefore he carries along his
commendation of the Ministry of the Gospel through the whole Chapter* by
comparing it with the Law, and the Ministry of the Old Testament. This
comparison is made by the Apostle,

First, A comparison (...) the Law and the Gospel.
more briefly, in laying down some distinct properties and prerogatives of the
Gospel wherein it excels the Law, verse. 6. as, 1. that this was the
Min^stery of the New Testament, that of the Law of the Old: 2. and not of the
letter, as the Law was; but of the Spirit: 3. nor of death, for the Letter
kills: but of life, for the Spirit qaickeneth.

And then, by Inferences drawn from these properties thus briefly summed up,
the Apostle more largely illustrates the transcendent Glory of the Gospel and
howfarre it exceeds the glory of the Law, although it be granted the Law be
glorious.

As 1. if that which was but a ministration of the Letter written and engraven
in s^ones was glorious, verse the seventh; that is, if the litterall notions
and bare knowledge of the Law, which (like so many dead words or Characters)
makes no a^^eration at all, but leaves their hearts hard and stony, like the
Tables on which the law was written, which remained stones still. If this was
glorious, even the litterall ^^owledge of the Law. as (...) was, both in the
Jews own account of themselves, and in the judgment of the Nations amongst
whom they lived: How shall not the ministration of the Spirit be rather
glorious? verse the eighth: the meaning whereof is largely explained in the
third Verse; where the Corinthians are said to be an Epistle written not with
ink, or dead Letters, but with the Spirit of the living God; which kind of
writing leaves not the heart a heart of stone, as the dead writing of the Law
did, but changes it into a heart of flesh, and makes such a through
alteration in the wholeman, as the writing within, in the Tables of their
hearts, is known and read of all men: so that their lives and conversations
being answerable to that spiritual and gracious writing of Christ in their
hearts, they are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ: and therefore
such a Ministry as this is, by which the Spirit of the living God is received,
(and no by the Law, Gal. 3. 2.) which is a Spirit of glory, and works
gloriousthings both in the hearts and lives of men, must needs be rather
glorious.

2. Another Inference we have in the 9. verse; if the ministration of
condemnation be glorious; that is, if that word which concluded men under
sin, and pronounced the sentence of death upon them be glorious; much more
does the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory: For it is more
glorious to pardon than to condemn; to give life, than to destroy. It is the
glory of a man to pass over an offense, Prove. 19. and in God it is called the
riches of his glory, Romans 9. 23 The Law, which was made glorious, in
terrifying, condemning, and stopping the mouths of men, in so much as they had
not a word to say for themselves, has no glory, by reason of the glory of the
Gospel that excels, even in this respect that it brings such a
righteousness, as by the merit whereof, and satisfaction given by it, we are
justified and have peace toward God, notwithstanding the utmost rigor of the
Law.

3. The Apostle argues further, verse the eleventh, if that which is done away
was glorious, as the old Covenant is, which was made old by the coming of the
New, Heb. 8. and by it removed as a thing grown weak and shaken, Heb. 12.
much more that which remains, which is the New Covenant which cannot be
shaken but shall remain, and is the everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14. is more
glorious: as Gods last works exceed the former, and takes away the remembrance
of them in comparison; as when he creates New heavens, and a New earth, the
former shall not be remembered nor come into mind. Esa. 65.

4. There is another excellency of the Gospel above the Law, which the Apostle
adds, and insisteth upon it more largely then upon all the rest; and that is,
the comfortable plainness and perspicuity of the Doctrine and Ministry of it,
verse the twelfth; Seeing we have such hope, we use great plainness of
Speech. In which it excelled the Ministry of Moses, which was in much
difficulty and obscurity, and that in a threefold respect laid down in the 13,
14, and 15 verses.

1. The Matter of it was terrible, tending to the shame, confusion of face, and
condemnation of the hearers; insomuch as they were notable to stand before him
nor steadfastly to behold his face, it was such a dazzling and amazing light that
shined in his Ministry.

2. The Manner of delivery was in obscure and dark expressions, that the
Children of Israel could not see to the end of that which is abolished: that
is, they could not see the drift and scope of his Ministry, by reason of the
Types and Shadows, which was the veil he put upon his face.

3. Their minds were blinded, there was a veil upon their hearts, which is
evident by experience in the Jews at this day; who so cleave in their
affections to Moses, and to the Shadows and Ceremonies of his Ministry, that
they reject the scope and end of it, which is Jesus Christ crucified. And they
can do no other; for although the veil that was upon Moses face by removed,
as it is by the doctrine of the Gospel, which shows us in all possible
plainness what the drift and meaning of Moses was in all those Types and
Ceremonies, yet until the Gospel in the Spirit and efficacy of it comes home
to their hearts, and takes off the veil that is upon their hearts also: that
is, until their natural blindness and obstinacy be taken away, which cannot
be (but is rather increased) by the Law, ( for although Moses be read, yet
until this day remains the same veil untaken away,) the Jews will
unavoydably abide in their Ignorance and bondage.

Now in opposition to this darkness and obscurity of the Law in all those
respects, the Apostle exalts the Gospel in this high and excellent privilege
of it, That it is plain, and evident, and full of demonstration; and that the
light of it is not terrifying and amazing, but sweet and comfortable; so that
we may with much liberty and boldness of Spirit look constantly upon the
great and glorious things set before us in it, although it be no other but the
glory of the Lord Jesus Christ.

And there is moreover such an efficacy and working power in this Ministry of
the Gospel, as it will not suffer men to remain the same without alteration,
as they did under Moses Ministry, though he was read daily; but it will
change them even into the Image of Jesus Christ, and the carry them on still in
that Image and likeness from one degree of glory to another, after a most
admirable and spiritual manner of working.

This special excellency and prerogative of the Gospel is laid down in the
two last verses of this Chapter, which are the words upon which we shall more
largely insist in the following discourse.

Verse. 17. Now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty.


The Lord is that Spirit that takes away the veil, The Explication of the
words.
that is spoken of before.

He sets down what Christ is, by what he does; Christ is that Spirit, because
he gives the Spirit.

And then a sweet effect of the Spirit of Christ, Where the Spirit of Christis,
there is liberty.

The Spirit here is not taken for the person of God; as if the Holy Ghost had
said, The Lord is a Spirit, and not a bodily thing, though that be a truth.

And as it is not meant naturally, so not personally, Christ is that Spirit, as
if Christ were the holy Ghost, that were a confusion of persons; nor as
restrained to the third person; the holly Ghost is the Spirit. Neither (as some
heretofore would have it) to show that the Spirit is Jehovah, God: It is
neither to show that Christ is God, nor that the Spirit is God, nor that Christ
is the holy Ghost: But it is meant in regard of a special dispensation, The
Lord is that Spirit; that is, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Lord of his
Church by marriage, office, etc. is that Spirit; that is, he 1. has the
Spirit in himself eminently; and, 2. dispenses and gives the Spirit unto
others; all receiving the Spirit from him as the common root and fountain of
all spiritual gifts.

First, he was that Spirit, as having the holy Ghost in himself as man, 1.
Christ has the Spirit in himself
the holy Ghost filled the Humane Nature, and made it spiritual: The Spirit is
all in all in the Humane nature of Christ, and whatsoever he does, he does, as
it were, being full of the Spirit, in himself. He gives the Spirit as God, and
receives it as man; so he both gives and receives: the Spirit proceeds from
the Father and the Son as God, but the Spirit sanctified Christ as man, as it
did in the Virgins womb; the holy Ghost sanctified that blessed mass of his
body; it sanctified him, and filled him with all graces and gifts; whereupon it
is said he received the Spirit without measure; Christ has the Spirit in
greater measure than any other.
that is, in ^bundance: Christ has the Spirit in himself in a more eminent
excellent manner than all others; and it must needs be so for these reasons:

1. From the near union between the Humane nature and the Divine, they ^re
one person; therefore ^here is more Spirit in Christ than in all creatures, ^ut
them together; then in all the Angels, and all men, because the Divine nature
is nearer to Christ, then it is to the Angels, or to any creature.

2. Christ has the Spirit without measure, both in regard of extention and
intention (as we say,) he has all graces in all degrees, even next to an
infinite; all others have it in their measure and proportion.

3. The Spirit does rest upon Christ invariably; in other men that have the
Spirit it ebbes and flows, it is sometimes more, and sometimes less; there be
spiritual desertions, not only in regard of comfort, but in regard of grace
(though not totally;) but the Spirit rests ^n Christ eternally in a full
^easure: and therefore you have it thus in Esa. 11. 2. The Spirit of the Lord
shall rest upon him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Under standing, the Spirit of
Counsel and might, etc.

4. By reason of his place or offices in relation to the Church, as Head,
Husband, King, Priest, Prophet, etc. the Head is made by nature the seat of the
more noble faculties; as of Seeing, Hearing, Understanding, Iudgeing; and is
furnished accordingly with greater plenty of spirits, for the ruling and
governing the whole body; so Christ is the head of the Church, and the
government of all the world is laid upon him, and all excellencies are derived
from him unto all his members, as from the Root life is derived unto all the
branches; and therefore he must needs have the Spirit in greatest abundance:
his fullness of the Spirit is as the fullness of the fountain, ours is but as
the fullness of the Cister^^; he has grace in the Spring, we have it but in
the Conduit; his graces are primitive, ours derivative; we have nothing but
what we have received; therefore it is said, he has the oil of gladness
powered upon him above his fellows.

He has his name from Annoynting, Christ. He was anointed; that is,
separated and ordained to the office of Media^orship, by annoynting, not
properly, that is, with any material oil, but with the Spirit; this was in
regard of his Humane nature only, but it was above his fellows; that is,
above all Kings and Priests, for they are his fellows in regard of titles; he
was above them all, for all have their annoynting from him, therefore he is the
King of Kings, and the Prophet of Prophets etc. Also above all his fellows; as
we take his fellows; for Christians, they are his fellows; I go to my God,
and your God, etc. he is the first borne amongst them, and in all things he
has the preeminence.

5 He is to be as the pattern, we are to follow him* we are predestined to
be conformed to ^im, and to grow up to that fullness which is in him; and in
thi^ respect there is cause why he should have the Spirit and all the graces
of it is greater abundance, that he might exceed all, even Christians of
greatest growth and perfection: he is to be a pattern and example to all, to
the strongest as well as to the weak. Eve^ Paul himself, who was (...) Leader
to others, for the excellency of the grace (...) Christ that was in him, (...)
a follower of Christ; Be (...) followers of me, as I am of Christ.

Q. When did this fullness of the Spirit come upon Christ, when had he it?

Ans. There was a fullness of the Spirit powered out upon Christ in the union of
the Humane nature with the Divine; Union and Unction went together: there was
annoynting of the Spirit, together with the union of the Spirit.

2. There was a more full manifestation of the Spirit in his Baptism; when the
holy Ghost fell on him in the shape of a Dove, then he received the Spirit, he
was to enter into the Minist^ry of the Gospel; the Spirit of the Lord God was
upon him, because he had anointed him to Preach good tidings unto the meek,
etc. Esa. 61. 1.

3. But the fullest degree of declaration and manifestation of the Spirit upon
Christ, When the fullest manifestation of the spirit in Christ was
was after his Resurrection: after he had satisfied fully for our salvation,
then the stop of his glory was taken away: For to work our salvation, there
was a keeping back of the glory of Christ from his Humane nature, that he
might be abased to suffer for us; when he had fully suffered for us, that
stay of his glory, his abasement was taken away, and then nothing appeared but
all glory and Spirit in Christ. All things were put under his feet, and he was
set upon his Throne as a glorious King: His Priestly Office appeared in his
death; his Prophetical Office, before his death; but then he appeared to be
King, and Lord of all in the Resurrection. Thus we see how Christ is that
Spirit; that is, he is full of the Spirit in regard of himself.

Secondly, he is that Spirit in regard of his dispensations toward his Church
and Children: 2 Christ gives the Spirit.
The Lord is that Spirit; that is, 1. of all truths, and 2. of all persons, to
give life and quickening to them.

First of truths: 1. To all truths and Ordinances.
what is the scope of the whole scriptures, but Christ? from the first Promise
of the blessed Seed, The Seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head, to
the end of the book? What is all the Scriptures without Christ? The Law is a
dead letter, yea and so is the Gospel too without Christ, he is that Spirit
which gives life unto all the Scriptures; Moses without Christ is but a shadow
without a body, or a body without a soul. Take away Christ, what was the
Brazen Serpent? What was the Arc? What were the Sacrifices? What is all? Is
not Christ all in all these? The Kings, and Pr^ests, and (...) they were types
of Christ, all the Promises they were made and fulfilled in Christ, the Law
Ceremonial aimed at Christ, the Law Moral is to drive us to Christ, Christ is
the Spirit of all; and the Scripture without Christ, it is but a mere dead
thing, it is but a shell without a kernel, as it is to the Jews at this day.

2. Christ is that Spirit, in regard of persons, 2 To all persons that are
spiritual.
quickening them; he is an universal Principle of spiritual life, infusing it
into al his Church and Children: Christ is always with his Church from the
beginning of the world, and will be to the end. It was no loss to the Church
that Christ in his bodily presence l^ft it, for he left them the Comforter,
his Spirit, by which he wrought greater works after his Ascension than he did
before. He is anointed with the oil of gladness and grace, above his
fellows, but all was for his fellows; whatsoever he is, or has, all is for
his Church and Children; for us he was borne, for us he was given; he is a
King, a Priest, a Prophet for us: he dyed for us, he rose again for us.

And he does all he does toward the Church, Why Christ works all by the
Spirit.
as he has the Spirit, and by the Spirit. The Father is the first in the
Trinity, from whom all comes; and the Son by whom all things are; but the holy
Ghost is the immediate worker of all things, next the creature; all things are
applied from God the Father, through the Son, by the Spirit: what Christ
wrought, and what the Father in wisdom devised, was applied by the Spirit: and
so the framing of us to be fit for such a glorious condition as we have by
Christ, is also by the Spirit. And this is the reason why Christ gives the
Spirit to those to whom he purposes to give faith or love, or to work any
gracious work.

For where Christ saves he does it not only by merit and satisfying the wrath
of God for us, but also by san^tifying and effectual working in us, that he
might be a perfect Savior. Now the Essential vigor and operative Principle
in all things, either wrought by or from the Father or the Son, is the
Spirit. As in Man there is his will from which he resolves and purposes,
there is wisdom and understanding by which he proceeds, and then there is
a vigorous power in man by which he executes and does all: so is it in this
working of God; the Father plotteth and determines of what is to be done; the
Son, who is the wisdom of the Father, dispenses what the Father wills;
the holy Spirit, the power of both, finisheth and works all upon us, and
therefore he is called the power of the highest, Luke 1. 35.

Whatsoever works come from God to the creature in general, and are wrought in
the world as works of Creation and providence, are immediately by the holy
Spirit, nakedly considered, as the third person coming from the Father and the
Son. And in those special works, wrought in his Church and on his Children,
all things comes from the holy Ghost, but not simply considered as the third
person, but as he is the Spirit of Christ; that is, first sanctifying and
filling the Humane Nature of Christ, and then sanctifying and filling us;
Christ could not give the holy Ghost immediately to us, we being in enmity
with God, and separated from him through our sins, but he must first take it
to himself, who having by his death and sufferings reconciled us to his
Father, and purchased the Spirit for us, may now dispense and give forth his
Spirit to us.

If we had stood in Adam, we should not have received grace so as now we do;
for we should have received it from the first Adam but as from a man; now we
receive it not from mere man, but (which is much more) from the second Adam,
who is God-man: nay, Adam himself received not his grace after so glorious a
manner as we do, for he received it from the Spirit nakedly considered as the
third person in the Trinity, and as all other creatures received their
excellencies: but we receive it from the holy Spirit, which does not only
proceed from the Father and the Son, but comes, as it were, through our own
nature (which was marvellously united to God the Son, and made one with him)
unto us, and works in us.

The first Adam was a living soul, the last Adam was a quickening Spirit: he
quickened himself when he was dead, and he quicke^s all his members too:
first, he receives the Spirit himself, and the same Spirit that filled and
sanctified his humane nature, the sam^ Spirit sanctifies his Church which he
loves even as himself, as he loves that his own humane nature, which the
holy Ghost sanctified, so does he love his own mystical body, his Church,
being mystically united to him, and sanctifies it by the same Spirit.

Christ dispenses his Spirit unto us, Christ communicates the Spirit to u^
diverse ways: as,
as Head of his Church; and this he does in diverse respects.

1. As he is God, 1. Of influence
by way of immediate influence; he powers it out upon us as the prime and
pricipall cause; and this he does as God, not as man, for the Manhood cannot
work above it self, it cannot do the work of God, it cannot work grace or
give the Spirit.

2. As he is Man, 2. By way of merit
(considered as joined together with the Godhead) by way of merit and
satisfaction, he procures the Spirit to be given and powered out, which is
done by the Father and the Son on all those who are beloved in the Son; so
that the Spirit is given by Christ, with the Father, as Mediator,
Meritoriously: for he by suffering and satisfying, procured the gift. Christ
himself is the first gift, yea the greatest that ever was given, the giving of
Christ to dye, to satisfy the wrath of God, and to obtain eternal life: Next
to (...) maine gift is the gift of the Spirit, in which is the seed of all
gifts and graces; and this we have by his Merit and Mediatorship. Yet this we
must likewise remember, that although Christ be said to give the Spirit, as he
does, yet the holy Spirit gives it self too; for there is such an unity in
the Trinity of consent and nature, that though the Father and the Son send
the Spirit, yet the Spirit comes of his own self; though the Father and the
Son give the Spirit, yet the Spirit gives himself.

3. We have the Spirit from Christ not only by way of Merit, 3. By way of
example.
but in some kind by way of Example; he is the exemplary cause of all graces
in us; looking to whom, we are transformed (as we shall see afterward) from
glory to glory: For when we consider that Christ has done so much for us, as
to save us, and redeem us, and dye for us, this begets a love in us to
Christ, and makes us often to think of him, and desirous to imitate him, as
we usually do such as we love and highly esteem of.

The dispensation of the Spirit is in most abundance Christ gives the Spirit
in greatest abundance after his Resurrection.
after the resurrection of Christ, as he appeared in himself then to be most
spiritual and glorious after he rose again, so then being as the Sun in its
full height and perfect beauty, casts his beams most plentifully abroad, and
that for these reasons:

1. Because then he having finished the work of Redemption, and satisfied the
wrath of God fully, and given contentment to Divine Justice, and accomplished
all by his death, there was nothing to hinder the blessed gift of the Spirit.
It is said, that before, the holy Ghost was not given, because Christ was not
glorified: The gift of the holy Ghost especially depends upon the glorifying of
Christ, when he had fulfilled the work of Redemption, and was raised to glory,
God being pacified, gave the holy Ghost as a gift of his favor.

2. Then again after his Resurrection and Ascension he did give the holy Ghost
more abundantly than before to his Church, because now he is in heaven, and
has the advantage of the place, being exalted on high: As that glorious
creature the Sun, by the advantage it has, being placed in the heavens above
us, is able to shine upon the greatest part of the earth at all times; and we
need not call the Sun down from its place to come into our houses, or
fields, or gardens; no, where it is seated in its proper place or orb, it has
the best opportunity in most abundance and largest extent to send down heat,
and light, and influence to inferior things: So Christ does his Church more
good now he is in heaven, from whence he sends the Spirit, then he could do
if he were below; because though his Humane nature be confined in heaven, his
person is every where: and being ascended now far above all heavens, he
gives gifts more liberally and plentifully, insomuch as he fills all things,
Ephesians. 4. Ephesians. 4. 10.
he enlarges the tents of his Gospel, and has taken in a greater people to
himself. We see in Winter when the Sun is low and near the earth, all
things are dead, and cold; but when the Sun in the Spring comes to overtop
us, to be in a higher point above us, we see how all things put a new garment
upon them, there is a new vigor and freshness in them; so there was more
abundant vigor of the Spirit when Christ came in the Flesh, his virtue
appeared much more every way then before. But when this blessed Son of
righteousness was advanced, and seated at the right hand of his Father, where
his Nature was perfectly enriched, and perfectly adorned with all kind of
graces whatsoever in the highest glory of them; his influence of light and heat
now begins to be increased, and the efficacy and working of it to be felt
every where. The glorious beams of the Sun began to be scattered, and the
light of the Gospel to shine to a greater number of people; now there was no
respect of persons, whether Jew or Gentile, bond or free, male or female, all
was one, the Commission was enlarged to all; Mark. 16. Go preach the Gospel
to every Creature; and with the Word the Spirit went, and was received, and
those that were added to the Church, even such as should be saved, were many
thousands.

Thus have we opened the meaning of the words, and showed how Christ is that
Spirit, both in respect of the Spirits being eminently in him, and his giving
of it, and spiritual gifts by it; all the vigor, and life, and influence we
have, that is spiritual and supernatural, and above the ordinary course, is
from the Spirit* and whatsoever the Spirit has, or does for us, is done as
sent from Christ, in whom the Spirit is in all fullness: Now we shall show how
many ways the consideration of these truths will be profitable and useful to
us in the course o^ our lives, and for the comfort of our spirits.

Christ is the Spirit of the Scriptures, of all Truths of all Ordinances. We
may be this be able to reconcile the Scriptures, one place with another, where
they s^eme to contradict: The Law is said to be a (...), a ministr ation of
condemnation, etc. 2. Cor. ^. but in the 19. Psalm. there it is said, The Law of
the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, etc. These places are thus
reconciled: The Law is said to be dead, so it is without Christ, without the
Spirit which quickneth, and so is ^he Gospel too, even a savor of death; and
so are the Sacraments also as well as the Word, dead Ordinances if Christ be
not in them. The Law is said to be perfect, and to convert the soul; so it
does when the Spirit goes along with ^t, as it did ordinarily before Christ
came in the flesh, as in David's time; but after Christ was come, who was the
substance of those shadows, they became beggarly Rudiments, as in Paul's time;
and the Spirit did not work with them, but with the Gospel, the hearing of
Faith, Gal. 3. 2.

Why the Ordinances of God are no more effectual unto us.
at one time differs so much from it self at another time in respect of the
life and comfort of it, as we often find even in our own experience; as also
why the same Ordinance (be it the Word or Sacrament, etc.) at the same time is
profitable to one, and another has no benefit at all by it: This is from the
presence or absence of Christ, who is that Spirit. What is the reason that
Wine, or Aqua-vitae, does more refresh and strengthen then common water? It is
of the same substance, of the same color that other water is? but there is
more spirit in it; all things work answerable to the spirits that is in them
So what is the reason that ^he reading or hearing of ^he same thing affects
one, and not another at all? the ^ubstance of the thing is the ^ame, but the
spirit is not ^he same; the spirit goes with the one, and not with ^he other.
We grant that our negligence in preparation and attention, our pride and
earthly-mindednesse, our want of faith to mingle with the Word; these, or ^he
like, may be causes why we are many times sent ^mpty away: yet this still ^ust
be observed as a most ^vident truth, that all the efficacy and fruit of any
Or^inance depends upon Christ's being present in it who is that Spirit that
quickneth. (...) most powerful means that ever was ordained for our good,
will be dead and heartlesse if he be not there, by his Spirit to put life into
it: It may seem^ strange what John says, chap. 6. The flesh profits nothing.
The flesh of Christ, John 6. 63
our nature which Christ took, and in which so much was wrought for us, which
is the greatest Ordinance o^ (...) this flesh profits not nor will there be
any benefit of it, if it be not applied unto us spi^^^ually; for it is not the
flesh simply considered, but as by it, and with it we receive the Spirit of
Christ; which Spirit quickneth and makes the flesh o^ Christ meat indeed. As
i^ is with the flesh of Christ, (...) with all other ordinan^es, the Scriptures
profit nothing, preaching profit^th nothing, the Sacra^ents will profit
nothing, ^^here is none of these will (...) meat indeed, unless (...) spirit
of Christ quic^^en them.

Therefore we ought to (...) with all the ordi^^nces of God, a desire ^^at
Christ would join ^^is spirit, and make them ^ffectuall: we ought to ^ome to
the ordinances in (...) dependence upon Christ ^or a blessing upon them, (...)
for his presence in ^^em, who is the life and ^cope of all, and then we should
not find such dul^esse, and deadness in them. It is the sin o^ this age
this formality, Formality is the sin of this age
it is the sin of those tha^ have any thing in them (set desperate drunkard^
and roarers and such wretches a side, as plainly discover themselves to be
acted by the spirit o^ the Devil) take them tha^ conform themselves i^ any
fashion to religion, the killing sin that they ly^ under is this same dea^
formality; they will hear a Sermon now and then, look on a book, and i^ may
be pray morning and evening; but never look up to the living and quickening
spirit Jesus Christ, so that all they do is dead and loathsome, like sal^ that
has no savor. What is the best liquor if it has lost its life and spirit,
but flat and unsavory? and blood when the spirits are out of it, what is it but
loathsome goare, so are all their performances, even like sacrifices that had
no fire in them, the Lord loathed such sacrifices as he did Cains, and so he
does all our flat and livelesse services, yea and our persons too, being as
Jude says, fleshly, and not having the spirit.

Chapter alone by our selves, or in our families, we should lift up our eyes
and hearts, and voices to heaven, we should say to Christ, Lord join thy
Spirit, be present with us, without thee thy Word is dead, our hearts are dead,
and will harden under the means, and darken in the light, and we shall fall
under the heavy condemnation of these secure and formal times, if thou
leavest us.

Comfort that Christ has ^ulnes of the Spirit.
and that for our sakes, it is a point of much comfort, that there is such
abundance of Spirit in our nature in Christ, and for the behalf of the Church,
that we have a fullness to receive of: It was a comfort to Joseph's brethren,
and that family, that Joseph was full of honor, and rules the second in the
kingdom, therefore they should want nothing that was good in Egypt; is it not
a comfort for Christians to know that Christ is the spirit, that he has the
spirit to give, the spirit of wisdom in all straights, the spirit of truth to
keep us from all errors, the spirit of strength for all services, the spirit
of comfort for all afflictions, he that is their Lord, has abundance of
spirit in him, and for them; therefore when we want any grace, or gift of the
spirit, we should go to Christ, for God does all by Christ, Christ does all
by the spirit, desire Christ that he would vouchsafe his spirit to rule us,
counsel us, comfort us, and strengthen us. Therefore in our emptiness, (as
indeed we are empty creatures of our selves) let us go to Christ for the
spirit, he has received that fullness for us, desire him that out of his
fullness, he would vouchsafe to give unto us.

It is the reason why Christians are so dead, Why Christians are so dark
spirited
and so dull, and so dark in their spirits, they do not first consider
themselves, and then go to Christ, we should all, in all exigents whatsoever,
make use of this our great high Treasurer, the great high Steward of heaven and
earth, of this our Joseph, the second Person in heaven, he is at the right hand
of God, and all to fill his Church with his spirit, our comfort is now that our
strength and comfort lies hid in Christ, that is near to us as man, and near
to God as God, he is between the Father and us, he is near the Father as
being of the same nature with him, he is near us as being of the same nature
with us, so being a Mediator in office, and being so fit for a Mediator in
nature what a comfort is this.

Indeed there is no coming to God, no intercourse between God and us
immediately, but between God-man and God and us, who is the Mediator between
God and us, he comes between, in Christ we go to God, in our flesh in our
nature, and in Christ, and from Christ, and by Christ, we have all grace and
comfort; from Christ we have all as God, together with the holy Ghost, and the
Father, and we have all in Christ as a head and husband, and we have all
through Christ, as mediator by his merit, therefore we should go to Christ
every way.



Christ is our Savior, not only by merit and satisfaction, but by efficacy
and grace, that is, as he has purchased us for his people by his blood; so
he will subdue our corruptions, Motives to stir us up to get the Spirit.
and rule us by his Spirit. Romans 8. 13.


For first, He that has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his; those that
have not the efficacy of the spirit in them to rule them, shall not have
benefit by his death to reconcile them, for these go always together, Christ as
a King to rule, and as a Priest to dye, He came by blood and by water; to
satisfy, and to sanctify.

Secondly, there is a necessity of the Spirit, that we may be new Creatures: it
was the Spirits brooding upon the Chaos that brought forth all, so the Spirit
must sit upon our souls before any change will be made: Now there is a
necessity that we be changed, and that we be new, or else we can never be
inhabitants of the new heavens and the new earth, we must have the Spirit of
God: therefore Zech. 4. 6. as in the material Temple, Its not by might or by
power, but by the Spirit; So in rearing up spiritual Temples, it is not by
strength of wit or parts, but by the Spirit; therefore the Spirit is necessary
for us, even as our being in grace is necessary.

The holy Apostles we know till the Spirit came more abundantly upon them;
what dark creatures they were? but when the holy Ghost was come upon them, how
full of life, and light, and courage they were, that the more they suffered,
the more they might suffer: So it will be with Christians, the more spiritual
they grow, the more lightsome and courageous, the more strong, the more lively
and vigrous to all duties: the holy Ghost is the substantial vigor of all
creatures what soever; all the spiritual vigor of every thing, comes from the
holy Spirit, and the holy Spirit from Christ.

For nothing can work above it self, nature cannot work above nature; That
which elevates nature above it self, and sets a spiritual stamp, and puts
divine qualities upon it, is the Spirit of God. That divine quality is called
Spirit: There is the flesh, and the spirit; all in us is flesh by nature, and
what soever is spiritual and divine, comes from the Spirit, and therefore it
is called Spirit; you see therefore a necessity of the working of the Spirit,
even as there is a necessity to be new creatures, and to be spiritual. If we
will be spiritual, we must have it from him, that is first spiritual, the
Spirit himself, that is the principle and fountain of all that is spiritual.

Thirdly, we are called often times to do, and suffer such things as are above
nature, and therefore we must have a spirit above nature, when we feel sin,
to believe the forgiveness of sins; when we see death, to believe life
everlasting; and when we are in extremity, to believe God present with us to
deliver us; to believe contraries in contraries, is a strange almighty work of
faith, by the works of the Spirit. It is above the work of nature to dye, to
end out days with comfort, and to resign up our souls; for nature sees
nothing but darkness, and desolation in the grave and destruction (...)
nothing can make a man comfortable in death, but that which rayseth him above
nature, the Spirit of God.

Now these things and many such like, we must do and suffer, if we be
Christians, and therefore we must have the Spirit to enable us to do all. The
Spirit the soul of the soul.
The spirit is to the soul, as the soul is to the body; what is the body
without the soul? a ca^k^ss^, a loathsome dead thing; what is the soul
without the spirit? a Caos of darkness and confusion.

Well, How to know if we have the Spirit.
how shall we know whether we have the spirit of Christ or no?

We may know it partly by that I said before. 1. It Is working.
The Spirit is a vigorous working thing, and therefore all three persons, take
upon them the name of Spirit, but the Holy Ghost especially, because he is the
spiritual vigor. The Spirit is an operative thing, the spirits are the
quintessence, and extraction of things, that is nothing but operation, God that
is nothing but a pure act is said to be a spirit, those that have the spirit of
God, are full of act, and vigor, the spirits of dull creatures, are active,
when they are ex^racted, shall the spirits of bodies be vigrous, and shall not
the Holy Ghost be vigrous, that is a substantial vigor? therefore, if a man
have the Spirit of God in him, it will work in him, it is very operative.

Therefore it is compared to fire, The spirit compared to fire.
in diverse respects, for, first, Fire it is of a working nature, 1. It is
active.
it is the instrument of nature, if we had not fire, what could we work? all
Fabrickes and all things, are done by Fire, especially mettalls, they are
framed, and made mallyable by fire. So the Holy Ghost, it is a working thing
and softneth the heart, and makes us mallyable, it makes us fit for the
impression of all good.

Secondly Fire, again, 2. It transformes things.
though bodies be dark, it makes them lightsome like it self, Iron is a dark
body, but if the fire penetrate it, it makes it lightsom: We are dark
creatures of our selves, if we have the Spirit it makes us light.

Again, 3. It carries upwards.
Fire it mak^s cheerful, and it ascends upward; if a man have the Spirit of
God, his conversation will be upward, his conversation will be heavenly, he
minds the things of God, he does not grovel here below, so in diverse such
respects, the Holy Ghost is compared to Fire, and has such effects in us, in
some sort we find our understandings enlightened, and our selves quickened,
and carried up to be above nature, in holy and heavenly actions, and then it is
a good sign that we have the Spirit of Christ. A part will follow the whole,
as we see a part of the earth, it falls to the center, because all the earth is
heavy, all the whole earth falls down to the Center, and therefore every little
clod will do it, so Christ our head that has abundance of the Spirit is in
Heaven, and if we have the spirit, we will follow him, and mind the things
where Christ is.

Where the Spirit of Christ is likewise, 2. It is convincing. Ioh. 16.
it convinces, as it is John 16. that is, it brings a clear evident
conviction with it, that the truth of God, is the truth of God: It is no
doubtful thing, therefore when a man st^ggers in the truth, in this and that
course, whether he should do this, or that, it is a sign, he has not the
spirit, or that he has it in a very little measure, because the Spirit is a
convincing thing, as light it convinces a man, he does not doubt of that that
he sees at noone day, so that that a man sees by the Spirit, he is convinced
of, when a man doubts, and wavers, whether he should take a good course or a
bad, and wavers, it is a sign, he is carnal, and has not the Spirit of God,
for if he had the Spirit it would convince him, and set him down, you must
take this course, if you will be saved, To convince what.
That is said to convince, that says more for a thing then any thing can say
against it. Now when a man has the Spirit of God, he can say more for God and
for good things, and good ways then all the devils in hell, by discouragement
can say against them. Therefore, when a man cannot say any thing for God, and
for good causes to purpose, he has not the spirit of God, the spirit of God
would so convince him, that he should answer all cavils, and objections. The
argument is wondrous large, I give you but a taste to know whether the Spirit of
Christ be in you or no.

In a word, 3. It makes us like Christ.
if Christ be that spirit, and have infused the spirit into us, it will make
us like him, it will transform us into his likeness, it will make us holy and
humble, and obedien^ as he was, even to the death; these things, might be
largely followed, bu^ we have occasion to spea^ of these, in other portio^^ of
Scripture, therefore that ye may get the Spirit of God, Directions to get the
Spirit.
take these directions.

We must go to Christ, 1. Labor to know Christ.
studdy Christ, if we will have the Spirit, studdy the Gospel of Christ, what
is the reason that before Christ, there was so little spirit in comparison?
there was but a little measure of the knowledge of Christ, the more Christ is
discovered, the more is the spirit given, Why there was so little spirit before
Christ's time.
and according to the manifestation of Christ what he has done for us, and
what he has, the more the riches of Christ is unfolded in the Church, the
more the Spirit goes along with them* The more the free grace, and love of God
in Christ alone is made known to the Church, the more Spirit there is, and
again back again, the more spirit, the more knowledge of Christ; for there
is a reciprocal going of these two, the knowledge of Christ, and the Spirit:
What is the reason, that in Popery, the Schoolmen that were witty to
distinguish, that there was little spirit in them? they savoured not the
Gospel, they were wondrous quick in distinctions, Why so little spi^rit in
Popery.
but they savoured not the matters of grace, and of Christ, it was not fully
discovered to them, but they attributed it to satisfaction, and to merits, and
to the Pope, the head of the Church, etc. They divided Christ, they knew him
not, and dividing Christ, they wanted the Spirit of Christ, and wanting that
spirit, they taught not Christ as they should, they were dark times, as
themselves confessed, especially about nine hundred, and a thousand years
after Christ, because Christ was vayled then in a world of idle ceremonies (to
darken the Gospel and the victory of Christ) that the Pope made, who was the
Vicare of Satan, these were the Doctors of the Church then, and Christ was
hid, and wrapped, in a company of idle traditions, and ceremonies of men, and
that was the reason that things were obscure.

Now when Christ, and all good things by Christ, 1. The knowledge of Christ
makes life and death comfortable.
and by Christ only are discovered, the veil is taken off: now of late for
these hundred years, in the time of reformation, there has been more spirit,
and more light somenesse and comfort, Christians have lived, and dyed more
comfortably, why? because Christ has been more known; and as it is with the
Church, so it is with particular Christians, the more they studdy Christ, and
the fullness that is in Christ, and all comfort in him alone to be had,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and redemption, the more men grow up
in the knowledge of Christ, the more they grow spiritual, and the more
spiritual they grow, the more they grow in the knowledge of Christ, therefore
if we would have the spirit, let us come near to Christ, and labor to know
him more, who is the fountain of all that is spiritual.

Then again if we would be spiritual, 2. Not to trust to any performance
without Christ.
let us take heed we trust not too much to dead things, without Christ, to have
a kind of Popery in the work done, to think that reading, and hearing, and
receiving the Sacrament, and that the government of the Church will do it, as
if it were as man would have it, put case there were all these, (which are
excellent good things,) but what are all these without the spirit of Christ, a
man may be dead with all these, though he hear never so much, and receive the
Sacrament never so often, if a man go not to Christ the quickening spirit in
this manner; Lord these, and my soul too, are dead things without thy spirit,
therefore quicken me, join Christ with all our performances, without which all
is nothing, and then he will be spiritual to us.

And when we go to Christ, 3. Be careful in use of means.
for the spirit (as we must beg it, if we will have it, (God will give the
holy Ghost to them that ask him) remember that we use the means carefully,
reading, and hearing, and holy communion of Saints, because though these
without the spirit* can do nothing, yet the spirit is not given but by these,
these are the golden conduites of the spirit of Christ: no man is ever
spiritual but they are readers, and hearers, and conferrers of good things,
and attenders upon the means of Salvation, because God will work by his own
tools, and instruments; therefore it is said, Revel. 1. That John was full of
the spirit upon the Lords day, Let a Christian sanctify the Sabbath, as he
should do, he will be in the Spirit on the Lords day, more than on other
days: Why? Because then he is reading, and hearing, and conferring, and in
some spiritual course, and the more a man on the Lords day is in a spiritual
course, the more he is in the spirit; John was in the Spirit on the Lords day,
so much for those words,

The Lord is that Spirit.

And where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty.


WE see here what the Spirit works where it is; The Spirit works liberty.
Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty, I will name, the instance
that I gave before, that I may the better go on, we say the sun is heat,
and influence; not that it is so, for they be accidents, but the sun
appears to us for our comfort in heat and influence, therefore we call it by
that name, we say of a man, he is all spirit, so Christ is all spirit, the
sun is all light, and where the light and heat of the sun is, there is
fruitfulness, so Christ is all spirit, and where the spirit of Christ is,
there is spiritual liberty.

It were expense of time to no purpose, Liberty desired of all men.
to tell you of the diverse kinds of liberty; in a word, liberty is that that
all desire, but our miscarriage is in the means of it, the way to attain to
it, here we see whence to have it, from the spirit of Christ: liberty is a
sweet thing, especially liberty from the greatest enemies of all, if outward
liberty be such a sweet thing, liberty from tyranny and base servitude, it is
a thing that man's nature delights in, and the contrary man, as a man abhorres,
and he has not the nature of a man, that does not abhor it, what shall we
think then of the liberty of the spirit, from the great enemies that daunt the
greatest Monarchs in the world? liberty from the anger of the great God, and
liberty from Satan Gods executioner, liberty from the terror of conscience,
from the fear of death, and hell, and judgment; what shall we think of
liberty in these respects? therefore we speak of great matters here, beloved
when we speak of liberty. Now liberty is either Christian or Evangelicall.
Liberty two fold.




You may think this a nice difference, but there is some realty in it.

Christian liberty, 1. Christian.
is that that belongs to all, even to those before Christ, though they have not
the term of Christians, yet they were members of Christ, Christ was head of
the Church, Yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

Evangelicall 2. Evangelicall
liberty is that that is more appropriated to the times of the Gospel since
the coming of Christ, now the liberty that belongs to Christians as
Christians, is perpetual from those grand enemies, the greatest enemies of all
spiritual and inward liberty. In Evangelicall liberty besides that, there is
another outward liberty, from the ceremonial and morrall law, and such like
and a liberty from the restraint of the law: the Jews were under many
restraints, that under the Gospel in this time we are not; I speak therefore
of liberty as it runs through all ages of the Church, not of Evangelicall
merely since the time of Christ, where the spirit is, both these liberties are
now since the coming of Christ: now in that the holy Ghost says here, where
the spirit of Christ is there is liberty; it supposes that

We are in bondage before we have the spirit of Christ. We are in bondage
without the Spirit.


That is a supposed ground and truth, and indeed so it is: for out of Christ
we are slaves, the best of us all are slaves; in Christ, the meanest of all,
is a free man, and a King, out of Christ, there is nothing but thraldom, we
are under the kingdom of the devil, when he calls us we come we are in
thraldom under the wrath of God, under the fear of death, and damnation, and
all those spiritual enemies, that I need not mention, they are well enough
known to you, by often-repetition, there is no man but he is a slave, till he
be in Christ, and the more free a man thinks himself to be, and labors to be,
the more slave he is: for take a man that labors to have his liberty, to do
what he list, he thinks it the happyest condition in the world, and others
think it the best condition, to have liberty not to be tyrannized over by
others, The more liberty without Christ, the more slavery.
It is the disposition of man's nature without grace, they account it a
happiness to have their wills over all other, but the more liberty in this, the
more slavery. Why?

The more liberty that a man has to do lawlessely what he will, contrary to
justice and equity, the more he sins: the more he sins the more he is
inthrawled to sin, the more he is inthrawled to sin, the more he is in
bondage to the devil, and becomes the enemy of God, therefore if a man would
pick out the wretchedest man in the world, I would pick out the greatest man
in the world if he be naught, that has most under him, he has most liberty,
and seeks most liberty, and accounts it his happiness that he may have his
liberty, this is the greatest thraldom, and it will prove when he dies, and
comes to answer for it, the greatest thraldom of all, therefore the point
needs not much proof, that if we be not in Christ, we are slaves, Aug. de
civit. Dei.
as Augustine says in his Book, De, civit. Dei, he is a slave though he
domineere, and rule.

A man till he be in Christ is a slave, not of one man or of one lord over him,
but he has so many lords, as he has so many lusts. There are but two
Kingdoms Two kingdoms.
that the Scripture speaks of, that is, the kingdom of Satan, and darkness,
and the Kingdom of Christ, all therefore that are not in the Kingdom of
Christ, in that blessed liberty, they must needs be shoaled under the other
kingdom of Satan. This is a ground, therefore I speak shortly of it, as an
insentive, and provocation, to stir us up, to get into Christ, to get the
Spirit of Christ, that we may have this spiritual liberty, or else we are al
slaves, notwithstanding all our civil liberties whatsoever they be. Now where
the Spirit of Christ is, there is liberty, there is freedom from that bondage,
that we are in by nature, and which is strengthened by a wicked course of life,
for though we be all slaves by nature, borne slaves, yet notwithstanding by a
wicked course of life, we put our selves into bonds and tangle our selves, Sins
bonds.
so many sins and so many repetitions of sin, so many cords, the longer a man
lives, the greater slave he is; Now when the Spirit of Christ comes, it frees
us from all; both from the natural, and from the customary slavery.

Now this liberty is wrought by Christ, Liberty wrought by Christ applied by
the Spirit.
and applied by the Spirit, what Christ works, he makes it ours by his
Spirit, which takes all from Christ, as Christ does all by the Spirit, so the
Spirit takes all from Christ, all the comfort it has, is from reasons taken
from Christ, from grounds from Christ, and doctrines from Christ, but yet both
have their efficacy, Christ, as the meritorious cause, How the Spirit works
liberty.
and the Spirit, as the applying cause; The spirit discovers the state of
bondage we are in by nature, and it discovers withal a more excellent
condition, By conviction.
and as it discovers, so likewise the spirit of God brings us to this state, by
working faith, in that that Christ has done for us, Christ has freed us by
his death from the curse of the Law, from the wrath of God, from death and
damnation, By Faith.
and the like: Now whatsoever Christ has done, the Spirit works faith, to
make this our own by uniting us to Christ; when Christ and we are one, his
sufferings are ours, and his victory is ours, all is ours, By Love.
then the Spirit persuading us of the love of God, and Christ redeeming us from
that cursed slavery we were in, that Spirit, it works love in us, and other
graces whereby the dominion of sin is broken more, and more, and we are set
at liberty by the Spirit.

Now the Spirit does not work liberty properly, originally, but Christ is the
grand redeemer, but Christ redeemeth two ways. Christ redeemeth two ways, 1.
By Price.


He redeemes us by paying the price, and so he only redeemeth, for he paid the
price to divine justice, we are in bondage to the wrath of God under his
justice, and so there must be satisfaction to justice, before we can be free.

Then we are in bondage to Satan, 2. By strong hand.
as Gods Executioner, and Iaylor, now from him we are freed by strong hand, so
Christ free^eth us by his holy Spirit, working such graces in us, as makes us
see the loathsomenes of that bondage, working likewise grace in us to be in
love with a better condition, that the Spirit discovers to us, so that the
Spirit brings us out by discovery, and by power. All that Christ freeth by
virtue of redemption, paying the price for all those he frees likewise by his
Spirit, discovering to them their bondage, and the blessed condition, whereunto
they are to be brought to a state of freedom; which freedom he perfects by
little and little, till he bring them to a glorious freedom in heaven.

And the reason of this, All that Christ redeemes, he frees by his Spirit.
that where Christ does free by way of redemption, to dye, and satisfy Gods
justice for any, to those he gives his Spirit, by which Spirit they are set at
liberty, the reasons are manifold, to name one or two:

Christ does save all that he does save answerable to the nature of the party
saved, 1. Because we are saved as men.
he saves them as reasonable persons, for he saves us that he may make us
friends, he saves us as men, and redeemes us as men, he does not only pay a
price for us as we buy a thing that is dead, but likewise he frees us, so as
we may understand to what, and by whom we are freed, and what condition we
are freed from, therefore there must be a spirit joined with the work of
Christ, to inform us thoroughly, being creatures fit to be informed.

And God intending to come into covenant with us, that we may be friends with
him, 2. We are freed to be friends with God.
(which is our glory, and happiness) he acquaints us as friends with all the
favors and blessings, that he has done for us, he acquaints us what misery
he brings us out of, and what happiness he brings us unto, and what is our
duty, this is the work of the spirit to show us what he has done for us, that
we may be friends.

And then it is a ground to love God, 3. We cannot love God ^lse.
God saves us by a way of love, in the covenant of grace, his desire is, that
we may love him again, and maintain love; Now how can this be without the
Spirit of God, discover what God in Christ has done for us, therefore there
must be the Spirit, to show to the eye of the soul, and to tell us this
Christ has done for us.

Then again there must be a fitting for Heaven, 4. Because we must be fitted
for heaven.
for that glory that God intends us in election, now this fitting must be
altogether by the Spirit, the same Spirit that sanctified Christ in the womb,
the same Spirit that anointed Christ, annoints all those that are Christ's,
that they may be fit for so glorious a head, so there must be the Spirit as
well as Christ in the work of redemption and liberty.

Now this Spirit of God does set us at liberty, The Spirit sets us at liberty,
in all the course of salvation
in all the course, and whole carriage of Salvation, from the beginning to the
end.

He sets us at liberty at the first in calling us.

He sets us at liberty when we are justified.

He sets us at liberty, when he sanctifies us.

And he sets us then at liberty fully in glorification.

First of all the Spirit of God is a Spirit of liberty, 1. In our first calling.
when we are first called powerfully and effectually: For living in the Church,
sets us not at liberty, unless the spirit stir us up to answer a divine call:
for many are called, but few are chosen. In the Church, there is Hagar and
Ishmael, as well as Isaac, there are hypocrites as well as sound Christians,
there is outward baptism as well as inward, there is outward circumcision of
the flesh, as well as inward of the Spirit, a man may have all these outward
privileges, and yet notwithstanding be a slave in the bosom of the Church;
for Ishmael was a bondslave, though he were in the house of Abraham* therefore
the first beginning of spiritual liberty is when the spirit of God in the
ordinances, 1. The heart must answer Gods call.
in the means of Salvation, stirs up the heart to answer Gods call as it
were, when we are exhorted to believe, and repent, the Spirit gives power to
Echo to God, Ioh. 9. 25.
Lord I believe, help thou my unbeleefe; Lord I repent, and desire to repent
more, and more; when the spirit of God in the ordinance says, Psalm. 27.
seek my face, Thy face Lord will I seek, be thou mine Lord, and I will be
thine, this spiritual Echo, and answer of the soul, comes from the Spirit
of God in calling, and it is the first degree of liberty.

Now this answer of the soul, 2. We must practice that we answer.
by the power of the spirit, overpowring our corruptions, is together with the
obedience of the inward man, to go out, for man answers the call, not only
by the speech of the heart, Lord I do it, but he does it indeed, therefore
when by the power of the Spirit, we come out of the world, and out of our
corruptions and walk more freely in the ways of God, then we are set at
spiritual liberty, now the Spirit does all this: for if it were not the Spirit
that persuaded the soul, when the Minister speaks, alas all ministerial
persuasions are to no purpose, if the Spirit do not stir up the soul to
answer, all speech is to no purpose from men; but this the Spirit does, in the
first place he opens the eyes with spiritual eye salve, to see our natural
bondage, he opens our eyes to see, I must come out of this condition, if I
will be saved of necessity, or else I am miserable for ever, and it is enough
for the soul of a miserable man if he be convinced to see his misery, and
bondage what he is by nature, for let us be convinced of that once, and all the
rest of the linkes of the golden chain of Salvation will follow; let a m^n be
convinced that he is as the Scripture says he is, and as hereafter he shall
find to his cost, you shall not need to bid him come out of his conversation,
and condition, and worldly course, that he is in, all this will follow where
there is conviction of Spirit, therefore the first work of the Spirit in
Spiritual liberty is to convince us of sin and misery, and then to work as
I said an answer of the soul, and an obedience of the whole man, this I will
not be long in, being a clear point.

Where the Spirit is, there is liberty: again in matter of justification, 2.
Liberty in justification.
there is a liberty and freedom of conscience from sin, and the curse of
sin, and all the danger that follows upon sin by the Spirit.

is imputed to us.

No benefit by Christ without union.
except we be united to Christ what good have we by Christ, if Christ be not
ours? if there be not a spiritual marriage, what benefit have we by him, if we
have not him to pay our debt, for his riches to be ours, and our debt to be
his, there must be a union first. Now this union is wrought by the Spirit, it
is begun in effectual calling, from this union there comes to be a change,
his righteousness is mine, as if I had obeyed, and done it by my self, and my
debts, and sins are his, this is by the Spirit, because the union between
Christ and me is by the Spirit: for whatsoever Christ has done; it is nothing
to me till there be a Union, and then freedom is by the Spirit likewise,
because the Spirit of God works faith in me, not only to unite and knit me to
Christ, Double work of faith.
but faith to persuade me, that Christ is mine, and that all his is mine, and
that my debts are his; this supernatural hand of faith the Spirit works, to
lay hold upon Christ, and then to persuade me; for the Spirit is a lightsome
thing, and together with the graces it tells me the graces it works: As
reason, besides reason, it tells me that I use reason when I do, it has a
reflex act, so the Spirit of Christ, it has a reflex act upon it self, for
being above reason, it does not only lay hold upon Christ, it does not only
do the work, but it tells me that I do so when I do; therefore it not only
tells me that Christ is mine, when I believe, but it assures me that I do
believe, it carries a light of its own; I know the light by the light, and
reason by reason, and faith by faith, together with the reflex act joining with
it; so that the reflect act joining with it, so that the Spirit is the cause of
liberty in justification in that respect, as it is a means of union, whereupon
there is a passage of all that is Christ's to be mine, and mine to be Christ's:
and likewise it assures me that I do believe, when I do believe without
error, for the Spirit is given me to know the things that I have by Christ,
not only to know the privileges by Christ, but the graces of Christ.

And beloved unless the Spirit should do it, The heart fu^l of fear^s without
the Spirit.
it would never be done: for the soul of man is so full of terrors, and
fears, and jelousies that except the Spirit of God witness to my spirit, that
God is reconciled in Christ, and that Christ's righteousness is mine, I could
never be persuaded of it, for the soul it always thinks, God is holiness it
self, and I am a mass of sin, what reason have I to think that God will
be so favorable to such a wretch, to such a lump of sin as I am? were it
not that God the Son has satisfied God the Father, God has satisfied God,
and the Spirit certifies my conscience, so the Spirit that searches the deep
things of God, that knows wh^^ love is in the breast of God, and therefore he
searches the heart, he searches the heart of God, and he searches my
spirit, except the Spirit should tell me that God the Son has satisfied, and
God the Father will accept of the satisfaction of God the Son, I should never
bleeve it, therefore God must stablish the heart in a gracious liberty of
justification, as well as that God the Son has wrought it.

It is no wonder that men of great parts without grace are full of terrors and
despair, Why men of great parts without grace are full of fears.
for the more parts and wit a man has, without the Spirit of God, the more he
disputes against himself, and entangles himself with desperate thoughts, but
when the Spirit is brought to speak peace to the soul in Christ, and makes
the soul to cast it self on him for salvation, then Gods Spirit is above the
conscience, though conscience be above all things else, yet God is above
conscience, and can still the conscience, and the Spirit tells us that God the
Father is reconciled by the death of God the Son, and when God witnesses
what God has wrought, then conscience is at peace. Thus we see how the Spirit
sets us at liberty in the great matter of justification.

3. In Sanctification.
So likewise in the matter of holy life, in the whole course of a holy life,
Where the Spirit of Christ is, there is liberty; and freedom, from the slavery
of sin, for there the understanding is freed from the bondage of ignorance,
and there the will is freed from the bondage of rebellion, there the affections
likewise, and the whole inward, and outward man is freed, but this liberty of
holiness, inherent liberty, it does spring from the liberty that we have by
justification, Sanctification springs from justification.
by the righteousness of Christ, whereby we are perfectly righteous, and freed
from all the title that Satan has in us, we are freed from the curse of God,
from the Law, are enabled in a course of Sanctification, to go on from grace
to grace; the Spirit of Christ comes after justification; for whom God gives
forgiveness unto, he gives his Spirit to sanctify them, the same Spirit that
assures me of the pardon of my sin, sanctifies my nature; where the Spirit
is of sanctification it breaks the ruling power of sin, before then the
whole life is nothing but a continual sinning, Liberty of disposition.
and offending of God: but now there is a gracious liberty of disposition, a
largeness of heart which follows the liberty of condition, when a man is free
in state and law, from wrath, and from the sentence of damnation, then he has
a free and volentary disposition wrought to serve God freely without fear, or
constraint.

When a man is under the bondage of the Law, when he is under the fear of
death, being armed with a sting, whatsoever he does, he does it with a slavish
mind, where the Spirit of God is, there is the Spirit of adoption, the Spirit
of Sons which is a free Spirit: the son does not duties to his father out
of constraint, and fear, but out of nature; the spirit alters our nature and
disposition, it makes us sons, and then we do all freely; God does enlarge
the hearts of his children, they can deny themselves in a good work, they are
zealous of good works; it is the end of their redemption, as it is Tit. 2. We
are redeemed to be a peculiar people, zealous of good works: for then we have
a base esteem of all things that hinder us from freeness in Gods service,
Christians esteem basely all things but Christ.
as worldliness, etc. what does a Christian when he sees his gracious
liberty in Chrst? the love of the world and worldly things, he is ready to part
with all for the service of God, he is so free hearted that he can part with
life it self, Paul says of himself, My life is not dear to me, so I may
finish my course with joy: as we see in the Martyrs and others, how free they
were; even of their very blood.

What shall we think of those therefore, that if we get any thing of them, it
must be as a sparkle out of the flint: duties come from Christians as water
out of a spring, they are natural, and not forced to issue so far forth as
they are spiritual.

I confess that there is remainders of bondage, where the Spirit sets at
liberty, Double principle in a Christian.
for there is a double principle in us, while we live in this world, of nature
and grace, therefore there will be conflict in every holy duty, the flesh will
draw back, when the spirit would be liberal, the flesh will say, oh but I may
want? When the Spirit would be most courageous, the flesh will say, but there
is danger in it, so that there is nothing that we can do but it must be gotten
out of the fire, we must resist, yet notwithstanding here is liberty to do
good, because here is a principle that resists the backewardnesse of the flesh.

In a wicked man there is nothing but flesh, Liberty in in Sanctification, to
conflict not from it.
and therefore there is no resistance and we must understand the nature of this
Spiritual liberty in sanctification, it is not a liberty freeing us altogether
from conflict, and deadness, and dullness, and the like, but it is a liberty
inabling us to combat, not freeing us from combat; it is a liberty to fight
the battles of the Lord against our own corruptions, not freeing us from it,
that is the liberty of glory in heaven, when there shall be no enemy within,
or without.

Therefore let not Christians be discouraged with the backwardness, Comfort
against the dullness of the flesh.
and untowardnesse of the flesh, to good duties, if we have a principle in us
to fight against it, to enable us to fight against our corruptions, and to get
good duties out of it, in spite of it, it is an argument of a new nature, God
will perfect his own beginnings, and subdue the flesh more and more, by the
power of his spirit: We see our blessed Savior, what a sweet excuse he makes
for his Disciples, when they were dead hearted and drowsy, when they should
have comforted him in the garden, oh says he, The spirit is willing, but the
flesh is weak.

Indeed there is a double hinderance in Gods people, Double hindrance of good
duties.
when they are about holy duties, sometimes from their very mould, and nature,
considered not as corrupted, the very mould without the consideration.

And then consider it as it is made more heavy and dull be the flesh, and
corruptions in them* as there be invincible infirmities and weaknesses in
nature, sometimes deadness after labor, and expense of spirits, creepes in
invincibly that a man cannot overcome those necessities of nature, so that the
spirit may be willing, and the flesh weak, the flesh without any great
corruption; God looks upon our necessities, as the father says free me from
my necessities, as we see Christ made an excuse for them: It was not so much
corruption, though that were an ingredient in it, as nature in it self; Christ
saw a great deal of gold in the Oar, therefore we see how he excuses them:
therefore when we are dull let us strive, Christ is ready to make excuse for
us, if our hearts be right, The spirit is willing but the flesh is weak, I
speak this for the comfort of the best sort of Christians, that think they
are not set at liberty by the Spirit, bebecause they find some heaviness, and
dullness in good duties, as I said, there is sin in us while we live here,
but it reigns not after a man has the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of Christ
maintains a perpetual combat, and conflict against sin; it could subdue
sin all at once, if God saw it good, but God will humble us while we live
here, and exercise us with spiritual conflicts, therefore God sees it
sufficient to bring us to heaven, to set up a combat in us, that we are able
by the help of the Spirit to fight Gods battles, against the flesh, so that
the dominion of sin, may be broken in us, and excellently says Paul, Romans 8.
2.
Romans 8. 2. The law of the spirit of life, in Christ Jesus has freed me from
the law of sin, and of death. The law of the Spirit of life, that is, the
commanding power of the Spirit of Christ, that commands as a law in the hearts
of Gods people, it frees us from the law, that is, from the commanding power of
sin, and death, so that the dominion and tyranny of sin is broken by the
Spirit of Christ, and so we are set at a gracious liberty, in some respects we
are under grace, therefore sin shall not have dominion over us, as the
Apostle speaks.

Again by the Spirit of Christ in Sanctification we are made Kings,
Christians, Kings over their lusts.
to rule over our own lusts, in some measure, not Kings, to be freed
altogether from them, but Kings to strive against them: It is a liberty to
fight, and in fighting to overcome at last: When the Israelites had a promise
that God would give their enemies into their hands, the meaning was not that
he would give them, without fighting a blow, but I will give them into your
hands, you shall fight and be of good comfort, in fighting you shall overcome,
so this liberty of Sanctification, it is not a liberty that we should have no
combat with our corruptions, but a gracious liberty to keep them under, till
by subduing them by little and little, we get a perfect victory; what greater
encouragement can a man have, to fight against his enemy, then when he is sure
of the victory, before he fights of final victory, you see then how the Spirit
brings a liberty into the soul, it brings us out of that cursed kingdom of
Satan and sin, it brings us out of the curse of God, and the law in
justification, and it brings us from the dominion and tyranny of sin, by a
Spirit of Sanctification.

But this is not all that is in liberty, Freedom from the consequents of sin.
for the Spirit does not only free ^s from all that is ill, from sin, but
from that that follows it, there is some ill that follows, as fear and
terrors of conscience, etc. they follow sin and death and wrath, and such
like, the subjection to these: now where the Spirit of God is, it frees from
the ill consequents, from the tail that follows sin; where the Spirit is,
it frees us from fear, for the same Spirit that tells us in justification that
God is appeased, the same Spirit frees us from the fear of damnation, and
death and judgment, from the terrors of an evil conscience, being sprinkled
with the blood of Christ, we are freed from fear.

And it frees not only from the fear of ill things, Freedom to good things.
but it shows immunity, and freedom to good, liberty implies here two things,
a freedom from ill, from a cursed condition, and likewise a liberty to a
better, a liberty from ill, and to good, we must take it in the just latitude,
because the benefits of Christ are complete, not only privative but positive,
not only to free us from ill, but to confer all good to us, as much as our
nature is capable of, as much as these souls of ours are capable of, they
shall be made free and glorious and happy in heaven, God will leave no part of
the soul unfilled, no corner of the soul empty, by little and little he does
it, as we shall see in the next verse, when we are called out of Satan's
kingdom we are not only called out of that cursed state, but we are made free
of a better kingdom, we are mede the members of Christ, we are infranchised,
and so in justification we are not only freed from damnation, from the justice
and wrath of God, but likewise we can implead our righteousness whereby we
have title to heaven which is a blessed privilege, and prerogative, we are not
only free from the curse of the law, but likewise we have other gracious
prerogatives and privileges, we are not only freed from the dominion of
sin, but we are likewise set at liberty by the spirit, to do that that is
good, we have a voluntary free spirit to serve God with as great
cheerfulness as we served our lusts before, and as we are freed from the
rigor and curse of the law, so we have prerogatives to good answerable, we are
now by the Spirit set at liberty to delight in the law, to make the law our
counselor, to make the Word of God our counselor, that that terrified and
affrighted us before, now it is our direction, Use of the l^w before and after
we be in Christ.
even as he that was a severe Schoolmaster to one in his under years, after
when he comes to years, becomes a wise Tutor to guide and direct him, so the
law that terrified and whipped us when we were in bondage, till we be in
Christ, it scares us to Christ, that law after comes to be a Tutor, to tell us
this we shall do, to council us, and say this is the best way, and we come
to delight in those truths, when they are discovered to us in the inward man;
and the more we know, the more we would know, because we would please God
every day better, so that besides freedom from that that is ill, and the
consequents of ill, there is a blessed immunity, and prerogative, and
privilege, that is meant here by liberty.

For Gods works are complete, we must know when he delivers from ill he
advances to good, his works are full works always, he does not things by
halves, therefore we have through Christ, and by the Spirit, not only
freedom from that that is ill, but advancement to all that is comfortable, and
graciously good.

And one thing give me leave to touch, Liberty of judgment and will
which though it be more subtle, yet it is useful, that the text puts me to
speak of, Where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty of the inward man,
liberty of judgment, and liberty of will, where the Spirit of God is not there
is no liberty, no free will, a little to touch upon that.

That which we call free will, Freedom of will. Natural.
it is either taken for a natural power and indowment that God has put upon
the soul, and so the will is always free in earth, and in hell: the divils will
is free so, free to evil, there is the natural freedom, for freedom it is a
dowry upon the will, invested upon the will, that God never takes from it, to
do it freely, that is upon reason that it sees, be it good or evil; so I
mean not freedom, but I take freedom for ability and strength to that that
is good: 2. Ability to good.
for any liberty, and ability to that that is good, is only from the spirit;
and the defense of Luthers, Luther.
and others that wrote of this freedom is sound, and good, that the will of
man is slavish altogether, without the Spirit of God, Where the Spirit is there
is liberty. Liberty as it is taken for power and ability to do good. In a
word, there is always a liberty of the subject, of the person, a liberty of the
understanding, but not of the object, to this or that thing, a liberty to
supernatural objects comes from supernatural principles, nothing moves above
its own sphere, nothing is acted above its own activity, that God has put
into it: now a natural man can do nothing but naturally, for nothing can
work above it self, by its own strength, no more than a beast can work
according to the principles of a man, therefore the soul of man has no
liberty at all to that which is spiritually good, without a supernatural
principle, that rayseth it above it self, and put it into the rank of
supernatural things.

First the Spirit of God puts a new life into the soul of a man, The Spirit
puts a new life in us.
and then when he has done that, it preserves that life against all
opposition, and together with preserving that life, it applies that inward life
and power it has put into it, to particular works, for when we have a new
life, yet we cannot do particular actions without the exciting power, of the
Spirit of God, the Spirit stirs up to every particular thing, when the soul
would be quiet of it self, the moving comes from the Spirit of God, as every
particular moving in the body, comes from the soul, so the Spirit it puts a
new life, it applies that life, it applies the soul to every action. Where the
Spirit of God therefore is not, And then applies it to action.
there is no liberty to any supernatural action, but where the Spirit of God
is, there is liberty, It follows both the negatively, and affirmatively; there
is a liberty of will to that that is good, so then this rises from hence,
again that where the Spirit of God is efficatious, and effectual in his
working, there it robbes not the soul of liberty but perfects that liberty.

You have some Divines (too many indeed) that hold that the holy Ghost, The
Spirit in conversion does more then persuade.
only works by way of persuasion upon the soul, and by way of mooving as it
were without, but he does not enter into the soul nor alter and change the
soul, he does not work upon the soul as an inward worker, but only as an
outward intreater, and perswader, and allurer, propounding objects, and with
objects persuasions, and allurements; this is too shallow a conceit for so
deep a business as this, for the Spirit works more deeply than so, it puts a
new life into the soul, it takes away the stony heart, and gives a fleshly
heart; those phrases of Scripture are too weighty, to fasten such a shallow
sense upon them, only as to entreat them to be converted, as a man would
entreat a stone to be warm, and to come out of its place, he might entreat
long enough, but the Spirit with that speech, it puts a new life and power, and
then acts and stirs that power to all that is good.

their maine objection) here is a prejudice to the liberty of the will, this is
to overthrow the nature of man?

The work of the Spirit takes not away freedom.
for the Spirit of God is so wise an agent that he works upon the soul,
preserving the principles of a man, it alters the judgment by presenting
greater reasons, and further light than it saw before, and then it alters the
will, that we Will contrary to that we did before, by presenting to the will
greater reasons to be good, than ever it had to be ill before: then the soul
chooses freely of its own will any thing when it does it upon discovery of
light, and reason, with advisement and reason, then the soul does things
freely, when i^ does them upon the designment of reason, when judgment tells
me this is good. Now when the Spirit changes the soul, it presents such
strong reasons to come out of that cursed estate I am in, and to come to the
blessed estate in Christ, that the will presently follows that that the
understanding presents as the chief good of all, here the freedom is
preserved, because the will is so stirred by the holy Ghost, as that it stirs
it self, being stirred by the holy Ghost, and upon this ground, it sees a
better good. So that grace takes not away liberty no; it stablisheth liberty:
though we hold that in effectual grace the Spirit of God works upon the soul
thoroughly, yet notwithstanding we preserve liberty, because we say that the
soul works of its own principles, notwi^hstanding grace, because the Spirit
of God acts, The Spirit preserves the soul in its manner of working.
and leads the soul according to the nature of the soul, the Spirit of God
preserves things in the manner of doing of things, it is the manner of doing of
the reasonable creature, to do things freely, therefore the Spirit working
upon the soul it preserves that Modus, though it work effectually upon the
soul, and the more effectually it works upon the soul, the more free the
soul is, because it sees reason to do good; therefore the more we give to
the Spirit in the question of grace, and nature, the more we stablish liberty
and prejudice it not: Rules concerning liberty.
Where these three or four rules are observed, there liberty is preserved,
though there be a mighty working of the holy Spirit, As.

First, 1. When it is done with advisment of reason.
where the will chooses, and makes choice, and inclines to a thing with the
advisement of reason, always that must be, or else it is not a humane action,
now when the Spirit of God sets the will at liberty, a man does that he does
with full advisement of reason, for though God work upon the will it is with
inlightning of the understanding at the same time, and all grace in the will
comes through the understanding as all heat upon inferior things it comes
with light, All heat comes through light.
so that though heat ch^rish the earth, it comes with light, so all the work
upon the soul, is by the heat of the Spirit, but it comes from the light of
the understanding so the freedom of the soul is preserved, because it is with
light.

Again, where freedom is, 2. A power to argue on both sides.
there is a power to apprehend other things, as well as that it does, to reason
on both sides, I may do this or that, for that power to reason on both sides,
is proper to the soul always: now grace takes not always that power to reason on
both sides, for when a man is set at liberty from the base slavery of ill, to
do good, he can reason with himself, I might have done this, and that if I
would be damned, so that the judgment is not bound to one thing only but the
judgment tells him, he might have done otherwise, if he would, but he sees
he must do this if he will not be damned.

Again, where there is liberty, 3. There is a power to choose many things.
and freedom there is an enla^gement to understand more things then one, or
else there were no freedom, and though the soul be determined to choose one
thing, and not many, yet of it self it has power to choose many things: to
make this clear a little, some creatures are confined to one thing, out of the
narrowness of the parts they have, some are confined to one thing out of the
largeness of parts, these seem contrary, but thus, I will give this instance
to make it clear; the creature that is unreasonable, is always confined to one
manner of working, because they want understanding to work in a diverse
manner; birds make their nests, and Bees make their hives always after one
manner, because of their narrowness, that they have not choice.

Now when the Spirit sets a man at liberty to holy things, he is confined to
good, especial this is in heaven, this is out of largeness of understanding,
apprehending many goods, and many ills, and that good that he conceives to be
the best good out of a large understanding he is determined, to that one, so
that though the Spirit of God take away as it were that present liberty that a
man cannot do ill, it will not suffer him to be so bad as he was, yet it
leaves him in a state of good to do a multitude of good things. And then
though it confine him to a state of happiness, that he cannot will the
contrary, yet here is no liberty taken a way, because it is done out of
strength of knowledge, not out of narrowness, because there is no more things
for him to judge, but out of largeness, telling him this is the best of all,
and carries all the soul after it, the glory of heaven robbes not a man of is
power.

What is the reason, they are determined eternally to that that is good? Is it
for want of understanding that the Angels choose not ill? No, The Angels
determined to that that is good.
they know what ill is by speculation, but there is a strength of understanding
to know that that is good, and the understanding where it has a full light, it
carries the will to choose, therefore where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty, notwithstanding all objections to the contrary, the Spirit takes not
away, nay it strengthens, the liberty of the soul: it is an idle objection
and a great stay of many that are willing to be deceived: oh if grace confine a
man, determine him, as the word is, sway him one way perpetually, that he
holds on to the end, and leaves him not at liberty to his will, this confining
and swaying one way, it is an abridging him of his liberty, etc. No, for it
comes not from weakness of understanding, but from strength of understanding,
and it is perfect liberty to do well: therefore on the contrary, it is so
far from abridgeing the liberty of the soul that it cannot do ill, or that
it cannot but persevere, to do good, that ^t is the strength of liberty.

For I would know whether the first Adams liberty, Difference in the liberty of
the two Adams.
were greater or the liberty in heaven the second Adams liberty? our liberty in
grace, or that in glory? the liberty of the first man was, that he might not
sin, if he would? the liberty of Christ, was that he could not sin at all:
which think you was the chief, he that could not or he that might sin, if
he would? was there not a more gracious, and blessed liberty in Christ, than
in Adam, when he might not sin if he would. Is this a worse liberty then when
a man cannot sin, so when the Spirit of God bears that sway over the soul,
and takes away that potentiallity, and possibility to sin, that a man cannot
sin, because he will not, his will is so carried by the strength of
judgment: this is the greatest good, I will not moove out of this circle, if I
go out of this I shall be unhappy, and this is the greatest liberty of all.

What do we pray in the Lords prayer but for this liberty? Thy will be done,
that is, take me out of my own will more, and more, conform my will to thine
in all things, the more I do so, the more liberty I have, the strength of that
petition is, that we may have perfect liberty in serving God.

The greatest, and sweetest liberty is, when we have no liberty to sin at
all, Greatest liberty not to have liberty to sin.
when we cannot sin, it is greater chastity not to have power to resist to be
impregnable in continence, and sobriety, when there is such a measure of these
graces, as they are not to be overcome, it is greater strength than when they
may be prevailed over, so men mistake to think this the greatest liberty to
have power to good or evil, that is, Imperfection to have power to good, and
evil.
the imperfection of the creature; man was at the first created free to either
good or evil of himself, that he might fall of himself, this was not
strength, but a thing that followed the creature, that came out of nothing, and
that was subject to fall to his own principles again, but to have the soul
stablished that it shall not have freedom to ill, it is so stablished in good,
it has the understanding so englightned, and the will so con^irmed and
strengthened, that it is without danger of temptation, that is properly glorious
liberty, and that is the better endowment of both, so that we see it clearly,
that grace takes not away liberty, but establishes it.

Now besides this inward spiritual liberty, that we have by the Spirit,
Outward liberty.
there is an outward preserving liberty that must be a little touched, and
that is two fold.

A liberty of preaching the Gospel, 1. Of Preaching the Gospel.
and a liberty of discipline as well call it, of government, 2. Of Discipliue.
that is in the Church of God, and should be (at least) in all places, because
we are men, and must have such helps. Now these are liberties that the Spirit
bestows upon the Church, wheresoever there is an inward spiritual liberty men
are brought into the Church by the liberty of the Gospel, and preserved by
government: there must be a subjection to Pastors, there must be teaching, and
some discipline, or else all will be in a confusion. Now this inward liberty is
wrought by the liberty of the Gospel?







when the Charter, and Patent of our liberty is laid open, in laying it open,
we come to have interest in those liberties, therefore, the liberty of the
Temple, the liberty of the Church, of the Word and Sacraments, and some order
in the Church with it, it brings in spiritual liberty and preserves it, it is
as it were the bonds, and sinews of the Church: Now where the Spirit of God is
with the Gospel, there is this liberty of the Gospel, there are the doors of
the Temple and Sanctuary set open, as blessed be God, this kingdom has had,
with the Spiritual liberty, there is an outward liberty of the Tabernacle of
God, and the house of God, that we can all meet to hear the Word of God, and
to receive the Sacraments, that we can all meet to call upon God in Spirit,
and in truth, and these outward liberties beloved are blessed liberties? for
where God gives these outward liberties, he intends to bestow, and to convey
Spiritual liberty: how shall we come to Spiritual liberty without unfolding
the Charter, Spiritual liberty comes by outward liberty.
the Word of God? therefore Christ has established a ministry, Apostles, and
Doctors, and Pastors to edify the Church, to the end of the world; and
therefore we see where there is no outward liberty of unfolding the Word,
where there is no outword liberty of the ministry, there wants this inward
liberty: for God by the preaching of the Gospel, sets us at liberty.

Again when Christ preached the Gospel first, it was the year of Iubile.
Year of Iubile in preaching of the Gospel.
Now in the year of Iubile, all servants were set at liberty, and those that
had not sold their inheritances might recover them again, if they would: this
Iubile was a type of the Spiritual liberty that the Gospel sets us at: those
that have served sin, and Satan before, if they will regard the gracious
promises of the Gospel, they may of slaves of sin and Satan, become the
free men of Jesus Christ. But in those times some would be servants still, and
would not be set at liberty, their ears were boared for perpetual slaves, and
it is pity but their ears should be boared for everlasting slaves, that now
in the glorious Iubile of the Gospel, resolve still to be slaves. When a
Proclamation of liberty was made to come out of Babylon all that would, many
would stick there still; so many are in love with Egypt and Babylon, and
slavery, it is pity but they should be slaves: but those that have more noble
spirits, as they desire liberty, so they should desire spiritual liberty
especially, and here you see how to come by it, Where the Spirit of the Lord
is, there is liberty, and where the ordinance of God is, that is, the ministry
of the Spirit, there is the Spirit, where these outward liberties are, it is a
sign that God has an intendment to set men at Spiritual liberty.

Those therefore that are enemies of the dispensation of the Gospel, Enemies
of the Gospel enemies to spiritual liberty.
in the ministry, they are enemies to spirit^all liberty, and it is an
argument that a man is in bondage to Satan, when he is an enemy any way of
the unfolding of the Word of God, for it is an argument that he is licentious,
that he will not be called to Spiritual liberty, but live according to the
flesh, when he will not hear of the liberty of the Spirit, as you have some
kind of men, that account it a bondage; Let us break their bonds, Psalm. 2.
and cast away their coards, why should we be tied with the Word, and with
these holy things? it is better that we have no preaching, no order at all,
but live every man as he would, though they speak not so in words, yet their
lives and profane carrige, show that they regard not outward liberties, and
that argues that they are in spiritual bondage, and that they have no
interest in spiritual liberty, because they are enemies of that whereby
spiritual liberty is preserved.

Therefore the Gospel is set out by that phrase, The Gospel the kingdom of
God, why?
The Kingdom of God, not only the Kingdom of God set up in our hearts, the
Kingdom of the Spirit, but likewise where the Gospel is preached, there is
the Kingdom of God, why? because with the dispensation of divine truth, Christ
comes to rule in the heart, by the outward kingdom comes the spiritual
kingdom, they come under one name.

Therefore those that would have the spiritual kingdom of God, by grace and
peace to rule in their hearts, till they reign for ever in heaven, they must
come by this door, by the ministry, by the outward ordinance, the ordinance
brings them to grace, and grace to glory, and it is a good and a sweet sign
of a man spiritually set at liberty, brought out of the kingdom of Satan, A
good sign of spiritual liberty.
and freed from the guilt of sin, and from the dominion of sin, which is
broken in Sanctification, when we can meekely and cheerfully submit to the
ordinance of God, with a desire to have his spiritual thraldom discovered,
and to have spiritual duties unfolded, and the riches of Christ laid open,
when he hears these things, with a taste, and relish, and a love, it is a
sign God loves his soul, and that he has interest in spiritual liberty,
because he can improve the Charter of his soul so well, Where the Spirit of
the Lord is, there is liberty.

And besides this liberty in this world, Liberty of glory.
there is a liberty of glory, called the liberty of the Sons of God; Romans 8.
The liberty of our bodies from corruption, the glorious liberty in heaven,
when we shall be perfectly free; for alas in this world we are free to fight,
not free from fight, and we are free not from misery, but free from thraldom
to misery, but then we shall be free from the encounter and incombrance, all
tears shall be wiped from our eyes, we shall be free from all hurt of body,
in sickness and the like, and free from all the remainders of sin in our
souls, that is perfect liberty, perfect redemption and perfect adoption, both
of body and soul: And that we have by the spirit too, for where the Spirit of
God is, there is that to in this world, in the beginnings of it: for beloved
what is peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost? is it not the
beginnings of heaven? is it not a Grape of the heavenly Canaan? is not the
Spirit that we have here, an earnest of that inheritance? an earnest penny,
and an earnest is a piece of the bargain, it is never taken away, but is made
up with the bargain, therefore when by the Spirit, we have the beginnings of
grace, and comfort, we have the beginnings of that glorious liberty, and it
assures us of that glorious liberty as sure as we have the earnest; for God
never repents of his bargain that he makes with his children; grace in some
sort is glory, as we see in the next verse; because grace is the beginning of
glory, it frees the soul from terror, and subjection to sin, from the
thraldom of sin, so the life of glory is begun in grace, we have the life
of glory begun by the Spirit, this glorious life.

To labor for the Spirit that sets us at liberty.
in this world and in that to come* by the Spirit, then we should labor to
have the Spirit of Christ, or else we have no liberty at all, and labor every
day more, and more to get this spiritual liberty in our consciences, to have
our consciences assured by the Spirit that our sins are forgiven, and to
feel in our consciences a power, to bring under sin, that has tyrannized
over us before, let us every day more and more labor to find this spiritual
liberty, and prize daily more the ordinances of God, sanctified to set us at
liberty, Attend upon the Ordinances of God.
attend upon spiritual means, that God has sanctified wherein he will convey
the Spirit, there were certain times wherein the Angel came to stir the
waters of the poole, so the Spirit of God stirs the waters of the Word, and
Ordinances, and makes them effectual, attend upon the ordinances of God, the
Communion of Saints, etc. and the Spirit of God will slide into our souls in
the use of holy means, there is no man but he finds experience of it, he
finds himself raised above himself in the use of holy means. The more we
know the Gospel, the more we have of the Spirit, and the more Spirit we have,
the more liberty we enjoy: If we prize and value outward liberty as indeed we
do, and we are naturally moved to do it, how should we prize the Charter of
our spiritual liberty, the Word of God? and the promises of Salvation, whereby
we come to know all our liberty, where we have all the promises opened to us;
the promise of forgiveness of sins, of necessary grace, the promise of
comfort in all conditions whatsoever: therefore let us every day labor to grow
farther and farther both in the knowledge, and in the taste, and feeling of
this Spiritual liberty.

The comfort of Spiritual liberty.
do but see the blessed use, and comfort of it, in all conditions; for if a
man has the Spirit of God, to set him at Spiritual liberty in all
temptations, either to sin, he has the Spirit of God to free him from
temptation; or if temptation catch hold on him for sin, he has the Spirit of
God to fly too, the blood of Christ, to show that if he confess his sins,
and lay hold on Christ, he has pardon of sin, and the blood of Christ
speaks better things, than the blood of Abel, it speaks mercy and peace, if
he by faith sprinkle it upon his soul, if he know the liberty of
justification, and make use of it; what a blessed liberty is this, when we
have sinned?

In restraint of the outward man, In outward restraint.
if ever God restrain us to humble us, what a blessed thing is this, that the
Spirit is at liberty? and that is the best part of a man; a man may have a free
conscience, and mind in a restrained condition, and a man may be restrained in
a free state, in the guilt of sin, bound over to the wrath of God, and bound
over to another evil day, a man in the greatest thraldom, may have liberty,
what a blessed condition is this?

So in sickness In sickness.
to consider that there is a glorious liberty of the Sons of God, and a
redemption of body, as well as of soul, that this base body of mine shall be
like Christ's glorious body, that there is a resurrection to glory, the
resurrection will make amends for all these sicknesses, and ills of body, what
a comfort is it to think of the resurrection to glory.

And to when death comes to know that by the blood of Christ, In death.
there is a liberty to enter into heaven, that Christ by his blood has opened
a passage to heaven.

And so in all necessities to think I have a liberty to the Throne of Grace,
In all wants.
I am free of heaven, I am free of the company of Saints in earth, and in
heaven too, I am free to have Communion with God, I have a freedom in all the
promises, what a sweet thing is this, in all wants, and necessities to use a
spiritual liberty, to have the ear of God, as a favorite in heaven, not
only to be free from the wrath of God, but to have his favor, to have his
ear in all our necessities, what a blessed liberty is this? that a man may go
with boldness to the throne of grace, by the Spirit of Christ?

Beloved it is invalluable, there is not the least branch of this spiritual
liberty, but it is worth a thousand worlds, how should we value it? and bless
God for giving Christ to wroke this blessed liberty, and for giving his spirit
to apply it to us more and more, and to set us more and more at spiritual
liberty, for both the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost, all join in
this Spiritual liberty; the Father gives the Son, and he gives the Spirit,
and all to set us free: It is a comfortable and blessed condition.

^^gnes of Spiritual liberty.
and from the curse of God, and his wrath in justifica^ion, and though it be
the foundation of all, I will not speak of that, but of that that always
accompanies i^, a liberty of holiness, a liberty to serve God, a liberty from
bondage, to lusts, and to Satan. Therefore,

Wheresoever the Spirit of God is, there is a liberty of holiness, 1. Liberty
from the dominion of any one sin.
to free us from the dominion of any one sin, we are freed to serve him in
holiness all the days of our lives, where the Spirit therefore is it will
free a man from thraldom to sin, even to any one sin: for the Spirit
discovers to the soul, the odiousness of the bondage, for a man to be a slave
to Satan, who is his enemy, a cruel enemy, what an odious thing is this? Now
whosoever is in thralled to any lust, is in thraldom to Satan by that lust,
therefore where this liberty is, there cannot be slavery to any one lust;
Satan therefore cares not how many sins one leaves, One sin inthralls as
well as many.
if he live in any one sin, for he has them in one sin, and can pull them
in by one sin, as children when they have a bird they can give it leave to
fly, so it be in a string, Simil.
to pull it back again, so Satan has men in a string, if they live in any
one sin, the Spirit of Christ is not there, but Satan's Spirit, and he can
pull them in when he will. Simil.
The beast that runs away with a coard about him, he is catched by the coard
again, so when we leave many sins, and yet notwithstanding carry his coards
about us, he can pull us in when he lists, such are prisoners at liberty more
than others, but notwithstanding they are slaves to Satan by that, and where
Satan keeps possession by one sin, and rules there, there is no liberty:
for the Spirit of Sanctification where it is, is a counterpoyson to the
corruption of nature, and it is opposite to it, in all the powers of the soul,
if suffers no corruption to get head.

Again where this liberty from the Spirit is, 2. Freedom to good duties.
there is not only a freedom from all gross sins, but likewise a blessed
freedom to all duties, an enlargement of heart to duties, Gods people are a
voluntary people, those that are under grace, Psalm. 110.
they are anointed by the Spirit, and the Spiritual annoyntment makes them
nimble, Christian is nothing but anointed; now he that is truly anointed by
the Spirit, Christian anointed
is nimble and quick, and active in that that is good in some degree, and
proportion, one use of annoynting is to make the members nimble, and agile, and
strong, so the Spirit of God is a Spirit of cheerfulness, and strength where
it is, therefore those that find some chearefulnes, and strength to preforme
holy services, to hear the Word, to pray to God, and to perform holy duties,
it is a sign that this comes from the Spirit of God, the Spirit sets them at
this liberty, because otherwise spiritual duties, are as opposite to flesh,
and blood, as fire and water. When we are drawn therefore to duties, as a
Bear to stake, as we say with foreign motives, Forced duties without liberty.
for fear, or out of custom, with extrinsicall motives, and not from a new
nature, this is not from the Spirit, this performance is not from the true
liberty of the Spirit; for the liberty of the Spirit is, when actions come off
naturally without force of f^are or hope, or any extrinsicall motive; a child
needs not extrinsicall motives, to please his father, when he knows he is
the child of a loving father, it is natural, so there is a new nature in those
that have the Spirit of God to stir them up to duty, though Gods motives may
help as the sweet encouragements and rewards, but the principal is to do
things naturally, not for fear, or for giving content to this or that man.

Artificial things move from a principle without them, Hypocrites have
foreign motives.
therefore they are artificial: clockes and such things have weights that
stir all the wheels they go by* and that moove them, so it is with an
artificial Christian, that composeth himself to a course of religion, he
moves with weights without him, he has not an inward principle of the Spirit
to make things natural to him, and to excite and make him do things
na^urally, and sweetly, Where the Spirit of God is, there is freedom, that
is, a kind of natural freedom not forced, nor moved by any sorraigne
extrinsicall motive.

Again where the freedom of Spirit is, 3. Courage against opposition.
there is a kind of courage against all opposition whatsoever joined with a
kind of light, and strength of faith breaking through all opposi^ions, a
consideration of the excellent state I am in, of the vileness of the state we
are moved to by opposition, when the Spirit discovers these things with a
kind of conviction, what is all opposition, to a Spiritual man? it adds but
courage, and strength to him to resist, the more opposition the more courage he
has, in Acts, 4. When they had the Spirit of God, they opposed opposition, and
the more they were opposed, the more they grew, they were cast in prison, and
rejoiced, and the more they were imprisoned the more courageous they were
still, there is no setting against this wind, nor no quenching of this fire,
by any humane power, where it is true; for the Spirit of God where it sets a
man at liberty indeed, it gathers strength by opposition. See how the Spirit
triumphed in the Martyrs over all opposition, fire, and imprisonment and all,
the Spirit in them set them at liberty, from such base fears, that it
prevails in them over all. The Spirit victorious.
The Spirit of God where it is, is a victorious Spirit, it frees the soul from
base fears of any creature, Romans 8.
If God be on our side who shall be against us? It is said of Saint Stephen,
that they could not withstand the Spirit by which he spoke, and Christ
promises a Spirit, that all the enemies shall not be able to withstand, so
those that are Gods children, in the time of opposition, when they understand
themselves, and that to which they stand, God gives them a Spirit, against
which all their enemies cannot stand, the Spirit of Christ in Stephen put such
a glory upon him, that he looked as if he had been an Angel, so the Spirit of
liberty where it is, it is with boldness, and strength and courage, against
opposition: Those therefore that are awed with every petty thing for standing
in a good cause, they have not the Spirit of Christ, for where that is, if
frees men from these base fears, especially if the cause be Gods.

Again, where the Spirit of liberty is, 4. Boldness with God.
it gives boldness with God himself, and thus it is known especially where
it is, where the Spirit is, there is liberty, what to do? even to go to God
himself, that otherwise is a consuming fire; for the Spirit of Christ goes
through the mediation of Christ to God, Christ by his Spirit leads us to God,
he that has not the Spirit of God cannot go to God with a spirit of
boldness, therefore when a man is in affliction, in the time of temptation, or
great affliction, especially when there is opposition, he may best judge what
he is in truth, when a man is in temptation, or opposition from the world,
within or without, and can go boldly to God and power out his soul to God
freely, and boldly as to a father, this comes from the Spirit of liberty: where
the Spirit of Christ is not though the parts be never so strong, or never so
great, it will never do thus, Carnal men sink in extreaminty.
take another man in the time of extremity, he sinkes, but take a child of God
in extremity, yet he has a Spirit to go to God, and to cry Abba Father, to
go in a familiar manner to God, Saul was a mighty man, when he was in anguish;
he could not go to God; Caine could not go to God; Judas a man of great
knowledge, he could not go to God, his heart was naught, he had not the
Spirit of Christ, but the spirit of the devil, and the spirit of bondage,
bound him over for his treason, to hell, and destruction, because he had not
the Spirit to go to God, but accounted him his enemy, he had betrayed Christ,
if he had said as much to God, as he did to the Scribes, and Pharisees. he
might have had mercy, in the force of the thing. I speak not of the decree of
God, but in the nature of the thing it self, if he had said so much to Christ
and to God, he might have found mercy, so let a man be never so great a sinner,
if he can go to God, and spread his soul, and lay open his sins, with any
remorse, if he can come, and open his soul in confession, and in petition,
and beg mercy of God, in Christ, to shine as a Father upon his soul, this
Spirit of liberty to go to God, it argues that the Spirit of Christ is there,
because there is liberty to go to God; in Romans 8. speaking there of comfort in
afflictions, this is one among the rest, that the children of God have the
Spirit of God, to stir up sighs, and groans. Now where the Spirit of God
stirs up sighs, and groans, God understands the meaning of his own Spirit,
there is the spirit of liberty, and there is the Spirit of Sons, for a spirit
of liberty is the Spirit of a Son, a man may know that he is the Son of
God, and a member of Christ, and that he has the spirit of Liberty in him, if
he can in affliction, and trouble, sigh and groan to God in the name and
mediation of Christ, for the Spirit stirs up groans, and sighs, they come
from the Spirit.

That familiar boldness whereby we cry, Abba, Father, Abba Father, the voice
of Sons.
it comes from Sons, they only can cry so, this comes from the Spirit, if we
be Sons, then we have the Spirit, whereby we cry Abba Father, so if we can
go to God with a sweet familiarity, Father have mercy upon me, forgive me,
look in the bowels of pity upon me, this sweet boldness, and familiarity,
it comes from the Spirit of Liberty, and shows that we are Sons, and not
bastards.

Your strong, Proud Rebels die desperately.
rebellious, sturdy hearted persons, that think to work out their misery, out
of the strength of parts, and friends, etc. they dye in despair, their
sorrows are too good for them, but when a broken Soul goes to God in Christ
with bo^^nesse, this opening of the Soul to God, it is a sign of Liberty, and
of the Liberty of Sons, for this liberty here, is the liberty of Sons, of a
Spouse, of Kings, of members of Christ, the sweetest liberty that can be
imagined, it is the liberty that those sweet relations breed of a wife to the
husband, and of loving Subjects to their Prince, and of Children to their
Father, here is a sweet liberty, and where the Spirit of God is, there is all
this sweet Liberty.

There are three degrees that a man is in, Three degrees in the way to heaven.
that is in the way to Heaven.

The state of nature, Of Nature.
in a manner, so he may have sensual nature pleased, and go on without fear
or wit, without grace, nay without the principles of nature, so he may
satisfy himself in a course of sin, that is the worst state, the state of
nature.

But God, if he belong Under the Law.
will not suffer him to be in this sottish, and brutish condition long, but
brings him under the Law, that is, he sets his own corrupt nature before him,
he shows him the course of his life, and then he is afraid of God, Depart
from me, I am a sinner, as Adam, he ran from God when he had sinned, that
was sweet to him before, so a brute man, when he is awakened with conscience
of sin, considering that there is but a step between him and hell, and
considering what a God he has to deal with, and that after death, there is
eternal damnation, when the Spirit of God has convinced him of this, then he
is in a state of fear, and when he is in this state, he is unfit to have
liberty to run to God, he uses all his power, to shift from God all he can,
and hates God, and wishes there were no God, and trembles at the very thought
of God, and of death, etc.

State of liberty.
but if a man belong to God, God will not leave him in this condition, (and
though this be better then the first, it is better that a man were out of his
wits almost, then to be senseless as a block) there is another condition
spoken of here, that is, of liberty when God by his Spirit discover^ to him in
Christ, (...) of sins, the gracious face of God, ready to receive him, Come
unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, Mat. 11. 28.
faith Christ, and where sin has abounded, grace more abounds, when a man
hears this still sweet voice of the Gospel, he begins then to take comfort
to himself, then he goes to God freely: Now all in this state of freedom,
take them at the worst, they have boldness to go to God; David in his
extremity, Difference of men in extremity.
he runs to God, David trusted in the Lord his God, when he was at his wits
end, what does Saul in his extremity? he runs to his swords point, take a man
under nature, or under the Law, in extremity, the greater wit he has, the more
he intangleth himself, his wit serves to entangle him, to weave a web of his
own despair; but take a gracious man, that is acquainted with God in Christ,
in such a man there is a liberty to go to God, at the lowest, for he has the
Spirit of Christ in him, what did the Spirit in Christ himself direct him to
do, at the lowest? Oh my God, my God, In the deepest discertion, yet my God,
there was a liberty to go to God, so take a Christian that has the same
spirit in him, as indeed he has My God still, he ownes God, and knows him in
all extremity.

Many are discovered hence, Want of boldness shows want of freedom.
to have no spirit of God in them, In trouble, whether go they? to their
purse, to their friends to any thing, they labor to overcome their troubles
one way or other, by Physic and the like, but never to go with boldness and
comfort, and a kind of familiarity to God, they have no familiarity with God,
therefore they have not a Spirit of liberty.

Again, 5. Freedom in regard of the creature.
where this spirit of liberty is, as there is a freedom to go to God, so in
regard of the creature, and the things here below, there is a freedom from
popular, vulgar conceits, from the errors of the times, and the slavish
courses of the times.

There are always two sorts of wicked persons in the world; Two sorts of wicked
men.


The one who accounts it their heaven, 1. Such as Lord it over others.
and happiness, to domineere over others, to bring them into subjection, and
to rule over their consciences if they can, and sell all to please them,
conscience, and all: 2. That respect their private gain.
Another sort again, so they may gain, they will sell their liberty, their
reason, and all, if it be but for a poor thing, so they may get any thing that
they value in the world, to make them beasts, as if they had no reasonable
understanding souls, much less grace, between those two, some domineering,
and others beastly serving; A few that go upon terms of Christianity, are of
sound judgment, now where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty, that is, a
freedom not to inthrall our judgments to any man, much less conscience. The
judgment of man enlightened by reason, is above any creature, for reason is a
beam of God, and all the persons in the world ought not to think to have power
over a man, to say any thing against his knowledge, it is to say against God,
if it be but in civil matters, be it what it will, judgment is the spark of
God, Reason an inferior light to grace.
nature is but Gods candle, it is a light of the same light that grace is of,
but inferior, for a man to speak against his conscience to please men, where
is liberty? for a man to inthrall his conscience to please another man, no man
that has the spirit of a man will be so pharisaicall, to say as another man
says, and to judge as another man judges, and to do all, as an other man
does, without seeing some reason himself, going upon the principles of a man
himself. It is true of a man, as a man unless he will unman himself. It is
much more true of a Christian man, he will not for base fears, and
engagements, inthrall his conscience, and sell heaven and happiness, and his
comfort, for this and that, and those that do it though they talk of liberty,
they are slaves, though they domineere in the world, the curse of Caine is upon
them, they are slaves of slaves.

Therefore, A Christian in dependant, in respect of other men.
where the Spirit of Christ is, there is an independent liberty, a man is
independent upon any other man, further then he sees it agrees wi^h the rules
of Religion, and he is dependant only upon God* and upon divine principles and
grounds. The Apostle says, The Spiritual man judges all things, and is
judged of none: so far as a man is led with the Spirit, he discernes things
in the light of the Spirit, he judges all things to be as they are, in the
light of the Spirit, and is judged of none, his meaning is not, that none will
usurp judgment of him, for that they will do, the emptyest men are most rash,
and censorious, but he is judged of none aright, it is a fools bolt, but the
Spiritual man indeed, passes a right verdict, upon persons, and things, as
far as he is spiritual; And that is the reason that carnal men, Why carnal
men hate those that are Spiritual.
especially hate spiritual men above all things; they hate men that have a
natural conscience, that judge according to the light of reason, for that is
above any creature, when a man will not say white is black, that good is
evil, to please any man in the world, a man that has a natural conscience
will not do this, and this is very distastefull, where men Idolize themselves
they love not such, but such as are slaves to them, but much more when a man is
spiritual he j^dgeth all things, and censureth them, and their courses, for he
is above all, and sees all beneath him, therefore the greatest men in the
world are holy men, they are above all other men, Christians the only great
men.
and without usurpation, they pass a censure upon the course and state of
other men, though they be never so great (howsoever the Image of God is upon
them, in regard of their authority, and the like:) yet in their dispositions
they are base, and slaves to their corruptions, and to Satan, they are not out
of the base rank of nature, Now a man that is a child of God, he is taken
into a better condition, and has a spiritual liberty in him; he judges all
things, and is judged of none, they may call him this and that, it is but
malice, and a spice of the sin against the holy Ghost, but their hearts tells
them he is otherwise, he shall judge them ere long, for The Saints shall judge
the world, therefore Christians should know, and take notice of their
excellency, where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty to judge all things as
far as they come within their reach and calling, to judge aright of all
things; therefore we should know how to maintain the credit of a Christian,
that is, to maintain a liberty independent upon all but God, and other things
with reservation, as far as they agree with conscience and religion: thus we
see, how we may judge of this liberty; Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there
is liberty.

He does not say licenciousnesse to shake off all government: Where the Spirit
is there is liberty, not licentiousness.
for by too much licenciousnesse, all liberty is lost, but where the Spirit of
God is, there is liberty: for a true Christian is the greatest servant, A
Christian a free man, and a servant.
and the greatest freeman in the world, for he has a Spirit that will yield to
none, in things Spiritual he reserves a liberty for his judgment, yet for
outward conformity of life and conversation, he is a servant to all, to do
them good, love makes him a servant. Christ was the greatest servant that ever
was, he was both the servant of God, and our servant: and there is none so
free, the greater portion of the Spirit, the more inward and Spiritual
freedom; and the more freedom, the more disposition to serve one another in
love, and to do all things, that a man should do outwardly: all things that
are lawful, we must take heed of that, mistake not this Spiritual liberty,
it stands with conformity, to all good laws, and all good orders, and there is
a great mistake of carnal men for want of this, What carnal men judge liberty.
they think it liberty to do as men list; it is true, if a man have a strong
and a holy understanding, to be a good leader to it, but it is the greatest
bondage in the world, to have most freedom in i^l, as I said before, those
that are most free in ill, are most slaves of all, for their corruptions will
not suffer them to hear good things, to be where good things are spo^en, to
accompany with those that are good, their corruptions has them in so narrow a
custody, The tyran^^ of lusts.
some kind of men their corruptions are so malignant and binding, that they
will not suffer them, to be in any opportunity, wherein their corruptions may
be restrained at all, but they hate the very sight of persons that may
restrain them, and all laws that might restrain them. Now this is the
greatest slavery in the world, for a man to have no acquaintance, with that
that is contrary to his corrupt disposition.

Well, new Lords new Laws, as soon as ever a man is in Christ, and has
Christ's Spirit, he has another law in his soul to rule him, contrary to that
that there was before, before he was ruled by the law of his lusts, that
carried him whither he would, but now in Christ he has a new Lord, and a new
law, and that rules him according to the regiment of the Spirit, The Law of the
Spirit of life in Christ, has freed me from the Law of sin and of death.

Not to grieve the Spirit.
there is this sweet and glorious liberty, let us take heed by all means
that we do not grieve the Spirit, when we find the holy Ghost, in the use of
any good means to touch upon our souls, oh give him entrance, and way to come
into his own chamber, as it were to provide a room for himself, as Cyprian
Cyprian.
says, Consecra habitaculum, etc. enter into thy bed chamber, consecrate a
habitation for thy self, so let us give him way to come into our souls, when
he knockes by his sweet motions. We that live in the Church, there is none
of us all but our hearts tell us that we have often re^isted the holy Ghost,
we^ might have been saved, if we had not been rebellious, and opposite;
Grieve not the Spirit by any means.





The Spirit is grieved,
With unclean courses.
and words, and actions, he is called the holy Spirit, and he stirs up in the
soul holy motions like himself, he breathes into us holy motions, and he
breathes out of us good, and holy, and savory words, and stirs us up to holy
actions. Now when we give liberty to our mouths, to speak rottenly, to
swear, (I am ashamed almost to name that word) when we give liberty to such
filthiness, is not this a grieving of the Spirit, if we have the Spirit at
all? If we have not a care to grieve our selves, do we not grieve all about
us, therefore take heed of all filthy unholy words, thoughts, or carriages, it
grieves the Spirit.

Then the Spirit is a Spirit Malice, and canckor.
take heed of cankor, and malice, we grieve the Spirit of God by cherishing
cankor, and malice, one against another, it drives away the sweet spirit of
love, therefore make conscience of grieving the Spirit, he will not rest in a
malicious heart, who is the Spirit of love.

Again, Pride.
the Spirit of humility, God gives grace to the humble, it empties the soul,
that it may fill it, it empties it of what is in it of windy vanity, and fills
it with it self, therefore those that are filled with vain, high, proud
conceits, they grieve and keep out the good Spirit of God; for we should
empty our souls, that the Spirit of God may have a Sins against conscience,
or else we grieve the Spirit; in a word, any sin against conscience, grieves
the Spirit of God, and hinders spiritual liberty, because Where the Spirit of
God is, there is liberty; would we preserve liberty? Hinder our liberty.
we must preserve the Spirit, if we sin against conscience, we hinder
liberty every way, we hinder our liberty to good duties, when a man sins
against conscience, he is dead to good actions, conscience tells him, why do
you go about it, you have done this and that? he is shackled in his
performances, he cannot go so naturally to prayer, and to In Prayer.
especially he has not liberty to the throne of grace, how dares he look to
heaven, when he has grieved the Spirit of God and broken the peace of his
conscience? what communion has he with God, so it hinders peace with God, a
man cannot look Christ in the face, as a man when he has wronged another
man, he is ashamed to look on him, so the soul when it has run into sins
against conscience it is ashamed to look on Christ, and to go to God again,
therefore any sin against conscience grieves the Spirit, and hinders all
sweet liberty that was before, it takes away the degree of it.

It hinders boldness with men.
for what makes a man courageous in his dealings with men? a clear conscience;
let it be the stoutest man in the world, let him maintain any lust against
conscience it will make him so far a slave, for when it comes to the crossing
of that lust once, then you shall see he will even betray all his former
stoutnesse, and strength, if a man be covetous, and ambitious, he may be stout
for a time, but when he comes to be crossed it will take away all liberty,
that a man has to cherish any sin.

In a word, to preserve this liberty, Go to Christ to free us from corruption.
let us go to Christ, from whom we have this liberty, complain to him, when
we find any corruption stirring, go to the Lord in the words of S. Austine
and say, Now Lord free me from my necessities, I cannot serve thee as I should
do, nor as I would do, I am inthralled to sin, but I would do better, I
cannot do so well as I would, free me from my necessities: complain of our
corruptions to God; as the woman in the Law, when ^he complained, if she were
assaulted, she saved her life by complaying, so let us complain to Christ, if
we find violence offered to us by our corruptions, I cannot by my own
strength set my self at liberty from this corruption, Lord give me thy Spirit
to do it, set me more and more at liberty, from my former bondage, and from
this that has inthralled me, so complain to Christ, and desire him to do his
office; Lord thy office is To dissolve the works of the devil: And go to the
Spirit, it is the office of the holy Ghost to free us, to be a Spirit of
liberty: now desire Christ and the holy Ghost to do their office of setting us
at Spiritual liberty: and this we must do in the use of means, Avoid
^ccasion^.
and avoiding of occasions, and then it will be efficatious to preserve that
Spiritual liberty, as will tell our consciences that we are no hypocrites,
and that will end in a glorious liberty in the life to come.

And let this be a comfort to all poor struggling, The office of Christ by his
Spirit.
and striving Christians, that are not yet set at perfect liberty from their
lusts and corruptions; that it is the office of the Spir^t of Christ, as the
King of the Church, it is his office by his Spirit to purge the Church
perfectly, to make it a glorious spouse; at last he will do his own office,
and besides this liberty of grace joined with conflict in this world there is
another liberty of glory, when I shall be freed from all oppositions without,
and from all conflict and corruption within* It is called The liberty of the
Sons of God, Romans 8 and those that look not more and more, for the gracious
liberty to be free from passions, and corruptions here, they must not look for
the glorious liberty in heaven, but those that live a conflicting life, and
pray to Christ more and more for the Spirit of liberty, to set up a liberty in
us, these may look for the liberty of the Son of God, (...) will be ere
long, when we shall be out of reach, and free from corruption, when the Spirit
of God shall be all in all. Now our lusts will not suffer the Spirit to be all
in all, but in heaven he shall, there shall be nothing to rise against him:
This that has been spoken shall suffice for that 17. verse, The Lord is the
Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is there is (...): I proceed to the
next verse, which I purpose to dwell more on.

VERSE. XVIII. But we all as in a glass, with open face behold the glory of the
Lord, and are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, as by the
Spirit of the Lord.


AS the Sun rises by degrees, till he come to shine in glory, so it was with
the Son of righteousness, he discovered himself in the Church by little
and little: the latter times now are more glorious than the former* and because
comparisons give luster, the blessed* Apostle to set forth the excellency of
the administration of the covenant of grace under the Gospel, he compares it
with the administration of the same covenant in the time of the law, and in the
comparison prefers that administration under the Gospel, is more excellent.
Difference between the Law, and the Gospel.
Now besides other differences in the Chapter, he insists upon three
especially, they differ in Generality. Evidence. Efficacy.



We all now with open face etc. In the number.
Moses only beheld the glory of the Lord in the Mount, but We all, not all
men, but all sound Christians that have their eyes opened, all sorts of
believers, behold this glory: no envy in Spiritual things.
In Spiritual things there is no envy, every one may be partaker in solidum,
entirely of all. Envy is in the things of this life, where the more one has,
the less another has, it is a matter of glory, and excellency, the more are
partakers of Spiritual things: the Jews rejoiced that the Gentiles should be
called, and we now rejoice in hope, and should rejoice mervelously, if we
could see it effected, that the Jews should be taken in again; the more the
better, We all.

And then for evidence, We behold with open face, In the evidence.
that is, with freedom, and boldness, which was not in the time of the law,
for they were afraid to look upon Moses, when he came down from the Mount,
his cou^^enance was so majesticall and ^^^rible, but We all with open face,
freely, boldly, and cheer^fully, look, upon the glory of God in the Gospel;
the light of the Gospel is an alluring com^^rting light, the light of the law
was dazelling and terrifying.

As in, a Glass, they beheld God in a glass, but it was not so clear a
glass, they beheld him as it were in the water, we behold him, in Christ^ll,
we see God in the glass of the Word, and Sacraments, but they in a wor^^ of
Ceremonies, Christ was to them swadled, and wrapped up in a great many types.

And then for the power and efficacy, the Gospel Efficasie.
the law had not power to convert, to change into its own likeness, but now
the Gospel, which is the ministry of the Spirit; it has a transforming,
changing power, into the likeness of Christ, whom it preaches, we are changed
From glory to glory* it is a graduall change, not all at once, but from glory
to glory, from one degree of grace to another, for grace is here called glory,
we are changed from the state of grace, till he come to heaven the state of
glory.

And then the cause of all, It is by the Spirit of the Lord; The Spirit runs
through all, it is by the Spirit of the Lord, that we behold, it is the Spirit
of the Lord that takes away the veil, it is by the Spirit, that we are changed
from glory to glory.

Thus you see how many ways the administration of the covenant of grace now,
is more excellent than the administration of the Covenant of grace was then:
Four excellencies in the covenant of grace since Christ.
In a word i^ has four excellencies especially as,

Freedom.
liberty and freedom, from the bondage of ceremonies, and of the law, in a
great part they had little Gospel, and a great deal of Law mingled with it,
we have much Gospel, and little Law, we have more freedom, and liberty.

And thereupon we have Clearness.
we see Christ more clearly, with open face we behold the glory of the Lord.

And thirdly, there is Intention.
the spirit works more strongly now, even to a change, the ministry of the
Gospel has the Spirit with it, whereby we are changed from the hear^roote
inwardly, and thoroughly.

And l^stly, in the extension, Extention.
We all, Gentiles, as well as Jews, Behold, etc.

Hence, let us seriously and fruitfully consider, in what excellent times the
Lord has cast us, that we may answer it with thankfulness, and obedience,
God has reserved us to these glorious times, better then ever our forefathers
saw.

There are three m^ine parts of the Text, Three parts of the Text.
our communion and fellowship with God in Christ, we all now in a glass,
Behold the glory of the Lord.

And then our conformity thereupon, by beholding, we are changed into the same
Image.

The third is the cause of both, the cause why we b^hold the glory of God, and
why by beholding we are changed from glory to glory, it is the Spirit of God.

This Text has many theames of glory, all is glorious in it; there is the
glorious mercy of God in Christ, who is the Lord of glory, the Gospel in which
we see the grace of God, and of Christ, The glorious Gospel, the change by
which we are changed* a glorious change, from glory to glory, and by a
glorious power, by the Spirit of (...), Lord, all here is glorious. Therefore
blessed be God, and blessed be Christ, and blessed be the Spirit, and blessed
be the Gospel, and we blessed that live in these blessed and glorious times,
but to come to the words.

But we all as in a glass, etc.

The happiness of man consists especially in two things, Happiness of man in
two things.
In Communion with In Conformity to God.


The means how to attain them, both, are laid down in this Verse.

I shall speak of them in order. First, of our communion with the chief good:
And then of the conformity wr^ught upon that communion.

And in the Communion first of Gods discovering of himself by his Spirit.

And then of our apprehension of him, by beholding.

We all with open face, behold the glory of the Lord, etc.

In the glass of the Gospel, we see Christ, and in Christ the glory of God
shining, especially of his mercy.

The point then here is, that, Doct.


The grace and free mercy of God is his glory, The mercy of God his glory.
Now in our fallen estate, the glory of God is especially his mercy shining in
Jesus Christ.

What is glory?

Glory implies these things. Glory what?


Excellency.
nothing is glorious but that that is excellent.

Evidence.
and manifestation, for nothing is glorious, (though it be excellent) if it
appear not so, therefore Light is said to be glorious, because the rays of
it appear, and run into the eyes of all as it were, and therefore we call
things that are glorious by the name of Light, illustrissimus, and Clarissimus,
terms taken from light, because where glory is, there must be manifestation,
thus light, it is a creature of God that manifests it self and other things.

Thirdly, victoriousnesse, Victory.


Witness.
usually glory has with it the suffrage, and approbation of others or else it
has not its right end, that is, why does God create such glory in nature as
Light, and such like? but that men may behold the Light? and why are Kings, and
great men glorious at certain times, but that there be beholders? if there
were no beholders there would be no glory

Now to apply this to the point in hand, The glory of the Lord, That is, his
attributes, especially that of grace, mercy, and love in Christ, that
especially is his excellency.

And there is an evidence and manifestation of it, it appears to us in Christ,
The grace of God has appeared, Christ is called grace, he is the grace of God
invested, and clothed with man's nature, when Christ appeared, the grace, and
mercy, and love of God appeared.

Then again it is victorious, shining to victory, over all that is contrary:
For alas beloved, what would become of us? if there were not grace above
sin, and mercy above misery, and power in Christ Jesus, above all the power
in Satan, and death.

And then they have a testimony of all that belong to God, for they have their
eyes opened to behold this glory, and by beholding are transformed from glory
to glory, as we shall see after.

So that whatsoever may be said of glory, may be said of this glory, whence
all other glory indeed is derived.

The glory of the Lord.


By the glory of the Lord then is meant especially the glory of his mercy, and
love, in Jesus Christ.

The several attributes of God shine upon several occasions, Several
attributes shine on several occasions.
they have as it were several theaters whereon to discover their glory. In
Creation there was power most of all, in governing the world, wise providence;
In hell, justice in punishing sinners. But now to man in a lapsed estate, what
attribute shines most, and is most glorious? Oh it is mercy, and free grace. If
grace and mercy were hid, All attributes terrible without mercy.
our state being as it is, since the fall, what were all other attributes but
matter of terror? to think of the wisdom, and power, and justice of God,
would add aggravations, he is the more wise, and powerful to take revenge on
us, etc. grace is the glorious attribute, whereby God does as it were set
himself to triumph over the greatest ill that can be over sin, that that is
worse than the devil himself, cannot prevail over his grace: There is a
greater height, and depth, and breadth, there are greater dimensions, in love
and mercy in Christ, then there is in our sins, and miseries, and all this is
gloriously discovered in the gospel.

Do you wonder then why the grace of God has found such enemies as it has
done always: Especially in Popery, Why men are enemies to Gods free grace.
where they mingle their works with grace; For the opposite heart of man being
in a frame of enmity to God, sets it self most against that that God will be
glorified in, therefore we should labor to vindicate nothing so much as grace.
We have a dangerous incroaching Sect risen up, enemies to the grace of God,
that palliate, and cover their plot cunningly and closely, but they set nature
against grace, let us vindicate that upon all occasions; for we live by grace,
and we must dye by grace, and stand at the day of judgment by grace; not in
our own righteousness, but in the righteousness of Christ, being found in
him; but because it is a sweet point and may serve us all in steed, to
consider that God will honor himself gloriously in this sweet attribute, let
us see a little how the glory of God shines in Christ more then otherwise,
parallel it with other things a little.

Adam, for Adam had the Image of God upon him, The glory of God in the Gospel
greater than that in Adam.
and had communion and fellowship with God, but there is greater glory now
shining in the Gospel, in Jesus Christ to poor sinners; for when man stood in
innocence, God did good to a good man, and God was amiable and friendly to a
friend; Adam was the friend of God then. Now to do good to him that is good,
and to maintain sweet communion with a friend, this is good indeed, and it
was a great glory of Gods mercy that he would raise such a creature as man
hereto. But now in Jesus Christ there is a further glory of mercy, for here God
does good to ill men, and the goodness of God is victorious, and triumphant
over the greatest misery, and the greatest ill of man. Now in the Gospel God
does good to his greatest enemies, herein as it is Romans 5. God set forth, and
commended gloriously his love, that When we were enemies, he gave his Son for
us, therefore here is greater glory of mercy, and love, shining forth to fallen
man in Christ, than to Adam in innocence.

The glory of God in Gospel above that in Creation.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
Work: Every creature has a beam of Gods glory in it, the whole world is a
Theater of the glory of God, but what is the glory of Creation, of
preservation, and governing of the world, to the glory of his mercy, and
compassion that shines in Christ? The glory of the creature is nothing to this,
for all the Creatures were made of nothing, but here the glory of mercy is such
in Christ, that God became a Creature himself.

Nay to go higher to Gods glory to man more than to Angels.
it is not Philangelia, but Philanthropia that out-shines all, God is not
called the lover of Angels, he took not upon him, the nature of Angels, but
the nature of man, and man is the spouse of Christ, the member of Christ,
Angels are not so, they are but ministering Spirits for the good of them that
shall be saved, Christ as it is Ephesians. 1. when he rose again, he was advanced
above all principalities, and powers, therefore above the Angelical nature:
now Christ and the Church are all one, 1 Cor. 14.
they make but one mystical body, the Church is the Queen, and Christ is the
King, therefore Christ mystical the Church, is above all Angelical nature
whatsoever, the Angels are not the Queen and Spouse of Christ, so the glory
of Gods goodness is more to man, to sinful man, after he believes and is made
one with Christ, than to any creature whatsoever, thus God has dignified and
advanced our nature in Jesus Christ, comparisons give luster, therefore this
shows plainly unto us Christians that the glory of the mercy, and love, and
kindness, of God to man in Christ, shines more than his glory, and mercy, and
kindness, to all the creatures in the world besides, therefore here is a glory
with an excell^ncie.

On the other side nothing more terrible than to consider of God, The glory of
Gods mercy shines in Christ.
out of Christ, what is he but a consuming fire, but to consider of his mercy,
his glorious mercy in Jesus Christ, nothing is more sweet: for in Jesus Christ
God has taken upon him, that sweet relation of a Father, The Father of mercy,
and God of all Comfort, so that the nature of God is lovely in Christ, and our
nature in Christ is lovely to him; and this made the Angels, who though they
have not increase of grace by Christ, yet having increase of comfort and glory,
when Christ was borne to sing from heaven, Glory to God on high, etc. what
glory? why the glory of his mercy, of his love, of his grace to sinful men.
Indeed there is a glory of wisdom to reconcile justice, and mercy together,
and a glory of truth to fulfill the promise, but that that sets all attributes
for our Salvation on work, was mercy and grace, therefore that is the glory of
God especially here meant, for as we say in morallity, that is the greatest
virtue, that other virtues serve, so in Divinity, that attribute which others
serve, is the greatest of all; in our salvation wisdom, yea and justice it
self, serves mercy: for God by his wisdom devised away to content justice,
by sending his Son to take our nature, and in that nature, to give
satisfaction to justice, that there might be a harmony among the a^tributes:
to make some use of this.

To embrace this mercy.
glory? (I will not speak at large of glory being an endless argument, but
confine it to the glory of grace, and mercy in the Gospel, which therefore is
called the glory of the Gospel) I say does God show such glorious mercy in
Christ? then I beseech you let us justify God, and justify this course that
God has taken to glorify his mercy in Jesus Christ, by embracing Christ: It
is said of the proud Pharisees, they despised the counsel of God; God has
powered out mercy bowels of mercy, in Christ crucified, therefore in embracing
Christ we justify the counsel of God concerning our salvation.

Do but consider what a loving God we have, God joins our good with his
glory.
who would not be so far in love with his only Son, as to keep him to
himself, when we had need of him; a God that accounts himself most glorious
in those attributes that are most for our comfort, he accounts not himself so
glorious for his wisdom, for his power, or for his justice, as for his mercy
and grace, for his Philanthropia, his love of man; shall not we therefore even
be in flamed with a desire of gratifying him, who has j^yned his glory with
our salvation, that accounts himself glorious in his mercy, above all other
attributes? shall the Angels that have not that benefit by Christ as we have,
shall they in our behalf, out of love to us, and zeal to Gods glory, sing
from heaven, Glory to God on high, and shall we be so dead, and frozen hearted
that reap the crope, as not to acknowledge this glory of God, breaking out in
the Gospel? the glory of his mercy and rich grace; the Apostle is so full when
he falls upon this Theme, that he cannot speak without words of
amplification, and enlargement, one while he calls it rich grace, another while
he stands in admiration, Oh the depth of the Love of God, What deserves
admiration but glorious things, To admire the love of God.
the best testimony that can be given of glorious things, is when we admire
them; now if we would admire, is there any thing so admirable that we can
say, oh the height, and depth, as we may of the love of God in Christ? there
are all the dimensions of unparalleld glory, height, and breadth, and depth:
therefore I beseech you let us often even stand in admiration of the love of
God to us in Christ; So God loved the world, the Scripture leads to this
admiration, by phrases that cannot have a podesis, a redition back again, So,
how? we cannot tell how, so as is beyond all expression, the Scripture it self
is at a stand for words, Oh base nature, that we are dazzled with any thing,
but that that we should most admire. How few of us spend our thoughts this way
to consider Gods wonderful and admirable mercy, and grace in Christ, when yet
there is no object in the world so sweet and comfortable as this is, that the
very Angels pry into, they desire to pry into the mystery of our Salvation by
Christ, they are students therein, the Cherubins, they were set upon the mercy
seat, having a counterview, one upon another, implying a kind of admiration,
they pry into the secrets of Gods love in governing his people, and bringing
them to Heaven, shall they do it, and shall not we study, and admire these
things that God may have the glory, God made all for his glory beloved, and the
wicked for the day of wrath, as Solomon says, and has he not new made all for
his glory? is not the new creature more for his glory then the old creature?
therefore if we will make it good, that we are new creatures, let us seek to
glorify God every way, not in word alone, but in heart, admiring him, and in
life, conversing with him.

And that we may glorify God in deed, We may glory in Gods love without danger.
let us glory in Gods love, for we must glory in this glory, nature beloved is
glorious of it self, and vainglorious, but would you glory without vanity?
go out of your selves, and see what you are in Christ, in the grace, and mercy,
and free love of God, culling us out from the rest of mankind, and there you
may glory safely over sin, and death, and hell, for being justified freely from
our sins, you can think of death, of the damnation of others, of hell
without fear, God forbid says Saint Paul, that I should glory in any thing,
but in the cross of Christ, that is, in the mercy of God appointing such a
means for satisfaction. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the
strong man glory in his strength, etc. There is danger in such glorying, it is
subject to a curse, but if a man will glory, let him glory in the Lord.

shall we think that God will admit of any partner with Christ, in the matter
of salvation, If as the Psalmist says, He made us, and not we our selves.
shall we think that we have a hand in making our selves again. Will God
suffer his glory to be touched upon, by intercessions of Saints merits, and
satisfactions, and free will, grace is not glorious, if we add the least thing
of our own to it, cannot we make a hair of our head, or the grass that we
trample upon, but there must be a glory and power of God in it? and can we
bring our selves to Heaven, therefore, away with that, Hayle Mary full of
grace. Hayle Mary freely beloved, is the right interpretation, and they that
attribute matter of power and grace, and favor to her, as in that, Oh beseech
thy Son, etc. they take away that wherein God, and Christ will be glorified,
and attribute it to his Mother, and other creatur^s. I do but touch this to
bring us into loathing, and abomination of that Religion, that sets somewhat of
the creature, against that wherein God will be glorified above all.

Again, let us stay our selves when we walk in darkness, with the
consideration of the gloriousness of Gods mercy in Jesus Christ, Glorious
mercy will satisfy conscience.
here called, The glory of the Lord. It is no less mercy, then glorious mercy,
that will satisfy us, when we are in distress of conscience, and if this
will not, what will, let Satan aggravate our sins as much as may be, and
join with conscience in this business, y^ set this glorious mercy against all
our sins, make the most of them, they are the sins of a finite creature,
but here is infinite mercy triumphing, and rejoicing over justice, having
gotten the victory over it, Oh beloved, when the time of temptation comes, and
the hour of death, and conflict with conscience, and a confluence, and
concurrence of all that may discourage, Satan will bestirre himself, and he
is a cunning Rethoritian to set all the colors upon sin, especially in the
time of despair, be as cunning to set all colors upon mercy, glorious mercy.
If God were glorious in all other attributes, and not it mercy, what would
become of us? The glory of other attributes without mercy, tends to despair,
glorious in wisdom to find us out, glorious in justice, to deal with us in
rigor, these affright, but that that sweetneth all other attributes, is his
mercy.

What a comfort is this to sinful man, Comfort from Gods mercy.
that in casting himself upon Christ, and upon Gods mercy in Christ, he yields
glory to God? that God has joined his glory with our special good, that here
is a sweet concurrence, between the Summus finis, and the Summum Bonum of
man. The last end of man of all, is the glory of God, for that is as it were
the point of the circle from which all came: (for he made all for his glory)
and in which all ends, so is the chief good, therefore by the way, it is a
vain conceit for some to think, Oh we must not look to our own Salvation
so much, this is self-love.

It is true to severe the consideration of the glory of Gods mercy, How we may
look at our own Salvation.
and goodness in it, but see both these wrapped, and knit together
indissolvable, our Salvation, and Gods glory, we hinder Gods glory if we
believe not his mercy in Christ to us, so at once, we wrong our selves and him,
and we wrong him not in a mean attribute, but in his mercy and goodness,
wherein he has appointed to glorify himself most of all, and therefore I
beseech you let us yield to him the glory of his mercy, and let us think that
when we sin, we cannot glorify him more, then to have recourse to his
mercy, when Satan tempts us to run from God, and discourageth us, as he
will do at such times, How to think of mercy in temptation.
then have but this in your thoughts, God has set himself to be glorious in
mercy, above all other attributes, and this is the first moving attribute that
stirs up all the rest, and therefore God will account himself honored, if I
have recourse to him, let this thought therefore be as a City of refuge, when
the avenger of blood follows thee, flee presently to this sanctuary, think
thus, let not me deny my self comfort and God glory at once, Where sin
abounds, grace abounds much more. Though sins after conversion stain our
profession, more then sins before conversion, yet notwithstanding go to the
glorious mercy of God still, to seventy times seventy times, there is yet mercy
for these: we beseech you be reconciled, says Saint Paul to the Corinthians,
when they were in the state of grace, and had their pardon before, let us never
be discouraged from going to Christ.

Oh but I have offended often, Often offenses exclude not from mercy.
and grievously? What says the Prophet? My thoughts are not as your thoughts,
but as high as the Heavens are above the earth, etc. Therefore, howsoever
amongst men, often offenses breed an eternal allyenation, yet notwithstanding,
with God it is not so, but so often as we can have Spirit to go to God for
mercy, and spread our sins before him, with broken and humble hearts, so
often we may take out our pardon, Compare Exodus 33. with Exodus 34. Moses, in
Chap. 33. had desired to see the face of God, there was some little curiosity
perhaps in it, How God showed Moses his glory.
God told him that none could see him, and live, to see the face of God in
himself, must be reserved for heaven, we are not proportioned for that sight.
But in the next Chapter, there he shows himself to Moses, and how does he
show himself, and his glory to Moses? The Lord, the Lord, gracious, merciful,
long suffering, clothed all in sweet attributes, he will be known by those
names, now, then if we would know the name of God, and see God as he is
pleased, and delighted to discover himself to us, let us know him by those
names that he proclaims there, showing that the glory of the Lord, in the
Gospel especially shines in mercy, and as I said before, it must be glorious
mercy, that can satisfy a distressed conscience, how soever, in the time of
ease and peace, we think a little mercy will serve the turn, but when
conscience is once awaked, it must be glorious, and infinite mercy must allay
it.

And therefore those that find their consciences any thing wounded with any
sin, Exhortation to accept mercy.
stand not out any longer with God, come, and yield, lay down your weapons,
there is mercy ready, the Lord is glorious in his mercy in Jesus Christ, it is
a victorious triumphing mercy, over all sin and unworthiness whatsoever.
Look upon God, in the face of Jesus Christ, as you have it in, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
God who commanded Light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts,
to give us the Light of the knowledge of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. In
the face of Christ, God is lovely, loveliness and excellency is in the face
above all the parts of the body.

The Glory of God.


We are never in such a condition as we ought to be, When we account grace
glorious.
except grace be glory to us, and when is grace glory to a sinner? Oh when he
feels the weight and burden of his sin, and languishing desires. Oh that I
might have a drop of mercy, then grace is glory, not only in Gods esteem,
but in the eye of the sinner, indeed we are never soundly humbled, till grace
in our esteem be glory, that is, till it appear excellent and victorious, I
beseech you remember it, we may have use of it, in the time of desertion.

How is this grace of God in Christ, conveyed to us yet nearer? By the Gospel.

As in a glass.


The Gospel is the good Word of God, Heb. 6. It reveals the good God to us,
and the good Christ, it is a sweet word: for Christ could do us no good
without the word, if there were not an obligation, a covenant made between God
and us, Necessity of the Gospel.
the foundation of which covenant, is the satisfaction of Christ, if there were
not promises built upon the covenant of grace, whereby God has made himself a
debtor, what claim could a sinful soul have to Christ, and to Gods mercy?
but God has bound himself in his word, therefore the grace of God shines in
Christ, and all that is in Christ, is conveyed to us, by the word, by the
promise. The Gospel then is a sweet word. You know that breeding promise of
all others, Genesis 3. The seed of the woman, that repealed and conveyed the mercy
of God in Christ to Adam: So the continuance of that and all the sweet and
gracious promises, bud from that, all meet in Christ, as in a cen^er, all are
made for him, and in him, he is the sum of all the promises, all the good
things we have, are parsels of Christ, Christ, he is the word of the Father,
that discovers all from the bosom of his Father, therefore he is named the
Word, the Gospel is the word from him. Christ was discovered to the Apostles,
and from the Apostles to us, to the end of the world by his Spirit accompanying
the ordinance, so the Myrrour wherein, we see the glorious mercy of God, is
first Christ, God shines in him, and then there is another glass wherein
Christ is discovered, the glass of the Gospel, thus it pleases God to
condescend, to stoop to us poor sinners, to reveal his glory, the glory of
his mercy, fitly, and suitable in a Savior, God-man, God condescends in giving
the Gospel.
God incarnate, God our Brother, God our Kinsman, and to do it all yet more
familiarly to discover it in a word: and then to ordain a Ministry, together
with the Word, to lay open the riches of Christ, for it is not the Gospel,
considered nakedly, but the Gospel unfolded by the Ministry.

Christ is he great Ordinance of God, for our Salvation, the Gospel is the
great Ordinance of God, to lay open the unsearchable riches of Christ, the
casket of this Jewel, the treasury of his treasure, the grace and love and
mercy of God, are treasured in Christ, and Christ and all good things are
treasured in the Gospel, that is the rich Mine, and the Ministry of the
Gospel, lays open that Mine to the people. Nay God yet goes further, he
gives his holy Spirit with the Ministry, it is the Ministry of the Spirit,
that howsoever there are many that are not called, and converted in the
Gospel, yet the Spirit of God is before hand with them. There are none under
the Gospel, Motions of the Spirit in men unconverted.
but the Spirit gives them sweet motions, he knockes at their hearts, he
allures and persuades them, and if they yield not, it is because of the
rebellion of their hearts, there is more grace of the Spirit offered, then is
entertained so that the mouths of men shall be stopped, thus God descends,
and Christ, and grace, the Gospel, the Ministry, the Spirit, all in way of
love to us, that we may do all in a way of love to God again, it should
therefore work us to do all with ingenious hearts to him again.

The Gospel is the glass, wherein we see this glory. Christ indeed in some
sort is the glass, for we cannot see God out of Christ, but he is a
terrifying sight, but in the glass Christ, we can see God, as we see the
Sun in the water: If we cannot see the Sun in his glory that is but a
creature, God must be seen in some glass.
how can we see God himself, but in some glass? therefore we must see him in
Christ, and so his sight is comfortable.

And in the dispensing of the Gospel, especially in the Preaching and
unfolding of the word, the riches of God in Christ are unfolded and not only
unfolded, but the Spirit in unfolding, conveyes the sense, assurance, and
persuasion thereof unto us.

There is such a connection, between the Evangelicall truth of God, and Jesus
Christ, that they have both one name, to insinuate to us that as we will be
partakers of Christ, so it must be of Christ, as he is revealed in the
Gospel, not in conceits of our own, the Word is truth, and Christ is truth,
they have the same name, for were there never so much mercy and love in God, if
i^were concealed from us, that we had nothing to plead, that we had not some
title to it by some discovery of it in his will, the Word and the seal of the
Word, the Sacraments (for the Sacrament is but a visible Word, they make one
entyre thing, the Word and Sacraments, the one is the evidence, the other the
seal) what comfort could we take in it? Now his will is in the promise, God
has engaged himself by his promise.
wherein there is not only a discovery of what he does or will do, but he
has engaged himself, If we believe we shall not perish, but have life, and
Come unto me, and be refreshed says Christ, every one that thirsts, come and
be satisfied, and now we may claim the performance of what he has spoken,
and bind him by his own word, he cannot deny himself, so now we see him
comfortably in the glass of the Word and Sacraments.

These three go together, We cannot see Divine things but in a glass.
the glory of God, Christ the foundation of all grace, in the covenant of
grace, and then the Gospel of grace, the Gospel of the Kingdom, the Gospel
of life, that discovers the gracious face of God shining in Christ, we have
Communion with God through Christ, with Christ through the Gospel, therefore
in the Gospel we behold as in a glass the glory of God.

This is suitable to our condition while we are here below, we cannot see divine
things, otherwise than in a glass, that sight of God that we shall have in
heaven, immediately without the Word and Sacraments, that is of a higher
nature, when our natures shall be perfect, but while we live here we cannot
see God but in Christ, and we cannot see him but in the Word and Sacraments,
such is the imperfection of our sight, and such is the luster and glory of the
object, the glory of God, that we cannot perfectly see it but in a glass; God
says to Moses, None can see me and live, his meaning is none can see me as I
am, none can see me immediately and live, if we would see God, and the glory of
God immediately without a glass, we must see it in heaven, we must dye first,
we must pass through death to see God face to face as he is then, not as he
is, but more familiarly than we can now, then God will represent himself so as
shall be for our happiness, though not simply as he is, for he is infinite,
and how should finite comprehend infinite, we shall apprehend him, but not
comprehend him: while we are in earth therefore, we must be content to see him
in a glass, which is the Gospel, especially unfolded.

Now in this word glass in which we see the glory of God, is employed both,

A Perfection,

And some Imperfection.

Perfection, because it is as a clear Crystal glass in regard of the glass
that was before, for those under the law saw Christ, in a glass of Ceremonies,
and as I said before, there is difference between ones seeing his face in
water, and in a Crystal glass, so then this implies perfection in regard of
the former state.

Again in regard of heaven it implies imperfection, for there we shall not see
in a glass, sight in a glass is imperfect though it be more perfect than that
in water: for we know out of the principles of learning and experience that
reflections weaken, and the more reflections, the more weak, when we see a
thing by reflection, we see it weakly, and when we see it by a second
reflection, from that we see it more weakly, when we see the sun on the
wall, Sight, weak here, perfect in heaven.
or any thing that is light, it is weaker than the light of the sun it self,
when a man sees his face in a glass, it is a weaker representation, than to
see face to face, but when we see the sun upon the wall, reflexing upon
another wall, the third reflection is weaker than the first, the more
reflections the more weak, so here all sight by glasses is not so powerful,
as that sight and knowledge which is face to face, in heaven; that is the
reason that S. James says, that he that sees his face in a glass is subject
to forget, what is the reason that a man cannot remember himself, when he
sees his face in a glass so well as he can remember another man's face when he
sees it? because he sees himself only by reflection, therefore it is a
weaker presentation to him, and the memory and apprehension of it is weaker,
when he sees another face to face, he remembers him longer, because there is
a more lively representation, it is not a reflection, but face to face. So
there is imperfection in this sight that we have of God, while we are here as
in a glass, it is nothing to that when we shall see face to face without the
Word and Sacraments or any other Medium, which sight what it is, we shall know
better when we are there, we cannot now discover it, it is a part of heaven to
know what apprehensions we shall have of God there, but sure it is more
excellent than that that is here, therefore this implies imperfection.

We consist of body and soul in this world, Our souls helped by our senses.
and our souls, are much confined and tied to our senses, imagination
propounds to the soul greater things than the senses, so God helps the soul
by outward things that work upon the senses, sense upon the imagination, and
so things pass into the soul.

God frames his manner of dealing suitable to the nature he has created us in,
therefore he uses the Word, and Sacraments and such things whereby he makes
impressions, upon the very soul it self.

And this indeed (by the way) makes Spiritual things so difficult as they are
often times, What makes spiritual things difficult.
because we are too much inthralled to imagination and sense, and cannot
abstract and raise our minds from outward sensible things to spiritual things:
therefore you have some, all the days of their life spend their time in the
bark of the Scriptures, and they are better than some others that are all for
notion, and out side, such things as frame to the imagination, and never come
to know the Spirit of the Scriptures, but rest in outward things in languages
and tongues, and such like, whereas these things lead further, or else they
come not to their perfection, the Scripture is but a glass, to see some other
excellencies in it, Use of a glass.
We see as in a glass.

Now the use of a glass among us, especially is two fold:

It is either to help To help weak sight.
against the excellency of the object, when there is a weak sight, and an
over excellent object, then a glass is used, or some polite and clear body,
as we cannot see the sun in it self, the eye is weak, and the sun is
glorious, these two meeting; therefore together we help it by seeing the Sun
in water as in an eclipse, if a man would judge of an eclipse, he must not
look on the sun, but see it in water, and there behold and discern these
things, so to see the glory of God in himself, it is too glorious an object,
our eyes are too weak, how does God help it, he helps it by a glass, by God
manifest in the flesh, and by the Word, and Sacraments whereby we come to have
Communion with Christ: to apply this more particularly.

Now that we are to receive the Sacrament, Sacraments glasses.
conceive the Sacraments are glasses, wherein we see the glory of the love,
and mercy of God in Christ: for take the bread alone, as it does not represent,
and figure better things, and what is it? and take the wine alone, as it does
not represent better things, and what is the wine? but an ordinary poor
creature; Oh but take them as they are galsses, as things that convey to the
soul, and represent things more excellent than themselves, so they are
glorious ordinances, take a glass, as a glass it is a poor thing, but take
the glass as it represents a more excellent thing than it self, so they are
of excellent use, so bread and wine must not be taken as naked elements, but as
they represent and convey a more excellent thing than themselves, that is
Christ and all his benefits, the love, and mercy, and grace of God in Christ,
and so they are excellent glasses: therefore I beseech you now when you are to
receive the Sacrament let your minds be more occupied than your senses, when
you take the bread think of the body of Christ broken, and when you think of
uniting the bread into one substance, think of Christ and you made one, when
the wine is powered out, think of the blood of Christ powered out for sin,
when you think of the refreshing by the wine, think of the refreshing of your
spirits, and souls by the love of God in Christ, and of the love of Christ,
that did not spare his blood for your souls good, how does Christ crucified,
and shedding his blood, refresh the guilty soul, as wine refreshes the weak
Spirits, thus consider them as glasses, where better things are presented, and
let your minds be occupied as well as your senses, and then you shall be fit
receivers, as in a glass.

We behold, etc.


God when he made the World, this glorious frame of the creatures, and all
their excellencies, he created light, to discover it self, and all other
excellencies: for light is a glorious creature, it discovers it self, it goes
with a majesty, and discovers all other things, good and bad whatsoever; and
together with light God created sight in man, and other senses, to apprehend
the excellency of the creation, what were all this goodly frame of creatures,
the sun, and moon, and stars, and glory of the earth, if there were not
light to discover, and sight to apprehend it by? Is it so in this outward
creation of the old heavens, and old earth that must be consumed with fire, and
is it not much more in the new creation? there is excellent glory, mervailous
glory, wondrous grace, and Christ, etc. must there be light, and must there not
be an eye to discover this? surely there must, therefore it is said here We
behold.

God puts a Spiritual eye by his Spirit into all true believers, whereby they
behold this excellent glory, this glorious grace, that God may have the glory,
and we the comfort, those are the two maine ends, God intends his own glory,
and our Salvation, there must be a beholding, how should he have glory, and we
comfort, unless all were conveyed by spiritual sight? Well then the Spirit
creates, and works in us Spiritual senses; with Spiritual life there are
Spiritual senses, sight, and taste, and feeling, sight is here put for all; We
behold.

There are many degrees of sight, Degrees of sight.
it is good to know them, therefore I will name some of them.

We see God in his In the creatures.
for The heavens declare the glory of God, they are a book in folio, there God
is laid open in his creatures, that is a goodly sight, but what is this to the
knowledge of him in his will to us, what he means to us? the creatures
discover not what he means to us.

Besides therefore the In the Word.
there is a sight of God in his will, in his Word and promises, there we see
what he is, his grace is revealed in Christ and what his good will to us is,
and his will from us, what he will do to us, and what he will have from us
again, there we see him as a spouse sees her husband in a loving letter,
which concerns her self, we see him as the heir sees a deed made to him with
an inheritance, he sees with application, it is not a bare sight, but a sight
with seeling, and discovery of a favor, so the sight in the Word and
Sacraments, it Of Christ in the flesh.
there was a sight of Christ when he was in the flesh, when he was covered
with the veil of our flesh upon earth, it was a swee^e sight, Abraham desired
to see it, and Simeon when he saw it, was willing to be dissolved, and to
depart he had enough, but that outward sight is nothing without another inward
sight of faith.

There is a sight therefore Of faith.
and other sights are to no purpose if they be without this, a sight of God
shining in Christ, and this is perfected in heaven, in the sight of glory, when
we see him as he is: Now there is a comfort in all these sights to see him in
his Word and works, it was a glorious thing to see him in his bodily presence,
and by faith to see God in Christ, to see his face in Christ, oh it is a sweet
and lovely sight to see God shining in Christ, oh but what is all this to the
sight of him after in glory? Now this beholding meant here especially, is the
beholding of faith in the Ordinances, in the Word and Sacraments; We all
behold, as in the glass of the Word and Sacraments, by the eye of faith; faith
is expressed by beholding, by knowledge, for indeed faith is nothing but
knowledge with application, therefore faith includes knowledge, what is faith
but o know God and Christ, and the promises as mine, Christ in the Sacrament as
mine as verily, as the outward things are mine, knowledge, with application is
faith, therefore, when I ^ay faith, I include knowledge, We behold.

The knowledge of the mind is compared to the eye of the body, Faith compared
to sight.
knowledge and faith is compa^ed to seeing, and beholding, for many reasons.

First, because sight is It is the noblest sense.
and noble sense, it is the highest in situation, and the quickest in
apprehension, for in a moment, presently sight apprehends its obj^ct in the
highest heavens, so it is with faith, it is the most noble sight of all, and it
is quick as sight is, for faith is that Eagle in the cloud, it breaks through
all, and sees in a moment Christ in heaven, it looks backward, and sees
Christ upon the cross it looks forward, and seeeth Christ to come in glory,
faith is so quick a grace, that it presents things past, things above, things
to come, and all in a moment, so quick is this Eagle-eye of Faith.

It is largest
it is the largest sense, for we can see, almost the whole hemisphere at one
view, that a little thing in the eye should apprehend so much in a moment, as it
is quick in apprehension, so it is large in comprehension.

It is the surest.
it is the most sure sense, sight more then hearing, therefore, that divine act
of knowledge is compared to seeing, believing is compared to beholding, when
faith looks upon God in the glass of the word, and promises, it is as
certain as the object is certain; Now how certain is the object? the mercy,
and love of God in Christ, who is truth it self, is most certain.

Then it is that sense, It is most working.
sight: for what the body sees, the soul is affected and moved with the
affections of desire, and love, rise out of sight, it works upon the
affections most; therefore the knowledge that stirs up the affections, and
works upon the heart, is compared to sight, it affects us marveilously, for
answerable to our faith, we love, and joy, and delight, it alters the frame of
the whole man, therefore it is expressed here, by beholding, divine, spiritual
knowledge, it works upon the heart. So we see why this beholding spiritual
of the understanding, and soul is compared to outward sight, it is called
beholding, because it is a most noble spiritual act of the soul, and it is
most certain and sure, faith is the evidence of things not seen, and it
works upon the heart and soul.

Use.
Therefore, we should labor to clear this eye of the soul, that we may
behold the glory of God, in the glass of the Gospel.



How to keep the eye of the soul clear.
and the excellency of Christ; a moving, To ^ixe it on the object.
rouling

Then again, Remoove hindrances.
we must within, and without.

Inward.
is hindered by some inward suffusion, we must labor that the soul be
cleansed and purged from all carnal passions and desires, and base humors,
that we may clearly behold this spiritual object, unless the soul be
spiritual, it can never behold spiritual things, the bodily eye cannot
apprehend rational things, nor the rational eye, beholds not spiritual
things, therefore there must be a spiritual eye, the soul must be purged, and
sanctified by the Spirit, there must be some proportion between the soul and
spiritual things, before the soul can behold them, therefore as the soul must
be fixed upon this meditation, so the Spirit of God must sanctify and purge
the soul.

Outward Outward.
hindrances of sight, as dust in the eyes, The God of this world blindes the
eyes of men, that they behold not the glory of God shining in the Gospel,
therefore if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish, that are lost,
in whom the god of this world has blinded their minds, that they believe not,
least the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine upon them,
therefore take heed of too much worldly things, of fixing our souls upon the
dust of the world, upon things here below, the sight of Christ, and of God in
Christ, it is not gotten by looking below, by fixing the soul upon base things
below, let us look therefore that our souls be inwardly cleansed, and fixed
upon spiritual things, and then we shall the better behold the glory of God
shining in the Gospel.

And we should preserve this sight of faith by hearing, Spiritual sight
presered by hearing.
begets seeing in Religion, death came in by the ear at the first; Adam
hearing the Serpent, that he should not have heard, death came in by the ear,
so life comes in by the ear, we hear, and then we see, as we have heard, so
have we seen, say they in the Psalm: It is true in Religion, most of our
sight comes by hearing, which is the sense of learning, God will have it so;
therefore we should maintain all we can, this beholding of the glory of the
Lord, in the glass of the Word, and for that end hear much.

You will ask me, The best glass to know Christ in.
what is the best glass of all to see and know Christ in^

If you ask a Papist, he will show you crucifixes, and such kind of things;
Oh but to behold Christ in the glass of the word, with a Spirit of faith, that
is the best picture, and representation that can be, it is skarce worth
spending so much time, as to con fute that foolery, to have any grace wrought
in the heart, by such abominable means as that is, as they use it, take it at
the best, it is but a bastardly help, and bastardly means breed a bastardly
devotion, for will God work grace in the heart, by means of man's devising? If
pictures be any teachers, they are teachers of lies says the Prophet, and in
the Church of God, till Pastors, and Teachers became Idols, Idols never became
Teachers, then came the Doctrine of Idols teaching of simple people, when Idols
became teachers a thousand years after Christ. So that the best picture to see
Christ in, is the Word, and Sacraments, and the best eye to see him with, is
the eye of Faith, in the Word and Sacraments, keep that clear, and we need no
crucifixes, no such bastardly helps, of bastard^ ly devotion, devised by proud
men, that would not be beholding to God for his Ordinances: But a touch is
almost too much, for such things that are so clear to men that have spiritual
eyes, in Gal. 3. See what Saint Paul says, what his judgment was: Oh foolish
Galathians, before whom Christ has been painted and cruci^ied, how was he
painted? nothing but by the preaching of Christ crucified in the Gospel, and
the riches of Christ in the Gospel, and in the Sacraments laid open, do you
think there were any other crucifixes in the world then?

With open face.


The manner of this beholding is with open face, there must be a double veil
taken away before we can behold the glory of God; the veil of obscurity, and
the veil of slavery, the veil of ignorance, and infidelity within* and the
veil of the things themselves, these two vayles are both taken a way before we
can with open face behold the glory of the Lord: the inward veil is taken away
by the Spirit of God illuminating our understandings, and giving us a Spirit of
faith; the outward veil of the obscurity, of the things is taken away by the
teaching, and ministry of the Gospel, having that help to know the meaning
of the Scriptures, so that now in these glorious times of the Gospel, both the
vayles are taken away, that we may behold without hinderance the glory of God
shining in the Gospel, for now we enjoy the ministry of the Spirit, the
Spirit is effectual to shine in our hearts, and then we have the gifts of men,
outward gifts, whereby the veil of ignorance is taken away in regard of the
things themselves, the things are unfolded.

If the things of themselves be dark, The veil took away.
or if they be lightsome, and there be no sight within, or if there be sight,
and that sight be vayled, there can be no seeing, but now to Gods elect he
takes away all these vayles, he shines in wardly, and gives outward light in
the help of means, and yet not withstanding while we live here, there is
always some obscurity, and darkness, But in part.
for the veil of the Scriptures is not quite took away, there is some
darkness of the Scriptures, and likewise the veil of ignorance, and
infidelity is not altogether taken away, there are some remainders of
ignorance, of infidelity, and hardness of heart, but yet in a great measure it
is taken away here, and shall by little and little took away till we come to
see God face to face in heaven.

With open face.


Coverings had two uses in the Jewish state. Two fold use of a veil.


They had a use of subjection, therefore the Women had their vayles in token of
subjection.

And they had a use likewise of obscurity to hinder the offensive luster of
that that is glorious, therefore Moses put a veil on his face, when he came
down from the mount; now in Christ Jesus in the Gospel, both these vayles are
taken away in some respects, the veil of subjection and slavery, so far as
it is a slavery is taken away, the Spirit of Christ works liberty, as I said
before, now we serve God as Sons, and not as servants any longer, the veil
of subjection is taken away, only there is a spouse like filial subjection,
the servile subjection we are freed from.

And then the veil that hid the things is taken away too, so now with open
face, we behold the glory of the Lord; now the things themselves, Christ and
the gracious promises of grace and glory and comfort, they are clearly laid
open without any veil; how comes it then that we see them not? Why men see not
though the Gospel be unvailed.
there is a veil over our hearts, the more shame for us, that when the things
are unvayled we should have a veil upon our hearts, of ignorance and
unbeleefe, therefore if any believe not, it is because The god of this world
has blinded their eyes; where the means of Salvation are, and Christ laid
open in the means, if men do not believe, the fault is not in the things, for
they are unvayled, they are discovered and laid open, the fault is in us, there
is a veil over the heart, there is a cloud of ignorance and unbeleefe, that
keeps the heart from beholding the glory of the mercy of God in Christ.

With open face.


We see the glory of God with boldness in the Gospel, Boldness in the
Gospel.
we go boldly to God, Christ takes us by the hand, and leads us to his
Father, we have boldness and access to God through Christ by the Spirit, as
S. Paul teaches in diverse places, God is not terrible to us, now in Christ
Gods nature is Fatherly and sweet to us, Christ in the Gospel is our head,
therefore we go boldly to God in Christ, and Christ by his Spirit brings us
to his Father, we may boldly lay open our souls in prayer, and all our
complaints before him as to a Father, we come not as malefactors to a judge, as
slaves to a Lord, but as children to a father, as a wife to her spouse, with
open face in the Gospel, we behold God, that is, with boldness we go to
him: the Gospel by shining upon us takes away a Spirit of fear, Fear taken
away by the Gospel.
and bondage, the more we see Christ the less fear, the more love the less
fear, the more we see the grace of God in Christ, it diminishes a Spirit of
fear, and puts into us a Spirit of love and boldness, for it presents to us
in Christ, full satisfaction to divine justice, that when we offer Christ to
the Father whom he has sent and sealed for us, God cannot refuse a Savior of
his own sending, and sealing and appointing to satisfy his justice, therefore
we go boldly to the throne of grace, it is a mervailous privilege, that we
see God clearly in the Gospel, with open face, with a Spirit of boldness,
the veil of ignorance being taken away, for the sight of God to a conscience
that is natural, and is not convinced of the mercy of God by the Spirit, it is
a terrible sight, a guilty conscience cannot see a man but it trembles, it
cannot see a judge without trembling, and will not the trembling conscience,
the guilty soul, flee from the face of God a pace, that trembles at the sig^t
of a man? What is so contrary, as the nature of God, to the nature of man out
of Christ? the unholy, impure, and unclean nature of man to the pure, holy
nature of God, if Christ had not taken our nature, and sanctified it in
himself, and satisfied justice in it, what boldness could this unclean
nature of ours have had to go to the holy God^ let us I beseech you be wrapped
up in admiration of the singular love of God to us, especially in the days of
the Gospel, that now we see in a glass, in a clear glass the love of God in
Christ, and with open face boldly we may go to God.

Sometimes when the soul is bold in sin, Boldness in sin weakneth
boldness of faith
it weakeneth boldness and faith, and makes us look upon that object that our
sins has deserved, upon a wise God: for howsoever we may behold his glorious
face in Christ, yet if we behold sin against conscience, God will hide
himself, Christ will hide his face, and hide the promises, and leave us to
terrors of conscience, and the soul shall not apprehend his gracious face in
Christ, but that correction that our sin has deserved, God has power over
the soul, and makes the soul appreh^nd what obj^ct he will, and he presents
to a bold soul that runs into sin what it deserves, hell for the present;
there is no terrors to the terror of a Christian that is bold in sin, till
God shine upon him in his grace again, sins against conscience especially
wasting sins, weaken faith, that we cannot go so boldly to God, therefore
those that say when they sin against conscience, that all the cause of their
grief is because they do not conceive the free mercy of God, they are
ignorant of Gods ways, God is wise, and though he pardon sin, (as sin is
pardoned in heaven, before it be pardoned in the conscience) they shall never
be pardoned in thy conscience, till God have made thy conscience smart for it,
and God will let wrath into thy conscience, and thy faith shall stagger, it is
a sin for faith to stagger, it should not do so, but it will ^remble, and
quake, till we have humbled our selves before God.

What is the way, after we have had boldness and sweet familiarity with God,
and it has been interrupted by sin, how shall we recover our selves?

Surely, to apprehend our sins to be pardonable in Christ, How to ^ecov^r
boldness with God.
and that God is an everlasting Father, and that the covenant of grace is
everlasting, and that there is mercy in Isra^ll, for this thing, and the
conceit of mercy, must work our hearts to grief and shame that is certain:
for mark in the Gospel, Come unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden,
he calls us when we find our consciences afflicted, and tormented, He came to
save that which was lost: by the blessed power of the Spirit, and the blood of
Christ is as a fountain for Judah, and Jerusalem to wash in, and the blood of
Christ purges us from sin, and Christ bids us for daily trespasses ask
pardon, daily therefore conceive goodness in God still, an everlasting current
of mercy, and this must work upon us grief, and shame, and recover and
strengthen our faith again, for Gods children after breaches arise the
stronger, rather then ever they were before, but this only by ^he way, we see
here how Gods glorious grace is conveyed to us, and what is wrought in us to
apprehend it, a spiritual eye to see it, in the glass of the Gospel, and
with open face we behold it, we may go boldly to the throne of grace.

I beseech you let not this privilege be forgotten, this privilege of the
Gospel, what is the glory of the times we live in, but Gods face discovered in
Christ? in the Gospel faith is wrought in us, to apprehend this, to see Gods
face openly, and that we may come boldly with Benjamin our elder brother, come
with Esaus garments, come with Christ, and we cannot be too bold, remember
always there must be a reverent familiarity, because he has Majesty mixed with
his bowels of mercy, both are mixed together, beams and bowels, so our
carriage to him must be loving and familiar, as he is full of bowels of mercy,
but then he has Majesty, a reverent familiarity is fit for a father, and for
so gracious, and so sweet a God, therefore that phrase we see in the
Scriptures, We go boldly, and cry Ab. ba Father; Father is a word of
reverence, that is, we go boldly to God in Christ, and open our wants as to a
Father, with love, and reverence, as it is said here, with open face, let us
not forget this privilege.

We all.


Here is the generality, We all, before, in Moses time, he alone went into
the Mount and saw God, but now, We all, ^ewes, and Gentiles, where the Gospel
is Preached, We all. Therefore, you see here the Church is enlarged by the
coming of Christ. And it was a comfort to Saint Paul, and to all good
Christians, to think of the enlargement of the Church, by taking in the
Gentiles, as it will be a comfort hereafter to think of the inlargeing of the
Church, by taking in the jews again. The more the better in religion. Why is
it a privilege for many, that we all? because in matters of grace and glory
there is no envy at all, all may share without prejudice, all cannot be Kings
here upon earth, nor all cannot be great men, because the more one has, the
less another has, but in Christ and in Religion, all may be gracious, God
respects every one, as if there were none but them, he respects all as one,
and one, as if there were none but he, every man in solidum (as Civillians
express it) entirely enjoys Christ, as if there were none but he, he is to
all as one, and to one, as if there were none but he, Comfort in community in
Religion
there is no envy as I said, in grace and glory, where all may share alike, and
that is the reason why it is always comfortable, to think of community in
Religion it is joined with comfort.

And indeed so it is matter of comfort to see a communion of many in one: for
what is the mystical body of Christ Jesus, but many members joined in one
body, under one gracious and glorious head? and therefore it is a deformed
sight to see fraction; and disunion it is that the devil rules in, divide and
rule, it is fit for the devil, God and Christ rule in union, the same Spirit
of God that knits the members to the head by faith, knits the members one to
another in love, and all grace is derived from the head to the members, as they
are united to the body, if there be therefore disunion, there is no grace
conveyed so far as there is disunion, there is no grace conveyed from the
head: for the body grows up as compact under one head.

Therefore let us labor to cherish union, To labor for union.
and as we hate distraction it self, so hate distraction and division, for
dissipation causes distraction, therefore by all means labor for union,
especially now we are to take the Communion, that is a seal of our Communion
with Christ by faith, and one with another; by love let us labor to bring our
hearts to a holy Communion, none gains by disunion, but the devil himself,
always his policy is to make the breach greater where any is, therefore let us
labor by all means to be united, the more join together in the blessed
mysteries of the Gospel; the more comfort, and the more glory when all live,
and join together in holy things, of God, and in sweet love one to another,
it is the glory of that place, and society, and state, so much for that, We all.

And are changed.


I showed before, how man's happiness stands partly in commnnion with God, and
partly in his conformity, and likeness to God. And surely whersoever there is
communion, there will be conformity. This conformity is here set down
springing from communion. We all behold the glory of God, now reconciled in
Jesus Christ, what does that beholding work? a conformity, we are Changed into
the same Image, from glory to glory. In these words we see,

First, a necessity of a change, changed we must be:

Then in this change, there must be a pattern of conformity, we are changed
into the Image of Christ, who is the pretotipe, the first type, and Idea of all
perfection, we are changed into the same Image.

And then, how this change is wrought to the Image of Christ, it is by
beholding the glory of Christ in the Gospel, there is a transforming power, in
beholding the glory of Gods mercy in Christ, it is not a delighting object,
only to see the mercy of God in Christ, but it is a powerful object that has
an influence upon the soul.

And then the state of man after this change, it is a glorious condition, We
are changed from glory.

And then it is a growing condition, we are changed from glory to glory, still
till we come to that pitch, where there can be no growth, when the soul shall
be filled with the fullness of God, as the Apostle speaks, when the soul
shall have (all the powers that it has to receive, and retain, and comprehend)
all the corners of it filled, so we grow from glory to glory till then, these
things follow one another: To begin with the first.

There is a necessity of a change. Necessity of a chang.



In the state we are, we must be changed, as Christ tells Nichodemus, there
must be a change, and such a change as is a new birth, it must be all new, as
a bell, if there be but a crack in it, Simil.
it must be new molded, and cast again, it is good for nothing else, so the
soul of man, if there be but a flaw, but a crack all is naught, it must be
cast, and molded again anew, we must be set in tune again, all is out of
tune, before the soul can make any sweet harmony in the ears of God, there
must be a change, there is no coming to Heaven without a change, what need I
press this, it is so easy a point in religion? except we be borne anew, we
cannot enter into heaven. But to clear from evidence of reason the necessity
of a change in the whole man. Reasons why our nature m^st be changed.


First, because we are in a contrary state to grace, Because naturally we are
opposite to God.
we are dead, there must be life in us before we come to heaven, we are
enemies, and of enemies we must be made friends; how shall we be sit for
communion else with God, wherein our happiness stands, without conformity?
communion is between friends, before those that are in an opposite condition
can be friends, there must be an alteration, and this alteration it must be on
Gods part, or on our part: Now who must change, God that is unchangeable, or
we that are corrupt, and changeable? God will not change, there is no reason
he should, he is goodness it self, always unchangeable, his perfection
stands in an indivisible point, he cannot alter a whit, there is not a shadow
of change in God, therefore, when there is difference between God and us, the
change must be on our part, we must be changed, as it is Romans 12. and other
places, In the Spirit of our minds, we must be wholly molded anew, where
there is a condition so opposite, as the frame of our hearts is to God, he
being holiness, and we a mass and lump of sin, of necessity there must be
a change, God intends in the Gospel to bring us near himself, and Christ's end
is to bring us to God, as it is 1 Pet. 3. 18. all the Gospel is to bring us
back to God from whom we fell, now our nature as I said is defiled, and
unholy, and we cannot be friends with God, till there be a likeness in
disposition to God, therefore our natures must be suitable to the sweet, and
holy, and pure nature of God in some measure. We enter into a covenant with
God, in the covenant of grace, and how can we maintain the covenant of grace,
without some likeness to God and Christ? in that regard of necessity there
must be a change, Simile.
and this change must be on our part, as we see in an instrument, those strings
that are out of tune, are brought to them that are in, so it is we that must
change and alter and not God, God is always unchangeable like himself in his
love, and it is our comfort that he is so unchangeable in his mercy, and
holiness, and justice, therefore I say the chang must be on our part.

Flesh and blood (as it is) cannot enter into heaven, that is, the nature of
man, as it is corrupted, we must have new judgments of things, and new
desires, and new esteem, new affections new joys, new delights, new
conversation, new company, all the frame of the soul must be new, there must
be a new bent of soul, it must be turned another way, the face of the soul
must look clean another way, whereas before it looked to the world-ward and
to things below, now it must look to Godward and heaven ward: therefore those
that are in their pure naturalls, that feel no change in themselves, what
shall we think of them? they are not in the state of grace, for of necessity
there must be a change:

There is a double change, Change double.
real, and graduall.

First a real change, from ill to good.

And then a graduall change, from better to better, from glory to glory.

The first change is from the state of nature to grace, at our first
conversion, when God puts the first form, and stamp upon us.

And then a change in grace, from glory to glory, we must be changed.

Then again we all expect We cannot ^lse be fitted for heaven.
the Church is the fitting place for glory, we enter into heaven in the Church
here, we are hewed and squared here, if we be not holy here, we shall never
enter into heaven, there must be a change begun here if ever it be perfected
in heaven, no unclean thing shall come there, as soon as ever Satan an
Angel of light sinned, he was tumbled out of heaven, it will brook no
unclean thing, no unclean thing shall ever come there again, therefore our
nature must be altered suitable to that place, and glorious condition, before we
come to heaven, except we be newborn, we cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God, there is direct Scripture for it: Beloved this is forgot, men trust to the
grace and mercy of God, and look not after a ch^nge, and this holds many from
embracing the Gospel in the truth of it, from knowing Christ as the truth is
in him, they hear they must be changed, which they are unwilling to, they
believe that God is merciful, and that Christ dyed, etc. they snatch so much
of the Gospel, as may serve to build them up in self-love, so far they
think all is well, but when they see such grace as must teach them to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts and such grace as must change and alter them,
this they cannot brook, they are content to go to heaven if they may have it
in a way to hell, in maintaining their corruptions, being proud and covetous,
and worldly, as they are, this must not be of necessity, there must be a change.

Every true Christian desires it.
the soul that truly desires mercy and favor, desires always power against
finne, pardon and power go together, in Gods gift and in the desire of a
Christians soul, there is no Christian soul but he desires the grace of
sanctification to change him, as much as the grace of pardon, for he looks
upon corruption and sin, as the vilest thing in the world, and upon grace,
and the new creature, as the best thing in the world, there is no man changed
but he has those apprehensions of sanctification.

Remember this against some weak conceits likewise, A change in
Sanctification as well as justification.
that would have* all the change in justification, they rent Christ's Offices,
as if he were all Priest, and not a King to govern, as if he were
righteousness, and not sanctification, as if he had merit to dye for us, and
to give us his righteousness and no efficacy to change our natures, as if in
the covenant of grace God did not write his law in our hearts, but only
forgive our sins, he does both in the covenant of grace, and where God makes
a combination, we must not break it, efficacy and merit, justification, and
sanctification, water and blood go together, there must be a change: but to
follow the point a little further.

There must be change, because no holy action We can perform no holy action
else.
actions spring from powers and faculties, they are suitable to them, therefore
there must be a change in the powers, and faculties of the soul, before there
be a change in the life and conversation, these three follow in nature.

The form, and living, and being of things, and powers,

And action issuing from the power; so in the life of grace and sanctification
there is a power, and ability to believe in God, and to be holy, and to love
God, and then the actions of love Spring from that power, we live and then we
have a power to move in nature, being, and life, and moving go together, so if
we have a being in grace, we have a power to move; I beseech you therefore
consider the necessity of a change, of the inward man, of the powers, and
faculties of the soul, can the eye see without a power of seeing, or the ear
hear without a faculty of hearing? can the soul perform sanctified actions
without a sanctified power? it is impossible.

And especially the alteration and change is in the will, The change especially
on the will.
which some would have untouched they would have it free, those that would have
no more given to grace than needs must, but grace works upon the will most of
all, divinity rules the will especially: for the bent of the will makes a good,
or a bad man, and the desires of the will carry the whole man with it, we are
as the bent is of our will, we are as the choice of our will is, if the choice
and bent, and by as be the right way, by the Spirit it is good; if the will be
not inclined, and wrought to go the best way, there is no work of grace at
all, though all grace come in through the understanding enlightened, that is the
first, yet it goes into the will, it passes through the understanding into
the will, and it puts a new taste, and relish upon the will, and affections.

Well you see therefore that the grace wrought in the Gospel, it is not a
mere persuasion, and entreaty, etc. but a powerful work of the Spirit
entering into the soul, and changing it, and altering and turning the bent, and
inclination of the will heavenward, whereas by corruption of nature, turns
the soul downward to things below, when the Spirit of God enters into the
soul, it is not only by mere outward persuasion, to leave it to the liberty
of will, but it alters the taste of the will, the soul is carried up* and is
shut to things below, it uses the world as though it used it not, we must have
great conceits to the work of grace, the Scripture has great words of it, it
is an alteration, a change, a new man, a new creature, new birth, etc. we see
the necessity of a change.

Again another reason God qualifies whom he dignifies.
God where he calls and dignifies he also qualifies, Princes cannot qualify
those they raise, but God whom he advances to glory he fits and qualifies for
glory, where he bestows his mercies and favors to life everlasting, he calls
to great matters, and he also changes them. If Saul were changed when he came
to be a King, in regard of a new quality, shall we think that God will call
any to the participation of his glorious mercy in Christ, in pardoning their
sin, and accepting them to life eternal, but he will change them? No,
whosoever he calls to glory he changes, and alters their dispositions, to
be fit for so glorious a condition as a Christian is called to, there must be
a change.

Proud men love not to hear of this, it is a prejudice to their former
authority, what, I that was accounted* a wise man, now to be a fool, I that
was accounted so and so, to alter all my frame and course, and to turn the
stream another way, the world will say I grow mad? I say because grace
alters and changes all, Old things are past away, and all things are become
new, those that are carnal and proud, cannot endure a change; because it is
some prejudice to their reputation, but it must be so if they look for
salvation, thus you see that point prooved enough.

Into the same Image.


The pattern to which we are changed, is the image of Christ. It is a rule,
and a true rule, the first in every kind is the measure of all the rest, it is
the Idea, the pattern, and platform of all the rest; now Christ is the first,
for he is the first borne, the first fruits, the first beloved, therefore he
is the pattern of all the rest, and the measure of all other, the nearer we
come to Christ the better we are, for that that is the measure of a thing, the
nearer it answers to that the better: Now Christ is the best, and our nature
in Christ is joined to the Godhead in one person, therefore we are changed to
the likeness of Christ, the second Adam, for as before we are changed we are
corrupted, and depraved according to the likeness of the first Adam after his
fall, and as before his fall, if he had not fallen we had been borne according
to his likeness that is good and righteous, so now being fallen, as soon as
by faith we are planted, and grafted into the second Adam we are changed into
his likeness: Christ as it were it Gods masterpiece, that is, the
excellentest work and devise, and frame of heaven that ever was, to set up
such a Mediator, to reconcile justice and mercy, in bringing God and man into
one person, now Christ being Gods Masterpiece the best and: most excellent
frame of all, he is fit to be the pattern of all excellency whatsoever,
therefore he is the Image, the Idea, the pattern, and platform of all our
sanctification.

Christ the second Adam is the Image into which we are changed, All good in
Christ opposite to the ill in Adam.
we are not changed to the Image of the first Adam by grace, but to the Image
of the second Adam: There is from him a derivation of all good, opposite to all
the ill we drew from the first Adam, we drew from the first Adam the
displeasure of God; by the second, we obtain the favor of God by his death,
and satisfafaction; with the wrath of God, we drew corruption from the first
Adam, in the second we have grace, from the first Adam we have death, and all
the miseries that attend death, and follow it. In the second Ada^ we have life
and all happiness, till it end in glory; In a word, whatsoever ill we have in
the first Adam, it is repaired abundantly in the second, when we are changed
into his Image, therefore, when you read of the Image of God in the New
Testament, it must be understood, of the Image of God in Jesus Christ, the
second Adam.

Now this Image confists in knowledge, in holiness and righteousness, if we
compare Col, 3. with Ephesians. 4. this was perfect in Christ, who was the Image of
his Father, and we must be like Christ, the second Adam in sanctification.

Now the grounds why we must be conformable to the Image of the second Adam,
and not to the first, are these;

Because the second Adam is far excelling the first Adam, and as I said, we
must be conformed to the best Image, as we have borne the Image of the first,
so we must bear the Image of the second, as it is in 1 Cor. 15.

And then the Image of God in the second Adam, is more durable: for all
excellencies, and grace is more firmly set on Christ then ever they were upon
Adam, it is set upon him with such a character and stamp, as shall never be
altered, when God set his Image on the first Adam, it was raced, and decayed,
and lost by the malice of the devil, because it was not set on so firmly, Adam
being a man, and a good man, yet he was a man changeable; But Christ is God
man, in one nature, God has set such a stamp of grace on the humane nature,
being eternally united to the Godhead, that shall never be altered, therefore
we are renewed according to the Image of God, as it is stamped on Christ, not
as it was stamped on the first Adam.

And that is the reason, Why the (...) of Gods children is un^lt^rable.
why the state of Gods children is unalterable, why, being once gracious they
are so for ever, if God set the stamp of the Spirit of Christ on them, it is
firm, as it is upon Christ, it never alters in Christ, nor in those that are
members of Christ, the alteration is in growth from better to better: Gods
children sometimes a little deface that image by sin, security, and the like,
but as a piece of coin that is a little defaced, yet it has the old stamp
still, and is acknowledged for good coin, so a Christian in all desertions, in
the worst state, he has the stamp still, though it be darkened by his
carelessenesse, yet after it receives a fresh stamp, it is an everlasting
stamp, when once we are Gods coin, we are never reprobate silver, and all
is, because we are renewed according to the Image of Christ, and grace is
firmly set in our nature in Christ, so sure that all the devils in hell cannot
race it out, and he is the quickening Spirit, and therefore able to transform
us to his likeness, better then the first Adam was, therefore the Image of God
is the likeness of the second Adam, and we are changed into that.

Now the reasons why the second Adam changes us into his own Image are many;
Why Christ changes us into his Image.


First, because he is a He is a powerful head and husband.
a powerful root that changes all his branches into his own nature, a
powerful husband that changes his own Spouse, I say, he is a quickening
Spirit, a public person, and the root of all believers as the first Adam,
was of us all, as we are natural men.

Again, it is meet that We are predestinate to his likeness.
therefore, as it is in Romans 8. We are predestinate to be conformed to
Christ, he is the first among many brethren, the chief brethren must be all
alike, therefore we being predestinate to salvation, it was fit we should be
predestinate to be conformable to our elder brother, that brethren might be of
one nature and disposition, it is fit that the husband and wife should be of
one disposition, Christ is the husband, and we are the Spouse, therefore by
grace he alters, and cleanses, and purges his Spouse, as it is, Ephe. 5. He
loved his Spouse, and gave himself for it, that he might purge it, and make it
a glorious Spouse. It is meet the wife should be the glory of the husband, as
S. Paul says, that is, that she should reflect the excellencies of her
husband; therefore that the Church might be the glory of Christ, and reflect
the excellencies of Christ, she is changed to be like Christ more and more
daily, there is a kind of congruity that brethren should be like, and that the
Spouse and the Husband should be alike, therefore God has ordained that we
should be like him in a threefold degree, in suffering, in grace, and in glory,
whosoever will be like him in glory, must be like him in grace, first Gods
election, and ordaining must have its issue, that is, the representation of the
likeness of Christ in our natures.

Again, the end of Christ's end is to destroy satan's work in us.
to deface all Satan's works, especially his work in us, the image of Satan
in our dispositions, for every man by nature, carries the image of the devil
on him, till the Image of Christ be stamped on, and the image of Satan raced
out: for in man there is naturally an opposition to the truth, a hatred of God,
and of good things, now Christ coming to dissolve the works of the devil,
puts out this image, and sets his own stamp and Image upon the Soul,
therefore unless Christ change us to his own Image, he should miss of the
end of his coming, these, and many such reasons there are to prove, that we
are restored, according to the Image of Christ Jesus, and why Christ will
change us to his own likeness, to add one more;

The end of Christ is, that We could have no communion with Christ else.
therefore he will set such a stamp upon us, as he may delight in us, and be
friends, now if he should not change our natures, what correspondence could
there be between Christ and us, now when he has altered, and changed us, he
looks on us as carrying his stamp and image.

Adam, lesus Christ;

Then I beseech you, To stu^^dy Christ.
let us labor every day more and more to study Christ, that so by beholding
Christ, we may be transformed into his likeness; for the looking upon Christ
is a transforming sight, therefore let us look into his disposition, as it is
set forth in the Gospel, and to his carriage, and look to his privileges
that so we may receive grace for grace, grace suitable to his grace,
disposition suitable to his disposition, conversation suitable to his
conversation, and privilege, and prerogative suitable to his pre rogative, that
we may be like him every way.

What was his disposition, and carriage? it were too large to unfold it to you
as it is in the Gospel, but because we must be changed into the Image of
Christ, it is good to look to that picture, that we may resemble that Image
as much as may be, you see in the Gospel how he carried himself To his
Friends. Enemies. the Devil. Himself.



You see how full of love he was, what drew him from heaven to earth? and so to
his cross, and to his grave, but love to mankind, you see how full of
goodness he was, he went about doing all the good he could, how much good does
that speech savor of that Paul speaks of him, It is a more blessed thing to
give than to receive, see how full of zeal he was, he whipped the buyers and
sellers out of the Temple, he was full of goodness, it was his meat and
drink to do good, it was as natural to him as for a fountain to stream
out. Christ's carriage.


And as I said for his carriage toward his friends Toward his friends.
how sweet and indulgent was he, where there was any beginnings of goodness
To weak Christians.
he never sent any back again, but those that went back again of their own
head, as the young man, Christ sent him not back, he was so full of
sweetness to weak Christians, nay he discovered himself most to the
weakest, he was never more familiar with any than with the woman of Samaria
that was an adultresse, and Mary that had been a sinner, how sweetly did he
appear to her first? how sweet was he to sinners when they repented, how
ready to forgive and pardon? see it in Peter, he never cast him in the teeth
with his Apostasy, he never upbrayded him with it, he never so much as tells
him of it, only he looks upon him, and afterward Love thou me, etc. he
would not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed, To those
that had but seeming grace
so gentle and sweet a Savior have we, he was sweet to those that were good
in the lowest degree of goodness, nay where there was but a representation of
goodness, as in the young man, he kissed, and embraced him, when he came and
said, What good thing shall I do^ to inherit eternal life, he embraced him,
and made much of him; and so to the Pharisee, Thou art not far from the
kingdom of God, he labored to pull him further, he was of a winning, gaining
disposition, those that were good he loved them, and carried himself so to all
as much as might be, shall we not labor to be of his disposition? not to set
people further off, but to be of a gayning, winning nature.

See how obedient he To his Father.
Not my Will but thine be done, both in active, and passive obedience in all
things he looked to his fathers will, being ^ubordinate to him, wheresoever
there is subordination there ought to be obedience; now there is a
subordination to God as our Father in Christ, therefore we should labor to be
obedient even to death as Christ was, our happiness stands in subordination,
the happiness of the inferior is in subjection to the superior that may do
him good, therefore we must be obedient to God as Christ was, we see he
prayed whole nights.

To himself.
and heavenly was he, he takes occasion of vines, of stones, of water, of
sheep, and all things to be heavenly minded, to raise his soul upon all
occasions, and when he rose from the dead, and conversed with his disciples
what was his talk? he discoursed all of matters, of the kingdom of heaven, so
his whole disposition was heavenly, and holy in himself; and patient in wrongs
done to him, he did not return injury for injury, you see how meek he was; I
give you but a touch of every particular, you may by proportion apply the rest,
he was in his own particular holy, and heavenly, and full of purity, and
holiness, and heavenlinesse.

To his enemies.
when they wronged him, was he all on a heat? when his poor Disciples being
more flesh than Spirit, would have fire from heaven; You know not what spirit
you are of, says he, he shed tears for those that shed his blood, Oh
lerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. that afterward crucified him, and upon the cross
you see there to his very enemies, Father forgive them, they know not what they
do, so then if we will be like to Christ, consider how he carried himself to
God in devotion, and obedience, and how in himself he was full of purity and
holiness, unspotted every way, how to his friends, to all that had any
goodness in them, and how to his enemies, he prayed for his very enemies.

And for the Devil To the Devil.
deal with him as Christ did, that is, have no terms with him, although he
come to us in our nearest friends, he came to Christ in Peter, Satan avoid,
says he, if the devil come to us in our wives, in our children, in our
friends, avoid Satan, Satan comes to us sometime in our friends, to give
corrupt judgment to maintain false causes, to do this or that that may
crack our conscience, discern the devil in our best friends, for sometime
they may be the trunkes of the devil, the devil may conveigh his Spirit
through Peter, let us immitate Christ, discern between our friends love, and
the subtilty of the devil in them, and be able to give them an avaunt, avoid
Satan: we see Christ when he encountered Satan, he fights not with Satan's
weapons, and when he was to deal with his instruments, but with the Word of
God, he gives not reproach for reproach, nor sophistry for sophistry, but It
is written, showing that we must encounter Satan with Gods armorie, with
weapons out of the book of God.

And then when Satan would confess him, and make much of him, Oh thou art the
Son of God, he would have nothing to do with him, so those that are
manifestly led with the Spirit of Satan, and would press kindnesses on us,
have nothing to do with them so far: as we say of the devil, he is not
always a liar, but he always cozeneth, so take those that are lead by the Spirit
of the devil, that are Iesuited Papists, they lie not in all, but there is
cozening in all, for all is but snaring kindness and gifts that will hurt
more, all offers from Satan, and those that are led with the Spirit of Satan,
we ought to suspect, as Christ we see when Satan offered him a kindness, he
saw he was to be took heed of, therefore says he away, you and your
kindness; so have nothing to do with devilish men, those are best at ease,
and prosper most that have least to do with them, those that see they are
always deceivers though they be not always liars, those that are nearest
hostility prosper best, thus you see a taste of Christ's carriage to his
friends, to his enemies, to Satan: and for hypocrites he speaks Woe to them,
To Hypocrites.
he hated them above all the proud Pharisees. I might spend much time in going
over particulars in the Gospel, to see what expressions there are of Jesus
Christ.

How to read the life of Christ in the Gospel.
of his love and gentleness, of his obedience and humility, in washing his
Disciples feet; and Learn of me for I am meek, etc. and Come unto me all ye
that are weary, and heavy laden, then think this is the expression of my
blessed Savior, the socond Adam, to whose Image I must be conformed, and
transformed, and changed, and therefore when you are moved and tempted to
sin, from your own corruption, or from Satan, reason thus with your selves,
would our blessed Savior if he were upon earth do thus, would he speak
thus, would he not do thus if he were here now, would he not be ready to do
this good turn? surely he would, and I must be changed into his Image and
likeness, therefore let me consider what my blessed Savior would do in the
like case, surely our blessed Savior would not stain, and defile his body, he
would not make his tongue an instrument of untruth to deceive others, he would
not be covetous and injurious: Art thou a Christian or no? If thou be a
Christian thou have the anointing of Jesus Christ, that annoynting that was
poured on him as the head, it runs down to thee as a member, as Arons
ointment ran down to his skirts, if thou be the skirt of Christ, the meanest
Christian, thou have the same grace if thou be a Christian, and therefore thou
must express Christ, that as thou art partaker of his name, so thou must be
partaker of his anointing if thou be a Christian why do thou thus? does this
suite with thy profession? do thou carry the Image of Satan, and do thou
think to be a Christian, except it be in title and profession only? No,
there is no Christian, but if he be a true Christian, he is changed into the
likeness of Christ, into his Image, therefore it is a good thought upon all
occasions, every day to think what would my blessed Savior say, if he were
here? and what did he in the like case, when he was upon earth? I must be led
by the Spirit of Christ, or else I am none of his, therefore let us shame our
selves when we are moved by our corruptions, and temptations to do any thing
contrary to this blessed Image.

And consider the more we grow into the likeness of Christ, The more we are
like Christ the more beloved of God.
the more we grow in the love of God, who delights in us as he does in his
own Son, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; now the more
like we are to Christ, the more he is pleased with us.

And the more we shall grow in love one to another, And of one another.
for the liker pictures are to the first pattern, Simil.
the liker they are one to another, so the liker we grow to Christ, the liker
we are one to another, and the more like, the more love.

Who keeps Christ a live in the world, Who keep Christ alive in the world.
but a company of Christians that carry his resemblance, as we say of a child
that is like his father, this man cannot dye as long as his son is alive,
because he resembles his father, so as long as Christians are in the world
that have the Spirit of Christ, Christ cannot dye, he lives in them, and Christ
is alive no otherwise in the world, than in the hearts of gracious 'Christians,
that carry the picture and resemblance of Christ in them.

But how are we changed into the likeness of Christ? How we come to be like
Christ.
how come we to be like him?

When once we believe in Christ, we are graft into the similitude of his death,
and into the likeness of his resurrection; it is a point somewhat mystical,
yet it is stood upon in the Scriptures, in Romans 6. especially at large.

How come we to dye to sin, by virtue of Christ's death? and to live to
righteousness by the fellowship of Christ's resurrection? it is said we are
transformed into the likeness of Christ, the phrases of Scripture show it, but
to stand upon these phrases a little.

Beloved as it was in Christ's own person, How we are dead and risen with
Christ.
when Christ dyed, whole Christ dyed, and was crucified, but yet the death it
self, the crucifying was terminate, in the humane nature, the humane nature
dyed, and not the Godhead, yet by reason of the union, whole Christ dyed, and
was Crucified, the Lord of glory was crucified, as the Scripture speaks, and as
it was in Christ natural, so it is in Christ mystical, whole Christ mystical
was crucified, whole Christ mystical is risen again, notwithstanding the
crucifying was terminate in Christ the head, not in the members as his death
was terminate in his humane nature it ended, and was confined in that, so this
crucifying belonged to the head, and the head rose, yet whole Christ, all
believers as soon as they are one with Christ, by reason of the mystical
union, they are dead and crucified in Christ their head, and risen and sit in
heavenly places, in Christ their head, so then a true believer, when he is made
one with Christ, he reasons thus, my corruption of nature, this pride of heart
that naturally I have, this enmity of goodness, this is crucified, for I am
one with Christ, when he dyed I in my head did dye, and this pride and
covetousness, and worldliness, this base and filthy carnal disposition, was
crucified in Christ my head, I in my head was crucified, and I in my head now
am risen, and sit in heaven, therefore now I am in some sort glorious,
therefore I mind things above in my head, and therefore because of the
necessary conformity of the members to the head, therefore I must more and more
dye to sin, be crucified to sin, and rise by the Spirit of Christ, and
ascend with him, the more I know, and consider, and meditate of this, the more
I am transformed into the likeness of his death and resurrection; but to go a
little further.





In regard of us, Three things comfortable to us in Christ's death.
wonderful love that he dyed for for us.

In regard of sin, wonderful hatred that he would dye for sin.

And wonderful holiness and love of grace, he showed his hatred of sin,
that he would shed his heart blood for it, and wanting the glory of God as it
were, by feeling the wrath of God for a time, even in hatred to sin.

There were these two affections pregnant in Christ upon the cross, wondrous
love for us to dye for us, and wondrous hatred of sin to purge it, for which
he dyed, and wondrous holiness from whence hatred of sin came; Whence hatred
of sin proceeds.
whence does hatred of sin come but from wonderful purity, and holiness,
that cannot endure sin. Thus when the soul considers it is one with Christ,
it has the same affections that Christ had, Christ in love to us dyed, can I
apprehend that love of Christ when he dyed, and was crucified, and tormented
for my sin, but out of love, I must hate sin again? And when I consider
how Christ stood affected to sin upon the cross, when he dyed to purge it,
and to satisfy for i^, c^n I have other affections, being one with him, then
he had upon the cross? I cannot, so whether I consider his love to me, or the
hatred he bore to sin, considering my self one with him, by a mystical
union, I shall have the same affection of love to him, and be like him every
way, to love what he loves, and to hate what he hates.

I cannot but hate sin, and hating sin, I must act his part anew, that is,
as he dyed for sin, so I dye to sin, as he was crucified for it, so it is
crucified in me, as he was peirced, so he gives corruption a stabbe in me, as
he was buried, so my corruption is buried, and as he dyed once never to dye
again, so I follow my sins to the grave, to death, and consumption of old
Adam, that he never rises again, so I say, the consideration of my union
with Christ, that I in Christ did dye, and was crucified, because my head dyed,
and was crucified. And then it puts that affection into me that was in Christ,
and makes me act Christ's part, to dye to sin daily more and more, these, and
the like thoughts are stirred up in a christian, which Saint Paul aims at, in
Romans 6. and other places.

So by the virtue of his resurrection, I am conformable more and more, to the
graces in him, for as the power of Gods Spirit raised him up, when he was at
the lowest, when he had been three days in the grave, so the Spirit in every
Christian, ray seth them up at the lowest to comfort, to a further degree of
grace, more and more, nay, when they are fallen into any sin, or any
affliction for sin, the same power that raised Christ when he was in the
grave; for our sins in the lowest humiliation that could be, it raises them
from their sins daily, that they gather strength from their sins, the power
that raised Christ at the lowest, raises a Christian at the lowest in sin,
and in affliction for sin, for when he is tripped, and undermined by his
corruptions, God by that power that raised Christ at the lowest, recovers and
strengthens him, and makes him afresh revenge himself upon his sin, and when
he is at the lowest, in the grave, the same power will raise him like Christ
every way, so you see how we are changed to the liknesse of Christ.

How shall we know then whether we have the Image of Christ stamped upon us,
How to know if we be changed to Christ's Image.
or no?

If we be changed into the likeness of Christ, we shall be changed in our
understandings, to judge of things as he did, his aim was to please his father
in all things, if we have the same ends, and the same opinion, and esteem of
things, he judged matters of grace, and of the kingdom of God above all other,
for the soul is more worth then the whole world, see the judgment that he
passed upon things: Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and all other things
shall be cast upon you. We must be changed in our judgment, if we will have
his Image upon us. We must be like him in our will, in our choice, in the
cleaving, and purpose, and resolution of our will, we must have the bent of
our soul, as his was, our souls must be edged, and pointed as his was, wholly
for heaven, and the Kingdom of God: And so for our affections there must be a
change in them, in our love, and joy, and delight, we must love, and joy, and
delight, in whatsoever he did.

Now the way to stir us up to this, is to see what Image we naturally carry,
and to see our selves in the glass of the Law, if a man consider thus, if
Christ's Image be not upon me, I carry the image of the devil, this would make
him labor to get another Image upon him: For beloved at the day of judgment,
Christ will not own us, if he see not his Image upon us, Caesar will own
Caesar's coin, if he see his image upon it. Whose image and superscription is
this? Give unto Caesar, that which is Caesar's. If Christ see his stamp on us,
he will own us at the day of judgment, or else not. Naturally we are all
opposite to Christ, naturally we are full of pride and malice, of the spirit
of the world, and the devil, get out this by all means, or else Christ will
not own us at the day of judgment, he will not look upon us, he cannot
abide to see us, if we have not his image, we must bear the image of the
second Adam, as we did the image of the first.

Again, the law of God that was written in Adams heart, it is expressed, and
coppyed out, there see our selves, there see all the curses, there see our
selves guilty of the breach of every commandment, if we understand the law
spiritually, that desire of women, and revengefull thoughts, are murder, and
adultery, understand the law spiritually, and see our selves in that glass,
see our selves utterly condemned, this will make us fly to the glass of the
Gospel, that we may be changed into the Image of Christ.

There is another image that we more desire to be changed into, Most desire to
be changed into the likeness of the world.
we are transformed into the likeness of the world, cast into the mould of the
times, we labor to have those opinions that the times have, and those ways of
getting, and rising to preferment that the world has, and to have that
carriage and disposition every way that the world has, and so frame to the
spirit of the world in all things, that so we may not be observed by others,
and crossed in our pleasures, and preferments, and profits, well, this desire to
be transformed into the likeness of the world, to have the spirit of the
world, what will it come to in the end? The world shall be condemned, if we
will be condemned with the world, let us labor to be transformed into the
opinion of the world, and to go with the stream, and the errors of the time,
if we desire to be damned. The world must be condemned, it is the kingdom of
Satan wherein he rules, therefore, there is no image or likeness for us to
be transformed into, if we will be saved, and have comfort, but the Image of
Christ, and can we have a better likeness to be transformed into, then the
image of him, by whom we hope to be saved? then to be like him from whom we
hope for so great a matter as Salvation is.

Meditate on Christ.
let us fix our meditations upon him, and we shall find a change we know not
how, insensible, as those that stand in the Sun, for other purposes, they
find themselves lightened, and heat, so let us set our selves about holy
meditations, and we shall find a secret insensible change, our souls will be
altered and changed, we know not how, there is a virtue goes with holy
meditation, a changing, transforming virtue, and indeed we can think of nothing
in Christ, but it will alter and change us to the likeness of it self, because
we have all from Christ, can we think of his humility, and not be humble? can
we think, was God humble, and shall base wo^^es be proud, shall I be fierce,
when my Savior was meek, can a proud fierce heart, apprehend a sweet meek
Savior? No; the heart must be suitable to the thing apprehended, it is
impossible that a heart that is not meek, and sweetened, and brought low,
should apprehend a loving, and humble Savior, there must be a sutablenesse
between the heart and Christ: As he was borne of a humble Virgin, so he is
borne and conceived in a humble heart, Christ is borne, and conceived, and
lives, and grows in every Christian, and in a humble, and lowl^ heart, made
like him by his Spirit, that is the womb. The heart that is suitable, that is
the heart that he is formed in.

The sight of remainder of sin.
when we are once in the state of grace, let us look to the remainder of our
corruptions, the best of us shall see, that that will make us look after
Christ, look to our world limindednes, to our passions, to our rebellions, to
our darkness and deadness of spirit, and then go to Christ; Lord thou have
appointed Christ, to be a head, to be a full vessel, that of his grace, we
might have grace for grace, he was anointed with the oil of gladness above
his fellows, but for his fellows, I am earthly minded, he is heavenly, I am
full of rebellions, of lusts, all is at peace in him, the Image of God is
perfect in him, and he is a head to infuse grace, a head of influence as well
as of eminence, he is not only above me, but he has all grace for me,
therefore go to Christ, I need thy heavenly mindedness, and some portion of
thy meekness, of thy spiritual strength, I am weak, and dark, and dead,
shine on me, thou haste fullness for me, so go to Christ, and draw upon every
occasion, virtue, and life, from Christ our head, this is to know what is meant
by being transformed to Christ our head.

There are two conformities beloved exceeding comfortable to us, and we must
meditate on both.

First, Christ's conformity to us, he was transfigured into our likeness, he
became man in love to us, not only man, but in the form of a servant, base
man, he took man's nature, and man's base condition, Phil. 2, here is the ground
of our comfort, that Christ took our form, he transfigured himself to our
baseness, and shall not we labor to be transformed, to be like him, that out
of love stooped so low to be like us? let us but think of this beloved, our
blessed Savior took our nature on him, pure and holy by his Spirit, he
followed sin to death, he was conceived, and lived, and dyed without sin,
to satisfy for sin, and now by his Spirit, he cleanses out sin, he
pursued, and chased out sin from his conception, in all the passages of his
life, so we should be like him, drive away sin, get the Spirit, that our nature
in us, may be as it was in him, holy, and pure, and spiritual, shall he be
conformed to us, and shall not we conform to him, many such reasons, and
considerations there be, to moove us to be changed into the Image of Christ.

Christ in this work of changing is all in all, Christ all in all in changing
us.
for first of al by Christ's death and satisfaction to divine The gift of the
Spirit.
we have the Spirit of God that does all, For Christ.
for the Spirit is the gift of Gods love, next to Christ, the greatest: Now
Christ having reconciled God, God being reconciled gives the Spirit, our sins
being forgiven, the fruit of Gods love is the Spirit, so we have the Spirit
by the merit of Christ.

Again, we have it from From Christ.
as a head derived unto us, we have the Spirit for Christ, and from Christ,
Christ receives the Spirit first, and then he sendsit into our hearts, so for
Christ's sake, and from Christ as a head, we have the Spirit.

Again, from Christ we The pattern of all grace from Christ.
to which we are changed, the pattern of all grace is from Christ, he begins
to us in every grace.

The reasons of this c^ange from Christ
the reasons inducing are all from Christ: for we are not only changed by
power, but by reason, there is the greatest reasons in the world to be a
christian, and to come out of the state of nature, when our understanding is
enlightened to see the horrible state of nature, with the angry face of God with
it, and then to have our eyes opened at the same time to see the glorious, and
gracious face of God in Jesus Christ, here is the greatest wisdom in the
world to come out of that cursed state to a better: now the reasons of this
change are fetched from Christ, that by knowing Christ, we know by reflection
the cursed state out of him, and to see the glorious benefits by Christ's
redemption, and glorification, these set before the eye of the soul, and then
the heart wrought upon by these reasons; if Christ gave himself for me, shall
not I give my self to Christ, Paul has his heavenly Logic, Christ dyed for
us, that we might live to him, so we have the merit of the Spirit from Christ,
the derivation of the Spirit from Christ as a head and the pattern of grace
from Christ, and the inducing reasons all from Christ, in this changing to his
Image.

Again in that Christ is the Image to which we are changed, To see all that
is good and comfortable in Christ, first
let us learn if we would see any thing excellent, and comfortable in our
selves, see it in Christ first, there is nothing comfortable in man but it is
in Christ first, as the first Image, the first receiver of all, Christ Jesus
himself, if we would see the love of God see the love of God in Christ our
head first, in him that is Gods beloved, if we would see the gifts that God
has blessed us with spiritual blessings, but it is in Christ, we have it from
our head first, if we would see Gods favor, This is my beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased, I am well pleased in him, and in all his, that are one
mystical body with him, if we would see comfortably our ill done away, our
sins removed, see it in Christ abased, in Christ crucified, and made a curse,
see them all wiped away in the cross of Christ: If we would see glory upon the
removal of our sins, see it in Christ first, he is first risen, and
therefore we shall rise, he is ascended and sits in heavenly places, therefore
we ascend and sit in heavenly places with him, all that we have or look to
have comfortable in us, see it in the first pattern, and platform in Christ,
the reason is clear in Romans 8. We are elected, and predestinate, to be
conformed to the Image of his Son, we are predestinate to be conformed to
Christ in all things, to be loved as he is, to be gracious as he is, to rise
to be glorious, to be freed, and justified afterward from all our sins, as he
our surety was, we are ordained to be conformable to him every way. In a word
the flesh of Christ it was holy, it was a suffering flesh, and then a glorious
flesh, now it is glorious, so our nature must be like this Image, it must be
sanctified flesh, by the same Spirit that sanctified the mass that he was
made of in the womb, it must be suffering flesh, in conformity to him, for the
flesh that he took was suffering flesh, and he had a Kingdom of patience
before he had a Kingdom of glory, so we must go through a Kingdom of
patience to the Kingdom of glory and then upon conformity in holiness with
Christ, comes our conformity in glory, when we are content to be conformed to
Christ in our suffering flesh, then we shall be conformed to Christ in our
glorious flesh, for our flesh must be used as his was, it must be holy and
patient, and suffering, and then it shall be glorious, so in all things we must
look to Christ first, he must have the pre-eminence.

Beloved of all contemplations under heaven, there is no contemplation so
sweet and powerful, as to see God in Christ, and to see Christ first abased
for us, and our selves abased in Christ, and crucified in Christ, and acquitted
in Christ, and then raise our thoughts a little higher, see our selves made by
little and little glorious in Christ, see our selves in him rising, and
ascending, and sitting at the right hand of God, in heavenly places, see our
selves by a Spirit of faith, in heaven already with Christ, what a glorious
sight and contemplation is this? If we first look upon our selves what we
are, we are as branches cut off from the tree, as a river cut off from the
spring that dies presently, what is in us but we have it by derivation from
Christ, who is the first, the spring of all grace, the sum of all the beams
that shine upon us, we are as branches cut off, therefore now to see Christ,
and our selves in Christ, this transformes us to be like his Image, it is the
sweetest contemplation that can be.

We see this change is wrought by beholding, This change wrought by beholding.
the beholding the glory of God in the Gospel, it is a powerful beholding,
for says he, we are changed by beholding, to the Image of Christ; sight works
upon the imaginations in brute creatures, as Labans sheep, when they saw the
party colored rods it wrought upon their imaginations, and they had lambs
suitable: will sight work upon imagination, and imagination work a real
change in nature? and shall not the glorious sight of Gods mercy, and love in
Christ, work a change, in our soul, is not the eye of faith more strong to
alter and change than imagination natural? certainly the eye of faith
apprehending Gods love, and mercy in Christ, it has a power to change, the
Gospel it self together with the Spirit, has a power to change, we partake
by it of the divine nature.

This glass of the Gospel has an excellency and an eminency above all
other glasses, The excellency of the glass of the Gospel.
it is a glass that changes us, when we see our selves and our corruptions
in the glass of the law, there we see our selves dead, the law finds us dead,
and leaves us dead, it cannot give us any life, but when we look into the
Gospel and see the glory of God, the mercy of God, the gracious promises of
the Gospel, we are changed into the likeness of Christ whom we see in the
Gospel: it is an excellent glass, therefore that has a transforming power to
make beautiful, such a glass would be much prized in this proud world, such a
glass is the Gospel.

Therefore let us b^^ in love with this glass above all other glasses
whatsoever, nothing can change us but the Gospel, the Gospel has a changing
power, as you have it Isay 11. there the Lion shall feed with the Lamb, etc.
For the whole earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord: the knowledge
of Christ lesus is a changing knowledge, that changes a man even from an
untractable fierce creature, to be tractable, sweet, and familiar, so that the
knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, you see it is a transforming knowledge, and
changes us into the Image of Christ to the likeness of Christ.

Especially upon this ground, Upon what ground we are changed by beholding.
that when we look upon Christ, and God in Christ, we see our selves there,
in the love of Christ, and in the love of God, and thereupon we are moved to
be changed to Christ, not by seeing Christ alone, or by seeing God in Christ
alone, but by seeing Gods love in Christ to us, and Christ's love to us, for the
Spirit of faith which is given together with the Gospel, it sees Christ giving
himself for me, and sees God the Fathers love in me in Christ, and giving me
to Christ, when the Spirit of faith with this appropriation sees God mine in
Christ, and sees Christ mine, and sees my self in the love of God, and in the
love of Christ, hereupon the soul is stirred up from a holy desire, to be
like Christ Jesus, that loved me so much, and to be conformable to God all I
can: For if the person be great and glorious, and our friend too, there is a
natural desire to be like such to imitate them, and express them all we can.
Now when we see our selves in the love of God and Christ, out of the nature of
the thing it self, it will stir us up to be like so sweet, and gracious,
and loving a Savior.

There are three sights that has a wondrous efficasie, Three efficatious
sights.
and they go together.

God sees us in Christ, and therefore loves us, as we are in Christ.

Christ sees us in the love of his father, and therefore loves us as he sees
us in his fathers love.

We see our selves in Christ, and see the love of God to us in Christ, these
three sights are the foundation of all comfort, God gives us to Christ, and
sees us as given to him, in his election, Christ sees us as given of the
Father, as you have it John 17. And loves us as we are loved of the Father,
and then sees us as his own members, and we by a Spirit of Faith see Christ,
and see our selves in Christ, and given to Christ by the Father, hereupon comes
a desire of imitation and expression of Jesus Christ, when we see our selves in
Christ God looks upon us in Christ, and we look upon our selves in Christ,
and when we look upon the mercy of God in Christ, it kindles love, and love
kindles love, as fire kindles fire: Fire has that quality, that it turns
all to it self. Now the meditation of the glorious love of God in Christ it
works love, and love is an affection of changing, love transformes as fire
does, the love of God warmes us, and we are fit for all impressions, as things
that are warm, Iron is a dull and heavy thing, yet when it is warmed it is
bright, and pliable, and has as much as may be, of the nature of fire
imprinted upon it, so our dead, and dull, and unflexible, and unyeelding souls
become mallyable, and flexible by the love of Christ shining upon them, his
love transformes them, and kindles them, so here is the way, how the glory of
Gods love in Christ transformes us, because the discovery of the bowels of
mercy in God toward us, kindles love to him, and that being kindled it works
likeness, for love to greatness transformes us, it works a desire to be like
those that are great, where there is dependence, there is a desire to be like,
even among men, much more considering that God so loves our nature in Christ,
and that our nature is so full of grace in Christ as it is, the love of God in
Christ, that has done so much for us, it breeds a desire to be like Christ in
our disposition, all we can.

By looking to the glory of God in Christ, we see Christ, as our husband, and
that breeds a disposition in us, to have the affections of a Spouse, we see
Christ as our head, and that breeds a disposition in us, to be members like
him.



How to knoW if we see the glory of God as we ought.
to make thee like him; if it have not a transforming power, it is a barren
empty contemplation, that has no efficacy or comfort at all, so far as the
sight of Gods love in Christ, breeds conformity to Christ, so far it is
graciour and comfortable, see therefore whether thou art transformed to the
Image of Christ, if there be not a change, there is no beholding of Christ to
speak off, no man ever sees the mercy of God in Christ by the eye of faith,
but he is changed.

For beloved, as there must be a change, so it is in this order, from beholding
the mercy of God in Christ, for can you imagine that any soul can see it self
in the glass of Gods love in Jesus Christ, that it should see in the Gospel
Christ, and in him, God reconciled unto him in particular, but that soul out
of the apprehension of Gods love in Christ, will love God again, and be
altered and changed? It is impossible such a sight therefore, whereby we see
our selves in this glass, as when we look in a glass and see our own Image,
we see our own selves in Christ, and the love of God, such a sight alters
and changes always, it works love, and love is the worker of imitaiton: Love
works imitation.
for what does make one labor to express another, in their disposition,
carriage, and conversation? Oh it is love, as children imitate their Parents,
love is full of invention, and of this kind of invention, that it studdies to
please the person loved, as much as it can every way, hereupon we come to be
desirous to be like Christ, because we see the glory of Gods mercy shining in
Christ.

The adversaries of the grace of God, they fall foul upon us, because we
preach justification by the free mercy, and love of God in Christ; Oh say they,
this is to dead the spirits of men, that they have no care of good works.

Beloved, can there be any greater insentive, and motive in the world, to
sanctification, to express Christ, and to studdy Christ, then to consider what
favor and mercy we have in Christ? how we are justified, and freed by him, by
the glorious mercy of God in Christ? there cannot be a greater, therefore we see
here, they depend one upon another, by seeing in the glass of the Gospel, the
glory of God, we are transformed from glory to glory: An excellent glass the
Gospel is, by seeing Gods love in it, we are changed: The Law is a glass
too, but such a glass as Saint James speaks of, that when a man looks into
it, and sees his duty, he goes away, and forgets all, the Law discovers our
sin and misery. Indeed it is a true glass, if we look there, we shall see
the true picture of old Adam, and of corruption, but it is such a glass as
works nothing upon us, but when this glass is held out by the Ministers of
the word, whose office it is to hold the glass to people, when they see the
love of God in Christ, this is a changing transforming glass, to make them
that were deformed, and disfigured before, that bore upon them the image of
Satan before, now to be transformed to be like Christ, by whom they must be
saved. Is there any studdy in the world, therefore more excellent then that of
the Gospel, and of the mercy of God in Christ, that transformes and changes
men from one degree of grace to another, as it follows in the Text.

Therefore, those that find themselves to be the old men still that have lived
in corrupt courses, and do so still, let them not think to have any benefit
by the Gospel, they deceive themselves, they never knew God: for he that
says he has communion with God, and walks in darkness, he is a liar,
Saint John gives him the lie, for God is light, how can a man see himself in
the love of God, and remain in a dark state opposite to love, will it not
alter a man? It will not suffer him to live in sins against conscience, let
no man that does so, think he has benefit by Christ, that knowledge is but a
notionall knowledge, a speculation, a swimming knowledge, it is not a
spiritual knowledge, because wheresoever the knowledge of God in Christ is to
purpose, there is a change, and conversion of the whole man, there is a new
judgment, and new affections, the bent and byas of them is another way then
they were before, there is a change which is called a turning in the Scripture,
those things that were before them before, are now behind them, and those
things that were behind them, Repentance a turning.
are now before them, whereas they turned their back upon God and good things,
now they turn their faces, they look Godward, and Heavenward, and to a
better condition; for this change is nothing else but a conversion: therefore a
man may say as he said, I am not I, those that have seen Christ, it makes
them differ from themselves, this sight works a change.

If there were not a change it would make God forsworn, If there were not a
change, God would be forsworn.
as it is Luke 1. in Zacharies song, He has sworn that being delivered out of
the hands of our enemies, we should serve him without fear in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our lives: If any man therefore say he is
delivered from his enemies, that he thinks he shall not be damned and go to
hell; and yet does not live in holiness and righteousness, he makes Gods oath
frustrate, for Gods oath joins both together, He has sworn that being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we should serve him without fear,
without slavish fear, but with a fear of reverence, in holiness and
righteousness, all the days of our life: Whosoever therefore are in a state
of deliverance, have grace granted them whereby they may serve God in
holiness, and righteousness all the days of their life, they are changed
into the same Image.

From Glory to Glory.


By glory is meant especially grace here, and that which accompanies the grace
of God, the favor of God, when we are persuaded of it by the Spirit, by which
grace is wrought in us, upon grace in us there follows peace, and joy, and
comfort, and many such things which the Scripture accounts to be glory.

We say there are four degrees of the glory of a Christian. Four degrees of
the glory of a Christian.


First initiall glory, in his first conversion, and thereupon the knowledge of
his deliverance from that cursed and damnable state that he is in, the
knowledge likewise of his title to life everlasting, he comes to have
friendship with God, he comes to have his nature renewed that he may be friends
with God, there must be an assimulation by the Spirit like God in a holy
disposition: Now upon the favor of God we come to be friends with God, and to
have our natures altered, and hereupon comes those glorious qualifications, as
peace, and joy, and consolation in all conditions, and liberty, and boldness
to the throne of grace, this is glory beloved. Is it not a glory to be friends
with God, and to have God deal with us as friends, to reveal his secrets to
us of his love, and grace in Christ, to discover the hidden mysteries of his
love to us, that was hid from the beginning of the world? we never know it till
our effectual calling, till our first conversion, for God to be friends with
us all our life, Abraham was the friend of God, and then to have our nature
renewed, to have our shame laid aside: Sin makes us shameful.
indeed sin makes us shameful, it is the dishonor, and abasement of the
soul: The very change of our nature to be such as God may delight in, this is
glory, the Image of God is glory, therefore in Romans 3. it is said we are
stripped, and deprived of the glory of God since the fall, that is, of the
Image of God by Adams sin, whereby we resembled God in holiness, so grace
whereby we resemble God is the Image and likeness of God, and that is the
glory of man; If one should ask what is the best glory of a man? that
intrinsicall glory, that charactarizeth a man indeed, it is the stamp of
Christ upon him, the Image of the second Adam, in his soul to be like him.

And hereupon those glorious qualifications that follow upon it, Glorious
comforts in religion.
glorious peace, and glorious joy, glorious and unspeakeable comfort, above all
discomforts whatsoever, as indeed the comforts of religion, are comforts
triumphing, and prevayling above all discomforts, there are no comforts but
those in religion; that are above the discomforts we meet with in this world,
for what can be set against the wrath of God, against hell and damnation, but
the comforts of the Gospel, now when a man is in the state of grace, and has
these glorious things following him, sweet and glorious peace that passes
understanding, that all the world, and all the devils in hell cannot shake,
and joy in the holy Ghost, and comforts above all discomforts whatsoever. And
then glorious liberty he has to come into the presence of God upon all
occasions, being a friend of God, are not these things glorious beloved? and
these belong to every Christian.

Now as a Christian grows in assurance of his Salvation, Growth in grace glory.
and further friendship with God, and further peace, and joy, and comfort,
there is a further degree of glory, the growth of grace is glory, therefore in
2 Pet. 1. he follows the point at large when we add grace to grace, he says
it gives a further entrance, into the kingdom of God: for the Kingdom of God
is begun in grace here, and the further we grow in grace, the more we enter
into the kingdom of grace, and the further we enter into that, the nearer we
are to the Kingdom of glory.

The next degree of glory The glory of the soul in heaven.
then the upshot and conclusion, the closure, and consummation Of body, and
soul at the resurrection.
when body and soul shall be united again, then is perfect glory, here it is
insinuated, when he says we are changed from glory to glory, that is, from
grace to grace, till all end in glory, which is the perfection of all in
heaven, when body and soul shall be both glorious, From glory to glory.

In this is considerable, first that grace is glory;

And then that grace being glory, is growing in a continual course till it
come to perfection, we grow from glory to glory, from one degree of grace to
another.

Grace whereby we resemble Grace is glory.
and indeed so it is, It is Gods image.
for the Image and likeness of God is our glory, what was Adams glory; but his
likeness to God? he was created in Gods Image, and what is our glory? to be
like Christ, therefore grace is our glory.

Man's perfection is his Man's perfection.
but the renewing of Gods Image in grace is man's perfection, therefore it is
his glory.

That which makes a Terible to al opposites.
but grace makes a man terrible to the Devil, and to wicked men, both grace in
one man, and grace in the Church, for the Church is Terrible like an army with
banners, when the Ordinances of God are set up in glory, and there is glorious
obedience to them in the Church, it is terrible to the enemies as an army with
banners, for there is a luster and glory in all that is Gods, both in the
persons of believers, and likewise in the Ordinances of God; grace is glorious
as the wise man says, Wisdom.
Wisdom makes a man's face to shine. Is not wisdom a glorious thing, to see
a wise understanding man able to guide himself and others? it puts a beauty
upon a man, to be a wise, and understanding man: Humility.
humility makes a man glorious, for it makes God put glory upon a man when a
man is glorious, and understands it not, as Moses when his face shined, he knew
not that it shined himself, many humble men are glorious and think not so,
they are glorious, and they shine, though they see it not.

It is not a glorious thing to be taken out of our selves, Self denia^l.
to deny our selves, to offer a holy violence to our selves, and to our
corruptions, is not this a glorious thing, when others lie grovelling like
slaves under their corruptions, to stand immovable in all the changes of the
world, and in all intercourse of troubles to stand as a rock in the midst of
all unmovable, founded upon the love of God in Christ, and the hope of glory
after, not to be shaken with the wind of temptations from his standing, at
least not to be shook off his standing, this is glorious to have a constant
Spirit.

Is it not glorious to have admittance boldly by grace, Boldness with God.
to go into the presence of God at all times, to be prevailer with God, faith
overcomes, not only the world but God himself, it binds him with him own
promise? is not faith a glorious grace that triumphs over the great God
himself, binding him with his own Word and promise?

Is not love a glorious grace, Love.
that melts one into the likeness of Christ? beloved get love, it is the only
artificial worker of imitation, it melts us into the likeness of Christ it
constraines, it has a kind of holy violence in it, no water can quench it,
we shall glory in sufferings, for that we love, nothing can quench that holy
fire that is kindled from heaven, it is a glorious grace.

Hope, Hope.
what does it? when it casts anchor in heaven, it keeps us in all the waves,
it purges our natures to be like the thing hoped for, there is no grace but
it is glorious, so that grace is glory, the Image of God is glory, it makes a
man glorious, it makes him shine.

Beloved do but represent to your thoughts, such a one as Joseph, of a sweet,
wise, and loving Spirit, it is an excellent state, to see a man in his place,
in the common wealth, what a glorious sight is it to see a Joseph, a Nehemiah,
to see a man like Paul, all on fire for the glory of God, and the good of the
Church, the care of all the Churches lay upon him, the conceit of a man
shining in grace, what a glorious representation in our thoughts is it.

And so in men now living, when we see wisdom, and love tending to the common
good, when we see a spirit of mortification, when we see a Spirit of love,
that is not for it self but for other men, a Spirit of love above self-love,
all for the good of others, as Christ went about doing good, It makes them so
lovely and glorious, as that no object in the world is so glorious, as to see a
man in whom the Image of Christ is, it puts a glory upon him.

Besides it puts an inward glory upon a man, when it makes him rejoice, The
Spirit of glory rests upon him; nay in imprisonments and abasements, take a
good man in any condition he is glorious, his carriage is glorious, you shall
not see flesh and blood, no revengefull humor, The glorious condition of a
Christian.
when flesh and blood is subdued, and nothing appears in a man, but the Image
of Christ, he is a glorious creature, in the greatest abasement that can be,
when Paul was in the stocks, what a glorious condition was he in, when he sung
at midnight when the Spirit of glory was upon him, to see the Martyrs suffer
without revenge, to pray for their enemies, that they had a Spirit that
conquered all wrongs, and fear of death, and displeasure of men, a triumphant
Spirit above all things below, to r^yse them above encouragements, and
discouragements, what a glorious thing was this, to see a man in his right
principles, with the Image of God upon him, he sees all things below beneath
him, this is glorious to see a man that overcomes the world, that cares no more
for the offers of preferment on the right hand, or for threatenings on the other
hand, all is nothing to him, he breaks it as Sampson did his cords, to see
such a victorions spirit, is not this glorious? to see a glorious soul, that
is above all earthly things whatsoever, that tramples the world under foot, as
the Woman clothed with the Sun, treades the moon under her foot; the
Church clothed with Christ, who is the glory of the Church, tramples all
earthly things under feet, grace is victorious and conquering, prevayling over
those corruptions that prevayle over ordinary men. A Christian as David, when
he had Saul in the Cave, overcomes himself, it is an argument of a great deal
of strength of grace. Christ overcame himself on the cross, he prayed for his
enemies, so when the nature of man is so subject to the power of grace, that
though there be rebellions in us (as there will be, while we are in this world)
yet they cannot overpower the principle of grace, all this while a man is a
glorious Christian, because he is not subject to the common humors, and
infirmities, and weaknesses of men, therefore that makes a Christian glorious,
when he brings every thought, and affection, and every corruption as much as
may be, to the subjection of the Spirit of glory, to the Spirit of Christ in
him, though old Adam stir in him, yet he brings him down that he does not
discover himself to the scandal of the Gospel, and profession, and to the
weakening of the love of good things, in the hearts of others it shall not
break out, he subjects these rising thoughts, here grace is glorious.

Another man cannot do this, Difference between a Christan and another man.
he cannot love God, he cannot deny himself, he cannot resist temptations not
inwardly, he may forbear an action out of fear, but a Christian can love, and
fear, and delight in good things, and he can resist, and he can enjoy the
things of this life, in a subordinate manner to better things, a worldling
cannot do it, there is a glory upon a Christian, a derivative glory from
Christ, for we shine in his beams, we are changed according to his Image from
glory to glory.



I answer it is from blindness, Why the world despise those that are gracious.
and madness, they cannot discern of things, they are besotted, From
blindness of carnal men.
therefore they cannot discern things that are excellent, but take a man in
his right principles, take a sober man, and he will see an excellency in a
Christian above himself.

From Saints infirmities.
because it is joined with so many infirmities, our life is hid with Christ, it
is hid under infirmities, and under afflictions often times, and being hidden it
does not appear so much in this world.

It is but a forced contempt.
and of the best things, yet notwithstanding it is but forced, for their
conscience stoopes at it, witness conscience when it gives evidence on their
death bed, take a man when he is himself, when he is sober, when he is best
able to judge, when those things are taken from him, that obscured and darkened
his judgment, and then you shall have him justify all things that are good,
both grace and the means of grace.

Again it must be so, We must be conformed to Christ.
the world misguideth the state of a Christian, they think them vile and base
persons, so they did Christ the head of the Church, you see how Christ was
esteemed, his glory was vayled with our nature, and with misery a while, but it
sparkled out often times in his miracles: Now this was that he might suffer, and
perform the work of Salvation, for the devil nor the wicked world would
never have done that they did to him, if his glory had broken forth to the full
luster of it.

So it is with the body mystical of Christ, the world misjudgeth of them, it
appears not now what they shall be hereafter, nor what they are now indeed,
because God will have them conformable to Christ: If so be that the glory of
Christians were discovered in the true luster, who would wrong a Christian if
they did see him indeed to be a member of Christ, and an heir of heaven, the
care of Angels, and the price of Christ's death, if they did see him in his
excellency, all the world would admire him, and make another man of him, then
of Potentates, and Monarchs; but how then should he be conformable to his head
in afflictions? the head was to save us by death, he must be abased, the world
must take him as a strange man, and we that must be conformed to him, we must
pass as unknown men in the world, Grace in others either imitated or envied.
but not so unknown, but that grace breaks out sometimes to admiration, and
imitation, and when it has not imitation, it stirs up envy, and malice in
others, in the children of the devil, therefore, notwithstanding all
objections, grace is glory, it makes us like Christ, who is glorious, who is
the Lord of glory.

And then it draws glory with it glorious peace, and glorious comfort, and joy
in the Holy Ghost, the attendants of grace in the hearts of Gods people, is it
not as I said a glorious thing, for a man to have that peace in him that
passes all understanding, that shall settle, and quiet his soul in all
tumults in the world, when all things are turned upside down, for a Christian
to stand unmooveably built upon the Rock: Whence comes this glorious pitch,
but from grace, grace, and peace, one follow another, then for a man to have
inward joy and comfort in the midst of afflictions, and disconsolations in the
world, it is a wonderful and a gloriousthing, it in called joy unspeakeable,
and glorious grace, therefore in regard of that that follows it, in this world
it is glory.

Hence it is, that the wise man says, that the Righteous is more excellent
then his neighbor, The excellency of Christians above others.
he is more glorious then another man, as pearls are above pebbles, he is
more excellent in life, in death, and after death especially, for there is a
growing from glory to glory, he is glorious in life, more glorious in death,
when his soul shall be put into glory in heaven, and most of all glorious,
when Christ shall come to be glorious in his Saints, as it is in ^ Thessalonians. so he
is excellent in life, and in death, and for ever, for another man, that is but
a man, a man, said I, nay, if a man be but a man, he is either like a devil
in subtilety, or a beast in sensuallity, he carries the image either of a
beast, or of the devil, besides a man, Two sorts of carnal men.
a righteous man therefore that has the Image of God stamped upon him, he is
better then another man every way, for he is in a higher rank of creatures,
grace sets a man as far above other men, as other men are above other
creatures. At the first the creatures reverenced God in Adam, they came and
took their names from him, they were subject to him, so grace is a glorious
majesticall thing, wicked men, even Herod reverenced grace in John Baptist, and
evil men reverence it in their hearts, in Gods people, though their mouths
speak against it, a Christian is a Spiritual man, as reason lifts a man above
other creatures, so the Image of God set upon a man, it lifts, and raises him
above other men.

To labor for grace that we may be glorious.
and Christ, in us be glory, and make us excellent, let us all labor for grace
above all things, we all as I said before, desire liberty, and as we desire
liberty, so we desire glory, but we know not the way how to come to it, in
seeking liberty, we seek licensiousnesse, in seeking glory, we seek it from
men, that cannot give it, we seek glory in outward things that are nothing,
what is the glory of all outward things, but the shining of a rotten piece of
wood, in the night time? or as a glowworme? what is all this glory, but a
flash? it is nothing, if we would seek true glory indeed, as naturally all do,
let us seek grace, thereby we resemble Christ, the Lord of glory, thereby we
are glorious in the eyes of Christ, thereby we are glorious both without and
within, though this glory for the present be hid, thereby we are terrible to
the devil, and all enemies: For ever since his head was crushed by Christ,
that broke the Serpents head, he is afraid of man's nature in Christ, he is
afraid of Christians, as knowing that they be better then himself, and he
shall be judged by them ere long, the devil shall be judged by Christians,
therefore let us studdy for this glory, No man glorious but a Christian.
a man is never glorious till he be a Christian.

It is said of Antiochus that he was a vile person, what, though he was a
King? yes; let a man be never so great in the world, if he be a wicked man, a
man that dishonors his tongue, that should be his glory, that has not the
language of Canaan, that dishonors, and defiles his body, that should be the
Temple of the Holy Ghost, a man that carries a malicious, and malignant Spirit,
that has the image of the devil in his soul, if he be never so great a
person, he will be vile ere long, when all relations shall end in death, all
excellencies must be laid down in death, therefore seeing all other
excellencies cannot keep a man from being a vile person, let us labor for
that that will put a glory upon us, labor for the Image of Christ to be
stamped upon our soul. There is a great humor in this age in looking to
pieces of workmanship, if a man have skill to discern a piece as they call
it, it is more then ordinary: Beloved, what a vanity is this (though these
pictures be lawful, they are a kind of mute poetry) but what is this to the
having of the glorious Image of Christ stamped upon us, to be glorious in the
eye of God and in the very judgment of carnal men?

There is nothing so excellent as grace, and nothing so base as sin, indeed
there is nothing base but sin, and nothing excellent but grace, so that Gods
children, not only in their glorious riches, and prerogatives to be the Sons
of God and heirs of Heaven, are glorious, but they have an inward glory: The
Spouse of Christ is glorious within: Insomuch that Christ is in love with his
own graces, he wonders at his own graces in his children.

Oppose this glory to the base esteem of carnal men.
base minded persons that disgrace goodness, that their illness may be the
less discerned, they labor to make all alike, all they can by slanders, at
least that their illness may not appear, oppose the judgment of Gods Spirit
that esteems grace glory a against all the judgment of the base world:
Beloved, they shall know one day, that those that they despise shall judge
them, and their hearts secretly tell them so, what makes them malign men
better then themselves? they have a secret conceit, he is above me, The
spiritual man judges all things, he is a man that discernes by a spiritual
eye, he judgeeth and condemns my ways, and hereafter he will judge me, a
secret conscience in him, makes him fear a good man, though he deprave and
malign him, yet his heart stoupes.

my self with these things, shall I go and stain my self? Is it not an
unsightly thing to see a golden pillar daubed with dirt? or to see a crown
cast in the dirt? God has put a crown upon me, he has made me a King, he
has made me an Heir of Heaven, he has made me his Son, he has put a
glory upon me, shall I abase my self to devilish base courses? No, I will be
more honorable in my own eyes. Let us think our selves too good for the base
services of Satan, these thoughts we should take to our selves, these are not
proud thoughts, but befitting our condition, when we are tempted to any base
course whatsoever it is, it is contrary to my calling.

Comfort our selves in the disparagements of the world.
in all the disparagements of the world, for those that are besotted with false
vainglory, they have the eyes of their souls put out, and dimmed, and dazzled
with false glory, they cannot judge of the glory of a Christian, they want
eyes, therefore let us be content to pass in the world as hidden, Christ
passed concealed in the world, only now and then, the beams of his glory
brake forth in his miracles, so we must be content, for our glory is hid in
Christ, for the most part, and it is clouded with the imputations and malice of
men, and sometimes with infirmities, as it will in this world, let us comfort
our selves with this, that we are glorious howsoever, and glorious within, and
this glory will break out in a holy conversation, and it is better to be
glorious in the eyes of God, and Angels, and good men, and in the consciences
of ill men, then to have glory from their mouths, malice will not suffer them
to glorify them with their mouths, but their consciences must needs stoop to
goodness, for God has put a majesty into goodness, that any man that is a
man, that is not a beast, that has natural principles, will reverence it, and
the consciences of such men will make them speak the truth one day, and they
shall say We fools thought these men mad, but, N^w we see our selves fools:
therefore in the disparagements of worldly men, that know not where true glory
lies, let us be content with this, that God has made us truly glorious, by
working a change in a comfortable measure, let us comfort our selves in this.

To know whether we have grace by our esteem of it
let us have tha^ judgment and conceit of grace In himself
(by the Spirit of God, and the truth of God) as the Holy Ghost has here,
calling it glory, that very judgment shows that there is an alteration in our
affections, that we are changed, in the spirit of our minds, that we have a
right conceit of heavenly things: for none but a Christian indeed can judge
grace to be glory, that can truly think so: for if a man think grace to be
glory truly, if he be convinced by the power of the spirit, he will be
gracious: for there is an instinct in all men by nature, to glory in something
you have the gulls of the world, they glory in something, in swaggering, beastly
courses, you have devilish men glory that they can circumvent others, rather
then men will have no glory, they will glory in that that is shame indeed, man
having a disposition always to glory in something, if he be convinced that
grace is glory he will be gracious:

Therefore, I beseech you enter into your own souls, and see what conceits
you have of the Image of God, of the graces of Christianity, and then
certainly it will raise a holy ambition, to have that stamp set upon you.

In others.
if he can look upon the life of another that is better then he, with a
conceit that it is glory, and loving of it as glory, many men see grace in
other men, but with a maligning eye, they see it to disgrace it, for naturally
this is in men, they are so vaineglorious, and ambitions, that when they see
the lives of other men outshew theirs, instead of imitation, they go to base
courses, they obscure and darken that light with slanders, that they will not
imitate in their courses. This is in the better sort of men, the prouder, and
greater sort of men, what grace they will not imitate, they will defame, they
will not be outshined by any thing; therefore, those that can see so far into
the life of another man, as they love it, and honor the grace of God in
another man, it is a sign there is some work of glory begun in them, men
can endure good things in books, and by reports, and good things of men that
are dead, etc. but they cannot endure good things running in their eyes,
especially when it comes in a kind of competition, and comparison, they love
not to be outshined.

From glory to glory.


We see the state of Gods children here, The state of grace and glory, both
go under one name.
and the state in Heaven, come both under one name, both are glory. The
children of God are Kings here, they shall be Kings in Heaven, they are Saints
here, as they be Saints in Heaven, there is an adoption of grace, as well as an
adoption of glory, Romans 8. There is a regeneration here, of our souls, there
is a regeneration of soul and body then. We are new creatures here, and we
shall be new creatures there.



Heaven must be begun here.
for Heaven must be begun here, if ever we mean to enter into Heaven
hereafter, we enter into the subburbs here, we must be new creatures here, we
are kings here, we are Heirs apparent here, we are adopted here, we are
regenerate here, we are glorious here, before we be glorious hereafter,
therefore beloved, we may read our future state in our present, we must not
think to come de scelo in celum, (as he says) out of the filth of sin to
Heaven, but Heaven must be begun here, you see both have the same name, grace
and glory. Therefore, would thou know, what thy condition shall be
afterward? read it in thy present disposition, if there be not a change, and a
glorious change here, never look for a glorious change hereafter, what is not
begun in grace, shall never be accomplished in glory, both grace here, and
glory hereafter, coming under the same name it forces this.

And likewise it is a ground of comfort, Comfort, that grace and glory have the
same name.
for why have we the same term here, when we are in the state of grace, why
are we decked and adorned with the same title, as we shall be in heaven?

It is partly for certainety, grace is glory as well as the perfection of it is
glory, to show that where grace is truly begun, it will end in glory; all the
powers in the world cannot interrupt Gods gracious progress and way; what is
begun in grace, will end in glory, where the foundation is laid, God will be
sure to put up the roof, he never repents of his beginnings, Solomon says
that the righteous is like to the Sun, that grows brighter, and brighter, till
he come to his full strength, so the state of the godly grows more and more,
from light to light, till he come to full strength. Difference between the
state of the godly and wicked.
The state of the wicked is clean contrary; the state of the wicked is like
the declining day, the Sun grows down and down till it be twilight, and
thence to darkness, and then to utter darkness, so they being dark in
themselves, they grow from the darkness of misery, and terror of conscience
to eternal darkness, black dismal darkness in hell, but the state of the
godly it is like the course of the Sun after midnight, that is growing up, up
still till it come to mid day, so the state of the godly it is always on the
mending hand, it is always a growing state, it is a hopeful condition, they
go from glory to glory, and therefore let us be assured of eternal glory for
the time to come, as sure as we are of the beginnings of grace here wrought,
you see then a maine difference between the godly and others, other men grow
backward proficere in pejus as we say, they take degrees back from worse to
worse, till they end in utter desolation and destruction for ever, but the
other rises by degrees, till they come to that happiness that can admit no
further degrees, all the glory of the world ends in vanity and in nothing, but
the glory of a Christian that begins in grace, you see it proceeds from glory
to glory, always growing and amending: If men were not spiritually mad, would
they not rather be in a condition always amending and growing more and more
hopeful still, than to be in a condition always declining, and most subject to
decline when it is at the top. There is no consistence in any humane
felicity, but it is in precipite near a downfall when it is at the highest,
Gods children are near rising when they are at the lowest, there is a Spirit
of glory lights, and not only so, but rests on them, it does not light upon
them, and then go away, it is not as a flash or blaze of flax, or so, but the
Spirit rests, and grows still upon them, from glory to glory; the state of a
Christian it is comfortable that is soundly converted, when he shall think
every day brings me nearer my glory, every day I rise, I am somewhat happier
than I was the day before, because I am somewhat more glorious, and nearer to
eternal glory, when another wretch that lives in sins against conscience,
may say I am somewhat nearer hell, nearer eclipsing and ebbing, and declining
than before, so every day brings terror to the one, and matter of comfort to
the other.

From glory to glory.


Grace we see is glory, especially when it is in strength, Grace glorious when
it is in strength.
and the more grace grows, the more glory, the more it shines the more glory:
we say of fire, the more it burns the less it smoakes, the less infirmity
appears that may disgrace it, the more grace, the more light and luster, and
the less infirmity: glory belongs to the growth of grace in this world; for is
not a Christian, a glorious Christan, when he is a grown Christian, when he
sends a luster as a pearl, when as a glorious light, he shines to the example
of others; when he is able, as Paul says gloriously of himself, I can do all
in Christ that strengthens me, to want, and to abound, cast him into any
condition what you will, he is like himself; cast Joseph into prison he is
Joseph still, cast Paul in the dungeon he is Paul still, and is never more
glorious, than in the midst of afflictions, so grace growing to some
perfection is glorious; Wisdom makes a man's face to shine says Solomon, so
it is true of all other graces in some perfection, they make a man shine, there
is nothing in the world so glorious as a Christian that is grown to some
perfection, indeed he is so glorious that the eye of the world when it is cast
upon him, it stirs up envy, as carnal persons when they see a Christian man
unmovable in the midst of all motions, and unchangeable in all changes, when
nothing can alter him, but he goes on, they wonder at the condition of this
man, when as indeed his grounds, and resolutions are above all
discouragements, or encouragements that the world can afford: David was a King,
and a Prophet, and David was a holy man, and David for constitution of body was
ruddy, and of a sweet complexion, and David for the manner of his Kingdom,
was a King of a great people, there were many excellencies of David, oh but
what does David account the prerogative of a man? Blessed is the man whose
sins are forgiven, in whose spirit there is no guile, that is, that is truly
sanctified in Spirit, that is in the state of justification, and as a witness
of that, of the forgiveness of his sins, has a spirit without guile, happy
is that man, not that is a King or a Prophet, or a strong man, or a beautiful
man, or has this indowment or that, but happy is the man whose sins are
forgiven, and whose spirit is sanctified.

From glory to glory.


We see then that there must be an increase, Grace of a growing nature.
a growing from glory to glory, there is no stop nor stay to be made in
religion, there must be of necessity a desire to grow better and better, for
glory will grow still to glory, grace will never cease till it end in glory.

Both in our dispositions From our disposition.
we shall desire it may increase in us the Image of God and Christ, more and
more:

And in Gods purpose From Gods purpose.
makes an end, whether we look to him, that will not have us, in a state of
imperfection, he has not chosen us to imperfection, but to perfection; and he
has called us not to imperfection, but to perfection, he has elected us to
perfection, he has chosen us to be spotless, not to be conflicting with our
corruptions, and to be halting always as Jacob, we shall have perfect strength,
we are called and elected to perfection, therefore there is no standing at a
stay in religion, there must be a perpetual growth, it is our disposition to
desire and endeavor it still.

For beloved it is that that is inbred to all things that are imperfect, to
hasten to perfection, till they come to their ubi, to their pitch, we see it in
grain, weak grain, till it come to the full growth, it breaks through
clods, through harder things than it self, there is a nature in corn and
seeds, that have a beginning of life in their kind in them, till those seeds
come to growth, they put out themselves with a great deal of strength against
opposition, so grace is of such a strong nature, being intended by God to
perfection, it will not rest in mean beginnings, but puts it self forward
still, and breaks through opposition: I will not stand upon the common place
of growth in grace, it is a large discourse, and I touched it upon many
occasions, you see the necessity of it, there must be a growth from glory to
glory.

A growth not in parts as we say, for at the first regeneration, in the first
beginning, when we are gracious, there is the beginning of a new life, and
there is the seeds of all graces, but especially this growth is in intention,
and extention, grace grows more and more in strength and extends, and reaches
it self further and further to the use of many; grace grows I say in the
intention of it self, and extends, and reaches it self to the use of more,
the more a Christian lives, when he is in a right state, and frame as a
Christian should be, he is of more strength in all particular graces, and does
the more good, and shines more in his life and conversation to others.

And likewise as there is a growth in intention, and extention, so there is a
growth in the quality and purity of grace: for the longer a man lives, those
graces that he has grow more refined; when a Christian is but a new Christian,
he tastes much of the old stock, as all fruit at the first will taste of the
stock, Simil.
so there is no fruit of righteousness that comes from a man, at his first
conversion, but it tastes a great deal of old Adam, it savours of the old
stock, the more he live, and grows spiritual, the more that that comes from
him relisheth of the Spirit, the more refined is his wisdom, the more refined
is his love, the more refined from self-love, his joy and delight is more
refined.

grow in grace, he seems not to be so good a man, not to be so zealous, as
when he was young, not so forward.

Grace more refined in aged Christians.
there is a great deal of nature joined with a little grace, and that grace in
them makes a greater expression, because it is carried with the current of
nature, but in age it is more refined, that that is, that knowledge they have
is more pure, and more settled, and that love and affection is more refined,
there is less self-love, and that zeal they have it is joined with more
heavenly discretion, there is less wild fire, there is less strange fire
with, though there be less heat of nature, that it do not work in outward
demonstrations to the eye of the world, yet it is more refined, and pure, so
grace grows thus likewise in the purity and perfection of it; Not altogether
pure, for somewhat will stick to our best performances, savouring of the worst
principle in nature, for as we carry flesh and spirit always, so that that comes
from them will savor of corruption, yet less in a grown Christian, that is a
father in Christianity than in another.

From glory to glory.


Grace is glory in regard of the state before, The least degree of grace glory
in respect of the state of nature.
the least degree of grace is glory in regard of the state of nature; but grace
is not glory properly till it come to a growth, grace is not glorious so in
comparison to other Christians, that are grown, in regard of the state of
nature, grace is glory take it in the lowest, for is not this a glory for a man
to be taken into the fellowship of Christ? to be the Son of God, and an heir
of heaven, to have Angels for his attendants, to be begotten by the glorious
Gospel, the Word of God that imortall seed, whatsoever thing is about a
Christian it is glorious, is not he glorious that has God the Father, and God
the Son the Lord of glory, and the holy Ghost the Spirit of glory, and the
glorious Gospel, and glorious Angels for his attendants? every thing is
glorious in a Christian, in every Christian there is this, so grace is a kind
of glory, but notwithstanding we must not content our selves with that, grace
is then especially glory when it comes to growth, we must labor that grace may
appear, what is glory? properly glory is excellency, and victory over the
contrary with manifestation, excellency manifested; Now a man is said to be
glorious in grace, when his grace comes to be excellent in view, and victorious
over the contrary with public manifestation.

To labor for strength of grace.
yet in the rank of Christians, we ought to be glorious, that is, more and
more gracious, both

In regard of God, Privileges of growth in grace.
that God may have the more glory from us, the more grace, the more esteem
from him, because we resemble him,

And in regard of Christ Jesus, the more glorious we are, the more we resemble
him. Let us labor to be more and more glorious, in regard likewise of the
Church, whom we shall benefit more, the more we grow in grace, the more we
shall prevail with God by our prayers, who prevayled more with their prayers
than Moses, and such men? Again when grace is glorious, that is, with victory
and full manifestation, the more we are fit to give a luster, and light, that
others seeing it may glorify God, to draw others to the love of grace, when
they see grace glorious; now grace is then glorious in us, that others may be
encouraged, when we can resist strong temptations, when we are not like
children carried away with the wind of every doctrine, this is a glorious
thing, when a Christian can hold his own in the worst times, when it is a
witty thing to be a Christian, as Hillary said in a time of schism, it
required a great deal of wit to be a Christian, it requires a great deal of
wit and studdy, to hold a man on in Christianity.

And for a man to be strong against temptations and the world whether it
frown or fawn, that he cares for neither, but holds his own, is not this a
glorious thing? when a man shall carry himself as a Lion, break through
oppositions in ill times, and fall square, cast him as you will, in all
conditions, here is a glorious Christian, therefore though grace be glory, that
must not content us, but we must labor to have such a measure of glory as
that we may be glorious in our own rank: is it not a glorious thing when a
man can break through doubts, and fears, that trouble other folk too much?
as the sun is said to be in glory when he is gotten on high, there are many
clouds in the morning, but when the funne is gotten to his height at noone day
he scatters all, so a Christian is in his glory, and exaltation, when he can
scatter doubts and fears and terrors, that trouble other weak, beginning
Christians; therefore when we are troubled with scruples, with this, and that,
we should labor to get out of them, that grace may be glorious, to show that
we have gotten such a light, and such a convincing knowledge, and that we are
so rooted in faith, and grace, that the Spirit of Christ in us, has broken
through all these clouds, and mists, and made us glorious.

From glory to glory.


Our glory it is not like a torrent that runs a maine for a time, and after is
dried up for ever, grace it is a continuing, and an increasing thing, it
continues still, as the stream that it is fed with is an ever-living spring,
so is grace, it is fed with the grace in Christ, and he is a never-dying
spring, a fountain, for that grace in him is fed with his divinity, therefore
there must be a perpetual Spring in Christ, so where Christ has opened a
spring in the heart, he will feed that grace perpetually.

Not to be discouraged in the weakness of grace.
when he has begun a good Work, he will finish it to the day of the Lord:
Though grace be little at the first, yet it shall not stay there, it grows up
we know not how, but at last it is glorious indeed, for till grace be grown,
it is little discerned from other things, as between weeds and herbs, there
i^ little difference when they be green, till they be grown, grace is little
at the first, as a grain of Mustardseed, Jerusalem is not built in a day, as
we say of Rome, you have some that are a weaker sort of Christians, that are
good, they would feign be in Canaan, as soon as ever they are out of Egypt, and
I cannot blame them, but hereupon they are discomforted, as soon as ever they
have grace in them, they would have their pitch presently out of spiritual
covetousness, Oh that I had more knowledge, and more victory, etc. these
desires are good, for God puts not in vain desires into the hearts of his
children, but they must be content to be lead from glory to glory, from one
degree of grace to another, Christ himself grew more in favor with God and
man, as that little stone grew to a mountain, Dan. 2. so we must be content
to grow from grace to grace, there is a graduall proceeding in the new
creature, we must not be presently in Canaan, God will lead us through the
wilderness, through temptations, and crosses, before we come to Heaven, many
because they see they are far short of others, that are stronger Christians,
therefore they think they have no grace at all.

Therefore let those that are on the growing hand, though they be short of
many that are before them, let them not be discouraged with their overlittle
beginnings, God leads his by degrees to heaven.
for it is Gods Ordinance and course in this world, to bring his children by
little and little through many stations, as they were led in the wilderness
from standing to standing, and from place to place, so God brings his children
by many standings to Heaven, and it is one part of a Christians meekness, to
subject to Gods wisdom in this kind, and not to murmr, that they are not
so perfect as they would be, or as they shall be, but rather to magnify the
mercy of God that there is any change, in such defiled and polluted souls,
that he has vouchsafed any spiritual light of understanding, any love of
good things, that the bent of their affections are turned to a contrary course,
then they were before, that God has vouchsafed any beginnings, rather magnify
his mercy, then quarrel with his dispensation, that he does not this all at
once, and indeed, It is our own fault that we are not more perfect.
if we enter into our own hearts, it is our fault that we are not more
perfect, but let us labor to be meek, and say, Lord since thou have ordained
that I shall grow from glory to glory, from one degree of grace to another, let
me have grace to magnify thy mercy, that thou have given me any goodness,
rather then to murmr that I have no more, and be content in the use of
means, and endeavor to grow further, though we have not so much as others
have: Not to be discouraged in seeming interruption of spiritual growth.
Nay we may not be discouraged, because of the weakness of grace, but we may
not be discouraged with a seeming interruption in our spiritual growth; God
sometimes works by contraries, he makes men grow by their puttings back, and
to stand by their falls: sometimes, when God will have a man grow, he will
suffer him to fall, that by his fall he may grow in a deeper hatred of sin,
and in jealousy over his own heart, and a nearer watchfulness over his own
ways, that he may grow more in love with God for pardoning of him, and grow
more strong in his resolution for the time to come, that he may grow more in
humility, none grows so much as those that have their growth stopped for a
time: Let none be discouraged when they find a stop; but consider that God is
working grace in another kind, the Spirit appears in one grace, when it does
not in another, it grows in one grace, when it does not in another; sometime
the Spirit will have us grow in humility, as the juice of the herbs runs to
the root in the Winter, it is in the leaves in the Spring, it is in the seed
in Autumn, as the life, sometime appears in the plant in one part, and
sometime in another, so the Spirit of God appears sometime in humility,
sometime in joy, sometime in spiri^uall strength and courage: Let none be
discouraged over much when they find a stop, for there is no interruption of
spirit altogether, and this little interruption is like a sickness that will
make them grow and shoot up more, afterward it spends the humors that
hinders growth, there is such a mystery in the carrying of men from glory to
glory, that it makes men more glorious sometimes by base sins, I would have
no man discouraged, therefore, indeed God will work so, that he shall wish he
had not given him occasion to show his strength in his weakness, his glory in
his shame, but God, The least beginnings and the perfection of grace have the
same name, and why.?
where he has begun, he will go through with the work, and will turn all
to good.

And to encourage us, here grace begun has the same name as grace perfect,
both are glory, why does God call them by one name?

To encourage Christians, he tells them that if it be begun it is glory, not
that it is so properly, but if it be begun, it shall never end, till it come
in Heaven, therefore God styles grace in all the latitude from the highest, to
the very beginnings, by the same name, to encourage Christians, if they be
within the door of the Temple, though they be not so far as those that are
in high and glorious places, yet they are going thither to encourage Christians
to know that unavoydably, and undefesably, they shall come to perfection of
glory, if it be begun, and God looks not on Christians, as they are in their
imperfections, and beginnings, but that that in time he means to bring them
to, he intends to bring them to glory, therefore he gives grace the style of
glory: As in the creatures, God looked not on the seeds of trees as such, but
he looked on them as seeds that he meant to make trees of, Simile.
and when God looks upon his children, he looks not on them as they are
children, but as they shall be perfect men. Does the wisdom of God look on
the seeds of trees, as he intends to make them trees, and does he not look
upon Christians, that are babes in grace, as he intends to make them men, to
come to the perfect stature of Christ, he viewes us at once in our beginnings
and perfections, all is presented at once to him, therefore he gives one name
to the whole state of grace, grace and glory, all is glory, I beseech you
therefore, if there be any goodness, any blessed change in us, let us be
comforted; for he that has brought us to the beginnings of glory, will never
fail, till he has brought us to perfect glory in heaven, and there our
change shall rest, there is no further change there, when we are once in our
element.

For even as God, when he made man, he rested from all his work upon the
Sabbath, No change in Heaven.
man was his excellent piece; so the Spirit of God will rest sanctifying and
altering of us, when we are once in Heaven, in that eternal Sabbath, then we
shall need no changes from glory to glory, we shall for ever be filled with
the fullness of God, till which time there is no creature, in the world so
changable as a Christian.

For, first you see he was made in Gods Image, and likeness in his state of
standing:

After he fell there was a change, to his second state of sin.

After the state of fall, there is a change to the state of grace.

After that, from one degree of grace to another in this world till he dye, and

Then the soul is more perfect and glorious, but at the last, when body and
soul shall be united, there shall be no more change, there shall be an end
of all alteration.

So we see that God intends by his spirit to bring us to perfection, though by
little and little, to perfection of glory as far as our nature is capable,
and this shall be at the latter day.



Why we are not brought to per^^ction here.
Saint Peter on the Mount had but a glimpse of the glory of Heaven, and he was
spiritually drunk as it were, he knew not what he said, we are not capable,
therefore we must grow here from glory to glory, till we come to that
perfection of glory. God that gives us the earnest, could make up the bargain
here, if we were capable of it, but we are not.

God will have a differ^nce between the millitant, and the tryumphant Church,
and will train us up here, to live the life of faith, till we come to live the
life of sight, the life of vision for ever in Heaven.

Does God by his Spirit, change us by his Spirit to the liken^sse of Christ,
from glory to glory, till he have brought us to perfection of glory in Heaven;
Oh let us comfort our selves in our imperfections here, we are here lame
Mephibosheths, he was a Kings Son, but he was lame, we are spiritually lame
and defective, though we be Kings Sons, Oh but we shall grow from glory to
glory, till all end in perfection in Heaven, what a comfort is this in our
imperfections? that as every day we live in this world, cuts off a day of our
life: for we live so much the shorter, so every day we live, brings us nearer
to Heaven, that as we decay in the life of nature every day, so we grow up
another way, from glory to glory, till we come to perfect glory in Heaven, is
not this a sweet comfort? Let us comfort our selves with these things.

sweet and comfortable, and full of well grounded hopes, that glory shall go
further on to glory, and end in glory. Then why should we be afraid of death?
Not to ^^are death
for grace will but end in glory, a mean glorious estate will but even be
swallowed up of a truly glorious estate, indeed grace is swallowed up of
glory, even as the Rivers are swallowed up of the Ocean, glory takes away
nothing but perfects all better by death: why should we be afraid of death,
we are afraid of our glory, and of the per^ection of our glory. Degrees in the
glory of a Christian.


There be degrees of glory, there is glory begun here in grace, and there is
the glory of the soul after death, and the glory, both of soul and body, for
ever in heaven, and these make way one to another. A Christian is glorious
while he lives, and he grows in glory while he lives, he is more glorious
when he dies, for then his soul has perfectly the image of Christ stamped
upon it; but he is most glorious at the day of resurrection, when body and
soul shall be glorious, when he shall put down the very Sun it self, all
glory shall be nothing to the glory of the Saints, They shall shine as the Sun
in the firmament. And indeed there will be no glory but the glory of Christ,
and of his Spouse, all other glory shall vanish and come to nothing, but the
glory of the King of Heaven, and his Queen that he has chosen to himself,
to sollace himself eternally with, when the spiritual marriage shall be
accomplished they shall be for ever glorious together, why then should we be
afraid of death? for then there shall be a further degree of glory of the
soul, and after that a further degree of body and soul, when our bodies shall
be conformable to the glorious body of Christ, when they shall be spiritual,
as it is in 1 Cor. 15. I beseech you therefore let us learn this to comfort
our selves, against those darker times of dissolution, when we shall see an end
of all other glory, all wordly glory shall end in the dust, and lie down in
the grave, when we must say that rottenness is our Father, and the worm our
Mother, we can claim no other kin in regard of our body, yet then we shall
be more glorious in regard of our souls, Christ shall put a robe of glory upon
us, and then afterward we shall be more glorious still.

Therefore it is base infidelity to be afraid of our dissolution, when indeed
it is not a dissolution, but a way to glory, we should rather consider the
conjunction, then the dissolution, death takes in pieces body and soul, but it
joins the soul to Christ, it makes the soul more glorious then it was
before, we go from glory to glory, our Savior Christ says, He that
believes in me shall never dye, What does he mean by that?

Indeed, he shall never dye, for grace shall be swallowed up of glory, as
soon as ever the life of nature it gone, he lives the life of glory presently,
so he never dies, there is but a change of the life of grace, and of nature,
for the life of glory.

What that glory shall be at that day, A part of heaven to know the glory of
it.
it is a part of that glory to know: for indeed it is beyond expression, and
beyond the comprehension of our minds; they cannot conceive it, nor our
tongues express it, Peter as I said seeing but a glimpse of it said, It is
good for us to be here; he forgot all his former troubles, and afflictions: If
such a little glimpse of glory could so possess the soul of that blessed man
Peter, as that it made him forget all his former miseries, and all his
afflictions whatsoever, to be in love with that condition above all others,
what shall the glory of heaven be then? shall we think then of our former
misery and baseness, and trouble, and persecution? oh no.

To tr^ the truth of our graces.
by our care to grow, and proceed further from glory to glory, still to be more
glorious in Christianity: beloved of necessity it must be so, let us not
deceive our selves in our natural condition, do we content our selves that we
live a sick man's life? no, we desire health, when we have health, is that all?
no; when we have health we desire strength too, that we may encounter
oppositions: Is it so in nature that life is not enough but health, and that is
not enough but strength too, and is it not so much more in the new creature, in
the new nature, in the divine nature, if there be life there will be a desire
to have health, that our sick souls may be more, and more healed, that our
actions that come from our facul ies sanctified, be not sick actions, that
they be not weak languishing actions, that we may have healed souls, that God
together with pardoning grace, may join healing grace to cure our souls daily
more and more, that we may be more able to performances, and then when we have
got spiritual health, let us desire spiritual strength to encounter
oppositions, and temptations to go through afflictions, to make way through
all things that stand in our way to heaven; let us not deceive our selves, this
will be so, if there be truth of grace, still a further and further desire of
grace, carrying us to a further and further endeavor.

The more we grow in grace, the more God smells a sweet sacrifice from us,
that that comes from us is more refined, and less corrupt, it yields better
acceptance to God.

And then for others, the more we grow in grace, the more we grow in ability,
in nimblenesse and cheerfulness to do them good, and that that comes from us
finds more acceptance with others* being carried with a strong Spirit of love,
and delight, which always is accepted in the eyes of men.

The more we grow in grace, the more cheerful we shall be in regard of our
selves; the better we are, the better we may be; the more we do, the more we
may do, for God further instills the oil of grace to give us strength and
cheerfulness in good actions, so that they come off with delight, our own
cheerfulness increases as our growth increases: In a word you see glory
tends to glory, and that is enough to stir us up to grow in it, seeing glory
here which is grace, tends to glory in heaven, we should never rest till we
come to that perfection, till the glory of grace, end in glory indeed; for
what is the glory of heaven but the perfection of grace, and what is the
beginnings of grace here, but the beginnings of glory, grace is glory begun,
and glory is grace perfected, therefore if we would be in heaven as much as
may be, and enter further and further into the Kingdom of God, as Peter says,
2 Pet. 1. Let us be always adding grace to grace, and one degree to another, put
somewhat to the heap still, that so we may go from glory to glory, from
knowledge to knowledge, from faith to faith, from one degree to another.



that, Christians grow when they think they do not.
some because they cannot see themselves in growing, they think they grow not
at all; it is but ignorance, for we see the Sun mooves, though we see him not
in mooving: we know things grow, though we see them not in growing; therefore
it follows not, that because we perceive not our growth from grace to grace,
that therefore we grow not.

But put the case indeed that Christians decay in their first love, and in some
grace, there is a suspension of growth, it is that they may grow in some other
graee; God sees it needful they should grow in the root, and therefore
abaseth them, in the sense of some infirmity, and then they spring out a maine
again, as after a hard winter comes a glorious spring: upon a check, grace
breaks out more gloriously; and there is a mystery in Gods government in that
kind, that God often increases grace by the sight, and sense of our
infirmities: God shows his powerful govenment in our weakness, for Gods
children never hate their corruption more than when they have been overcome by
it, then they begin to be sensible of it, that there is some hidden corruption
that they discerned not, before that it is fit they should take notice off, the
best man living knows not himself till he comes to temptation, that discovers
himself to himself, temptation discovers corruption, and makes it known, and
then stirs up hatred for it, as love stirs up endeavor, so hatred
aversation, and loathing: It is profitable for Gods children to fall sometimes,
they would never be so good as they are else, they would not wash for spots,
but when they see they are foul indeed, then they go to wash, but this is a
mystery God will have it so for good ends.

It checkes the disposition of some good people they think they have not
grace, because they have but a little, this phrase shows that we have not all
at once, God carries us by degrees, from glory to glory, from one degree of
grace to another, Gods children when they have truth of grace wrought in them,
their desires go beyond their endeavor and strength, their desires are
wondrous large, and their prayers are answerable to their desires, therefore in
the Lords prayer, what say we? Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done in earth as
it is in heaven; can it be so in this world? No, but we must pray till we come
to it, we must pray till we come to heaven, where prayer shall cease, so the
prayers, and desires of Gods people transcend their endeavors their prayers
are infinite: hereupon the chief thing in conversion being the desire, the
turning of the stream of the will, when they find their will and desire good,
and their endeavor to fall short of their purposes, they say surely I have no
good, because I have not that I would have, as if they should have heaven upon
earth, we must grow from glory to glory; and thank God for that beginning, it
is Gods mercy that he would work the least degree of grace in such rebellious
hearts as all of us have, that he would work any goodness, any change,
though never so little, God looks not to the measure, so much as to truth: for
he will bring truth to perfection, though it be never so little, Why God brings
us on by little and little.
let us be comforted in it: and it is Gods government, to bring his children to
glory by little, and little that so there may be a dependence of one Christian
upon another, the weaker on the stronger, and that there may be pity, and
sweet^ affections of one Christian to another, and that there may be perpetual
experience of Gods mercy in helping weak Christians, and a perpet^all
experience of that which is the true ground of comfort, justification that we^
must needs be justified, and stand righteous before God, by Christ's absolute
righteousness, having experience of our imperfect righteousness; so a little
measure of grace in us is for great purpose, therefore let none be discouraged
especially considering that God whom we desire to please, vallues us by that
little good we have, and esteems us by that condition he means to bring us to
ere long, to perfection, so long as we take not part with our corruptions, but
with the Spirit of God, and give way to him, and let him have his work in us,
so long be of good comfort in any measure of grace whatsoever.

Not to decay in grace
whatsoever we decay in let us not decay in grace, beg of God; Lord whatsoever
thou take from me, take not thy Spirit from me, take not thy stamp from me,
let me grow in the inward man although I grow not in the world, let us labor
to grow from glory to glory though we lose otherwise, that is well lost, and
parted with in the world, that is with the gain of any grace, because grace is
glory: It is a good sickness that gets more patience, and more humility, it
is a good lo^se that makes us grow less worldly minded, and more humble by it,
all other things, are vanity in comparison, and that grace that we get by the
loss of them is well gained, grace is glory, and the more we grow in grace,
the more we grow in glory. Therefore I bese^ch you labor to thrive that way,
to grow up heavenward, daily more and more, in our disposition. Beloved, the
more grace we get, the more glory, and the more like we are to Christ, and to
God, the more we adorn our profession, and the more we shame Satan, and his
instruments, and stop their mouths; the more duties come off naturally and
sweetly from us, without constraint, it is good for us to be grown
Christians, that we need not be cumbred with corruptions, the more we grow,
the more nimble and cheerful, and voluntary we shall be in duty, we shall
partake more of that annoynting that ma^es us nimble in Gods service: There is
nothing in the world so glorious as a grown Christian; therefore let us be in
love with the state of Christianity, especially with grown Christians, of all
things, Christians compared to the best things.
he is compared with the best; if he be a house, he is a temple; if he be a
plant, he is a Cedar growing up; if he be a flower, he is a Lilly rising, and
growing fresher; if he be a stone, he is a pearl he grows in estimation, and
use more and more. Beloved if we had spiritual eyes to see the state of a
Christian, of a grown Christian especially we would labor above all things
to thrive in this way, have we not many works to do? have we not many enemies
to resist? have we not many graces to perfect? are we not to dye, and to
appear before God? are we not to enjoy the blessings of God purely, and do
not these things require a great deal of strength of grace? oh they do;
therefore labor above all things in the world to behold Gods love in Christ,
and to behold Christ, that by this sight we may grow from glory to glory.

And this will make us willing to dye, what makes a man willing to dye, but
when he knows he shall go from glory to greater glory, after death is the
perfection of glory, then we are glorious indeed, when we are in heaven, a
weak sight here by faith changes us, but a strong sight when we shall see
face to face perfectly changes us, then we shall be like him, when we shall
see him face to face.

A wicked man cannot desire death, A ^icked man cannot desire heaven.
he cannot desire heaven it self, why? because heaven is the perfection of
grace, glory is, but grace he loves not. Therefore it is a certain evidence of
future glory, for a man to love grace, and to grow, I say such a man is willing
to dye, a wicked man that hates grace, that loves not Christ in his Image, in
his children, or in his truth, he hates glory that is the perfection of grace,
for peace, and joy, and comfort, they are but those things that issue from
grace, and spring from grace, grace is the ^hiefe part of heaven, the
perfection of the Image of God the perfection of all the powers, to be like
Christ, but for peace, and comfort that springs from it, a wicked man loves
peace and quiet, but to have his nature altered he loves not that, and if he
love not grace how can he love glory, there is no man but a Christian, that
loves heaven. We are ready to drop away daily, now to be in a state unchanged,
it is a fearful thing, unless we be changed by the Spirit of God, we shall
be afraid to dye, we cannot desire to be in heaven: the v^ry heaven of heavens
is the perfection of grace, to see God to be all in all, and by the sight of
God to be transformed into his likeness, it is the chief thing in heaven,
therefore I beseech you let us labor more and more, to grow in grace, set
Christ before us. Let me add this one thing, make use of our patterns among
us, Christ is now in heaven, but there will be the Spirit of Christ in his
children to the end of the world, and grace is sweetly convayed from those
that we live amongst we grow up in grace by growing in a holy communion one
with another, Christ will kindle lights in every generation, therefore let us
labor to have the spirit of those we live with given to us, in conversing, to
be like Christ in his m^mbers, to love the Image of Christ in his children, and
to converse with them, to be altered into their likeness, this will change us
to the glorious likeness of Christ more and more.

Those that care not what company they keep those that despise the Image of
Christ in those among whom they live, can they grow in grace?

We shall give account of all the good examples we have had, Account must be
giv^n for examples.
does God kindle lights for nothing? we should glorify God for the Sun and
Moon, and Stars, and other creatures, is not a Christian more glorious than
all the creatures in the world? we should glorify God for grace in Christians,
and labor to be transformed to them that we may grow the liker to Christ, that
we may grow more and more glorious, I speak this to advance the Communion of
Saints more and more, as we desire to partake more and more of this grace, and
to grow from glory to glory.

To bear the reproach of Christ.
by little and little, by degrees to perfect glory of body and soul, and
condition in Heaven to be like Christ, let this make us be content to be vile
for Christ in this world as David said, when he was scorned, I will be yet ^ore
vile, do you think, I think much to show my self thus, for the honor of
God, when Michall scoffed, I will be more vile. Let us be content to go out
of the camp, and bear the reproach of Christ, bear the reproach of Religion,
let the world scorn us, for the profession of Religion, God is bringing us
from glory to glory, till he bring us to perfect glory, and shall we suffer
nothing for him? let us be content to be more vile, and to bear the reproach
of Religion, the very worst thing in Religion, the reproach of Christ, as Moses
made a wise choice, it is better then the treasures of Egypt, the most
excellent things in the world, are not so good as the worst thing in Religion,
because reproach ends with assurance of comfort, that God will take away that,
and give us glory after: Therefore let us not be discouraged from a Christian
course but go through good report, and bad report, break through al, to finish
our course with joy, as Saint Paul speaks of himself.

Use 7.
And does God bring us from glory to glory, til he have brought us to perfection
of glory, To be thankful for glory beforehand
then I be^eech you, let us before hand be thankful to God, as we see in the
Epistles of blessed Saint Paul. and Peter: Blessed be God, the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that has begotten us to an inheritance immortal,
undefiled, reserved in Heaven, says Saint Peter, and so Saint Paul, let us
begin the employment of Heaven before hand: for why does God discover to us,
that he will bring us to glory, why does he discover it to our faith, that
excellent state? that we might begin Heaven on earth, as much as might be,
and how shall we do that? by the employment of Heaven, what is that? Holy,
holy, holy Lord God of Hosts. There is nothing but magnifying, and glorifying
of God, there shall be no need of Prayer, there are praises always, and so much
as we are in the praises of God, and glorifying of God for his mercy, and love
in Christ, so much we are in Heaven before our time: I beseech you, therefore
be stirred up in consideration of this, that we are leading on by degrees,
from glory to glory, till we come to perfection, let us even give God the
praise of all before hand: for it is as sure as if we had it: For one way how
things to come, are present is by faith. Glory to come is present two or three
ways already, that may stir us up to glorify God before hand.

The glory to come, is In our head.
now he has taken Heaven for us.

And in regard of faith, that is the evidence of By Faith.
to present things to come as present, to faith, glory to come is present,
present in Christ, and we are part of Christ, Christ mystical, and members,
and we in our head, are in Heaven already, and sit there, and to faith, that
makes things present that are to come, we are in heaven already.

In the first fruits.
the first fruits of the Spirit, we have grace which is glory, the beginnings
of glory, we have the first fruits and earnest: Now, an earnest is never taken
away, but is made up by the bargain with the rest, so the earnest of the
Spirit of God, the first fruits, of peace, and joy, of comfort and liberty, to
the throne of grace, these are the beginnings of Heaven, therefore be much in
praising God, Oh that we could be so, if we could get into a frame and
disposition to bless God, we could never be miserable, no not in the greatest
afflictions: for thankfulness has joy always, when a man is joyful, he can
never be miserable, for joy inlargeth the soul, when is a man most joyful?
but in a state of thankfulness, and what makes us thankful so much as to
consider the wonderful things that are reserved in another world, the glory
that God is leading us to by little and little, from glory to glory, till we
be perfect.

Even as by the Spirit of the Lord.


As, here is taken according to the phrase in the Greek, and there is the like
word in the Hebrew, it signifies likeness, and similitude sometimes, and
sometimes otherwise, it is not here meant as if we were like the Spirit of the
Lord, but this change is wrought even as by the Spirit of the Lord, that is, it
is so excellent, and so strong that you may know that it is done by none but
the Spirit of God.

Again, As by the Spirit of the Lord, that is, so far as the Spirit of the
Lord changes us, it implies those two things, that is, it is done by the
power of the Spirit, that we may know it is done by the Spirit of the Lord, and
then as by him and no further, for we no further shine then he enlighteneth us,
as the air, it is no further light, then the Sun shines into it, so we have no
more glory, strength, comfort, and peace, or any thing gracious, and glorious,
then the Spirit of God shines into us: Therefore he says, As by the Spirit of
the Lord. It is so glorious, and excellent, and so far forth as he does it,
as by the Spirit of the Lord, so he expresses the meaning of that phrase.

Now you see here, the Doctrine is clear, that all that I have spoken of
before, comes from the Spirit of the Lord, and from no other cause.

The beholding, the transforming, the degrees of transforming, from glory to
glory, the taking away of the veil, all is from the Spirit of the Lord: To go
over the particulars,

The Holy Ghost does open our eyes, to behold the glory of the Lord, and
therefore he is called the Spirit of illumination. The Holy Ghost takes away
the veil of ignorance, and unbeleife, and thereupon he is called the Spirit
of Revelation. The Holy Ghost upon revealing the love of God to us in Christ
and the love of Christ to us, and illuminating our understandings, to see these
things, he breeds love to God again, showing the love of God to us, and
thereupon he is called the Spirit of Love, now when Gods love is shed into us
by the Spirit of illumination, and Revelation, then we are changed according to
the Image of Christ, and thereupon the Holy Ghost, from the working of a
change, is called the Spirit of sanctification, because he is not only the
holy temple of that blessed Person, but he makes us holy, and because this
change is a glorious change, a change from one degree of grace to another, till
we come to be perfect in Heaven, hereupon it is called a Spirit of glory, as
Saint ^eter says, the spirit of glory rests on you, that is, the Spirit of
peace, of love, of comfort, of joy, etc. The Spirit in regard of this blessed
attribute, working all these, he is called the Spirit of glory; the Spirit has
diverse names, according to the diverse operations he works in the Saints,
and People of God, as here the Spirit of Illumination, of Revelation, of love,
of sanctification, of glory, all is by the Spirit; whatsoever is wrought in
man, it is by the Spirit; all comes from the Father as the Fountain, and
through the Son as Mediator, but whatsoever is wrought it is by the Holy
Ghost in us, which is the substantial vigor in the Trinity; all the vigor,
and operation in the Trinity upon the creature, it is by the Holy Ghost, the
third person. As in the creation, the Spirit moved upon the waters, and
mooving there, and brooding on them, framed the whole module of the creatures,
all were framed by the Holy Ghost, so the Holy Ghost upon the water of our
souls frames the new creature, frames all this change, from glory to glory,
all is by the Holy Spirit: Therefore it is here in the passive term, We are
changed from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord, so in the chain of
Salvation, you have passive words in them all: Whom God foreknew he chose, and
whom he chose, he justified, and whom he justified, he glorified, all because
they come from God, and the Spirit of God, so here we are transformed from
glory to glory, all is by the Spirit of God, the third person, for beloved even
as from God toward us all things come through the Son by the Spirit, so back
again, all things from us to God, must come by the Spirit, and through Christ,
we do all by the Spirit, as all things are wrought in us by the Spirit. God
gives us the Spirit of Prayer, and supplication, and the Spirit of
Sanctification; and we pray in the Spirit, and work in the Spirit, and walk
in the Spirit, we do all in the Spirit, to show that the Spirit does all in
all, in this new creature, and work of Sanctification, it is by no less then
the Spirit of the Lord For beloved, as it was God that redeemed us, so it is
God that must change us: as it was God that wrought our Salvation, and
reconciled us, no l^sse person could do it, so it must be God that must
persuade us of that glorious work, and fit us for it by his holy Spirit, it is
God that must knit us to our head Christ, and then by little and little
transform us to that blessed condition, The work^ of the whole Trinity in man's
salvation.
that Christ has purchased for us; God the Son does the one, and God the
Spirit does the other, you have all the three persons in this place, for we
see the glory of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, shining in lesus
Christ. Christ is the Image, according to which we are changed, the Spirit is
he that changes us, according to that Image, God shows his mercy in Christ,
we knowing, and apprehending the mercy of God in Christ by the Spirit, are
changed by that Spirit, from glory to glory, so that the blessed Trinity, as
they have a perfect unity in themselves, in nature, for they are all one God,
so they have a most perfect unity in their love, and care, and respect to
mankind, we cannot want the work of any one of them all, their work is for
the good of mankind. The Father in his wisdom decreed, and laid the
foundation, how mercy and justice might be reconciled in the death of the
mediator, Christ wrought our Salvation, the Holy Ghost assures us of it, and
knits us to Christ, and changes and fits us to be members of so glorious a
head, and so translates, and transformes us more and more, from glory to glory.

It is a comfortable consideration to see how our salvation, and our fitting
for salvation, till we be put in full possession of it stands upon the unity
of the three glorious persons in the Trinity, that all join in one for the
making of man happy.

I will name two or three Doctrines, before I come to that which I mean to
dwell on:

As first that,

The Spirit comes from Christ. Doct.


It is said here, By the Spirit of the Lord, that is, of Christ, Because Christ
does spirare, as well as the Father: the Father does spirare, and the Son does
breath, the Holy Ghost proceeds by way of spiration from both; therefore the
Spirit is not only the Spirit of the Father, but of the Son, as we see here,
The Spirit of the Lord. Christ sends the Spirit, as well as the Father, I will
send you the Comforter, The Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son,
and he does report to us the love of the Father, and of the Son, and
therefore, 2 Cor. 13. The shut^ing up of the Chapter, The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the love of God the Father, and the communion of the Holy Ghost,
etc. As the Holy Ghost has communion in proceeding from the Father and the
Son, and knows the secrets of both, so he reveals them to us, the love of
God the Father, and the Son, and the communion of the the Holy Ghost, so, the
Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son, as well as from the Father, he is called
here the Spirit of the Lord.

Then again, the Spirit is a distinct person from Christ, it is said before,
The Lord is that Spirit, that might trouble men how to know that The Lord is
that Spirit, men might think that Christ is all one with the Spirit, No; here
the Spirit is said to be the Spirit of the Lord, he means, he is another
distinct person from Christ, and the Spirit is God as well as Christ, because
the Spirit has the operations of God attributed to him, to change and
transfrome, and make new, we are changed into the same Image from glory to
glory, Even as by the Spirit of the Lord, creation, and renovation of all new,
is from an Almighty power, all the power in Heaven and earth cannot make that
that was not to be, especially that that was contrary and opposite to be, now
for a man in opposition, and enmity to Religion, to be changed to a better
Image, to the Image of Christ, it argues an Almighty power, these Doctrinall
points I do but only touch, I come to that that I judge more useful, that
is, that

What soever ^ good in us it comes from the Spirit of God. Doct.


What need I stand upon reasons, whatsoever is above nature, it must come from
Gods Spirit, the Spirit is the Author of all things above nature, grace
whereby we are like Christ, it is above nature, therefore it must be by the
Spirit of God.

Besides, that which rises of nothing, and is opposite, and has Satan to
oppose it, it must have an Almighty power to work it. Therefore whosoever
works any thing, that is supernaturally good in us, he must be above the
devil, we cannot so much as call Jesus, with a feeling, but by the Spirit of
God; we cannot think a good thought, all is by the Spirit whatsoever is
gracious, and comfortable in us. I should be overtroublesome to you, to be
much in so clear a common argument as this is, therefore I will hasten to make
some use of it.

Not to rest too much in outward performances.
when you look to have any grace or comfort wrought, shut out of your hearts
too much relying upon any outward thing, think not that education can make a
man good, or plodding can make a man good in bodily exercise, in hearing much,
in conferring much, in custom or education or any pains of our own, these
are things that the Spirit will be effectual in, if we use them as we should,
but without the Spirit what are they^ nay, what is the body of Christ without
the Spirit? The flesh prositeth nothing, what is the Sacrament, and the Word,
dead things without the Spirit of the Lord, nothing can work upon the soul,
no outward thing in the world, but the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of God
works upon the soul by the means of grace, by gracious habits and qualities
wrought: for he does not work upon the soul immediately, before he alter and
change the soul, the Spirit works upon the s^ule by altering, and changing of
it, and when it has altered the soul, then it joins with the soul, and
alters and changes it according to the Image of Christ, more and more still.

I beseech you in your daily practice all learn this, that you trust not too
much to any outward performance, or task, to make Idols of outward things,
people when they would change their dispositions, and be better, they take a
great deal of p^ines in hearing, and reading, and praying, The Spirit quickens
all ordinances.
all these are things necessary, but they are dead things without the Spirit of
Christ; therefore in the use of all those outward things, whatsoever they be,
look up to christ, that is, the quickening Spirit, that sends the Spirit into
our hearts, the Spirit must enliven and give vigor to all these things, and
then somewhat will be done in religion, in hearing, and reading, and praying,
and receiving the Sacrament; Therefore in all these look to the Spirit first;
he labors in vain that relieth not wholly upon the Spirit of God, that
trusts not to a higher strength than his own, it must be a higher strength
than our own, that must work any good in our souls, either grace, or
comfort, or peace, and therefore in the use of all things, as the proverb is,
oculos, ad coelum, etc. let the eye be to heaven, when the hand is at the
stern at the same time, and then we shall be transformed, and changed by the
Spirit of God. Know that in all means always the spirit is the principle
efficient blessing, cause of all, and therefore before we set upon any thing
that is good, The Word and Spirit compared to the blood and arterie^.
wherein we look for any spiritual good, desire God by his holy Spirit that
hewould ^loath what shall be said; words are wind without the Spirit, the
Spirit must go with the ordinances, as the Arteries go together with the
Veins. You know in the Veins in the body there are Arteries that go with
them, they convey the spirits, the veins convey the blood, that is a dull
thing without the Spirits of it self, if there were no Spirits in the
Arteries, what would the blood in the veins be, nothing but a heavy
uncomfortable humor, but the Arteries that come from the heart, the fountain
of life, being joined, and conveying the spirits, they quicken the blood that
comes from the Liver, so the veins and arteries join together to make the
blood cheerful: The Word and truth of God are like the blood in the veins,
there is a great deal of matter in them, but there is no life at all, there
must the Spirit go along with them, to give life and quickening to the Word, to
cloth those divine truths with the Spirit, and then it works wonders, not
else: Paul spoke to Lydia Ast. 16. but the holy Ghost opened her heart, the
Spirit has the key of the heart to unlocke, and open the heart, we speak to
the outward man, but except the inward man be opened by the Spirit of God and
unlocked, all is to no purpose, therefore let us pray for the Spirit of this
changing, all is by the Spirit of the Lord.

It is in mystical Christ, The Spirit in Christ, natural and mystical.
even as it was in natural Christ, all his grace was from the holy Ghost as
man: for though he were conceived of the holy Ghost, he was anointed by the
h^ly Ghost, he was sealed by the holy Ghost, he was lead by the holy Ghost into
the wilderness, he offered himself by the Spirit, he was raised by the
Spirit, he was full of the Spirit. As it was in Christ natural, so it is in
Christ mystical, that is, in the Church, all is by the Spirit: as he was
conceived in the womb by the Spirit, so we are conceived to be Christians by
the Spirit, the same Spirit that sanctified him sanctifies us: but first the
Spirit by way of Union sanctifies us, by knitting us to him the head of all,
and then unction comes after union, annoynting after union, then the Spirit
when he has knit us to Christ, works the same annoynting that he did in
Christ. Therefore we are called Christians of Christ not only partakers of the
naked name, but of the annoynting of Christ, that annoynting that runs down
the head of our spiritual Aaron, to the skirts, to every poor Christian. All
change, all comfort, all peace, is from the Spirit of Christ, therefore give
him the glory of all, if we Find any comfort in any truth, it comes not from
us, but from his Spirit, and we must go upward to him again, as all descends
from heaven, from the Father of lights, and from the Spirit of God, so all must
ascend again, yield him the praise of all. And one work of the Spirit is to
carry our souls up: for the Spirit as it comes from heaven to change us, so it
carries us up again to view, and to imitate Christ, to be where Christ is, as
water when it is to be carried up, it is carried as high as the spring head,
from whence it came, so the Spirit coming from Christ, it never leaves
changing and altering of us, till it have carried us to Christ again,
therefore as it is the work of the Spirit to carry us to Christ, so let us
desire it may carry us before hand, for the good work begun in us, in
thankfulness that we may begin heaven upon earth, all is from the Spirit of
Christ.

A man now in the state of grace must look for nothing from himself, In the
state of grace we must look for nothing from our selves.
for as we are saved altogether out of our selves by Christ the mediator, so
the fitting for that glorious S^lvation, that we have purchased by Christ, it
is by the Spirit, the working of our salvation is by God, and the assurance of
it to our souls, is by the holy Ghost, by the witness of God sealed to us,
and the fitting and preparing, and changing, and sanctifying of us it is by the
holy Ghost; all is out of us, in the covenant of grace, wherein God is a
gracious Father in Christ, all is out of us in regard of the spring. The work
indeed is terminated in us, the Spirit of God alters our understanding, will,
and affections, but the spring is out of us, as in Paradise those four
streams that watered Paradise, that run through it, yet the head of them was
out of Paradise, in another part of the world, so though the work of the holy
Ghost, the streams of the Spirit run through the soul, and water it, yet
the spring of those graces, the holy Ghost is out of us, and Christ the root
of Salvation is out of us, for God in the covenant of grace will not trust us,
as in Adam God trusted us with grace, he had grace in his own keeping, if he
would he might have stood, he had liberty of will, but God saw we were all ill
husbands, of grace and goodness, that he would not trust us again, therefore
he trusted God-man, the second Adam, with grace, and he sends his Spirit into
us, and conveyes grace from glory to glory, by degrees, and all by the Spirit
of the Lord.

And in the next place, this point of doctrine should mervailously comfort, and
stay us, and direct us.

Comfort in want of goodness in us.
who expects any thing from a barren wilderness? our hearts are such God
knows it well enough, there is no goodness in us, no more than there is
moisture in a stone or a rock, therefore he looks that we should beg the
Spirit of him, and depend upon him for the Spirit of his Son, to open our
eyes with the Spirit of illumination, to reveal his love to us, and then to
sanctify us, and to work us more and more to glory, and to work out all
corruption by little and little, he expects that we should depend upon him for
the Spirit in all things we do.

Therefore Christians are much to blame, they think to work, and to hew out
of their own nature the love of God, and keep a do with their own hearts,
as if they had a principle of grace in themselves as of themselves, and they
may long enough work that way, but that is not the way, but acknowledgement
that in our selves as of our selves (as Saint Paul says) we cannot do any
thing, we cannot so much by all the power in the world as think a good
thought: If we should live a thousand years, there cannot rise out of our
hearts a good desire of our selves, all is out of us from the Spirit of the
Lord: Now thereupon we must not look for it in our selves, but go to God for
his holy Spirit, go to Christ for his Spirit (for the Spirit proceeds from
them both) that he would enlighten us, and sanctify us as I showed in
particular before, we must not therefore presume that we can do any thing of
our selves, and so we must not despair, shall we despair when once we
believe in Christ, when we have abundance of grace, and Spirit in our head
Christ? and he can derive his Spirit as he pleases, he gives the Spirit by
degrees as he pleases, for he is a voluntary head to dispense it as he will,
he is not a natural head, who shall despair when he is in Christ, who is
complete? and in him we receive grace for grace, grace answerable for grace
in him.

Let none presume that he can do any thing of himself: When men trust their
own strength they fall.
for you see how God suffered holy men to miscarry: it was folly in this case
in Peter, to presume of his own strength, Though all forsook Christ, yet
would not he, he presumed upon his own strength, God left him to himself, you
see how foulely he fell, so it is with us all, when we presume upon the
strength of our nature and parts. We must not come to this holy place, in the
strength of our own wit, and parts, but come with a desire that the Spirit may
join with his ordinances, and make them efficatious for our change, all change
is by the Spirit of the Lord, nothing works above his own sphere: It is above
the power of nature to work any thing supernatural; therefore if we will
profit by the Word, come not with presumptuous spirits, but lift up our hearts
to God that his Spirit may cloth the ministry with vigor and power, that he
may convey holy truths into our hearts, and make them, effectu^ll, for the
changing of the inward, and of the outward man, then we come as we should, all
is by the Spirit of the Lord, blessing all means whatsoever, without which all
means are dead, therefore we must open as that flower that opens and shuts as
the Sun shines on it, so must we as Christ shines on us, and we ebb and
flow as he flows upon us, we shine or are dark, as he shines on us, as the
air is no longer light than the sun shines, so we are no longer lightsome,
and open, and flow, and are carried to any thing, than Christ by his Spirit
flows on us: for we do what we do, but we are patients first to receive that
power from the Spirit, we hear, and do good works, but the activity, and
power and strength comes all from the Spirit of God.

Whether we have the Spirit.
whether we have the holy Ghost, which is called here the Spirit of the Lord?

I will not go out of It opens the eyes of the soul.
if a man have the Spirit of God, it opens the eyes of his soul, to see in
the glass of the Word, the face of God shining on him in Christ, if a man have
the Spirit he sees God as a Father, by the Spirit of ^illumination.

It discovers Gods love.
thou have the Spirit of love, Gods Spirit manifests the hidden love of God
(that was hid in the breast of God) to his soul: for the Spirit of God
searches the breast of God, and the secret of God, and it searches my heart:
Now he that has the Spirit of God, knows the love of God in Christ, to him it
reveals the love of God, the height, and breadth, and depth of it, to our
Spirits as in the text, we see the gracious love of God in Christ and then we
love him again.

And thereupon where It sanctifies.
it is not only a Spirit of illumination, but of sanctification, where he
dwells he sanctifies the house, and makes it a Temple, it is efficatious,
where the Spirit is, it will work, it is like the wind, where it is it will
stir, it will move, where it moves not it is not at all, where the Spirit
alters not the condition from bad to good, and from good to better, suspect
that it is not there, at least it will move, as the pulses will have a drawing
in, and a sending out, by stirring, so there will be some operation of the
Spirit that is discernable to a judicious eye, always some stirring, where the
Spirit of God is.

The Papists slander us willingly, Slander of the Papists.
I think against many of their consciences that understand any things Oh say
they, we will have Christians like satan, to appear as Angels of light and
blackamores in white garments, that have their teeth white, and nothing else,
so your Christians put on the garment of Christ's righteousness, let them put
on that, and then though they be not changed a whit, it is no matter, who
teaches thus? we teach out of this Text, that:

First of all, the Spirit of God opens our eyes, he takes off the veil, and
then we see the glory of Gods mercy in Christ, pardoning our sins, for the
righteousneffe, and obedience of Christ, and then that love warmes our hearts,
so that it changes our hearts by the Spirit, from one degree of grace to
another there is a changing power that goes with the love of Christ, and with
the mercy of God in Christ, this (...) Doctrine, the same Spirit that
justifies us by applying to us the obedience of Christ, the same Spirit
sanctifyeth us, therefore their allegations, and objections are to no purpose,
we see here the Spirit of the Lord changes us.

And so for your common Atheistical professors, that profess themselves
Christians, they partake of the name, but not of the annoynting of Christ, true
Christians that are anointed with the Spirit of Christ, it will enforce a
change. Beloved, we cannot behold the Sun, but we must be enlightened, we
cannot behold the Sun of righteousness but we shall be changed, and
enlightened. The eye of faith, though we think not of it, though it look upon
Christ for justification, and forgiveness of sins, yet notwithstanding at
the same time incensibly there is an alteration of the soul, if a man look up
for other ends, yet at the same time there is an enlightening by the Sun, so
at the same time that we look upon the mercy of God in Christ, at the same
time there is a glory shines upon us, and we are altered and changed, though we
think not of it, at the very instant that we apprehend justification and
forgiveness of sins, in the mercy of God in Christ, at the same instant
there is a glory put upon the soul, we cannot have commerse with the God of
glory, but we shall be glorious: Therefore, there is no man that has any thing
to do with God, that has not some glory put into his soul, whatsoever he is.

Therefore, let no man think he has any thing to do in Religion, till he
find the work of the Spirit altering and changing him: He has the title of
Holy Spirit, from the blessed work of sanct^^ying an^ changing, he (...)

And when hehath changed He promotes s^nctification.
he governes and guides us from glory to glory, where the Holy Ghost is,
therefore he promotes the work of grace begun, he does not only move us but
promove, he promotes the work begun, therefore those that have the Spirit of
God, they rest in no degree of grace, but grow from grace to grace, from
knowledge to knowledge from faith to faith, till they come to that measure of
perfection that God has appointed them in Christ, those therefore that set up
their staff, and will go no further, that think all is well, they have not
the Spirit of God for the Spirit stirs up to grow from one degree of grace to
another, to add grace to grace, and to enter further and further into the
Kingdom of grace, and to come nearer to glory still.

The Spirit a Counselor.
and guides us, as it is Romans 8. he is a Tutor to us, where the holy Ghost is
in any body, it is as a counselor, Guide me by thy counsel, till thou bring
me to glory: It is a Tutor, as Noblemens children, they have their Tutors, so
Gods children are nobly borne, they have their Tutor, and Counselor, as well
as Angels to attend them, they have the Spirit of God to tell them, this do,
and that do, and here you have done ill, they have a voice behind them, to
teach them in particular wherein they have done amiss, they that have the
Spirit, find such a sweet operation of the Spirit, the Spirit is a teacher,
and a counselor to them, they that are acquainted wi^h the government of Gods
Spirit, they find i checking them presently when they do ill, (...) grieves
them when they grieve the Spirit, so it teach^th them in particular ^usinesses,
do this, do not that. Thus we may know if we have the Spirit, if it guide
and govern us from glory to glory, till we come to per^ection, where the
Spirit is all in all in heaven.

Another evidence is It abides.
because it does not only change us at the first, but it leads us from glory
to glory, as Saint Augustine says, wicked men have the Spirit of God knocking,
and he would saine enter, as the wickedest man, when he hears holy truths
discovered, the Spirit of God knockes at his heart, and he finds sweet
motions in his poysonfull rebellious nature, but this is but the spirit
knocking, that would have entrance, but Gods children have the spirit entering,
and dwelling, and resting there. The spirit of God rests on Christ, and it
rests on Christ's members, how can it change them, and having done so, guide and
govern them from glory to glory, but he must rest there, he must take up his
lodging and residence, a Christian is not an ordinary house, but a Temple, he
is not an ordinary man, but a King, he is not an ordinary stone, but a Pearl,
he is not an ordinary tree, but a Cedar, he is an excellent person, and
therefore the Spirit of God delights to dwell in him: As the excellency of the
body is from the soul, so the excellency of the soul is from the spirit
dwelling in him. However in particular operations, the spirit suspends his acts
of comfor^ing and guiding, to humble them for their presumption, always the Holy
Ghost is in the heart though he be hid in a corner of the heart, I will send
you the Comforter, and he shall abide with you for ever, says Christ, thus we
see how we may try ourselves, whether we have the Spirit of the Lord o^ no: If
we have not the Spirit, we are none of his, we are none of Christ's, Romans 8.
13. And then whose are we, if we be none of Christ's? Do but think of that,
therefore if we would not be men, not having the Spirit, that is, men dead,
lead with a worse spirit then our own, let us labor to know whether we have the
Spirit of Christ or no? Let us see what change there is to the likeness of
Christ: for the Spirit, as it comes from the Lord* so it makes us like the
Lord, and we It changes by reasons from Christ
by reasons and considerations from Christ, and from the love of God in Christ,
because the spirit takes from Christ whatsoever he has; He shall take of
mine, etc. that is the comfort, he comforts the soul with, he fetches them
from his death and bloodshed, and the love of God in him, that he takes of
Christ, so there is a change wrought is us, by reasons fetched from the love of
God in Christ, those conforming reasons, God has given his Son, and Christ
has given himself, and we feel the love of God by the Spirit, if the Spirit
work any grace, or comfort by considerations fetched from Christ, this is the
true Spirit, the change and alteration that it works in us, is according to
the Image of Christ, that we may be like Christ so Christ is the beginning and
the end, and Christ is all, he works from Christ, and to Christ. Let us
examine therefore, if we have the Spirit of Christ, whether it change us, and
examine, if we have the Spirit, from what reasons and grounds it changes us,
and then we may upon some comfortable grounds say we have the Spirit indeed.

If we have not the Spirit, how shall we come to have the Spirit? what means
must we use to get it?

In a word, How to get the Spirit.
this Chapter excellently sets out By hearing the Gospel.
for the opening of the love of God in Christ, which is the Gospel, is the
Mynistery of the Spirit, why? because God has joined the Spirit with the
publishing, and opening of these mysteries, therefore study the Gospel, and
hear unfolded divine Evangelicall truths, the more we hear of the sweet
love of God in Christ, the more the Spirit flows into the soul together with
it, the Spirit goes together with the Doctrine of the Gospel; which is called
the ministry of the Spirit: Therefore let us delight in hearing Evangelicall
points, the love of God opened in Christ.

A civil moral man, Oh he is taken mightily, if he hear a moral witty
pollitique discourse that touches him, and he is in his element then. What is
this to the Gospel? this has its use, Oh but the Spirit goes with the opening
of the Gospel, with Evangelicall points, and if our hearts were ever seasoned
with the love of God, these points of Christ, and the benefits and privileges
by Christ, they will affect us more then any other things in the world, that is
one means to studdy the Gospel, and to hear the truths of the Gospel opened
where the Spirit works.

Again, the Spirit of In holy Communion.
the Holy Ghost fell upon them in the Acts, when they were gathered together;
and surely we never find sweeter motions of the Spirit then now, when we are
gathered at such times, about holy business, as this day we never find the
Spirit more effectual, to alter, and change our souls, then at such times:
Where two or three are gathered together, I will be in the midst of you, but by
the Spirit, says Christ, warming, and altering, and changing the soul: For
God inf^seth al grace in communion, as we are members of the body mystical:
those that have ^ullen spirits, a spirit of separation, that scorn all
meetings, they are carried with the spirit of the devil, and of the world,
they know not what belongs to the things of God. It is the mee^e spirit that
subjects it self to the Ordinance of God, the Holy Ghost falls usually upon
men when they are in holy Communion.

And in Luke 11. there God will give the Holy Ghost to all that beg Prayer.
pray for the holy Ghost as the most excellent thing in the world, he shall be
given to them that beg him, as if he should say, there is nothing greater
then that, and God will give him to them that ask him: Therefore, come to God,
and in any thing we have to do, empty our selves, and beg the Spirit: for the
more a man empties him, of his own confidence, in regard of holy performance
of duties, the more we will desire to be filled with the fulness of the
Spirit, and this sense of our own emptines will force prayer.

Therefore, know that of our selves we can do nothing holily, that may
further our reckoning, but by the Spirit, do all things therefore in a sense
of our own emptiness, and beg the Spirit.

As likewise when we are framed by the Spirit to obedience; those that obey
the motions of the Spirit, the Spirit joins more and more closely with their
souls, God gives his Spirit to them that obey him, those that obey the first
motions of the Spirit, they have further degrees: What is the reason that men
have no more Spirit in the Ordinances? The holy Ghost knockes at their hearts,
and would feign have entrance, and they resist it, as Stephen says, now the
Holy Ghost is willing to enter upon the soul, but he is resisted; therefore if
you will have him more and more, let us open our souls, that the King of glory
may come in; the Spirit is willing to enter, especially in holy assemblies;
says Saint John, I was on the Lords day, I was in the Spirit, that is, as if
he were drowned in the Spirit on the Lords day: when we are about holy
exercises, we are never more in the Spirit than then, let us open our souls to
the Spirit, and then we shall find the Spirit joining with our souls, the
Spirit is more willing to save us, and to sanctify us, then we are to
entertain him, Oh that we were willing to entertain the sweet motions of the
Spirit? our natures would not be so defiled, and we so uncomfortable as we are:
there are none of us all, but we find comfortable motions in holy exercises,
thus we may get the Spirit of the Lord, that does all, that illuminates, and
sanctifies, and rules, and rests in us.

To give the Spirit of God his d^e.
the Holy Ghost his due, since we have all by the Spirit, let us learn to
give the Spirit his due, and learn how to make use of the work of the Spirit,
there are several works of the Spirit, you see here what the Spirit does, We
all, the Spirit unites us together, it is a Spirit of union, it knits all
together by one faith to God, all meet in God the Father reconciled, and we
all are joined together by love, wrought by the Spirit, With open face, who
takes away the veil? we are all vayled by nature, the Spirit takes away the
veil from our eyes, and from the truth, what is the reason the Gospel is so
obscure? the Spirit takes not away the veil, it teaches not by the Ministry,
or else it takes not away the veil from the eyes, the Spirit takes away the
scales from our eyes, and the Spirit in the ministry takes away the obscurity
of the Scriptures, all those that we call graces, the free gifts, the
ministerial gifts, they are the gifts and the graces of the Spirit, and they
are for the graces of the Spirit, skill in tongues, and in the Scriptures, and
in other learning, are given to men that they may take away the veil from the
the Scriptures, that they may be lightsome, and then when the Spirit is given,
he takes away the veil from the soul by his own work, and then with open
face, we behold the glory of the Lord: What does open our eyes to see, when the
veil is taken off? the Spirit; we have no inward light nor sight, but by the
illumination of the Spirit, all light in the things, and all sight in us, it is
by the illumination of the Spirit. And then the change according to the Image
of Christ, this is altoge^her by the Spirit of Christ, it is altogether from
the holy Ghost. Christ baptiseth With the Holy Ghost, and with fi^e, and Christ
came By blood, and by water; by blood, to dye for us, and by water, by his
Spirit to change us, and purge and cleanse us: all is by the Spirit, Christ
came as well by the Spirit as by blood. This change and the graduall change
from glory to glory, all is by the Spirit; therefore we should not think
altogether of Christ, or God the Father, when we go to God in prayer, but
think of the work of the Spirit, that the holy Ghost may have his due.

Lord without thy Spirit my body is as a thing without a soul, a dead,
loathsome, stiff, unapt, carcass, that cannot stir a whit; and so my soul
without the operation of thy holy Spirit, it is a stiff, dead, unmovable
thing, and therefore by thy Spirit breath upon me, as thy holy Spirit in the
creation did lie upon the waters, and brood as it were all things there, lying
upon the waters it fashioned this goodly creature, heaven, and earth, this
Mundus, so the Spirit of God lying upon the waters of the soul, it fashions
all graces, and comforts whatsoever they are, all is wrought by the Spirit in
the new creature, as all in this glorious fabric of the world was by the
Spirit of God. Let the Spirit of God therefore have due acknowledgement, in all
things whatsoever.

And what are we to look to mainely now? the knowledge of God the Father, and
his love to us shining in Christ, all is in Christ, and if we would have any
thing wrought in us, any alteration of our natures, let us beg the Spirit
that we may have the discovery of the love of God in Christ, and the Spirit
attending upon the Gospel.

And because we have all these abundantly in these latter times, of the
Church, in the second spring of the Gospel, in the reformation of religion,
after our recovery out of Popery, there is a second spring of the Gospel, oh
belovd, how much are we beholding to God? never since the beginning of the
world was there such glorious times as we enjoy. We see how the holy Apostle
does prefer these times, before former times, when the veil was upon their
eyes, and when all was hid in ceremonies, and types, and such things among the
jews, Now says he, we behold the glory of God, and are changed by the Spirit
from glory to glory.

To conclude all, Whence the glory of times and places is.
therefore consider that the glory of the times, and the glory of places, and
persons, all is from the revelation of Christ by the Spirit, which has the
Spirit accompanying it: the more God in Christ is laid open, the more the times
and places, and persons, are excellent. What made the second temple beyond the
former? Christ came at the second temple, therefore though it were baser in it
self, yet the second Temple was more glorious than the first: what made
Bethelem that little City glorious? Christ was borne there: what makes the
heart where Christ is borne, more glorious than other folk? Christ is borne
there, Christ makes persons and places glorious. What makes the times now more
glorious than they were before Christ? what made the least in the Kingdom of
heaven, greater than John Baptist? he was greater than all that were before
him, and all that are after him, are greater than he, because his head was cut
off, he saw not the death and resurrection of Christ, and the giving of the
holy Ghost, he saw not so much of Christ, so that the revelation of Christ, and
the love of God in Christ, it is that that makes times, and persons, and places
glorious, all glorious, because the veil is taken away from our eyes, we see
Christ the King of glory in the Gospel flourishing, and the love of God
manifested, and by the Spirit of God the veil is taken away inwardly as well
as outwardly, now for a fuller discovery of Christ than in former times, Why
more are converted now than formerly.
comes the glory of the times, now there are more converted than in former
times, because the Spirit goes together with the manifestation of Christ: what
is the reason that this Kingdom is more glorious than any place beyond the
Seas? because Christ is here revealed more fully than there, the veil is taken
off, and here we see the glory of God with open face, which changes many
thousands from glory to glory, by the Spirit of God, that accompanies the
revelation of the Gospel; Is there any outward thing that advances our
Kingdom, before Turkey, or Spain? etc. No* thing, their government, and
riches, and outward things, are as much as ours if not more: the glory of
places and times are from the revelation of Christ, that has the Spirit
accompanying of it, that Spirit changes us from glory to glory, our times are
more glorious than they were a hundred years or two before, why? because we
have a double revelation of Christ, and of Antichrist; we see Christ revealed,
and the Gospel opened, and the veil taken off, we see Antichrist revealed
that has masked under the name of head of the Church, and has seduced the
world.

Now this double revelation, challenges acknowledgement of these blessed
times: what should all this do, but stir us up to know the time of our
visitation, and to thankfulness, to bless God that has reserved us for these
places, and Countries that we live in, to cast our times to be in this glorious
light of the Gospel to be borne in; what if we had been borne in those dark
Egyptian times of Popery? our lives had not been so comfortable, Now we live
under the Gospel, wherein with open face, we see the glory of the mercy of God
in Christ, the unsearchable riches of Christ opened, and discovered to us. And
together with the Gospel the ministry of the Spirit, goes the Spirit, and
those that belong to God, thousands by the blessing of God are changed from
glory to glory.

Certainly if we share in the good of the times we will have hearts to thank
God, The danger of unprofitablenesse under means.
and to walk answerably, that as we have the glorious Gospel so we will
walk gloriously, that we do not by a base and fruitless life, dishonor so
glorious a Gospel: I beseech you let us think of the times, else if we be not
the better for the glorious times, if the veil be not taken away, we are under
a fearful judgment, The god of this world has blinded our eyes, do we
live under the glorious light, and yet are dark, that we see no glory in
Christ, we see nothing in religion, but are as ready to entertain Popery as
true religion; is this the fruit of the long preaching of the Gospel, and the
veil being taken off so long? certainly the God of this world has cast the
dust of the world into our eyes, that we can see nothing but earthly things:
we are under the seal of Gods judgment, he has sealed us up to a dark
state, from darkness of judgment, to the darkness of hell without
repentance: therefore let us take heed how we live in a dull, and dead
condition, under the glorious Gospel, or else how cursed shall we be? the more
we are exalted and lifted up above other people, in the blessings of God this
way, the more we shall be cast down; Woe be to Ch^razin, etc. and Heb. 2. How
shall we escape of we ^^glect^ so great Salvation.

I beseech you let us take heed how we tri^le away our time, these precious
times and blessed opportunities, for if we labor not to get out of the state
of nature, into the state of grace, and so to be changed from glory to glory,
God in justice will curse the means we have, that ^n hearing we shall not
hear, and seeing we shall not see, and he will secret^y and insensibly harden
our hearts: it is the curse of all curses, when we are under plenty of means,
to grow worse and duller, oh take heed of Spiritual judgments above all
others, Spiritual judgments ^errable.
tremble at them, they belong to reprobates and cast-awayes* Let us labor for
hearts sencible of the mercies of God in Christ, and labor to be transformed,
and molded into this Gospel, every day more and more* That that has been
spoken shall be sufficient for this time, and for this whole Text.

FINIS.

