THE TRAITOR. A TRAGEDY, WRITTEN BY JAMES SHIRLEY. ACTED By her Majesty's
Servants.



LONDON* Printed for William Cook, and are to be sold at his Shop at Furnivals
Inne-gate in Holborne. 1635.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM CAVENDISH, Earl of New Castle, Viscount
Mansfield, Lord Boulsouer and Ogle.
My Lord,

THe Honor of your Name, and cleerenesse of Soul, which want no living
Monuments in the heart of Princes, have already made the Title of this Poem
innocent, though not the Author; who confesses his guilt of a long ambition,
by some Service to be known to you, and his boldness at last, by this rude
attempt to kiss your Lordships hands.

Fame with one breath has possessed the world with your Lordships general
knowledge, and excellent Nature, both, an ornament to your blood, and in both
you stand the rare, and justified example to our age. To the last, these cold
papers address themselves, which if (with truce to your richer contemplations)
you vouchsafe to read and smile upon, not only they shall receive a life,
beyond what the Scene exactly gave them, in the presentment, rewarded with
frequent applause, but your Lordship shall infinitely honor him, whose glory
is to be mentioned.

The humblest of your Lordships Servants,

JAMES SHIRLY.

To my Friend Master James Shirley, the Author.
FRiend, how I haste into that name? my quill
Runs fraught with my whole soul, and fears to spill
One drop before it; proud to have men know
The glory of the name thou did bestow.
And to derive Eternity thereto
From this learned Work, which Marble could not do:
Ambitious to posterity to send
For light to both, thy Traitor and thy Friend.
This, and I Have said; for Friend I stand not here
To praise, or in thy quarrel spend my ieere
On some third man, nor Court I, I profess
The humorous Reader into Gentleness:
No Friend, thou Writ'st before, thy self, and when
SHIRLEY is named, Praise is the same again.
WILL ATKINS of Grayes Inn*
THE SCENE, Florence.

The Persons.
Duke of Florence. Lorenzo, His Kinsman and Favorite. Sciarrha, Brother to
Amidea. Pisano, Lover to Oriana. Cosmo, His friend. Florio, Sciarrhas brother.
Depazzi, A creature of Lorenzos. Frederico, Noblemen. Alonzo, Petruchio,
Pisanoes Servant. Rogero, Page to Depazzi. Gentlemen. Servants.
Amidea, Sciarrhas Sister. Oriana, Beloved of Pisano. Morossa, Her Mother.
Lust. Pleasure. Furies.
THE TRAITOR.
Actus primus.
Enter Pisano and Petruchio. Pisano. Did bid him come?


Pet. I did.


Pis. Go back again,
And tell him, I am gone abroad*

Pet. He Is here Enter Cosm.
Already Sir.

Pis. Oh Cosmo!


Cos. Dear Pisano,
That I could let thee nearer, into me,
My heart counts this embrace a distance, yet,
Let us incorporate.

Pis. I was woing Cosmo,
My man, to tell thee, I was gone abroad,
Before thou came.

Cos. How Is this? your words and looks
Are strange, and teach me to infer I am
Not welcome, that on riper Counsel, you
Do wish my absence.

Pis. What for telling truth?
He thus should ha but made thee fit to see
Thy friend, thou come with expectation
To hear me talk sense, do not?

Cos. Yes.


Pis. La now!
And to discourse as I was wont, of State,
Our friendship, or of women, no such matter.

Cos. This is more wild then usual, your language
I not so clear as it was wont, it carries
Not the same even thread although some words
May knit, the sense is scatterd.

Pis. Right, right Cosmo,
The reason is, I ha straggled,
And lost my se*fe I know not where, in what
Part of the world, and would not this be shown
As well in him, to ha prepared thee now?

Cos. What humour's this Pisano, I am yet to understand?


Pis. Tounder stand? why Cosmo,
Had I not changed my Dialect and Method,
What need this tedious Apology?
That's it, I would have had thee known before,
Thou can not understand me, yet thou have
A name in Florence, for a ripe young man,
Of nimble apprehension, of a wise
And spreading observation, of whom
Already our old men do prophecy
Good, and great things, worthy thy fair dimensions.

Cos. This is an argument above the rest,
Pisano is not well; for being temperate,
He was not wont to flatter, and abuse
His friend.

Pis. Beside, there is another reason,
Thou should discover me at heart, through all
These mist, thou art in love too, and who cannot,
That feels himself the heat, but shrewdly guess
At every symptom of that Wanton Fever,
Oh Cosmo!

Cos. What misfortune can approach
Your happy love in fairest Amidea,
You have been long contracted, and have past
The tedious hope, Himen, does only wait
An opportunity to light his torch,
Which will burn gloriousat your nuptial:
Let jealous, lovers fear and feel what it is
To languish, talk away their blood, and strength*
Question their unkind stars, you have game
Before you sir.

Pis. Before me where? why do
Thou mock me Cosmo? she is not here:

Cos. It is
No pilgrimage to travel to her lip.

Pis. It Is not for you.


Cos. How sir for me? you have no
Suspicion, I can be guilty of*
A treason, to our friendship, be so just,
If malice have been busy, with my fame,
To let me know -- --

Pi. You hastily interpret,
Thy pardon I have only errd, but not
With the least scruple of thy faith, and honor
To me, thou have a noble Soul, and love me
Rather too well, I would thou were my enemy,
That we had been borne in distant climes, and never
Took cement from our Simpathies in nature.
Would we had never seen, or known each other,
This may seem strange, from him, that loves thee Cosmo,
More precious then his life.

Cos. Love me, and, wish
This separation?

Pis. I will give thee proof;
So well I love thee, nothing in the world
Thy soul does heartily affect, but I
Do love it too, does it not trouble thy
Belief? I wear not my own heart about me,
But thine exchangd, thy eyes let in my objects,
Thou hear'st for me, talk, kissest, and enjoyst
All my felicities.

Cos. What means this language?


Pis. But what is all this to thee? go to Oriana,
And bath thy lips in Rosy dew of kisses,
Renew thy eye that looks as Saturn hung
Upon the lid, take in some golden beam,
She Will dart a thousand at one glance, and if
At thy return, thou findst I have a being
In this vain world, I Will tell thee more.
Exit.
Cos. But sir, you must not part so.


Pet. Not with my good will,
I have no great ambition to be mad.

Cos. Petruchio, let me conjure thee, tell
What weight hangs on thy Masters heart? why does he
Appear so full of trouble?

Pet. Do You not guess?


Cos. Point at the cause, I cannot.


Pet. Why he loves --


Cos. The beauteous Amidea, I know that.


Pet. Some such thing was, but you are his friend, my Lord,
His soul is now devoted to Oriana,
And he will dye for her, if this Ague hold him.

Cos. Ha.


Pet. Your doublet pinch you Sir? I cannot tell;
But nere a woman in the world should make
Me hang my self, it may be for his honor,
He Will choose another death, he is about one;
For it is not possible without some cure,
He should live long, he has forgot to sleep,
And for his diet, h'as not eat this se'night
As much as would choke a Sparrow, a Fly is
An Epicure to him: Good sir, do you counsel him.
So, so, it works; Exit Cos.
This was my Lord Lorenzoes plot, and I
Ha'beene his Engine in the work, to batter
His love to Amidea, by praising
Oriana to him, he is here, my Lord.

Enter Lorenzo attended. Lor. Petruchio, where is your Lord? how moves the work?


Pet. To your own wish my Lord, he has thrown off
The thought of Amidea, and is mad
For Cosmo's Mistress, whom by your instructions
I have commended so --

Lor. My witty villain!


Pet. Cosmo is with him, to whom cunningly
I ha discovered his disease, and I
Beseech you interrupt 'em not.

Lor. This may
Have Tragical effects Petruchio:
For Cosmo, we shall prune his fortune thus,
Oriana's wealth would swell him in the S^ate,
He grows too fast already, be still ours.

Pet. My Lord, you bought my life, when you procured
My pardon from the Duke.
Exit Lor.
Enter Pisa. and Cosmo. Pis. O friend, thou can not be so merciful,
To give away such happiness, my Love
Is for some sin I have committed, thus
Transplanted, I looked rather thou should kill me,
Then give away this comfort, it is a charity
Will make thee poor, and 'twere a great deal better
That I should languish still, and dye.

Cos. While I have art to help thee? Oriana
And I were but in treaty, howsoever,
I were not worthy to be called his friend,
Whom I preferred not to a Mistress, if
You can find dispensation, to quit
With Amidea, your first love, be confident
Oriana may be won, and it were necessary
You did prepare the Mother, be not modest --

Pis. Each syllable is a blessing, hark
Petruchio.

Cos. There is an Engine leveld at my fate,
And I must arm,

Pis. Away.

Exit Pet.
Cos. This for thy comfort,
Although some complements ha past between
Me and Oriana, I am not warm
Yet in the Mothers fancy, whose power may
Assist you much, but loose no time, lets follow.

Pis. Thou miracle of friendship!

Exeunt.
Enter Duke Frederico, Florio, and Alonso. Du. Letters to us? from whom?


Al. Castruchio.


Du. The exile? whence?


Al. Sienna my good Lord,
It came enclosed within my Letter, which
Imposd my care and duty, in the swift
Delivery.

Fr. The Duke is pale oath sudden.


Du. A Palsy does possess me, ha? Lorenzo?
Our Cosen, the enemy of our life and State,
My bosom Kinsman? not too loud, the Traitor
May hear, and by escape prevent our justice.

Flo. What Traitor?


Du. Signior Alonso, come you hither,
What correspondency maintain you with this
Castruchio?

Al. None my Lord, but I am happy
In his election, to bring the first
Voice to your fafety.

Du. Most ungrateful man!
Turn Rebel? I have worn him in my blood.

Al. It Is time to purge the humor.


Du. I will doot.
Our guard, were he more precious, had he shared
Our soul, as he but borrowes of our flesh*
This action makes him nothing, had I been
In heaven, I could have lent him my eternity,
He turn conspirator? oh the fate of Princes!
But stay, this paper speaks of no particular,
He does not mention what design what plot*

Al. More providence is necessary,


Du. Right, right, good Alonso, thar't an honst man
And love us well, what is to be done?

Al. It Is best
To make his person sure, by this you may
Discover soonest who are of his faction

Du. And at our leisure study of his punishment,
Which must exceed death, every common trespass
Is so rewarded, first apply all tortures
To enforce confession, who are his confederates,.
And how they meant to murder us, then some rare
Invention to execute the Traitor,
So as he may be half a year a dying,
Will make us famed for justice.

Enter Lorenzo Depazzi. Al. He is here,
Shal's apprehend him?

Lo. Happy morning to
My gracious Sovereign.

Du. Good morrow Cooze.
Can Treason couch it self within that frame?
We ha letters for you.

Lo. Letters, these dread sir
Have no direction to me, your highness
Is only named.

Du. They will concern your reading,
Alonso now observe and watch him Florio,
Depazzi come you hither, does Lorenzo
Look like a Traitor?

Dep. How sir? a Traitor?


Du. I sir.


Dep. I sir, by my honor not I sir, I defy
Him that speaks it; I am in a fine pickle

Lor. I ha read --


Du. No blush? not tremble? read again
The substance is, that you maintain
A vigilant eye over Lorenzo, who
Has threatened with your death, his countries liberty
And other things, touching reducing of
A common wealth.

Du. I like not that.


Dep. All Is out:
A pox upon him for a Traitor, he
Has hedged meee in but I Will confess --

Du. What answer
Make you to this Lorenzo?

Lor. This o'th sudden,
Sir I must owe the title of a Traitor
To your high favors; Envy first conspired,
And malice now accuses, but what story,
Mentioned his name, that had his Princes bosom,
Without the peoples hate, it is sin enough
In some men to be great, the throng of stars
The rout, and common people of the sky,
Move still another way then the Sun does,
That guilds the creature, take your honors back,
And if you can, that purple of my veins,
Which flows in yours, and you shall leave me in
A state I sh'anot fear the great ones envy,
Nor common peoples rage, and yet perhaps
You may be credulous against me.

Du. Ha!


All. The Duke is cool.


Du. Alonzo look you prove.
Lorenzo what you say.

All. I say my Lord?
I have discovered all my knowledge sir:

Dep. stand to it --


Lo. With license of your highness, what
Can you imagine I should gain by Treason?
Admit I should be impious, as to kill you,
I am your nearest kinsman, and should forfeit
Both name and future title to the State,
By such a hasty, bloody disposition,
The rabble hate me now, how shall I then
Expect a safety? is it reformation,
Of Floence they accuse me of? suggesting
I disaffect a Monarchy, which how
Vain and ridiculous would appear in me,
Your wisdom judge, in you I live and flowrish,
What in your death can I expect, to equal
The riches I enjoy under your warm'th?
Should I for the air, and talk of a new government,
A Common wealth, loose all my certainties?
And you above 'em all, whose favors have
Fallen like the Dew upon me? have I a soul
To think the guilt of such a murder easy,
Were there no other torments? or can I
Expect the people will reward your murderer
With any thing but death, a parricide?

Al. So so the Duke's already in his circle.


Lor. But I am tame, as if I had no sense
Nor other argument to vindicate
My Loyalty, thus poisoned by a paper,
In my eternal fame, and by a slave?
Call to my brow, some one that dare accuse me,
Let him have honor, great as mine, to forfeit,
Or since your grace has taken me so near,
Your own hight, that may seal may not expect
Such a proportioned adversary, yet let him
Have name within his Country, and allow him
A Soul, sgainst which, I may engage my more,
Then equal honor, then I Will praise your justice
But let him not be one condemnd already,
A desperate exile -- is it possible
A Treason hatched in Florence, against the Duke
Should have no eyes at home to penetrate,
The growing danger but at Sienna, one
Mu t with a perspectiue discover all?
Ask this good Councellor, or these gentlemen
Whose faiths are tried, whose cares are always waking
About your person, how have I appeared
To them, that thus I should be rendered hateful,
To you and my good Country, they are virtuous
And dare not blemish a white faith, accuse
My sound heart of dishonor? sir you must
Pardon my bold defense, my virtue bleeds
By your much easiness, and I am compelld
To break all modest limits, and to waken
Your memory (if it be not to late
To say you have one,) with the story of
My fair deservings, who sir overthrw
With his designs your late ambitious brother
Hippolito, who like a Meteor threatened
A black and fatal omen?

Du. It Was Lorenzo.


Lo. Be yet as just, and say whose art directed
A countermine to check the pregnant hopes
Of Saluiati, who for his Cardinals Cappe,
In Rome was potent, and here popular?

Du. None but Lorenzo.


Dep. Admirable Traitor?


Lor. Whose service was commended when the exiles
One of whose tribe accuses me had raisd
Commotions in our Florence when the hindga
Of State did faint under the burden* and
The people sweat with their own fears, to think
The Soldier should inhabit their calm dwellings,
Who then rose up your safety, and crushd all
Their plots to air?

Du. Our dear Cozen Lorenzo.


Lor. When he that should reward, fogets the men
That purchased his security, it is virtue
To beast a merit with my services
I ha not starved your treasury, the grand
Captain Gonzales accounted to King Ferdinand,
Three hundred thousand crowns, forspies, what bills
Have I brought in for such inteligence?

Dep. I do grow hearty
All thy actions
Stand fresh before us, and confirm, thou art
Our best and dearest friend, thus we assure
Our confidence, they love us not that feed
One jealous thought of our dear Cooze Lorenzo
New welcome to us all, for you Alonzo
Give over your paper kites, learn wit, it is time.
Where shall we meet to night?

Lo. Pardon me sir I am a dangerous man.


Du. No more a that
I Will credit my soul with thee, shall we revell
This night with Amidea?

Dep. The Duke courts him,
Well go thy ways, for one of the most excellent
Impudent Traitors --

Du. Yet a murmuring
Of a Traitor? we shall sooner suspect him,
That thinks Lorenzo guilty.

Dep. I my Lord,
Dare boldly swear, his honor is as free --
From any treason, as my self,
I did prophisie this issue.

Duk. It Is an age
Till night, I long to fold her in my ar mes,
Prepare Sciarrha, but be very wise
In the discovery, he is all touchwood.

Lor. I know he is her brother, leave the managing
Of things to me.

Tu. Still when we expect,
Our bliss, time creepes, but when the happier things
Call to enjoy, each saucy hour has wings.
Exeunt.
ACTVS SECVNDVS.
Enter Sciarrha and Lorenzo. Sciarrha. MY Sister, though he be the Duke, he
dares not,
Patience, patience, if there be such a virtue,
I want it Heaven, yet keep't a little longer,
It were a sin to have it, such an injury
Deserves a wrath next to your own, my Sister?
It has thrown wildfire in my brain Lorenzo,
A thousand furies revell in my skull,
Has he not sins enough in's Court to damn him.
But my Roof must be guilty of new Iusts,
And none but Amidea? these the honors
His presence brings our house?

Lo. Temper your rage.


Sci. Are all the Brothels rifled? no queint piece
Left him in Florence, that will meet his hot
And valiant luxury, that we are come
To supply his blood out of our families?
Diseases gnaw his title off.

Lo. My Lord --


Sci. He is no Prince of mine, he forfeited
His greatness, that black minute he first gave
Consent to my dishonor.

Lo. Then I Am sorry.


Sci. Why should you be sorry sir?
You say it is my Sister he would strumpet,
Mine, Amidea? it is a wound you feel not,
But it strikes through, and through the poor Sciarrah,
I do not think, but all the ashes of
My Ancestors do swell in their dark urnes
At this report, of Amidea's shame:
It is their cause as well as mine, and should
Heaven suffer the Dukes sin to pass unpunishd,
Their dust must of necessity conspire,
To make an earthquake in the Temple.

Lo. Sir,
You said you would hear me out.

Sci. Why is there more
Behind?

Lo. And greater Master, your high blood
Till I conclude Sciarrha, I accuse not
Your noble anger, which I have observed,
Is not on every cheap and giddy motion
Inflamed, but Sir, be thrifty in your passion,
This is a petty trespass.

Sci. Has mischief any name
Beyond this? will it kill me with the sound?

Lo. My Lord, though the dishonouring your Sister,
Be such a fact, the blood of any other
But Alexander could no less then expiate,
Yet this sin stretches farther, and involves
With hers, your greater stain did you e're promise him?
Yet why do I make any question?
It were another crime, to think Sciarrah
Could entertain a thought, so far beneath
His birth, you stoop to such a horrid baseness,
Then all the virtue of mankind would sicken,
And soon take leave of earth.

Sci. You torture me.


Lo. What then could the Duke find, to give him any
Encouragement you would be guilty of
An act, so fatal unto honor, what
When you were least your self? (as we are all
Frail compositions) did appear so wicked
In you, he should conceave a hope, and flatter
Himself with possibility, to corrupt
Your Soul to a deed so monstrous?

Sci. To what?


Lo. Though all the ^eeming glories of His Dukedom,
Nay Florence State off^rd it (...) a ^ribe*
And tempted the betraying of your name
To infamy, yet to imagine, you
Would turn officious pander to his lust,
And interpose the mercenary bewde
To Court your Sister to his sinful coupling*
It Is horrid, affrights nature, I grow stiff
With the imagination.

Sci. Hah!


Lo. Yet this was his command I should impose*


Sci. Lorenzo,
I do want breath, my voice is ravished from me,
I am not what I was, or if I be,
Sciarrha thou have talked too, all this while
Look heedfully about me, and thou may
Discover through some cranny of my flesh,
A fire within, my soul is but one flame,
Extended to all parts of this frail building,
I shall to ashes, I begin to shrink*
Is not already my complexion alte^'d,
Does not my face look parchd, and my skin gather
Into a heap? my breath is hot enough
To thaw the Alps.

Lo. Your fancy would
Transport you.

Sci. It Is my rage, but let it cool,
And then we will talk o'something, something sir,
Shall be to purpose.

Lo. Now the flame is mounted,
My Lord I have given proof, although he be
My Duke, and Kinsman, I abhorte his vices,
How e're the world without examination,
Shoot their malicious noise, and stain my actions:
It Is policy in Princes, to create
A Favorite, who must bear all the guilt
Of things ill managed in the State, if any
Design be happy, it is the Princes own.
Heaven knows, how I have counseled this young man,
By virtue to prevent his fate, and govern
With modesty: O the religious days
Of Commonwealths!
We have outlived that blessing.

Sci. But I have thought a cure for this great State
Impostume.

Lo. What?


Sci. To lance it, is it, not ripe?
Lets draw cuts, whether your hand or mine
Shall do an act for Florence liberty,
And send this Tyrant to another world.

Lo. How, I draw cuts?


Sci. Coy it not thus Lorenzo,
But answer, by thy name and birth, you are
His Kinsman; we all kuow it, that you dwell
In's bosom, great in favor, as in blood,
We know that too, and let me tell you more:
We know you but disguise your heart, and wish
Florence would change her title.

Lo. How is this?


Sci. We know you have firm correspondence with
The banished men, whose desperate fortunes wait
Your call to tumult, in our streets, all this,
Not to feed your ambition with a Dukedom,
By the remove of Alexander, but
To serve your Country, and create their peace,
Who groan under the Tyranny of a proud,
Lascivious Monarch, is it not true Lorenz^?
My phrase is blunt my Lord.

Lo. My Genius
And thine are friends, I see they have convers't
And I Applaude the wisdom of my Stars,
That made me for his friendship, who preserves
The same religious fire, I will confess,
When Alexander left his piety
To Florence, I placed him beneath my Country,
As we should all, but we have lost our soules'
Or changd our active spirits, for a dull
And lazy sufferance, let this secret be
^n argument, how much I dare repose
Upon Sciarrahs honor, virtue witness,
I choose no other destiny, command
Lorenzo'es fate, dissolve me with your breath,
I Will either ive, in your exchange of faith
A patriot, or die my Countries martyr.

Sci. Thou have a fire beyound Prometheus
To quicken earth, thy flame is but a prophsie
Of that high paramide, the world shall build
To thy immortal name: it was the glory
Of Romans to prefer their Empires safety
To their own lives, they were but men like us,
And of the same ingredients, our souls
Create of no inferior substance; ha?

Lo. Heaven knows I Have no particular design
To leap unto a throne, I will disclaim
The privilege of blood, let me advance
Our liberty, restore the ancient Laws
Of the republicke, rescue from the jaws
Of lust your mothers, wives, your daughters, sisters,

Sci. Sisters.


Lo. From horrid Rape las Amidea:


Sci. I am resolvd, by all that's blessed, he dies
Return my willingness to be his pander,
My sisters readiness to meet his Dalliance,
His promises have bought our shame, he dies,
The roof he would dishonor with his (...)
Shall be his toombe, bid him be confident,
Conduct him good Lorenzo, i will dispose
My house for this great scene of death.

Lo. Be constant.

Exit.
Enter Florio, and his Sister Amidea. Flo. Now brother, what news brings the
great Lorenzo?


Sci. Let me have truce vexation for some minutes,
What news? preferments, honors, offices;
Sister, you must to Court.

Am. Who, I to Court?


Sci. Or else the Court will come to you, the Duke
Has sent already for us Amidea:
O that I knew what happy Stars did govern
At thy Nativity: It were no sin
To adore their influence.

Am. What means my brother?


Flo. He Is transported.


Am. I shall suspect your health.


Sci. I easily could forget I am Sciarrha,
And fall in love my self, is she not fair,
Exceeding beautiful, and tempting Florio?
Look on her well, me-thinkes I could turn Poet,
And make her a more excellent piece then heaven.
Let not fond men hereafter comm^nd what
They most admire, by fetching from the Stars
Or flowers their glory of similitude;
But from thy self the r^le ^o know all beauty,
And he that shall (...) at so much boldness,
To say his Mistress eyes, or (...), or ^reath,
Are half so bright, so clea^, so (...) as thine,
Has told the (...) enough of miracle.
These are the Dukes o^e Raptures, Amidea,
His own Poeticke flames, an argument
He loves my Sister.

Ami. Love me?


Sci. Infinitely,
I am in earnest, he employed Lorenzo,
No meaner person in this (...),
You must to Court, O^ happiness!

Ami. For what?


Sci, What do great Ladies do at Court I pray?
Enjoy the pleasures of the world, dance, kiss
The Amorous Lords, and change Court breath, sing loose
Belief of other, heaven, tell wanton dreams,
Rehearse your sprightly bed-scenes, and boast, which
Has most Idolaters, accuse all faces,
That trust to the simplicity of nature,
Talk witty blasphemy,
Discourse their gaudy wardrobes, plot new pride,
Jest upon Courtiers legs, laugh at the wagging
Of their own feathers, and a thousand more
Delights, which private Ladies never think of:
But above all, and wherein thou shall make
All other beauties envy thee, the Duke,
The Duke himself shall call thee his, and single
From the fair troop, thy person forth, to exchange
Embraces with, lay siege to these soft lips,
And not remove, till he has sucked thy heart,
Which soon dissolved with thy sweet breath, shall be
Made part of his, at the same instant, he
Conveying a new soul into thy breast,
With a creating kiss.

Ami. You make me wonder,
Pray speak that I may understand.

Sci. Why will you
Appear so ignorant? I speak the dialect
Of Florence to you, come, I find your cunning;
The news does please, the rolling of your eye
Betrays you, and I see a guilty blush
Through this white veyle upon your cheek, you would
Have it confirmed, you shall, the Duke himself
Shall swear he loves you.

Am. Love me? why?


Sci. To Court,
And ask him; be not you too peevish now,
And hinder all our fortun^; I ha promised him
To move you for his arme-full, as I am
Sciarrha, and your brother, more I ha sent
Word to him by Lorenz^, that you should
Meet his high flame, in plain Italian
Love him, and --

Ami. What for heaven, be the Dukes whore?


Sci. No, no, his Mistress, command him, make us.


Ami. Give up my Virgin-honour to his lust?


Sci. You may give it a better name, but do it.


Ami. I do mistake you brother, do I not?


Sci. No, no, my meaning is so br^ad, you cannot.


Ami. I would I did then, is it not possible
That this should be a dream? where did you drop
Your virtue Sir? Flori^, why move you not?
Why are you slow to tell this man? for sure
It Is not Sciarrah, he has talked so ill,
And so much, that we may have cause to fear,
The air about's infected.

Flo. Are not you
My brother?

Sci. Be not you a fool, to move
These empty questions, but join to make her
Supple, and pliant for the Duke, I hope
We are not the first ha bin advanced by a wagtai^e:
No matter for the talk of musty people,
Look up to the reward, thou art young, and skilled
In these Court temptings, naturally soft,
And moving, I am rough hewne, assist, wo't,
With some queint charm, to win her to this game?

Flo. My Sister?


Sci. I, I.


Ami. Come not near him Florio,
It Is not Sciarrha, sure my brothers Nurse
Played the impostor, and with some base issue
Cheated our house.

Sci. Gipsy, use better language,
Or I Will forget your sex.

Flo. Offer to touch her
With any rudeness, and by all that is virtuous* --

Sci. Why how now boy?


Flo. I do not fear your sword,
This with my youth, and innocence, is more
Defense then all thy armory, what Devil
Has crept into thy soul?

Sci. You Will not help?


Flo. I Will never kill thee.


Sc. It Is very well,
Have you considered better o^the motion?

Am. Yes.


Sci. And what is your resolve


Am. To have my name
Stand in the Ivorie register of Virgi^s,
When I am dead, before (...) f^tious thought
Should lurk within (...) to betray my fame,
To sucha blot, my hands shall mutiny,
And boldly with a poniard teach my heart
To weep out a rep^tance.

Sci, Let me kill thee
My excellent chaste ^ster, Flori^
Thou have my soul, I did but try your virtues,
It Is truth, the Duke does love thee, vitiously,
Let him, let him, he comes to be our guest,
This night he means to revell at our house,
The Tarquine shall be entertained; he shall,

Serve. My Lord, Pisano is come.


Sci. I had forgot his promise, Look up Sister
And shine with thy own smiles, Pisano's come,
Pisano thy contracted, honored friend,
A gentleman so rich in hopes, we shall Enter a Ser^ant.
Be happy in's alliance*
Enter Pisano, Cosmo, Freder. Welcome all,
But you above the rest, my brother shortly,
Sister and Florio entertain your noble
Friends, some few minutes, I am absent, we
Must not forget prepare for the Dukes coming,
I Will soon return
Exit.
Am. You are not cheerful sir.
How is it my Lord? you were not wont to look
So sad when you came hith^r.

Pis. I am not well Amidea.


Am, Oh my (...)!


Pis, Be you
Comforted Lady let all gr^ifes repair
To this, their proper Center.

Flo. Sir how fare you?


Pis. Alterd of late a little.


Fred. Virtuous Lady,
I cannot choose but pity her, and accuse
Pisano's levitie.

Pis. Would he were come back,
I might ha finishd ere he went, and not
Delayed his business much, two or three words,
And I had dispatched.

Am. How sir? your language is
Another then you use to speak, you look not
With the same brow upon me.

Cos. Las sweet Lady,
But who shall accuse me?

Pis. We shall expect to long, Lady I am come
To render all my interest in your love,
And to demand my self again, live happier,
In other choice Fair Amidea, it is
Some shame to say my hearts revolted.

Am. Ha.


Pis. Heeres witness, all is canceled betwixt us,
Nay and you weep --
Farewell.

Am. He Is gone.


Flo. I am amazd.


Pis. Now lead me to my blessing.

Exit.
Flo. Shall a long suite and speeding in his love
With the worlds notice, and a general fame
Of contract too, just in the instant when
A marriage is expected, be broke off
With infamy to our house.

Am. Brother, if ever
You loved poor Amidea, let not this
Arive Sciarrhas ear there is danger in
His knowledge of it, this may be a trial
Of my affection

Flo. A trial; no
It showed too like a truth

Am. My tears entreat
Your silence

Flo. You have
Power to command it, dry your eyes then,
He Is returned.

Enter Sciarrha. Sci. How now,
Weeping? where is Pisano, and his friends?

Flo. Their gone sir.


Sci Ha!


Am. Guess by my eyes, you may
Something of sorrow has befalne, no sooner
You were beparted, cut some strange distemper
Iuvaded him, we might discern a change
In's countenance, and though we prayed him to
Repose with us, he would straight back again,
So with Frederico,
And signior Cosmo, he returned.

Flo. The alteration was strange and sudden.


Sci. Las noble gentleman -- but come clear up
Your face again, we hope it wonot last,
Look bright again I say, I ha given order --

Enter Gentleman. Genu. My Lord the Dukes already come.


Sci. Remove,
Good Amidea, and reserve thy person
To Crown his entertainment, be not seen yet.
Exit Am.
Enter Duke Lorenzo, Alonzo, attendants. Du. Sciarrah, we are come to be your
guest.


Sci. Your highness does an honor to our house.


Du. But where is thy Sister, she must bid us welcome


Sci. She is your graces handmaid,


Du. For this night,
Let the whole world conspire to our delight.
Lorenzo --
Whisper.
Lor. Sir be confident -- and perish.


Enter Morosa, and Oriana in the garden. Mor. You should not rashly give away
your heart,
Nor must you without me dispose your self,
Pray give access to none -- yet if Pisano
Enquire, direct him to the garden, Cosmo
Is young, and promising, but while Lorenzo
Lives must expect no sunshine.

Enter Pisano, Cosmo, Servant. Pis. There Is for thy pains,
They are now at opportunity

Cos. My Lord,
Do you prepare the Mother, and let m^ ^lose
With Oriana.

Pis. What service can reward thee?


Cos. Take occasion
To leave us private, this hour be
Propitious, win but the Matron to you.

Pis. She is prepared already


Cos. Loose no time
Take the other walk.
Exit Pis. and Mor.
Ori. My dear Cosmo:


Cos. My best Oriana.


Ori. You have bin too much absent I must chide you


Cos. You cannot sweet, I would I knew which way.
To make thee angry, yes, that I might see
How well it would become thee, I do fear
Thou art some Angel, and that sin would be
An argument, to me, that thou were mortal
I must suspect thy too much goodness else,
And leave thee for the fellowship of Saints,
I am to wicked.

Ori. You will make me angry.


Cos. But you will love me still, I fear.


Ori. Do You fear it?
Is It a misfortune?

Cos. What?


Ori. My love


Cos. Your anger,
And yet the the other often times may carry
An evil with it, we may love to well
And that's a fault

Ori. Not where the objects good.


Cos. Oyes: Always beware of the extremes.


Ori. What mean you? I affect none but my Cosmo,
Nor him with too much flame.

Cos. If you should Lady, 'twere
Not nobly done.

Ori. To love another?


Cos. Yes,
If there be cause, that may be called a virtue:
For what have I to ingrosse the affection
Of any Lady, if she can discern
A greater merit in some other man:
Wisdom forbid, but she command her smiles,
To warm and cherish him.

Ori. So we should be inconstant.


Cos. Why not, if our reason be
Convincd, that is no such fault as the world goes:
Let us examine all the creatures, read
The book of Nature through, and we shall find
Nothing does still the same, the stars do wander
And have their diverse influence, the Elements
Shuffle into innumerable changes,
Our constitutions vary, Herbs, and Trees
Admit their Frosts and Summer: and why then
Should our desires, that are so nimble, and
More subtle then the spirits in our blood,
Be such stayed things within us, and not share
Their natural liberty, shall we admit a change
In smaller of things, and not allow it in
What most of all concerns us?

Ori. What?


Cos. Our Loves?


Ori. Have you a suspicion I am changd, and thus
Would school me for it, or shall I imagine
That you are alterd.

Cos. Yes, I am, and therefore
Proclaim thy freedom, I do love thee less,
To show I love thee more.

Ori. What riddle's this.


Cos. I will explain, upon maturity
Of Council Oriana, I have found
I am not worthy of thee, therefore come
To make thee satisfacton for my sin
Of loving thee, by pointing out a way,
And person, will become thy affection better.

Ori. You have a pretty humor.


Cos. What do think
Of brave Pisano, shall his merit plead
Succession in thy chaste thoughts?

Ori. I do know him.


Cos. Thou can not choose, and I could study none
Worthy thy love but him.

Ori. It Is very likely you would resign then.


Cos. I to honor thee,
His service will deserve thee at the best,
And richest value.

Ori. Why it shall be so.


Cos. Nay but be serious, and declare me happy
That I may say, I have made thee just amends.
I will thank thee.

Ori. Why sir I do love him.


Cos. Oh when did Cupid aim that golden shaft^
But do thou love him perfectly with a
Desire, when sacred rites of marriage
Are past, to meet him in thy bed, and call him
Thy husband?

Ori. Why sir, did you ever think
I was so taken with your worth, and person,
I could not love another Lord as well?
By your favor, there be many as proper men,
And as deserving, you may save your plea,
And be assurd I need no lesson to
Direct my fancy, I did love Pisano,
Before, but for your sake, I mean to place him,
A great deal nearer, sure he does but jest. You did love me.

Cos. Now by my heart. I love thee.


Cos. This act shall crown our story Oriana,
Thou do not know how much thou honor me,
For he is not in the common* list of friends,
And he does love thee past imagination
Next his religion, he has placed the thought
Of Oriana, he sleeps nothing else.
And I shall wake him into Heaven, to say
Thou have consented to be his.

Ori. Pray tell me:
But truly I beseech you, do you wish
Pisano mine indeed? are you jealous,
And name him to accuse me?

Cos. Not by goodness,
But if there be a charm beyond thy innocence,
By that I would conjure thee Oriana,
Love him and make three happy, it shall be
My bliss to call you his, let me but o wne
A servant in your memory.

Ori. Unkind,
And cruel Cosmo, do thou think it possible,
I can love any but thy self? thou will
Undo my heart for ever.

Enter Pisano and Morossa. Mor. You shall be
Ever most welcome, if I be her Mother,
She must declare obedience, Oriana --

Cos. Go cheerfully, thy Mother calls, to him
Whose Orator I have been, alas poor Lady,
I half repent me since she is so constant:
But a friends life weighes down all other love;
Beside, I thus secure my fate, Lorenzo
Threatens my spring, he is my enemy.

Ori. You Will not compel affection?


Pis. No, but Court it
With honor, and religion, thus invite it,

Mor. I shall forget the nature of a Parent,
Unless you show more softness, and regard
To what is urged, what promise could you make
To Cosmo without me? or if you had --

Cos. Here Cosmo' does give up all ^tle to it,
I have no part in Oriana now*

Ori. I Have heard too much, do with me what you please
I am all passive, nothing of my self,
But an obedience to unhappiness.
Exit.
Cos. Follow her Pisano.


Pis. Thou Art all friendship.


Cos. Trace their warm steps, Virgins resolves are weak.
Leave not her eyes, until you see day break.
Exeunt.
ACTVS TERTIVS.
Enter Depazzi and Rogero. Depazzi. ROgero?


To. My Lord.


Dep. Make fast the Chamber-doore, stiffle the keyhole and the crannies, I must
discourse of secret matters, do thou smell nothing Rogero? ha?


To. Smell? not any thing my Lord to offend my nostrill.


Dep. Come hither, what do the people talk abroad of me?
Answer me justly, and to the point what do they say?

To. Faith my Lord, they say that you are --


Dep. They lie, I am not, they are a lousie impudent multitude, a many-headed,
and many horned generation, to say that I am --


To. A noble gentleman, a just and discreet Lord, and one that deserved to
have his honors without money.


Dep. Oh is that it? I thought the rabble would have said, I had been a
Traitor, I am half mad certainly ere since I consented to Lorenzo, it is a very
hard condition, that a man must loose his head to recompense the procuring of
his honors: what if I discover him to the Duke, ten to one, if Lorenzo come
but to speak, his grace wonot ha the grace to believe me and then I run the
hazard to be thrown out of all atother side: it is safest to be a Traitor, hum,
who is that you whisperd to?


To. I whisper?


Dep. Marry did you sir.


To. Not I good faith my Lord.


Dep. Sir, sir, sir, I smell a Rat behind the hangings? Here Is no body,
ha? are there no Trunkes to convey secret voices?


To. Your Lordship has a pair on.


Dep. I do not like that face in the arras, a my conscience he points at me, a
pox upon this treason, I have no stomach to it, I do see my self upon a
Scaffold, making a pitiful speech already, I shall ha my head cut off, seven
years ago I laid my head upon a wager I remember, and lost it; let me see, it
shall be so, it is good policy to be armed, Rogero, imagine I were a Traitor.


To. How sir?


Dep. I but say imagine, we may put the case, and that I were apprehended for a
Traitor.


To. Heaven defend.


Dep. Heaven has something else to do, then to defend Traitors:
I say, Imagine I were brought to the bar.

To. Good my Lord, you brought to the bar?


Dep. I will beat you, if you wonot imagine at my bidding:
I say, suppose I now were at the bar to answer for my life.

To. Well sir.


Dep. Well sir, that is as it happens, you must imagine I will answer the best
I can for my self, conceive I prithee, that these chaires were Judges most
grave and venerable beards and faces at my arraignement, and that thy self
were in the name of the Duke and state to accuse me what could thou say to me?


To. I accuse your good honor? for what I beseech you?


Dep. For high Treason you blockehead.


To. I must be acquainted with some particulars first.


Dep. Mass thou say right: why imagine, do you hear? you must but imagine,
that some greatman had a conspiracy against the Dukes person, and that I being
an honest Lord, and one of this great man's friends, had been drawn in, for
that is the plain truth on it, it was against my will, but that is all one: Well,
thou understandst me, show thy wit Rogero, scratch thy nimble pericranium, and
thunder out my accusation ex tempore: Here I stand Signior Depazzi, ready to
answer the indictment.


To. Good my Lord it will not become me, being your humble servant.


Dep. Humble Coxcombe, is it not for my good? I say, accuse me, bring it home,
jerke me soundly to the quick Rogero, tickle me as thou lovst thy Lord; I do
defy thee, spare me not, and the devil take thee if thou be not malicious,


To. Why then have at you, first Signior Depazzi, thou art indicted of high
Treason, hold up thy hand, guilty, or not guilty?


Dep. Very good.


To. Nay, very bad sir, answer I say, guilty or not guilty?


Dep. Not guilty.


To. It Is your best course to say so, well imagine Irise up the Duke's most
learned in the Laws, and his nimble tongued Orator, have at your Signior.


Dep. Come, come on sir, here I stand.


To. I will prove thou lie in thy throat, if thou deniest thy Treason, and
so I address my self to the most understanding seats of Justice ^ most wise,
most honorable, and most incorrupt Judges, sleep not I beseech you, my place
^ath called me to plead in the behalf of my Prince and Country against this
notable, this pernicious, and impudent Traitor, who has plotted and contrived
such high, heinous, and horrible treasons as no Age nor History has ever
mentioned the like. Here he stands, whose birth I will not touch, because its
altogether unknown who begot him: He was brought up among the small wares in
the City, became rich by sinister and indirect practices, married a Merchants
wife at adventures, and was soon after advanced to be a Head-officer.


Dep. Why you rascal.


To. Peace sir, peace, nay your Lordships shall find him very audacious:
This fellow not content to have his branches spread within the City, I speak
it to his face, let him deny it, was afterward by the corruption of his
confederate, and the mere grace of his highness raised to honor, received
infinite favors from his Prince of blessed memory, yet like a wretch, a
villain, a viper, a Rat of Nilus, he has practiced Treasons against the
sacred person of the Duke, for which he deserves not only to die, but also to
suffer tortures, whips, racks, strapadoes, wheels, and all the fiery brazen
bulls that can be invented, as I shall make it appear to this honorable and
illustrious Court.


Dep. This rogues transported.


To. With all my heart I obey your Lordships -- thus then I pass from these
circumstances, and proceed to the principal villainies that we have to lay to
his charge. Imprimis thou Signior Depazzi did offer to a groom a 100 crowns
to poison his highness hunting saddle.


Dep. Did I?


To. Do not interrupt me varlet I will prove it, his hunting saddle, and woe
shall be unto thy breech therefore, and finding this serpentive treason broken
in the shell, do but lend your reverend ears to his next designs I will cut
em off presently. This irreligious nay Atheistical Traitor, did with his own
hands poison the Dukes prayer book, oh impiety! and had his highness as in
former times, he accustomed but prayed once in a month, which by special
grace he omitted, how fatal had it been to Florence? but as by justice his
excellence did then, and by his own want of devotion, prevent this assasinates
purpose, so we hope in his own discretion, and the council of his state, he
will take heed how he prays hereafter while he lives, to which every true
subject will say Amen.


Dep. May it please your honors --


To. Thou impudent brazen faced Traitor, will thou deny it? more over, and like
your good Lordships, he has for this fortnight or three weeks before his
apprehension, walked up and down the Court with a case of pistols charged
wherewith, as he partly confessed, he intended to send the Duke to heaven with
a powder.


Dep. This rogue will undo the Devil at invention, may it please this
honorable --


To. These are but sprinklings of his treason.


Dep. Will you justify this? did I any of these things you tadpole?


To. Hold your self contented my Lord, he that is brought t^ the bar in case
of treason, must look to have more objected then he can answer, or any man
is able to justify.


Dep. I confess and please your good Lordships.


To. Mark, he will confess.


Dep. That's the the way to be sent of a headles errand* indeed I confess that
I never intended any treason to his highness, nor ever sought the princes life,
true it is, that I heard of a conpiracie.


To. That that my Lord has overthrown him, he says he never sought the
princes life, ergo he sought his death, besides he has heard of treason, now
he that hears and discovers not is equally guilty in fact: for in offenses
of this nature there are not accessaries, ergo he is a principal, and being
a principal Traitor, he deserves condemnation.


Dep. Shall I not speak?


To. No, traitors must not be sufferd to speak, for when they have leave, they
have liberty, and he that is a Traitor deserves to be close Prisoner.


Dep. All that this fellow has vtterd, is false and forgd, abominable lies.


To. I will speak truth, and I will be heard, and no man else in this place.


Dep. I never dre'mt of a hunting saddle, nor never had so much as a thought of
any prayer book.


To. You sit hear to do justice, I speak for the Duke and the safety of the
common wealth.


Dep. As for pistols, it is well known I could never endure the report one them,
I defy powder and shot as I do him that accuses me.


To. I defy all the world that will hear a Traitor speak, for himself, it is
against the Law which provids that no man shall defend treason, and he that
speaks for himself being a Traitor, does defend his treason, thou art a
Capital obstreporous malefactor.


Dep. Thou art a madman:


To. Go to you have played the fool too much.


Dep. Thou continual motion cease, a pox upon thee hold thy tongue.


To. The pox wonot serve your turn.


Dep. Why then this shall.

Beats him.
To. Hold, hold good my Lord, I am sensible, I ha done, imagine I ha done, I
but obeyed your Lordship, whose batoone I find stronger then my imagination, my
Lord you will answer this to strickei'th Court thus?


Dep. I Am as weary -- hark Rogero one knocks, see, see there is to make thee
amends see good

Knockes Rogero, and say nothing pray heaven it be no pursevant.


Enter Petruchio with a Letter. To. Petruchio my Lord, Pisanoes Secretary.


Dep. But Lorenzoes Engine a very knave,


Pet. My very good Lord.


Dep. What Is here? it can be no goodness:

Reads. My Lord I would not have you go to bed to night, he wonot let me
sleep now, I dreamed as much, something will be done to give Florence liberty:
In the depth of night you may cunningly disperse some rumors in the City,
that the Duke is dead, the people must be distracted, in the common fright be
not you wanting in your person to assist their fears, and speak well of
Lorenzo, speak well of the devil: my humble service to your Lord, and say he
has power to command me in all things.
Pet. My very good Lord.


Dep. No matter and you were both hanged, Rogero, show him the Wine-sellar: let
me see, I must report the Dukes death, I cannot abide this word Death, yet he
desires me but to report it, hum, if it be false, why so much the better;
th^re will be the less harm in it, if it should prove true, they will believe
me another time: Well I will drink my self half drunk, and be fortified.

Exeunt.
Enter Duke, Amidea, Lorenzo, Sciarrha, Florio, etc. Du. Sciarrha, you exceed
in entertainment,
Banquet our (...) too.

Lo. He will feast all Senses.


Sci. Only a toy my Lord, I cannot cal't,
A mask, not worthy of this presence, yet
It speaks the freedom of my heart, and gratitude
For this great honor.

Du. Amidea must sit near us.


Sci. Lords your places, 'twonot be
Worth half this ceremony, let them begin.

Enter Lust richly apparreld, the pleasures attending. Du. Whose the presenter?


Sci. Lust sir, pray observe:


Lust. Now let Lust possess the throne
Of Love, and rule in hearts alone:
You sweet tempters to my Sin,
Beauty, smiles, and kisses win
Upon frail mortals, let them know
There is no happiness, but you
Shoot no arrows tip'd with lead
Each shaft have his golden head:
Call no Love, delude menstill,
Through the flesh, their spirits kill,
Nor spend all your art to take
Common pesons, greatness make
By your potent charms to be
Subjects unto hell and me,
Inflame but Kings with loose desire,
Ye soon set all the world on fire.

Enter a young man in rich habit and Crowned. Du. What Is he?


Sci. A wild young man that follows lust,
He has too much blood it seems.

Du. Why looks he back?


Sci. There is a thing called death that follows him
With a large train of furies, but the Sirens
Of lust make him secure, and now the hagge
Embraces him, and circles him with pleasures,
The harpyes mean to dance too, hang his conscience
It whines too much.

Lo. This is too plain.


Sci. He does not tremble yet,
By an by sir you shall see all his tormentors
Join with 'em, there is the sport on it.

Lo. Me thinks they
Should have been first forth' antimaske.

(...). Oh no!
In hell they do not stand upon the method
As we at Court, the gr^und mask and the glory
Begin the revells, Sister you do ill
To keep the Duke in talk, he cannot see
The devil for you, and the whipps: does not
That deaths head look most te^ptingly? the worms
Have kissed the lips off. The furies join in the dance, and in the end carries
the young man away.
How does your highness like this dance?

Du. My eyes so feasted here, I did not mark it,
But I presume 'twas hansome.

Sci. Oh the Lethargy
Of Princes! we ha kept you Sir from bed:
More lights.

Du. Good night to all, to you the best:
Sciarrha bind us ever by performance.

Sci. We are all yours.


Du. And Florence thine, once more --
Brightest of Ladies.

Lo. You are firm.


Sci. Suspect not.

Exeunt all, but Amidea and Florio.
Flo. I do not like my brothers Moral Mask,
The Duke himself was personated, I
Wonder it did not startle him.

Am. I hope
Sciarrha does not mean so ill as that
Did promise, he is returned: his looks are full. Enter Sciarrha.
Of threatening.

Sci. Amidea, go not to bed,
And yet no matter, I can do it alone:
Take both your rest, and in your prayers commend
The Duke to Heaven, it is charity; has made
His will already, and bequeathd his body
To you Sister, pity his soul for it, it is now
Within few minutes of departing.

Am. How?


Sci. Why this way I must help him in his groans
To bring his flesh a bed.

Am. You wonot kill him?


Sci. I am not of your mind.


Am. I know you cannot.


Sci. You are not studied so perfect in
His destiny I hope; I will endeavor --

Am. To kill your Prince?


Flo. What here?


Sci. No, in his Chamber.


Am. Shall it be read in Stories of our Florenoe,
Sciarrha first did stain his family
With such a Treason?

Flo. Was he not invited?


Sci. Yes, by his lust.


Flo. And in your crowned tables,
And Hospitality will you murder him?

Sci. Yes, and the reason wherefore he was murderd,
Shall justify the deed to all posterity,
He came to wrong my Sister.

Flo. Wanton heat,
Let youthful blood excuse him.

Sci. So it must.


Flo. Mistake me not, oh think but who he is,
The Duke, that word must needs awake your piety.

Am. How will good men in this remembrance
Abhor your cruelty, that send to hell
One with the weight of all his sins upon him.

Sci. It is too late to cool with argument
My incensed blood, will you go dally with him,
And let him board your pinace: I hagon
So far in promise, if you claspe not with him,
It will be dangerous if he outlive
This night.

Am. I ha thought on it, send him to my bed.


Sc. Ha?


Am. Do not question what I purpose, heaven
Witness to my chaste thoughts.

Sci. Wot thou trust him?


Am. I will do much sir, to preserve his life,
And your innocence: be not you suspectfull*
At the worst, you can but respite your revenge.

Sci. Do thou not fear unhappy Luenesse chance,
Or wretched Philomels dishonor?

Am. No:
Give me his life, and send your wanton to me;
I Will to my Chamber, fear me not Sciarrha,
Have not one thought so bad, I sha' not prosper;
Virgins n heaven will suffer with me.
Exit Am. and Flo.
Flo. Trust her?


Sci. It Is but deferring of my justice,
She wonot kill him sure: draw on her soul
The guilt she hates in mine, if she do yield
To the hot encounter: ha? twill be just,
That both their hearts weep blood* to purge their lust.
Exit.
Enter Florio and Amidea. Flo. My Poniard?


Ami. I Have no black intent
To stain't with any blood.

Flo. Take it, I know, thou art my virtuous Sister,
It were wickedness to doubt thy purpose
Or the event.

Ami. Now leave me.


Flo. Thou have a guard of Angels.


Ami. They are coming.

Enter Sciarrlia and Duke.
Sci. Look, there she is sir, you know how to undresse her.


Du. Dearest Sciarrha.


Sci. To your recreation, here
I Will obscure my self, Florio? it is well.
Withdrawes behind the hangings.
Du. Lady you know me?


Am. Yes my Prince.


Du. I was so,
Till I saw thee, but I gave up that title,
A conquest to thy beauty, which among
Her other wonders has created me
A subject and servant, and I shall
Be happier to be received yours by
One of those names then Duke of Tuscany.

Am. Oh take your self again, use your greatness
To make the hearts of Florence bow to you,
And pay their duties thus.

Du. Rise Amidea,
And since you have given my power back, it will
Become me to command.

Am. And me to obey.


Du. I see thy noble brother has bin faithful
To my desires, he has prepared thee with
A story of my love, which thou rewardst
With too much humbleness: thou have a quarrel,
And a just one with thy Stars, that did not make thee
A Princess Amidea, yet thou art greater,
And borne to justify unto these times
A Queen of Love, Venus was but thy figure,
And all her graces prophesies of thine,
To make our last age best; I could dwell ever
Here, and imagine I am in a Temple,
To offer on this Altar of thy lip, Kisses her often.
Myriads of flaming kisses with a cloud
Of sighs breathd from my heart,
Which by the oblation would increase his stock,
To make my pay eternal.

Am. What mean you?


Du. That question is propounded timely, had
Not interrupted me, I should ha lost
My self upon thy lips, and quite forgot
There is a bliss beyond it, which I came for:
Let others satisfy themselves to read
The wonders in thy face, make proud their eye,
By seeing thine, turn statues at thy voice,
And think they never fix enough to hear thee.
A man half dead with famine, would wish here
To feed on smiles, of which the least has power
(...) (...) an Anchorite from his prayers, tempt Saints
(...) their bodies on, thou do with ^ase
(...) aptivate Kings with every beam, and may
Lead them like prisoners round about the world,
^roud of such golden chains; this were enough,
Had not my Fate provided more, to make me
Believe my self immortal in thy touches,
Come to thy bed, transform me there to happiness;
I Will laugh at all the fables of the gods,
And teach our Poets after I know thee,
To write the true Elysium.

Am. Good my Lord,
I understand you not, and yet I fear
You do not mean well, if you have brought with you
A sinful purpose which I may suspect.

Du. Why Lady, what do yon imagine I
Came hither for?

Am. I know not.


Du. How? is it come to that?
Your brother gave you more.
Desirous of the sport, and brought me hither
Ripe for your dalliance, did you not expect me?

Am. Yes.


Du. And to what other purpose?


Am. To tell you that you are not virtuous.


Du. I Am of your mind.


Am. But I am not so wicked
To be of yours: oh think but who you are,
Your title speaks you nearest heaven, and points
You out a glorious reign among the Angels,
Do not depose your self of one, and be
Of the other disin'herited.

Du. I would
Your brother heard you, prithee do not wast
This tedious divinity, I am
Resolvd to grapple with you.

Am. Keep off.

Shows the Poniard.
Du. Ha?
Turned Amazon.

Am. Prince, come not to near me.
For by my honor, since you have lost your own,
Although I bow in duty to your person,
I hate your black thoughts, tempt not my just hand
With violent approach, I dare, and will
Do that will greeve you, if you have a soul.

Du. Thou dare not kill me.


Am. True, but I dare die.


Du. Be thy own murderer?


Am. Rather then you should be my ravisher.


Du. Thou can not be so merciless, uslesse sin
To be unchaste, I am thy Prince, I prithee
Throw by that cruel weapon, let our war
De soft embraces, shooting amorous smiles,
Kill and restore each other with a kiss,
I know thou can not be unkind so long,
Then I command thee.

Am I must not obey
To be your strumpet, though my hand be unskilful,
I shall soon find my heart.

Du. I Will not believe --


Am. Let this deserve your faith, I dare be just, She wounds her arm.
This crimson river issuing from my arm.

Du. Hold.


Am. Never, it shall flow, and if this channel
Yield not enough, I Will stricke another vein,
And after that another, and not pity
The murmuring stream, till through a prodigal wound
I have draind the fountain: this does weep for you,
And shall extol my death, if it may teach
You to correct your blood.

Du. There Is so much gone
From me Icoole apace; this action
Has shot an ague through me; Amidea,
Pity thy self.

Am. Not, till you swear repentance;
I do not faint yet, it is somewhat about,
But I can find a nearer way, this does it.

Du. Contain, I am sorry, sorry from my soul,
Trust me, I do bleed inward, Amidea
Can answer all thy drops: oh pardon me,
Thou faintst already, do not? I am fearful,
The Phoenix with her wings, when she is dying
Can fan her ashes into another life:
But when they breath more sweet then all the spice
That helps the others funeral, returns
To heaven, the world must be eternal looser:
Look to thy wound.

Am. May I believe you sir?


Du. I dare not think awry, again I ask
Forgiveness, in thy innocence I see
My own deformity.

Enter Sciarrha, hastily embraces Amidea, Enter Florio. Sci. Now a thousand
blessings
Reward thy goodness; thou deservst a statue,
A tall one which should reach above the clouds.
Justle the moon, that people a far off
Beholding it, may be invited hither
In hope to climb to heaven by it, but apply
Betimes unto thy wound; Florio assist her. Ex. Am. and Flo.
And now my Lord --

Du. Sciarrah I Will begin to be thy Lord,
I brought intentions of dishonor to thee,
And thy fair sister, but I am reconciled
To virtue, and will study how to satisfy
For you and Floreuce.

Sci. You will be more precious,
Then had you never fallen, I am all joy
in your conversion.

Sci. Lorenzo? I think he has not said his prayers yet,
But --

Du. What?


Sci. I cannot tell, may be, he does not use it.


Du. How?


Sci. My Lord, you now are lovely,
Twere better you would forget him, he is not right
At heart I fear.

Du. Fear nothing.


Sci. To be plain,
You cherrish your disease in him, and are
Not safe while he is near you.

Du. Do not envy him.


Sci. Then I must tell you sir he is a Traitor,
Within my knowledge has conspird your death.

Du. With whom?


Sci. With me, I should ha killed you sir
This night, and every mineut he expects
To hear you numberd with the dead, I can
Demonstrate this, your pardon, but in truth,
The injuries you meant us were severe,
And he with as much violence did urge em
To your destruction, but your piety
Has charmed my purpose, and I look upon you
With new obedience.
Enter Florio.
Du. Possible.


Sci. We wonot shift the scene till you believe it,
Florio, entreat my Lord Lorenzo hither,
Step but but behind the arras, and your ear
Shall tell you who is the greatest Traitor living,
Observe but when I tell him, you are slain,
How heel rejoice, and call me Florence great
Preserver, bless my arm that in your blood,
Has given our groaning state a liberty:
Then trust Sciarrha, but observe, I here them

Enter Lorenzo. Lo. Whom talkd he too?


Sci. It Is done --


Lo. What good Sciarrha?


Sci. The Duke is dead.


Lo. We are not left so miserable,
Heaven is more kind to Florence.

Sci. With this hand
I made a passage for his soul.

Lo. Defend
Omnipotence, what murdered? and by noble
Sciarrha? how my ear abuses me!

Sci. Did not we plot it too?


Lo. How we? collect,
I fear you are not well: pray tell me why
You talk thus? where is the Duke? he has a guard,
An army of heaven about him; who in Florence,
Dares be so black a devil to attempt
His death.

Sci. This is fine eunning, why that devil is
Lorenzo, if he dars deny it, we are in private,
You need appear no stranger to that is done
By your direction.

Lo. I in the practice?
Then let me creep into the earth, and rise
A monster to affright mankind, Sciarrha,
I must abhor thee for it, oh my Prince!
My dearest kinsman, may thy hand rot off,
Treason, treason.

Sci. Then my sword shall fetch As they draw, the Duke interposes.
another witness in thy heart

Du. Hold.


Lo. Tush, let him come,
My royal Lord, nay, let him kill me now,
Ive so much joy and peace about me, twere
A sin to wish my life beyond this minute.

Du. Put up I say.


Sci. My Lord, we are both cozend:
That very smile's a Traitor.

Du. Come, be calm:
You are too passionate Sciarrha, and
Mistook Lorenzo.

Lo. But I hold him noble:
I see he made this trial of my faith,
And I forgive him.

Du. Ye shall be friends, you shall I say.


Enter Cosmo and Alonzo. Cos. The Duke --


Alon. Where Is the Duke?


Cos. My Lord, we are blessed to see you safe, report
Has frighted all the City with your death:
People forsake their beds, and seeking how
To be informed, increase the wretched tumult.

Alon. There Is nothing but confusion: all men tremble
As if some general fire invaded Florence.

Sci. Have comfort sir.


Du. What Is to be done?


Lo. Depazzi has remembered,
My Lord there is no safety for the State,
Unless you personally appease 'em.

Du. How?


Lo. I hope they will tear him, would he were dead any way.


Alon. He has counselld well.


Cos. Your presence only has the power to charm 'em.


Du. I fear their rage: where is our Guard?
Alonzo, haste before, proclaim our pardon,
And that we live to give the offenders mercy.
Why are we borne to greatness, mocked with State,
When every tumult staggers our proud fate?

Sci. Our quarrel is deferd Sir.

Exeunt.
ACTVS QVARTVS.
Enter Lorenzo. MY plots thrive not, my Engines all deceive me;
And in the very point of their discharge
Recoile with danger to my self: are there
No faithful villains left in nature? all
Turned honest? man nor spirit aid Lorenzo,
Who has not patience to expect his fate:
But must compel it? how Sciarrha played
The dog-boltwo'me, and had not J provided
Jn wisdom for him, that distress had ruined me,
His frozen Sister Amidea too
Has half converted him; but J must set
New wheels in motion, to make him yet
More hateful, and then cut him from his stalk,
Ripe for my vengeance: Jle not trust the rabble
Confusion on the giddy multitude,
That but two minutes ere the Duke came at'em,
Bellowed out liberty, shook the City with
Their throats, no sooner saw him but they melted
With the hot apprehension of a gallows:
And when a pardon was proclaimd, (a fine
State-snaffle for such Mules) they turned their cry
To acclamations, and deaf'd Heaven to beg
His long and prosperous reign, a sudden rot
Consume this base heard, and the devil want,
Any Cattle for his own teeth, these are for him.
Enter a Servant. Ser. Sciarrha, my Lord desires to speak with you.


Lo. Sciarrha, come near -- you understand, admit him. Exit. Ser.
Welcome my noble Lord, Enter Sciarrha.
You were not wont to visit me.

Sci. Nor mean ever to doot again.


Lo. You bring frowns,
J can be sullon too: what is your pleasure?

Sci* You have abused me.


Lo. You have injured me.


Sci. Jn what?


Lo. Betrayed me basely to the Duke.


Sci. You denied then, you were a Traitor.


Lo. Yes, J was no fool to run my neck^ upon
The Axe, and give you such a cause of triumph,
Were it again in question --

Sci. You Are a villain sir.
And I must have it certified under your own hand
To show the Duke.

Lo. You shall be humbled to
Confess the contrary, nay subscribe
That I am honest, and desire my pardon;
Look, I have a sword, and arm, and vigor
Dare fight with thee, did ride upon a whirle-winde,
Provoke me on a rock, in waves, in fire?
And kill thee without scruple, such a strength
Is innocence.

Sci. Innocence? do not fear a thunderbolt?
I shall be charitable to the world, and I
Cut thee in pieces; and yet then I fear
Thou wo't come together again: the devil does
Acknowledge thee on earth the greater mischief,
And has a fear when thou art dead, he shall not
Be safe in hell: thou wot conspire with some
Of his black fiends, and get his kingdom from him:
Did not thou rail upon the Duke?

Lo. I grant it.


Sci. Call him a Tyrant?


Lo. More I do confess,
I did exasperate you, to kill or murder him;
Give it what name you please, with joy I brought him
Under the color of your guest, to be
The common sacrifice: all this I remember;
But is heavens stock of mercy spent already,
That sins though great and horrid, may not be
Forgiven, to the heart that groans with penitence?
Are the eternal fountains quite sealed up?
I was a Villain, Traitor, Murderer,
In my consenting to his death, but hope
Those stains are now washed off.

Sci. Have thou repented?


Lo. Trust me, I have.


Sci. The devil is tum'd religious, augment not thy damnation.


Lo. As he was
A lustful Duke, a Tyrant, I had lost him
In his return to piety: he commanded
My prayers, and fresh obedience to wait on him;
He Is now my Prince again.

Sci. This is but cunning to save your life.

Enter diverse gentlemen armed.
Lo. My life? within there, ha? welcome.


1 My gracious Lord.


2 Wilt please your honor
Command my service?

3 Or me?


4 Or any?


5 Our swords and lives are yours.


Sci. Perhaps your Lordship has some business
With these Gentlemen, I Will take some other time.

Lo. By no means good Sciarrha:
You visit seldom, those are daily with me,
Men that expect employment, that wear swords,
And carry spirits, both to be engaged,
If I but name a cause: Gentlemen, ^raw.

Sci. My providence has betrayed me.


Lo. Now Sciarrha, you that with single valor dare come home
To affront me thus; know; but too late, thy heart
Is at the mercy of my breath: these swords
Can fetch it when I please, and to prevent
Your boast of this great daring: I beseech
As you do love and honor your Lorenzo,
No hand advance a weapon, sheath again,
And leave us; I owe service to your loves;
But must not so dishonor you.

All gentl. We obey.

Exeunt Gentlemen.
Sci. They Are gone: this is some nobleness.


Lo. You see
I do not fear your sword; alone I have
Too much advantage, yet you may imagine
How easily I could correct this rashness:
But in my fear to offend gracious Heaven
With a new crime, having so late obtained
My peace, I give you freedom.

Sci. Do I dream?


Lo. Pray chide me still, I will be patient
To hear my shame.

Sci. Is this to be believed?
Does not Lorenzo counter feit this virtue?
He does? it is impossible he should repent.

Lo. Why tell me Sciarrha, and let us argue a while
In cooler blood; did not you once resolve
To kill the Duke too?

Sci. I confess --


Lo. To give him death with your own hand?
Methinkes it should be the same parricide
In you, if not a greater; yet you chang
Your purpose, why did you not go through
And murder him?

Sci. He was converted.


Lo. Good, that taught you mercy, and perhaps repentance
For your intent.

Sci. It did.


Lo. Why should not sir
The same conversion of the Duke possess
My heart, with as much piety to him
And sorrow for my self? if I should say
You are but cunning, is this shape of honesty,
And still suspect your soul to be a Traitor?
Might you not blame my want of charity?

Sci. He says but right, we are
Both men, frail things* ^is not impossible.

Lo. I am reconcild to heaven already, and the Duke, if you
Be still unsatisfied, I am ready sin.

Sci. The circumstance considerd, I incline
To think this may be honest.

Lo. Come Sciarrha,
We are both hasty: pardon my rash language
In the beginning, I will study service
Shall make you love me: I ha bin too wicked,
Too full of passion, inexorable:
My nature is corrected, at this minute:
I Am friends with all the world, but in your love
Shall number many blessing.

Sci. I am converted.

Enter Petruchio.
Lo. What Is the news?


Pet. My Lord Depazzi prays some conference
In the next chamber we arrivd by chance
Together at your gate: I do not like his talk sir.

Lo. Hang him property, let him
Expect, thou art come in the opportunity:
I could have wished, be wise and second me.

Sci. He waits upon Pisano,
Whose health I may enquire, I ha not seen him
Since he departed sick, a fit occasion.

Lo. Married to Oriana: thou mistak'st,
It Is Amidea, Lord Sciarrha's sister.

Pet. That contract's broken, and the old Lady
Morrossa is violent to have the marriage
Finished with her daughter.

Lo. Sciarrha,
Is It true Pisano marries Oriana
The rich Morassa's daughter.

Sci. Ha?


Lo. We did expect to here your sister should
Have been his bride: has he forsaken Amidea?

Sci. Do not you serve Pisano?


Pet. Yes my Lord.


Sci. And dare you talk he is to be married
To Oriana?

Pet. If they live till to morrow:
There Is great provision to my knowledge and --

Sci. Take that, and learn to speak a truth hereafter.


Lo. That blow shall cost his life,
It is not possible he dares affront
You thus; the world takes notice of a contract,
He Is much to blame if he should wrong so sweet
A Lady as Amidea, now by Hymen.
It Is not so honorable he need not scorn,
Such an alliance.

Pet. I am not to give
Account for my Lords actions, let him answer
And justify his honor: but my Lord
Since J am provoked, J must declare he has
Called back his vows to Amidea, given
Her freedom, and does mean to use his own,
And this he dares publish.

Lo. What, disclaimed a Lady of her birth and glorious merit?


Sci. Thou Art a villain,


Lo My Lord he is not worth your anger, he
Declares but what his master has committed,
It Is none of his fault.

Pet. It becomes my duty
To take correction my Lord, from you,
I am a servant, a poor gentleman.

Sci. Shall I suspect the circumstance at his departure?


Lo. It is strange you knew not this before.


Sci. I must examine if he dares --


Lo. Be patient.


Sci. Teach fools and children patience,
The dogs eat up Sciarrha; let me live
The prodigy of sorrow, die a death
That may draw tears from Scithians, if Pisano
Lead o^re his threshold, any soon won dame
To be my sisters shame: I am calm now;
One false, heaven why should thy altars save?
It Is just that Hymen light him to his grave.
Exit
Lo. A thousand furies swell his rage, although
Pisano bleed, this is the safest killing;
Wisemen secure their fates and execute
Invisibly, like that most subtle flame
That burns the heart, yet leaves no path or touch
Upon the skin to follow or suspect it:
Farewell dull passionate fool, how this does feed me?
Kill and be lost thy self; or if (...) sword
Conclude thy life both ways I am revenged.
Petruchio, thou did hit my instructions rarely,
And I applaude thee': now send in Depazzi, and visit me anon.

Pet. I shall my Lord.

Exit.
Lo. Some Politician
That is not wise, but by a president,
Would think me weak for using such an instrument,
As this Depazzi; but I know by proof,
Such men whom fear and honor make our creatures,
Do prove safe Engines, fools will still obey,
When cunning knaves our confidence betray.

Enter Depazzy and Rogero. Dep. My Lord, I would speak a word or two in
private.


Lo. You may.


Dep. Is no body within hearing? all clear behind the arras?


Lo. Make no doubt sir.


Dep. My Lord the truth is, I am very fearful: is your Lordship sure there
are no eves droppers.


Lo. What needs this circumstance? I pray come to the point.


Dep. It Is not unknown to your Lordship, that you have bin my very good Lord,
neither am I ignorant, that I am your humble servant, you advanced men, brought
me into the number of the nobles, and I brought you a reasonable number of
crowns: I am not the first wise Citizen that has bin converted into a
foolish Courtier, but my Lord, I beseech you pardon me: it will out.


Lo. What Is the matter?


Dep. I am ready to burst.


Lo. With what?


Dep. Treason, treason, now'ts out, and I feel my body the lighter fort
already: the last plot did not take you see, and I would humbly entreat your
Lordship to excuse me, and get some body else hereafter to be your Traitor in
my stead.


Lo. How sir?


Dep. If you did but know the tenderness of my constitution, or feel the
pangs and conv^sions that I suffer, you would pity me: I fall away you see,
I cannot sleep for dreaming of an axe, I have caused, my hangings of
Holefernes to be taken down in my dining room, because I dare not look upon
a head that is cut off in it, something of my complexion: my wisdom tells me
I am a fool to be so fearful, but my conscience tells me I am a greater fool
if I ha not wit enough in my pare to keep my head on my shoulders, I beseech
your Lordship take me into your consideration, I am but a mortal, though I
be a Lord, every man has not the like gift of impudence, I have a weak
stomach* and treason is physic to me, and although I do not vomit up your
secrets they may out some other way.


Lo. You wonot betraie me.


Dep. But alas in such a case I may soon bewray my self, and then your
Lordship may soon be smelt out: to prevent therefore some mischief that may
happen, I desire to leave off while I am well, end that your Lordship may know
I mean plainly: I ha brought you all your letters, I durst not trust any
other place with 'em for fear of state rats, I have unript my bo some to you,
and there they are to a title -- now I may safely swear I have no hand with
your Lordship.


Lo. This is very strange.


Dep. Mistake not my good Lord, J am still your creature, but I have a great
mind to be honest a little while, among the weaker sort of nobility: yet
thus much persuade your self, I will never wrong your Lordship in a syllable,
should you tell me of athousand treasons, and stratagems, J will never reveal
any, J scorn that, but your Lordship must pardon me, J will be a Traitor no
longer, that is certain, J will be honest, and the rather because nobody shall
hit me in the teeth after J am dead, and say look were Depazzi carries his
head very high, and my Lord the more to induce your Lordship to dismiss me --
Rogero.


To. My Lord.


Dep. Give me the gold, I have brought 1500 crowns more.


Lo. Wherefore?


Dep. That J may have my Lordships good will, to leave my office before it be
taken from me, and preferred to a worse, it is half the price J paid for it, J
love peace and a litttle honesty, J know your honor will find an able man for
it, and it is fit J should pay for my quietus.


Lo. And what do you resolve?


Dep. To return to the dunghill from whence J came, for though J was borne in
the City, J have some land in the country durtie acres, and Mansion house,
where J will be the miracle of a courtier, and keep good hospitality, love my
neighbors, and their wives, and consequently get their children, be admird
amongst the Justices, sleep upon every bench, keep a Chaplain in my own
house to be my Idolator, and furnish me with jests; and when I have nothing
else to do, I will think of the court, and how much I have bin obliged to
your Lordship: my Lord I may do you service with a leading voice in the
country, the kennell will cry a my side if it come to election, you or your
friend shall carry it, against the Common wealth.


Lo. Well sir, since you have expressed your self so freely, I will not
council you against your disposition to stay at court, you may go when, and
whither you please; and though at parting J have nothing worth your
acceptance, I will bestow these Crowns upon your servant.


Dep. Thou shall give 'em me again.


To. Indeed my Lord J love a little honesty, it is his Lordships bounty, it
will be a stock to set me up, for my self at Court, when your Lordship is
retired into the Country, I humbly thank your Lordship: and take my leave of
yours.

Exit.
Enter a servant Ser. The Duke my Lord.

Exit servant.
Dep. How the Duke?


Du. Signior Depazzi.


Lo. He has bin earnest with me, and please your highness
To be his humble suitor, he may have
Freedom to leave the Court.

Du. He shall be banished


Dep. How?


Lo. What time will your grace allow to provide?


Du. Two hours.


Dep. I had rather loose my head at home, and save charges
Of travail, I beseech your grace.

Du. Well it is granted, let him not trouble us.


Lo. Enjoy the country, and return when the Duke sends for you.


Dep. I humbly thank his highness, and wilpray for your increase of grace.

Exit.
Du. Lorenzo, are we private?


Lo. Yes my Lord.


Du. I am very melancholy.


Lo. J know the cause, it is Amidea.


Du. Right.


Lo. I do not wish her dead.


Du. It were a sin.


Lo. Not in heaven sir, yet
There be Ladies, that would think it a promotion.

Du. It were pity she should leave
The world, till she has taught by her example
The nearest way

Lo. I am very confident she is yet honest.


Du. Yet Lorenzo?


Lo. I sir, but I Am not of opinion it is
Impossible to know a change.

Du. Take heed.


Lo. I must confess she has been very valiant,
In making you remove your seige, and showed
Pretty dexterity at the poniard,
See her self bleed: but this a mortal Virgin
Might do, and not be adord for it: other weomen
Have gone as far, or else false Legends have
Been thrust upon the easy world: some say
There have bin creatures that have killd themselves,
To save their sullen chastities; but I
Have no strong faith that way, yet you were startled
To see her strike her arm, and grew compassionate.

Du. I was not Marble, we break Adamant
With blood, and could I be a man, and not
Be moov'd to see that hasty eb be of li^e
For my sake?

Lo. I have read some aged Stories:
What think you of Lucrece? she is rememberd.

Du. Chastities great example.


Lo. How the world
Was cozend in her? she knew of Tarquin first,
And then suspecting she should never meet
Again the active Gentleman, having
Determined of his death, with well dissembled
Sorrow did stab her self, in hope to meet
The gamester in Elysium, Amidea,
You will allow beneath this Roman Dame.

Du. Lorenzo had the burning ravisher,
Made this attempt on Amidea, she
Would have compelld his penitence, to quench
His fire with holy tears. I had a body
Refined to air, or I was borne up by
A thousand wings: methought I could have flowne
And kissed the cheek of Cynthia, thence with ease
Have leapt to Uenus Star, but I was wounded,
And the gay feathers, in whose pride I had
My confidence, served now but with their weight
To hasten me to earth.

Lo. Ascend again,
And fix in your loved orb, he brings this comfort
That can assure it, if you have not lost
A heart to entertain with love and pleasure
The beauteous Amidea.

Du. Ha?


Lo. You shall enjoy her.


Du. Enjoy fair Amidea? do not tempt,
Or rather mock my frailty with such a promise.

Lo. Shake off your melancholy slumber, I
Have here decreed you shall possess her: she
Be sent submissive to your arms, and you
Be gracious to accept what she made coy of.

Du. Is this in nature?


Lo. Thus: Sciarrhas life
And fortunes are already growing forfeit
These brains have plotted so: your mercy shall
Purchase what you can wish, for, in his Sister
And he acknowledge rifling of her honor,
A fair and cheap redemption.

Du. Do this,
And I Will repent the folly of my penitence,
And take thee to my soul, a nearer pledge
Then blood or nature gave me: I Am renewd,
I feel my natural warmth return, when, where,
Is this to be expected? I grow old,
While our embraces are deferd.

Lo. J go, to hasten your delight, prepare your blood
For amorous game: Sciarrhas fate is cast
Firmer then destiny.

Du. Thou art my Prophet, Jle raise thee up an Altar.


Lo. Trust these brains.


Du. Thou make my spirit caper in my veins.

Exit.
Cosmo and two Gentlemen above* 1 Genesis This way they pass.


Cos. J would not see 'em.


2 Genesis Why?


1 Genesis What melancholy of the sudden? it is now past cure.


Cos. J know it is, and therefore do not
Desire to witness their solemnity, should Oriana
See me to day.

2 What then?


Cos. The object
J Fear would be too prodigious.

2 We dispute not those nice formalities.


Enter Alonzo, Piero, Pisano, Oriana, Morossa, 1 She has spied you already.


Cos. I am sorry for it.

Oriana faints.
Mor. How is it my child?


Pis. My dearest Oriana,
She faints, what grief is so unmannerly
To interrupt thee now Oriana?

Mor. Daughter!


Pis. Will Heaven divorce us ere the Priest have made
Our Marriage perfect? we in vain hereafter
Shall hear him teach, that our Religion binds
To have the Churches ceremony, she returns.

Oria. Why were you so unkind to call me from
A pleasing slumber? Death has a fine dwelling.

Pie. This shows her heart's not yet consenting, it is
Her Mothers fierce command.

Ori. Something spoke to me from that window.


Pis. There is nothing.


Ori. Nothing now.


Pis. Set forward.


Alon. I do not like this interruption: it is
Ominous.

Enter Amidea. Am. Not for my sake, but for your own, go back,
Or take some other way, this leads to death
My brother.

Pis. What of him?


Am. Transported with
The fury of revenge for my dishonor,
As he conceives; for it is against my will:
Has vowed to kill you in your Nuptial glory.
Alas I fear his haste, now good my Lord,
Have mercy on your self, I do not beg
Your pity upon me, I know too well
You cannot love me now, nor would I rob
This Virgin of your faith, since you have pleased
To throw me from your love: I do not ask
One smile, nor one poor kiss, enrich this maid
Created for those blessings: but again,
I would beseech you, cherish your own life,
Though I be lost forever.

Alon. It is worth
Your care my Lord, if there be any danger.

Pis. Alas her grief has made her wild poor Lady:
J should not love Oriana to go back,
Set forward, Amidea, you may live
To be a happier Bride: Sciarrha is not
So irreligious to profane these rites.

Am. Will you not then believe me? pray persuade him,
You are his friends. Lady, it will concern
You most of all indeed: fear you will weep
To see him dead as well as J.

Pis. No more,
Go forward.

Am. J have done, pray be not angry,
That still J wish you well, may heaven divert
All harms that threaten you, full blessings crown
Your Marriage: J hope there is no sin in this;
Jndeed J cannot choose but pray for you,
This might have been my wedding day.

Ori. Good Heaven
J would it were, my heart can tell, J take
No joy in being his bride, none in your prayers,
You shall have my consent to have him still:
J will resign my place, and wait on you,
Jf you will marry him.

Am. Pray do not mock me,
But if you do, J can forgive you too.

Ori. Dear Amidea, do not think J mock
Your sorrow; by these tears that are not worn
By every Virgin on her wedding day;
J am compelld to give away my self:
Your hearts were promisd, but he never had mine:
Am not J wretched too?

Am. Alas poor Maid,
We two keep sorrow alive then, but J prithee
When thou art married, love him, prithee love him;
For he esteems thee well, and once a day
Give him a kiss for me, but do not tell him,
It Was my desire, perhaps 'twill fetch a sigh
From him, and I had rather break my heart,
But one word more, and heaven be with you all,
Since you have led the way, I hope my Lord
That I am free to marry too.

Pis. Thou art.


Am. Let me beseech you then, to be so kind
After your own solemnities are done,
To grace my wedding, I shall be married shortly.

Pis To whom?


Am. To one whom you have all heard talk of,
Your fathers knew him well: one, who will never
Give cause I should suspect him to forsake me,
A constant lover, one whose lips though cold
Distill chaste kisses, though our bridal bed
Be not adorned with roses, twill be green,
We shall have Virgin Laurel Cipresse, Ewe,
To make us garlands, though no Pi^e do burn,
Our nuptial shall have torches, and our chamber
Shall be cut out of marble, where we will sleep
Free from all care for ever: death my Lord
I hope shall be my husband, now farewell*
Although no kiss, accept my parting tear,
And give me leave to wear my willow here.
Exit.
Enter Sciarrha, Lorenzo, aloof with a guard. Al. Sciarrha! then I prophecy
--


Sci. Pisano, where is Pisano?


Pis. Here, Sciarrha.
I should have answered with less el^mor.

Sci. But I would not lose my voice, I must be heard,
And does concern you, I profess no Augu^ie,
I have not quarterd out the heavens* to take
The flight of birds, nor by inspection
Of entrails made a divination.
But I must tell you, it is not safe to marry.

Pis. Why?


Sci. Twill be fatal, Hymen is gone abroad,
And Venus, Lady of your nativitoe,
Is found by wise Astrologers this day
In The house of death.

Pis. This must not fright me sir, set forward.


Sci. One cold word you are a villain,
I do not flatter.

Pis. I am patient:
This day I consecrate to love, not anger;
We Will meet some other time.

Sci. Deride my fury?
Then to thy heart I send my own revenge Stabs him with a poniard.
And Amideas.

Pis. I am murderd.


Mor. Help, murder gentlemen, oh my unhappines!


Enter Lorenzo with a gaurd. Pis. Bloody Sciarrha.


Lo. Hold.


Sci. Come all at once,
Yet let me tell you, my revenge is perfect,
And I would spare your blood, if you despise
My charity --

Lo. No man attempt his death,
I Will give yea reasons, this attempt deserves
An exemplarie justice.

Sci. I am above
Your politic reach, and glory in the wound
That punished our dishonor: is he dead?
I would not be so miserable, not to ha sped him
For the Empire.
Enter Cosmo.
Cos. Oh my friend, poor Oriana.


Lo. Disarme him:
Return and comfort one another, some Exeunt all but Lorenzo, Sciar. and guard.
Remove Pisanos body, while I make it
My care Sciarrha escape not.

Sci. None of all give me a scrach?


Lo You have forced him with descretion.


Sci. Now what must I expect?


Lo. You are my prisoner.


Sci. J am so.


Lo. And be confident to find that favor.


Sci. Favor.


Lo. Be at distance, more
My Lord, J am sorry for your great misfortune
And if you can but study how I may
Assist you, you shall soon descerne my love
My readiness to serve you.

Sci. Ha, this honest?


Lo. I would deserve your faith,
A friend but in affliction justify
His heart and honor, I durst run some hazard,
Might I secure your fate, name something to me
That may declare my friendship.

Sci. Be still safe,
And teach the world repentance, for mistaking thee
I pity not my self, but envy thy Heroic honors.

Lo. I will impose no more
Restraint, then your own house, you are honorable:
You have many severe enemies, the Duke
Looked graciously upon Pisano, but --.

Sci. You shanot loose the smallest beam of favor,
To buy a man so desperate, I never
Thought death the monster, that weak men have fancied,
As foil to make us more in love with life,
The Devils picture may affright poor fowls
Into their bodies palenesse, but the substance
Too resolute: man's a shadow, and cold sweat
Dare not approach his forehead, I am armed
To die, and give example of that fortitude
Shall shame the Laws severitie: my sister
May now give back Pisano his false vows,
To line his coffin, one tear shed on mee's
Enough, the justice I ha done, shall make
My memory beloved.

Lo. I ha thought a way.
To recover you, if you incline to it,
Dare you consent?

Sci. To any thing that is noble,
Although I never feared to suffer; I
Am not so foolish to despise a life.

Lo. There is no difficulty attends it, listen*
The time will not permit much circumstance:
The Duke you know did love your sister.

Sci. Vitiously.


Lo. Her Virtue did but cool him for the present,
As sprinklings on a flame, he is now more passionate*
To enjoy her.

Sci. Ha?


Lo. If she consent to meet
His soft embrace, with his first kiss, he seals
Your pardon, then the act upon Pisano
Appears a true revenge, when none dares question it:
Beside addition of state and fortune,
To you and Amidea, weigh your danger,
And what a trifle she gives up, to save
Your life, that never can be valued,
Less recompensed; the Duke may be so taken
With her return to his delight, who knows
But he may marry her, and discharge his Duchess
With a quaint sallet, you do apprehend me.

Sci. And repent more, I had one good thought of thee,
Then I had killed a thousand: save my life
And prostitute my sister, though I have
No weapon, I will look thee dead, or breath
A dampe shall stifle thee, that I could vomit
Consuming flames, or stones like Aetna, make
The earth with motion of my feet shrink lower,
And take thee in alive, oh that my voice
Could call a Serpent from corrupted Nile,
To make thee part of her accursed bowels,
Is this noble freindship? readiness
To save my life? let malice read all stories
Famous for cruelty, awake dead Tyrants,
Or be instructed by their ghosts with tortures,
Such as will make a damned fury weep
Only to see inflicted, I would beare'em,
And weary my tormentors, ere consent
In thought to thy temptation.

Lo. I ha done,
And praise your heathen resolution
Of death, go practice immortality,
And tell us when you can get leave to visit
This world again, what fine things you enjoy
In hell, for thither these rash passions drive thee,
And ere thy body has three days inhabited,
A melancholy chamber in the earth,
Hung round about with skuls and dead men's bones,
Ere Amidea have told all her tears
Upon thy Marble, or the Epitaph
Belie thy soul, by saying it is fled
To Heaven: this Sister shall be ravished,
Mauger thy dust and Heraldry.

Sci* Ha, ravished?
When I am d^ad, was it not so? oh my soul,
I feel it weep within me, and the tears
Soften my flesh: Lorenzo, I repent my fury.

Lo. I advised you the best way my wisdom could direct.


Sci. I thank you for it,
You have awaked my reason, I am ashamed
I was no sooner sensible: does the Duke
Affect my Sister still say you?

Lo. Most passionately.


Sci. She shall obey him then, upon my life:
That's it, my life; I know she loves me dearly.
I shall have much ado to win her to it,
But she shall come, I Will send her.

Lo. Perform this?


Sci. I wonot only send her, but prepared
Not to be disobedient to his Highness:
He shall command her any thing.

Lo. Do this,
And be for ever happy, when these have
Only for form but waited on you home:
This disingages'em.

Sci. My humblest service
To the Duke I pray, and tell him, Amidea
This night shall be at his dispose, by this.

Lo. I Am confident, farewell; attend Sciarrha.


Sci. Pity the Seaman, that to avoid a shelfe,
Must strike upon a rock to save himself.
Exeunt.
ACTVS QVINTVS.
Enter Sciarrha and Amidea. Sci. THe doors are fast,
Enough is wept already for Pisano:
There Is something else that must be thought on, and
Of greater consequence: I am yet unsafe,
That for thy sake am guilty of his blood.

Am. Though all my stock of tears were spent already
Upon Pisanoes loss, and that my brain
Were banquerout of moisture, and denied
To lend my grief one drop more for his Funeral;
Yet the remembrance that you have made
A forfeit of your dear life
Is able to create a weeping spring
Within my barren head: oh my lost brother,
Thou have a cruel destiny, my eyes
In pity of thy fate desire to drown thee.
The Law will only seek thee upon land,
Hid in my tears, thou shall prevent the stroke
Kills both our name and thee.

Sci. I know thou love me
Poor Girl. I shall desire to cherrish life
Jf thou lament me thus: so rich a comfort
Will tempt me, wish I might delay my journie
To Heaven.

Am. Good Heaven that we might go together.


Sci. That must not be.


Am. Then let me go before.


Sci. How?


Am. Make my suite unto the Prince, my blood
May be your ransom; let me die, Sciarrha
My life is fruitless unto all the world,
The Duke in justice will not deny this:
And though I weep in telling thee, I shall
Smile on the Scaffold.

Sci. How my Honor blushes
To hear thee Amidea? in this love
Thou woundst me more, then thou desir'st to save:
Suffer for me? why thou art innocent:
I have provoked the punishment, and dare
Obey it manly; if thou could redeem me
With any thing but death, I think I should
Consent to live, but I Would not have thee venture
All at one chance.

Am. Nothing can be too precious
To save a brother, such a loving brother
As you have been.

Sci. Death's a devouring gamester,
And sweepes up all: what think thou of an eye?
Could thou spare one, and think the blemish r^co^penc'd,
To see me safe with the other; or a hand,
This white hand, that has so often
With admiration trembled on the Lu^e,
Till we have prayed thee leave the strings awhile,
And laid our ears close to thy Ivorie fingers,
Suspecting all the Harmony proceeded
From their own motion, without the need
Of any dull or passive instrument.
No Amidea, shall not bear one scarre
To buy my life: the sickle shall not touch
A flower that grows so fair upon his stalk:
Thy the other hand will miss a white companion,
And wither on thy arm; what then can I
Expect from thee to save me? I would live
And owe my life to thee, so 'twere not bought
Too dear.

Am. Do you believe I should not find
The way to Heaven: were both mine eyes thy ransom,
I shall clime up those high and rugged (...)
Without a hand.

Sci. One way there is* if thou
Do love wit^ that tenderness.

Am. Pronounce it,
And let no danger that attends, incline you
To make a pause.

Sci. The Duke thou know did love thee.


Am. Hi?


Sci. Nay do not start already, nor mistake me;
I do not as before, make tria^l of thee,
Whether thou can, laying aside thy honor,
Meet his lascivious arms but by this virtue
I must beseech thee to for go it all,
And turn a sinful woman.

Am. Bless me!


Sci. I know the kingdoms of the world contain not
Riches enough to tempt thee to a fall
That will so much undo thee: but I am
Thy brother, dying brother; if thou love
Him therefore, that for thee has done so much;
Died his pale hands in blood to revenge thee,
And in that murder wounded his own soul
Almost to death, consent to loose thy innocence*
I know it makes thee grieve, but I shall live
To love thee better for it: we (...) repent
Together for ou^ sins, and pray and weep
Till Heaven has pardoned all.

Am. Oh never, never.


Sci. Do but repeat thy words, to save my life,
And that will teach com^assion: my (...),
Our shame, the stain of all our family,
Which will succeed in my ignoble death*
Thou washest off.

Am. But stain my self for ever.


Sci. Where? in thy ^ace, who shall behold one blemish,
Or one ^ot more in thy whole frame, thy beauty
Will be the very same, thy speech, thy person
Wear no deformity.

Am. Oh do not speak
So like a rebel to all modesty,
To all Religion, if these arguments
Spring from your jealousy that I am fallen,
After a proof you did so late applaude.

Sci. I had not killd Pis^no then: I am now
More spotted then the Marble, then my head
Did owe no forfeiture to Law:
It does ache now, then I but tried thy virtue.
Now my condition calls for mercy to thee,
Though to thy self thou appear cruel for it:
Come we may live both if you please.

Am. I must never
Buy my poor breath at such a rate, who has
Made you afraid to die: I pity you,
And wish my self in any noble cause
Your Leader, when our souls shall leave this dwelling,
The glory of one fair, and virtuous action
Is above all the scutcheons on our ^ombe,
Or silken bann^rs over us.

Sci. So valiant,
J will not interpose another syllable
To entreat your pity say your prayers, and then
Thar't ripe to be translated from the earth,
To make a Cherubine.

Am. What means my brother?


Sci. To kill you.


Am. Do not fright me good Sciarrha.


Sci. And I allow three minutes for your devotion.


Am. Will you murder me?


Sci. Do You tremble?


Am. Not at the terror of your sword,
But at the horror will affright thy soul,
For this black deed: J see Pisanos blood
Is texted in thy forehead, and thy hands
Retain too many, too many crimson spots already
Make not thy self, by ^urthering of thy ^ister
All a red letter,

Sci. You shall be the martyr.


Am. Yetstay, is there no remedy but death,
And from your hand? then keep your word, and let me
Use one short prayer.

Sci. J shall relent*


Am. Forgive me heaven, and, witn^sse J have ^till K^eels.
My Virgin thoughts, it is not to ^ave my life,
But his eternal one.
Sciarrha give me leave to veil my face, Rises.
J dare not look upon you and pronounce,
J am too much a sister, live, hereafter
I know you will condemn my frailty for it.
I will obey the Duke.

Sci. Dare thou consent.

Wounds her.
Am. Oh let me see the wound She unvails.
It Is well, if any other hand had done it:
Some Angel tell my brother now, I did
But seem consenting.

Sci. Ha b^t seem?


Am. You may believe my last breath.


Sci. Why did say so?


Am. To gain some time, in hope you might call in
Your bloody purpose, and prevent the guilt
Of being my murderer; but Heaven forgive thee.

Sci. Again, again, forgive me Amidea,
And pray for me, live but a little longer,
To hear me speak, my passion has betrayed
Thee to this wound, for which I know not whether
I should rejoice, or weep, since thou art virtuous:
The Duke, whose soul is black again, expects thee
To be his whore: good Death be not so hasty.
The Agent for his lust, Lorenzo, has
My Oath to send thee to his bed: for otherwise
In my denial, hell; and they decree
When I am dead, to ravish thee: mark that,
To ravish thee: and I confess in tears,
As full of sorrow, as thy soul of innocence,
In my religious care to have thee spotless,
I did resolve, when I had found thee ripe,
And nearest Heaven, with all thy best desires
To send thee to thy peace: thy faind consent
Has brought thy happiness more earelie to thee,
And saved some guilt, forgive me altogether.

Am. With the same heart I beg Heaven for my self,
Farewell.

Sci. Thou shall not die yet Amidea Sister.

Florio knockes. I cannot come:
But one word more: oh which way went thy soul?
Or is it gone so far it cannot hear me?

Florio breaks open the door. Flo. Look, here is our Sister! so, so, chafe her:
She may return; there is some motion.

Flo. Sister?


Sci. Speak aloud Florio, if her spirit be not
Departed, I will seal this passage up:
I feel her breath again, here is Florio
Would feign take his leave; so, so, she comes.

Flo. Amidea, how came this wound?


Am. I drew the weapon to it:
Heaven knows my brother loved me: now I hope
The Duke wo'not pursue me with new flames.
Sciarrha, tell the rest, love one another
The time you live together: I Will pray for you
In Heaven, farewell, kiss me when I am dead;
You else will stay my journie.
She dies.
Sci. Did not hear
An Angel call her? Florio, I have much
To tell thee, take her up; stay I will talk
A little more with her, she is not dead,
Let her alone; nay then she is gone indeed.
But hereabouts her soul must hover still:
Lets speak to that, fair Spirit.

Flo. You talk idly.


Sci. Do you talk wisely then? an excellent pattern
As she now stands for her own Alablaster:
Or may she not be kept from putrefaction,
And be the very figure on her Tomb:
Cannot thy tears and mine preserve her Florio?
If we want brine, a thousand Virgins shall
Weep every day upon her, and themselves
In Winter, leaning round about her Monument,
Being moist creatures, stiffen with the cold,
And freeze into so many white supporters.
But we loose time, I charge thee by thy lo
To this pale Relic, be instructed by me,
Not to thy danger; some revenge must be,
And I am lost already; if thou fall,
Who shall survive to give us Funeral?
Exeunt.
Enter Lorenzo and Petruchio. Lo. Petruchio?


Pe. My Lord.


Lo. Thou Art now my servant.


Pe. I ever was in heart your humblest vass^ll.


Lo. Thou Art faithful, I must cherish thy desert,
I shortly shall reward it, very shortly;
Next morning must salute me Duke; the Sun
And I must rise together.

Pe. I shall pray
Your glory may outshine him in your Florence,
Apd when he sets, we may enjoy your Sun-beame.

Lo. It Is hansome flattery, and becomes a Courtier*


Pe. J flatter not my Lord.


Lo. Then thou art a fool:
No Music to a Great man chimes so sweetly:
And men must thrive, come hither, how many
Have thou killd?

Pe. But one my Lord.


Lo. But one?


Pe. And J must owe
My life to your Lordship, I had been hanged else.

Lo. But one? wait at the door, he is
Not fit to kill a Duke, whose hand is guilty
But of a single murder; or at least
Not fit alone to act it: J ha been
Practiced already, and though no man see it,
Nor scarce the eye of Heaven, yet every day
I kill a Prince, appear thou Tragic witness.
He discovers the Dukes Picture, a Poniard sticking in it. Which though it
bleed not, I may boast a Murder:
Here first the Duke was painted to the life:
But with this Pencill to the death: I love
My brain for the invention, and thus
Confirmed, dare trust my resolution.
I did suspect his youth, and beauty might
Win some compassion when J came to kill him:
Or the remembrance that he is my Kinsman,
Might thrill my blood: or something in his Title,
Might give my hand repulse, and startle Nature:
But thus J have armed my self against all pity,
That when J come to strike, my Poniard may
Through all his charms as confidently wound him,
As thus J stab his Picture, and stare on it.
Me thinks the Duke should feel me now: is not
His soul acquainted; can he less then tremble
When J lift up my arm to wound his counterfeit?
Witches can persecute the lives of whom
They hate, when they torment their senseless figures,
And stick the waxen model full of pinnes.
Can any stroke of mine carry less spell
To wound his heart, sent with as great a malice?
He smiles, he smiles upon me: J will dig
Thy wanton eyes out, and supply the dark
And hollow Cells with two pitch burning Tapers:
Then place thee Porter in some Charnell house
To light the Coffins in.

Enter Petruchio. Pet. My Lord.


Lor. The Duke's not come already.


Pet. Signior Florio desires to speak with you.


Lor. This must retire again into my Closet: admit him. Enter Florio.
Welcome, how does Sciarrha?

Flo. He commends
His service to your Lordship, and has sent --

Lor. His Sister?


Flo. Much ado he had to effect it:
He hopes his Grace will quickly sign his pardon.

Lor. It shall be done.


Flo. I have a suite my Lord.


Lor. To me?


Flo. My Sister would entreat your Honor
She may be admitted privately* and that
I may have privilege to prepare her chamber:
She does retain some modesty, and would not*
Trust every servant with her shame: their eyes
Are apt to instruct their tongues.

Lor. I wonot see her my self, command what you desire.


Flo. You Are gracious.


Lor. I Will give directions instantly: poor Lady,
This is the Dukes hot blood, but Heaven convert him,
Follow me good Florio.

Flo. I attend my Lord.


Lor. Things shall be carried honorably.


Flo. We are all bound to you.

Exeunt.
Recorders. Amidea discoverd in a Bed, prepared by two Gentlewomen. 1 This is a
sad imploiment.


2 The last wee're shall do my Lady.


Enter Florio. Flo. So, now you may return, it will become
Your modest duties, not to enquire the reason
Of this strange service, nor to publish what
You Have bin commanded; let me look upon Ex. gentlewomen.
My sister now, still she retains her beauty,
Death has been kind to leave her all this sweetness.
Thus in a morning have I often saluted
My sister in her chamber, sat upon
Her bed, and talked of many harmless passages,
But now it is night, and a long night with her,
Ineere shall see these Curtains drawn again
Until we meet in heaven. The Duke already.

Enter Duke and Lorenzo. Du. May I believe?


Lo. Trust me my Lord (...).


Du. Call me no more thy Lord, but thy companion
I will not wear that honor in my title,
Shall not be thine. Whoe's that?

Lo. Her brother Florio.


Du. She is a bed.


Lor. The readier for your pastime.
She means no make a night on it.

Flo. This shall declare thee to posterity
The best of Sisters -- what of that? and is not
A brothers life more precious then a trifle?
I prithee do not sigh: how many Ladies
Would be ambitious of thy place to night?
And thank his Highness? yes, and Virgins too.

Du. He pleades for me.


Lo. He will deserve some office 'bout your person.


Du. With what words shall I express my joy?


Lo. I leave you sir to action, Florio
Is soon dismissed.
Exit.
Flo. He Is come: goodnight --


Du. Florio?


Flo. Your Slave.


Du. My friend! thou shall be near our bosom.


Flo. Pleasures crown your expectation.

Exit.
Du. All perfect, till this minute, I could never
Boast I was happy: all this world has not
A blessing to exchange, this world? it is Heaven;
And thus I take possession of my Saint:
Asleep already? 'twere great pity to
Disturb her dream, yet if her soul be not
Tired with the bodies weight, it must convey
Into her slumbers I wait here, and thus
Seal my devotion -- what winter dwells Kisses.
Upon this lip? twa's no warm kiss, I Will try
Again -- the snow is not so cold, I have
Drunk ice, and feel a numbnesse spread through
My blood at once -- ha? let me examine
A little better; Amidea, she is dead, she is dead!
What horror does invade me? help Lorenzo;
Murder, where is Lorenzo?

Enter Lorenzo and Petruchio. Lo. Here my Lord.


Du. Some Traitor hid within the chamber, see
My Amidea's dead.

Lo. Dead? it is impossible,
Y^, she has a wound upon her breast.

Du. I prithee kill me: They wound him.
Ha will thou murder me, Lorenzo, villain?
Oh spare me to consider, I would live
A little longer: Treason.

Lo. A little longer say^ee
It was my duty to obey you sir.

Pet. Lets make him sure my Lord.


Lo. What would you say? no cares but ours
Can reach his voice, but be not tedious.

Du. Oh spare me, I may live and pardon thee:
Thy Prince begs mercy from thee, that did never
Deny thee any thing; pity my poor so^le,
I have not prayed.

Lo. I could have wished you better
Prepared, but let your soul e'entake his chance.
Wounds him again.
Du. No tear prevail? oh whither must wander
Thus Caesar fell by Brutus. I shall tell
News to the world I go to, will not be
Beleevd, Lorenzo killed me.

Lo. Will it not?
I Will presently put in security.

Du. I am coming Amidea, I am coming
For thee inhumane murderer, expect
My blood shall fly to heaven, and there inflamed,
Hang a prodigious meteor all thy life.
And when by some as bloody hand as thine
Thy soul is ebbing forth, it shall descend
In flaming drops upon thee: oh I faint!
Thou flattering world farewell: let Princes gather
My dust into a glass, and learn to spend
Their hour of state, that is all they have; for when
That's out, times never turns the glass again.
Dies.
Lo. So lay him beside his mistress, hide their faces,
The Duke dismissed the train came with him.

Pe. He did my Lord.


Lo. Run to Sciarrha, pray him come, and speak wo'mee,
Secure his passage to this Chamber, haste, Exit Pet.
He Is dead; I Will trust him now, and his ghost too;
Fools start at shadows, I Am in love with night
And her complexion.

Enter Petr. Pe. My Lord, he is come without your summons.


Lo. Already? leave us.

Enter Sciarrha, and Florio. Welcome, let embraces
Chain us together, noble Florio welcome:
But I must honor thy great soul.

Sci. Where Is the Duke?


Lo. They are a bed together.


Sci. Ha?


Lo. He Is not stirring yet:
Thou kildst thy sister, did not?

Sci. I preserved her.


Lo. So it was bravely done.


Sci. But where is the wanton Duke?


Lo. A sleep I tell you.


Sci. And he shall sleep eternally.


Lor. You cannot wake him, look you.


Sci. Is he dead?


Lo. And in his death we two begin our life
Of gr^tnesse, and of Empire, nay he is dead.

Sci. That labor's saved.


Lo. Now I pronounce Sciarrha,
Thy pardon, and to recompense thy loss,
The share of Florence, I Will but wear the title,
The power we will devide.

Sci. I like this well:
You told a tale once of a common wealth
And liberty.

Lo. It was to gain a faction
With discontented persons, a fine trick
To make a buzze of reformation.
My ends are compas'd: hang the ribble rabble.

Sci. Shall we sweat for the people? loose our breath
To get their fame?

Lo. I Will have it given out
The Duke did kill thy sister.

Sci. Excellent.


Lo. Havingfirst ravished her, he cannot be
Too hateful; it will dull the examination
Of his own death, or if that come to question --

Sci. What if I say, I killed him in revenge
Of Amidea? they will pity me.
Beside, 'twil be in your power to pardon
Me altogether.

Lo. Most descreetely thought on.


Sci. The Devil wonot leave us of the sudden.


Lo. Rare wit:
How hastily he climbs the the precipice,
From whence one Fillup topples him to ruin:
We two shall live like brothers.

Sci. stay we two -- now I consider better,
I have no mind to live at all -- and you shanot,
I Will give you proof, if you but make a noise,
You gallop to the Devil.

Lo. I Am betrayed.


Sci. To death inevitable, brother be you
Spectator only.

Lo. This is somewhat noble.


Sci. Thank me not Lorenzo, I Will not engage
His innocence to blood, thy hands are white,
Preserve them Florio, and unless my arm^
Grow feeble, do not interpose thy sword
I charge thee.

Lo. None to assist me? help Petruchio, help.


They fight, Enter Petruchio, who offering to run at Sciarrha, is intercepted
by Florio, Petruchio, runs in crying help, Florio makes fast the door. Lo.
Reach thy jaws wider villain, cry out murder,
Treason, any thing; hold -- oh.
Lo. falls.
Sci Will you not fall Colosus?


Flo. Are not you hurt?


Sci. I know not. Ha? yes he has pricked me somewhere
But I Will make sure of him; now must I follow:
I Will fight with him in the the other world -- thy hand,
Florio. Farewell.
Dies.
Flo. He Is dead too: it is in vain for me to fly
Within Break open the doors*

Flo. You shanot need.


Enter Petruchio, Cos^o, Allonso, Frederico, with guard. Al. Disarme him.


Cos. Lorenzo, and Sciarrha slain?


Al. Where is the Duke?


Pet. Look here my Lords.


Al. What Traitor?


Fre. See Amidea murderd too.


Cos. I tremble, here is a heap of Tragedies.


Al. We must have an account from Florio.


Flo. He can inform you best that brought you hither.


Al. Lay hands upon Petruchio, disarme him.


Cos. What blood is that upon his sword? it is fresh.


Pet. I Am caught.


Cos. To tortures with him.


Pet. Spare your fury* know
It Was the best blood in Florence, I must quit
Young Florio; Lorenzo, and my self,
Are only guilty of the princes death.

Al. Inhumane traitors?


Co. But who killed Amidea?


Flo. The Dukes lust:
There was no other way to save her honor,
My brother has revengd it here, but fate,
Denyde him triumph.

Al. I never heard
Such killing stories, but it is meet, we first
Settle the state, Cos^o you are the next
Of blood to challenge Florence.

Cos. Pray defer
That till the morning, drag that murderer
To prison: Florio, you must not expect
Your liberty, til all things be exam'nd.
Lorenzo, now I am above thy malice,
And will make satisfaction to Oriana.
It Is a sad night my Lords, by these you see
There is no stay in proud mortality.
Exeunt.
FINIS.

