THE RICHES OF MERCY. In two Treatises; 1 Lydia's Conversion. 2. A Rescue from
death.
By the late learned, and reverend Divine, RICHARD SIBBS, Doctor in Divinity.
Published by the Authors own appointment, and subscribed with his own hand to
prevent imperfect Copies.

1 SAMUEL 2.6. The Lord kills, and makes alive; he brings down to the
Grave, and brings up.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Francis Eglesfeild, and are to be sold by him at
the sign of the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

LYDIAS Conversion.
ACT. 16.14. And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of Purple, of the City
of Thyatira, that worshipped God, whose heart the Lord opened, that she
attended to the things that were spoken of Paul. And when, etc.


THE holy Apostle Saint Paula vessel of mercy, having found mercy himself
of God, was a fit instrument to preach mercy to others.

Hereupon he was appointed to be a preacher to the Gentiles. Among the rest of
the Gentiles, he was called to preach to them of Macedonia, and it was by a
vision, as we see in the former part of the Chapter. A man of Macedonia, Verse.
9^
appeared to Paul by night and said Come to Macedonia* and help us. Indeed the
state of the people of Macedonia called for help, as now the state of many
people does: though there be not such a vision as a man of Macedonia, yet their
wretched estate (being under the Kingdom of Satan) cries Come and help us,
though they do not cry with their mouths, yet their estate cries. The
Apostle upon this vision, takes his journey to come toward Macedonia, and he
stayed there a good while; He abode certain days.

Though God called him to Macedonia: yet God did not give him great
encouragement for the present. This is the manner of Gods carriage, not to
discover at the present what he will do, but leads people on by gentle
encouragements: and to humble them the more with little fruit at the first, he
abode there certain days, without any great fruit. Afterward he goes out to
Philippi (the chief City in Macedonia, and on the Sabbath day, the people were
gathered together: a company of women were resorted together, and there he
preached to them: As indeed holy communion is never without a blessing; they
met together on a good day, the Sabbath, and for a good end they were met
together; Now Paul took the advantage of their meeting together on the Sabbath
day, he cast his net, and he catches one with her family, namely Lydia. The
Gospel was a sweet savor of salvation to her.

Hereupon there is a discourse of Lydia, a short story of Lydia, a story worthy
to be thought of, which is in the words of my text.

A certain woman named Lydia, etc.
She is described First by her person, Parts of the text.
and sex, a certain woman. By her name Lydia. By her calling a seller of
purple. By her city Thiatira. By her pious disposition, she worshipped God.
And then her conversion is set down, by the cause of it. God opened her heart.
And what followed upon that opening of her heart, she attended to the things
that were spoken by Paul, and likewise she was baptized with all her household.

And then the sweet fruit that this conversion of her with all her household
had presently she showed the love (that she felt from God in converting her)
to the blessed Apostle and his company, she besought them saying, If ye have
judged me faithful to the Lord, Come to my house, etc. which words I shall
unfold as I come to them.

And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, etc.
FIRST here-is a description of her person, and sex, and name, and calling,
and city, and disposition.

God takes notice of all the particulars of those that are his, God takes
particular notice of his.
he delights to speak of them, those that have their names written in the
book of life, he knows their names, and callings, and persons, they are as
Jewels in his eye, they are written on the palms of his hands, he takes more
special notice of them then of the rest of the world: Therefore the Apostle is
very punctual in the description of all particulars.

For her person I will be very short, I will give but a note or two, and so
come to that I mainly aim at, her conversion.

A certain woman named Lydia.
FOR her sex, she, and the rest were women that were gathered together, as we
see in the former verse. In Christ Jesus there is neither male nor female. Sin
came in by a woman, and the means of salvation was by a woman too, here were a
company of women gathered together.

For the most part women have sweet affections to religion, Women's affections
to religion strong.
and therein they often go beyond men.

Reas. 1.
The reason is, Religion is especially seated in the affections: and they have
sweet and strong affections.

2
Likewise they are subject to weakness, and God delights to show his strength
in weakness.

3
And thirdly, especially Child bearing-women, bring others into this life with
danger of their own, therefore they are forced to a nearer communion with God,
because so many children as they bring forth, they are in peril of their
lives. Therefore the Apostle here mentions a company of women that were
gathered together, and among the rest, a Certain woman named Lydia.

What! a woman to be the foundation of the Church of Macedonia, Great things
in religion from small beginnings
a poor woman, and then a Jailer afterward, a rugged rough Jailer: for these
to be the foundation of so famous a Church as Philippi and other Churches in
Macedonia! Oh! yes; the Kingdom of heaven is as a grain of mustard seed small
in the beginning. It is so in regard of the Church it self; and in regard of
the grace, that every particular member has, it is little and weak beginnings
Christians are not as the Angels were, perfect at the first: The Church grows
by little, and little. Therefore we should not be discouraged when the
plantation of the Gospel has poor success at the beginning: We see in the
Church of Macedonia, there was little success at the first: A woman and a
rough Jailer, a Jailer that both by calling, and disposition, and custom was a
man, hard and hardened too: yet these two were the foundation of a great Church.

Was it not so among our selves? The Church of latter times, in the time of
reformation, how began it? By a child, and a woman, King Edward the sixth, and
Queen Elizabeth of famous memory* Therefore as the Prophet says, Who art thou
that despisest the day of little things? despise not little things. There is
nothing less then grace at the first: But as Christ the stock of Iesse, rose
from the dead and rose up to heaven, and overspreads the world now so every
Christian rises of mean beginnings: and so does the Church it self. A
certain woman named Lydia, she was the foundation of a famous Church.

Then she is set down by her calling.

A Seller of Purple.
Callings allowed by God.
GOD allows callings.

The calling of Christianity is showed in particular callings, which are
sanctified by God to subdue the excess of corruptions. Men without callings
are exceeding vicious, as some Gentlemen, and beggars, in this I may rank them
together: those that have no callings, nor fit themselves for a calling, and
that are out of a calling lawful.

Callings are lawful. Commerce lawful.
And so this calling of commerce, and trade, A seller of purple: Though for the
most part men gather a great deal of soil, and corruption, by commixture of
manners with those they deal with: yet there must be commerce, and this
particular commerce of selling of Purple.

The body of man needs many callings, there is not a part of man's body, not one
member, but it sets a particular calling on work Therefore this life is a life
of many necessities? and there must be callings and trading, and this
particular trading, selling of purple. It may seem superfluous, but it is not
altogether: for Garments are for 3. ends.

For Use of garments.
Necessity. Ornament. Distinction.


Now purple, howeuer it be not for necessity, it is for ornament, and
distinction, for Magistrates, and the like, persons of great quality. How-ever
the pride of the times has bred a confusion, that one will go as well as
another yet God that allows distinction of callings, and persons, allows
distinction of habit, and attire Therefore selling of purple is lawful and the
wearing of rich attire. The selling and wearing rich attire lawful.
Kings daughters went in such, as it is said of David's daughters.

So there be not over much delicacie: Object,
for delicacie in this, in these times is fatal as there be many in the City,
and in the countries that are given to overmuch nicitie, and sumptuousnes in
this kind; it is a fore runner of ruin.

Otherwise it is lawful (for those that may,) to wear purple, as it is
lawful to sell Purple, so that (as he said to the great Emperor) they do not
consider the purple so much, as that the purple couers dust, and base flesh
that must turn to dust and ashes, and rottenness ere long, so that people be
not lift up in that, that is borrowed from the poor creature, from worms. It
is a strange thing that men should be so sick in their fancy, as to think
themselves the better for that they beg of the poor creature: so a man take
heed of fancy and pride, it is lawful to use purple, She was a seller of
Purple, So much for her calling.

She worshipped God.
SHE was perhaps a Jew, and looked for a Messiah. There were 3. sorts of
people before Christ. 3. Sorts of people before Christ
The Jews and those that we call prose lites; and Religious persons fearing
God. She might be one of the three it is not certain what she was.
Certainly she was one that feared God* She had some religion in her, though
yet she was not ripened in the true Religion, she was a woman that feared God.

From such kind of places as this, we have occasion to speak of works of
preparation. Saint Paul was sent to her, she was a woman that feared God. To
speak a little of works of preparation.

Works of preparation necessary to conversion.
It is true, God usually prepares those that he means to convert: as we plow
before we sow, we do not sow among the thorns, and we dig deep to lay a
foundation, we purge before Cordialls. It is usual in nature, and in grace
preparations: therefore preparations are necessary. There is such a distance
between the nature, and corruption of man, and grace, that there must be a
great deal of preparation, many degrees to rise by before a man come to that
condition he should be in, therefore preparations we allow, and the necessity
of them.

But we allow this, Preparations are from God.
that all preparations are from God, we cannot prepare our selves, or deserve
future things by our preparations; for the preparations themselves are of God.

And thirdly, though we grant preparations yet we grant no force of a
meritorious cause in preparations to produce such an effect as conversion is:
No; only preparation is to remove the hindrances, Preparations remove
hindrances.
and to fit the soul for conversion that there may not be so great a distance
beetweene the soul, and conversion, as without preparation there would be.

Quest.
But when is preparation sufficient?

Answ.
When the soul is so far cast down, as it sets a high price on Christ, and on
grace above all things in the world, it accounts grace the only pearl, and
the Gospel to be the Kingdom of heaven: when a man sets a high price on grace
more then all the world besides then a man is sufficiently prepared,

Some poor souls think they are never prepared enough: but let them look to
the end that God will have preparation for that is, that a high price be set
upon the best things, and value all things but grace meanly in their own
rank, when a man is brought to that pitch that by the light of the spirit, he
esteems all nothing but Christ, and that he must be had, and he must have
saving grace let him never talk whether he be prepared or no. This
disposition shows that he is prepared enough, at least to bring him to
conversion.

Progress of preparation.
Now, God in preparation for the most part Civilizeth people, and then
Christianizeth them as I may say: for the spirit of GOD will not be effectual
in a rude wild, and barbarous soul, in men that are not men; Therefore they
must be brought to Civilitie, and not only to civilitie, but there must be a
work of the law, to cast them down, and then they are brought to
Christianity thereupon.

Therefore they take a good course that labor to break them from their
natural rudeness, and fierceness: as by nature every man is like a wild
asse-Colt, there cannot be more significant words a Colt, an ass Colt, and
wild. Now there is no sowing in the sand or on the water: there is no forcing of
grace on a soul so far indisposed that is not brought to Civilitie, rude,
and barbarous souls therefore Gods manner is to bring them in the compass of
Civilitie, and then seeing what their estate is in the corruption of nature to
deject them and then to bring them to Christianity as we see here in Lydia.

For howeuer there is no force of a meritorious cause in preparations to grace,
to raise up the soul to grace: for alas that cannot be! it is not in it, to
produce such a blessed effect: yet notwithstanding it brings a man to a less
distance then other wild creatures that come not within the compass of the
means. Therefore usually to those that use the talents of their understanding
and will, that they have well, God after discovers himself more, and more.

Therefore let all be encouraged to grow more, and more to courses of civility,
and Religion, and wait the good time, till God shine on them in mercy: For
though those courses can never produce religion, yet it brings men to a
proximity, and nearenesse to God, and Christ, more then those that stand
further off. But I will not force this point further at this time- She was a
woman that feared, and worshipped God. She was faithful in that light she
had, and to him that has shall be given.

She worspipped God.
NOT in any sight of her own, she had the grace of God from the spirit of God.
All fear comes from the spirit of God, initiall fear, and ripened fear, all
fear is from God, but I will not conflict with adversaries at this time. You
see the person, a woman, her calling; A seller of purple, and her pious
disposition, she was such a one as worshipped God; And she heard Paul.

The sweet providence of God, brings those that belong to Election, under the
compass of the means at one time or other. God brings his elect under means.
Let the devil, and the instruments of the Devil, rage and oppose, and do
what they can; those that belong to God, God will have a time to bring them
within the compass of his calling, and effectually call them by his spirit. As
here Lydia, there was a sweet preventing providence that she never thought
of, God brought an Apostle for the salvation of her soul, she heard Paul and
was converted. To come to the description of her conversion in the next words.

Whose heart the Lord opened to attend to the things that were spoken of Paul.
GOD opened her heart. To what purpose? To attend to the things spoken of Paul.

God by the word preached opens the heart; to attend to the word: by the word,
we are fitted to the word. The spirit and the word draw us to themselves: The
spirit, and the word draw us to regard the word, by the word her heart was
opened to attend to the word.

First I will speak of the opening her heart: And then of her attending upon
the word preached by Paul. God opened her heart. She was a religious woman yet
her heart was shut before God opened it. She was religious in her kind, yet
her heart must be further opened before she could be saved. There is no
staying in preparations in this or that degree: Preparations not to be rested
in.
as many abortiues in our times that make many offers; they have the spirit of
bondage, and are cast down: but there they stick and never come to proof. But
those that will attain to salvation, must not rest in religious dispositions,
in good affections, and gracious offers, they must go on further and further,
as we see here, God opened her heart.

Observe then in the opening of the heart these things. God opens the heart.


The heart naturally shut.
First the heart is naturally shut, and closed up as indeed it is to spiritual
things: it is open enough to the world, and to base contentments here, but it
is shut to heaven and heavenly things, naturally it is clean locked up.

Partly in its own nature, being corrupt, and earthly, partly because Satan
he beseigeth all the senses, and shuts up all. There is a spirit of deafness,
and blindness, and a spirit of darkness, and deafness in people, before God
has brought them by the powerful work of the Gospel, from the Kingdom of
Satan, that poffesseth every man naturally. Naturally therefore our hearts are
not open, but locked and shut up (that is supposed here) so that except God be
merciful to break the prison as it were, whereby by unbelief, and the
wickedness of our nature we are shutt up, there is no hope of salvation at all.

God opens the heart.
The second thing is this, that as our hearts are shut and closed up naturally:
God alone opens the heart.
so God, and God alone opens the heart, by his spirit in the use of the means,
God opened Lydia's heart.

God has many keys, he has the key of heaven, to command the rain to come
down, he has the key of the womb, the key of hell, and the grave, and the
key of the heart, especially, He opens, and no man shuts, and shuts and no men
opens. He has the key of the heart, to open the understanding, the memory, the
will, and affections. God, and God only has the key of the heart to open that,
it is his prerogative. He made the heart, and he only has to do with the
heart, he can unmake it, and make it new again, as those that make locks can
do. And if the heart be in ill temper, he can take it in pieces, and bring it
to nothing as it were (as it must be before conversion) and he can make it a
new heart again. It is God that opens the heart, and God only. All the Angels
in heaven cannot give one grace, not the least grace; Grace comes merely from
God: it is merely from God: All the creatures in the world cannot open the
heart, but God only by his holy spirit: For nature cannot do above its sphere
(as we say) above its own power. Natural things can do but natural things.
For nature to raise it self up to believe heavenly things it cannot be.
Therefore as you see vapors go as high as the sun draws them up and no
higher: so the soul of man is lift up to heavenly things by the power of Gods
spirit: God draws us and then we follow: God I say only opens the heart.

Because there is not only want of strength in the soul, There is want of
ability in the soul.
to open it self: but likewise there is enmity, and poison in the heart, ^o
shut it self, and shut out all goodness. A man has no senses to spiritual
things; no eyes, no ears, no taft, no life. Nay there is an opposition to all.
There is an opposition.
A natural man perceives not the things of God, neither can he, he wants
senses: and those senses he has are set against goodness, as the Apostle
says he esteems them foolishness. I need not be much in so easy an
argument, that you are well enough acquainted with. Naturally the heart is
shut, and God only must open it.

Use Patience to others.
This should teach us patience, when we can do little good with those that are
under us by all our instructions, and corrections wait the due time. Grace is
not of thy giving, the heart is not of thy opening, or of any man's opening: 2 Timothy 2.
therefore as it is 2 Timothy 2. wait, and bear with patience men of contrary
minds, waiting when God in due time give them grace to repent. Grace is Gods
creature it is none of our own. Therefore take heed that we be not short, and
angry spirited, if we cannot have all we would have of those that are under us,
children, or servants, let us wait Gods time, he opens the heart in his time.

And if we find not grace wrought in our own hearts at the first, or second
or third sermon Let us do as he at the Poole of Bethesda, lie there till the
Angel stir the water, till God be effectual by his spirit. God does it and
he only does it, only we must wait, he will do it in his good time, be not
over short-spirited. This we ought to observe out of these words God opened the
heart of Lydia. Thankfulness.


The heart is put for the whole soul, What meant by heart.
he opened her understanding to conceive: for all things beegin with heavenly
light of the understanding all grace comes into the soul by the understanding.

There is no sanctifying grace in the affections but it comes by enlightening
the understanding, we see the grounds of it in the understanding first: God
opens the understanding, and then he opens the memory to retain. That the
memory may be as the pot of Mannah to hold heavenly things: he opens and
strengthens it with retention to keep them, and he opens the will to close
with holy things, and the affections to joy and delight in them. So the heart
is the whole inward man, he not only enlightens the understanding, but infuseth
grace into the will, and affections, into the whole inward man. We must take it
in that extent for else if God should only open the understanding, and not
through the understanding flow into the will by the power of his spirit, the
will would always rebel: as indeed it is a poysonfull thing; there is nothing
so malicious next the devil, as the will of man. God will have one way, and it
will have another: Therefore God does not only open the understanding to
conceive, but he opens the will to close with, and to embrace that that is
good; or else it will take head, and take arms against the understanding in
that that is good, and never come to the work of grace: Therefore take it so,
he opened the will and affections as well as the understanding: though
what-soeuer is in the will, and affections, comes through the understa^ding, as
well as heat comes through light. God opened her heart, to what end?

To attend to the things that were spoken of Paul.
THe word signifies, to apply, and set her mind to the things that Paul said,
to join and fasten the mind, to what Paul said.

First you see then, here is the opening of the heart before there is
attending, before there can be any attending, The mind must be sanctified to
attend to the word.
and applying of the mind, the mind must be sanctified, and strengthened: the
soul must be sanctified before it can attend.

The reason is; nothing can flow but from a suitable faculty, and ability to
attend is a power and act of the soul, it must come from a sanctified power of
the soul, the heart must first be opened, and then the heart attends. God
says, he will circumcise the heart, and then we shall love him, he sanctifies
the heart, and then it loves him. God changes and alters the frame of the
soul, and then holy actions come from it. First, grace begins with the
abilities and powers of the soul, the heart is opened, and then come holy
actions suitable. There is no proportion between holy actions, and an
unsanctified soul, the heart must first be opened, and then it attends.

Whose heart the Lord opened that she attended, etc.
YOU see then in the next place, that God opening the heart of any Christian,
it is to carry the attention to the word. God opens the heart to attend.
God by grace carries the heart to the word, she attended to what Paul spoke.
Where true grace is wrought it carries not to speculation or to practice this
or that idle dream, but where the heart is open, grace carries to attend to
the word, especially to the good word the Gospel of Christ. As grace is
wrought by the word: so it carries the soul to the word.

Use. Trial whether our hearts be opened.
And therefore it may be a use of trial to know whether we have our hearts
wrought on by the grace of God or no, whether GOD by his spirit have opened our
hearts or no? if our hearts be carried to the blessed word of God to relish
that. If they be, God has opened our hearts to attend to the word. And there
is no better evidence of a child of God, then that that is fetched from the
affection that he carries to the word and blessed truth of God: Oh! he
rellisheth it as his appointed food, he cannot be without it, take away that,
and you take away his life. My Sheep hear my voice, you are none of mine
because you hear not my word. A delight in the blessed truth of God is an
argument that God has first opened the heart.

Therefore poor souls when they want good evidence, when they doubt whether
their estate be good or no? Let them consider what relish they have of divine
truths. Whether it be connaturall to the word or no? whether it be savourie or
no? whether they could be without the means of salvation or no? and let them
judge of themselves by their delight in Gods truth, her heart was opened to
attend to the word.

She attended to the things which were spoken of Paul.
WHich were the blessed truths of salvation. The forgiveness of sins, The
free mercy of God in Christ. The particulars are not set down, but it was the
Gospel, and she believed upon it, therefore it must needs be the word of
faith: We see here then, that The Gospel the Ground of faith:
The seed and ground of faith is the Gospel.

Her heart was opened to attend to that, that Paul spoke which was the Gospel.
And indeed so it is. The foundation of faith, the word of faith is the Gospel:
nothing can breed faith but the word of God: for how can we hope for heaven,
and happiness, but by the mind of God discovered? Can we look for any thing
but GOD must discover his mind to bestow it? and where have we the mind and
bosom of God opened to us, is it not from the scriptures the word of God, from
the good word especially? It is called the word of grace, and the word of the
Kingdom, and of glory; The word of life: because by it all these blessed
things are conveyed to us.

Now it is not the word simply here, The word preached the usual means of
faith.
but the word spoken by Paul, that is, the word preached by an authorized
minister, is the usual means of faith, her heart was opened to attend to what
was spoken by Paul an authorized minister, so the word preached is the ordinary
though not the sole foundation of faith. Therefore the Apostle says, that God
by that converted the world, by the foolishness of preaching, And in the
ladder of heaven in Romans 10. Romans 10.
How shall they call on him of whom they have not heard and how shall they
preach except they be sent: so there is no faith without teaching. The point
is plain, you hear it often: The word is the ground of faith, and the word
especially as it is preached by a Paul, by a Minister unfolding it.

Use. To pray ^or labou^^ers in Gods har^est.
Therefore be stirred up as ye favor the souls of Gods people, to pray to God
to send laborers into his harvest, and to pray that the Gospel and the
preaching of it may have a free passage, that God would set up lights in all
the dark corners of the kingdom, and every where to those that are in
darkness, and in the shadow of death: And blessed are their endeavor that
labor, that the Gospel may be preached in every part of the Kingdom. For we
see here, it is the word unfolded, the unsearchable riches of Christ spread
open, the Tapestry laid open, that usually beget faith. The mine must be
dug: people must see it familiarly laid open.

Therefore says he here, Lydia's heart was opened, and she attended to the
word spoken by Paul.

To prize the ordinance of preaching.
Let this teach us to set a price upon the ordinance of God: does God set up an
ordinance; and will he not give virtue, and power to it? Yes: there is a
majesty, and a power in the word of God to pull people out of the Kingdom of
Satan, to the blessed light of Gods Kingdom. It was the word, and the word
opened by the ministry of Paul.

Attention necessary.
But it was the word, and the word opened, and attended to, she mixed it with
her attention and her heart closed with it. There are these 3. go together.
The word, and the word preached, and then attending to the word preachedth at
was the ground of her faith, these 3. meeting together.

There are these four things must always be in the senses of our body. Things
requisite to ^ight.
If we will see there must be an object to see, we must see something; and a
faculty to see, our eye; and then a light whereby we see we cannot see in the
dark And then there must be an application of the eye to see the object by
that light. So in spiritual things there is the blessed truth of God, the
mercy of God in Jesus Christ: that we may see these things, we must have a
light by which we may see them. And there must be a power to see which is the
sanctified opened understanding, when the understanding is opened, then there
is an application of the soul to attend to the word of God, by the light of
the word. So that there must be application, and attention to the word: before
the word can do us good, it must be applied to the object, the taste to the
thing tasted, and so in all the other senses.

Attention is a special thing: how many sermons are lost in this City, that
are as seed drowned, that never come to fruit? I think there is no place in
the world where there is so much preaching, and no place, where there are so
many sermons lost; why; because people want a retaining power, and faculty to
attend, and retain and keep what we hear she attended to the word preached.

To give a little direction in this point of attending, Directions to attend on
the word.
and applying the mind, not to speak much I will name two or three principal
things that I think fit at this time.

If we would come, Search our wants.
as we should, to the word preached: let us search our wants before we come,
and all the occasions we shall have to encounter with, all temptations, that
we are like to encounter with, let us forecast by presenting to our souls. I
am weak in knowledge, and I want such graces. I am like to encounter with such
temptations, I am too weak for it; I shall meet with such adversaries, I know
not how to answer them, I am plunged in such businesses, I shall be lost in
them without grace: then the soul comes with a mind to be supplied, and then
it will attend, and wll pray for the preacher! Oh Lord direct him that he may
speak fitly to me, somewhat for my understanding, somewhat for my affections,
somewhat to help me against such, and such a temptation: this is wanting, and
therefore we profit no more by the word then we do.

Then when we come to hear the word, Come with subjection.
let us hear it with all spiritual subjection, as that Word that has power
to Command the conscience. This is the word of God: the Minister of God speaks
in the place of God to me. I must give an account of it. I will subject my
conscience to it: It is spoken with evidence, and proved, I will stoop to it.
Thus we should come with subjection of soul and conscience to whatsoever is
taught; and not come to judge, and censure, or to delight in it as music, as
if we came to a play, to hear some pretty sentences: but come to hear God,
as to the ordinance of God, come as to that Word that shall judge our souls at
the latter day; that is the way to attend.

Then again, if we would attend, when we have heard the word of God, To get
the word ingrafted.
let us labor by all means to bring it near to us; that it may be an
ingrafted Word, that the soul may be leavened by it, that it may be so
ingrafted in the understanding, and affections that we may think the better,
in the virtue of it, and love, and speak, and do the better as a Sience
savours of the pla^^ it is put into. Let us labor that the word of God may be
written in our souls in the tables of our hearts: that the truth of God may be
near us, as any temptation shall be near us, or any corruption near us. What
is the reason we yield to corruptions and temptations? They are near, and the
Word is far off, We never attended to the Word to bring it near home. If the
word were as near as corruptions, and temptations, that it were ingrafted, and
in vested into the soul, we should have the word ready for every temptation:
there should not ^e a temptation offered, nor a corruption arise, but we
should subdue it, and beat it down with the blessed truth of God, accompanied
with the spirit. Let us labor to get it near us; that the reasons of the word
and our reason, that the judgment of God, and our judgment, that the will of
God, and our own will may be all one: and so to have it incorporated, and
naturalized into our hearts, that we may speak and think, and do nothing but
that which is Divine: that is, to have the word written in our hearts, our
attention should be to that end. Therefore when we hear, we should do as
nature does with the meat we eat, it suckes out a strength suitable for every
part, every part has a power to draw out nourishment what is suitable to it
self: so when we hear the word of God, we should be able to say this is good
for such, and such an end, and never leave thinking of the word of God when we
have heard it, till we have turned the word into our souls, till we have it
fixed in our understandings, that we can say, Now I know it; till we have
subdued our hearts to it, and we be molded, and delivered up to it, that we can
say, Now I have it; now the word is mine. Let us never leave the truth we
hear till we be brought to that: alas to what purpose is it to hear except we
make it our own, as nature makes the meat our own that we eat! There is a
second or third digestion, that goes before digestion be perfectly made, and
the meat turned into it. It is ruminating, and meditating, and altering of
that we hear, and working on it that makes spiritual nourishment: thus we
should do to attend to purpose.

And that we may do it let us add some meditations to these practices.
Meditation.
Consider first of all whose word it is. It is the word of the great God, and
the word of God for my good It is the good word of God, and the word of God
that brings me much good, eternal salvation if I obey it, it is the word of
God that brings eternal damnation if I obey it not.

It is the word of the great King, a Proclamation, a Law whereby I shall be
judged, and perhaps that word that I shall not hear another time, perhaps the
spirit may work more now then at another time: therefore I will be wise, and
give way to the spirit of God, and not beat it back, perhaps I shall never
have such a gale of the spirit offered again, it may be the last Sermon I
shall hear while I live: we should have such meditatio^s, we that speak; as if
it were the last time we should speak; and you that hear, as if they should
be the last things that ever you should hear: for how do we know but it may
be so? It is another manner of matter to hear, then we take it. Take heed how
ye hear says our blessed Savior: We hear nothing but it sets us forward in
the way of Grace to heaven, or forward to hell, we are helped by it to heaven,
or else hardened by it further to hell. We had need to take heed how we hear,
we must be judged by that we hear: and that that we hear now negligently,
and carelessly, God will make good at the day of judgment. We may shake off (as
profane spirits do) the Ministers exhortations: but will you shake off depart
ye Cursed at the latter day? Will you shake off that sentence, you would not
hear me, and I will not hear you? Oh! no: Therefore shake not that off now,
that will be made good then. If thou entertain the Gospel now, God will make
it good then; if thou receive mercy now, he will show that thou art acquitted
then before Devils, and Angels, and Men. Let us regard this, and let it make
us hear the word with attention as this good woman here. God opened her heart,
and she attended to the things that were spoken of Paul.

But you will ask, Quest.
how shall I know a man whose heart is opened, How to know we attend aright.
and attends better then another man does?

I will give two or three brief rules of discerning. Answ.
He that by the spirit of God attends to the good word of God to purpose, When
we know not the word, but the things.
with an opened underding, he not only knows the words, and the shell in
preaching the word of God, but the things: he knows not only what faith and
repentance is in the words: but he has a spiritual light to know what the
things are, what repentance is, and faith, and love, and hope, and patience,
he knows the things. And likewise he that has attended to purpose he can do
the things: he not only knows what he should do: but by the grace of the
spirit, and attending upon the word of God, he knows how to do them. Grace
teaches him not only that he should deny himself, and live soberly, and
righteously, and Godly, but it teaches him how to live soberly and
righteously, and Godly. Grace, when we attend upon the word as we should,
teaches us to do the things; not only that we should repent, and pray etc.
but to do them it opens the things, and gives ability to do them.

And in the next place, The soul echoes to the word.
those that attend as they should do, there is a spiritual echo in their
souls to every thing that is taught: that is, when they are exhorted to
believe, they answer, Lord I will believe; Lord I will hear, I will repent,
and I will take heed of such sins by thy grace; when God says seek my face;
Lord thy face will I seek. This is the answer of a good conscience, this
echo, where there is attention to the word of God by the spirit, there is an
echo to that the spirit speaks, Lord it is good, and it is good for me, if I
yield to this, if I do not, it is naught for me to put off repentance till
another day; I desire to yield now, and oh! that my heart were directed; if it
be rebellious, and not yielding, there is a desire that the heart may be
brought into subjection to every truth revealed, there is a gracious echo in
them that attend to purpose.

Then again those that do attend from a sanctifing grace, They see things in
their own light.
they see things by another light, by a spirit of their own, by a heavenly
light, by a species in their own kind, spiritual things with a spiritual
light. Many come, and hear sermons, and can discourse, and wrangle, and
maintain janglings of their own, and all this out of natural parts, and out
of pride of heart: but a gracious holy man, sees spiritual things by a
spiritual light, in their own kind.

A man that is borne in a dungeon, and never saw the light, when he hears
discourse of the Sun, and stars, and earth, and flowers, and plants, he that
Imaginations what they should be, but he fancies other things: so a man that
never had spiritual eyesight, to see spiritual things in their kind; he
fancies them to be this and that, but he sees them not by their own light,
many speak and talk of good things, but it is by the spirit of other men, out
of books, and hearing and not by a spirit of their own. He that attends by
grace speaks out of a spirit of his own, and not out of other men's spirits,
he sees spiritual things in their own colors. Thus we see how to discern
spiritual attention.

And he that knows what this means, They judge according to their profit.
what is it to have his heart opened to attend, when he goes from hearing the
word, he judges of his profiting by it not by what he can say by heart; but by
how much the meeker he is, how much more patient, how much more able to bear
the cross, to resist temptations, and to have communion with God, so he
values his attending upon the means and hearing the word by the growth of his
grace, and the decay of his corruptions. She attended to the things that were
spoken of Paul.

And she was baptized, and her household.
Baptism the seal of salvation.
SHE had the means of salvation, and she had the seal likewise, which is
baptism. We have all need of seals, we have need to hane our faith
strengthened: God knows it betthen we our selves, We think Baptism, and the
Communion small matters but God knows how prone we are to stagger, he knows
that all seals are little enough; therefore it is said here, she was
baptized, and all her household. Baptism is a solemn thing, it is the seal of
the Covenant of grace: you are well enough acquainted, I imagine, with the
thing, therefore I will not enter into the common place, it is needless. As the
whole trinity was at the Baptism of Christ, so every infant that is baptized,
is the Child of Christ. And it is a special thing that we should meditate of.

We slight our baptism and think it needless you see the holy woman here
would be baptized presently; she would have the seal of the covenant. There
are many that are not booke-learned, that cannot read, at least they have no
leisure to read; I would they would read their book in their Baptism: and if
they would consider what it ministers to them upon all ocasions they would be
far better Christians then they are. How to think of our Baptism.


Think of thy Baptism when thou go to God, especially when he seems
angry, it is the seal of the covenant; bring the promise, Lord it is the
seal of thy Covenant, thou have prevented me by thy grace, thou brough test
me into the Covenant before I knew my right hand from my left. So when we go
to Church to offer our service to God, think, by baptism we were
consecrated, and dedicated to God, we not only receive grace from God but we
give our selves to God. Therefore it is sacrilege for persons baptized to
yield to temptations to sin, we are dedicated to God in baptism. When we are
tempted to despair, let us think of our baptism: we are in the Covenant of
Grace, and have received the seal of the Covenant, baptism. The devil is an
uncircumcised, damned, cursed spirit, he is out of the Covenant: but I am in
the Covenant: Christ is mine, the holy Ghost is mine, and God is mine,
therefore let us stand against all the temptations of that uncircumcised,
unbaptized damned spirit. The thinking of our baptism thus, will help us to
resist the Devil, he is a coward, if he be resisted he will flee: and what
will better resist him then the Covenant of grace, and the seal of it? When we
are tempted to sin, let us think, what have I to do with sin? by baptism
I have union with the death of Christ; he died to take away sin, and my end
must be his. I must abolish sin in my nature? Shall I yield to that: that in
baptism I have sworn against? And then if we be tempted to despair for sin
let us call to mind the promises of grace, and forgiveness of sins, and the
seal of forgiveness of sins, which is baptism: For as water in baptism
washes the body, so the blood of Christ washes the soul: Let us make that
use of our baptism in temptations not to despair for sin. And in conversing
among men; let us labor to maintain the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace, to live peaceably. Christians must not fall to jarre, why? There is one
faith, and one Baptism, have we not all one father? one inheritance, one
baptism, one Religion, and shall we break one with another for trifles, they
forget their Baptism that are so in quarrels. Thus if we would think of it,
it is such a book as would be ready at hand for all services.

And then for our children* those that God has committed to us, let us make
use of baptism, do they die in their infancy? make this use of it, I have
assured hope that my child is gone to God, he was borne in the Covenant, and
had the seal of the Covenant, baptism, why should I doubt of the salvation of
my child? If they live to years of discretion, then be of good comfort, he is
Gods Child more then mine, I have dedicate him to God, and to Christ, he was
baptized in the name of Christ, Christ will care for him as well, as for me. If
I leave my Children behind me they are Gods, and Christ's children, they have
received, the seal of the Covenant; baptism, Christ will provide for them:
and he that provides heaven for them, will provide all things in the way to
heaven necessary. God has said, I will be the God of thee, and of thy
children, they are in Covenant, thine they were Lord. A man may commit his
Children to God on his deathbed; thou gave them me, and I commit them to
thee again, as before I did by baptism. All this we have by thinking of our
baptism. If we look no further (as profane spirits do not) then the water,
and the elements, we can have no comfort by these things: but we should
consider Gods blessed institution, and ordinance, to strengthen our faith. And
to our children when they come to years, baptism is an obligation to believe;
because they have received the seal before hand, and it is a means to
believe. She was Baptized

And her household.
Honor of good governors of families.
SO good is God where the governor of the family is good, he gives all the
family good: because he makes conscience in governing, and instructing them;
God crowns their endeavors with success that they shall be all good. As we
see Abraham, and his household; the Jailer, and his household, Zacheus, and his
household. Oh! it is a a blessed thing to be a good governor in a family; he
brings a blessing upon his house: the Church of God is in his house. There
cannot be a more honorable title to any house, then to say it is the Church of
God: that the Governor of the family brings all in subjection to God; that as
he will have all serve him, so he will have all serve God; that he will not
have a servant but he shall be the servant of God, nor a child but he shall be
the child of God; and he labors to make his wife the Spouse of Christ. Thus it
should be said of every Christian family, and then they are Churches.

Alas! in many places now they are hells because there is little regard had of
instructing of them. Beloved, many poor souls have had occasion to bless God
forever, that they have bin grafted into such good families. And put case
sometimes, Good instructions may be effectual long after.
thou have instructed them, and taken pains and there is no good done. When
thou art dead; and twenty years after, it may come to their minds, all those
instructions, when they are in worse families. Oh! in such a place, with such a
Master I had such instructions, but I had no grace to take good by them: but
now I call them to mind: so the seed that was sown long before may take effect
then. This should encourage those that are Governors of families to be good.
Lydia was baptized, and her household.

And she besought them saying, if you have judged me faithful to the Lord come
to my house and abide there.
HEre is the fruit of Lydia's conversion, when she was converted, and
baptized, she entreated the Apostles to come to her house, and abide there,
and she prevailed, she constrained them by a morrall kind of violence they
suffered themselves to be overcome.

If you have judged me faithful etc. Come to my house and abide there.
Here is her invitation; and the argument that she forces it by. If you have
judged me faithful to Christ, then come to my house.

To speak a little of her argument, whereby she forced the blessed Apostle,
and the rest to her house.

If ye have judged me faithful.
IT is a most binding argument. If you judge me faithful, you must judge me a
child of God, an heir of heaven, the Spouse of Christ, you must judge me all
these, and the like. If you have judged me faithful come to my house. And if
you judge me so, can you deny me this courtesy. It is a conjuring, wondrous
forcible argument. If you have judged me faithful.

It implies that S. Paul, and holy men would be more strange else. And so there
should not be intimate familiarity (converse there may be, but not
familaritie) with those that are not faithful. Indifferent carriage to all
alike shows a rotten heart: those that make no difference between good
Christians and formal hypocrites, No; but if you have judged me faithful come
to my house. As if she had said, I know your spirits are such, that except you
judge me faithful, you will not take this courtesy at my hands.

Christians easy to be entreated.
Again she supposed if Paul judged her faithful he would not deny her that
courtesy. Those that upon good grounds we judge faithful, we should be
gentle to them, and easy to be entreated. The wisdom that is from above is
so. Grace Sweetness the Carriage, and alters a man's disposition. Those that have
felt pity from God, are merciful to others. Therefore if you have judged me
faithful, etc.

It was an argument of a great-deale of sincerity, to appeal to their
knowledge and judgment, If you have judged me faithful.

If she had not been sincere she would not have done so: but sincerity makes
a man bold to appeal to God himself. Lord thou know that I love thee says
S. Peter, and If there be any iniquity in my heart says David, they dare
appeal to God and to Gods people, if ye have judged me faithful.

In this speech likewise she desires to have confirmation of her estate from
the Apostles. Approbation of strong Christians confirms the weak.
And indeed it is a great confirmation of weak Christians to have the
judgment of strong Christians that they are good, If you have judged me
faithful, do me this courtesy. And would it not comfort her soul to have
the judgment of so strong a man as Paul?

It is a great strengthening not only to have the spirit of God witness for
us, but the spirit of God in others. And sometimes in temptations, the judgment
of others will do us more good then our own, in a dark state: Therefore we
should appeal to those that fear God to judge us faithful; though we be in a
mist, and in darkness sometimes: that we are not able to judge of our own
condition.

And indeed when we judge the people to be truly good, To judge well of
Christians.
and true hearted to God, we owe them this duty? to think them good people,
and to show it, it is a debt: we wrong good persons, when we take wrong
conceits of them. Shall we not affect and love them that God loves? It is as
if she had said, God has taken me into his family, and will admit me to
heaven, and will not you come to my house? when Christ shall take men to be
members of his body, shall not we take them into our company. It is a wrong to
good people to be strange to them: sometimes there may by way of censure, in
some sin, be a little strangeness: but ordinary stangnesse becomes not
Christians, it becomes not that sweet bond the Communion of Saints. If you have
judged me faithful. That is the bond. Her invitation is,

Come to my house, and and abide there.
YOU see many sweet graces presently after she believed, Lydias invitation.
here is a loving heart? Why did she desire them to come to her house? To show
her love.
To express the love she did bear to them for their works sake, she felt the
love of Christ by their ministry and now she desired to express the fruit of
her love in maintaining them.

And not only so but she desired to be edified by them: To be further
inst^^cted.
she was yongly planted, and she desired to be watered from them. She knew
Paul would drop heavenly things, and give her that that might stablish her,
therefore she desired that they would stay at her house, that she might have
benefit by their heavenly discourse, and be built up, and edified further, and
further.

So you see these two graces especially upon believing, a bountiful loving
heart, she entreated them not only to come to her house, but to abide there a
good while, as they did. And here was her desire to be edified. And a
boldness to appear to own Christ, and his ministers in dangerous times: for
in those times it was a dangerous thing to appear to be a Christian; they were
worse hated then the Jews were, though both were hated: yet Christians were,
above all: Therefore false Christians would be circumcised, they would be
Jews, Faith fruitful.
to avoid the Cross that they might not be accounted Christians.

You see in General, true faith that works love and works by love: It works
love in the heart, and by love it works all duties of hospitallity, and bounty
by love. When it has wrought that holy affection, it works by that holy
affection? You see here it is never without fruit, presently faith brings forth
fruit, as soon as she was baptized. she shows her love, to the Apostles,
and their company, and her bounty and her boldness in the cause of Christ.

We say of a graft, it is grafted to purpose, if it take, and bring forth
fruit, so she being a new sience graft into Christ, she took presently as
soon as she was baptized into Christ, here is the fruit of love and bounty,
and boldness in the cause of Christ. Zacheus as soon as ever he believed,
half my goods I give to the poor. So we see the Jailer afterward presently
upon believing, he entertained the Apostles with a feast and washed their
wounds.

Take heed of a barren dead faith, it is a false faith if thou believe indeed
faith will work love, and work by love, as it did in this blessed woman, her
faith knit her to Christ in heaven, her love was as the branches of the tree,
her faith knit her to the root: but love as the branches reached to others,
her branches reached fruit to the Apostle and his company. So it is the nature
of faith that knits us to Christ, the same spirit of love knits us to others,
and reaches forth fruit to all we converse with.

Trial of faith by love
As we desire to have evidence of the soundnes of our faith, let us see what
spirit of love we have, especially love to these three things, To Christ.
love to Christ to whom we are ingrafted, and love to the ministers of Christ.
We cannot show kindness to Christ, he is in heaven: but his ministers, To his
members.
and his poor are upon the earth when we can buy ointment to pour on Christ's
feet his poor members, and his Ministers; and love to the word of God, To his
Word.
they are the three issues of a gracious believing heart, and where they are
not, there is no faith at all.

I beseech you let us imitate this blessed woman. You see here the name of
Lydia, is precious in the Church: the name of Lydia, (as it is said of Josiah)
it is as a box of ointment powered out: the name of Lydia cannot be named in
the Church, but there is a sweet savor with it. As soon as she believed;
the Holy Ghost, the spirit of GOD blowing upon the garden of her heart, where
the spice of Grace was sowed, stirred up a sweet sent of faith and of bounty
and liberality in the cause of Christ.

Let not this be in vain to us: but every one of us labor to be like Lydia:
you see what loadestone drew PAVL here to go unto her house: she had Faith,
and she expressed it in love.

Let us labor to have faith, and to express it in love to GOD unto CHRIST, to
his people, and word, and ordinances that have his stamp on them, and let us
boldly own the cause of CHRIST: let us not regard the censures of vain men
that say thus and thus. Faith and love forget danger, it is bold. She forgot
all the danger that she was in by countenancing Paul and such men.

Let us labor for faith and love and we shall not say this and that.

There is a Lion in the way, but we shall go on boldly until we do receive
the end of our faith and love, the salvation of our souls.

FINIS.
The Table.
A.
Abasement.
part. page. Christ's word powerful in his abasement. 2.92
Affections.
Affections* to Religion strong in women. 1.9
Affliction.
Affliction, why sent of God. 2.58 Prayer a remedy in affliction. 2.60
Angels.
Praise, a duty fit for Angels. 2.108
Appetite.
To bless God for appetite, 2.46 Spiritual appetite how recovered. 2.140
Attend, Attention.
God opens the heart to attend. 1.46 Attention necessary. 1.54 Directions to
attend on the Word. 1.57. Trials of attending aright, 1.69
Attire.
Selling, and wearing rich Attire lawful. 1.17 Atheism, see Nature.
B.
Baptism.
Baptism, a seal of salvation. 1.76. How to think of our Baptism. 1.78
Beginning.
Great things from small beginnings. 1.11 Boldness, see Sincerity.
C.
Callings.
Callings, allowed of God, 1.14
Censure.
Censure of wicked men not to be regarded. 2.24
Command.
Command of God over all things. 2.84
Commerce.
Commerce lawful. 1.15
Confirm.
Approbation of strong Christians confirms the weak. 1.95
Cry.
Gods children cry in afflictions. 2.57
D.
Death.
Gates of death what. 2.49 Death how to disarme it. 2.53
Defer.
God why he deferres help. 2.81
Dishonor.
Only wicked men dishonor God. 2.104.
displease.
To take heed of displeasing God. 2.87
Distemper.
What to do in spiritual distempers. 2.141
Divinity.
Divinity transcends other Arts. 2.37
E.
End.
Fools forget their End, 2.17
Epicures.
Happiness of Epicures unstable. 2.45 Extremity, see Cry.
F
Faith.
Faith, trialls of it. 1.104
Fools, Folly.
Wicked men, fools. 2.9 Why they are fools 2.10 Folly in Gods children. 2.25
Fruitful.
True faith fruitful. 1.101
G.
Garments.
Garments, the use of them, 1.16 Gates, see Death.
God.
God to be sought in trouble. 2.35
Gospel.
Gospel, the ground of faith. 1.50
H.
Heathen.
God hears the prayers of the Heathen. 2.21
Heart.
Heart opened by God, 1.32.34 Heart what meant by it, 1.40
Humiliation.
Ground of humiliation of wicked men. 2.21
I.
Jesting.
Jesting with sin a sign of folly. 2.16
Invitation.
Lydia's invitation. 1.99
Justify.
To justify God in his judgments. 2.33
L.
Laborers.
Laborers to be prayed for in Gods harvest. 1.52
Love.
Trials of faith by love, 1.104
M.
Means.
God brings the elect under means. 1.29
Mind.
The mind must be sanctified to attend to the Word. 1.43
Misery.
Misery of wicked men, 2.50 Why God suffers men to fall into great misery.
2.55
Murmuring.
Murmuring in trouble, the cause of it. 2.39
N.
Nature.
Atheism against nature, 2.57
Notice.
God takes particular notice of his. 1.7
O.
Open.
Trials whether the heart be open. 1.46 See heart.
Passion.
Wicked men fools for their passion. 2.12 Passion, how it presents things.
2.13
Patience.
Patience to others, the ground of it. 1.38 Patience in our selves. 2.34
People.
People of three sorts before Christ. 1.19
Pestilence.
To praise God for deliverance from the pestilence, 2.129.
Physician.
God the best Physician, 1.71
Power, Powerful.
Gods word Powerful. 2.83 Encouragements to pray from Gods power. 2.89 See
Abasement.
Poison.
Sin as poison. 2.41
Prayer.
What state we are fit to pray in. 2.62 Prayer to God successful, 2.73 See
affliction.
Praise.
All men to praise God, 2.99 Other creatures how they praise God. 2.102 Praise
the end of all we do, 2.109 Helps, and means to praise God, 2.113
Preached.
The Word preached, the usual means of faith. 1.51 Preaching how to be
prized, 1.54
Preparation.
Works of preparation necessary. 1.20 Preparation from God, 1.21 Preparations
remove hindrances. 1.22 Progress of preparation, 1.24 Preparations not to be
rested in. 1.31
Providence.
Instances of Gods providence. 2.3
R.
Rod.
Sin puts a rod into Gods hand. 2.40
S.
Sickness.
Sin, the cause of sickness, 2.32 Sickness how from God, 2.38 Extremity of
sickness, 2.43 Natural cause of sickness, 2.44 How to converse with the
sick. 2.47 To have recourse to God in sickness. 2.73.
Sight.
Four things requisite to sight. 1.55
Sin.
Aggravation of sin. 2.22 Unhappy succession of sin, 2.31 Beginnings of
sin to be avoided. Ibid. Particular sins to be searched out 2.34 What
sins hinder prayer, 2.82
Sincerity.
The boldness of sincerity, 1.95
Soul.
God by his Word heales the soul. 1.137
T.
Table.
Whence the breach of the second Table comes. 2.27
W.
Waiting.
Waiting after prayer necessary. 2.79
Weak.
How to judge of weak Christians. 1.77
Wisdom.
Spiritual Wisdom to be begged. 2.23
Witty.
Wicked men witty in their Generation. 2.18 Women, See Affections. Word, See
Power.
Worldling.
The course of Worldlings, 2.35
Wound.
Fools wound themselves, 2.20
FINIS.
A Rescue from DEATH, with a Return of Praise.
PSALM. 107.17. etc. Fools because of their transgressions, and because of
their iniquities are afflicted, etc.


THis Psalm contains some passages concerning Gods particular sweet
Providence, The scope of the Psalm.
not only to the Church, but to other men: for He that created all things
even the meanest creature, must have a providence over all things, his
providence must extend it self as large as his creation: for what is
providence but a continuance of creation, a preservation of those things in
being that God has given to have a being. The Prophet here of purpose opposes
the profane conceits of them, that think God sits in heaven, and lets things
go on earth as if he cared not for them, it was the fault of the best
Philosophers to ascribe too much to second causes. The Psalmist here shows
that God has a most particular providence in every thing. 4 Instance of Gods
providence
First he sets it down in general, and then he brancheth it out into
particulars, especially four, wherein he specifieth Gods providence.

The first instance is of those that wander in the wilderness hungry and
thirsty, verse. 4. verse. 4.
They cry and God regards them.

The second is in verse 10. verse. 10.
They that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, bound in iron, They
cry and the Lord hears them.

The third is in the words of the text, verse. 17.
Fools for their transgressions are afflicted, their soul abhors all
manner of meat, him instanceth in sickness the most ordinary affliction, and
shows that God has a most particular providence even in that.

The fourth is in verse. 23 Those that go down into the Sea, Verse 23
they see experiments of Gods particular providence.

Since the fall, the life of man is subject to a wondrous many inconveniences,
which we have brought on us by our sins, now in this variety it is a
comfortable thing to know Gods care of us in our wanderings, and imprisonments,
in our sickness etc. But to omit the other 3. and to come to that, that is
proper to the place, that is, the instance of Gods providence in sickness.

Fools because of their transgressions, and because of their iniquities are
afflicted, etc.
In these words you have;

First the cause of this visitation, Division o^ the text.
and of all the greivance he speaks of, Transgression, and iniquity.

And then the kind of this visitation, sickness.

And the extremity in two branches; Their soul abhors all manner of meat,
and secondly, They draw near to the gates death.

And then the carriage of the affected and sick parties, They cry unto the
Lord in their distress.

And the remedy of the universal and great Physician, He saves them out of
their distress.

And the manner of this remedy, He sent his word and healed them, his
operative, and commanding word, so as it works with his command.

Lastly, the fee that this high Commander asks for, all the tribute or reward
that he expects, is Praise, and Thankesgiving. Oh that men would therefore
praise the Lord for his goodness, and his wondrous works for the children of
men, etc.

So you see this Scripture conteines several passages between God, and man, in
misery, and in deliverance. In misery, God afflicts man for his sin, the
passage of man to God is, he cries to God, Gods passage back again, is his
deliverance: and then his return back again must be Thankesgiving. So here
is a double visitation, in justice, God correcting sin, and then a visitation
in mercy upon their crying and praying, God restores them; and then man's
duty, Thankesgiving: But to proceed in order.

Fools because of their transgressions, etc.
HERE you have first the quality of the persons set down.

Fools.

We must understand by fools, wicked fools, not such fools as are to be
begged as we say, Who meant by fools.
that are defective in their naturals; but the wise fools of the world, they
are the chief of fools, how ever in the Courts of men they be not found
fools, yet they are fools in Gods esteem, who is Wisdom it self, those
that think themselves wise, that are conceitedly wise, they are these fools
here.

In the phrase of Scripture, and the language of the Holy Ghost, every sinner
is a fool. It were a disgraceful term if any man should give it, but let no
man stumble at it, it comes from the wise God, that knows what wisdom is,
and what is folly. If a fool shall call a man fool, he does not regard it,
but if a wiseman, especially the God of wisdom call a man fool, he has
reason to regard it, who can judge better of wisdom then God, who is only
wise?

Why wicked men are termed fools.
Why are wicked men fools, and Gods children, so far as they yield to their
lusts?
In diverse respects.

For lack of discerning.
First, For lack of discerning in all the carriage, and passages of their
lives. You know a fool is such a one as cannot discern the difference of
things, that is defective in his judgment; discerning, and judgment, that
especially tries a fool: when he cannot discern between pearls and pebbles
between Jewels, and ordinary base things, so wicked men are defective in their
judgments they cannot discern aright between spiritual and heavenly things,
and other things, all your worldly fools he hunts after and places his
happiness in things meaner then himself, he takes shadows for substances.

A fool is led with his humor, For passion
and his lust even as the beast, so there is no wicked man that shakes of the
fear of God, ( which is true wisdom,) but he is led with his humor, and
passion, and affection to some earthly thing. Now a man can never be wise, and
passionate unless in one case, when the good is so exceeding that no passion
can be answerable as in zeal, in divine matters, that will excuse all
exorbitant carriage otherwise. When David danced before the Arc, a man would
think it had been a foolish matter except it had been in a divine business,
when the matter is wondrous great that it deserves any pitch of affection then
a man may be eager, and wise: but for the things of this life, for a man to
disquiet himself and others, to hunt after a vain shadow, (as the Psalmist
says) after riches and honor; and to negl^ct the main end of a man's life, it
is extreme folly a man that is passionate in this respect cannot be wise, all
fools are passionate, and wicked men have their affections set deeply on
somewhat else besides God. Because passion presents things in a false glass,
Passion presents things falsely.
as when a man sees the sun through a cloud he seems bigger, when men look
not on things in the judgment of the scripture, and the spirit of God, and
right reason, but through affection, things appear to them otherwise then they
are and themselves afterward see themselves fo^les: Take a worldling on his
death bed, or in hell, he sees himself a fool then, when his drunkenness is
past, when he is come to himself, and is sober, he sees that he has catched
all his lifetime after shadows, wicked men that are carried with their lusts
to earthly things, they cannot be wise, therefore the rich man in the Gospel,
is called a fool, and in Ier. 17. he speaks of a man that labors all his life
time, and in the end is a fool; Is not he a fool that will carry a burden,
and load himself in his journey more then he needs, and is not he a
spiritual fool, that loads himself with thick clay (as the Prophet calls it)
and makes his pilgrimage more cumbersome then he needs? Is not he a fool
that lays the heaviest weight on the weakest: that puts off the heaviest
burden of repentance, to the time of sickness, and trouble, and death, when
all his troubles meet in a center as it were, and he has enough to do to
conflict with his sickness.

Again, he is a fool that will play with edgetooles, Jesting with sin.
that makes a sport of sin, he is a fool that provokes his betters, that
shootes up arrows, and casts up stones, that shall fall on his own head, he
that darts out oaths, and blasphemies against God, that shall return back
upon his own pate, many such fools there are, God will not hold them
guiltless.

He is a fool that knows not, or forgets his end, Forgetfulness of his end.
every wicked man forgets the end wherefore he lives in the world, he comes
here into the world, and lives, and is turned out of the world again, and
never considers the work that he has to do here, but is carried like a
fool, with affections, and passions to earthly things, as if he had been
borne only for them. A wiseman has an end prefixed in all that he does, and
he works to that end. Now there is no man, but a sound sanctified Christian
that has a right end, and that works to that end, other men pretend they have
an end, and they would serve God, etc.

They pretend heaven, but they work to the earth-ward, like moles, they dig
in the earth, they work not to the end they pretend to fix to themselves: All
men how witty soever they are otherwise in worldly respects, they are but
fools. As we say of owls, they can see, but it is by night so wicked men are
witty but it is in the works of darkness they are wise in their own
generation, Wicked men witty in their generation.
among men like themselves but this is not the life wherein folly, and
wisdom can be discerned so well, it will appear at the hour of death, and
the day of judgment, then those will be found wise, that are wise for
eternity, that have provided how it shall go with them, when all earthly
things shall fail them, and those will be fools that have only a particular
wit for the particular passages of this life, to contriue particular ends, and
neglect the main they are penny wise, and pound foolish. Achitophel a witty
wiseman, his counsel was an oracle, yet he was not wise to prevent his own
destruction.

He is a madman, a fool that hurts and wounds himself, He wounds himself.
none else will do so, wicked carnal men, they wound, and hurt, and stab
their own consciences, oh if any man should do them but the thousandth part
of the harm that they do themselves every day, they would not endure it, they
gall, and load their consciences with many sins, and they do it to themselves;
therefore it is a deserved title that is given them. God meets with the pride
of men in this term of folly: for a wicked man above all things is careful to
avoid this imputation of fool, account him what you will, so you account him,
a shrewd man withal, that can overreach others, that he is crafty and wise,
he glories in the reputation of wisdom, though God account him a fool, and
he shall be found so afterward, and to abate the pride of men, He brings a
disgraceful term over their wit and learning, and calls them fools.

This should abase any man that is not a right and sound Christian, Use 1. To
humble wicked men.
that the God of wisdom, and the Scripture that is GODS word esteems of all
wicked men, be they what they will, to be fools, and that in their own
judgments if they be not Atheists, if they will grant the principles they
pretend to believe.

Let this therefore be an aggravation in your thoughts when you are tempted to
commit any sin, Oh! besides that it is a transgression and rebellion against
Gods commandment, it is folly in Israel, and this will be bitterness in the
end.

Aggravation of sin.
Is he not a fool, that will do that in an instant, that he may repent many
years after? Is he not a foolish man (in matter of diet) that will take that,
that he shall complain of a long time after? None will be so foolish in
outward things. So when we are tempted to sin, think, is it not folly to
do this, when the time will come that I shall wish it undone again, with the
loss of a world if I had it to give?

And beg of God the wisdom of the holy Ghost, Beg spiritual wisdom.
to judge aright of things, the eye salve of the Spirit of God, to discern of
things that differ: to judge spiritual riches to be best, and spiritual
nobility and excellency to be best, and to judge, of sinful courses to be
base, how ever otherwise gainful let us labor for grace, The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom, those that do not fear the Lord they have
no wisdom.

Not to pass for the censures of the wicked
And pass not for the vain censures of wicked men, thou art hindered from the
practice of religious duties and from a conscionable course of life, why?
Perhaps thou shall be accounted a fool by whom? By those that are fools
indeed, in the judgment of him who is wisdom indeed, God himself: who would
care to be accounted a fool of a fool? We see the scripture judges wicked
men here to be fools.

We must not extend it only to wicked men, Folly in Gods children.
but even likewise Gods children when they yield to their corruptions, and
passions they are foolish for the time, in Psa. 38.5. Psa. 38.5.
My wounds stink and are corrupt because of my foolishness, and in Psa. 73.
Psalm. 73.
So foolish was I and ignorant, etc.

Therefore when any base thought of Gods providence comes in our mind, or any
temptation to sin let us think it folly and when we are overtaken with any
sin, let us be-foole our selves, and judge it as God does to be foolishness,
this is the ground and foundation of repentance: So much for the quality of the
person here described, Fools.

I come to the Cause.

Because of their transgressions and because of their iniquities.
Transgression, especially has reference to rebellion against God, and his
ordinances in the first table, Iniquity, has reference to the breach of the
second table against men, and both these have their rise from folly, for want
of wisdom causes rebellion against God, and iniquity against men, all
breaches of Gods will come from spiritual folly.

Why does he begin with transgressions against the first table, and then
iniquities the breach of the second?

Because all breaches of the second table issue from the breach of the first a
man is never unjust to his neighbors, The breach of the second table comes
from the breach of the first.
that does not rebel against Gods will in the first table, and the foundation
of obedience, and duty to man, it rises from man's obedience to God. Therefore
the second table is like the first that is, our love to our neighbor is like
to our love of God, not only like it but it springs from it: for all comes from
the love of God, therefore the first command of the first table runs through all
the Commandments, Thou shall honor God; and honor man, because we honor
God. A man never denies obedience to his superior to the magistrate, etc. but
he denies it to God first, a man never wrongs man, but he disobeys God first,
Therefore the Apostles lay the duties of the second table in the Scriptures
upon the first, Saint Paul always begins his Epistles, with the duties to God,
and religion and when he has discharged that he comes to parents, and masters,
and children, and servants, and such particular duties, because the spring of
our duty to man, is our duty to God, and the first justice is the justice of
religion to God, when we are not just to give God his due: thereupon come all
breaches in our civil conversation, and commerce with men, for want of the
fear of God, men do this, as Joseph said, how shall I do this and offend
God? and Abraham he had a conceit they would abuse his wife, Surely the fear
of God is not here, therefore he thought they would not be afraid to do any
thing, he that fears not God if opportunity serve, he will not be afraid to
violate the second table he that fears God he will reason, how shall I do
this, to wrong another in his name, and reputation, or in his estate, and sin
against God? for I cannot sin against man, but I must first sin against God,
that is the reason he sets it down thus, transgressions and iniquities.

See an unhappy succession of sin, ^nhappy succession of sin.
that where there is transgression there will be iniquity, when a man yields
to lust once presently he breaks upon Gods due, and then upon man's, one sin
draws on another, as we see David giving way to one sin, it brought another,
so the giving way to transgression, neglecting the word of God, and duties of
religion presently another follows neglect of duty to men.

Take heed of the beginnings of sin, Use. Take heed of beginnings of sin.
there are degrees in Satan's school from ill to worse till we come to worst
of all, and there is no staying it is like the descent down a steep hill, let
us stop in the beginning by any means, as we would avoid iniquity, let us
take heed of transgression.

Are afflicted.
HE means especially that affliction of sickness as appears by the words
following.

Doct. Sin the cause of sickness.
Sin is the cause of all sickness. Fools for their transgressions, and
iniquities are afflicted: for Gods quarrel is especially against the soul,
and to the body because of the soul, I will not dwell on this point having
spoken of it, 1 Cor. 11.31.
at large on another text.

The Use that I will make of it now shall be, Use 1. To justify God.
First of all, If sin be the cause of all sickness, Let us justify God, and
condemn our selves, complain of our selves, and not of God; Wherefore does the
living man complain, and murmr, and fret, Man suffers for his sin,
Justify God and judge our selves. I will bear the wrath the Lord because I
have sinned against him, judge our selves and we shall not be judged.

To be patient.
Then again is sin the cause of sickness, it should teach us patience, I held my
tongue because thou Lord did it, Shall not a man be patient in that he has
procured by his own evil and sin?

Search out our particular sin.
And search our selves, for usually* it is for some particular sin, which
conscience will tell a man of, and sometimes the kind of the punishment will
tell a man, for sins of the body, God punishes in the body he pays men home,
in their own coin, what measure a man measures to others shall be measured
to him again. If a man have been cruel to others, God will stir up those
that shall be so to him, therefore we should labor to part with our particular
transgressions and iniquities. It is a general truth for all ills whatsoever
as well as this of sickness. To seek God in trouble.
Therefore we should first of all go to God by confession of sin. It is a
preposterous course that the athesticall careless world takes, where the
Physician ends, The course of worldlings
there the divine begins* when they know not what to do. If diseases come from
sin then make use of the divine first to certify the conscience, and to
acquaint a man with his own mercy. First to search them, and let them see the
guilt of their sins and then to speak comfort to them, and to set accounts
strait between God, and them, as in Ps. 32. (an excellent place. Psalm. 32.
David roared, his moisture was turned into the drought of summer, what course
does he take? he does not run to the Physician presently but goes to God. Then
said I it was an inward resolution, and speech of the mind, then I concluded
with my self, I will confess my sin to God, and thou for gave my
iniquities and sin, so body, and soul were healed at once. Divinity
transcends other arts.
Divinity herein transcends all other Arts, not only corrupt nature, and
corrupt courses but all other: For the Physician he looks to the cause of the
sickness out of a man or in a man, out of a man and then especially in
contagious sickness, he looks to the influence of the heavens, in such a
year, such conjunctions, and such eclipses have been, he looks to the
infection of the Air to subordinate causes, to contagious company, and to
diet, etc. And then in a man to the distemper of the humors, and of the
spirits, when the instrument of nature is out of tune it is the cause of
sickness. But the divine, and every Christian (that should be a divine in this
respect) goes higher and sees all the discord between God, Sickness how from
God, how from sin.
and us, there is not that sweet harmony there, and so all the jarres in second
causes come from God as the cause inflicting, from sin, as the cause
demeriting: The Divine considers those two always: The Physician looks to the
inward distemper and the outward contagion, and this is well, and may be done
without sin, but men must join this too, to look into conscience, and look
up to God together with looking for help to the Physician, because we have
especially to deal with God.

I would this were considered that we might carry our selves more
Christian-like under any affliction whatsoever, The cause of murmuring in
trouble.
what is the reason that people murmr, and struggle, and strive as a bull in
a net as the Prophet speaks, when God hampers them in some judgment? They
look to the second causes, and never look to clear the conscience, of sin,
nor never look to God, when indeed the ground of all is God offended by sin,

Fools for their transgressions are afflicted.

We by our sins put a rod into Gods hand, Sin puts a rod in Gods hand
A rod for the fools back as Solomon says, and when we will be fools we
must needs endure the scourge and rod in one kind or other: those that will sin
must look for a rod, it is the best reward of wicked, and vain fools that
make a jest of sin, (as the wiseman says) They cast firebrands, and say am I
not in jest? That rail and scorn at good things, that swear, and carry
themselves in a loose, ridiculous scandalous fashion, as if God did not eye
their carriage, and yet am I not injest? Well, it is no jesting matter, sin
is like a secret poison, Sin a poison.
perhaps it does not work presently, as there are some kind of subtle poisons
made in these days (wherein the Devil has whetted men's wits) that will work
perhaps a year after, so sin if it be once committed perhaps it does not
kill presently, but there is death in the Pot, thou art a child of death, as
soon as ever thou have committed sin, as Salvian says well, Salvian
thou perishest before thou perish, the sentence is upon thee, thou art a dead
man, God to wait for thy repentance prolongs thy days, but as soon as thou
have sinned without repentance, thou art a child of death, and as Poison that
works secretly a while, yet in time it appears, so at last the fruit of sin
will be death, Sin and death came in together: take heed of all sin, it is
no dallying matter.

Their soul abhorres all manner of meat. Extremity of sickness.

THIS is one branch of the extremity of the sickness, the loathing of meat,
for God has put a correspondencie, between food that is necesary for man, and
man's relish: for man being in this world to be supported, the natural moisture
being to be supplied, and repaired by nourishment as it is spent by the
natural heat which feeds upon it, therefore God has put a sweetness into
meat that man might delight to do that which is necessary: for who would care
for meat if it were not necessary? Therefore being necessary God has put
delightful tastes in meats to draw men to the use of them, to preserve their
being for the serving of him. Now when these things savor not, when the relish
of a man is distempered that he cannot judge aright of meats, when the palate
is viciated, there must needs follow sickness, Natural cause of sickness:
for a man cannot do that that should maintain his strength, he cannot feed
on the creature, therefore the Palmist setting down the extremity of
sickness, he says their soul abhors all manner of meat, This the great
Physician of heaven and earth, sets down as a symptom of a sick state when
one cannot relish and digest meat, experience seals this truth and proves it
to be true. Happiness of Epicures unstable.


You see then the happiness of Epicures how unstable and vain it is, whose
chief good is in the creature, God by sickness can make them dis-relish all
manner of meat, and where is the summum bonum then of all your bellygods, your
sensual persons

Again in that he says, Their soul abhors all manner of meat, To bless
God for appetite.
it should teach us to bless God, not only for meat but for stomachs to eat,
it is a blessing common, and therefore forgotten. It is a double blessing when
God provides daily for our outward man and then gives a stomach to relish his
goodness in the creature, sometimes a poor man wants meat, and has a
stomach: sometimes a rich man wants a stomach, when he has meat, they that
have both have cause to bless God, because it is a judgment when God takes
away the appetite that men abhor and loath all manner of meat.

Therefore if we would maintain thankfulness to God, labor to thank God for
common blessings, what if God should take away a man's stomach, we see his
state here he is at the gates of death, therefore thank God that he maintains
us with comforts in our pilgrimage, and withal that he gives us strength to
take the comfort of the creature.

We fee here again one rule how to converse with them that are sick, How to
converse with the sick.
blessed is he that understands the estate of the afflicted and sick, not to
take it ill to see them wayward, it comes not from the mind, but from the
distemper of the body: as we bear with children, so we must bear with men in
those distempers, if they have food, and yet loath it, you see how it is with
men in that case, Their soul abhors all manner of meat, It should teach us
to sympathize with those that are sick, if we see them in these distempers.

The next branch of the extremity is;

They draw near the gates of death.
DEATH is a great Commander, a great Tyrant, Gates of death.
and has gates to sit in, as Judges and Magistrates used to sit in the gates.
There are things employed in this phrase.

First, Death it self.
They draw near to the gates of death, that is, they were near to death, as
he that draws near the gates of a City, is near the City, because the
gates enter into the City.

Authority of death.
Secondly, gates are applied to death for authority, they were almost in deaths
jurisdiction; death is a great Tyrant, he rules over all the men in the world,
over Kings, and Potentates, over mean men, and the greatest men fear death
most: he is the King of fears as Job calls him, I, and the fear of Kings.
Yet death that is thus feared in this life by wicked men, at the day of
judgment, of all things in the world they shall desire death most, Misery of
wicked men.
according to that in the Apocalips, They shall desire death, and it shall not
come to them, they shall subsist to eternal myserie; that, that men are most
afraid of in this life, that they shall wish most to come to them in the world
to come, Oh that I might die! What a pitiful state are wicked men in?
therefore it is called the Gate of death, it rules and overrules all mankind:
Romans 5.
therefore it is said to reign, Romans 5. Death and sin came in together,
sin was the gate that let in death, and ever since death reigned, and will,
till Christ perfectly triumph over it, who is the King of that Lord and
Commander, and has the key of hell and death: To wicked men (I say) he is a
Tyrant, and has a gate, and when they go through the gate of death, they go
to a worse, to a lower place, to hell, it is the trappe-doore to Hell.

Power of death.
Thirdly, by the gate of death is meant not only the authority, but the power
of death, as in the Gospel, The gates of hell shall not prevail against it
that is, the power, and strength of hell, so here it implies the strength of
death, which is very great for it subdues all, it is the executioner of Gods
justice.

If death have such a Jurisdiction, Use.
and power, and strength, To disarme death.
let us labor to disarme it before hand, it is in our power to make death
stinglesse, and toothlesse, and harm less: nay we may make it advantageous,
for the gate of death may become the gate of happiness: let us labor to have
our part, and portion in Christ, who has the key of hell and death, who has
overcome and conquered this tyrant, Oh death where is thy sting? oh grave where
is thy victory? 2 Cor. 15.
1 Cor. 15. Thanks be unto Ged who has given us victory through Jesus Christ
our Lord, that now we need not fear death, that though death have a gate, yet
it is a gate, to let us into heaven, as it is a door to let the wicked into
hell; So much for that.

In the next place we come to their carriage in their extremity.

They Cried to God in their trouble.
THIS is the carriage of man in extreme ills; if he have any fear of God in
him, to pray and then prayers are cries they are darted out of the heart as it
were to heaven. It is said, Christ made strong cries, in extremity prayers are
cries hence I observe briefly these things.

That God suffers men to fall into extreme ills even to the gates, Doct. God
suffers men to fall to great misery.
of death, that there is but a step between them and death.

Why?
To weane them perfectly from the world. Reas. 1.
To make them more thankful when they recover: for what is the reason that men
are so slight in thanksgiving? Usually the reason is they did not conceive
that they were in such extreme danger as they were.

3.
Likewise he suffers men to fall into extreme sickness that he may have all
the glory, for it was his doing, there was no second cause to help here, for
their soul abhorred all manner of meat, and they were even at the Gates of
death, Now when all second causes fail, then God is exalted therefore he
suffers men to fall into extremity, the greater the malady, the more is the
glory of the Physician.

The second thing is this, as God brings his children into extremity, So;

Gods children in extremity they cry to him. Gods children cry to him in
affliction.

EXtremity of afflictions does force prayers, In their affliction, they will
seek me early: When all second causes fail then we go to God, nature
therefore is against atheism (as one observes) that naturally men run to God in
extremity; Atheism against nature.
Lord help me, Lord succor me, so especially in the Church in extremity,
Gods people cry to God, and as afflictions, so p^rticularly this of sickness
of body, drives men to God. God should not hear of us (many times) unless he
should come near us by afflictions, and deep afflictions: Out of the deep
have I cried, Why God sends affliction.
God brings us to the deep, and then we cry. Our nature is so naught, that
God should not hear of us, (as I said) unless he send some messenger after
us, some affliction to bring us home as Absalom dealt by Ioab, when he fired
his corn. In the Gospel, Christ had never heard of many people, had it not
been for some infirmity: but blessed are those sicknesses, and infirmities
that occasion us to go to God, that makes us cry to God. It was the speech of
a Heathen, we are best when we are weakest, why? as he says very well, who is
ambitious, voluptuous, or covetous for the world when he is sick, when he sees
the vanity of these things?

This should make us submit more meekly unto GOD, To submit to God patiently.
when we are under his hand when we are his prisoners by sickness, when he
casts us on our sick beds, because GOD is working our good, he is drawing us
nearer to him.

Then they cried to him. Prayer a special remedy in affliction.
So we see then that prayer it is a remedy in a remediless estate, when there
is no other remedy and this one difference between a child of GOD and another;
In extremity a carnal man that has not grace, he has not a spirit of prayer
to go to GOD, but a child of GOD, he cries to GOD, he had acquaintance with
God in the time of health, therefore he goes boldly to GOD as a father in the
time of extremity. Gods children can answer Gods dealing; for as he brings his
children to extremity, when there is no second cause to help, so they answer
him by faith, in extremity when there is nothing to trust unto, they trust
him. when there is no physic in the world that can-charme the disease, they
have a spirit of faith to answer Gods dealing, in the greatest misery, as Job
faith, though he kill me yet will I trust in him.

For GOD is not tied to second causes, and therefore if he have delight in us,
and if he have any service for us to do he can recover us from the gates of
death, Nay from death it self, as we see Christ in the Gospel raised from the
dead, and at the resurrection he will raise us from death much more can he
raise us from the gates of death when we are near death.

To be in a state fit to pray.
Therefore considering that pra^er is a remedy in all maladies, in a remediless
estate, Let us labor to have a spirit of prayer, and to be in such a state as
we may pray.

Take heed of known sin.
What state is that?

First take heed of being in league with any sin, If I regard iniquity in my
heart, God will not hear my prayer, nay he will not hear others prayers for
us, oh what a pitiful state is it when God will not hear us nor others for
us! Pray not for this people (says God to Jeremiah) and if Noah, Daniel, and
Job stood before me they should but deliver their own souls. If a man be in
a peremptory course of sin, and will not be reclaymed, but is like the deaf
Adder that will not be charmed, God will not hear prayers for him: will God
hear a rebel when he comes to him for mercy, and is in a course opposite to
Gods will? As if a Traitor should come to sue for pardon with a dagger in his
hand; which were to increase the treason: So when a man comes to God and cries
to him and yet purposes to live in sin, and his conscience tells him that
he offers violence to GOD by his sins, and lives in rebellious courses, GOD
will not hear his prayers.

Hear God calling on us.
Again if we would be in such a state as God may accept us when we come to
him, let us hear GOD when he cries to us, he cries to us in the ministry of
the word, Wisdom has lift up her voice, and this is GODS course, he will
hear us when we hear him, He that turns his ear from hearing of the Law,
his prayer shall be abominable. Those that do not attend upon Gods
ordinances, that will have a kind of devotion private to themselves, and avoid
the public ordinance, that fear perhaps they shall hear somewhat that would
awaken their conscience, and they would not be tormented before their time,
Let them consider (it is a terrible speech of Solomon) He that turns his ear
from hearing the Law, his prayer shall be abominable. Let us take heed, it is
a fearful thing to be in such an estate, that neither our own prayers, nor
others shall be regarded for us, and let any man judge, if we will not hear
GOD speak to us, is it fit that he should hear us speaking to him?

And before I leave the point, let me press it a little further, at this time
we have cause to bless GOD for the deliverance of the City: Oh! but let all
that have the spirit of prayer, that have any familiarity with GOD,
Exhortation to prayer.
improve all their interest in heaven at this time, do we not conceive what
danger we are in? What enemies we have provoked? What if we be free from the
sickness, are we not in great danger of worse matters th^n the sickness? Is
it not worse to fall into the hands of our enemies? Have we not great,
provoked, cruel Idolatrous enemies? therefore let us jointly now all cry to
GOD, and importune him, that he would be good to the State, that as he has
given us a pledge of his favor in delivering us from the plague, so he would
not be weary of doing good unto us, but that he would still make it a token
of further favors, and deliverances hereafter: That as He delivered us in
former times, in 88, and magnified his mercy to us, so now He would not
expose us to the cruelty of Idolatrous enemies, whose mercies are cruel. Let
us stir up our selves; Prayer best before affliction.
Security and carelessness always fore-runnes one destruction or other.

Prayer will do a great deal more good, now, then when trouble has overtaken
us, for now it is a sign it comes from a religious seeking of God, then it
comes from self-love. There is a great deal of difference, when a malefactor
seeks to the judge before the time of the Assizes, and when he seeks to him at
the present time, for then it is merely out of self respect and not respect to
him. If we seek to God now he will single, and mark out those that mourn
for the sins of the time, and pour out their spirits to him in prayer that he
would still dwell and continue the means of salvation amongst us, Mal. 3:
when God I say comes to gather his Jewels Mal. 3. He will single, and cull
out them as peculiar to himself. Remember the Church in our prayers.


Therefore let us in all our prayers put in the Church, things do more then
speak, they cry to us to cry to GOD earnestly, put case we be not in trouble
our selves, our prayers will be the more acceptable: before trouble come it is
the only way to prevent it, as it is the only way to rescue us when we are in
trouble.

I come now to the remedy.

He saved them out of their distress.
GOD is a Physician good at all manner of sicknesses, God the best Physician.
it is no matter what the disease be, if GOD be the Physician, though they
be as these at the gates of death, he can fetch them back; herein GOD
differs from all other Physicians.

First of all he is a general Physician, he can heal a Land, a whole
Kingdom of sickness, of pestilence and as it is in, 2 Chronicles. 7.14.
2 Chro. 7.14.

Then he is a Physician of body, and soul, of both parts; And then he is not
tied to means.

Other Physicians can cure, but they must have means. Other Physicians cannot
cure all manner of diseases, nor in all places, but GOD can cure all.

He saved them out of their distress.

Other physicians cannot be always present but God is so to every one of his
patients he is a compassionate tender present Physician.

Which should encourage us in any extremity (especially in sickness of body)
to have recourse to God, Use. To have recourse to God in sickness.
and never to despair though we be brought never so low, he that can raise
the dead bodies, can raise us out of any sickness; therefore let us use the
means, and when there is no means trust God: for he can work beyond means,
and without means.

They cried to the Lord, and he saved them out of their distress; It was the
fruit of their prayers. Doct. Prayer to God successful


There was never any prayer from the beginning of the world made to God
successelesly.

What should I speak of prayer, our very breathings are known to God when we
cannot speak our sighs, as it is Psalm. 38. My groans and sighs are not hid
from thee. Psalm. 38.
God has a bottle for our tears, and preserves our sighs and groans, there
is nothing that is spiritual in us, but God regards, Romans 8.
as in Romans 8. We know not what to ask, but the spirit of God stirs up in
us sighs and groans that cannot be expressed, And God hears the voice of the
sighs of his own spirit.

Let us also be exhorted from this issue, to cry unto the Lord: for there was
never any man did, sow prayers in the breast and bosom of God, but he received
the fruit of it, he is a God hearing prayer, he will not loose his attribute.
God hears heathens.
Nay, further (mark) the instances in this Psalm, are not made only of men
in the Church, but likewise of men out of the Church, of men that have not the
true religion, they pray to GOD, as creatures to the Creator, and though GOD
have not their souls, yet he will not be beholding to any man for duties, if
Ahab do but hypocritically fast, Ahab shall have outward deliverance for his
outward humiliation, and these men mentioned in the text, if they call to GOD
but as creatures, and not to Idols, GOD will regard them in outward things, and
deliver them. GOD will not be in any man's debt for any service to him though it
be outward.

And do we think that he that regards dogs out of the Church, will neglect
his children in the Church? Much more his children
He that regards heathen men when they pray to him in their extremity, and
delivers them to show his overflowing bounty, and goodness, will he not
regard his own children, that have the spirit of Adoption, of supplication,
and prayer, that put up their suits, and supplications, in the mediation, and
sweet name of Christ? will he not regard the name, and intercession of his
son and of his spirit, the Holy Ghost stirring up prayers in them, and the
state of his children, being his by adoption, since he regards the very heathen.

Nay more then so, God hears the very young ravens, and spreads a table for
every living thing, and will not suffer them to die for hunger, but provides
for them, because they are his creatures, and will he not for his children,
those that he has taken to be so near him to be heirs of heaven, and
happiness? Let us I say, be encouraged to cry unto the Lord upon all
occasions, if God be so good as to deliver sinful men (that have nothing in
them but the principles of nature) when they fly to God in prayer, as the
author and preserver of nature, much more will he hear his own children,
Luke 11.
he will give his spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11.

But here may an objection be made, I have cried long, I am hoarse with crying,
Object.
I have waited a longtime, I have bin a long time sick, or annoyed with some
particular trouble, and God seems as it were to stop his ears, to harden his
heart against me, to shut up his bowels of compassion, and pity, therefore I
were as good give over as continue still crying, and not be heard.

I answer, Answ.
there is no one duty almost more pressed in scripture then waiting and
watching to prayer, Waiting after prayer necessary.
wait still, has not God waited thy leisure long enough, and wilt not thou
wait on him?

A patient when he feels his body distempered with Physic, oh he cries out
partly for the Physic, and partly for the sickness, that trouble him both
together, and make civil war in his body, yet notwithstanding the Physician
wisely lets it work he; shall have no cordial, nor nothing to hinder it, he
lets it go on till the Physic have wrought well, and carried away the
malignant matter, that he may be the better for it, and that he is a loving
and tender Physician, yet so God when we are in trouble it is as Physic we cry
but God he turns the glass as the Physicians do; nay this time shall be
expired it shall work so long, till thy pride be taken away, thou shall be
humbled thoroughly, till thou be weaned from thy former wicked pleasures, till
thou be prepared to receive further blessings; therefore they cry, and cry,
and God deferres to hear the voice of his children, God deferres for our good.
in the mean time he loves to hear the cry of his children, and their prayer
is as sweet incense, yet he deferres still, but all is for the patients good, be
not weary of waiting, it is a great mercy that He makes thee able to continue
crying that thou have the spirit of Prayer, that thou can pour out thy soul
to God, it is a great mercy and so account of it.

Perhaps thou have not cast out thy Jonas, thy Achan, that there is some
particular sin, Beloved sins hinder prayer.
unrepented of, and thou cryest and cryest but thy sin cries louder, thy
pride, or thy oppression cries, thy wicked course cries, thou cryest unto God,
and there is another thing cries in thee, that cries vengeance as thou do
for mercy, therefore search out thy Achan, cast out thy beloved sin, see if
thou regard iniquity in thy heart, if thou regard any pleasing, or profitable,
or gainful sin, and never think that God will hear thee till that be out,
for it will outcry thy prayers.

The next thing is the manner of Gods cure.

He sent his word and healed them.
WHAT word? His secret command, Gods powerful word*
his will. Let such a thing be, as in the creation. Let there be light, etc.
Besides his word written, there is his word creating, and preserving things
created, and so here restoring them that were sick, He sent his word and
healed them, and so at the resurrection, his Word, his voice shall raise our
bodies again. It is a strange manner of cure for GOD to cure by his word, by
his command. It shows that GOD has an universal command of all things in
the world, Gods command over all things.
in heaven, and earth, over devils, and over sicknesses, as it is said in the
Gospel, He rebuked the sicknesses, He can rebuke the agues, the plague, and
the pestilence, and they shall be gone by his word, as the Centurion said, I
am a man that have servants under me, and I say to one come, and he comes,
and to another go, and he goes, so thou have all things under thee, thou art
GOD, and if Thou say to a disease, Come, it comes, if Thou say go, it goes,
GOD sent his word of command and healed them. It is but a word of God to heal,
but a word of God, to strike, He is the Lord of Hosts, If He do but hiss
(as the Prophet says) for the fly of Egypt; If He do but call for an
Enemy, they come at his word, as we see in Pharaohs plagues, the Flies, and
Frogs, all things obey his word.

There is a s^cret obedience in all things to God, when his will is that they
shall do this or that: why does the Sea keep his bounds, when as the nature
and position of the Sea is to be above the earth? It is the command of GOD
that has said, Let it be there, and hither shall thy proud waves go, and no
further. I might give many instances how GOD does all by his word; The Devils
are at his word, the whales, the Sea, when Christ rebukes it obeyes.

It should teach us not to displease this GOD, Use. Take heed of displeasing
God.
that can strike us in the midst of our sins even with a word. Let us fear
this GOD, put case we had no enemy in the world, God can arm a man's humors
against him, he can raise the spirit, and soul against it self, and make it
fight against it self by desperate thoughts, he needed not foreign forces
for Achitophel* and Saul, he could arm their own souls against themselves.
And when he will take down the greatest Giant in the world, he needs not
foreign forces, it is but working of a disease, but giving way to a humor,
but inflaming the spirits, and the soul shall abhor all manner of meat.

Again, he gives a command, a rebuke, and they are gone presently, therefore
let us not offend this great God, that is commander of heaven, and earth; let
us labor to please him, and it is no matter who else we displease: for he
has all things at his command, even the hearts of kings as the rivers of
water, when Esau sought for Jacob to hurt him, there was a secret command God
set upon him to love him; therefore we should fear him, and all other things
shall fear us, we need fear nothing (so we have a care to fear God) further
then in God, and for God; but not so to fear them, as to do evil for them,
and offend the great God that can with a word command sickness to come or bid
it be gone.

Again, in that God when all second causes fail can heal by his word,
Jncouragement to pray from Gods power.
therefore, let us never be discouraged from praying though we see a
hurly-burly, and tumult in the Church, though we see all Europe in combustion,
and the Church driven into a narrow corner, let us not give over prayer; for
Christ, that with a word commanded the waves to be still, and the devils to be
gone, and they presently obeyed him; he can still the waves of the Church? he
can pt a hook into the nostrils of his enemies, and draw them which way he
please, he can still all with his word; therefore howsoever things seem to run
contrary, and opposite to our desires, yet let us not give over, he that sees
no ground of hope in carnal fleshly reason, let him despair of nothing,
despair shuts the gate, and door of mercy and hope, as it were: you see here
when all means fail, when they were at the very gates, and entry of death,
God fetches them back again; how? with physic? no, he is not tied to
physic, there is difference between God, and between nature and art; nature
and art can do nothing without means, but the God of nature and art can do
it with his word. How made he this heaven, and earth, this glorious fabric?
with his word; Let there be light, and there was light, etc. And how shall he
restore all again? with his mighty commanding word, how does he preserve
things? by his word, how are things multiplied? by his word, increase and
multiply, a word of blessing, he does all things with his word.

So he can confound his enemies with a word, Nay Christ in his greatest
abasement when they came with ^taves, and arms to take him; Whom seek ye,
Says he? that word struck down all the Officers of the Scribes and
Pharisees, Christ's word in his abasement powerful.
they fell flat on the ground. Could he in his humiliation (before his great
abasement on the cross) strike down his enemies with his word, what shall he
do at the day of judgment when all flesh shall appear before him? And what
can he do now at the right hand of God in heaven? Let us never despair, what
state soever we be in, in our own persons, or in respect of the Church or
common wealth; Let us yet pray, yet solicit God, and wrestle with him, for we
see here when they were at the gates of death, he fetches them again with his
word, he can fetch things again when they are at destruction, as it were,
when man's wit is at a loss, that he knows not what course to take, God with
a word can turn all things again.

Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wondrous works to the children of men!
Let them sacrifice the sacrifice of Thansgiving and declare his works with
rejoicing.
YOU see that God the great Physician, he is good at all disseases, he is
never set at any thing for he can create helps, and remedies of nothing if
there be none in nature, he can create peace to the soul, in the the midst
of trouble of conscience, God can make things out of nothing, nay out of
contraries, you see here, what this great Physician has done he fetched them
from the gates of death when their soul abhorred all manner of meat, and what
does he require for all this great cure? surely the text tells us he looks for
nothing but praise.

Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, etc.
In which words you have these circumstances considerable, together with the
substance of the duty.

First the persons, who must praise God, Oh that men would praise the Lord;

And then the duty they are to perform, to praise God, to sacrifice to God, to
declare his works, one main duty expressed by three terms.

The third is, for what they should praise him; For his goodness, It is the
spring of all: for all particular actions of God do come from his nature, his
nature is goodness it self and indeed all other attributes are founded on
goodness, why is he gracious, and merciful and long-suffering? because he is
good, this is the primitive attribute.

And then another thing for which we must praise him, For his wondrous works
for the children of men.

Fourthly the manner how this should be done with rejoicing, and singing as the
word signifies, declare his works with rejoicing. For as all holy actions must
be done joyfully, and chearefully, so especially praise, God loves a
cheerful giver, much more a cheerful thanksgiver: for cheerfulness is the
very nature of thankesgiving, it is a dead sacrifice of thanksgiving it is a
dead sacrifice else these are the main things considerable in these words,

First of all of the persons.

Oh that men would praise the Lord.
THE blessed Psalmist whosoever he were, (directed by the spirit of God, All
men praise Go^
) he would have all men to praise God, not only those that participate and
have interest in the favor but the beholders also of the goodness of God to
others, for here he that was not interressed in these favors for his own
particular, yet he prayseth God for the blessings to others, To praise God for
others.
and he wishes that God might have praise from them.

For we are all of one society, of one family, we are all brethren, therefore
we must praise God for his blessings, and benefits on others, and not only
our selves but we must wish that all would do so, and specially we must praise
God for our selves, Especially for our selves.
when we have part of the benefit: for shall others praise God for us, and shall
notwe for our selves? Shall the Churches of God abroad praise God, for his
great deliverance of this city, (as there is no Church in the world that
hears of it, but is thankful for it) and shall not we for our selves? Shall
the angels in heaven praise God, and sing for the redemption of the Church by
the blood of Christ, Glory to God on high peace on earth, Luke 2.1^ 14.
good will to men, and shall not we that have interest in the work of
redemption: For Christ is not a mediator of redemption to Angels he has
relation to them in another respect, yet they out of love to God, and the
Church, and a desire to glorify God, hey praise God for this, and shall not
we much more for our selves? we must praise God our selves and desire that
all would do so, as he says here, Oh that men would praise the Lord, etc. and
in some other Psalms, Creatures praise God bow.
he stirs up 'all the creatures hayle, and snow, and wind and all to praise
God.

How can these praise God?
They do it by our mouths by giving us occasion to praise him. And they
praise him in themselves: for as the creature groaneth, Romans 8. Romans 8.
That none knows but God, and it self, they groan for the corruption, and
abuse that they are subject unto, and God knows those groans, so the creature
has a kind of voice likewise in praising of God, they declare in their nature
the goodness of God, and minister occasion to us to praise GOD, therefore the
Psalmist being desirous that GOD might be praised, for his goodness and mercy,
he stirs up every creature, Psalm. 103. Psalm. 103.
even the very Angels, insinuating that it is a work fit for Angels.

The children of God, have such a love, and zeal to the glory of GOD, that
they are not content only to praise GOD themselves, but they stir up all:
they need not to wish Angels to do it, but only to show their desire, oh the
blessed disposition of those that love God in Christ!

What shall we think then of those wretched persons that greiue that the word
of God should run and have free passage, Wicked men only dishonor God.
and be glorious, and that there should be a free use of the sacraments and the
blessed means of salvation? they envy the glory of God, and the salvation of
peoples souls. What shall we say to those that desire to hear God
dishonored, that perhaps swear, and blaspheme themselves, or if they do not
yet they are not touched in their hearts for the dishonor of God by others,?
this is far from the disposition of a Christian, he desires that all creatures
may trumpet ou^ the praise of God, from the highest Angel to the lowest
creature, from the Sun, and stars to the meanest shrub, only divellish
spirited carnal men take delight to blaspheme God, (that can strike them with
his word and send them to their own place to hell, without repentance) and can
hear him dishonored without any touch of spirit, a child of God desires God
to be glorified from his very heart root, and is greived when God is
dishonored any kind of way, so much briefly for the first,

Now what is the duty this holy man wishes?

That men would praise God. And sacrifice the sacrifice of thankesgiving, and
declare his works.
OUT of the largeness of his heart he expresses the same thing in many words,
therefore I shall not need to make any scruple in particularizing of them,
because there is not so much heed to be given in the expressions of a large
heart as to be punctual in every thing.

First he begins with praise.

Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord, etc. Praise a duty fit for Angels.
It is a duty as I said before fit for Angels, fit? nay it is performed by them:
For it is all the work they do, it is the only work that was religious,
that Adam did in Paradise, and that we shall do in heaven with God, therefore
we are never more in Heaven, then when we take all occasions of blessing, and
praising God, we are never in a more happy estate.

It is a duty therefore we should aim at, and the rather, because it is the
fruit, Praise the fruit, and end of all we do.
and end of all other duties whatsoever; what is the end of all the good we
do, but to show our thankfulness to God? the end of our fruitfulness in our
place, that others may take occasion to glorify God. Of hearing.
What is the end of our hearing? To get knowledge, and grace, that we may be
the better able to praise God, in our mouths, and in our lives. What is the end
of receiving the sacrament? Of the Sacrament.
nay, what is the duty it self? a thanksgiving? what is the end of prayer? to
beg graces, and strength that so we may carry our selves in our places, as is
fit, that so we may not want those things without which we cannot so well
glorify God, so the end of all is to glorify God.

Praising God the end of the creation,
It is the end that God intended in all, he framed all things to his own
praise, in the creation. Why has God given man reason here upon the stage of
the world? to behold the creatures, Romans 1. Romans 1.
that seeing in the creature, the wisdom of God, in ordering of things, the
goodness of God in the use of things, and the power of God in the greatness
of things, the huge, vast heaven, and earth, he might take occasion to
glorify, and magnify this God, to think highly of him, to exalt him in our
thoughts, that his creatures heaven, and earth, be so beautiful, and
excellent, what excellency is in God himself?

And as the end of creation so in redemption, It is the end of redemption.
all is for his glory, and praise, in Ephesians 1. Ephesians. 1.
how sweetly does Saint Paul set forth the end of it. To the glory of his rich
mercy and grace To be merciful to sinners to give his own son, for God to
be come man, not for man in that estate as Adam was in innocence but for
sinners for God to triumph over sin, by his infinite mercy here is the glory of
his grace shining in the Gospel, all is for the glory, and praise of God there.

Psalm. 50. It is the end of our particular deliverances.
And for particular deliverances in Psalm. 50. Call upon me in the day of
trouble. I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, his deliverances of
us in the passages of our life is that we may glorify him, by taking notice in
imminent dangers of some of his attributes: when there is no means of
deliverance, of his power and goodness, etc. In Revel. 4. Rev. 4.
The Elders are brought in praising God for the work of creation, Rev. 5.
and then in the fifth for redemption, Thou art worthy, for thou have redeemed
us, so indeed the work of creation, redemption, and the particular passages of
Gods providence, and protection, and preservation, they are matter of praise in
heaven, and earth among Gods people.

Now to name a few helps, Helps and means to praise God.
and means, to perform this duty the better.

If we would stir up our selves to praise God let us consider our own
unworthiness? Consider our own unworthiness.
As in prayer, there must be a humble heart, for a man will not seek abroad,
if he have somewhat at home, poverty of spirit and humility of heart, makes a
man pray: so it is the humble soul that praises God, that sees no desert in
it self, this is one way to help us to praise God, to see nothing in our
selves, why God should so regard us, as to give us our lives for a prey, to set
his love on us, and to follow us with good, nay we have deserved the contrary,
that God should leave us, and expose us to misery, rather then to watch over us
by his providence: what is in us? It is he that has made us, and not we our
selves, and he made us again, when we were sinners when we were worse then
naught, therefore to humble us, we must consider our own unworthiness, he
that knows himself unworthy of any favor, he will be thankful even for
the least, as we see in Jacob, I am less then the least of all thy favors,
therefore he was thankful for the least: so we see here in the text, these
men are stirred up to praise God, they saw no other help, no worthiness in
themselves, they were at the gates of death, in a desperate estate, O that such
men would praise God, indeed such men are fittest to praise God, that can
ascribe help to nothing but to God, to no second causes.

Not to rest on second causes.
Therefore in the next place (as a branch of the former) if we would praise God,
dwell not on the second causes, if God use second causes in any favor he
bestows on us, either in keeping us from any ill or bestowing any good
consider it as a means that God might dispense with, that he might use if he
would, or not use: See God in the second causes, rise from them to him: Art
thou healed by Physic? Use Physic as a means, but see God in it, but if God
has cured thee without Physic, without ordinary means, then see him more
immediately doing good to thee without the help of second causes, that is one
way to help us to praise God to see him in every favor, and deliverance, for
what could second causes do, if he should not give a blessing? especially
praise him when he has immediately done it, as he can, did not he make light
before there was a sun? he is not tied to give light by the sun, and he
made waters before he made the clouds; he is not tied to the clouds,
therefore especially praise God, when we have deliverance we know not how,
without means, immediately from the goodness, and strength of God.

Again if we would praise God for any favor, The necessity and use of the
blessing.
consider the necessity, and use of the favor we pray for, as these men
here, they were at Deaths door, and loathed all manner of meat, alas they had
died if God had not helped them, If thou would bless God, consider what a
miserable stare thou should be in, if thou had not that favor to praise God
for: If thou be to bless God for thy senses, put case thou should want thy
sight, what a miserable case thou should be in: so for any of the senses
that a man wants, whereby he should glorify God, and take the comfort of the
Creature, put case a man should want his taste, as these men here, their soul
abhorred all manner of meat, alas what a miserable case is it to want a
relish, and taste of the comfort that God has put into the creatures, put case
we should want the meanest benefit we enjoy, how uncomfortable would our
lives be?

This spark of reason that God has given us, that we have understanding to
conceive things, which is the engine whereby we do all things as men, and are
capable of the grace of God, what a miserable thing were it, if God should take
away our wits, or suspend the use of them?

But especially in matters of grace, if God had not sent Christ to redeem the
world, what a cursed condition had we lain in? next to Devils.

Again if we would praise God, Daily register Gods favors.
let us every day keep a Diary of his favors, and blessings; what good he
does us privately, what positive blessings he bestows upon us, and what
dangers he frees us from, and continues, and renewes his mercies every day,
and publikly what benefit we have by the state we live in, Oh what a happy
state is it that we live in peace, that we enjoy such laws, that every man
may fit under his own vine, and under his own figtree and enjoy the comforts
of this life, when all the world about us are, and have been in combustion! We
should keep a Register of Gods blessings, Oh, that we could learn to have
such exact lives! it would breed a world of comfort, and we should have a
less account to make, when we die.

Every day labor to be humbled for our sins specially such as break the
peace of our consciences, and never give our bodies rest till our hearts have
rest in the favor of God, and together with matter of humiliation daily
observe how God bestows new favors, or else continues the old, that notwith
withstanding our provocation, and forgetfulness of him, he strives with us by
his goodness, this is a blessed duty that we should labor to perform.

And then when we have done this let us rouse up all that we are, To praise
God with that which is in us.
and all that we have within us to praise God, Psalm 103. My soul praise the
Lord, Psalm. 103.
and all that is within me praise his holy Name. What have we within us to
praise God? Let us praise God with our understanding, Our vnderstaning.
to conceive, and have a right judgment of Gods favors, of the worthiness of
them, and our own un worthiness, and then a sanctified Memory, Memory.
forget not all his benefits; forgetfulness is the grave of Gods blessings it
buries all. And then there is in us the affection of joy, Joy.
and love to God to taste him largely, and then all within us will be large in
the praising of God. And our tongue likewise though that be not within us,
Tongue.
it is called our glory; let us make it our glory in this, to Trumpet our Gods
praise upon all occasions, all that is within us, and all that we are, or have,
or can do, let it be all to the glory, and praise of God.

To draw to a conclusion with some general application, of all that has been
spoken, and then in particular to the present occasion.

You know how God has dealt of late with this City, In the great visitation.
1625.
and with our selves indeed, for we are all of one body politic, and however
God visited them, yet it was our sins also that provoked him, we brought
sticks to the common fire. Simile.
A Physician lets the arm blood, but the whole body is distempered, God let
the City blood, but the whole kingdom was in a distemper, so that it was for
our sins as well as theirs we, all brought (I say) some thing to the common
flame, and God afflicted us, even in them: God has now stayed the sickness
almost as Miraculously as he sent it: It was a wonder that so many should be
swept away in so short a time, it is almost as great a wonder that God should
stay it so soon. And what may we impute it unto? Surely as it is in the text.
They cried unto the Lord, God put it into the hearts of the Governors of the
state to appoint humiliation and crying to God, and therefore since God has
been so merciful upon our humiliation it is religiously, and worthily done of
the state that there should be a time to bless God

Again, God did it with a word, with a command, it was both in the inflicting
and delivery (as it were) without means: for what could the Physicians do in
staying the Plague? Alas all the skill in the world is at a loss in these
kinds of sicknesses! it comes with Gods command, it is Gods arrow more
especially then other sicknesses, God sent it by his Command, first to humble
us for our sin, and now he has stayed it with a word of command that from
above 5000. a week, it is come to three persons, God has sent his word and
healed us.

It was a pitiful state we were in before: for indeed it was not only a
sickness upon the City but a civil sickness: the whole state was
distempered: for as there is sickness in the body when there is obstruction,
when there is not a passage for the spirits and the blood from the liver, and
from the heart, and from the head these obstructions cause weakness, and
faintings, and consumption, So was there not an obstruction in the state of
late? were not the veins of the kingdom stopped? Was not civil commerce
stayed? the affliction of this great City, it was as the affliction of the
head or of the heart or of the liver; if the maine vital part be sick, the
whole is sick, so the whole kingdom not only by way of sympathy, but it was
civilly sick in regard that all trading, and intercourse was stopped, it was a
heavy visitation. And we have much cause to bless God that now the ways of
this Sion of ours mourn not, that-there is free commerce, and intercourse as
before, that we can meet thus peaceably, and quietly at Gods ordinances, and
about our ordinary callings, Concerning deliverance from the plague, to bless
God.
those that have an apprehension of the thing cannot choose but break out in
thanksgiving to God, in diverse respects.

That he would correct.
First of all, have not we matter to praise God that he would correct us at all?
he might have suffered us to have gone on and been damned with the wicked
world as it is 1 Cor. 11.33. 1 Cor. 11.33.
We are therefore chastened of the Lord that we should not be damned with the
world: it is his mercy that he would take us into his hands as children, that
he would visit us at all.

Another ground of thankesgiving is this that since he would correct us, That
he would do it himself.
he would use this kind of correction, that he would take us into his own
hands; might he not have suffered a furious, bloody dark spirited, divellish
spirited enemy to have invaded us, to have fallen into the hard hands of men
acted with divel^ish malice? David thought this a favor, even that God would
single him out to punish him with the Plague of pestilence that he might not
fall before his enemies. The mercies of God are wondrous great when we fall into
his hands he is a merciful God, he has tender bowels fu^ll of pity and
compassion: but The very mercies of wicked Idolaters are cruel, there was a
mercy therefore in that, that God would take us into his own hands.

That he stayed the Pestilence.
In the third place, we see when he had taken us into his own hands, how he has
stopped the raging of the pestilence, and has inhibited the destroying Angel,
even in a wondrous manner, that the Plague when it was so raging that it should
come to decrease upon a sudden; God was wondrous in this work, is not here
matter of praise?

That our lives were spared.
Then again, it is a mercy to us all here that he should give us our lives for
a prey as God says in Jeremiah to Baruch, Wheresoever thou go thou shall
have thy life for a prey, might not Gods arrow have followed us wheresoever we
went?

Whither can a man go from this arrow, but that God being every where might
smite him with the pestilence? now in that he has watched over us, and kept
us from this noisome contagious sickness, and has brought us altogether here
quietly and freely, that so there may be intercourse between man and man in
trading, and other callings, this is the fourth ground of praising of God.

And that it did not rage in other parts: That it spread not far.
in former time God scattered the pestilence more over the kingdom: It is a
great matter to bless God for. I beseech you let us say with the same spirit,
as this holy man h^re, Oh that men therefore would praise the Lord for his
goodness, and for the wonders that he does for the children of men! For his
goodness, that he would rather correct us here then damn us, for his
goodness, that he would not give us up to our enemies, For his goodness,
that he stayed the infection so suddenly, and that he stayed the spreading of it
further, For his goodness unto us in particular that he has kept us all safe.

What shall we do now but consecrate, and dedicate these lives of ours for he
gives us our lives more then once, at the beginning, there is never a one here
but can say by experience, GOD has given me my life, at such a time, and such
a time, let us give these lives again to God, labor to reform our former
courses, and enter into a new covenant with God, this is one part of
thanksgiving to renew our covenant with God, to please him better, and indeed
in every thanksgiving, that should be one ingredient. Now Lord I intend; and
resolve to please thee better, whatsoever my faults have formerly been, I
resolve by thy grace, and assistance to break them off, without this all the
other is but a dead performance.

Now briefly by way of analogy, and proportion, to raise some meditations from
that that has has been delivered concerning the body to the soul, for God
is the Physician both to soul, and body.

If God with his word can heal our bodies as the Psalmist says here, much
more can he with his word heal our Soul. God by his Word heales the soul.
There are many that their bodies are well (thanks be to God) but how is it
with their souls? here you have some symptoms to know their spiritual state
and oh that people were apprehensiue of it! Symptom of a sick soul.
have you not many that their soul loatheth all manner of meat, and they draw
near the gates of death, their souls are in a desperate state, they are
deeply sick, how shall we know it? their soul abhors all manner of
wholesome meat: how many are there that relish Poets, and history, any trifle
that does but feed their vain fancy and yet cannot relish the blessed truth,
and ordinances of God? Where is spiritual life, when this spiritual sense is
gone: when men cannot relish holy things? if they relish the ordinance of God,
it is not the spiritual part of it, so far as the spirit touches the
conscience, but something that (it may be) is suitable to their conceit
expressions, or phrases or the like, but it is a symptom and sign of a
fearful declining state, when men do not relish the spiritual ordinances of
God, which should be (as it were) their appointed food, when they do not
delight to acquaint themselves with God in hearing of the word, and reading,
and the like, let such therefore, as delight not in spiritual things know that
their souls lie gasping they are at the gates of spiritual death, all is not
well there is some fearful obstruction upon the soul, that takes away the
appetite, the soul runs into the world overmuch, they cloy themselves with
the world, when men cannot relish heavenly things they are eat up with the
delight and joy of other things pleasures and profits.

Let them search the cause, To recover spiritual appetite.
and labor for purging sharp things that may procure an appetite

Let them judge themselves, and see what is the matter that they do not
delight more in heavenly things; let them purge themselves by confession to
God, and consideration of their sins, and labor to recover their appetite, for
it is almost a desperate estate, They are at the gates of death.

Especially now when we come to the communion, what do we here if we cannot
relish the food of our souls? let us examine if we desire to taste the love of
God, and to be acquainted with God here if not, What to do in spiritual
distempers,
What shall we do in these spiritual distempers?

Desire of God, cry to God, that he would forgive our sins, and heal our
souls by his holy Spirit, that he would make us more spiritual to relish
heavenly things, better then we have done before, that as the things, that are
heavenly, are better in their kind then other things are; so they may be better
to our taste.

A man may know the judgment of his state, when he answers not the
difference of things: what the difference is between the food of life, and
ordinary food, what the difference is between the comforts of the holy Ghost,
and other comforts, between the riches, and pelf of the world, and the riches
of the spirit, the graces of God that will cause a man to live and die with
comfort, the true riches that make the soul rich to eternity, there is no
comparison: beg of God, this spi^ituall relish to discern of things that
differ, that we may recover our appetite God by his word, and spirit can do
it, not only the word written, but the in ward spiritual word written in our
hearts, desire God to join his spirit with his word, and sacraments, and that
will recover our taste and make us spiritual that we shall relish him that is
both the feast-maker, and the feast it self, he is both the meat and the
provider of the banquet.

For whence is it that all other things are sweet to us? Deliverance from
troble, and sickness? because it is a pledge of our spiritual deliverance in
Christ, the deliverance from hell and damnation, what comfort can a man have
that knows not his state in grace, in the enjoying of his health, when he
shall think he is but as a sheep kept for the slaughter? he knows not whether
he be in the favor of God or no?

Therefore let us come, and renew our faith in the forgiveness of our sins
through the blood of Christ, of whom we are made partakers in the Sacrament.
For if we believe our deliverance from hell, and damnation by the body of
Christ broken, and his bloodshed, then every thing will be sweet, when we know
God loves us to life everlasting, then every thing in the way to life
everlasting even day^^ bread will be sweet, because the same love that gives
heaven, gives daily food, and the same love that redeemes us from hell redeemes
us from sickness, therefore let us labor to strengthen our faith in the maine,
that we may be thankful for the less. And as we enter into new covenant
with God; so labor to keep it: Levit. 26.
in Levit. 26. every thing auengeth the breaking of Gods covenant when we make
covenant to serve him better for the time to come, and yet break it, God is
forced to send his messenger he sends sickness to avenge his Covenant,
considering that he has lately so avenged it, let it make us so much the more
circumspect in our carriage. So much for this time, and text.

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

Thomas Wykes.
May 11 1638.

