THE CHRISTIANS PORTION:

Wherein is unfolded the unsearchable Riches he has by his interest in Christ.
Whom enjoying he possesses all things else.

By R. Sibbs D. D. and Preacher to the Honorable Society of Grayes-Inne, and
Master of Catherine Hall in Cambridge.

Published by T. G. and P. N.

LONDON. Printed by JOHN NORTON for JOHN ROTHVVELL, and are to be sold at the
Sun in Paul's Churchyard, 1637.

1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. Ver. Let noe Man glory in Man for all things are yours,
whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods.
THe principal The Apostles scope in these words*
scope of the Apostle in this place, is to cut off faction, and over much
dependence upon men, who had crept into the consciences of people, and set up
themselves in steed of Christ: As that is the pride of false teachers to set up
themselves in the conscience where Christ alone should be. The Apostle to
prevent this, says, let no man glory in man; do not glory in your teachers,
they are but your servants, and Christ's servants, for all things are yours, all
the teachers in the World are your servants and Christ's. Having set down this
general, All things are The division of the Text.
yours, to discourage them from glorying in Man, he parcells that general into
particulars, Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or Life, or Death.

1 All persons are yours. 2 All things are yours. 3 All events are yours.
Persons. Paul, Apollo, Cephas.

Things. The World, or Life, or Death.

Events, whatsoever can come for the present or for time to come. All is yours.

For the persons. Paul, An inferencefrom the first particular.
Apollo, Cephas are yours, therefore Peter is not the head of the Church; he is
named here in the third place, among the rest and after the rest. Whether it
be Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, he is yours. You know who ground all their
Religion on this, Peter is the head of the Church, and they are the successors
of Peter but Peter: is the Churches, and therefore cannot be the head and
commander.

The World is yours. 2 Particular. The natural world is the Churches.


What world is the Churches.

1 The World natural is the Churches, that is, the frame of Heaven and Earth,
all things are made for man, and he is made for GOD. As the wise Philosopher
could say, that man is the end of all things in a semicircle, that is, all
things in the World are made for him. He is made for God in whom all things
end. As all things come from a point and end there again, so all things come
from God and all end in God. We are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, but the World
is ours, and we are Gods, all things in the World are our servants, for they
mourn in black, as it were, for our miseries, since the fall. And in our
restoring again they shall be restored, they wait for the day, as it is Romans
8. 21. For Romans 8. 21.
the glorious liberty of the sons of God: they have their happiness and misery
together with men.

But there is another World The world of wicked men is also the Churches. And
therein first the good of this world
that is ours, take it in the worst sense, the World of wicked men; all their
plotts and the Prince of the World are the Churches.

How is this? He and all his instruments are under the command of him that
turns all his designs contrary to his own intention, this is a hell to
Satan, and one of the chief torments he has, that as his malice is limited by
this power, so his power is limited by Gods power, who overshootes him in his
own bow: what ever he designs against the head Christ, and against his
members the Church, it is overturned for the good of the Church. In the
primitive Church some were given over to Satan, that they might learn not to
blaspheme. Its a strange thing 1 Timothy 1. 20
that Satan should teach not to blaspheme who is the author of blasphemy. Yet
by consequence he afflicting their bodies, thereupon they came to be wise, and
seemed to be moderate and sober, and to be Christianly minded, and not to
blaspheme. So the Prince of the World is ours in this, by an overcommanding
power, that turns all to good against his intentions. For there is but one
grand Monarch in the World. Every Kingdom is under a higher Kingdom, there is
but one to whom all are subject, there is one grand Wheel that turns all the
other, and therefore Satan himself is serviceable to Gods end, whether he
will or not.

And then for the World 2 All wicked men.
of wicked men, all their designs, though for the present they seem to be
against the Church, yet they are serviceable to the Church: for wicked men are
but the Launderers of the Church Simile.
(as it were) to wash the Church, to purge the church, to do base services
that God intends for the refyning of the Church, and all their hatred is for
the good of the Church, for God suffers the World to hate his children. That
his children James 4 4.
might not love the World: for if the World did not hate his, they would love
the World, and it would be a dangerous love. A consectary from the former
particulars
The Church is a strange corporation; it is such a corporation as has the
greatest benefit by enemies: The enemies of the Church are the promoters of the
greatest good of the Church: the very World is the churches, take it in the
worst sense, for the wicked World that lies in mischief: but I will not dwell
upon that. To go on. 3 Particular. 3 Particulars how Life is the Churches.


Or Life.

The life of others is the Churches.

Why does God continue the life of good Magistrates and good pastors?

For the Church: as Paul 1 The life of Ministers. Philip. 1. 23, and 24.
says, It were better for me to be with Christ, a great deal, yet for your
sakes I must continue. I am content to be without the joys of Heaven a while
for your good.

And therefore my life is yours, it is at your service, for you I shall
continue still.

And so the life of good 2 The life of Magistrates.
Magistrates, it is for the benefit of the Church; it were better for them to
be in Heaven, the life of all that may be serviceable to the Church, till they
have acted their part and served God in their generation, as it is said of
David Acts 3. 36. He served GOD in his own Generation: so every Magistrate
has his generation, a time allotted, a generation to stand up in the Church
and state, and to serve God in his turn, and then God takes him away.

And then the life of every 3 The life of every particular Christian.
particular christian is theirs, for God suffers them to enjoy it so long as
life may be a benefit to gather the more assurance of salvation, and to do
their work that he has given them to do here, and when they have done their
work they are gathered to their Fathers: so that life is the Churches. And
indeed life is a special benefit, Because bythe advantage of life we further
our reckonings, a good christian, The benefit of longer life
the longer he lives, the larlarger good accounts he has, all his sins are
wiped away, they shall not be laid to his charge, all his deeds, to a cup of
cold water, shall be set on the score, And he shall be rewarded: there is not a
sigh, not a tear, but it is regestred: the longer a man lives, if he should
live Methushelah his days, the richer he should be in good works, and the more
rich he is in good works, the more he shall have his part and share in glory
after, and therefore Life is yours. The longer he lives the happier, the time
in which he lives is for his good, and he makes the time happy, and it is
happier for himself: the more rich he is in good works, the more rich he
shall be in glory after. These Use of this particular. Thankfullnes for life.
things being so, we should be very thankful that God yields to us this life,
for besides an advantage of doing good, It is a preparative to a better. This
life is (as it were) the seminary of Heaven; Heaven indeed is the true
Paradise of all the Plants of God, but they must have a seminary to be
planted-in first, and therefore the Church is called the Kingdom of Heaven,
because we are first planted here. Now this life is an advantage, we are
planted here in the Church, to grow a while until we be taken from your semina
ry the Paradise of the Church, to the Paradise in Heaven. So Life is ours for
that end. I will not further enlarge the point, it is clear.

Or Death.

As life is ours, So death 4 Particular how death is the Churches.
is ours. It is astrange thing that death should be ours, that is a destroying
hostile thing to nature, The King of fears as the Scripture calls it Ioh. 15.
26.
and that terrible of all terribles, as the Philosopher, the last enemy 1 Cor.
15, 26.
as Paul says; that death should be ours. Death is ours many ways, you see
here it is a piece of our jointure, for these words contain the jointure of
the Church. The Church is Christ's Spouse, all things are Christ's, and therefore
all things are the Spouses: and among other particular gifts given to the
Church, death is ours. It is a strange thing 1. Death by the Gospel is ^ours,
a Snake without a sting.
that death should be given to the Church, and yet so it is, and we shall see
this, if we consider how death in the Gospel is turned into another thing, it
is a harmless thing in the Gospel the sting is pulled out, it has lost all
its venom in Christ. now death is a passage to 2. Its the passage ^^^n all
^ill to all good.
another World, it is the gate of glory, death nothing but divests us of these
rayments that we have here on our bodies, and puts us into garments of glory,
it puts off these rags, and puts us into a better condition, that is all the
hurt it does, it ends all that is ill, and all is determined in death, it is
the last evil, and it is the beginning of all that is good, that is
everlastingly good, that is spiritually good and eternally good, for by death
we are freed, both from the labor of sin which is a labor irksome to Gods
people, by reason of a principle of corruption which they have in them, that
accompanyes them till they be in their grave: death is the accomplishment of
mortification, in death there is an end of the labor of sin, and of all
other labors whatsoever, for death is a sleep, and all labors end in sleep:
and as after sleep the spiritts are refreshed, so after death we shall be more
refresht, then we can conceive now: so death is ours, It ends all labors of
sin, and all labors of the body, and it frees us from all contagion of
wicked men, and from all grief from wicked men, and it sets us clear out of
Satan's reach; Satan has nothing todoe with us when we are dead once; because
here the World is the Kingdom of Satan, but when we are gone hence, Satan has
nothing to do with us; and that is a great priveledge, so death is ours, it
frees us 3 Death is the beginning of eternal life.
from all that is evil, our death is our birth-daie: indeed we never live
till wedie, for what is your life? alas it is a dying life. Every day we live,
a part of our life is taken away, we die every day* 1 Cor. 15. 31.


The more we have lived the less of our life we have to live, this is but a
dying life.

There are three degrees 3 Degrees of life.
of life.

The life in* 1. The Mothers Womb. 2. The World. 3. Heaven.

The life in Heaven begins at death; death is the birthday of that life.
Deaths day is the birthday of imimmortality. When Christ came to die to
purchase life, he came not to die, to purchase a sorry life on earth: but he
came to die to purchase immortal glory, that is the life that Christ came to
die for, and to purchase. The day of death is the first birthday of that life;
and for our bodies, they are but refined by death, and fitted as Vessels cast
into the fire to be molded and fashioned to be most glorious Vessels after,
so our bodies are fitted by the grave, till body and soul be for ever happy at
the day of Resurrection, so that death is ours, and here upon it is that the
Wiseman says, that The day of death is better, then the day of birth, Eccle.
7. 1.
When we are borne we come into misery, When we die we go out of misery: It
is better to go out of misery then to come into misery. If the day of death
be better then the day of birth to a Christian, certainly then death is theirs,
and blessed are those that die in the Lord says the Spirit: Revel. 14.
A voice from Heaven says so, and therefore write, says he, it may be
written; if the Spirit says it, it is testimony and argument enough; Blessed
are those that die in the Lord, they rest from their labors, and their reward
follows them. They rest from all that is evil and their reward follows them;
all that is good, their works follow them, so that if all evil cease and all
good follows, I hope death may well be said to be ours. Death is ours, it is
our preferment: why should we be afraid of that, that is a part of our portion?
as the Apostle says here.

Death is yours.

I beseech you therefore, Use.
let us lay up this against those dark times wherein death will be represented
to us as an uglie and grimme thing, it is so to nature indeed, but to faith
death is my friend, it is become amyable: indeed there is nothing in the world
that does us so much good as death, for its the best Physician, it cures all
deseases whatsoever of soul and body, it frees us from all. And indeed (to
shut up all this point) death is the Death of death, it is the destruction of
it self, forafter death there is noe more death, so it consumes it self; by
death, we overcome death. We can never die more, we Rom 6.
are freed from all death; to be afraid of death is to be afraid of life, to be
afraid of victory: For we never overcome death, till we die. Lay up these
considerations against the time of need, the diseases of the body, the guilt
of sin, the loss of employment, the stripping of us of all earthly comforts,
they will all meet in a cen ter, in a point, at death; a man had need to
gather the greater comfort against that hour, and can we have a greater
comfort then this that now it is become our friend, that it is ours? now
Blessed be GOD, for Jesus Christ, that has made in him, even death the
bitterest 1 Cor. 15. 54.
thing of all to be sweet unto us.

Or things present.

Whatsoever is present serves us, whatsoever it be; good or evil, all is yours
but the most difficult is in

Things to come.

For what assurance have 5 Particulars how things to come are ours.
we of things to come? Things to come are ours, whether they be Good, or Evil.

For good; Death is to 1 All good things.
come, and that is ours; and for judgment, that is ours, for our Head, our
Savior, and our husband he shall be our judge: And at the 1 Cor. 62.
Day of judgment, we shall judge the World, and thenafter judgment, Heaven
is ours, immortality is ours, happiness is ours, all is ours then.

Indeed the best is to come, this is the best part of the portion, for if we
had nothing but what we have in this World, we were of all men most miserable,
alas what have we, if things present only are ours? but things to come also are
ours, and the best is behind, that for which CHRIST came into the World, is
behind, that which he injoyes in Heaven is ours, he will take his Spouse where
Himself is, into his own House, and he will finish the marriage, which is
begun in contract, and then we shall be for ever with the Lord. The things to
come are the maine things, that which our Faith lays hold of, that which we
raise our selves and comfort our selves by; are especially things to come,
neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor has ever entered into the heart
of man to conceive those things that GOD has prepared for 1 Cor. 2. 9.
his children, indeed its a part of Heaven to know them, and therefore the
full knowledge of them is deferred for that time.

The very judgment of 2 All evil
the wicked and the eternal sentence of them, it is the Churches, why? It adds
a luster to Gods mercy in advancing his own, as it is Romans 9. 23. God
magnifies Romans 9. 23.
his mercy to the Vessels of mercy by this, by punishing a company of
Reprobates in whom he has noe delight, by reason of their sins; his mercy much
appears by that, even by the eternal sentence and punishment of wicked men.
So all serves to set out the glory and excellency of Gods people. St. Paul in
Romans 8. (that Heavenly discourse of his) toward the Romans 8. 38. 38.
later end of the Chapter says triumphantly, Nothing shall separate us from
Christ, neither Life, nor Death, nor things present, nor things to come, Its a
great comfort that nothing to come can do us hurt, but this is a degree of
comfort higher, that all things to come are ours, so then this Text affords an
exuberancy of comfort above that, it is excellent comfort that nothing shall
separate, noe not Death it self: but this is more, death is ours, and in being
so, it shall not only not separate us from Christ, though it separate soul
and body, but join us to him, I beseech you take it as a Notion that may heple
against the terror of that separation that is a means of conjunction, the
doleful separation of soul and body. Two old friends join better friends
together, the soul and Christ, so things to come are ours, even all things
taken in the largest sense, the bitterest of all things, even death it self,
is ours. There are several Uses but the grand Use which the Apostle manely
intends, is. A Christian sure of the future.


That a Christian is as sure of the time to come, as of the time past, or
present: we are sure of what we have had, and what we have, but a Christian is
in so firm a condition and state; that he may be as sure of what is to come,
as of what he has, because God and Christ are not only Alpha but Omega also.
Christ Rev. 1. 8.
is not only he was, and is, but is to come, he is Jehova, the same for ever.
Heb. 13 ^.
And therefore as things past could not hurt us from being elected and called,
and things present cannot hurt us, but they are ours, so are things to come,
because God and Christ who is the Mediator under GOD has the command of all
things to come, and therefore we may be as sure of things to come as of things
present; what comfort is this to a Christian; what should become of me if times
of trouble and public calamity should come, or personal to my self? what
idle forecasts are these, why things to come? come what will come, all shall be
for the best, all things to come are ours even all things to come are ours
whatsoever.

The Apostle goes on and wrappes up all (as it is the manner of inductions) to
save labor; for it is in vain in that manner of reasoning that we call
inductions, to go over all particulers, because there is the same reason in
all; as if he should say Paul, and the World, and all things are yours; what
should I say more? I should but trouble you and my self to name particulars
All things are yours.

But yet we must understand Limitations and resolutions of some cases and
questions.
this with some limitts, we must therefore unloose some knotts, and answer
some cases of conscience, first, It may seem there is no distinction of
propertyes, if all be a Christians, and 1. Concerning propriety.
if every Christian may say, all is mine, then what is Ob.
one man's, is another, and there will be noe propriety.

I answer, undoubtedlie there is a distinction of properties Ans.
in the things of this life, though all be ours, because it is spoken of in
another sense, all is ours, to help us to Heaven; all is How all is ours, and
not ours.
ours in an order to comfort and happiness, but for propriety, so all things
are not ours; for you know the distinction, some things are common jure naturae
by the Law of nature, as the Sun and air, and many such like things, and
some jure gentium, by the Law of nations, it is but some things are common jure
gentium, but then there are some that by particular municipall Laws are proper.

The distinction is established Read Iud 11. from. 12, verse. to 20.
both by the Law of God, and the Law of man; Now not to stand long in answering
this question, though there be some frantic people that are a little troubled
with those things, Anabaptists and the like, we see in Scripture a distinction
of estates. Religion takes not away the distinction of Master and Servant, and
therefore it takes not away distinction of goods which is less. It is a great
burden to be a servant, but the Scripture stablisheth the distinction of Master
and Servant, and therefore it establishes distinction of goods. The Scripture
stablisheth Bounty and Alms, If there be not a distinction of property where
were Alms? Saloman says, the Rich, and Poor meet together, God is the maker
of both, Pro. 22, 2. Verse. He means not, as men, but as Poor and Rich.

If Riches be of God, then distinction of properties is of God; for what is
Riches but a distinction of properties, if God make Poor, and Rich, then there
must be Poor and Rich. The Poor you have always with you, Mat. 26, 11.
Therefore the meaning is all is yours, that is all, that we possess, and all
that we need to help us, is ours, in that order and carriage of things that
may help us, to Heaven, And so the want of things is ours, as well as the
having of them; the very things which a Christian wants, are his, not only the
grace of contentment to want but when God takes away those things that are
hurtful for him, that may hinder him in his course to Heaven, that is his; it
is his, a part of his Fortion, not to have things if God see it good; the want
of things is a part of this Law. That which is commonly alleged to the
contrary is that in the Acts 2. 44. All things were common.

To which I answer, first, it was partly upon necessity, Ans. 1.
if all things had not then been common, they had all been taken from them.

And then it was, secondly, arbitrary also, was it thine 2.
own? says Peter Acts 5. 4 Thou might not have parted with it if thou
would, it was arbitrary, though it was common.

And then, thirdly, all things were not common, 3.
some good men kept their houses, Acts 12. Mary had her House, Acts 12. 12.
Verse.

And then fourthly, all 4.
things were common, but How? to distribute as they needed, not to catch who
would and who can; but they were so common, as they had a care to distribute to
every one that which they needed

Another case is this, All The 2. case concerning the right of evil men.
is the Churches; all is good peoples, and therefore if a man be naught,
nothing is his. There is a great point of Popery grounded upon this mistake.

For therefore if Kings be naught, say the Jesuited Ob.
Papists, the Pope may excommunicate Princes in In ordine ad spiritualia.
order to spiritual things, he is the Lord and Monarch of all, because they
are evil governors, and all is the Churches.

But we must know, that Ans.
political government is not founded upon Religion, that if a Prince be not
religious he is no King: but it is founded upon nature, so that the Heathen
that have noe Religion, yet they may have a Lawful government, and governors;
because it is not so built upon Religion, but where that is not, yet this may
be, and Gods appointment to uphold the World, so that let the King be any thing
or nothing for Religion, he is a lawful King.

But its further objected, Ob.
That they succeed Christ. etc. and he was the Lord of the World, and they are
the Vicars of CHRIST, and therefore they may dispossess and invest whom they
will.

But you must know Christ as man had no government Ans.
at all, but Christ as God-man, Mediator, and so he has noe successor. That
is incommunicable to the creature: CHRIST as man had noe Kingdom at all, for
he says my Kingdom is not of this World, and St Austin says well, surely
he was not King that feared he should be a King, for When they came to make
him King he withdrew himself and went away, John 6. 15. undoutedly he was
noe temporal King that fled away, because he would be noe King. And now Christ
governes ^ll Kings in the Church; How? as God mediator, as god-man, not as man,
in which respect he has substitutes; but not as God-man, so he has none. They
are all vain impudent allegations, as if all were theyrs, because all is the
Churches to dispose, and the Pope takes himself virtually to be the whole
Church.

All are ours, does not 3. cas.
this hinder bounty? It is mine and therefore I do not owe any bounty to
others, it is mine own.

Noe, all things that we Ans.
possess in this World are ours for the service of the Church, and when Christ
calls for any thing that is ours, we must give it: and if we were not liable to
humane Laws, if we do not, yet we are liable to Gods Law; and Alms, mercy,
is Justice in Gods account, for we ought to be merciful to Christ's. And in the
Royal Law, the works of love and Mercy are Justice, and we with hold good
from the owners, if we be not merciful; for in Religion the poor that by
GODS providence are cast on us to provide for, they have a right, though not in
Law to challenge it, yet in Religion: that which we detayne from them is
theirs, we withold good from the owners, when we give not: And therefore as
Ambrose says very well, if thou have not nourished one, howsoever in the Law
thou art not a murderer, yet before GOD thou art, it is a breach of the Law
thou shall not steal. Not to relieve, the very denial of comfortable Alms,
is stealth in Gods esteem. And therefore though all be ours, yet it is so
ours, as that we must be ready to part with it, when Christ in his members
calls for it; for then it is not ours.

Again here is another 4 Case.
question, If all be ours, we may use a liberty in all things, what and how we
list, because all is ours.

I answer, the following Ans.
are good consectaries hence, all is ours, and therefore with thankefullnes we
may use any good Creature of God. All is ours, and therefore we should not be
scrupulous in the creatures, we should not superstitiously single out one
creature from another, as if one were holier then another. All is ours, and
therefore with a good conscience we may use Gods bounty; but hereupon we must
not take upon us to use things as we list, because all is ours, there is
difference between right and the use of that right.

And Gods children have right to that which God gives them, but they have not
the use of that right at all times, at least it may be suspended. As for
example, in case the Laws forbid the use of this, or that which we have a
right to, and so in case of scandal a man has right to eat or not to eat,
but if his eating offend his brother, he must suspend the use of his right. 1
Cor. 10. 9. So all things are ours in right, not in the use of that right, for
then it is ofttimes a scandal to the weak brethren, there is an excellent
place for this in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10 25.
where he gives directions. Whatsoever is sold in the Shambles that eat asking
noe question, that is, freely take all the creatures of God without scruple,
for the Earth is the Lords and the fullnes thereof. Psalm. 24. 1. GOD out of his
bounty spreads a Table for all creatures, for men especially, the eyes of all
things look up unto thee, and thou give them Meat in due season, Psalm
145. 15, 16.

The Earth is the Lords and the fullnes thereof, make noe scruple therefore:
but mark in Verse 28. He restraynes the Use of that liberty upon the same Text
of Scripture Psalm 24. But if any man say this is offered to an Idol, and
take offense, eat not for his sake that showed it, and for conscience sake,
till he be better satisfied, for the Earth is the Lords and the fullnes thereof.

Can the same reasons be Qu.
for contraries?

Yes, that is for thy self, when thou art alone, Ans.
take all things boldly, God envies not thy liberty, take any refreshment, yet
needst thou not to eat to offend thy brother; GOD having given thee variety of
creatures even in abundance, and has not limited thee, or that creature, so
that the same reason answers both. The Earth is the LORDS and the fullnes
thereof, Use it then alone, and not to the scandal of thy Brother, for the
Earth is the Lords and the fullnes thereof, why should thou use this creature
as if there were noe more but this? and therefore in case of scandal and
offense, we should suspend our liberty, though all be ours.

Again though all be ours, yet notwithstanding we have not a sanctified Use,
but by the Word and Prayer, as it is. 1 Timothy 4. 4. Every Creature of GOD is
good, etc. his meaning is this, though we have a right to all things to our
comfort, to help us to Heaven, to cheer us in our way, to be, as it were,
Chariotts to carry us, yet in the use of that right we must sanctify all by
Prayer; we must do it in faith that we may apprehend our right, that we do
not use them with a scrupulous conscience, and then we must sanctify it with
Prayer, we must take it with GODS leave, for though we have a right in the
use of it, we must take it at his hand.

And for instance. A father gives all to his son Simi.
that he needs, and promises his son that he shall want nothing, but he
will have his Son write a Latter before he have a particular right to any
thing, he will have his Son acknowledge his homage: you shall have all, but
I will hear from you first, you shall have all but I will reach it to you from
my hand: so GOD deals with his children, they have a right to all, but he
reaches it to them in the use of the means, we must have a civil right by
labor or by conctract, etc. And then we must have a religious right
sanctified by Prayer; we must not pull GODS blessings out of his Hands, for
though he gives us a right in the thing, yet in the use of that right, he will
have us holy men.

If you ask what is the reason that good men Qu.
often fall to decay, and have a great many crosses in the World.

Why surely (not to enter into Gods Mysteries, Ans.
what the secret cause of this may be) one among many is, when they have Gods
blessings, they sanctify them not with Prayer, they pray not for a blessing,
they use them not religiously and holily, and they venture upon their right
with scandal and offense to others.

Well thus we see how all things are ours, with Answers to such Objections as
might be moved, all things are ours, that is, howsoever we have a right to the
thing yet we must have also a right in the thing.

To make some use of Use.
all, and so an end of this Point All things are ours, in regard of right to
all things, if it be for our good, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas; here
we The largnesse of the Churches Ioynture.
see then the Rich jointure of a Christian, that all things are his, that is,
they are so far his as shall further his journey to GOD; for though he have
a Jus, as I said before, to allthings, he shall have in particular nothing
conveyed to him, but that, that may help him to Heaven, if a man say, why have
I not the use of such things, GOD in Wisdom sees that it is not fit to bring
him to Heaven.

If poverty be good, I shall have it.

If disgrace be good, I shall have it.

If the order of evil things will help me to Heaven, I shall have them.

If cross winds will blow me to Heaven, I shall have them.

For I said before, the World and the miseries of the World, the persecutions
and afflictions all are ours, that is the worst things are commanded to serve
for our maine good.

And is not this a wonderful prerogative that a Christian has; that turn him
to what condition you Singular consolation For all true Christians
will, kill him or spare his life, you hurt him nothing either ways? If you
spare his life, life is his, GOD sees his life is good for the Church; if you
kill him, Death is his; kill him, save him, enrich him, beggar him, his
happiness is not at your command; there is a commanding Power to rule all
things, for the good of Gods people that is not at the devotion of any creature
in the World, either devils or men.

And therefore let us comfort our selves in this, in regard of the large
jointure that we have, we have all things to be ours. And therefore when a
Christian comes to be religious, to be a true Christian indeed, a Member of
CHRIST, what does he loose, he loses nothing, all things are his, because
Christ is his. But to go on, in the second Branch says he.

You are Christ's.

There is the Tenure we hold all things by, because we are Christ's, whatsoever
the tenure in capite be amongst men (which you are better acquainted with then
my self) I know not, I am sure it is the best tenure in Religion. All is ours,
because we are Christ's, we hold all in that tenure, if we be not Christ's,
nothing is ours comfortably, we are Christ's and therefore all is ours.

Those that are not Christ's Qu.
are not the things theirs that they have, because they are not Christ's? have
not wicked men title to what they have?

I answer they have, and Ans.
it is rigor in some, that say wicked men are usurpers of that they have, they
have a Title, both a civil Title, and a Title before God. God gave
Nebuchadonessar Tirus as a reward, Ezekiel. 29 18 19.
and God gives wicked men a Title of that they have, and they shall never be
called to account at the day of judgment for possessing of what they had, but
for abusing that possession, and therefore properly they are not usurpers in
regard of possession, but they shall render an account of the abuse of that
bounty.

It is in this, as it is in the Kings carriage to a Traitor: when a King gives
a Traitor his life, he gives him meat and drink that may maintain his life
by the same right that he gives him his life; GOD will have wicked men to live
so long, to do so much service to the Church; for all are not extremely wicked
that are not CHRIST'S Members, that go to Hell, but there are many of excellent
parts, and indowments that God has appointed to do him great service, though
they have an evil eye, and intend not his service, but to raise themselves in
the World, yet GOD intends their service for much purpose, and he gives them
encouragement in the World, as he will not be behind with the worst men, If
they do him service, they shall have their reward in that kind, Psalm 62.
12. If it be in policy of state, they shall have it in that, and they shall
have commendations and applause of men; if they look for that: and if he give
them not Heaven, they can not complain, for they cared not for that, they did
it not with an eye for that; now if God use the labor, and the industry, and
the parts, and indowments of wicked men for excellent purposes, he will give
them their reward for outward things, Verily you have your reward, says
Christ, Math. 6. 2. when he gives them life he gives them outward liberties,
and therefore they are noe usurpers in that regard, yet those have not so full
a Title as a Christian has, to that they have.

Now to come more directly to the Second How we are Christ's.
Branch and to show; how we are Christ's. I have unfolded that Point upon
another Text, and therefore I will but touch it here, because there be diverse
here that did not hear the unfolding of that Text. My beloved is mine and I am
his, Can. 6. 3. Cant. 6. 3.


Not to speak of creation, 1. By his Redemption.
he made all things, but we are Christ's by his redemption and purchase, he
purchased his Church with his own blood, Acts 20. 28.

And secondly, we are 2. By marriage in all sweet relations.
Christ's by spiritual marriage, for we are his, and Christ is ours, in all
sweet relations he is ours, he has purchased us to be his in all the sweet
terms of relation, name what you will, we are Christ's; we are his subjects, as
he is a King; we are his servants, as he is a Lord, we are his Scholars, as he
is a Prophet; we are his Spouse, as he is a husband; we are Members, as he is
an Head; you cannot name any degree of subjection, if it be a sweet subjection
and subordination, but we are that to Christ, and Christ is that to us, so that
Christ is ours, and we are Christ's in all the sweet relations that can be, we
are his Members, we are his Spouse, we are his Children, for he is the
everlasting Father Isa. 9. 6. He is all that can be to us, and we are all that
can be to him that is lovely and good, we are Christ's, and therefore all things
are ours, because we are Christ's, so that we see from this, that Christ comes
in between GOD and us. GOD is a pure and holy GOD, A consuming fire, and we as
chafe and dust, and therefore CHRIST comes between, you are Christ's.

Why?

Because God is a consuming fire of himself, there Christ is our Mediator, and
Why.
must be a Mediator, to come between, who is a friend to both sides, to us as
man, to him as GOD, So must be a means of conveying all things from GOD; all
things come originally from the Fountain of all, God, they are Gods, and in
God you know the three Persons meet in one nature, in GOD the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, I but the holy GOD in three Persons does not convey immediately
good things to us, but by the mediation of Christ, Mediator. All things are
ours, and therefore we are Christ's, and Christ is Gods; for GOD would have it
thus since the fall, that having lost all we should recover all again by the
second Adam, that should be a public person; a Mediator between Him and Us,
and so through CHRIST we should have access, and entrance to the Father by
Him, and that by Him we should have boldness, and that God again downe-ward
might do all things with due satisfaction to his justice, because we are as
stuble, and God a consuming fire, were not Christ in the middle what
intercourse could there be between the Lord and us? noe other than between
the fire, and the stuble, Majesty on his side, and Misery and sin on ours,
there must be a Mediator, to bring these two contraries together. And therefore
all All good comes to us from God through Christ.
is ours, because we are Christ's, and Christ is Gods; so all comes downward
through Christ, from God to us, God does all in Christ to us, he chooses us in
Christ and sanctifyes us in Christ, he bestows all spiritual blessings on us
in Christ, as Members of Christ, he conveyes all through Christ. To Christ
first, he has put fullnes in him, and of his fullness we receive grace for
grace, for Christ is complete, and in him we are complete.

Now all things come downward from GOD All must be returned to God through
Christ.
through Christ, so from us to God upward, all is ours, and we are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods, and therefore we have noe intercourse with that great God, who
is a consuming fire, if we be to deal with him in himself, but through
Christ, and therefore we ask all in Christ's name. Whatsoever you ask the
Father in my Name, etc. Joh. 14. 13, 14. and do all in the Name of Christ.
Col. 3. 17. For it were presumptious arrogance and fruitless, if we should go
to God in our own name; but we go in the name of Christ, considering that he
is the middle that knitts God and us together, and therefore Lord we come not to
thee in our own name, and in our own worth, and in our own desert, which is
none at all, we come to thee in the merits of Christ, in the mediation of
Christ, in that love thou bear him, and that, for his sake, thou bear to
us, that are his Members, that is the way of intercourse between God and us,
not to think of God absolutely out of Christ, that is a terrible thought,
nothing more terrible than to think of God out of the Mediator, but to think
of God in Christ nothing more sweet, for now the nature of GOD is lovely
coming to us in Christ, and the majesty and justice of God are lovely coming
to us from Christ.

As the waters of the Sea, though they be salt of themselves, when they are
strayned through the Earth are sweet in the rivers, so though the justice of
God be a terrible thing, yet when it comes through Christ to be satisfied, it
is sweet, for Lord thou will not punish the same sin twice, and the Majesty
and greatness of God is comfortable, whatsoever is Gods is ours, because Christ
is ours, God in his greatness, in his justice, in his power, all things being
derived and passing through Christ are sweet, and comfortable to us: and
therefore from excellent Wisdom, the Apostle inserts the Mediator between
All things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ's is Gods.

FINIS.
Imprimatur Tho. Wykes R. P. Epis. Londi. Capell. Domest.


