A PASTORAL CALLED THE ARCADIA.

Acted by her Majesty's Servants at the Phaenix in Drury Lane.

Written by James Shirly GENT.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for John Williams, and F. Eglesfeild and are to be
sold at the sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1640.

The Persons of the Comedy.
BAsilius King of Arcadia Musidorus a Prince disguisd as a shepherd, lover of
Pamela, Pyrocles a Prince disguisd as an Amazon, lover of Philoclea. Evarchus
father to Pyrocles 3. Arcadian Lords.
Calander Philonax Simpathus
Caladolous servant to Musidorus, Dametas a Rustic shepbeard and Guardian to
Pamela and Philoclea. Cupid. Masquers. Thumb a miller Captain of the Rebels.
Rebels. A Messenger Gynecia the Queen. Daughters to Basilius and Gynecia.
Pamela Philoclea
Miso wife to Dametas. Mopsa daughter to Dametas and Miso.
The Scene Arcadia. A PASTORAL CALLED THE ARCADIA.
Actus Primus.
Enter Basilius, Philonax and Calander. Philon. SIr yet be gracious and hear
them pray
That beg not for their own, but for your safety
And honor of your state which eclipse
In your long dark and melancholy life,
We want you at the helm.
Our duties bind us tell you it is unnatural
To bury your self alive, the people call
For their own King to govern, the'ile forget
To pray for you if you continue thus
A stranger to em

Call. Or if not for them
Which every good king makes his care as being
A steward to provide them all earthly blessings,
Yet for the other part of you, our Mistress
That sleeps within your boosome, and not made
For such a conversation, return
And warm your thoughts again, about which all
Your servants like so many pictures gaze
At one another, but want motion, and take up
Room ith Chambers of your Court, like Arras

Philon Have a compassion to our daughters sir
Kill not your hopes in their restraint

Call. What cage
Can please the birds Created for sky freedom?

Philon. How can you see your eldest child Pamel^
Spend her best part of time with such a rude
And ignorant hind as the unbred Dametas?
A Lady of a high and active soul,

Bas. No more

Philon. Our duties bids us tell you this.

Bas. Have thou forgotten
Philonax, or made a better gloss upon the Oracle?
Should we remain in Court and let our daughters
Be in the sight of the admiring world
Read that paper, and be not partial Philonax
Philonax reads Thy eldest Care shall from thy careful face
By princely mean be stolen and yet not lost
The younger shall with natur^es bliss embrace
An uncoch love, which nature hates most
Both these themselves unto two such shall wed
That at a Beer, as at a bar shall plead
Why i will thee a living man they have made dead,
In thine own seat a forralgne state shall sit
And ere that all these blows thy head shall sit
Thou with thy wife adultery shall commit.

Bas. Can blame me now? I should rejoice to see
My daughters happy mothers, but since their
Fate must be ripened with my blood, their pride
Rooted in my grave, and that untimely, it is
Wisdom to keep 'em vrigins. I me resolved

Enter Gynaecia, Philoclea and Pyrocles. Call. Your queen and Ladies

Bas. Vanish all discontent, Madam this place
Is empty of all royal entertainment
Your worth may Challenge, but since fate allows not
A Courtly life which best may answer your
High birth spirit, let your virtue guide you
To accept of what we tender,

Pyr. This my Lord
Exceeds all merit here, it was the bliss
I aimd at to be acquainted with your goodness
I am your humble servant

Bas. Such a title
Would rather become me, call me so Lady
And style me above Kings, while I write yours

Philon. If your grace
Could call him from this life you would melt the hearts
Of your subjects into prayers for you

Gyne. I thank your care but he is mexorable

Call. Alas dear princess can you brook these grove:
Has not a palace something more of pleasure?

Phi. This shall be so to me while it is n^y fathers,

Call. I ha not seen a goodlier person, how
Came she admitted* (...) gracious with the king

Phi. She has a charm to win from all the world

Philon. I have read the Amazons discrib'd so

Pyr. Good my Lord.

Bas. These lips had he that robbed the dragon of
The golden Apples, but once seen he would
Ha wished to ha gatherd fruit here, and esteemd
The gain of one sweet kifse reward sufficient
For all his twelve hard labors

Pyr. Sir your grace
Is pleasantly disposed to make my person
The subject of your mirth

Bas And had those Creatures,
Book blinded men, that dream of other worlds
Tell of Elizian blessings, know the joys
Are in your love they would have lost themselves
As I have done in speculation

Pyr. You make me blush to hear you

Bas. There Is no action
Dares so affright your blood, to talk, why Lady
There be those men and women great and good
Have found no shame in telling of their loves
Nay in the acting

Pyr. Give me leave to tell you
You are not modest if I understand you
A King give breath to such foul thoughts,
Your every action should be a starr
To guide your subjects, if you loose your piety
What wickedness have they not heence for
If the devotion of your service be
To such a friend as Lust (as what name else
Can it deserve) let those whose hearts are lost
In sin be tempted to dishonor, I
Abhor the thought, pardon me royal sir
I hope these are but trialls, if I thought
There had been such a levity in men
Thus to provoke you

Bas. Smooth thy brow again
Or I shall need no other punishment
There Is death too much in that; Philocle^

Pyr. That name sounds all my comfort, and I must
Despair to tell her so, I was to blame
To be so peremptory, would I were again;
To shape my answer

Bas. Noble Lady.

Pyr. Sir

Bas. That smile has put me out, oh look thus ever
I was studying a new complement to beg
Thy excuse

Pyr. If you brought no offense there needs none sir
I must suppose your love, love is noble chaste

Bas. You will find that hereafter, oh Zelmane.
Would thou could tell the meaning of my sighs

Pyr. You can express them.

Bas. Not I

Pyr. Choose another to speak them for you
And yet I want an or at or to tell you
What I would say, how ere I seem

Bas. Do bless me

Pyr. There Is something wants a tongue, but for your passions
I should not think they would carry so much discord
To any virgin care delivered by a woman
There is a Way to meet a gentle audience.
At least not harsh disdain, did your fair daughter
Philo^lea the volume of all sweetness
Plead half your suit, although it borderd on
Something not altogether just, her tongue
Might perchance guide it, but I am confident
Your ends are noble

Bas. There Is a lightening yet
Of comsort, happiest Lady I will study.
How to be worthy of this grace,

Gyne. You are expected at the pastoralls

Philon. We take our leaves my Lord again beseeching
Your pardon for our boldness to reduce you
To your own sphere of greatness

Bas. Do you continue
Faithful to your employments, and deserve of us
And of your Country; come Zelmane
There are some sports which you must grace

Pyr. I wait a servant to your commands

Gy. Come sweet Zelmane

Pyr. Come sweetest of thy sex

Phi. It Is pity nature.
Made thee not a man, this complement
Would then become you

Exeunt* Enter Pamela and Mopsa. Pam. Mopsa you are to coy in my opinion
Tho I confess your beauty may deserve
As much as any; Dorus tho he be
Your fathers servant, he is a hansome shepherd
And not to be despised.

Mop. Despised, cannot a virgin love a young man I pray but she must despise
him.


Pam. You should then with some smiles encourage him.


Mop. Smoyles, let me alone to smoile, and something else when we are alone; if
I thought he did not love me, I know What I know


Pam. Alas poor man he cannot sleep for you he says,


Mop. Nay and I were a bed with him he should not sleep so long as his eyes
were open, I Would watch him for that, but do you think my father would let us
couple in matrimony as they say, he has never a son but I and I am his only
daughter.


Pam. Make no scruple of that, if you can find in your heart to love him, in
the name of ^upid go together, for ought I perceive your father houlds a good
opinion of him, marry I know not how your mother is inclinde


Enter Musidorns. Mop. Whoope my mothers a scould

Pam. Here Is your sweet heart*
Look you make much of him, poor Gentleman
How love is abie to transport, who could
Expect so rich a guest in that poor dwelling
Oh how ere the winds compel him, or the stream
Into whose troubled waves he has launched forth
This way he steeres his love, yet I seem ignorant.

Mus. My dearest Mopsa

Mop. Dear; I never cost you anything

Mus. I know not
At what expense of fortunes were I able
I should be willing to make purchase of you
But I Am sure you have already cost my heart
And yet I find yours made of Marble
Which neither pity nor my prayers can soften,
Sweet Madam plead for me, one gracious word
From you would make me happy, let one beam
Shoot from your eye, and it will strike a spring
Into that frozen piece of earth, and make it
A bower for love to spo^^ in, it is in you
To unarme her noble heart, there is too much steel
And gentle love in vain attempts to fasten
The softer blows.

Pam. Mopsa take heed, your Shepherd can speak well
And if he be honest Menalcus brother
And heir, I know no reason why you should
Think scorn of him.

Mop. But for all his queint speeches I Will keep my honesty
close enough I warrant you

Mus. Why should you be so cruel, nature made
Your face the only object of man's wonder

Mop. Does my face look like a flapiack?

Mus. Is It possible there can be a soul so hard
So unrelenting dwell in that fair body?
If you knew the truth of my affection and with what
Religion it looks upon your virtues.
'T would teach your eye compassion, gracious princess
Let the distressed Dorus gain this mercy
From you that with the blessedness of your
White hand reaching to Mopsa this poor toy
Which late I found my love may cherish hope
At last to be accepted

Mop. Oh fine what is that Madam?

Pam. You must yet be a little coy to receive it

Mop. I wonot have it, and he wou^d give it me

Pam. A rich Jewel the figure of a Crabfish

Mus. The true emblem of my loves pace which looks another way
To that it moves, she cannot but distinguish
Whether I would direct my heart, her eyes
Are fixed upon it, and my poor soul could here
Star-gaze for ever

Pam. By force not choice -- all his desire is Mopsa
Tow in your grace by my presenting it

Mop. I Will take it for your sake, I wonot thank him

Mus. She has no apprehension, with what
A calm and careless temper does she give it

Enter Dametas Dame. Madam Pamela, oh are you there, it is well

Pam. What Is the matter?

Dame. I me out of breath, let me walk my self a little

Pam. What haste does tire you?

Dam. Tire me, I am no woman, keep your tires to your self
Nor am I Pericles prince of Tire.

Pam I do believe it, heaven make you an honest subject,
For a wise one, I despair to see you.

Dam. Am I the subject of your talk? But I give you leave to use your tongue,
you are a woman, Dorus what make you ideling here? is the field dung'd as I gave
Directions, and the Calfe with the white face brought home to execution?


Mus. I was careful in my duty.


Pam. Believe me governor there is much hope of your servant,


Dam. I, governor becomes you, I like it well when you carry an M under your
girdle, our govern, he will do pretty well in time, when I have taught him the
manners of the Cart, he begins whistle in tune already, and can curry favor
with the horses, but now I remember my self I forgot what I came hither for,
oh dee hear it is the king your fathers pleasure and mine, that you make haste
to the lodge.


Pam. I Will attend


Dam. There will be gambolls to please my Lady Salamandor.


Pam. Zelmane you would say.


Dam. I care not what you say, but if you mean to hear the Dances and see the
fine songs you must make haste; Dorus you shall have leave to shake your
heels, look you be mannerly, and show a clean calf, Mopsa what is that you ha
got there?


Mop. A fine thing our man Dorus game, he says it is a fish


Dam. It Is a Codds head is it not, much came how you by this


Mus. Following the plow I found it.


Dam. Would all my acres were sown with such, vmh doors he throw his stones at
thee already, well set forward, if thou die before me Dorus I Will make some
body mine heir; if I out live thee, I wonot say what legacy I mean to bestow
upon ^hee, Continue thy duty Dorus and follow me with a reverence.


Exeunt Enter Basilius, Gynecia, Pyrocles, Pamela, Philoclea, Mopsa, Musidorus,
a Shepherds. Bas. Ladies our revells wants the state and glory
With which the Court delights might charm your senses
Our scene is natural but interpret fairly 'twas meant
A cure for times sick feathers, and your mirth,

Gy. Virtue will prompt you to
Accept what was intended for your service
Yet it is within my wishes to salute you
With other testimony of your welcome.

Pyr. I kiss your white hand,

Gy. Every touch conveies a firce spirit through my blood
I shall betray my suffering, and through my eyes
Let out my heart, Philoclea sit

Phi. Wilt please you rest your self?

Pyr. Dwell here for ever
I am now but one degree from heaven,

Phi. Since you imagine you are so near, it is no sin
I hope to entreat you stay with us a little, I would
Wish tho to make you blessed with too hasty a remove*

Pyr. You are all goodness, oh that I durst but give
Some liberty to my imprisoned thoughts

Gy. Philoclea you hinder the fair stranger.

Pyr. Pardon me that am her trouble rather

Bas. She should want virtue to call you so, but they begin
Dametas is the steward for this days mirth I see.
Enter Dametas And means to bring in the first course.

Dam. Cupid is blind some say but there are lies
Abroad, for Cupid never wanted eyes
He is a Deity with bow and arrow
And he can pirce with it the very marrow
And never hurt the bones, is it not a wonder.
That flaming Ice should cut man's heart in sunder,
Enter Cupid Shepherd Musedo. Mopsa and Miso: Behold the Dandiprat that
liv'dat Court.
But is come hither to make country sport
A woody god; but yet a very Coult
Among the maids who feel his furious boult.
Now Cupid speak thy self or while they play
Sing if you please I have not more to say.
Cupid. Tell me tidings of my mother.
Shepherds, and be Cupids brother
Down from heaven we came together
With swanns speed came she not hither?
But what Lady have I spyde.
Just so was my mother eyde
Such her smiles wherein I dwelt
In those lips have I been felt
Those the pillowes of her breast
Which gave Cupid so much rest.
It Is she it is she make holyday
Shepherds Carroll Dance and play
It Is Venus it can be no other
Cupid now has found his mother

Gy. This was your poetry, Zelmane
You are beholding to him, he would make
You another I see,

Bas. Gynecia

Gy. I am silent -- Philoclea is too near
I am not well'oth sudden, break off your mirth

Bas. What ails Gynecia?

Gy. My heart is sick

Pyr. Forbid it heaven

Bas. Retire, come my Zelmane

Pyr. I attend

Bas. Look to your charge Dametas

Exeunt. Pam. I have a precious time; will you pace it governor?

Dam. Trot, amble or gallop I Will run in your hand Lady.
Exit.
Mop. Come Dorus

Mus. Your humble servant

Exeunt. Pyr. Thou art cruel.
To an innocent bosom love, there is no way
Within thy power to save me, oh Philoclea
Where shall I cool my heart, oh if there be
One shaft can kill, good Cupid aim at me.
Exit.
Actus Secundus.
Enter Gynecia and Miso. Mi. I warrant you Madam they shall have good luck if
they whisper together in my hearing,


Gy. Where is Zelmane?


Miso. In some of the Arbours, she took a Lute abroad with her but I left
Philoclea with her father


Gy. Prithee be careful and watch them well good Miso


Miso. They shano't escape me, I Will watch their waters narrowly I warrant you.

Exit.
Gy. I see through his disguise it is so, and love
Has put this shape on him for Philoclea,
In what a miserable flame I burn!
Zelmane thou have stolen.
My virtue from me, I have not power to think
A harmless thought, ha Music,
Music. Song Pyrocles sings Enter Pyroclos. From whence breathes that sound?
it is Zelmane.

Pyr. What miserable accident brought her?

Gy. Zelmane

Pyr. Madam I hope you will pardon
The trespass of a rude hand and voice, I meant not
This for your curious care

Gy. 'Twas harmony

Pyr. It was no light air I Am sure

Gy. Indeed it carried something me thought
Of sorrows descant, I heard love i'nt too
Who is so happy to deserve a memory
But in your sigh, come whoe's your servant?

Pyr. I have no servant.

Gy. Nay then I see you can dissemble, my husband

Py. Madam I hope

Gy. Nay I am so far from Iealosie I should not
Be angry to see you both a bed together

Pyr. How Madam

Gy. Why I can love you too, come thou shall be my bedfellow

Pyr. I am not worthy

Gy. Believe me I could take as much delight
In thy embraces as my husbands, why
Are we so nice to one annother, I
Am a woman, are not you so too?
Why should we not be bold then, I have a mind
To call thee Mistress, Yes and I Will disguise.
My self in some queint shape to court thy love:

Pyr. Disguise

Gy. Nay do not blush: thou shall be a man

Pyr. Your discourse appears.
Strange to me Madam.

Gy. As you would to me
And yet you may as easily perceive
Gynecias mindas I distinguish you
Through all your clouds, Cupid does dictate rarely.
To those that come to school to him, instruct
With hansome shadows to deceive the eye
But cannot change my substance, I have a sense
Can look beyond the superficial bark
Come you are transparen't

Pyr. Madam what dee mean?

Gy. What means Zelmane to be igonrant
When a Queen pleads for love, my heart will not
Allow more circumstance; do not question
How you became reveald, but pity her
Whose boosome is tormented with those fires
Thy smiles the only greater flame can quench.

Pyr. Pray heaven, you have your perfect senses.

Gy. Then I must be plainer, and be witness love
I am compelled, be witness modesty,
I now must blush for thee more then my self,
A man, and be so cruel to a Lady
Zelmane either give consent I shall
be welcome to thee, or I vow by heaven
To tell Basilius what thou art, I have
Patience to let him court thee as a woman
But when he see's his love abuse his privacie
And daughters so dishonored had thou a thousand
Lives they were all forfeited by this
So desperate in trusion, think uppon't
A woman I have lost thee, wheither will
Thetempest of my fate enforce my tongue
Yet be thou kind Zelmane if thou takst
A glory in my suffering, Philoclea
Does that name startle you? Philoclea
My rival now

Pyr. Your rival

Gy. Come I am familliar with every thought
Your dear saint shall repent it, for this hand
Shall take again the unluckie life I gave her:
Turn not Gynecia fury

Pyr. I am lost
In the same minute I am found, I prithee
Do not forsake me heart, I never had
More use of thee, great Queen can you forgive?

Gy. And ask thy pardon, but believe me it was
Your strangenes did compel me to this language

Py. I never thought that pity of annother
Could be a reason to betray my self
But you have thoroughly charmed me, and I must
Deliver up my thoughts, the truth is Madam
I am a man, and if you dare believe me
A prince, I must confess beside Gynecia
Since I came heither I have had some sprinckling of
I know not what affection to Philoclea
For how could I imagine such a blessedness
From you, but if you mock not

Gy. Joys reward your pity
Oh pardon the over chardg'd Gynecia
Whose error may be yet made more excusable
By the immortal name of love

Pyr. This grace is worth more then Zelmane, and yet I
Have nothing but my self to give you for it
A small but free gift, bestow me as you please

Gy. My soul is narrow to receive this wide blessing.

Pyr. But me must be wise
It were not safe to be observe,'d stand I
Discovered to none else?

Gy. To none

Py. Then know
I want no apprehension of what
True lovers would desire, but your honor is
My own, if shortly to secure 'em both
You let me study an opportunity
I Will bring your wishes home, and bless my stars
That pointed me the glorious fate, we are
Already interrupted

Enter Basilius and Philoclea. Bas. Do this my dear Philoclea, and leave
My cares to thee, I Will call Gynecia
Away, and leave you both together, how
Faireth the best Zelmane?

Pyr. Still your servant

Bas. Gynecia.

Pyr. I cannot rule my eyes they will betray
My cunning to Gynecia if she go not
Hence quickly

Phi. How is it with my virtuous Amazon?

Gy. Philoclea

Bas. Let her alone, they have some business sweet

Gy. What business can they have together?

Bas. Why art thou troubled, thou would be jealous
Of me I see, were I in private with her,
Come let 'em alone a while

Gy. Stay you and spare not I would employ Philoclea

Bas. You shall obey me now, I prithee walk

Exeunt. Phi, My father sweet Zelmane to whose command
I owe my life

Pyr. First let me give my life
Up to these lips, and take a new one from
This kiss, oh dear Philoclea contain
All other breath I know thy fathers mind
Already, and must now beseech thy patience
To a short story which I must deliver
Or die before thee, if it be within
My desteny to be condemned by you
At least know whom you sentence; I am

Phi. What? I fear not well

Pyr. Cannot your eyes discover me, have I a shroud
To hide me from Philoclea? did the kiss
I gave thee last convey no secret to thee?
There was a spirit in my lip assured me.
To save the tedious trouble of my language.
I heard it whisper something, did it not?
I would be fraine undone

Phi. Good heaven forbid

Pyr. You wonot understand me yet Philoclea
Then I Will undo my self, I am not what
I seem Zelmane; but --

Phi. What?

P^. A thing not worth the name, if you frown on me, a man

Phi. A man, good heaven^

Pyr. I have told you all the worst
If it be no offense to name a prince
Whose memory your own breath often has sweetened
I dare be called Pyroclos of Macedon
Transformed by loving your fair self to this
Feminine shape, if now I have not sinned
Above forgivenes.

Phi. Oh Philoclea
Come not too near I charge you; I would chide.
But dare not, would you had not told me this
Indeed you were to blame, I must not hear you
Excuse your self

Pyr. She must not leave me thus
But she returns

Phi. I have lost my self already,
And love is but a blind guide to direct
My virgin steps, I feign would reply something
But feel a tremblinge in my voice, Zelmane
My father, what account shall I give him
Enter Basilius I have said nothing he commanded

Bas. She smiles

Pyr. My Lord I see you can use the advantage
And I did arm you against my self; I did not
Think when I advised you make Philoclea
Your advocate, she could so much have won
Upon me, but my counsel has betrayed me,
Pray think me not immodest, if my words
Do fall too rudely from me, your fair daughter
Whose tongue would lay a charm upon the gods,
Has gained all this.

Bas. The gods reward her for it

Phi. Was this his plot?

Bas. A thousand blessings overtake my child
But not a word, not a word Philoclea
To thy mother

Phi. I have learnt my duty sir

Pyr. Beshrew your haste

Bas. Remove, convey thy self away dear girl, I Will follow

Phi. My heart is full, and tho my tongue denies
Him farewell, he may read it in my eye.
Exit.
Bas. I knew thou could not choose at last but give
My heart an audience; I am not my self
With the imagination

Pyr. Of what?

Bas. Of any thing; come I allow thee modest, it is not fit we should say our
pleasures, sweet but act them


Pyr. You are to violent my Lord, I shall
Repent my freedom, if you give no limit
To your desires, if you do love your servant,
Husband your flame that it may last

Bas. It shall
Pardon me dear Zelmane, I have a stock
Of blood, tho you may think it could is high
And active as the veins of promising youth
I wear this snow but a disguise

Pyr. Poor winter,

Bas. My hairs are black at root, and shall grow up
Fair as the Ebony and curle themselves
Into a thousand pretty caves for love
It self to sit that best delights in darkness

Pyr. This will be strange.

Bas. It Is you that work these miracles
Upon Basilius, as I came heither
I felt a score of years drop off, which hung
Upon my locks

Pyr. A score of hairs you mean: it is molting time
Contain your self a while, you have
A jealous queen, and yet it goes against my Conscience
To wrong so sweet a Lady, pray my Lord
Think better ont

Bas. This Does inflame me more
Be not so cruel to remember her
Thou must preserve my life.

Py. Well I ha thought a way
Shall perfect all without suspicion
There is a cave hard by which nature made
Intending well to lovers, thither will I
With license of your grace pretending
To exercise a few days some devotions
We Amazons have obligation to
At some convenient hour.

Bas. May I come to thee

Pyr. I Will give you notice in some evening

Bas. Zelmane now thou dostravish me

Py. You may with ease secure all at the lodge

Bas. Most excellent

Pyr. I imagine sir the rest but do not come till I desire you

Bas. Be not tedious then, I will prepare all this

Pyr. I hope you do not
Conclude me impudent that I incline
To do this for you, by my hopes of a blessed
Eternity nor love nor lust ere tempted
My thoughts to yield thus much to any man
Be careful of my honor.

Bas. Oh devine Zelmane keep my soul.
Exit.
Pyr. Philoclea mine

Enter Musidorus Mus. Oh my dear Pyrocles

Pyr. How is it dear Cozen

Mus. Never till now could you salute me happy
The gods have been propitious

Pyr, Will she know thee yet?

Mus. There Is nothing wants to make me perfect blessed
But to hear thee pronounce thy love as fortunate
The envious clouds which interpose themselves
Like a dark Curtain ore Pamelas face.
Are drawn away and I enjoy her smile
She does believe my proofs, sweetly excusing
Her long neglect, and promises as much
As I dare ask: sheel' trust me with her person
I want but opportunity to deceive
Our waking Dragons; -- and in good time Dametas.
Enter Dame Away you shall know all my fate hereafter,

Pyr. I joy in thy success, pray thou for mine.
Exit.
Dam. Where is this rascal Dorus

Mus. Whether were I best to tell the King ont first or seek out
Dametas, he will never be able to spend it, there may be gold
Enough to purchase half Arcadia

Dam. Vmh, what is that?

Mus. I Will seek him out at all adventures; oh s^r, pray is this
Gold -- and this and this?

Dam. Ha gold, yes very good gold, where had it

Mus. You shall hear more hereafter

Dam. Dorus, honest Dorus, put on thy hat, where where, had it

Mus. Did you never hear of one Aristomines?

Dam. He was banished Arcadia

Mus. Was he rich

Dam. Infinite rich, so rich

Mus. It Is so, belike he there had all his treasure

Dam. What treasure, where is it honest Dorus tell me

Mus. You are my Master and may be my Father

Dam. My son Dorus, Mopsa is thine, and she were made of as pure gold as
this, thou should touch her, and melt her

Mus. Well I see it was ordained to make you rich
In duty I Will discover it, and yet --

Drm. Out with it good Dorus

Mus. Well -- sitting beneath an oak that shall be namelesse
I chanced to turn up some turff with my mole-spade

Dam. With thy mole spade, what then

Mus. I saw a yellow brightness peeping out oth' ground, which
when I came to examine I pr^v'd this metal, I this was the first,
you are sure it is gold, you shall pardon me for the rest but if these
will do you any pleasure, or twenty more

Dam. Nay good honest Dorus proceed.

Mus. Why the truth is I suspect where a great treasure has been
Long buried, these it seems were scattered when the rest
Went to the pit-hole.

Dam. But where is this place good Dorus? thou have no more
About thee

Mus. No but if you please to furnish me with tools I Will try
The bottom; I digd till I came to a stone, whose inscription
Promised something worth a man's labor

Dam. Did it sound

Mus. Melodiously a goulden tune

Dam. Where, where, thou may tell me thou know I
Am secret

Mus. For Mopsa sake I will reveal't, you know*
The oak where you first met me

Dam. Ha very well

Mus. On the right side of that same spreading tree
Lies all this riches

Dam. As thou art honest

Mus. As I hope to be dear Mopsa's husband, I Will get strong tools
And bring you better proof

Dam. Stay Dorus stay, let me see
As I intend to be your father Dorus
And so in Mopsas name make you my heir
Of all my wealth, good Dorus I am yet
Till things and things be done your Master Dorus
Beside that ground is mine, the Oak is mine
Where under lies this treasure, I am Lord
Lord of the soil my Dorus, of the soil
I am content to be a ground for you
To build to hopes on Dorus, but my ground
No man shall dig or build on but my self
On such as this, be there a mine
Of Coin or vncoyne metal it is mine
All may be yours annother day my Dorus.

Mus. I know my duty sir and cannot think
The gods had ere a lotted my free mind
To serve you but for some strange end

Dam. In this thou shewst it, keep all close, not a word Dorus, I take no
leave be careful my good Dorus of my young Madam, it is a charge I turn over
to thee, over look her well.


Mus. I mean to do it doubly

Dam How, ha you a duble meaning?

Mus. I mean with double care

Dam. Honest Dorus it is the last service I shall put thee to

Mus. I hope so to

Dam. Now to the Oak my golden land mark

Mus. Load a horse with tools sir

Dam. Mattocks and shovells

Mus. Hooks and ladders.

Dam. Spade and Pickaxes

Mus. Ropes and daggers; you will have no help

Dam. No no, a man's own toil
Sweeter the profit makes in his own soil.
Exit
Mus Go thy ways for the Lord a'th soil
There Is one block out a'th way the golden fly,
Has caught this trowte, my jealous Mistress I
Hope she ore heard not

Mis. Oh that my ears had been long enough to have heard some of there
precious Knaverie


Mus. It were but charity to tell her on it, little does my Mistress Think what
a flesh fly my Master is,


Mis. What says the Knave

Mus. Tho she be a little stricken in years she is hansome enough
For as good a man as Dametas, and he to run neighing
A this fashion after a blowse, and then put me to make excuse
For him, it is not right.

Mis. Oh fidious Rascal, I thought there was some roguerie,
Dorus as thou come of a woman tell me

Mus. What forsooth

Mis. Oh naughty man to use an honost woman the wrong way thus, have I been
married so many years, and carried my self like his lawful wife uprising and
down lying as they say, so even and jumpe with his desires to be thus handled,
but I Will be revenged it shall fall heavy upon his head for this I warrant him,
nay I did always suspect him for a co^t


Mus. What mean you forsooth,


Mis. Come I ouer-heard somewhat to my grief, and therefore leave your bogling
and your trim tram tricks you must not flap me oath mouth with fleering and with
flams whilst he


Mus. Claps up another betwixt the -- a ha mistress mistress but you say you
overheard, and therefore if you know whether he is gone you may come two hours
hence time enough to prevent the blow.


Mis. If thou look to have my daughter with, mark what I say


Mus. With fathers mark and mothers mark, and every mark about her


Mis. If you conceal any thing in this case, thou know no case of her, nay
tho thy teeth water out the liquor of thy life, thou should not get a bit,
the worst bit of her.


Mus. Be more charitable


Mis. Or if thou chance to get her against my will i will teach her a trick of the
mother shall make thee curse her and all the brood she came one,


Mus. What is Charita to me, I know you heard him name her.


Mis. Charita.


Mus. I will discharge my conscience and yet if you overheard us without my
telling, you know where he appointed to meet her this evening at Mantinea at
her fathers in Ondemion street,


Mis Ondemion street?


Mus. I do not betray him now if you provide so happily to take em at it
mistress at it.


Mis. I at it, how I itch to be at it


Mus. Saddle your mare.


Mis. They shall not escape with half an eye betwixt them.

Exit.
Enter Pamela and Mopsa. Mus. I have given her the bells and she will fly to
the devil -- here comes the the other I ha given her physic already fit for her
constitution and now it works.


Pam. How comes it Mopsa that you are so taken
So lifted up with high conceit?

Mop. Who I

Pam. Yes Mapsa you, dee think I cannot Judge
By outward gestures and your looks what joy
Does inwardly possess you

Mop. Who me

Pam. Yes you again, and it were not over boldness
To request some knowledge of the cause

Mop. Rest you content; you are a Princess borne I might have been so to,
some body may be a Queen before you, make what you can of that


Pan. Oh fate how is this


Mop. There is a tree, and there is things worth wishing, and some may wish and
wishes may be had make what you can of that too


Mus. To my wish it works

Pam. But Mopsa may I not beseech a word
That may be to my understanding

Mop. You may know more hereafter, but till then I must presume upon your
Princely patience to keep your Chamber, it is now my reign and do not dare
to follow


Pam. Not I, when you are drawn up to majesty
I can but wish you graciously would then
Remember the obedience of your handmaide
That first submits her self to your Command.

Mop. I faith I will Pamela, and reward it, go in sweet Lady, on my Royal
word I will,


Exit Pamela. Mus. She has spide me

Mop. Happy Dorus

Mus. What will my Mopsa say when she has climbed
The tree of happiness?

Mop. I I the tree, when I climb that tree, honey Dorus tell me it over again,
my dear bird what did Jupiter to Apollo.


Mus. Upon some falling out I told you Jupiter threw Apollo out of heaven and
his deity taken away he was feign to live upon the earth and keep Admetas
Cattle, in the time of his service being sent to fetch abreede of beasts out
of Arcadia, in this very desert he grew fainte and weary; and would needs rest
himself in the boughs of an Ashen tree.


Mop. The tree we wot of; on sweet bird


Mus. Apollo in that tree calling to mind his quarrel with Jupiter became
very sorrowful, and pitifully complaining to his father, asking him mercy
for having offended him was from that tree received into his golden sphere,
and made a god again


Mop. Oh brave

Mus. Having the perfect nature of a god
Never to be ungrateful he then granted
A double life to Admetas, and because
That tree was chapel of his happy prayers
To it he gave this quality

Mop. Now it comes

Mus. That whosoever sat down in that tree
In like estate and sort as he did then

Mop. Oh now now now.

Mus. Should forthwith have there their wish

Mop. Oh the tree, the tree, the tree

Mus. The king understood thus much by Oracle; and tried himself but being
neither heardman as then Apollo was, nor of the race which is necessary,
delivered this secret to your father but made him swear to wish by his
direction; for his own benefit Dametas told it me, and is now gone to furnish
himself with a scarlet Cloak for in that he must be mufled just as Apollo
was, I might now prevent'em all and be king my self, but what have I to wish
more then the love of Mopsa which since without more charming force you yield
me; I Will fit you with a cloak and then wish what you will your self


Mop. I Will be Queen or Apollo shall never look me in the face again, quickly
sweet Dorus, come muffle me I long to be Queen, and my father shall ask me
blessing.


Exeunt Actus Tertius.
Enter Rebels and Thumb Cap. COme my masters let us be resolute, is there any
man That will justify himself to be sober amongst us?


2. No hang sobriety


Cap. We must be valiant, the King I say again has left us, and since He scorns
our company for my part I scorn to be his subject


3. I I scorn subjects, I Will be an Emperor


2. It is time to look into the government, none but Gentlemen are of his
Counsel, I see no reason since the Country is 'ours but we should have a
stroke in the state.


Cap. That was bravely spoke my bully, stroke, heby Mars his Gauntlet spoke
like a soldier, I do not like the Carriage of the secret Counsels


3. Nor I nor any body


Thu. Take heed my Masters


3. Lets hear Thumb the Miller


Thu. We met together to drink in honor of the Kings birthday and tho we have
tickled the Cannikins, let us be merry and wise that is my opinion, no treason,
the King is an honest Gentleman, and so is the Queen.


3. Very wisely spoken.


Cap. But shall be governed by Philonax':


2. Who knows but he has made away the King


Th. Made away the King, who honest Basilius, ask the King who has made him
away, by this hand if I thought they had made him away I would make some body
away, tho I hanged fort, but neighbors for my own part I will join with you
in any thing that is honorable, dee mark honorable; but I say still I am
clear of opinion it is not a miss to be merry and wise Gentlemen, my name's
Thumb,


3. I Tom


Th. And I Will be a your side howsoever


3. A great spirit


Cap. Shall I speak for you


Omnes. I I agreed you shall be Captain


Cap. Why then let me alone; I will know a reason why he has left the
government without our consents to depose him, it is wisely spoken mybrave men
'oth commonwealth, we will have other laws and the old shall be executed


3. I I hang the old ones


2. It Is a discredit for any subjects as we are to have a King as if we were
not able to govern our selves


Cap Stroke up thy forehead thou were borne to be a statesman, Be ruled by me
and weel have no justice in Arcadia


2. How


Cap. No justice, why should we loose our liberties, and being free men, upon
any occasion suffer our selves to be bound over


Th. Gentlemen Citizens it were very good you would take into your
consideration the statute against drunkenness


Cap. It shall be lawful for any man to be drunk without forfeiting or paying
anything to the poor


Th. Very good, every man drink away his estate, and then charity begins at
home,


Cap. No man shall marry


2. That Is worse then the statute against two wives


Cap, For every woman shall be common


3. Every woman common, what shall we do withal the proper women in Arcadia


Cap. They shall be common too


3. Oh'rare, and what shall we do withal the prisons


Cap. Set'em a fire 'twill warm the City when there is cold doings


2. What with the prisoners


Cap. Put'em in possession of their creditors lands, they are the only men fit
for authority; for no men are used worst, and they will know the better to
domineere, nay weel have admirable laws, but who shall be this Ambassador to
the King


4. Me me choose me Captain,


The Choose you Captain, Haberdasher of small wares, choose you a Capon, I Will
be the Ambassador, ever while you live let a bold man be ambassador, and one
that has a brain, I will not be mealc mouthed.


3. Well said Miller


Cap. And because we will be wise


Th. I I be merry and wise, ever while you live be sober and discreet.


Cap. Say weattend here to do our duties


3. Duties oh base


Cap^ Say so we must, heel not come forth else


4. What if I could his highness there was a dance to be presented we are
furnished with our noise still


Th. I I, I do love this noise withal my heart


2. Excellent, get you behind the trees with your instruments, and tune 'em
ready, the new friske we danced at Enispies to day will serve rarely as the
Prologue, away; but Captain what shall we do with the Kings daughters


Cap. I Will have one


3. And I Will ha the the other our Captain shall ha the Queen

2. And what shall we have.


Cap. Thereare Ladies about the Court will content you


Thu. I will have both the Kings daughters, and he that speaks against it --


They fight Cap. Thumb valiant Thumb, all spirit no mutiny no mutiny all of
a faction together by the ears for a piece of venison


Th. I will have both the Kings daughters or else I shall not be satisfied.


Cap. First let us know the Kings resolution, and if we like not our
conditions, the hares a foot; and every man take what course he please in my
Lords Park Enter Basilius, Gynecia, Pyrocles, and Philoclea. But stay the King
vmh


2. Speak Captain


Cap. If it please your Majesty, what was it resolved upon


3. He Is out, let me come to him, prithee do thou tell him thy mind, that
delicome wench has made my teeth water


2. And drowned thy tongue, a Company of bashful shrimpes; if I but open my
mouth, I say no more


Th. King, by your leave; which is the King, my eyes twinckle, we have been
playing the good fellows to celebrate your majesticall birth day, will your
grace see a song


3. A dance


Th. Or a dance, alls one, our seete are in tune, strike up behind the tree,
you are the King and I am the Miller, there is all the difference, sweet Ladies
my name is Thumb


Bas. This is rudeness


Gy. Pardon their simplicity


Th. I Will have that wench she looks like Hercules, Omnes, Stand


Cap. We have intorrogations points to put to you


Bas. Treason, treason,


Pyr. Barborous Villains


Basilius runs in, a bell rings, Philoclea, and Gynecia hid^ themselves,
Pyrocles fights with them, Basilius comes in with a two handed sword, after
some skirmish Enter Philonax and Calander with a guard the Rebels beaten off.
Pyr. Where is Philoclea

Phi. Here art thou not hurt Zelmane.
My soul at every stroke made against thee
Was leaving my palebody

Py. Dear Madam are you safe

Bas. I think I ha peppered some of 'em, Philonax 'twas not amiss you came,
but Zelmane and I should have made a shift


Pyr. You alone my Lord, were an army against such reeling valors, I did not
think you could ha bestir'd your self so well


Bas. And I were in an other place alone with thee I could best^ my self better


Call. I would you would consider yet to quit
This dangerous kind of life

Phi. Had not the valiant Amazon it seems, defenc'd your person
Ere the troops ariv'd, it might have proved too fatal

Gy. He plaide the man indeed, the King is troubled
And thinks me Jealous of him, less old man

Bas. No more
Wait upon our Queen and daughter, weel follow
Exit. I am wounded

Pyr. How

Bas. By thee Zelmane

Pyr. I see your passions are the same and I
This might resolve to wait for you in the Cave
If you when your Gynecia is a bed
And fast a sleep, (be sure of that) will please
To put your self to a short travel, I
Shall not express your welcome, but

Bas. Dear as my soul I apprehend my comfort
One kiss in earnest of the million
Thou shall receive, but carry it close Zelmane

Exeunt Enter Musidorus, and Mopsa. Mus. This is the Tree

Mop. Oh let me kiss it toes

Mus. Best loose no time

Mop. Hail upon hail sweet tree, Crown thee and all thy wishes, Oh Dorus up
womee Dorus, up womee, up womee, up womee Dorus, teach me to clymbe the right
way prithee


Mus. You must be muffled in the cloak, so now remember your instructions,
make first your invocation to Apollo as I told you, which being done, employ
your mind withal devotion to his deity, until you hear a voice call three
times on you by your name, tho you should think your father mother Pamela or
my self talk to you answer not they are spirits that would delude.


Mop. Under three Mopsas I Will not talk to 'em, I Will not be cozend

Mus. Hold there and youl' be happy

Mop. I Will ask a king to my hus^and, and thou shall be he

Mus. Your invocation.

Mop. Into the great ears of Apollo
Now let my invocation hollow
Oh thou that lightest all the day
For some to work and some to play
By owl light now
Incline a gracious ear to me
Thus* muffled in thy wishing (...)
Singing whoope whoope who^^
And pardon this my subtilty
That I deceive the passers by
I in this bough
Do use the accentes of that foul
Because I would be thought an Owl
With whoope whoope whoee

Enter Pamela. Mus. She has done her invocation

Pam. Can she not hear us

Mus. She shall hear us, but I have taken order with her eyes and
understanding too, she will not believe us, thou lovely bird Madge howlet


Mop. That Is a spirit in the voice of Dorus, but I Will not answer.

Mus. See Dorus and Pamela both are here
Whilst old Dametas Miso, and their dear
Daughter are stragled forth, they both together
Are taking now their flight, and who knows whether

Pam. This is too plain

Mop. Oh cunning Devils, but I Will not hear nor speak a syllable

Mus. If thou can find a tongue to tell Dametas,
Make known unto his wisdom he is gulled
Take courage Madam the way lies fair before us
And abarque already prepared cries come a bour'd
Farewell Howlet

Exeunt Musidorus and Pamela Dametas sings within Mop. Whoope whoope whooe --
Hey I hear another singing spirit in my fathers voice, be it Apollo himself,
under three Mopsas I Will not speak


Enter Dametas Dam. This is the tree, and here the earth is broken
The certain sign left by my trusty Dorus
The mouth of the rich treasure I salute thee
And kiss the hole from whence shall come my gold
Which being done blithly to work I fall
My hand is in the moone-shine, and up goes all

Mop. Whoope whoope, whooe

Dam, What Is that; an Owl, good Mis^^is Margerie I am busy Art thou poor and
would thou be advanced by wealth to Dignity do not think it then unmeet to
stoop with hands beneath thy feet It Is not with hand over head to be found no
^o thou must stoop though thou holdst up thy poope and grable for it in ground
Ha what is this, my hand is in the Honey pot I think, vmh vmh I do not like the
softnes, I did groape for harder stuff, if this be gold it is liquid, and yet
too thick to be potable as they say, it has a kind of weft me thinks if I
have not lost a sense upon the sudden, I smell, call you this gold finding


Mop. I have an extreme list now so I have saving your presence, devil would
restore your sense


Dam. What Is this, a written parchment this may be the inventory of all the
treasure. Who has his hire has well his labor placed
Earth thou did seek, and store of earth thou have
Howe's this


Mop. Whoope whoope whooe


Dam. As sure as this is my own nose, I am stinkingly abused


Mop. Ha ha ha,


Dam. Can Madge Howlets laugh, that laugh was like my Daughter Mopsa


Mop. There Is one time, again again sweet Apollo


Dam. It Is her voice what makes she there, now the dread vengeance of my dear
fatherly curse, light over th'wart thee thou aukeward helding Mopsa


Mop. There Is two times, Mopsa once more and it is Apollo


Dam. Will you not answer in the Devils name Mopsa I say, oh are you come


he strickes she falls. Mop. Yes yes divine Apollo


Dam. I Will unhoode ye where is Pamela


Mop. Thank your Deity


Dam. Speak now and tell me


Mop. Answer my wishes as 'thou art Phoebus, as thou art Apollo tho in the
likeness of the Clown my father, grant me my wishes first, I ask a King to
be my husband.


Dam. What talkest thou of a King; the King will hang thy father if Pamela be
gone


Mop. Let him be hanged I care not, but let Dorus be a King, and let him be my
husband good Apollo


Dam. She Is stark staring mad, have thou forgot thy father, where is thy wit


Mop. I do not ask for wit, I tell thee, let me have a sufficient husband and
let him be a King


Dam. Thou shal't have thy bellifull of husbands


Mop. Oh that, that, that


Enter Miso Miso. I Will at you both thou ribald villain and thou harlot

Dam. Miso my spouse fallen mad too
Thou wot not beat thy mother

Miso. Oh me


Mop. I defy her and thee and thou be not Apollo,


Dam. Oh who has gulled us all, dear Miso, tender Mopsa hear me, before I
open my mouth, art not thou Miso, and thou my daughter Mopsa, oh we are all
undone we are all undone


Mop. Are not you god Apollo


Dam. No as ever I hope to see him or any of his fellows in the face again, I
am mortal Dametas and I think thy father, I am sure I am by thy mothers side,
where is Pamela all this while, whoes at home.


Mop. As sure as you are my father and you my mother, there is No body at home


Dam. She Is gone, she is gone


Mop. Dorus and Pamela, or two feends with their voices pastby whilst I was in
Apollos tree


Miso. Apollos tree


Dam. Cast off your wonder I am not such an ass, but I perceive We are gulled


Mop. So Devil Dorus told me


Miso. Oh me they are gone, was this your care


Mop. Nay then where was your own.


Dam. Fall not at odds bout that, but go with me
And help me to escape the gallow tree.

Exeunt* Enter Gynecia and Pyrocles, with a Taper. Gy. Did I not counterfeit an
infirmity

Pyr. Rarely, how love will prompt his votarie
The King suspects not what we purpose

Gy. Las poor man, how careful he seemed of my health
And counseled me to bed

Pyr. I smiled to see it

Gy. So soon as he is a sleep expect me

Pyr. Stay, oath sudden I ha thought upon a way
Blessed blessed minute.

Gy. What Is the device

Pyr. You shan'ot go to bed

Gy. Not I

Pyr. God Genius
I will not trust our work to fortune if
You should want cunning in your passions
Or he should wake unhappily and find
You absent, all were lost, to prevent this
You shall not come to me if there be danger
It Is fit I be exposed I Will take your place
And disaray me for Basilius bed.
De'e mark, muffled up for your supposed
Distemper, let me alone to counterfeit
Dulnes, and when his senses are chained up
In sleep, I will come down toth cave to you
But take my mantle if any of Dametas
People meet you

Gy. I will visit bu^ my Closet
And follow thy instructions,
Exit.
Py. If there be any stars are kind to love
This night shoot forth your golden heads, be thou
Bright moon propitious; on all eyes that would
Betray our flight, cast out a fullen mist
And hide thy silver cressent in a cloud,
But to our passage be a gentle goddess
And borrow of thy brother yet more light
The day may spare it, Musidorus is
Enter Gynecia with a golden Violl. Embarked already with his Mistress,
If I obtain Philocleas consent

Gy. Zelmane now I am prepared

Pyr. Haste to the Cave, expect,
Your servants visit

Gy. And my happiness
Exit.
Py. How rudely vice becomes us, here is a Lady
Whom never fame yet blemished, now the example
Of Cupids tyranie, love transformes us all
And fools our understandings, I pity her*
Now are Basilius thoughts in motion
And hurry him to the same licentiousnes.
There is warm snow I see, he delays time.
In hope to find his Queen asleep, whose place
I must assume for once, love dwells upon
A cliffe and all the ways to our enjoying
Are difficult and ragged,
But I forget, Basilius, I must
Compose me for his bed, I shannot be
Much troubled, good old King he wishes me
Lutes Recorders Exit. Good rest I know, and secure dreams, oh see
Philoclea what ways I come to thee

Enter Basilius. Bas. These sounds may charm her into slumbers sweetly
Oh steal into her, hang upon her heart,
Come fix your gentle raptures in her soul
That it may take delight to be overcome
And never wake the body, till Basilius
Return with happy Conquest from Zelmane
Or if there be a leaden god of sleep.
Here let him shake his wings and then dispatch
A Herra^ld to the silent house of dreams
To bring one hither happier then the rest
Enter Philoclea To entertain my melancholy Queen; oh Philoclea
Thy mother will excuse thee this nights duty
Do not disturb her, yet your voice and Lute
'Ith next Chamber may procure her sleep
That done without more ceremony go
Exit Philoclea To bed, so so my blood begins to move
She Is fast, I hear her, and the music ceast,
Now to Zelmane.

Again loud Exit. Enter Philoclea. Phi. I Am troubled, and dare not go to bed
There Is some thing whispers to my soul this will
Will be a fatal night, my mother is not well
I must needs see her -- ha, the gods protect me

Enter Pyrocles Pyr. If there were any treason meant against
Philoclea her prayers were vainly offered,
Since her own innocence is protection
As powerful as the Gods, I bring no horror
To fright your blood, dee not know me Lady
I was Zelmane,

Phi. Was^

Pyr. I have been
So watched by your Ielous mother

Phi. Ha.

Pyr. But I forget

Phi. What mean you?

Pyr. To make fast the doors
If I could bar all the air out saving what
Your breath should draw, for should I live by that
You would not chide my care

Phi. You make me tremble.

Pyr. If you cannot forgive me punish pray
This rudenes with my death; I prostrate to
Your feet my sword, and call you to my breast
To meet your anger, at this distance beg
I may behold you, but when you shall find
In the dissection of my heart, whose name
Has filled it, and with what religion there
My thoughts adore your memory, too late
It may invite your tears, can fair Philoclea
Think I have a soul that dare be wicked to her?
Such looks would charm a ravisher, and throw
Ice through a Satires blood, but a man chaste
Already it draws up to the simplicity
And nature of an Angel, oh Philoclea
I am so far from being ill my self
In such a sensual way, that although time
And this fair opportunity might tempt
And excuse wanton heat, I should repent
Forget to, love your self, if you but with
One thought so treacherous to your virgin honor
Should give consent to enjoy you, it has snow
Upon my blood Philoclea, whose flowings
Are Chaste as Crystal: dare you trust me yet
To kiss your hand, my lips shall gently touch it
Nor will I leave a breath to stain the whiteness
Pray be not fearful.

Phi. Sin did never yet
Profane that voice.

Pyr. When it sounds lustfully
Your hate, a punishment next the wrath of heaven
Strike my heart dead -- be pleased to rest a little
And if you dare vouch safe me to sit so near you*
I have much to tell you

Phi. I know not what to say, where is my father
I had a mother too, this Chamber they
Used to call their's

Pyr. They are safe Philoclea,
Let not your cheek look pale, their absence wrought
For such a minute does encourage me
To tell you now or never you must show
There dwells a pittle in you, oh look smooth
On him whose life and fortunes you may now
Advance or ruin ever, if you can
Remember who I am, and what your virtue
Has made me suster, think me worthy of
A life, let it begin from your consent
To love poor Pyrocles, it is in your power
To be no more a prisoner to this rude
And solitary dwelling, such a brightness
Is lost in caves, extend your arm and reach
A throane where seated with becoming greatness
You may disperse with moving of your eye
An influence beyond the stars, and quicken
A world that waits to be your creature

Phi. Pyrocles
For so you call your self, and such I dare
Believe you are, for falsehood cannot dwell
A neighbor to that tongue although I might
Demand with reason, and my duty first
What does concern my parents, such a truth
Shines in your language, and such Innocence
In what you call affection, I must
Declare you have not placed one good thought here
Which is not answered with my heart, the fire
Which sparkled in your bosom long since leaped
Into my breast and there burns modestly
It would have spread into a greater flame
But still I curbed it with my tears, oh Pyrocles
I would thou were Zelmane again, and yet
I must confess I loved thee then, I know not
With what propheticke soul but I did wish
Often, thou were no man, or I no woman

Pyr. Thou were the comfort of my sleeps

Phi. And you
The object of my watches, when the night
Wanted a spell to cast me into slumber
Yet when the weight of my own thoughts grew heavy
For my tear dropping eyes, and drew these Curtains
My dreams were still of thee, forgive my blushes
And the imagination thou were then
My harmless bed fellow

Pyr. I arive too soon
At my desires, gently oh gently drop
These joys into me, least at once let fall
I sink beneath the tempest of my blessings
And you swell my heart too fast

Phi. If yo^ be Pyrocles
You will rest satisfied with this confession
You only shall obtain my love

Pyr. Although my soul acknowledge this a blessing
Such as no service can reward enough
There remains something, something which your honor
May easily consent to in this absence
Of both your parents whom with several promises
Of my return, I have already sent
To 'th Cave where they in vain this night expect me
We must for sake this place, I have provided
For our conueiance to my fathers kingdom
If after all these arguments of love
You dare trust Pyrocles to convey you thither,

Phi, I dare give thee my life, but pardom me
This is not safe, thus seeking to assure.
You may untimely happen loose Philoclea
My duty binds me not to rob my parents,
Such a departure may undo their comfort^
As you are a prince persuade me not commit
So unnatural a trespass, weel expect
And satisfy our young desires till time
Mature our joy, I could content my self
To look on Pyrocles and think it happiness
Enough, or if my soul affect variety
Of pleasure every accent of thy voice
Shall Court me with new rapture, and if these
Delights be narrow for us there is left
A modest kiss, whose every touch conveies
Our melting souls into each others lipes,
Why should not you be pleased to look on me
To hear and sometimes kiss Philoclea
Indeed you make me blush

Pyr. What an Ecclips
Has that veil made, it was not night till now
Look if the stars have not withdrawn themselves
As they had waited on her richer brightness.
And missing of her eyes are stolen to bed,
What world of beauty is behind that cloud
But keep it still concealed, and let the creatures
When they shall miss day (for the same without
Thine eyes will glimmer like a petty taper)
Fear to be lost in darkness, and expect
No light to follow, but from those wide flames
Which heaven has threatened to destroy the world,
When thou have frighted us renew again
Our state and cure again the fainting universe
One look restores all -- ha, Philoclea.

Phi. There Is something that sits heavy on my forehead
I know you cannot but be noble, pray
A little sleep, if I exceed three minutes
Prithee wake me

Pyr. Ha, I do not like
Her senses should be snatchd away so strangely
It Is an ill omen, I should trespass much
Against manners, to disturb her, beside she
Did make it her request whose will is sacred,
Then gently may she sleep, and yet if she
Draw out this slumber to any length my hopes
Are blasted, if I loose this opportunity
Of flight, no hope hereafter can releeve us
We are both undone, she sleeps still, I was not
Quick enough to persuade her resolution
So necessary, yet look up Philoclea,
No, then enjoy thy dream, and let us try
The kindness of our fate, pity a harsh
Sound should disturb thy ^oft repose, I would
But dare not steal a kiss for fear to wake her,
And yet my loud voice may be more offensive
Our souls are knit I see into one love
Then it is but reason they should exercise
Both the same act, why do not I sleep too
The mist is fallen already, if I but dream of her
My slumbers shall be happy

he sleeps Enter Dam^tas as from a Vault. Dam. There be more ways to the
wood then one, she may be in her sisters Chamber, I may thank my acquaintance
with the Buttery and a trap door for this passage; she has shut me out of
doors of all: vmh a sword I had rather it were Pamela naked, I durst undertake
to handle her with less fear; vmh Philoclea; it is she and this is-no -- this
is not Pamela, she was a woman, unless she be crept into breeches since I left
her, no it is a man, here is no tarrying for me; and he were not soundly a
sleep, my smell were enough to wake him; -- treason treason

Exit.
Py. Ha, what voice is that, who cries out treason?

Phi. Pyrocles what is the matter?

Pyr. Nothing

Within. Treason, treason.

Pyr. Hark, is it not treason, my sword, my sword
Is gone, we are betrayed, some thief has been
Within the Chamber, yet the doors are safe* ha
Lets see, search every where, alas Philoclea
If now I must be ravished from thee, how
Can there be charity enough on earth
To pity me, they die but once who still
Despair of bliss; but the Fares twice destroy
A lover whom they kill so near his joy.

Exeunt. Actus Quartus.
Enter Rebels. Cap. COme my bloods since there is no hope of our pardons let
us be honest out-lawes one to another, and do all the mischeife we can, we are
Masters of the Woods, and we will domineere like Lords of the soil; I say we
will live, we will eat and we will drink.


3. Would I were at my forge again

Cap. Arcadia shall be thy Anvile smith; and thou may live to beat
Great men to dust

2. Some of them are so rotten they will save us a labor

Cap. Be resolute and strike the iron while it is hot, where is the little
miller


3. Thumb the miller is cut off

Cap. Who can help it, be not crest falen, but show your selves Cocks of the
game, weel make the state send for us home, and agree to our own conditions,
let us therefore play the thieves manfully


3. And so be hanged honorably


Cap. Hang hang ng, we defy the laws and we will execute when we list in our
own quarters we will rob man woman and child


2. Do you fight with the men, and let me alone with the women.


1. And Thumb had he been alive he had been a fit match for the children


Enter 4. Rebel. 4. A prise a Captain, I see a Gentleman and a Lady strike
into a grove hard by, their horses are for their better behavior, already bound
to a tree, follow me and I Will conduct


Cap. Without noise or tumult lets steal upon them


Enter Musidorus and Pamela. Pam. This grove is all one bower, nature her self
Must be delighted to dwell here, the Sun
Can shoot no beam upon us through this Arbe^
Tho he does rage abroad

Mus. The heat betrays
The Sun is angry Madam to see you
Whose brightness takes all wonder from his shine
And leave him a pale starr.

Pam. You complement.

Mus. Are you not weary Madam

Pam. I shall never
In thy society, yet we may re^t
A little in this shade, oh M(...)
He should be enemy to virtue now
To cherrish one suspectfull thought of thee
Some wild licencious Prince had now (...) me
And careless of his own ruined my honor.

Mus. It were not simple theft but Sacrilege
To rob you of one peaceful thought, if any
Service already have obtaind so much
Trust I am so familliar with mine own
Desires, that hereafter I Will deserve to keep
Your fair opinion of me, lust could never
Intrude himself a guest here, I should not
Love mine own eyes, had they been but tempted
To see an unchaste picture with delight

Pam. What Is that behind the trees?

Mus. Nothing, the birds are dancing on the leaves
Called heither by the music of your tongue
Those that are silent do but listen to
Your voice to mend their singing

Pam. Still methinkes I hear annother noise

Mus. It is your fear

Pam. There Is some thing whispers

Mus. Shall I tell Pamela

Pam. Pray if you can

Mus. It is the wind that would
Steal through the boughs to give you more refreshing
Whom the trees envy, I do hear it murmer
To be kept from your lips which it would kiss
And mixing with your breath catch odors thence
Enough to sweeten all the wood, there can
No other danger enter here

The Rebels cease upon Pamela Pam. We are betrayed help

Mus. Ha, villains, y'ad better lay violent hands
Upon your mothers

Cap. Let your courage cool, and hear us you were best
If you do love this Gentlewomans life.
Put up your tool, dee see this b^dkin sir
With it, I Will punch her heart, if you but offer
A blow at any of my train, I Will do it
As I am true Rebel and for the more security
Deliver up your whinyard to our use^
Or I Will make an oylet-hole presently

Pam. Do not resign your sword but use it.

Mus. Hold hear me

Pam. Let us both die with honor, do not give
Your strength and trust t'the mercy of those slaves
In humane villanes to us

Mus. But thy life, -- as you are men but hear me

Cap. Drop your steel quickly, or

Mus. Alas she is my wife

2. Your wife, if you love her be not troublesome I tell you again

Pam. Pamela bids thee fight, fear not for me
If I die I shall not be dishonord
And thou shall take a brave revenge on them,
Pity not me to loose us both, weel meet
Again in death and love eternally

Mus. My soul's divided, shall I venture her?

Cap. I Will stay no longer

Mus. Hold and take my sword
But swear by some religion you will use
No violence to her

3. We swear

Cap. So first and foremost throw his sword out of the way, we have no use on it,
secondly bind him to a tree


Mus. Set her at liberty
And use what cruelty you please on me
Kill me, and I Will forgive you.

3. Forgiv'e us, heaven forgive thee, say thy prayers

Mus. I see there is pity in you, if your wants
Council you to this sinful trade, we both
Will freely give our wealth, we have some Jewels
Of value to redeem you all, and make
You rich if you dare first be so in goodness
And exercise no tyrany upon
Our bodies, what a misery it is
Such spirits as you are should not have fortunes
High as your thoughts, when every dunghill fellow
Surfets with honors and estates, and vomits
In Taverns what would keep your families,
But it is the times disease, when merit thus
Disgraced and unrewarded by the state
Makes subjects desperate

3. He says true

Mus. I prithee take my clothes, would they were rich
And worth your pillage, and will serve me

3. Alas good Gentleman, let even strip him

Cap. None dare to take a skirt

Mus. Perhaps for some offenses you are banished
Your houses and estates

2. For nothing but being drunk

3. And offering to kill the King

4. He will not live amongst us as a good King ought.

Mus. Alas good men, I do presume you, would not have killed the King in any
malice to him


3. I love the King withal my heart, and a pox take him that does not, would
he would but pardon us


1. There Is no hope now, we have submitted our selves too often

Mus. Yet let him hear well of you, and tho
Necessity compel you to be thieves,
Be honest thieves and ravish no body.
And this report ariving at his ears
It inclines him to have pity on you
And call you to his favor

Cap. Vnhand the Gentlewoman, he that offers her
But a wry look had better eat my sword

3. Or my scabbard tho it have been pist in

2. Faith Captain he has given us good council let us deal
Honestly, if we take away but all they have they will
Have more cause to speak well of us

Cap. Unbind the malefactor

3. Shall I give him his sword?

Cap. His sword thou ignorant thief no so he may chance to ask us again for
his Jewels; take thy Penelope sweet tong'd Ulysses; and on the next back
smother her in kisses -- farewell


Mus. Oh, my Pamela.

3. Captain captain comebacke he calls her Pamela that should be the Kings
daughter,


Cap. How, vmh; now I look better on her I have seen that face in a mask
before now


Mus. We are lost again


Pam. I am the same Pamela


2. What ha we done, here are all your Jewels not a stone deminish'd


3. If there be let me be gelded

Pam. I easily forgive all and will be
So far from a complaint that I Will plead for
Your pardons to my father, and he sha' not
Be able to deny me
Omnes A pardon, a pardon, if it please your highness weel go back with you


Pam. Not with me

Cap. As we are true men and thieves Madam

Pam. We are undone again

Mus. At our return I Will join with her

3. Return, why whether are you going so far from the lodge this is the way
to the sea


Cap. Vmh, I guest treason, are not you an't shall please your Ladyship running
away with this Gentleman


2. He said she was his wife

3. I do not like him

Cap. Lay hands on him again, well thought upon you shall Justify your selves
before the King


Mus. Dare you go to the King without a pardon

2. It Is the only way to procure one

Mus. Rather go with us, and, as I am --

3. What are you

Mus. I am -- I know not

Cap. Weel teach you to know your self; away with 'em we are all made


Mus. Villains and Rebels.

Exeunt Enter Basilius, and Gynecia. Bas. Zelmane has abused me

Gy. Chide not her
'Twas mine own plot to try your constancy.
Death cease upon Zelmane for his coming
But I will be revenged, when did I fall
From my high birth; in what lascivious action
Lost I my fame, that this Basilius
should wrong his own Gynecia

Bas. I am ashamed, I prithee chide no more.
She gave me sure some philter to betray
My blood to this dishonor.

Gy. Tho your lust
Mist the enjoying him for whom your heart
Grew wanton, yet the sin cannot be purged
They are adulterate sheets, and those embraces
Which locked mine arms thy guilt, not one warm kiss
But was intended for Zelmanes lips
Oh my fate

Bas. Prithee forgive

Gy. The silence which I used
I wished might save my modesty a language
To accuse you now; indeed you have done ill
Touse me thus

Bas. My love to thee hereafter
Shall redeem all, wound me no more I prithee

Gy. If vice have so possessed you that my bed
Is now grown hateful, make me not the scorn
Of all your kingdom, send me home again
To Argos to wear out my life in weeping
My Lord has quite forsaken me

Bas. Not for
The crowns of Greece, and all the world dear dearest
Gynecia pardon thou have saved mine honor
Destroy me not again, on what a rock
(Had not thy goodness rescued me) had I
Been ever ship wracked, take me to thy love,
A sad man for my fault, never, oh never
Shall such unworthy thoughts corrupt my heart
To leave a chaste wife

Gy. I do freely pardon this error

Bas. Then I am strait again

Gy. But Zelmane shall account
Dearly for this unless he satisfy
My furious blood, new welcome to my bosom

Bas. A cup of wine would crown our reconcilement
As I remember in the cave I saw
A golden bottle
Exit.
Gy. Your Majesty may taste on it, but I meant it
A draught for false Zelmane, it being virtuall
To increase affection, to me a gift
My mothers love bestowed when I was married
To Basilius if ever he grew cold
Enter Basilus To quicken his desires, I never yet
Made trial

Bas. It is the gods
Nepenthe, or a drink more precious
I prithee giv'ta name, and if my kingdom
Afford th'ingredients let me taste it often;
Ha Gynecia where am I?

Gy. Here my Lord

Bas. I think I am deceived, my tongue oath sudden draws backward; and my
limbs grow very feeble Ha, oh-farwell.


Falls Gy. My Lord, my Lord, Basilius, oh he is dead
If he be poisoned I have made fair work
Dear husband, then for ever mourn Gynecia
The gods have punished thy lascivious heat
With hasty justice, has my care so long
Almost religiously preserved this drink
To kill thus in a minute; oh my soul
Does feel a scorpion, and my lust appears
Enter Dametas and a Shepherd Circled with thousand furies

Shep. Treason treason

Dam. Do set out your throat here; and let me alone to rore treason in the
ears of my Lord Philonax -- I should ha'beene the town crier


Shep. Make have.

Dam. Oh yes treason,

Gy. When you have spent your voices, let your eyes
Speak a more killing language

Dam. Ha, the Queen, Madam Pamela, is gone

Gy. No matter for Pamela, look here shepherds
Herelies the King

Dam. No matter for Pamela? I am glad of that
Is his majesty a sleep

Gy. Never to awake, he is dead poisoned by this violl

Dam. Oh base violl, why here is more treason then we looked for, this is
admirable, did he dye against his will, or was he killed a natural death let
us sit upon him


Gy. For bear, I can direct you to the murderer
Look here you shepherds, it was I that killed him

Dam. You, your Majesty is very merry

Gy. Will you not trust me

Dam. Yes for more then I am worth, but if you killed him your self, your
majesty must pardon me for that, I have nothing to say to you but, treason
treason;

Exit.
Gy. Yet fly Gynecia and save thy life,
Betray not thine own, life; why do I talk
Of safety, can there be in all the World
A consort, when my honor and Basilius
Have both forsaken me

Enter Philonax and Dametas with a guard. Philon. Pamela gone, how does the King
take it


Dam. The King, would he could take it any way, good gentleman he is in a
pitiful taking himself


Philon. What sales the screech-oule


Dam. The truth is, he is sent of an errand to Erebus he is dead, and for my
Lady Philoclea, whom I suspect


Philon. Ha


Dam. And you make have you may take her napping, there is a thing in the
likeness of a man with her, whom very valiantly I dis-arm'd, and brought away
his naked weapon


Philon. What traitor? did disarme him?


Dam. Did I and there had been twenty of 'em I would not have cared a rush
though they had been as valiant as Hector, had I not treason a'my side so soon
as I came in


Philon. Thou do amaze me what said he?


Dam. Never a word, my friend quoth to his sword

Philon. Idiot did speak to his sword?

Dam. Why he was fast a sleep my Lord,
And never so much as dreamt of me

Philon. A sleep, we loose time go you along with Dametas, seize upon that
Traitor, oh I am rent with sorrow


Dam. Come my Masters be not afraid as long as I have a sword
You shall go before, and follow my example there is the
King my Lord

Exeunt Dametas and guard, Philon. Madam

Gy. Oh Philonax

Philon. Be comforted

Gy. You shannot need to mock me, when you know
By whom he dye'd thou will call in thy charity
And curse me, it was I that poisoned him,

Philon. Good Madam speak that I may understand,
You poisoned him? he was Basilius
Your husband and your King, it cannot be
You are the Queen his wife

Gy. His murderer
The horror of my sin dwells round about me
I need no more accusers then my Conscience.
Do with me what you please, the wicked reasons
That moved me to it you shall know hereafter

Philon, Bless me eternity, I Will not believe
That any woman after this can love
Her husband, oh my Lord, merciless woman
For here all other titles lost away
With her, see her lodged within the Castle.

Enter Dametas and a guard with Philoclea and Pyrocles at one door, at the
other Enter the Rebels with Musidorus and Pamela. Dam. Here they are my Lord

Cap. Where is the King?

Philon. New uprores.

Dam. My charge, it is Pamela, my Lord Philonax it is Pamela Philon, Pamela and
Philoclea

Cap. Yes my Lord we suspected they were running away together and therefore in
hope of his majesty's pardon


Py. Musidorus and thy sister under guard?

Mus. Pyrocles and Philoclea prisoners too?

Philon. Look here unnatural children, for I cannot pronounce you Innocent,
this circumstance betrays your guilt, see where your king and father lies a
cold pattern for a tomb


Pam. Dead?

Phi. Oh we are miserable

Pyr. Basilus dead?

Mus. Slain

Philon. He was murdered, and you are accessaries
Sure I have seen your face; were not you called
Zelmane the Amazon?

Pyr. I was.

Philon. Disguises, injurious villain
Prophaner of all hospitable laws

Pyr. I am not loose to answer thee

Dam. And this was my man Dorus my Lord, a ha have I found you sir, you sent
me abroad to be a gold-finder.

Philon. You have done service worthy all your pardons.
Now in my rage I could prevent the Law
And sacrifice their treachrous bloods my self
To this reverend hearse.

Mus. You are transported Philonax
But that I have compassion for the death
Of that good King I could laugh at thee.

Philon. Hence, load them with Irons, Ladies you must both
Be patient to be confinde until
You clear yourselves.

Pam. What saucy fellowe's that?
Meant you me Philonax, vnhand those prisoners

Philon. Away with them I command

Pam. Yet stay and hear me
As you did love Basilius hear his daughter,
This insolence does interupt the tears
Due to my dear dead father, and inforces
Me, since he thus forgets, to declare to you
With confidence who I am, I am Pamela
The eldest daughter of Basilius
Your Queen if I mistake not, since my father
Is dead, to whose memory these pious dropps
Fall as the tribute of my grief, who then
Shall be obay'd, he that was trusted with
My fathers power, which in his death is cancelled
Or I your natural princess?

Dam. Vmh, my charge speaks to the purpose.

Pam. Have you found so much sweetness in the reign
You borrowed of my father, that you would
Usurp now he is dead? I have not signed
Any commission for your office, how
Dare you then in my presence command any
To prison, nay like a bold insolent traitor
Talk of confining me? we are merciful
To let you keep your proud head on.

Reb. What will be come of us?

Dam. You shall have clean halters.

Pam. But in the justice to my royal father,
Snatched hence untimely from us, since you attempt
To charge them with his death, we give you space
To live and to accuse them, they shall be
Our prisoners, ith mean time it will become
Your person to go home and study how
To play the Advocate when you are called
By us, and the grave laws, you are dismis'd.

Philon. I am astonished, do you not wonder with me
To hear the daughter of our late good King
Lost to her filial piety, this comes.
To near apracide Pamela. Contrie-men
It is apparent they have all conspird
The death of the old king, me thinks I hear
His groans confirm it, if you suffer such
A treason pass Arcadia will become
The scorn of all the world, nor ever shall
Any good prince; trust his life amongst you,
For my Ambition, all the angels know
How tedious the hours have been, since I
Was forced to take this kingdoms weight upon me.
But let not ceremony to the daughter.
Whose title I dispute not shame our duties
To him that was her father and our Master.
Poisoned, yes poisoned by those men that have
No names, and will betray in our remisnes
The honor of these Ladies and our country
As they have done his precious life already,
As you are good men let them be arraigned
If they be innocent their goodness will
Protect them, but if guilty let them dye
Like slaves unpittied.

Reb. A Philonax, a Philonax

Pam. Dare ye all be traitors then?

Philon. This your great love reviues me, then convey
All to the Castle, but command these two
As traitors to be made safe, the ladies shall
Be under mild restraint.

Pyr. Villains

Mus. You lives shall dearly answer this.
We must obey the tyrant, were our hands
At liberty, and armed with our good swords
We should not off so tamely.
Exit.
Dam. Come away traitors.

Philon. Well remembered you.
Are not to be discharged, lodge himsafe too.

Dam. Who I, he does not mean me, my Lord these fellows.

Phi. Take him a way, a traitor with the rest,

Enter Messenger. Dam. Away away

Reb. So you must sir

Dam. Would I might never see my wife and children in my right wits, if I be a
traitor that is enough my Lord, the'il carry me away too.


Reb. De'e remember a clean halter? come on sir.
Exit
Phi. King Evarchus say?

Mess. He has but a small train my lord.

Phi. Alas he comes to late to visit, but
Most seasonable to be a judgein this
Great cause, take gently up thatroyall body
Whose souls a star already, all that we
Can pay is justice to his memory.

Exeunt Actus Quintus.
Enter Smipathus, Pamela, Philoclea. Pam. GOod Master jailer you might be so
courteous in your office to let us see these Gentlemen,


Sim. Madam I dare not,


Pam. It Is well you dare obey King Philonax and be a rebel to me, the time may
come you will repent.


Sim. Confident that you will keep your princely words not to interupt or
change any discourse with 'em, I have brought you where you may tho at some
distance hear 'em, they are preparing for music, it is all I dare consent to,
neither durst I tell them you should be with in reach of their voices


Pam. Well sir we are content

Song Phi. Weel speak with them but in your hearing,

Pam. Do not entreat him sister, pray have a special remembrance to let them
want air and necessaries, youl' forfeit your place if you make conscience to
be over honest to'em.


Sim. I am sorry Madam you accuse my nature
Which never yet was observed cruel, I
Would be as just to your commands.

Pam. So it seems

Sim. Were these misfortunes over

Pam. Good sir no tedious excuses nor Apollogy but proceed you and your great
Master Philonax, and he will make you his treasurer, or trust you with his
great seal, you cannot choose but be an excellent keeper.


Phi. What will become of us?


Pam. Nay what will become at'h Princes, there is my fear, would they were free
again, and had but their good swords to second their innocence, I am mad to
think what a condition we are fallen to, prithee Philoclea shed some tears for
me, if I weep now it must be for anger that we cannot help 'em, but let the
gray-beards look to it, for if they suffer, unless they send me of an errand
after them, not a head that nodded to their sentence, shall know where to find
Shoulders to support'em


Phi. Alas sister I want drops for my own grief
My fathers death,

Pum. My father, that that has opened
The spring again

Ph^. And although guilty of his blood, for so
They say our mother has confessed her self
I must in duty weep for her.

Pam. My mother
That word strikes double sorrow, and does call
A flood to drown my eyes, shall we not see her?

Phi. She could not kill him sure, did ever grief
So soon make such a pair of Orphants, our
Fortunes are so strange and thick, posterity
Will think our story fiction, and yet
It seems they are not so great to break our hearts
A'th sudden, I would willingly dye too
But I remember Pyrocles

Pam. And I my dear loved Musidorus, at which name
My tears dry up, and black revenge prepares
Thy throne within my blood, but Simpathus

Sim. Madam

Pam. Are not the Princes sent for yet?

Sim. Not yet

Pam. I prithee tell me how they look; what say they to thee?

Phi. Do they name us?

Sim. It has been all their question, how both their
Princely mistrisses do fare, for so
They call you Ladies, when I answer well
Their joy shootes up in prayers that you may still
Continue safe.

Phi. Do they not rail sometimes and curse?

Sim. I never heard'em

Pam. Can thou be such a fool then to believe
They are murderers?

Sim. I do not believe they are

Pam. Do not if thou dare be a Knave, and try if the Devil will bear you
out in it, we must not see'em


Sin. Alas Madam

Pam. Nor speak to our mother,

Sim. I am commanded

Pam. Thou shat not deny us a little discourse with Dametas my old governor
since we have no other company.


Sim. You shall

Phi. His presence could be never more unwelcome
Beside his follies will but ill agree
With our affliction

Pam. They cannot hurt
Us sister I have a breast as deeply charged
As thine although I flatter it, it is no sin
To enable us for bearing -- how de'e Governor?

Enter Dametas Dam. How dee Madam, 'een as you see, as ill as this iron age can
make a man

Pam. What will they do with thee?

Dam. They cannot use me worse then they have; for I am hanged in chains
already, I have had three whippings into the bargain to, if they hold such a
hand over me long, I shall never be able to sleep in a whole skin.


Pam. Had you any hand in my fathers death?


Dam. Hand, I was so far from having any hand, that I had not so much as a
finger in it, no your mother poisond him with a base violl.


Phi. Oh misery!


Dam. But Madam, I did not think you had been so dishonest, and you had meant
to run away with any body I thought you would have told me so, but I see a
woman and a wet eele have both slipperie tails.


Pam. You ran away from me.


Dam. Who I run? I was'never so good a foot man in my life, alas I was told
by that rascal Dorus where a great deal of gold was buried, and I went simply
with a resolution after I came home to build half a dozen Churches, but now I
hear say there is a Gallows built to my hands, and I must hang ding dong like
a bell in the wodden steeple.


Pam. Speak well of Dorus sir, you had more need to pray for him.


Dam. Heaven convert him then, and tho he live when I am dead he may be rotten
as soon as I


Phi. Who sent you sir to my Chamber?


Dam. Sent me, the Devil; and I ha thrived accordingly, would my wife had
broke her neck when I took you together.


Pam. Your wife.


Dam. Or my daughter, or you or any body to save the loose of my own sweet
Madam speak a good word for me, and I Will -- speak annother for you, my
evidence will be heard, and I care Not what I swear; it is not for the King
he is dead, I look Every minute for a voice to call me to the Sessions.


Within. Dametas Dam. Hey there'tis already, as ever you hope to be married
while your maiden heads are sweet; save me from the Gallows, for if I be once
hanged I shall never be my own man ag^n.

Exit.
Phi. They are very hasty to arraigne em, Pyrocles
There Is nothing left me now but prayers for thee
With which I Will weary heaven or tire my self
For thy success.

Recorders, Pam. I woe ld do so but I
Flourish. Fear my revenge will kill my charity.

Exeunt, Enter Evarchus, Philonax and Slmpathus, The Bear. Euax. My Lord your
sorrow and not my ambition
Has made me Judge to day, therefore attend
The proof of your election, I came
With purpose of a visit to your Master
But now salute his hearse, and wear a title
Of your Protector, in whch name I gave command
The prisoners should be sent for.

Sim. It Is done, and they are ready;

Philon. My Lord my part to day is to accuse
And not side in compassion.

Enter Gynecia, Mufidorus, Pyrocles and Dam^tas guarded: a Bar set out. Eu.
That the Queen?

Philon. Yes, My Lord

Eu. She shows a much dejected Lady.

Philon. Has she not cause?

Eu. Those the pretended Princes?
Of comely presence both, what is he?

Philon. Dametas to whose trust the King gave up
Pamela his eldest daughter.

Eu. Where is she?

Philon. Accompanied with her sister in the Castle
Their presence might occasion some tumult,
Nor do the Arcadian Laws allow proceeding
Against the next of blood, as they permit not
She should determine anything her self
Till years or marriage enable her.

Dam. I will forgive thee Philonax for more malice then thou have brought
against my life, for being so honest to Pamela,


Philon. Sir I look not for your thanks

Pyr. As you are honorable, I beseech you
In The name of sacred Justice, ere you further
Proceed against our facts declare what you
Determine of Philolea, who is all Innocence
And most unjustly suffers, tho in thought
You doubt there virgin honor

Eu. She must become a recluse
And all her life with strict profession
Of Chastity repair her blemished honor.

Pyr. A Vestall?
Not if I live, yet if I die it carries
This comfort none hereafter shall enjoy
The fair Philoclea.

Eu. Now to the Queen

Philon. Madam stand to the bar.

Gy. My bar indeed which I have laid my self
To bring my honor to a fall and ruin
Oh my dear Lord my tears do now enbalme thee,
My blood shall quickly follow.

Philon. As you are just
Let not her sorrow tempt you to forget
What sin she has committed, I want words
To express the horror of the deed which will
Throw shame on all her sex.

Gy. Stay Philonax sh'at have.
What thou desire, I have been a judge already
Upon my self and do not desire life,
That am condemned by my own killing sentence
I do again confess I was the murderer
Of your and my Lord, robbed Arcadia and
My children of a father, I, none but I
Poisoned Basilius

Pyr. Palladius do hear?

Mus. Unfortunate Lady,

Gy. And what could Philonax say more against me?
There remains only to obey your Judgment
Which cannot come in any shape of death
Too horrid for my sin I Am very weary
Of this bad world, be just and take a life
From me that else will groan it self away
And mock your Justice.

Philon. You hear my Lord?

Evar. And thus proceed to sentence
Having confessed, to spare your proof how much
She has offended, an example to all times
We censure thus, she shall presently
Be carried to prison where she may
Have food but only to sustain her life
Until her husbands burial, with whom
In the same vault she shall be closed alive
To keep his body company from which
Her cruelty divorced his soul,

Gy. Ya're Just.

Pyr. My heart weeps for her

Mus, It Is a severe sentence.

Gy. Who binds my hands? Basilius I come
To de a living guest in thy sad tomb.
Exit.
Philon. The others to the bar

Eva. What are their names?

Pyr. Daiphantas of Licia mine

Mus. Mine Palladius of Iberia.

Ev. We do not dispute their titles here, they are
Private persons, you may proceed.

Phil. I shall, and with as much brevitie

Ev. Choose whom you will first accuse.

Philon. Then first this Daiphantas, this Zelmane
This what you will, for he has yet no name
Nor shape that we can trust to, having knowledge
Of our late masters solitary life,
Came not without a purpose of this treachery
And by the cunning of Gynecia
Ith habit of a woman was received
As an unsuspected guest, enjoyed the freedom,
Of those whom the King placed nearest his bosom,
His children not more dear, treason thus fortified
They soon conspird the death of this good King,
A cave this Gentlewomans, lodging was
The fatal scene where the unhappy Queen
By his direction forced his dear life from him
I omit what lustful motive prompted her
That with more license she might twine with this
Hermophrodite, and that they had appointed
Where they might meet when this black deed was done,
But heaven was merciful and prevented her
Flight by the happy coming in of Shepherds
In the mean time transported with the confidence
Of her performance, that he might not leave
Any revenger of this hateful murder
He hastily makes up to Philocleas Chamber,
Whereby the mingling (what he could) her shame
With his offense, he easily might enforce
Her to be accessarie to her fathers death,
And under her protection, and her sisters
(Against whom they knew we were not to rebel)
So^e with one gripe the state, but heaven preserved
All by the unexpected coming up
Of this Dametas.

Dam. Yes heaven and I preserved all.

Philon. Who sought then for Pamela
Which the other Princely thief had stolen away,
And finding these, I mean Philoclea
And this young man together, found occasion
To enclose the ravisher till by command
They were apprehended: thus you have in short
His wicked story, and what punishment
Will not be thought a mercy to that monster
That kills a King, dishonoreth a Queen,
And violates the daughter?

Pyr. In things promoted with such cunning mixture
It Is hard to shape a square and direct answer.
My accusers sordid and malicious railing
More greevious to my tender sense of honor
Then death can be, I forget him
A thing beneath my anger and armed with
My own simplicity doubt not to assure
How much my cause is injured, know Grave Judge
This prince and I drawn hither by the fame
Of the rare beauties in Basilius daughters
Knowing that with their parents they lived here
Secluded from the world, where no access
In our own persons was to be expected,
Put on these forms as soonest might conduce
To make our loves known: this Palladius
Became so fortunate that his Princely Mistress
Consented to forsake, and trust his conduct
To a happier kingdom: my fortune
Was not so happy, for I did not cherrish
A greater flame, yet modest, of Philoclea
Then her weak father in my sex deceived
Retained of me, that tired with his solicites
I had no time to perfect my desires
With his fair daughter,
Till under color of some devotions
I made a cave my lodging to invite
Basilius thither, with full hope to enjoy me,
But this revealing to the Queen, she took
My place to make the old King see his follies.
In the mean time I must confess I went
To bright Philocleas Chamber hoping to
Win her by all the charms of noble love
To leave Arcadia; but she unhappily
Obeying her own Genius gave no
Consent, when in the midst of my security
I know not by what means I was made prisoner.
And here is the thread to guide through this laborinth,
Me thinks your man of mighty tongue should blush
To have spent his rage so poorly.

Ev. What ic all this to the death of the old King?

Pyr. By all the gods I am innocent
The Queen has absolu'd me, as for Philoclea
If you will called a crime in that I loved her
I am and shall be guilty, but had never
A thought so rude to force her unstained chastity:
Or if the honor of this excellent Lady
Suffer in the blind opinion of the world
Our marriage not my death may cure all wounds
Malice can fasten on her name.

Philon. Oh impudence.

Ev. If this be all you have to say proceed
To his confederate.

Philon. The imagination how miserable
These juglers would have made us and our Country
If their disguise had prosper'd, strikes a terror
Through all my faculties, my tongue's enfeebled.
Therefore to omit his practice in the murder
Which you may easily collect by circumstance
This is enough to call him a foul traitor
He did attempt to steal a way out princess
The hope and treasure of Arcadia
And taken in the fact dares not deny it,
Had he no other cry me to answer for
This pulls severe death on him, and to insist
Upon offenses of so foul a nature
Were to distrust your wisdom or your Justice.
Thou to there shame of mankind speak to this.

Mus. Not for thy sake who in this misery
Have only merrited to be my scorn
But for the truth I answer, pardon sir
If passion make me not remember language
That should become this place, this ill tongued man
That with such vehemence accuses thus
Is himself guilty.

Philon. How?

Mus. Of a more hateful vice, ingratitude.
Is this the payment for our services
Which once thy tongue acknowledged had desev'd
Statues to the eternal memory
Of the preservers of your King and Country?
Is all the valor of this young man cancelled
When Rebels had advanced their daring swords
High as the throat of your old King, his wife
And trembling daughters, is the time forgotten
When wild beasts had prepared their riotous mawes
To bury the dear pledges of your kingdom?
Oh where had been my treason or his rape
Had they been then devourd? the ground has not
Drunk up the blood so perfectly, but there
Remains a color to teach impious men
To blush for their ingratitude, have we
Been careless of our lives to preserve
The King when danger threatend horror to him
And can a temperate man imagine we
Should be his murderers, we had not saved
To be our selves the hangmen? but I Am charged
For stealing of your Princess, can your breathes
Acknowledge her your Sovereign, and allow
No faith to what she says, you have degraded
My blood from honor, and unless you make me
Less then her subject I was bound to obey
When she commanded I should wait upon her,
But you will object I counseled her, I did
And justify the act, she was confinde
Too narrowly, and I durst lead her to
A throane above the Majesty her birth
Can challenge in Arcadia, love whose force
The gods have not resisted may plead for me.

Ev. Is this all?

Mus. Tho it want method'tis enough to vindicate
My honor from his base aspertion.

Ev. To him you call Dametas

Dam. Not guilty my Lord, as I hope to be saved not guilty.

Philon. Neglect of the great charge with which the King
Our Master trusted him sums up his fault.

Dam. I was made a gould-finder, I desire Justice for him and
Mercy for my self.

Philon. Silence.

Eu. I have heard you with attention, and whereas
To the Kings death (the unhappy cause of this
Assembly) you have answered with denial
Which you think fortified by the Queens
Selfs only accusation, I must tell you
It frees you not, for tho no manifest proofs
Yet circumstances well examined make you
The accidental causes of his murder.
For the other part of your offense I find not
You have denied your guilt, but onley use
Quallification and excuse; your services
In themselves high and honorable, allow you
No privilege to offend, but give your black, faults
A black die; then justly weighing your offense, you meet
In equal guilt, for tho you first conveid
Away Pamela, his intention was
Early as yours, and by the rules of justice
The will stands for the act, both ravished
Although not of the Ladies from themselves
Yet from their parents and their country, which
By all the Grecian Laws is paid with death.
Thus then I must pronounce Daiphantas shall
Be thrown from some high tower to mere his death,
Palladius loose his head before Sunne-set
The executioner shall be Dametas
Which office of the common hangman he
Shall for his whole life execute, a punishment
For his neglect of duty.

Dam. must I be hangman? oh brave, heaven preserve your Lordship, I shall
quickly learn the trade, and if ever any of your honors have occasion to use
me, I will owe you a good turn, and in token I have been bound to you the
knot of my dutiful affection, shall tella tale in your ear you shall thank
me when you are hanged, come your ways, but I beseech your Lordship, I may be
allowed a man some times I would be loath to hang or to behead my self, my
wife or my own kindred, but if it happen there be more work then he can turn
his hands to, I will not stick with him to hang my self, provide you
malefactors and let me alone for halters.


Enter Callander and Calodoulus Cala. Hold stay the prisoners my Lord Protector

Calo. Oh my Lord

Mus. My servant Calodoulus by thy duty
Reveal us not.

Calo. Let me rather be dumb eternally
Then two such princes be lost by my silence.

Ev. My son and Nephew are they living?

Calo. Your own Pyrocles and his Princely Nephew,

Cala. Ask your father blessing, unhand'em rascals.

Philon. The two most famous Princes in the world.

Mus. It Is Evarchus thy father Pyrocles, my uncle king of Macedon, all ye
gods, my heart is extaside with joy.


Pyr. My father

Ev. My blessing and my tears you both divide.
Witness with me, ye immortal powers this day
I have done nothing, but what justice and
Your native laws require, without the knowledge
How near they were to my own blood, but since
They are proved my Son and Nephew
Endowed by nature richly, and how merriting
The fame and love of all the world before
This accident, I leave to your own thoughts,
Besides these two I have no joys of life.

Cala. Excellent Evarchus; why did you change your names?

Pyr. To prevent the dishonor of our blood
If we had suffered

Ev. But I have judged already and if right
I have not wronged, unless the name
Of child have power to alter sacred Justice
You both must dye, though when I speak your death
It creeps upon my heart.

Mus. We dream, is this thy father Pyrocles?

Ev. Away with em.

Mus. It Is most tyranicall he is thy son.
Thou wot not be a murderer of thy own?
Make not thy name hated of all the world
When it shall say hereafter Pyrocles
Had no fault in him but he was thy son.

Pyr. For me I am his own and being so
Disposed of by his Justice; to whom rather
I hoped to have been a comfort then a shame
I kiss my sentence; but you cannot place
Your Kinsman in the sacrifice his mother
And country plead a title he is theirs
Oh save my princely cosen

Ev. Sure I shannot live
Long after them, and Gentlemen if I dye
Before I leave Arcadia let my ashes
Mingle with theirs:

Bas. oh oh oh

Dam. My Lord, Gentlemen, there is something stirs and groan^^ Come back.


Ev. Basilius alive, assist him Philonax.
He breathes, what (...) of joy run through me?
Send for Gynecia and his daughters.

Bas Why am I supported thus like a dead man?
What are you?

Ev. Evarc^us your old friend.

Bas. I ha seen that face before,'it is like sweet Zelmane.

Ev. My son

Pyr. But was a conterfeit Zelmane.

Bas. Wonders, and you?

Ev. My Nephew, prince of Thessaly

Enter Gynecia, Pamela and Philoclea, Mus. Tho (...) your servant Doru^

Bas. Very strange; Gynecia

Gy. My dear Lord returned
A thousand kisses welcome him to life
Which I was weary of in thy loss.

Bas. My daughters

Pam. Oh my father

Bas. Are you Philonax?

Ev. Your trusty servant

Philon. The oracle is accomplished.

Bas. You amase me, let me collect

Phi. Oh my sweet Pyrocles

Pam. We shall not be divor'd I hope again

Pyr. I am your servant ever

Mus. Devinest Mistress

Ev. Your souls I see are married
Let me present these princes to be your sons

Bas. Is this real?

Gy. It Is dangerous to expect the story.
I feared the drink, but it may be his virtue
To increase his love to me, I Will tell you more within sir.

Philon. Let me obtain your pardons

Ev. To his Chamber (...) him gently

Bas. All is strange.

Mus. Never was day so full of happy change

Flourish: FINIS.

