THE EXAMPLE. As IT WAS PRESENted by her Majesty's Servants At the private
House in Drury Lane.

Written by JAMES SHIRLY.

LONDON. Printed by JOHN NORTON, for ANDREW CROOK, and WILLIAM COOK. 1637.

Prologue.
TWill be a great Assize, how things will hit
For us appearing at this bar of wit.
Is most uncertain, we have named our Play
The Example, and for ought we know it may
Be made one, for at no time did the laws
However understood, more fright the cause
Of unbefriended posy, since the praise
Of wit, and judgment is not now adays
Owing to them that write, but he that can
Talk loud, and high, is held the witty man,
And censures finely, rules the Box, and strikes
With his court nod consent to what he likes;
But this must be, nor is it our parts to grudge
Any that by their place should be a judge;
Nay, he that in the Parish never was
Thought fit to be o'th jury, has a place
Here, on the Bench for six pence, and dares sit,
And boast himself commissioner of wit,
Which though he want he can condemn with oaths,
As much as they that we are the purple clothes,
Robes I should say, or whom in the Roman state
Some ill-look'd stage-keepers, like Lictors wait
With Pipes for fasces, while another bears
Three-footed stools in stead of Juory chaires,
This is a destiny, to which we bow,
For all are innocent but the Poets now,
Who suffer for their guilt of truth, and arts,
And we for only speaking of their parts.
But be it so, be judges all, and be
With our consent, but thus far taken me w'ee
If any meet here, as some men in the age
Who understand no sense, but from one stage,
And over partial will entaile like land
Upon heirs male all action, and command
Of voice and gesture, upon whom they love,
These, though called Judges, may delinquent's prove.
But few such we hope here, to the rest we say
Hear patiently ere you condemn the Play.
It Is not the authors Confidence, to dare
Your judgments, but your calm ears to prepare,
That if for mercy you can find no room,
He prays that mildly, you pronounce his doom.
THE EXAMPLE
Actus. 1.
Enter Sir Solitary Ploit. SOl. Dormant, why Dormant, thou eternal sleeper!
Who would be troubled with these lethargies about him?
Dormant, are you come Dreamer.

Enter Dormant. Dor. Would I were so happy, there is less noise in a Steeple
upon a Coronation, ohsleepe, sleep, though it were a dead one, would be
comfortable; your worship might please to let my fellow Oldrat watch, as well
as I.


Sol. Oldrat? that fellow is a drone.


Dor. He has slept this half hour, on the Iron Chest, would I were in my
grave to take an nappe, Death would do me a courtesy, I should be at rest,
and hear no noise of Dormant.


Sol. Ha? What Is the matter?


Dor. Nothing but a yawne sir, I do all that I can to keep my self waking.


Sol. It Is done consideratelie, this heavy dullness,
Is the disease of souls, sleep in the night,?

Dor. Shall I wake my fellow Oldrat, he is refresht

Sol. Do, but return you with him, I have business with both.

Dor. To hear us join in our opinion, of what is a clock, they talk of
Endimion, now could I sleep three lives.

Exit.
Sol. When other men measure the hours with sleep,
Careless of what they are, and whom they trust,
Exposing their condition to danger
Of plotts, I wake, and wisely think prevention,
Night was not made to snore in, but so calm
For our imaginations, to be stirring
About the world, this subtle world, this world
Of plotts, and close conspiracy, there is
No faith in man, nor woman, where is this Dormant?

Enter Dormant, and Oldrat. Dor. Here is the sleepie vermin.

Sol. Oh come hither; surra, where is your Lady?

Ol. Out all this night at play sir,

Sol. All night, there is some plot, but I am safe
At home, your gaming Ladies are strange Whirligigs,
But while she plays, and revells with the gallants,
Here I am cabled up, above their shot,
And see in my imagination all there plotts,
Nay, we are the quietest couple, never meet,
No* not a bed, there may be plotts in that,
This part o'th house is mine, and here I walk
And see the soul, the very soul o'th world.

Old. It has bin Day this two hours.

Sol. Then it is time for me to go to bed.

Dor. Would my hour were come once.

Sol. Keep out day light, and set up a fresh taper,

Dor. By that time we have dined, he will have slept his first sleep.

Old. And after supper call for his breake-fast.

Sol. Yo're sure it is morning?

Dor. As sure as I am sleepie --

Sol. And that your Ladies not come in?

Old. As sure as I have the Key.

Sol. Is my Niece ready?

Dor. Two hours ago sir.

Sol. So early? there may be a plott in that, say
Her uncle would speak with her, I use every morning,
Before I go to bed, to give her counsel,
In her husbands absence, she is young, and hansome,
And there be plottsith world. Dormant, come hither.
What Gentlemen do frequentlie come hither?
Who does visit her most?

Dor. My Lady sir?

Sol. My Niece Ia^intha sir, for my wife
I will let her alone of purpose yet,
To mind her game, shuffle, and cut, and dice,
And dance the brawles, they cannot cosen me.
Say my intelligence, who does visit most
My Kins-woman?

Dor. The gay Lords often with her.

Sol. Who?

Do. He that comes every morning like S. George.

Sol. Ha!

Dor. I do not say to mount her, the Lord --

Sol. Fitzaverice.

Dor. The same, sir he is the most bountiful Gentleman and makes us all so
pray for him.


Sol. More plotts, he has a vast estate, and though
Fame speak him noble, I suspect he loves her.
He has my Nephews Land is morgage too.
A mere device, I ^adome it, come hither,
Let not the arras hear us, say what pranke
Of mischeife, has he done, he should be bountiful
To thee? on what suspicion can deserve it?
Come be ingenious, and confess.

Dor. Who I be ingenious? alas you are deceived.

Sol. Be free, this grome conspires.

Dor. Do I look like one that would be ingenjous?

Knocking at the Gate. Sol. What noise is tha^? more plotts, let me enter,
They are saucy with my doors, it is well they are
All heart of Oak, and sound to endure the Knocking.

Dor. I hear my Ladies footman call the Porter.

Sol. I Will keep no Gate that will be knocked of this fashon
I think it were a special policy
To have a kind of a wheel; or turning Engine
Advanced before my door, and admit none
Without a Ticket.

Enter Oldrat. Old. My Lady is come sir,

Sol. Is she alone?

Old. The Gentleman that complements with my Lady,
And is here half an hour before my Lord still --

Sol. Master Confident?

Old. The same, he manns her Ladyship, and she is coming this way through the
Gallery.


Sol. Was ever such an impudence? she wonot carry
Him to her Chamber? new Plotts, obscure me hangings.

Enter Master Confident, and L^^y Plott. Con. I shall report how much his
Lordship owes
For this most noble favor,

La. He deserves,
By many bounties ever to command me,
And I must thank your pains, but in my Chamber,
We may discourse more freely.

Con. You much honor me.

Exeunt. Sol. Bounty, and Lordships, and discourse in Chambers?
This fellow is a rascal, new new Plotts,

Dor. If your worship mean to lie with her Ladyship --

Sol. By noe means.
How happy am I, that we keep several quarters,
Some husband would torment himself with watching,
Skrue his Nose in at a Keyhole, or in some crannie
Wedge his long ear, let them alone, it makes,
It makes, and my lascivious Gamster find his plotts discovered,
All his wit, gleand from Italian Sonetts? and loose times;
His bouncing, and his braves shall not disguise
His heart from me, I see it, I see it already,
And laugh that I am alone, and have my humor.
Oh, it is my Niece, away and dress my Pillow.

Exit. Ser. Enter Lady Peregrine. La. Good morrow sir.

Sol. Morrow? it is now my bed time.

La. You were pleas^d.
To send for me.

Sol. I did dear Niece.
Before I go to sleep, I must commend
Advices to thee, it is part of my devotion,
In breife, because the Day comes fast upon me,
Have a great care you be not seen too public,
Your Chamber's spacious enough to walk in,
There Is danger in society, and the World
Is full of plotts,

La. What plotts?

Sol. I know not, but
Be solitary as I am, and be safe.
Your husbands debt's have made him quit his Country,
He was an unthrift, nay I spare him not
Although he were my kins-man, 'twas ill done,
Whose plott so ere it were, to loose your Jointure,
Times are necessitous, but while he drills
His men abroad, take heed you meet not hotter
Service at home, there be fine Lords ith World,
And Gentlemen that run, and carry messages,
And Pages, that bring Jewels, and can whisper
The baudy poesies, and soe-forth.

La. You are not; Jealous of me

Sol. Nor of my wife, I lie
Alone discreetlie, let my Madam play,
Sit up a nights and gamboll,

La. And dee love her?

Sol. At distance, as becomes a polliticke man,
That would not sell his state to buy an heir,
Our looks so seldom do converse, that if
We should engender at the eyes, she wod
Not teeme so often as an Elephant, fools diet with
There wives and be in danger of provocatives
To friske, and mount the table, precious pastime!
Come thou art happy; that thy husbands absence
Has given thee occasion to be solitary,
Trust not the ai^e abroad by my example.
Take heed of plotts, and so goodnight.

La. Good morrow.
I thank you for your counsel but it needs not,
I pity the condition of this Gentleman,
That makes his life a penance to seem wise,
He talks of plotts, and is the greatest enemy
To himself with his vain fears, but why do I
Discourse of misery without my self,
That carry in my bosom every minute,
All that can make a woman miserable?
Thought of my husband wounds me, yet I cannot
Be suffered to enjoy it, like a Dear
I am chased by foreign Hunters, and not left
To think what cruelty at home persues me.
Enter her woman and a Page. You might have known my pleasure, in good manners,
Ere you admitted any.

Woe. It Is but a Page Madam, the poor child
Wants years to offend.
Exit.
La. He serves the Lord Fitzamorous
Beshrew your diligence.

Pa. Who commends to your
Fair hand these Jewels Madam.

La. I preethe carry 'em back, their insid's poison,

Pa. I would not be corrupted with the one,
To betraie the other so, they cannot fright
When you examine, if you knew his Lordship
So well, as I would wish, you would accept
And cherish these presentiments, you are the first
Lady within my observation,
That has took time, to ask her conscience
The meaning of a Jewel, sent by a Lord,
A young and hansome Lord too; it is a thing
At Court, is not in fashion, and 'twere pity
One with so good a face, should be the presedent,
Of such superfluous modesty.

La. Does your Lord
Instruct you thus?

Pa. We take it of our selves,
Pages and waiting women are apt by nature
To understand their office, you may be confident,
My Lord means honorably, and as becomes
A Gentleman of high blood, he will visit
Your Lady-ship.

La. I shall not need, return him then my thanks,
By messenger.

Page I apprehend,
And wish you a morning fair as your own beauty,
My humblest duty.
Exit.
La. How black sin does scatter
Her seed betimes, and every ground is fruitful.

Enter Confident, and waiting woman. Con. Has she the Paper?

Pa. And the jewel too.

Woe. I know she will chide me, but his Lordships
Bounty commands I should be serviseable.

Con. Away, and wantonness inspire me, Lady.

La. More rude intrusions?

Exit Page, and wom. Con. Patience noble Madam,
The message that I bring, is more calm and gentle
Then the cool wind, that breathes upon the Flowers
Soft kisses in the Spring, the woollen feet
Of time do move with a less noise, then mine
Beneath this happy Roof, vouchsafe your ear,
And words shall meet your sense, and Court it with
Swifter delight then apprehension
Knows how to reach, and when I have let fall
Love, which does make all language rich, and told you
His name that gives his life up in my breath,
To be made blessed by being yours, you will wish
I were all voice, and to that harmony,
Chain your own soul for ever.

La. What do you mean
By this strange language? pray be cleerer, sir,
If you direct it to my understanding.
What is your business?

Con. I have tol'd you, Madam.
Love.

La. What love I beseech you sir?

Con. A love that does include in his own flame
What Poets made but fiction in the gods,
When Earthly beauties tempted them from Heaven,
A fire which from the bosom of loves priest
Shoots up religion and a sacrifice
To what his soul adores, a glorious love,
And love of you.

La. Of me? it will concern
That I should know him.

Con. Had his person bin
A stranger, so much worth, and fame preferrs him
To every noble knowledge, that you cannot
Be ignorant, what wonder of mankind
I point at, has report brought to your ear
In The stacke of men, one that has had the praise
Of wit, of valor, bounty, a fair presence,
A tongue to inchant heaven? these wait one him,
As he, to be your servant: he is a man
(What pity it is I cannot call him more)
The pride, and darling both of war, and peace,
The Lord of many Worlds.

La. How sir! He may be bountiful indeed then.

Con. With your pardon,
Shall we allow to every common man
A little world, and not think him worth many,
Who has the price of thousands in himself?

La. What miracle is this?

Co. He is a man
So full of all, that thought, or love can be
Ambitious of, that nothing can deserve him,
But she alone that has in her own frame
Of woman, all that ever praised the sex,
And these are all your own, make him so too,
And from your loves, the decayed world shall hope
To see a race of Demigods.

La. I find not
By all these marks of honor and of goodness
What person you commend thus

Co. Can there be any beside my Lord?

La. Your Lord may be
Besides himself after so great a Character.

Co. The Lord Fitzavarice.

La. Cry mercy sir,
I know him, and you might with half the expense
Of so much wit in blanke verse, have expressed
His purpose, and himself, I thank him hartelie,
But am not so much worth, pray tell him so.

Con. Lady, I do not use to thrive so ill
In my love-undertakings.

La. Is It your Trade?
It seems so, by your prompt and elegant way,
Are you soliciter general for other's,
In love, ti'd by your place, never to move
Conditions for your self? he is but a Lord
Whose fame you have advanced thus.

Con. You Are right, Lady.

La. And I was never taught, that wit or handsomeness are assured by patent,
dee think this Lord

May not find his peers?

Con. No question, Madam.

La. This would well be a double Knave.

Con. There may be Gentlemen,
That owe no high and mighty titles, Madam.

La. As gracious with a Lady;

Con. And as active;

La. With wit, with valor, bounty, a fair presence,
And tongue to inchant heaven.

Con. As I would wish,
I only was ambitious to enjoy her
After my Lord, if once she were corrupted?
Venus send me good luck, and I be
His taster, but he is here.
Enter Lord Fitzavarice. Trust me an other time.

Lo. Have prevailed?

Co. I have taken off the impossibility,
Or she deceives me much: To her your self,
I^le take my opportunity.
Exit.
Lo. Still Melancholy?
What dee mean Lady?

La. I have kept a Jewel for your Lordship.

Lo. Will she come to it already?

La. And because
I would not be held guilty of ingratitude,
Not furnished with a gift worth your acceptance,
I must present your own again.

Lo. Why this
I sent you, Madam, do not so dishonor me,
I have plenty of these trifles shall have more,
Richer and brighter to attend thy beauty,
Here they will shine in their own place.

La. I dare not accept of any, they are dangerous.

Lo. They are not poisoned.

La. Yes more killing then
The teeth of Serpents, or the Vipers blood,
Without a charm, they had ere this undone me.

Lo. Pray make your sense familiar to me.

La. Can you seem ignorant, by whose direction
They were sent hither, oh my Lord, but think,
What honor you can gain out of my ruins.
Why do you still pursue me with this heat
Of sensual f^ame, and send these tempters to me,
After so many vows, to keep my faith,
And name unstained?

Lo. Still in these foolish humors?
What did you marry for?

La. To enjoy my husband.

Lo. Enjoy him in his absence then by proxy.

La. When he is absent from my heart, may
Consent to be as black, as you would make me;
But while he has a constant dwelling here,
I must loose both at once, if I forsake him.
Oh think upon your self my Lord, and make
Your title good, and justify, that honor
By our selves acquired, is richer, then what blood,
And birth can throw upon us, send noe more
Agents to plead your shame, their errand is
So foul, it must infect 'em, to be false,
Even to your self, my husband is abroad
To far from home.

Lo. He Is fighting in the Low Countries,
By his example you may Skirmish here,
A little, if you please, I do not wish him
Returned, although I have his land in mortgage,
If you would be less cruel, you may pay
His debt in other property, and cancel
The payment in due time.

La. I Will hear no more.
You have a stained soul.
Exit.
Lo. I do love this Lady,
As Gentlemen now call love, and that extremely.
She is all nunns flesh about her, but has the Divell^
No trick to thaw her chastity? I must have
Some way to enjoy her body for my credit,
The world takes notice I have courted her,
And if I mount her not, I loose my honor.

Actus Secundus.
Enter Vay^e-man Pumicestone, and Scrivener. Va. So, so, now we are furnished.

Pu. Our acts and deeds are to show for it.

Scr. Sigillatum et deliberatum in praesentia not ari^.
Publici. I thank you Gentlemen.

Exit. Scr. Pu. In the presence of the notorious Publican.
But dee hear, who shall pay back the money?

Va. What money?

Pu. The money we ha taken up to go a wooing to
This Kick-shaw.

Va. Share and share like, how ever, the security
Is good, and the Scrivener satisfied.

Pu. I have (...) great mind --

Va. To pay it all, shat have my voice.

Pu. Upon condition the Lady would seal to
Covenants, you should find me reasonable.

Va. For that we must take our fates, one of
Us is sure to carry her against the World.
He that has least wit, has five hundred
Pound a year, if that, good clothes, and a
Handsome man with appurtenances, cannot
Tempt an elder sister, would she were sent
To a Nunnery, le^ts loose noe time, but advance to her instantly,

Pu. Stay I have it, and no unhappy invention,
A divice, if the worst come to the worst,
You will thank me sort.

Va. What is it?
Mercury himself be the Doctor Midwife, and
Deliver thee.

Pu. The gentlewoman we aim at, has a great
Estate, a fortune for a Lord.

Va. All this I know.

Pu. She has many Suitors,

Va. So much the worse, proceed.

Pu. But none in grace, makes her self merry with them,
And jeeres'em mainlie, cannot love.

Va. What comfort is this for us?

Pu. Now I come to it, we two do love this Lady,

Va. No matter for that, toth'poynt
We come a wooing to her.

Pu. It Is not possible
We should both draw the prise, but one can be
Her husband.

Va. Of us two, right.

Pu. And yet in our particular,
There Is none of us can say, he shall prevail,
And be the man, the man, that must be Lord
Of the estate, justle the Noblemen. And domineere.

Va. What of all this?

Pu. Now mark me,
He that shall conquer this Virginian Island
And write himself Lord of the Golden-mines,
Will have a very fine time on it.

Va. Very likely, what is the conclusion?

Pu. Nay tell me first, what will
Become of him that must
Sit down with a willow Garland, that has sealed
For a thousand pound; with what dear appetite
Shall he discharge the Scrivener?

Va. One on's must loose, unless we could devide her.

Pu. Then I have thought a way to make us both
Gayners, in some proportion.

Va. That were a trick worth our learning.

Pu. Play your Cards wisely, and it is done.

Va. As how prethy?

Pu. Why thus
He that shall marry her of us two,
As one of us must speed, shall enter Bond
At's marriage, to give the other a thousand pound,
This composition may be allowed and sealed to,
If you consider, something will be requisite,
For them, that go without the maidenhead,
Debts and devises will grow due, and Sack
Will not be unnecessary, to forget her health in,
What think you on it? and who e're obtaines the Lady
Will have no cause to grumble at this motion,
Is not this equal and a certainety for both?

Va. Let the Articles be drawn, it is a safe bargain,
Hee^'s my hand to it.

Pu. A match, the writings,
Will quickly be prepared, for things must carry
Formality and law, we do but talk else,
Va Withal my heart, subscribe to night, who is this?

Pu. It Is Confident.

Enter Confident. Con. My two ingenious sparks, my Landed wits,
And therefore more miraculous, what makes
Your looks exalted, as if Venus were
Propitious now?

Va. Thart right we are in love.

Con. I knew't, I read thy Caracter in your brow,
I see the desperate Archer in each eye,
Prepared with golden Shafts to wound your mistresses,
Their hearts must bleed, no destiny will help it,
You two are Cupids darlings, and he is bound
To bring you all the Ladies you can wish for,
Humble and suppliant for the Game.

Pu. Do think we shall prevail then?

Con. Have I ambition
To be your honorer, and o'th nuptial night
Light up my epi^halamy, to inflame
Your bosoms, and instruct your wanton limbs
The activitie of love beyond fierce Aretine.

Pu. But do hear! we are both suitors to one Lady;
Which do think shall carry her?

Con. To the same Lady!

Va. Thou know her,
Jacintha, Lady Peregrines sister.

Con. The glory of her sex, yau'e placed your thoughts,
With a discreet ambition.

Pu. Who shall have her do think?
Speak thy opinion.

Con. You, sir.

Pu. shall I?

Con. Can you appear doubtful?
Be not so much ingrate to natures bounty,
Each part about you in silent oratorie
May plead toth Queen of Love, yau'e to much excellence,
Were all your other graces worn in Clouds,
That eye, that very eye, would charm a Lucrece,
And by the golden unresisted Chains
Draw up her soul, and melt it in your bosom,
Your presence is a volume of inchantements,
But move, and every beauty falls before you,
But if you speak, which needs not to obtain,
You give a louder notice to the World,
Then when you list, you conquer, and create
One accent of your tongue, able to make
A Nyobe return from her cold Marble,
And spring more soft and active then the Air
To court your amorous breath.

Va. Hum no more, if thou loust me, we are upon
A composition, he that winnes the Lady
Shall give the other a thousand pound:
If you make him confident to be preferrd,
He Will never sign to'th' Covenant.

Con. How preferred?
Under what misconstruction have I suffered?
Although I name it justice, he should challenge
The mistress of his thoughts, can you want merit
Who live the example of all wit, to boast
A victory in your love? were I a woman
(As nature only hudles into the world When she sends forth a man) give me
license
To express my thoughts, and had all that invention
And truth could add, to advance me to opinion,
I should be hono'rd to be writ your servant,
And call obedience to you, greater triumph,
Then to be Empress of an other world,
You have so rich a wit, that dotage may
Be justified upon it, and nothing but
A soul purged from all dreggs, and quitted from
Mortality, can lay a worthy claim to^'t.
Yau'e put a question would afflict an Oracle
To understand, and answer, which of you
Should triumph over a Lady, I am madd
When I consider the necessity
Of fate, that one of you must be accepted,
And both so bounteoussie deserving. Then,
If I pronounce again that both must have her,
You Will pardon my ambition, Gentlemen,
Which levells with your wishes.

Pu. Could I speak thus,
I would not thank the Lady should run madd for me.

Va. Jack prithee lett's fancy him,
He has spoke home and handsomelie.

Pu. Let it be five pieces, oh wit of wits!

Con. You have, Gentlemen.
A care to enlarge my Library, I translate
These into books, whose title page shall own
Your name in shining Capitalls.

Pu. Drink, drink Sack.
And divine the world with thine own wit, it will sell,
Hang other books, woot never switch a Play up?

Con. Las the Comedians have no soul to speak.

Va. Naie do not leave us.
We are going to this Lady, she randevou's
To day at Lady Plotts, we shall have music, and dancing
You Will meet my Lord there

Con. I am his creature, and your humble servant.

Va. Nay no distinction.

Pu. What brains some men have?
I would change all my acres for his Poetry.

Exeunt. Enter Lord (...), and Lady Plott. La. Plott. Still peevish!

Lo. Most invinciblie, no temptation
Can fasten on her, wood I had nere laid seige to her,
The taking of her province, will not be
So much advantage to me, as the bare
Removing of my seige will loose me credit.
I would she were recoverable by Law,
There were some hope by vexing my estate,
And tiring Westminster, within few Terms
A gentleman might come to issue with her,
If all were of her mind, what would become on's?
Lent, everlasting lent would mortify
Our masculine concupiscence, and not leave
The strongest body worth an egg at Easter.

Plo. I am glad your Lordship yet is pleasant with
Her stubbornness, and were I worthy to
Advise you, it should never trouble your thoughts;
I know your Lordship is not barren of acquaintance.

Lo. There be more Ladies in the World,
And of the Game.

La. The Game my Lord? I hope,
You point not this at me, because I use
To pass the howrs at play with Ladies, and gentlemen.

Lo. At Dice and Cards? you have more charity,
Then to think I accuse your Ladyship,
Though there be some have dared to venture both ways
Upon record, yet seem stanch to the world,
I and are thought to pray sometimes, I wod-not
For the Indies tempt your Ladyship, I know
You are deaf to all leaud accents.

Plo. It Is your goodness --

Lo. Never to try thee, it is fit only such
As your cold kins-woman, wenches that have
No spirit should be tempted to those sports;
Nor is she otherwise considerable
To me, more then my charity may restore her,
I pity a hansome woman should eat chalk,
And die in the fullens, if she might be comforted, and cured.

Plo. With a Warm bedfellow?

Lo. You Are right, Madam,
Enter Jacintha, and Lady Bellamia. But she is here, and her elder sister.
There is an other Lady I would not touch now,
I mean in the leaud way, she has life and fire,
And moves without an Engine, give me a wench,
That I must mould into a wanton shape,
And quicken her to air by my own Art,
A wench that must be purged, sublimed, calcined,
By The chymistrie of Love, till she become
A glorified spirit, and acknowledge
She took her exaltation from me;
In that I glory more, then to have perfected
The Magisterium, and boast the Elixar.
But I waste time.

Plo. This I cannot help,
He wonot understand.

Lo. Can you work, Lady,
No cure upon your sister by the example
Of your free heart?

Ia. My Lord I chide her for it,
Tell her what folly it is, to wast her health
With feeding so much melancholy, I wish
She had my constitution; to laugh
At all the World.

Lo. You are satyricall.

Ia. No matter what men think of me: my Lord,
I am no great admirer of their virtues.

Lo. You do not hate us, Lady?

Ia. But with pardon
Of your Lordship, it is possible, I may never
Run madd for Love.

Lo. You do converse with us.

Ia. Because I have
As yet, no resolution to be cloistred:
Sometimes men stir my pity, but most commonly
My laughter.

Lo. Y^ are a strange conditioned Gentlewoman.

Ia. I would be so my Lord, to all that love me,
And love my self the better, for that humor.

La. You Will never marry?

Ia. Certainly, not while I have any wit,
And can buy folly at a cheeper rate.
My sister has taught me; that Lady has
A precious husband too, shall I, my Lord,
Be bold to ask you, but one question,
What are men good for?

Lo. Pray, Lady, do not fear I come a wooing.

Ia. Your Lordships mirth offends not me in this.

Lo. Yet if I could love, I would marry thee
Of all women alive.

Ia. Your Lordship should
Have little cause, I hope, to wish so ill to me.

Lo. What says my Lady April here, all showrs?

Plo. My Lord is a great honorer of your sister.

Ia. It Is his fault in my conscience, but I hope
She Will have a care, poor soul.

Enter Vayne-man Pumiceston, and Confident. Con. Let me prepare you,
And when you see me close with Madam Plott,
You may advance.

Pu. Be breife.

Co. Most noble Lady.
I have no time to enlarge my self; your fat's
In danger, if discretion sit not at
The Helm, with love; the Gentlemen, that next
Present themselves, are not to be admitted
Guests to your bosom, in the yet dark book
Of destiny, there is a name reserved,
To make you happy, your Stars guide you to
A husband, worthy of this blood, and beauty:
Think on the Prophet.

Va. Now we may come in.

Pu. Bright Lady, make your humble servants proud
To kiss your white hand.

Ia. Not to fast, Gentlemen,
You do not mean to marry me; some air,
Or i will go take it abroad: two to one woman?

Pu. The lot gave me prioritie, you know,
Therefore obey your chance, I must first court her.

Ia. These are the guests he talked on sure.

Va. What shall I do now?

Con. Fall in with the chamber-woman, that is a way
To know the ebb, and flowing of her Mistress,
Sail by that wind I say.

Pu. The truth is, Lady,
I love you in the noble way of Marriage.

Ia. I am sorry for it.

Pu. Why my prittie Mistress?

Ia. I cannot love that way.

Pu. Are you in earnest?

Ia. Do you take me for a Jester?

Pu. Do but name
The way you have the most mind to be loved in;
The high way, or the by way, any way,
I am at your service.

Ia. What is that Gentleman?

Pu. One that would be in love too,
If he had an apprehension
You Would favor him, a thing has neither wit
Nor honesty, he would needs come along,
I could not shake him off, without a quarrel,
You Will quickelie find his barrenness, and dismiss him:
He has bin practicing this fortnight, how
To make a leg, that learned Gentleman
Knows the inside of his soul, for my own part --

Ia. Methinks he is a very handsome man.

Pu. Should he but hear you, Lady, he would think
You jeered him fearefullie.

Ia. And he may have a generous mind. What Is his estate?

Pu. How Is this?

Ia. If you do love me, give him opportunity
To-tell me his poor mind alitle.

Pu. I obey.
She Is taken with him, and the worst come
To the worst, there will be a thousand pound good yet.

Con. So resolute?

Plo. That man must have a powerful tongue must charm her,
Into consent of marriage, her estate
Is worth ten thousand pound.

Con. A glorious sum,
Able to whet ambition, now the others
Turn is, to show himself ridiculous.

Va. I tell you in three syllables, I love you.

Ia. That gentleman professes the same language,
Your friend.

Va. My friend? he is none of mine, true we have bin
Acquainted, met, fell into conference of you,
And came together, Lady, he is no man
Of that clear fame, to engage my serious friend-ship,
A very puff-fist.

Ia. What Is that I pray?

Va. A Phantome, a mere Phantome.

Ia. Phantome, what is that?

Va. A mental Tiphon, a windy capruch, I do grace him,
Or so, but he is the impudent'st fellow --

Ia. He speaks well
Of you, gave you a worthy Character.

Va. He cannot choose.
He knows me well enough, and all the world,
Besides I have a temper must not be
Provoked with calumnies, it is true he has some
Pretty parts, is held an excellent scholar, can sing,
And dance, and manage a Horse well,
He Is borne of a good family, can speak,
When he lists, to purpose too, I confess it,
But what is all this when a man will be a rascal?

Ia. What blessed pair of customers have I got?
These would make excellent husbands, and love me
To The purpose.

Enter Lord, and Bellamia. Lo. Well, remember, you have promised,
Upon condition, I dismiss you now,
To give me an other answer.

Con. My good Lord,
I have an humble suite to you, I should ask
First how your hopes thrive in that sullen Lady.

Lo, I must expect, but what is your business, to me?

Con. In brief, to advance my service to
That Lady, by your Honors testimony
Of what I may deserve, I am confident
I shall reward it, by securing her
Fair sister to your wishes, she is your own,
Or if she prove too honest, I shall make
A recompense by offering to your pleasure,
The other, who by authority of your breath,
May make me Lord of her, and her full fortune,
You understand, my gracious Lord.

Lo. I do so.

Pu. Va. Your Lordships humble creatures.

Lo. I am your servant.
What shall we do, Ladies? but I forget,
I have something more to say to you.

Ia. To me, my Lord?

Lo. Your clyents increase, Lady,
That gentleman tells me, he does love you, and would marry you.
Because I have observed his nature, I Will
Give him in brief, he is a fellow will
Undo thee in a fortnight, though not in
Thy estate, yet in thy mind, a greater mischief.
If thou do marry him, it will be policy,
To turn witch betime, ere he sell thee over to shame,
And so much poverty, the Devil wonot
Trust thee with a familiar, now believe him,
We droupe methinks --

Ia. So, so, here are an other couple, who shall trust
Mankind? it will be a miracle to find
One honest man i th bundle, sir, you are
Bound to my Lord.

Con. His least favors to me
Are more then my whole life can satisfy,
Oh Lady, if you knew him but as I do,
You would be lost in wonder of his goodness.
Bove all, he is adorer of chaste truth,
And speaks religiously of any man.
He will not trust obscure traditions,
Or faith implicit, but concluds of things
Within his own clear knowledge what he says,
You may believe, and pawn your soul uppon't.
Vouchsafe me kiss your fair hand, whose least touch
Consented to though I were old and dying,
Would quicken me into a Spring.

Plo. You forget, my Lord, the music was prepared
To dance, and warm her blood.

Lo. Each take his Lady

Ia. Falstasse I will believe thee,
There is noe faith in vilanous man.

Lo. Begin there.

They dance in. Enter Lady Bellamia, as taking opportunity to go to her
chamber, Enter Lady Plott, and Fitzavarice. La. Follow her, my Lord, she is
stolen to her chamber: thi^ will
Give you admittance through my Lodgings, I Will excuse
Your absence, there be more ways to the wood, try all.

Lo. How much you bless me, she shall want noe trial,
This opportunity is worth an Empire.

Exeunt. Actus Tertius.
Enter Lord Fitzavarice, and Bellamia. Lo. What shall I say? consent, dear
Lady, to
Be mine, and thou shat taste more happiness,
Then woman's fierce ambition can pursue;
Shift more delights, then the warme-spring can boast
Variety of leaves, or wealthy harvest
Grain from the teeming earth. Joy shall dry all
Thy tears, and take his throne up, in thy eyes,
Where it shall sit, and bless what e're they shine on.
The night shall Sow her pleasures in thy bosom,
And morning shall rise only to salute thee.

Bell. Enough, too much. My Lord, I hoped when last
Your importunity enforced my promise
Of other answer, I should never see you,
If being a sad prisoner to my chamber,
Might have prevented your access: but since
I am betrayed to this discourse, receive
What the necessity of fate compells to.

Lo. Another answer?

Bell. Yes, but such an one
As must at least challenge affinity
With what I said before: not your estate,
Though multiplied to Kingdoms, and those wasted
With your invention, to serve my pleasures,
Have power to bribe my life away from him,
To whose use I am bid to wear it; be yet just,
And seek no further to pollute the stream
Of my chaste thoughts, I Will rather choose to die
Poor wife to Peregrine, then live a Kings
Inglorious strumpet, can you think my Lord,
Should I give up my freedom to your bend,
And for the pride of wealth, sell woman in me,
(For she must loose that name, that once turns whore)
Could I arrive at impudence enough
To come abroad, and not be moved to hear
My shame from every tongue, but scorn my infamy,
(As it is the nature of this sin to strengthen
It self still with a greater) could you think,
If noe religion can correct your wildness,
Another price, or pleasure, would not buy me
Even from your arms? there is no faith in lust,
And she that dares be false to one she loves,
Will twine with all the world, and never blush for it,
Kiss, and betraie as often. Think on this,
And call your self home,

Lo. Lady, I have heard you,
And do allow the excuse, I do not urge,
Although your husbands absence may plead for it,
You should be generally at my dispose,
Disclaim all place, and person, but what is mine,
I am not so ambitious, my desires
Are humble, and beg only so much favor
To admit me to one service, (you know what
To understand by it) and if you like not
My activitie handsomelie, discharge me again.

Bell. Worse then infection, how dare you speak
This blasphemy to honor, or I hear it?

Lo. I'ts not to be avoided, I have secured
Your Chamber, Lady.

Bell. Innocence defend me.

Lo. Once more, and nature work,
You say you love your husband, and account
His absence the misfortune, that does sit
Most heavy on your soul, this is increased
By the despair of his return; since all
Hop's f^ed, to satisfy his deep engagements,
Which threaten ruin here, I have a mortgage
Of his, for sums lent by my thriving father,
Your jointure, (but releast by you, I take it)
I am so much a servant to thy beauty,
The first night I embrace thy delicate body,
The Lands thy own again, a round encouragement.

Bell. What do I hear?

Lo. If Lords should pay so dear for every capering,
T'wou'd try the back of their estate: but mark me,
I ha not done, sum up his other debts,
They swell to thousands, be but fair conditioned,
For every time thou admitst me after, to thy
Pillow, I Will strike of an hundred pound,
Till all the debts be unravel'd: In the mean time
Thy husband shall return, and walk the Town,
Free as an Alder-man, and be mace-proofe,
Shall live, and lie with thee, and love thee too,
And praise thee for this noble composition,
What say? I find thy wisdom coming to thee.
Should it be known, who will think the worse of thee?
Alas, good soul, 'twas pure love to thy husband,
They must imagine, wrought with thee. What woman
But would to save a husbands life, and fortune,
Venture a trifle? nay they shall commend
Thy act, and read the story to their children*
And envy the example was not theirs,
I shall have all the blame, but i will endur't
For thy sake, all the tyranny will be mine,
But to secure thy peace, and do thy husband
A courtesy, I Will run a thousand hazards.
Do I appear now?

Bell. Yes, a glorious monster.
Good Heaven!

Lo. Once more, will you consent?

Bell. Neveroh, never: let me tell you, sir,
You have so little prevailed upon my Love,
That almost I forget my charity
You Are a bad man: I Will sooner meet a basiliske, and be one.

Lo. Nay then. -- He draws his Poynard.

Bell. What do you mean?

Lo. If soft entreaties
With all that man can promise, move you not
To the delight, I Will snatch it from your bosom,
Nay never shake, I Will change that modest palenesse
Into a blush, shall speak thy blood as hot
As mine, or leave thy veins dry as the face
Of earth, when winter has deflowred her cheek,
And sealed up all her beauties in a frost.
She faints. Ha, Madam, dead, help: I did but try thee,
My Lady Plott, a curse upon your Plotts.
Jacintha, Ladies, I am undone, no help?

Dormant above. Dor. Peace you will wake my master.

Lo. Help here, the Lady Peregrine is dead.

Dor. If she be dead, she wonot make a noise,
Would al in the house were dead, we should be at quiet.
Carry your self civillie an i will send somebody.

Lo. I shall be in for murder, oh my fate!

Enter Jacintha, Lady Plott. Ia. Alas my sister, what ha you done, my Lord?

Lo. I know not the extent of my offense,
But trust me, i le not fly past the next Chamber.
Show your best charity, oh my soul is wounded.
Exit.
La. She returns, give her more air.

Ia. Oh my poor sister, welcome to life again.

Bell. I know you both, is no body else with you?

La. No Madam.

Bell. Not my Lord?

La. I Will carry him the news of her recoverie.

Bell. Pray let me see him.

Enter Lord, and Lady Plott. Ia. He Is here too soon.

La. Plo. Cheer up your spirit my Lord, and speak to her,
She is alive, and likely.

Bell. You may come
A little nearer, if there be no change
In mind, there is in countenance, my Lord,
I have had a short, but pleasing vision,
My thought from a steep precipice, as you were falling
Into the Sea, an arm chained to a Cloud,
Caught hold, and drew you up to Heaven.

Lo. If you dare hear me speak
Again, I dare say more, but to your ear.

Bell. I feel a new, and secure confidence.
Will you vouchsafe us favor?

Ia. We Will not be
At to much distance.

Exeunt Ia. and Lady Plott. Lo. Can there be a hope,
After so great a wrong, to find a mercy?
You must be more then woman, and you are so.
It was the error of my soul that drew
The heavy mist upon my eyes, they now
See, and admire your innocence, oh Madam,
I have two mighty passions within me;
Two, that are welcome, yet extremes, a Joy,
To see you live, and sorrow for my trespass
Against so bright a chastity, to which,
I kneel within my heart, and ask forgiveness.

Bell. If this be earnest, it is a heavenly language.

Lo. I feel a holy flame disperse rich heat,
About me, the corruption of my blood
Is fallen away, and of that virtue, which
A devil in me would have betrayed, I rise
A servant, and admirer, live, oh live,
Thou best of wives, and practice still new wonders
Upon the heart of lust transformed men,
Until time boast, the example of thy faith
Has purged the world, and taught us how to count
Our hours by thy miracles: I am
In love now with thy goodness, by thy self
I am, and by some rare, and unknown act,
Must make a recompense to that fair honor,
I would ha blasted, once again forgive me,
And hide the shame, my soul does blush to think on.
Exit.
Bell. This is an noble change, and speaks his nature
Not barren, when good seeds are trusted with it.

Enter Lady Plott, and Jacintha. Ia. He Is gone.

Plo. And did not mind us.

Bell. I am sorry,
I could have chained my ears to his discourse,
And willingly ha grown old to have heard him:
Madam, the Character of praise you gave him,
Is short of that true nobleness I find.

Plo And yet you were not willing to believe it.
I think I know a man.

Ia. How is this sister?
I hope you are not in earnest, though he be
A Lord, as who can help, in my judgment
There are noe mountains of such nobleness
As you commend his talk, if he speak not:
Another language to the ear, could never.
Ravish my understanding, though I must
Confess it is wild enough, I do begin
To fear you, sister.

Bell. Be more charitable,
I apprehend your trouble, and shall give you
A fair account of his, and my own honor,
I could be merry now.
Exit.
Plo. Here are Gentlemen.

Ia. My customers.

Enter Confident, Vayne-man, Pumicestone. Con. Where is my Lord?

Bell. He Is gone, sir.

Con. I am sure he has left a heart behind with you,
Most excellent of beauties, in whose trust,
It Is safer, and more warm, then in his bosom,
Do you not find him a brave Gentleman?
He has but one fault Lady, he is to modest:
But your discretion must helpe^ hat.

Bell. I honor him.

Con. It Is well and wisely done.

Bell. Pray tell me, sir,
I have heard a little trial of your wit,
Are you honest too?

Con. Honest too?
I never did suspect your Ladyships
Breeding, and yet this question in public,
Would stagger the opinion.

Bell. But you having a leading voice.

Con. I ha not art to help you,
Though I confess, I might orerule some wits
O'th lower class, are you honest too?
Besides the freedom of my birth, and wealth
Of blood, I boast no over-swelling fortunes,
As to what purpose, should my wits be clogged
With heavy acres, when the Town's Exchequer
Is mine, and every Mercer is my Tenant,
If he pretend to wit, and hope to justify
His shop-booke, and orthographie of his bills:
I would not have the scandal on my name,
To be called honest, in the strickt sense I mean,
And as it ties my blood up, for a Duke-dome:
But you are for my Lord, and I allow it.
How thrive my gallants here?

Ia. They cannot choose
But prosper, sir, and much the better for
Your commendations.

Va. You may take his opinion Lady, it is authenticke.

Ia* But a little of your patience: if I found
Within me, that strong appetite to marry,
Who shall protect me from the statute gentlemen?
If it be fellonie to have two husbands,
I will not marry above one for certain.

Con. She s right for that, it is dangerous.

Pu. Cast lotts.

Ia. And tie my love to chance, forbid discretion.

Va. Choose whom you love best.

Ia. That Is to be resolved
By your demonstration, who loves me best,
For if there be, mark what I tell you, Gentlemen,
But the hundred part of a grain difference,
In your affections, beshrew me, if
I choose the lightest.

Both. How Is this?

Con. Wisdom Gentlemen,
And must be allowed.

Pu. Let him be the judge,
He knows us both to a scruple.

Con. Excuse me Gentlemen,
It Is fit the Lady satisfy her judgment*
Although I hate partiality, it becomes not
I should be here definitive, to perplexe
The freedom of her choice..

Va. What think you to agree among our selves?

Ia. Sure he that dares
Do most for my sake will deserve me best.

Con. Dee hear that resolution, be ruled
I Will open such a path to your ambition --

Pu. No more.

Va. At our next visit, you shall know us Lady,

Plo. Nay Gentlemen letts to gleeke.

Va. Command us Madam.

Plo. You and my Cozen may
To the same exercise.

Bell. I would be excused
For some few minuites.

Con. If it please you Lady,
We Will pass that time at sant: did you not find
My Character true of those rotten glo-wormes?

Ia. You did a high favor.

Con. you consult
Your honor in the acknowledgment, I wait you.

Ia. When will you open, sir, the book of destiny
And read the name you talk on? I am confident,
He must be master of an active soul
Whom you prefer, if I mislike his person,
I Will marry his wit, but we loose time, you will follow.

Exeunt Manet Lady Bellamia. Bell. Methinkes I feel some new access of comfort,
Something that tells me, I am near a blessing,
Or else my poor heart flattets me.

Enter Page. Pa. My Lord commanded me present you his best service,
And with it, these: he bad me say, they are
Prologue to that reward he has designed
Your virtue, I was glad to hear him say so,
And never went more nimbly on his message.

Bell. The mortgage? this confirms me, he is noble,
A wealthy Carkanet; though I cannot merit
This bounty from him, I am rich in thank's.
But prithee tell me boy, did not thou bring
Letters, and other Jewels to me?

Pa. Yes.

Bell. If I remember, you did speak an other
Meaning, then what you now deliver.

Pa. Madam,
Although the narrow tie of duty bind me,
To the discharge of his commands, which it
Becomes no servant to dispute, I meet
Honest employments with more cherefullnesse.

Bell. Thou have a modest countenance, here is to buy the
Garters, and Roses.

Pa. When I go upon
Lascivious errands, Madam, I take money,
There is no other benefit belongs to 'em,
But good ones pay themselves, I am rewarded,
I shall have cause to thank you for my Lord,
If he preserve this temper.
Exit.
Bell. A good boy: this is not the religion of all Pages.
They are a present worth acceptance,
The piety came with 'em more then doubles
Their value, if vice blush not at rewards,
There is no shame for virtue to receive them*
But What Is all this to me, that am poor still
Without my Peregrine? who all this while
Treads the uneaven path of war, and danger,
This very minute, for ought I can tell,
Wounded upon some service, or engaged,
To stand the murdring Cannon, oh, my blood
Grows pale within me to imagine, what
Horror attends the Soldier

Enter Dormant. Dor. Madam, Madam.

Bell. Ha, my heart trembles.

Dor. Sir Walter Peregrine.

Bell. Thy looks speak comfort, what of him?

Dor. He is returned.

Bell. Landed?

Dor. He Is marching up the stairs, with another soldade
Tough as his Jerkin, he has a tilting feather,
And looks so desperately, I fear they have
Brought home two regiments that wonot be
Casheer'd without a shift.
Enter sir Walter Peregrine, and a Captain. They are here already.

Bell. Oh! let me fly into his arms, my Peregrine.

Sir. My best of life!

Bell. Let tears of joy salute thee,
Welcome, ten thousand wellcomes.

Sir. I embrace
Millions of bliss in thee, but let not our
Joy make us unmannerlie, bestow
One welcome on my friend.

Bell. Your pardon, sir,
If after many years of absence, I
Dwell long upon a husbands entertainment,
And if you think I have expressed a truth
Of joy to see him, you will easily
Believe the man, whom he calls friend, is welcome.

Cap. Madam, you honor me, it were a sin
Not to be confident.

Sir. And are we met?

Bell. Never I hope to part again, it is time
We now should grow together.

Cap. You Will dispense
With me for some hours, I have friends expect
At my return a visit.

Sir I shall not
Desire you to let fall no mention
Of me, the little stay I purpose here,
You may imagine, carries danger with it.

Cap. I Hope you know me better.
Exit.
Sir. Noblest friend.

Bell. I heard some words sound most unkindly from you,
You named a little stay, have I scarce seen
My happiness, and must be sad again
To think it will so soon be ravished from me?

Sir. Alas my poor Bellamia, I have made
No purchase but of wounds, since my departure.
I have paid some debts of war, but cannot promise
To cancel one, that threatens me at home;
What we have more then to supply our wants,
Consumes on the Drum head, I was ambitious
To see thee, and this gentleman returning
With expectation to levy men
Gave me the opportunity, but I dare
Promise my self no dwelling here, scarce own
My face before a sun-beame, I must walk
In The dark to all the world but thee, Bellamia:
But trust me, when my body is called hence
By misery of my fate, it takes not all
The soul it brought, much stays to wait on thee:
I know it would afflict thee more, to see me
A prisoner, chained to heavy debts, and shame.

Bell. Thy state is not so lost, and miserable,
As it is presented in thy fears, look here,
And thank a providence, that smiles upon us,
This is recovered, we have some Land
Again, by whose revenue we may live,
And expect better fortunes, I have Jewels too,
Bright ones, and rich.

Sir. You have indeed.

Bell. Possess
What I enjoy, and let us live together.

Sir. It cannot, cannot be, alas Bellamia,
How flattring imagination would cozen us,
I am beyond sea still, in my cold Tent,
Where, though my sleeps be broken with the noise
Of war, I now securely dream of thee,
And of my coming home, and talking to thee,
That thou art rich in land again and Jewels,
Shadows, mere shadows: I am weary of
This dream, some charitable cannon wake me.

Bell. Sir you may trust your eyes, these are no forms, in aerie apprehension,
but the truth of things, that call you to believe, and use them as timely
benefits: yet I may allow you to wonder, there is a story will deserve it.


Sir. I know not what I fear, dee think it is true then?
I will have reason for this faith, pray tell me,
How came you by this wealth, certainly I left
No sums to purchase these, more my injustice
To thee, whose plentiful estate I ruined.

Bell. A friend, a noble friend.

Sir. That died, and gave thee
A swelling legacy, and thou have made
This use on it to release thy desperate land,
Buy thee a Carkanet, and this proud blaze
Of other Jewels.

Bell. If you please to hear me,
I must declare, these are the bounty of
A living friend.

Sir. Living?

Bell. A Gentleman --

Sir. A Gentleman? forbear I am not well.

Bell. One you are bound to honor.

Sir. Tha'st undone me,
Do not, do not name him,
I know, and feel too much.

Bell. Believe me, sir,
My storie's full of innocence, and when
You have more knowledge of this friend, you will quit
Your fears, and call him to your heart.

Sir. My heart*
Is very busy, yet you may tell me
His name, to whose strange bounty I am so obliged.

Bell. More to his virtue, though his title
Carry the shine of honor, he has a soul
More glorious; have patience but to hear me,
You will confess it, and reward his piety
With praise above a man, and be in love
With him your self.

Sir. In Love --

Bell. The Lord Fitzavarice.

Sir. Ha? the wanton Lord Fitzavarice.
Thou most undone of women, did my absence
So forfit me, or ebb of wealth corrupt
Thy giddie soul, thou could imagine, I
Would thank thy lust to piece up my wild ruins?
Transform me gentle Heaven,
For if I be a man, and hold the knowledge
Of this dishonor, I shall do an act
Equal to this, and murder this false woman.
Have I thought life not tedious for thy sake,
And in my poverty summed up wealth enough
But in my hopes to see thee, were my winters
Not cold, when I but thought I had Bellamia,
Were all the toils, and troubles of my spring,
Not valued for this harvest? curse upon
Thy Salarie, were it a price to buy
All Kingdoms, that the Sun e're shed a beam on,
Earned from thy bodies infamy, I Would choose
To live in the galley first, and chained to the oar,
Give up my breath through torture. I Will to prison,
And welcome all the stings, that want of liberty,
Disease, and famine, can let fall upon me,
And call thee yet more killing then all they,
Till my hard Creditors forgive me in pity,
And curse thee into all I have suffered,
Wives shall accuse thy perjury, whose act
Is able to make all the truth suspected,
And Virgins frighted at thy name, resolve
Never to marry, while the race of men
Curse thee, for whom they nere shall spring again.
But I let passion fool me, and my tamenesse
May prompt thee to more sin, I Will be revenged;
But first on him, that grafted shame upon me:
It shall be thy first punishment, to see
Him bleeding, where is he? come what fine conveiances
To keep your Goat close, till time play the baud,
And secure all your ruttings? I must find him,
Appear then stain to honor, Lordly devil:
Where art? Fitzavarice? Fitzavarice!
Enter Dormant. Whose reeking squire are you sir, ha my Lords?
Show me strait where this Fox does Earth himself,
Or I Will --

Dor. I know not where my Lord is, but there is one a Bed.

Sir. A Bed, expecting her, where?

Dor. But he is asleep, you will wake him.

Sir. Show me villain quickly.

Dor. Oh, this way, sir.

Exeunt. Bell. Has misery a name beyond my suffering?
Has love, and fortune both conspired to drop
Their stings into my bosom?

Within. Help Dormant.

Enter Sir Solitary in his shirt persued by Sir Walter. Plo. A plott, a plott
to murder me, hold, what art?
My Nephew; ha!

Sir. It Is not he, Uncle you must
Excuse my complement, he shall not fly me.
Exit.
Plo. Who goes about to fly? he did not wound me,
A naked man is soon undone, it is wisdom
To sleep hereafter in a shirt of Maile,
When came he hither, from the nether-lands?
He is sent upon some murdring design;
But why with his sword drawn, why not a knife?
Some great man is in danger; ha! my Niece weeping,
I Will sift her, Bellamia?

Bell Oh my husband, sir.

Sol. Nay, then there is a plott, whom would he kill?

Bell. The Lord Fitzavarice.

Sol. I knew it was some great man mus^ be visited
Beneath the ribbs, men of such vast estates
Are not long lived.

Enter Dormant. Dor. I know not what to do, sir,

Sol. He Is in the conspiracy, reveal the plott to me.

Dor. My fellow Oldrat met him, sir.

Sol. Ha, more traitors.
I did suspect that fools simplicity,
What man is to be trusted? if these men
Thrive in their first attempt, the stat's in danger.
This Oldrat is a politician.
I Will stand upon my guard, entrench, and dare
The Ghost of Tilly.

Dor. It Is not very warm, sir.

Sol. Your cold considerations are best.
But I Will to bed again.

Dor. They are here, oh!
Exit.
Enter Sir Walter, Bell: and Oldrat. Sol. Away.
Shall we be never free from plotts?
Exit.
Sir. Wall. Has he been gone this hour say?

Old. Yes, and please your worship,
Would I were well gone too.
Exit.
Bell. Yet will you hear me, sir.

Sir. And trust the language of your tears? they are false,
Your gamester shall weep blood: here we untwist
Our hearts, set up o'th trade, the youth will join.
Thou may be still Bellamia, but not mine.
Exit.
Actus Quartus.
Enter Sir Walter, and Captain, as coming from a Tavern. Within. All Is paid,
and ye are welcome gentlemen.

Cap. So; so, this Tavern was well thought upon:
In my opinion, it is a great deal better
Then to have trusted your own passion
In such a cause, which easily might engage you
To danger, when your rage grew high, and loud.

Sir. I have obeyed your counsel: you will carry this?

Cap. I have promised you.

Sir. And yet you must acknowledge
The wrong is greater then to be contained
Within this narrow leaf, and till I have
Revenged, it swells each minute to a volume.

Cap. My Lord is noble this way, and be confident,
Will render you an account, worthy his person,
Though I am sorry to salute him first,
With a defiance.

Sir. Shall not for all the World
Do thy self prejudice in his favor, i will
Disengage thee again.

Cap. Now you dishonor me, though he has bin pleased
To use me nobly when we met at Bergen,
That must not bar the office of a gentleman
To his friend: he has been a Soldier himself,
And must grant this an act of my profession.
You are certain he has done the injury?
For 't is not safe to trust suspicion,
In things of this high nature; Life and Honor
Must not be questioned upon naked fears,
And windy suppositions, pardon me
This plainness, you imagine I dare fight.

Sir. Shall I believe it is day, when I behold
The Sun disperse his beams about the World?
Do I know cold, or heat, or when I thirst?
Shall I be confident we talk together?
My cause will ask the same degree of faith,
As built on equal certainty.

Cap. I urge it
No father:
Is not that he?

Enter Fitzavarice and Page. Sir. It Is the same.

Cap. Withdraw, be careful of your self, I Will meet you
At your Uncles house, and give you an account
Of this employment.

Page She is an excellent woman,
If It be no wrong to her goodness that I spend
My childish character.

Lo. Thou Art right, she is
Indeed boy, and shows fairer for that goodness,
I have done nothing yet to cherish her
Rare piety, or to deserve my pardon.
I Will study both.

Cap. My Lord, an humble servant --

Lo. Captain you honor me,
Welcome to England, how do all our friends
In The Low Countries?

Cap. Happy in being your servants,

Lo. When Landed you?

Cap. But this morning, I am fortunate
In this opportunity, my Lord, to speak with you,
And to present --

Lo. Some letters, you oblige me,
How does sir Walter Peregrine?

Cap. Well,
If please you command your boy more distance:
This paper comes from him. My Lord, I should
Be guilty of much sin to your own honor,
Not to assure my self noble construction
From you, I had no thought within this hour,
To have brought more then my humble service
To your Lordship, which shall still be fairelie yours.

Page I do not like this soldads^ Embassage:
A challenge! some young Gentlemen that have
Strong purses and faint souls, do use to fine for it,
As Citizens do for Sheriffs: the Town swash-Bucklers
Practice these feats, and live by it; but my Lord
Has beaten that opinion out of some,
It should appear, all are not yet converted.

Lo. How Is this?

Cap. He appears noble, and not moved.

Lo. Are you acquainted with his discontents?

Cap. He has imparted some, but I have no
Commission to expostulate.

Lo. I thank you,
You show your self a Gentleman, and his friend.
He shall hear from me, I had ambition
To enjoy you longer: but the terms of honor
Threaten on both sides, know me for your servant.
Pray heaven he injure not the innocent Lady.
He has directed where to send to him,
And so again I thank you noble Captain.

Cap. Your Lordships honorer.
Exit.
Lo. This came unlooked for, but I must not wave it,
O'th sudden whom shall I employ? I cannot
Want friends ambitious of these engagements:
The next I meet.

Enter Confident. Confident? He has professed his soul was mine,
I Will try him for his body in this action.
Yet he that is not honest, dares not fight sure.

Con. My honorable Lord.

Lo. Oh Master Confident,
Your hopes thrive in your mistress?

Co. Your Lordship
Was pleased to advance 'em, she affects my wit,
And bold discourse, I turn and wind her soul,
She loves me infinitely.

Lo. I hope not, hark.
Be not too forward, I Am acquainted with
Her disposition, do not flatter her,
Nor seem to dote, she will triumph then: if you
Would make all sure, be ruled by me, and slight her,
And she will court you, it is the trick of Ladies,
If you abuse her, 'twere not much amiss.
I would not have the wench undo her self
Upon this fellow. I advise the best
And speediest way, for I expect your promise,
When she is yours, to bring us more acquainted.

Con. Be confident my Lord, good manners will
Instruct me to allow you the first fruits,
It was the fashion of our northern Princes:
And challenge it from your poor Homager.
I shall be as warm the first night with her Land,
And monie's. Then it seems you have no hope
To spring her sister.

Lo. Since our last salute,
Icicles hang upon my lip.

Con. My wife, for I
Dare speak her so, with smiles shall chase
That winter* and shoot spring throughout your blood;
You shall not only from her lip taste Cherries,
But she shall plant 'em with her amorous kiss
Upon your own, and they shall grow from thence
To tempt the Queen of Love to Adonis garden:
It shall be happiness enough for me, to watch
The Hesperides, but in no Dragons shape,
That you may rifle with security
The golden Orchard, I shall boast enough
By having an Elysium to serve you;
Her eyes are wealth enough to me, above
A rock of Diamonds, her breath rich gummes
Sweeter then those the Phoenix makes her Altar,
When she is her own sacrifice, and fannes
The glowing Pile with her gray wings; her voice
Enough for me, whose harmony would build
Up Thaebes again, and make it after move,
And follow her; one touch of her soft palm
Is health enough to me, and were I old
As Eson, would restore my active nerves,
And state my youth at thirty: I can gather
Warm Snow from her fair brow, her chin, her neck,
And at my eyes drink enough immortality:
Sated with these, I Will find new appetite,
And come a wanton strawberying to her cheeks.

Lo. No more, you have expressed in this your faith
To me, which I am bound in honor to
Acknowledge, and without more study, have
A fit occasion to requite, and show
How near I place your love, there is a difference
Between another gentleman, and my self,
Grown to a challenge, I must answer it,
You that are so well read in books, cannot
Be ignorant of man, I Will trust my life
And honor with no second, but your self.

Co. My Lord I see you know me, and am blessed
The chosen man to serve you, from a troop
Of lives at your command, I should have envied
His fate, on whom else you had thrown this honor.

Lo. Soresolute? you have not seen sir Walter Peregrine,
He Is returned.

Co. I hear some whisper --

Lo. I have named my enemy, the defyance comes from him.

Co. He Is jealous of his wife, good gentleman,
And wod be a cuckold upon record.

Lo. Call on me
An hour hence, I Will be at home, and use
Your friendship for the burden of an answer.
Exit.
Co. I shall think Time has lost his wings till then.
He put me to it cunningly, but his
Discovery releev'd me, though I make
A noise in the Town, and am admired for bouncing,
I am cool enough in the dogge-days: my Lords Scrivener.
Enter Scrivener. Fortune presents him to my with, the man
Of all World most useful to my purpose.

Scr. Master Confident, Rapture your most humble servant --

Co. When saw you the squires Vayne-man, and Pumicestone?

Scr. Not since I procured 'em a thousand pound,

Co. Now you put me in mind of debts, has not
Sir Walter Peregrine a name within
Some list of yours? has he no creditors
By your acquaintance?

Scr. I beseech you do not
Vex me with his remembrance. I have pai'd
Some moneys for him, he has other friends
That would be glad to embrace him.

Co. Sure he would not
Be such a traitor not to secure thee.

Scr. Would I could reach him.

Co. Why he is returned,
Within this four and twenty hours, you may
Salute him too. Alas, a sum may be
The ruin of thy fortunes, could he have
So little charity?

Scr. I would show
As much to him, if I could set my phangs on him.

Co. I have ever wished thee well, and if thou dare
Be secret, I Will direct thee to recover him,
I cannot say the deb't; may be, the Knight
Is poor still.

Scr Hang him, Master Confident,
It will refresh my heart to be revenged;
Some say men's blood, I say their bones are sweetest.
I Would make him an example, I Will not tell
My shirt on it, how honest Master Confident?

Enter Sir Walter. Co. Fate dotes upon thee, he, the very he,
Be art-full, j'le salute him, and delaie
His pace with some discourse, whilst you
Fetch shoulder-clappers, noble Sir Walter Peregrine,
I feel a springtide in my heart of joy,
Swell to congratulate your safe return,
The Town has droup'd for your society.

Sir. You are still the eligant time wit, I am happy
To witness both your brain, and body flourish.

Con. What news abroad? all expectation
Is fixed upon this summers war, we breath
Nothing but German air, allthough the chance
Of war be uncertain, you can tell which hand
Is fortunate, how ha the Dice run hitherto?

Sir. There Is not much won, or lost.

Con. No Towns of note
Taken? no convoyes of provision
Cut off?

Sir. Sir you are inquisitive, as if
You would turn Gallobelgicus, I am
On some affairs now, that importune their
Dispatch, my stay being short I must attend them.

Con. Nay prithee Knight be courteous, it is an age
Since we converst, is it true what loved fame scatters
Of the great Generals revolt?

Sir. We have
But the relation.

Con. He is slain for certain.

Sir. There was an execution.

Con. And what treasure
Was taken by the enemy? they talk
Of Millions.

Sir. Enough to keep the Eagle
In a good diet. I beseech you pardon me,
We shall hereafter meet, and ha more freedom
To enlarge our selves, and when you have my particulars,
I will be bold to inquire in the Exchange
Your news at home.

Con. I observe trouble in you,
I hope you are in no danger.

Sir. If you will give me
The liberty of a subject, and allow me
The Kings high way, I shall have less suspicion,
You wonot pay my debts.

Con. I beg your pardon,
Pray do not wound my service to you with
A jealous thought, I wonot for the World
Engage you another minute.
Enter Scriuener, and Officers. Now for the bloodhounds.

Off. Sir, we arrest you

Sir. Is the mischief fallen?

Off Your sword shall keep the peace.

Scr. It Is at my suite.

Sir. Thine?

Scr. I do but lead the dance to twenty more.

Sir. Hear me, what is your demand? let me not go
To prison.

Scr, An action of a thousand pound more,
For the Lord Fitzavarice.

Sir. Ha? then I am betrayed, that Lord's a villain,
That I could reach his heart; release my body
But for two hours, my soul be forfeited
For ever, if I render not my self
Your honest Prisoner.

Scr. That were a pretty jest.
Look to your charge.

Co. Here is a duel taken up discreetlie.
Exit.
Sir. Black Jew, base Lord, damned villain.

Scr. They can tame you.

Exeunt* Enter Jacintha, Vaine-man Pamiceston. Ia. Why look you gentlemen,
I Will not puzzle you
To find out dangers, famine, fire, and sword,
Or desperate things.

Va. Trifles for thy sweet sake.

P^s. I would not wish you, upon easy terms.

Ia. To prevent these, I have thought a way my self,
And with less cost, to try you, I have made
A vow I wonot marry these six months,
During which time, if you dare for my sake
Visit me every day, and never speak to me,
Nor in my company to any other --

Va. How Lady?
Shall I not answer any gentleman
Or Lady, that shall put a question to me?

Ia. By no means.

Va. You will give me leave to answer you,
If you should ask me any thing.

Ia. Not a syllable,
Though I desired to know what a clock it is,
There Is your obeydience, at six months end
I may reward your silence.

Pu. She Will make him the dumb Knight.

Ia. I wonot engage you to be a mute
So long, you shall be allowed to speak, and see me.

Pu. You are noble Lady.

Ia. But with this condition,
That whatsoever I entreat you say
Or do, you put in act the contrary
The very contrary, you understand me.

Pu. How Is this? if you command me to affect you,
What can I do?

Ia. I wonot be so cruel.
If these conditions please, you may proceed.

Va. But hark you Lady, I may laugh before you,
And in your absence have the liberty
To use my tongue.

Ia. What else, sir.

Va. And when must I begin to mumme.

Ia. I Will tell you.

Pu. Another word,
If we be just to your commands, dear Lady,
At six months end, how shall we both be satisfied?
You have forgot the statute.

Ia. He that shall
Express most care to do his penance for me,
Must be the man, I say no more, imagine.
My Lord Fizavarice.
Enter the Lord Fitzavarice. Now beginn's your trial.

Lo. How fares your virtuous sister Lady Peregrine?

Ia. That Gentleman can tell you.

Lo. He tell me?

Ia. Yes, he had a message to deliver you.

Vayne-m^ mak^s pi(...) signs, shrings. Lo. Sir you much honor me.

Ia. Nay, let him know it, here have been turns my Lord,
Since you were here.

Lo. Is she in health; you do not mock me?

Ia. If you love me, tell him the whole story, prithee,
For my sake.

Pu. How she Jeeres him.

Lo. Pox on your subtle shoulders, are you drunk?
If I shall think you Jeere me, be still silent,
I Will make you speak.

Ia. Ha, ha.

He kickes him, Vain. Exit shaking his head, and shoulders. Pu. Ha, ha.

Lo. What do you laugh at?

Pu. At his folly my noble Lord.

Lo. It Is well you do, sir, what is your meaning Lady?

Ia. You shall know presently, if you entreat
That Gentleman to stay.

Lo. He is not going.

Ia. But your commands upon him will make sure.

Lo. Let me entreat you not to leave me, sir.

Pu. I leave you my noble Lord? if every sand
Within my glass, were a long life, I should
Emploie 'em all in waiting on your Lordship.
And think the time were poor, and short to serve you
I leave you my good Lord? i am not about it.

Ia. Pray, sir, stay.

Pu. Your Lordships humble servant, some affairs
Press my departure.

Lo. You Will not mock me, sir?

Ia. You shall stay.

Pu. Lady I am gone, my Lord, I must beseech
Your pardon, for the world, I dare not slip
A minute:

Ia. Then go, you may go.

Pu. Not for a Kingdom Lady, I will stay,
And grow here for your service.

Lo. How came these gentlemen by these strange humors?

Ia. I Will tell you, sir.

Enter Lady Plott, and Dormant. Dor. Sir Solitary Plott, your husband and my
worthy Lord and Master, commends his service to your Lordship, and prays you
would please to accommodate him, with your Coach.


Plo. This fellow's infected too with serious folly.

Dor. Toward midnight he does purpose to take the air,
And make some visites.

Plo. Visites and air at midnight? pray return
My Lord imbassador to sir Solitary,
I will give order when I go to Bed,
To have the Coach made ready for his progress.
Stay, I have a great desire to see his worship,
Has he the same complexion still? I prithee
Leave of thy gravitie, and answer me,
Is he in Bed?

Dor. No Madam, a most strange
Disaster broke his sleep, and we shall be
At counsel presently, do not I talk
Already like a statesman?

Plo. It shall be so, come nearer.

Lo. This your device: it is pleasant and pursue it,
Your sister --

Enter Lady Bellamia. Plo. Be you sure, and secure, Jacintha you must
with me.

Exit Dor. Ia. Whether?

Plo. To my husbands Chamber.

Lo. Madam, your husband is returned I hear.

Bell. I hope you have not met.

Lo. Why noble Madam?
Enter Vaine-man as peeping if my Lord were gone, and beckons to Pumicestone.
We shall be friends if you have mercy, to
Forgive what is past, my soul shall not deserve
His ill opinion, I hope all is well between you two.

Bell. No hearts did ever meet
More loving lie, until he saw --

Lo. What, Madam?

Bell. The presents that you sent me.

Lo. It was my fear.

Ia. Servant.

Pu. Madam.

Ia. My dumb Knight too, we shall have the more mirth.
Ex.
Bell. Would I had been poor still, although you bring
All innocent thoughts. My Lord, I must beseech you,
Never to see me again, oh never, sir,
It will be dangerous to express your virtue,
And every minute you stay here, is fatal,
Alas I fear he is come.

Enter Confident. Co. My Lord, I have been active,
And all my bodies in a bath to find you.

Sir Walter Peregrine is arrested.

Lo. How?

Bell. Oh misery of miseries!

Lo. Look to your mistress.

Exit Lady, and waiting woman. Co. Her Ladyships pardon, I observed not her
So near. it is very certain.

Lo. I suspect
This knave, alas poor gentleman, and yet
It Is no misfortune to me, things considered:
Now he is safe, and I may walk securely;
In Prison let him lie and cool his valor.
I shall be in charity with the tribe of varletts,
For this good turn, this taking him in the nick,
And owe the wretch a sum, for being so fortunate
To set the Mastives on him, I owe thee too,
For thy good news, come Confident.

Co. To my ambition.
Dee hear my Lord, the good news is not all
You owe me for, I knew it would be grateful;
You owe me for the act, it was my wit
Betri'd him to the arrest, held him in prate
Whilst the honest Knave your Scrivener fetched the vultures
With phangs keen as the Devils.

Lo. How ^am bound to thee?

Con. I knew it was necessary. Every man
That vows his service, has not that extent
Of brain to bring about these fine things for you.
What think you of the mamoseile, his wife now?
You have no opportunity, no power
To humble her proud body, while her husband
Setts up a friperie with his gaie wardrobe;
Grows into new acquaintance with diseases,
And comfortable vermin; breaks stone walls
To show the proverb, and his hunger mighty;
Curses his Stars, and learnes to cant, and praise
The steame of ale, with an unchristian tossed in it;
Does reverence Barmudas, and the ghost
Of cheese, with the Egyptian Idol Onyous,
And crusts to break an Elephants tooth. All this
I ha done for you, my good Lord,

Lo. For which
I must pronounce thee a rascal; sordid wretch,
Was this your act for me? curse on thy soul for it,
My honor bleeds to death, see me no more.

Enter Scrivener* Scr. My Lord.

Lo. You are come in a good time, sir.

Co. Are you so cunning my young Lord, I must make my Lady
Sure, ere he talk, and tell her this; it is not'
The constitution of every Lord
To take unkindly when a man compounds
A duel for him, if I be driven to it
I can forswear't again. Let valiant fools
Brag of their souls no matter what they say,
A coward dares in ill, do more then they.
Exit.
Enter Sir Walter Peregrine, Captain, and under-Sheriffe. She. It Is all the
favor I could show him, sir,
To make my house his Prison.
Exit.
Sir. It Is but hell, one story higher.

Cap. You must arm your self
With noble fortitude, passion but unmans us,
And makes us less for bearing.

Sir. Do think friend,
The sense of all my debts could shake me thus?
I knew 'twould come, and in my fears examined
The mischief they present, it is not their weight
Affrights me, let the vultures whet their Tallons,
And creditors, with hearts more stubborn, then
The mettle they adore, double their malice,
Had I a pile of debts upon me, more
Heavy then all the World, it could, but with
The pressure keep this piece of earth beneath 'em,
My soul would be at large, and feel no burden;
That which I count my torture, exceeds all
That yet has been in mention. At a time,
Almost the very minute, when my hopes
Were ripe to punish him, and revenge had mounted
Her steely arm whose fall had crushed the soul
Of my fames ravisher, to be snatched up
By a wirle-wind thus, disarmed of all my hopes,
My hands bound up, not able to releeve
My bleeding honor: this, this murders me.
And that all this should be his cursed plott,
That gave me my first wound.

Cap. Dee think my Lord
Can show himself so dishonorable?

Sir. Can Lords
Be cowards? do not appear, when I am persued
By his own bloodhounds? has he not laid on me
(And what may not by this example follow
To sink me to a dungeon) all the debts
I owe him? nay is it not clear, he practices
Intelligence abroad, provoking others
To lay their sums upon me, that I may
Consume a Prisoner, and assure his lust
More scope to revell with my adulterous Madam,
My wife whose name is torment to my heart,
Bove all the engines meant to wound mankind*
Oh woman, that have forfeited the glory*
Of thy creation, and become man's ruin.

Cap. This is a circumstance I confess, but yet
Cannot make me conclude my Lord so ignoble:
I know he had a wanton pile of flesh,
But a more noble soul, then to betraie
His enemy so baselie.

Enter Sheriff and Scrivener. Sir. Is It not mischife
Enough to feel the cruelty of a prisoner,
But that black fiend must presecute my eyesight
Th'adopted son of Lucifer?

Scr. I have a letter from a noble friend of yours.

Sir. Carry it to hell.

She. Correct your passion,
And leave your understanding free, to know
Your happiness, this man how e're your rage
Let fly at him, will deserve better Character,
When he appears the means of your enlargment.

Cap. How Master Sheriff?

Sir. He means of my enlargment?
Take heed how you do mock me, sir.

She. Your Sword --
You Are free again, each particle of a deb't discharged.

Sir. By whom?

She. Not a fee left unsatisfied.

Sir. I am in a Wilderness.

Scr. You may come out when you please, if your worship
Will be at leisure to peruse this paper,
There is his name, has been at all this charge,
Who has commanded me to ask your pardon,
And on my knees I beg it, I am undone else,
For ever with his Lordship.

Sir. Cap. Lord Fitzavarice?

Scr. It was without his knowledge, Master Confident
Charmed me into it, the devil did assist.

Cap. The devil?

Scr. Yes, we three, I am sorry for it,
And if your worship have occasion
To use a hundred pieces more, I have'em
Ready at your service, pray entreat him to
Accept it, I expect no scribbling for it,
Nor use, nor principal, nor his word; but to
My Lord, that I may be the driver still of all his moneys.

Cap. I was confident, and long since cleared his Lordship
In my thoughts.

Sir. Was there ever such a thing in nature?

Cap. You must take the man's benevolence,
He is undone else, come there is no harm in it.

Scr. If they be not weight, I Will change 'em.

Cap. No, no.

Scr. I humbly thank your worship.
Exit and Sheriff.
Sir. I am all wonder.
Reads, When you find all things fairly discharged, though you acquit not
me, be pleased to continue a voluntary Prisoner for some few minutes, there is
necessity we should discourse, and conclude something else for both our
honors.
Cap. You must pronounce him innocent, had he
Been coward, as you thought him, at les^e charge
He might ha saved his honor, and secured your absence.

Sir. I begin to be a shamed,
And my suspicion cowardly falls off;
Yet certainly all this proceeds not from
Devotion to me, it is a bounty
He looks my wife should thank him for, ha?

Cap. Now I see all are your empty jealousies,
But think and be convinced, were his thoughts foul
As you imagine to your Lady, it
Had been ridiculous to set you at liberty,
The only bar to his design, lust is not
So tame, and foolish, common policy
would have instructed him to have let you rather
Languish, and rot in Prison, be collected,
And think whom your false fears have injured,
A noble wife and friend.

Sir. I am too blame,
This act has made me understand two souls.
I Will take 'em both to mine, and ask forgiveness.

Cap. Your Lady.

Enter Lady Peregrine. Sir. Forgive me my Bellamia,
Thou appearst white again, and only I
Black with my false suspicions of thy goodness,
My Lord has given me a satisfaction
Large as his virtue, welcome to my bosom,
My best, my chaste Bellamia.

La. This is joy
Able to drown my poor heart, but is all
This peace concluded?

Sir. Thus again confirmed.

La. Just heaven has heard my prayers, happy Bellamia.
What riches I embrace, what worlds of treasures,
In every kiss, how many lives I take
From those sweet smiles?

Cap. Who could suspect this Lady?

Bell. But I am lost again, in what place am I?
Is It not a Prison? oh that sad thought shoots
A trembling through me.

Sir. All is cured again.

Bellamia I am free too, out of debt,
Nay I did wonder at it.

Bell. You amaze me.

Sir. Wast not a brave Physician, that could cure
Two such distempers, when my soul, and fortune
Lay gasping, to recover both? it is done,
Done by thy friend, and mine, that honest Lord
Has paid all, to the scruple of a fee,
What thanks shall we both pay him my Bellamia?
Can he has done this miracle, allow
A place for lust within him? it is impossible.
But he is coming hither, stay not thou,
It will require more leisure to express
Thy gratitude, return, and tell thy friends
The wonder first, that when I shall present
His person next, they may have spacious souls,
To admire and entertain him.

Bell. I obey you,
Do not allay this unexpected joy
With a sad change good heaven.
Exit
Cap. You will expect him.

Sir. Religiously, an age I Will wait for him,
I prithee stay, and witness with what cheerfulness
I Will ask his pardon.

Cap. He is come.

Enter Lord. Sir. My Lord,
As you have made me object of your mercy,
By such an act of bounty, as noe times
Have gloried in, and in that shown the cleerenesse
Of your brave soul, incapable of stain,
Still let it shine with charity, and make
Me confident of pardon, for an injury
I blush, and dare bleed for, to show repentance.

Lo. Are you then satisfied?

Sir. I am my Lord.

Lo. I was bold, but with no purpose to disparage
Your credit, to discharge some trifling debts.

Sir. They were great, my Lord, and must enlarge my acknowledgment,
you have obliged two lives to pray for you.

Cap. And the whole age to admire.

Lo. You would encourage me.
One word, your honor's safe again.

Sir. And happy.

Lo. Mine suffers, it is but young and growing on me,
It bleeds by your suspicion, I was bound
To this expense, it is a malicious World,
And men are apt to imagine, I was glad
You were in prison, to preserve my skin
with some excuse, this brand must not come near
My forehead, though your sea be calm, I would not
Have my fame lost in the tempest of men's tongues,
I have made no reply, in point of man,
To your challenge, and the noise may be dispersed,
Nor will what you are pleased to accept, render
Me less unquestioned, but beget men's fears
At a high rate I have bribed your patience
Baselie, perhaps, their impudence will reach
To say, I have bought my passage to your Lady,
And your consent to the shame,

Sir. I will proclaim you
Noble to all the World, and my preserver.

Lo. There Is nothing but your sword can do me right,
We shall not trouble seconds, if you please
The Captain stand for both, he is a gentleman
Known truly valiant, which implies he cannot
Deceive where he is trusted, I Will expect,
You Will follow as you are a Gentlemen.
Exit.
Cap. He seems troubled. What Is the matter?

Sir. Did think it possible so fair a Sky
Should be delivered of a tempest?

Cap. How?

Sir. I Will tell thee as we walk, thou must not leave us.
That man is miserably compelled, that must,
To save his fame, be to himself unjust.

Exeunt. Actus Quintus.
Enter Sir Solitary, Dormant, and Oldrat. Dor. The Coach will be made ready.

Sol. So, so, lett's think and talk of something else:
Tim's precious, lett's talk wisely, 'twill concern us,
My brain is not in tune about my nephew,
Who knows upon what plott he is sent hither,
The Duch are grand projectors, letts examine
Where he is gone now.

Dor. My opinion is, to kill some body, or other.

Sol. That would be known, and yet I heard a buzze,
Some noble Man was aimed at, we were best
Say nothing, and discover him to the state,
We may be else in danger, and made accessaries
To the parricide, which is not as the vulgar
Interpret, killing of a father, but
Parem cedendo, killing of a Peer,
A Peer o'th land, mark that.

Old. I understand a Procedendo
Well enough, but who shall serve the writ?

Dor. Under your pardon, how can
You prove he is a murderer, let him first kill
Some body, no matter who it be, and then you may
Discover him with a safe conscience.

Old. Laughs.

Sol. What Is the matter.

Old. I am of an opinion under correction that if we
Should discover him, we should not carry it so
Privatelie, but it would be known, and then we shall
Be in as much danger o'th the other side for concealing it.

Dor. Laughs --

Sol. Who Is that?

Dor. Now I think better on it, it cannot be concealed
Under your favor fellow Oldrat, for if we do not
Discover, the state will not be so wise, as we are,
And then 'twere pity o'their lives, besides
If he go on to kill whom he list, and no body hear on it
He may undo the Town by degrees in a moment,
And neither we nor any that is hurt, the wiser for it.

Old. Laughs again.

Sol. Who is it laughs?

Old. Not I, sir, ha, ha.

Dor. Nor I, sir, ha, ha.

Sol. Stand both before me, is there not some spirit
In The room? has not some conjurer a plot upon me?
Cato was wise, and never laughed, but when
Out of his casement, he beheld an Ass
Eat Thistles, where is the may game? will none answer?
Sure they did laugh at me, but I Will prevent 'em,
And vex their spleenes, away. I wonot trust
A laughing visard, there is a killing face
Behind it, oh the juggling of the World!
Am I ridiculous at home? there is
Some plot in agitation. I smell a Rat.

Enter Dormant. Dor. If please you, sir, there is a dumb Ambassador desires to
Speak with you.

Sol. A dumb Ambassador?
When does he look for audience? of what nation?
Where in the Map is dumbe-land? I should much
Affect that Country, let him have access.
Enter Vaineman. I understand you are a dumb Ambassador;
Your business pray with me: you are no Lawyer,
Nor no divine I take it, are there no women
Non Magpies in your Country?

Vaineman makes signs, and salutes him. Sol. This fellow must have a rare
understanding,
For nature recompenseth the defects
Of one part, with redoundance in another:
Blind men have excellent memories, and the tongue
Thus indisposed, there is treasure in the intellect:
Yet there may be a plott, he is sent to observe me,
A state spy, but I Will cozen his intelligence,
And be as dumb as he.

They make signs one to another. Enter Pumiceston. Sol. What are you, sir?

Pu. I am his interpreter.

Sol. Oh then first answer me, how came he dumb?

Pu. With me lancholie, sir, he has a strange
Humor to cross the method of the World.

Sol. As how, sir? pray be plain.

Pu. Why; sir, to make
The night his time for study, talk, or business,
And never go to bed but in the morning.
But keep this to your self, for it is a secret.

Sol. Study? what did he study pray o'th nights?

Pu. Why plotts, nothing but plotts: he did suspect
All mankind, nay their shadows in the hangings,
If they but laid their heads together, were
Dangerous, and talked treason, such a fool,
A serious fool was never before extant.

Enter Jacintha. Ia. How does my Solitary Uncle?

Sol. Ha Cozen, forbear, we are engaged upon
Affairs of weight, that is an Ambassador.

Ia. What language does he speak?

Sol. None, none; but this is his interpreter.

Ia. Interpreter, and yet he speaks no language.

Sol. He Will over-heare you, it is a dumb Ambassador.
I pray be gone, you are a woman, go.

Ia. And can you get no other company
Then dumb and mad-folkes?

Sol. Who is mad?

Ia. That Gentleman.
Be you but master of some sense a while,
I Will mak't appear he has none. Come forward, sir,
Do you observe his motion? I entreat
He should come forward, and he plays the crab.
Stand still, sir, I beseech you.

Pu. With your pardon
I must be in action, it does stir my blood,
Which would congeale through cold else in my veins.

Ia. If it be beneficial to your body
Practice this motion still.

Sol. It Is very strange;
He now appears a statue:
Are they not both mad? do you think Jacintha
They have no plott in this, how came they thus distracted?

Ia. This grew mad with catching cold
A bed, and lying from his wife.

Sol. Cold causes are very dangerous.

Ia. You are something guilty on it.

Enter Lady Plott, Oldrat, Dormant. Noise within. La. Pl. What if my husband be
asleep?

Dor. We Will wake him.

Old Good Madam be not troublesome, do not you know who I am? I charge you to
resist us, come your ways, where; where be these traitors? let me see, where
is sir Solitary? I thought he would ha shown more wit then to concele traitors
in his house.


Sol. Traitors?

Old. Traitors, we look for, and traitors we will have,
And they be above ground.

Dor. I saw two suspicious persons come into the house with my
Own eyes, and they must out, there they are, I Will take
My oath Master Constable.

Ia. Master Vaineman, and Master Pumicestone you two suspected
For traitors, oh the rotten hearts of men!

Old. Reprehend them. Your good Knight must go too, go cheerfully 'twill be
the better for you, if you discharge an honest conscience, you may have the
favor to hang tell you be dead.


La. Did ever any man was sure o'th gallows, shake so?

Ia. This fright may work some good effect upon him,
Many men have been frighted from their wits,
Having none left, why is it not possible
He should be frighted back again into 'em?

Va. One word I beseech you, it is time to speak.

La. Pl. I hope you did not mean this for his cure,
I am not so weary cozen of my freedom.
He that is full master of his reason, may
Be master of his wife too, which I like not.

Enter Lady Peregrine. Per. My Uncle, sister, Madam. Sir Ha more plotts?

Ia. What Is the news sister? you look pleasantly.

Pu. Your face is full of sunshine Madam.

Per. bless me, but what are these?

Old. We are subjects of command, she will discover us.

Per. Men? apprehended? what new fears invade me?

Dor. What shall we do now?

Ia. Even what you please.

She pulls of their beards. Per, Why this is Dormant your servant Uncle.

Old. Who would ha thought it?

Per. And your name Oldrat, what is the matter gentlemen?
Ha you an interlude?

Pu. If they be no officers, we can be no traitors.

Dor. It Was Mistress Jacintahs plott, we did but act it.

Ia. I was desirous of a scene of mirth,
How far we should ha driven it, I know not,
Just so ridiculous are all your plotts Uncle, ha, ha.
You had your parts my brace of learned gentlemen,
Whom I do discharge from fear and further penance.

Per. Make not your self the general derision,
Your drudges mirth.

La. Pl. Nay, let him have his humor.

Ia. If you have still ambition to be laughed at,
And think it possible I can love such motleyes,
Come thus a wooing every day, I shall find
Some trick at last to make your worships famous.

Va. What think you of this?

Pu. One of us is sure to carry her, what think you o'th device, and the worst
come to the worst, for the thousand pound?


Va, We must agree, pay it, and be revenged.

Pu. Do not you think you have undone us now,
And that we shall despair, and drown our selves,
Or slip out of the World in a clean halter?
No, we will live to vex thee, for my part
Because thou gave me liberty to speak,
To show I scorn to obey thee, and in malice
To thy injunction, I will never speak
Again, to any woman, in revenge,
Exit. I Will be more dumb then he was.

Va. And because.
Thou did injoyne me silence, from henceforth
I Will practice talk to weary all thy sex.
I will be all, the everlasting talker,
And rail upon all women, till I have worn
My tongue to`th root, I Will study presently
A satyr that shall eat thee through the bones,
And send thee first to an Hospital.
Ex.
Sir. I see I am a fool, a melancholy
Suspicious fool, and all my plotts are nothing.

Ia. Lett's follow, and either make him mad outright,
Or bring it to a cure, your part's not done yet.

Exeunt. La. Pl. This will undo me, now must I to Prison.

Dor. What do thou think they mean Oldrat?

Old. I think? I hope they mean well.
And lovingly, and let us like honest servants
Into the sellar and pray for'em.

Dor. A match.

Exeunt* Enter Lord, Sir Walter, and Captain. Sir. Then nothing will prevail
but we must fight?

Lo. And no place more convenient, draw sir Walter,
And Captain, now indifferent friend to both,
For I have no suspicion thou can slain
Thy self by partiality, witness with
The heart I bring, I have no thought so black,
As murder, or revenge, but to preserve
My honor, which no balm can cure, if once
But the suspect of coward fall upon it.

Sir I am not so unjust my Lord to doubt your courage.

Cap. you have given proof my Lord abroad,
That you dare fight.

Lo. Though I affect no glory
From actions of this nature, yet the World
At home must be convinced, our fame is lost else:
Had Peregrine been coward, or not known
For valor, I had run less hazard of
My fame, by being silent, but as I am
Beneath him in opinion, a young man
Circled with expectation of something,
That must declare me worthy of a name,
And love of men, I must attempt this danger:
But let me tell thee this, which perhaps may
Render thy sword more fatal to me, I
Did love thy Lady with a sinful purpose,
Persued ever persecuted her chaste soul,
To satisfy my wantonness, but found
An innocence so rich in her, as may
Alone excuse the ill of all her sex,
Nor has the goodness only the effect
To preserve her, but it returned my eyes
With so much shame upon my self, that I
Threw off my lust, and doted on her virtue,
Heaven shut his mercy up if I dissemble,
This injust obligation to cherish,
I did reward with trifles, which perhaps
Gave fuel to your jealousy, but know
I have designed a larger recompense,
Which your sword may confirm to her in few minutes,
For if I chance fall by it, she is declared
The heir to my estate, and she deserves it,
Which she will employ no question to assure
Your peace, and pardon for my death, come on, sir.

Sir. I am more lost then ever, let my wonder
Be past, or you will fight against a man
Whose soul's a great way off. Did hear this Captain?

Cap. With pardon of your Lordship, since you have
Declard so freely, what I think winnes credit
With him too, your intentions to his Lady:
There is no cause, you should engage your bloods, To any loss

Sir. You are my preserver, sir,
Make me not so ungrateful to advance
My sword against your life, that gave me all
The benefit of mine, I have assurance
Enough of you, and my wives honor.

Lo. There Is
A purse of gold is troublesome, it may
Be useful to the surviver, come, sir, fight
By thy own Ladies virtue, I shall else provoke you rudely.

Sir. For her sake my Lord, we should be friends.

Lo. That wonot help my fame,
Nor yours, if you regard what threatens it,
I must not live upon the charity
Of peoples tongues, their justice shall acknowledge
I do not fear to bleed, let it be argument
To inflame thee, that thou majest be happyer
Upon my loss, since my last minute gives
Thy wife possession of all my fortune.

Sir. That rather charms me from each violence.

Lo. This must compel you then, till now I never
Fight. Thought thee ungrateful, by thy fame I charge thee,
By thy Bellamias love, fight not with pity,
Let me be worthy at least to fall with honor,
Fight so, as howsoever fate determine,
I may get honor, though in death, and not
Suffer without a wound.
Fight both wounded. So here is some blood yet.

Sir. I did but imitate my Lord your Character,

Cap. Blood of both sides, nay then I interpose,
As you are gentlemen, for other titles
Weigh nothing here, be just to both your honors,
You have done well, exceeding well, unless
I shall conclude there is malice on one side,
Be your selves now, and on such noble terms
Be reconciled again, sir Walter is
No enemy at heart, and the World must
Be satisfied my Lord, in your just valor,
Think what blessed providence has marked you both
For noble ends.

Sir. I Will trust him with my sword,
Which rather shall make next impression here,
Then be his danger.

Lo. I am overcome, take me thy Captive.

Sir. My most honored friend.

Cap. So, so, it is fair on both sides, but my Lord,
You bleed much, can you spare it.

Lo. Well enough, I Will wait upon you home.

Cap. First have a Surgeon.

Lo. What for a serath? let me present thee safe,
To thy Bellamia, she but with a smile
Can cure all wounds, come Captain.

Sir. We both wait on you.

Exeunt* Enter Jacintha, and Lady Peregrine. Ia. You tell me wonders.

Bell, I shall much repent
My discourse to thee, if it did not raise
Thy admiration, it is a noble Lord,
Thou art bound to make him restitution.

Ia. Of what?

Bell. Of fame, you were jealous of our honors.

Ia. I have read the Chronicles, but never met
With a young Lord has done the like.

Bell. To what
Virtue in time will he grow to Jacintha?

Ia. Virtue? there is another thing, not usual
In men of his rank, I allow a Gentleman
To pay his own debts, but another man's,
Want's a record, besides all this, to love
Another man's wife, a hansome woman too,
And be at cost to keep her honest? miracles.

Bell. What joys flow in my heart. Thou art sad fister.

Ia. No sadness, but I have another passion, that troubles me.

Bell. You Will be in time converted,
And leave your wild invectives against men,
It Is possible you may marry, if you could
Find such another man to be your husband.

Ia. No, I wood not.

Bell. What?

Ia. Find such another man to be my husband.

Bell. Thou woodst have him, how now my witty sister?

Ia. It cannot be concealed.

Bell. Has little Cupid
Been practicing with his bird-bolt, if thou be not,
I Will wish thee hartelie in love, to punish
Thy want of charity against all men
And marriage, it is but justice, nay be not melancholy;
He will be here presently.

Ia. He shall be welcome.

Bell. He shall.

Ia. Be very welcome hither, he once said
If I remember well, could he but love,
He would marry me of all women alive.
My fortun's not to be dispisd, however
My heart is rich enough, but it shall languish
To death, ere I will tell him so.

Enter Lord, Sir walter, and Captain. Bell. But do love him
Indeed? now but for pity I could laugh.

La. You may triumph sister, you have cause.

Bell. And thou can have no argument to despair,
Come shall I tell my Lord?

Ia. What?

Bell. That thou love him.

Ia. Do him not so much injury, my passion
Can still walk in disguise, though I confess
Since your relation, it is become more troublesome
To be confined, oh love! I never thought
To have felt thy sting, I dare not stay to see him;
I shall betray my self with many blushes:
Farewell my Lord Fitzavarice.

Lo. Not so
He Will rather meet a welcome to his bosomo,
Repent not Lady, you are but lovinglie
Betrayed, and it is my happiness, I should
Have pleaded at this bar, in this prevention
I am doubly blessed, be constant, and devide
With me both heart, and fortunes: thou must needs
Be excellently good in being her sister.

Ia. I must confess my Lord, I honor you.
But not for any titles, although some
Woman may be allowed the ambition,
But for your noble nature.

Lo. I am confirmed.

Sir W. But all is well again, and must exalt
Thy truer joys by finding us both live,
And knit into a peace no time can violate,

Lo. Let me salute The Example of chaste honor;
Sister I now must call thee, and shall glory
To own that title by Jacinthas love.

Sir W. La. All blessings crown your wishes.

Cap. I have a heart to wish you joys.

Lo. They will be all a debt
To your noble care of us, Master Confident.

Ia. One of my servants but not yet discharged.

Enter Confident. Lo. You come to turn and wind this Ladies fancy
With your wit now, but your devices fadge not,
It is three minutes since she was disposed of,
And though my stock of brain will not reach, to
Make a large jointure of so many hundred
Sonnets per annum, and rare Elegies,
Some fresh, and some that ha ^laine 7. years pickled,
In other languages: yet shee^le be content
With a less witty fortune, my estate sir.

Con. It Is happiness enough for me
To snuff your marriage Taper, whose bright shine
Shall put out the Worlds eye.

Lo. Spare, spare your fancies.
But I Will not now arraigne you, if you mean
To have me, know me again, chafer some wit
Away for honesty, I conceal your shame,

Co. There Is hope then of your pardon, when I rise
From what has iustiie forfeited my name,
To show the World your childing is not lost,
Your Lordship will not be ashamed again
To own me for your servant.

Lo. I shall be a glad witness and admirer.

How now, music? Music. Enter Dormant. Dor. Wilt please you gentlemen to
have a Song.
Sir Solitary, and my Lady are at it, he is grown
The most Joviall gentleman -- hark.

Song.
La. Pl. Welcome welcome, again to thy wits.
This is a holy day.

Sir Sol. I Will have no plotts, nor melancholy fitts
But merrily pass the time away:
They are mad, that are sad.

La. Pl. Be ruld by me;
And none shall be so merry as we.

Sir Sol. The kitchen shall catch cold no more.

La. I Will have no Key to the buttery door,

Sir. The Fiddlers shall sing,
The House shall ring,
And the World shall see.

Both. What a merry couple.
Merry couple.
Couple, couple,
we will be.



Enter sir Solitary, and his Lady. Sir. We are new married Gentlemen, I must
Invite your Lordship for my guest. Your Tunes
Are melancholy. Welcome home my wandering nephew;
You shall be welcome too, sir.

Cap. I Am your servant.

Sir. When shall we dance Jacintha?

Lo. Sure this humor
Is very young, pray Madam is he serious?
Is there no plott in this?

La. Pl. Beyond my hope
He is recovered sir, and I must stand to it,
And turn a miracle, a Lady huswife.

Sir Sol. No more, least with the joy I run into
A madness worse, then melancholy, you tell
Me wonders: bless my senses. And shall we dance?

Lo. I am for any mirth, the day requires it,
In which love too long blind has found his eyes,
And leads the way to his own Paradise.

FINIS.
Epilogue.
PRaise a fair day at night the Proverb says,
And it is the evening that must crown all Plays.
For although writers may be first allow^d,
To speak themselves, their judgments are too proud
That waving all authority beside
Think it is enough when they are satisfied,
We must appeal to you, unless you smile
We have but cherished vain hopes all this while,
But if you like, by this we shall best prove it,
You Will follow The Example, if you love it.
Imprimatur

October 19. 1637. Tho. Wykes.


