THE GAMESTER.

As IT WAS PRESENted by her Majesty's Servants At the private House in
Drury Lane.

Written By JAMES SHIRLY.

LONDON. Printed by JOHN NORTON, for ANDREW CROOK, and WILLIAM COOK. 1637.

THE GAMESTER.
Actus. I.
Enter Master Wilding; and Mistress Penelope. WIld. What need you be so coy now?

Pen. Pray collect
Your self, remember what you are, and whose
You have a virtuous gentlewoman, think
Upon your faith to her.

Wi. Think of a Fiddle-sticke.
While you put me in mind of what I am,
You quite forget your self: my wife I allow
Your kinswoman far off, to whom a widow
Your father left you, with a handsome fortune,
Which by her marriage, I have in possession,
And you too; therefore as you hope to be
In due time worth a husband, think upon it:
I can deserve respect, then wisely use me,
As you would keep me.

Pene. This is but a trial
Of my strength, for I know you have more charity,
(Should I consent) then Ship-wracke your own honor.
But take heed sir, how you proceed to jest
With frailty, least too much disordering
Your good thoughts, you forget and by degrees,
Loose your own innocence.

Wi. I jest? you would have me swear, and yet you should not think it such a
wonder: to love* come, shake off this frost, it spoils thee; your nature
should be soft, and flexible; perhaps thou think, I do not love thee
heartily, I know not how to give thee better testimony, then by offering my
self to thee if my wife-die, as tenn to one she is not immortal, we may
couple the other way.


Pene. What argument is this to assure the truth of your affection to me, that
break your vows to her?


Wi. Oh! great argument, and you observe: she was a widow when I married her,
thou art a young maid, and handsome.


Pene. Can you be so ungrateful, to punish whom you should reward, remember
sir, she brought you that wealth you have* took you from nothing --


Wi. There Is reason then for nothing I should love her: hang her estate, I was
held a proper man, and in that point, deserved her, and she had millions: and
I were free again. I would not draw in the teame of marriage for ten (...) not to
command a Province.


Pene. Yet you said, were your wife dead you would marry me.


Wi. Only thee, and no body else.


Pene. 'Twere dangerous to: have many.


Wi. To have one, is little less then madness; come, wo't promise? Enter
Mistress Wilding.


Pene. What?

Wi. A course, you know my meaning.

Mi. I do not like this whispering, why with her
So close in parley?

Wi. Wo't thou do this feate for me?
It Is finished in a pair of minutes.

Pene. Yes, upon one condition.

Wi. What condition?

Pe. That your wife give consent, you shall then command me.

Wi. I Will undertake to go a pilgrimage
To Jerusalem, and return sooner: wood
I did not love thee, love thee infinitely,
That Is all, 'two not do -- My wife, I hope. Exit Pene.
She has not cav's-dropd, us; what pity it is
She cannot find the way to Heaven; I should not
Trouble her in have, these wives will have no conscience,
But stick to us everlastingly. Now Lady,
How did your monkey rest last night, you look
As you had not done your prayers yet, I wonot disturb you.

Mi. Pray sir stay, let me but know
Some reason why you use me thus unkindly?
If I have been gilty of offense, I am not
Past hope, but with the knowledge of my error,
It Is possible I may amend, and please you.

Wi. I do not like you.

Mi. You did marry me.

Wi, Yes, I did marry you; here is too much record for it,
I would there were a Parson to unmarry us,
If any of our Clergy had* that faculty,
He might repair the old; and build as many
New Abbeyes through the Kingdom in a tweluemonth.
Shall I speak truth? I never much affected thee,
I married thee for thy souls sake, not thy body,
And shall as soon get children on it: and yet
I do not hate thee, witness, I dare kiss,
Hold thee by the hand, and sleep in the same house,
And in thy bed sometimes, something has been done.

Mi. Within the memory of man, but --
What sir?

Wi You have a scurvy quality wife, I told you on it.

Mi. Once more, and I Will correct it.

Wi. You are given to be jealous, I cannot
Ramble abroad in gentlemen's company
Whole days, ly out a nights, but you suspect
I am wanton, it is ill done, it becomes no modest
Woman: that loves her husband, to be jealous,
What e're she see, or hears, mend, mend this fault,
You do not know, how it may work upon me.
Some wife will bid her husbands leverets welcome,
Keep house together, and provide clean sheets,
And cullices to fortify; you near did it:
Know her own Chamber and not come forth*
Till she be sent for; if her husband kiss her,
Sometimes, allow her clothes and other trinkets,
Suffer her carve at Table, she is satisfied,
And none o'th parish talk, she carries it
So handsomely: these moralls I have read
Before now, but you put them not in practice,
Nor for ought I perceive, have disposition to it,
Therefore i will take my course.

Mi. To show I can
Be obedient to my griefs, from this time, sir,
I wonot urge with one unwelcome syllable,
How much I am neglected, i will conceal it
Too from the world, your shame must needs be mine.
I see you do not love me, where your heart
Has placed a worthier thought, let it dwell ever,
Freely pursue your pleasures, I will have
No passion that shall mutiny, you are,
And shall be Lord of me still.

Wi. I like this, if it be no disguise.

Mi. Do not suspect me,
I would swear by a kiss, if you vouchsafe it,
You shall not keep a servant, that shall be more humble*

Wi. And obedient to my will?

Mi. In all things.

Wi. But if I bring home a mistress?

Mi. I Will call her sister.

Wi. What if there be one
Already, that does please me, will you not
Repine, and look awry upon's, when we
Make much of one another?

Mi. So you will but sometimes smile on me too, i will endeavor.

Wi. Well said, this may do good upon me* as
I find you prompt in this, I may consider
Other matters: to tell you true, I love
Your kinswoman.

Mi. How?

Wi. In The way you wot on, but
I find her cold and peevish, how she may
Be brought about I know not, 'twould show well,
And be a president for other wives,
If you would put your help to it.

Mi. Goodness bless me.

Wi. One woman with another can do more
In such a cause, then twenty men. I do not
Wander, you see, out of the blood, this will
Be a way to justify your obedience.

Mi. You show a tyrant now, and stead of framing
My soul to patience, murder both. Exit.

Wi. I have gone too far a conscience; this may
Spoil all, and now I think upon it, I was
A coxcombe to discover any party,
I must deny't again, and carry things
More closely. How now Will? Enter Hazard.

Ha. How now Will? 's that all?
Look up, and ask me a question like a^ man,
What melancholy?

Wi. No, no; a toy, a trifle.

Ha. That should be a woman, who'st thou art thinking on?
I have been of your counsel.

Wi. I was thinking, of my Wife --

Ha. I met her sadd.

Wi. I cannot blame her;
We have had a dialogue; come, thou know my bosom,

Ha. when do mean to lie with her?

Wi. I know not, but I have offered fair conditions:
She is very confident, I do not dote
Upon her beauty, I have told her, sir,
I love her kinswoman.

Ha. You Are not so mad.

Wi. The worlds deceav'd in her, she will give me leave,
To ramble where I list, and feed upon
What best delights my appetite.

Ha. He that has
An ambition to be strangled in his sleep,
May tell his wife he loves another* woman.

Wi. But I was not content with this, because
The other wench was somewhat obstinate,
I must needs urge my wife, to mollify
And mold her, for my purpose.

Ha. And she consented too?

Wi. No 'twould not do.
This went against her stomach and we parted.

Ha. Next time you see her, look to be presented
With your mistresses nose for this, do think a woman
Can be so patient, to know her rival
In The same roof, and leave her eyes, to see thee
Again? I am sorry for thee.

Wi. I am confident
She dare not: but for all that, would I had
Been less particular.

Ha. Come, I love thee well,
But not thy wit, to carry things no handsomer:
You must unravell again, and make your wife
Believe you did but try her.
How now, what is the news here?

Enter Officers with Delamore wounded. 1 Off. Quickly to a Surgeon, bear him
gently.

Ha. What Is the business.

2 Off. Nothing, sir, but a gentleman is killed, and we are
Carrying him to a Surgeon.

Wi. It Is Jacke Delamore, he is not dead.

Ha. Who hurt him?

Ha. Master Beamont; we cannot stay, sir.

Wi. Why they were friends.

2 Off. But wine made them fall out, some say, about
Their Mistresses.

Wi. I did expect a woman at one end on it.
What miserable fools are men, to kill
One another for these Cockatrices!

Ha. I am sorry for poor Beamont.

Wi. It would be long ere any mistress would
Be so desperate for her servant, this is valur,
High and mighty valor.

Ha. Men must preserve
Their honors man, thou do not know their quarrel?

Wi. Thou art held a piece of a kill-Cow too, look to it before the sessions
take an order w'ee: is it not a great deal safer, now to skermish with a
Peticote, and touze a handsome wench in private; then be valiant in the
streets, and kiss the Gallows for it? hang, hang this foolerie, let gentlemen
rather live, and pay their Tailors, then let their clothes enrich the hangmans
wardrobe.


Ha. But skermishing as you call it, with the Peticote,
Is by some, held away to this preferment,
Your wenches (...) been sticklers, and some men
Dropped in their quarrel.

Wi. Let them be such coxcombs
They cannot die too soon; cannot I have
A Lady of pleasure, but to please her humor,
I must be engaged to fight and kill men for her?
Because her healths refused, another nose
Or teeth preferrd, substantial grounds for murder,
We spend our blood too much another way;
Consumption take me, if I fight for one on'em,
I will drink single beer first, and live honest,
Gentlemen are come to a fine pass, do not you
Think but it is possible, I may fight for all this?

Ha. There may be causes, that have women in'em,
But I confess, no polecats, or Iewd strumpets,
Though I do use the trick o'th flesh, shall drive
Me to the Surgeon; I had a mother.

Wi. And I have a wife, would thou had her.

Ha. No, No, she is well as she is,
There may be honor to defend these.

Wi. Sometimes.

Ha. But there is a mischief greater then all these
A base and sorded provocation,
Used among gentlemen, they cannot quarrel
About a glass of Wine, but our files streigth
Son of a whore, dead mothers must be torn,
Out of their graves, or living, have their names
Poisoned by a prodigious breath: it were
A brave and noble Law, to make this tongue
Be cut for it, it wod save much blood ith year,
That might be spent more honorably.

Wi. The lie grew a dull provocation, this has quickn'd us, but leave this
common place, thou can not help it, letts talk of something else. Stay is
not this Beaumont?


Enter Beaumont, and Officers. Ha. Apprehended, alas poor gentleman; how now
Ned?

Bea. As you see gentlemen, called to my account.

Wi. We heard a piece of the misfortune, but
Be not dejected, he may live.

Bea. I fear it.
Pray lead me where you please, alas. Violante! this news will wound thee too.
Exit.

Wi. I Will with him, and know the story.

Ha. Twill but trouble me
I can do him no service, beside that,
I am engaged to meet old Master Barnacle.
Enter Acre-lesse, Little-stocke, and Sell-away Whither, whither Gentlemen,
with your swords drawn?

Acr. Do not see a gentleman led to Prison?
We Will reskue him from the Offcers, come join with us:
We shall draw more to the cause.

Ha. You do not mean
this rashness: hide your swords be advised better;
Do You know his fact?

Lit. He has slain a gentleman.

Sell. They say he is not dead, the wounds not mortal.

Ha. And will you make one past cure?

Acr. How do mean?

Ha. Upon your selves, cool your hot bloods a little,
No mutuny my country men, remember,
If he recover that is hurt, the the other
Will come off well enough, without your volour:
Breath, breath a while, you may if you have a mind to it
Instead of reskuing, betray a gentleman,
And your selves too, to a danger.

Lit. He says right.

Ha. It Is scurvey wearing hemp, if you escape killing,
There be more butchers then sell flesh; and Citizens
Have no mercy in their Clubs, especially
When gentlemen have so little wit, to bring
There heads to the knocking down, it is a revenge
They owe you for their wives, oh take heed mainely
Of these left handed Halberdiers.

Acr. Confound 'em.

Ha. How many will you kill with your bird-spit?
You have more legs and arms at home, which makes
You valiant, i will not pare my nails to day,
And yet I love my friend, as the best on you;
You know I dare fight too, but in this cause
You must needs pardon me, I believe the stoutest
That now would seem all fire, and sword, will go
With as ill will to hanging, as another,
And will becom't as scurvily, take your courses.

Sell. I think it is better:

Ha. O'th two, to go to the Tavern, and be drunk
In your own defense, a wench is not so dangerous
Nor the Disease that waits upon her.

Acr. What if the gentleman that is hurt should die?
Then there is no hope for the other.

Ha. Less for you,
You would be guilty of his murder too,
And snatch him from the Law, why you may do it:
It Is pity but the government should thank you,
And if you escape the halter for it, it may be
Another man in time, may cut your throat,
And there is one for another, paid in the blood.
Come be your selves, these are not acts of gentlemen,
Where shame, not honor must reward your daring,
Though we be wild, it follows not we should
Be mad outright.

Lit. I was ever of his mind.

Acr. Come lett's to Tavern.

Ha. I am for that coast, now I think upon it
I Will meet you at the new randevow within
This halfe-houre, I expect a gentleman
That has engaged my promise; i will come to you
Ere you be half drunk.

Sell. Do not fail.

Ha. Drink Sack and think not on it, what should be
The business that old Barnacle has desired
My conference? it is not to lend me money sure,
He Is here.

Enter Master Barnacle. Bar. Master Hazard.

Ha. I was coming to you, sir.

Bar. I am fortunate to prevent so great a trouble,
There is a business, sir, wherein I must desire your favor.

Ha. Mine? command it, sir.

Bar. Nay i will be thankful too, I know you are
A gentleman.

Ha. That should incline, you think
I am not mercenarie

Ba. I beseech you, sir,
Mistake me not, rewards are due to virtues,
And honor must be cherished.

Ha. What Is your purpose?
Pray clear my understanding.

Ba. To be plain, sir,
You have a name in the Town for a brave fellow.

Ha. How, sir, you do not come to jeere me?

Ba. Patience, I mean you have the opinion
Of a valiant gentleman, one that dares
Fight and maintain your honor against odds,
The swordmen do acknowledge you, the baylies
Observe their distance, all the swaggering pusses
Strike their top-sailes, I have heard 'em in the streets
Say there goes daring Hazard, a man careless
Of wounds, and though he have not had the luck
To kill so many as another, dares
Fight with all them that have.

Ha. You have heard this.

Ba. And more, and more, mistake not.
I do not all this while acompt you in
The list of those are called the blades, that roar
In brothells, and break windows, fright the streets
At midnight worse then Constables, and sometimes
Set upon innocent Bell-men, to beget
Discourse for a weeks diet, that swear, dammes,
To pay their debts, and march like walking armories,
With Poyniard, Pistol, Rapier, and Batoone,
As they would murder all the Kings liege people,
And blow down streets; no I repute you valiant
Indeed, and honored, and come now without
More ceremony, to desire your favor;
Which as you are a gentleman, I hope,
You Will not deny me.

Ha. Though your Language
Be something strange, yet, bcause I think you dare not
Intend me an abuse, I wonot question it,
Pray to the point, I do not think, your come
To have me be your second.

Bar I am no fighter,
Though I have seen a fence-schoole in my Days,
And cracked a Cudgel, yet I come about
A fighting business.

Ha. You would have me beat some body for you.

Bar. Not so noble Hazard, yet
I come to entreat a valiant courtesy,
Which I am willing to requit in money,
I have brought gold to give you payment, sir,
It Is a thing you may easily consent to,
And 'twill oblige me ever.

Ha. Be particular.

Bar. Then thus you are not ignorant I have a Nephew, sir.

Ha. You have so.

Bar. One that is like
To be my heir, the only of my name
That Is left, and one that may in time be made
A pretty fellow.

Ha. Very well, proceed.

Ba. You know or you imagine, that I have.
A pretty estate too.

Ha. You Are held a maine rich man, sir,
In money able to weigh down an Alderman.

Ba. I have more then I shall spend; now I come close,
I would have this Nephew of mine, converse with gentlemen,

Ha. And he does so.

Ba. I Will not pinch him in's allowance,
The University had almost spoild him.

Ha. With what?

Ba. With modesty a thing you know
Not here in fashion, but that is almost cured,
I would allow him to be drunk.

Ha. You may, sir.

Ba. Or any thing to speak him a fine gentleman,

Ha. With your favor, sir, let me be bold a little
To interrupt you, were not you a Citizen?

Ba. It Is confessed, sir.

Ha. It being a thriving way
A walk wherein you might direct your Nephew,
Why do you not breed him so?

Ba. I apprehend;
And thus I satisfy you, we that had
Our breeding from a Trade, cits as you call us,
Though we hate gentlemen our selves, yet are
Ambitious, to make all our children gentlemen,
In three generations they return again,
We for our children purchase Land, they brave it
In The Country, begets children, and they sell,
Grow poor, and send their sons up to be Prentises:
There is a whirle in fate, the Courtiers make
Us cuckolds; mark, we wriggle into their
Estates, poverty makes their children Citizens;
Our sons cuckold them, a circular justice,
The World turns round, but once more to the purpose.

Ha. To your Nephew.

Ba. This Nephew of mine, I do love deerly;
He is all my care, I would be loath to loose him,
And to preserve him both in life, and honor:
I come to you.

Ha. Now you come to me indeed, sir.

Bar. What shall I give you, sir, to let him --

Ha. What?

Bar. Pray be not angry.

Ha. By no means.

Bar. There is no such security in the World,
I Will pay for it heartily.

Ha. For what?

Ba. What shall I give you troth, and let him.

Ha. What?

Bar. Beat you, sir?

Acr. How?

Ba. Nay do not, sir, mistake me, for although
I name it, caursely I desire it should be
With your consent, no otherwise; my Nephew
Is raw, and wants opinion, and the talk
Of such a thing, to beat a gentleman,
That all the Towns afraid of, would be worth
In's credit, heaven knows what, alas you cannot
Blame a kind Uncle, to desire all means
To get his Nephew fame, and keep him safe,
And this were such a way.

Ha. To have me beaten.

Ba. You Are in the right, but do not misconceive me*
Under your favor, my intention is not
He should much hurt you, if you please to let him
Quarrel, or so at Tavern, or where else
You shall think fit, and throw a pottle-pot --

Ha. At my head.

Ba. Yes, or say it be a quart, still under your correction,
Only that some of your acquaintance and
Gentlemen may take notice, that he dares
Affront you, and come off with honor handsomelie,
Look here is a hundred pieces, tell, 'em in the Ordinary
They Are weight upon my credit, play 'em not
Against light gold, this is the Prologue to
My thanks, beside my Nephew shall in private
Acknowledge himself beholding.

Ha. A hundred p^eces! I want money.

Bar. Right.

Ha. You give me this to let your Nephew beat me.

Bar. Pray take me w'ee, I do not mean he should
By beating, hurt you dangerously, you may
Contrive the quarrel, so that he may draw
Some blood, or knock you, over the pate, and so forth,
And come of bravely, this is all.

Ha. Well, sir,
You do not mean, you say he should endanger
My life or limbs; all you desire, if I
Mistake not, is to get your Nephew credit,
That being fleshed, he may walk securely, and be held
Valiant by gayning honor upon me.

Bar. You understand me right.

Ha. I Will put it up,
Pray send your Nephew to me, we will agree.

Bar. Agree, sir? you must quarrel, and he must beat you, else, it is no
bargain.


Ha. Not before
We have concluded how things shall be carried.

Ba. I must desire your secrecy and --

Ha. Here Is my hand.

Bar. And there is my money.

Ha. Your Nephew shall be a blade.

Ba. Why there is ten pieces more, cause you come off
So freely, i will send him to you.

Ha. Do so, why this, if the Dice favor me may bring all
My Lands again, be sure you send him, but
No words for your Nephews credit.

Ba. Mum -- I thank you heartily. Exit.

Ha. Be there such things in the World, i will first to the Tavern,
There I am staid for, gentlemen I come,
I Will be beat every day for such a sum. Eixt.

Act. II.
Enter Mistress Wilding, and the Page. Mi. Where Is your Master, boy?

Page I know not Mistress.

Mi. Come nearer, sir, you are of your Masters
Counsel sometimes, come, be true in what
I shall desire, and I shall find a time, for your reward.

Pa. How do you mean Mistress?
We Pages meet rewards of several natures,
This great man gives us Gold, that Lady Gloves,
The Other silk Stockins, Roses, Garters: but
The Lady, and Mistress whom we serve in ordinary,
Reserves another bounty, for our closeness.

Mi. I see you can be a wag, but be just to me, and secret.

Pa. As your Physician, or your looking-lasse;
That in your absence cannot be corrupted
To betraie your complexion.

Mi. What private mistresses, does Master Wilding visit?

Pa. Who my Master?
Alas forsooth, do you think he lets me know?

Mi. Nay, nay dissemble not.

Pa. I hire a Coach
Sometimes, or so, but ride always in the boot,
I look at no body but the passengers,
I do not sit in the same box at Plays with him.
I wait at Tavern, I confess, and so forth,
And when he has supped, we must have time to eat too,
And what should I trouble my conscience,
With being too officious, till I am called for?
It Is true, he waits upon the Ladies home,
But it is so dark, I know not where they dwell,
And the next day we have new ones, las mere strangers
To me, and I should be unmannerlie
To Catechize 'em, if now, and then, there be
Any super^^uous cast waiting woman,
There be so many serving men about her,
I cannot come to ask a question,
And how should I know any thing?

Mi. I see you are old enough for vice.

Pa. Alas forsooth,
You know it is ill to do a thing that is wicked,
But 'twere a double sin to talk on it too,
If I were guilty; beside forsooth, I know
You would near trust me again, If I should tell you.

Mi. Thou art deceav'd, it shall endeare thee more.

Pa. I must beseech you
To be excused, my Master is my Master,
My feet are at your service, not my tongue,
I would not forfet my recognizance,
And shame the tribe, Pages, and Mid-wives are
Sworn to be close.

Mi. Hence thou old in vilanie,
But it is in vain to chide, leave me, and bid
Mistress Penelope come hither.

Pa. Yes forsooth.

Mi. I know not which way to begin, to me
He has betrayed he loves her, she is present.

Enter Penelope. Pene. Will you be sad still Cozen, why do you greeve?
Be kinder to your self, trust me, I weep
When I am alone, for you.

Mi. Sorrow and I
Are taking leave I hope, and these are only
Some drops after the cloud has wept his violence:
Were one thing finished, I should nere be sad more,
And I cannot despair to know it done,
Since the effect depends upon your love.

Pene. My love? it is justice you command my service,
I would I were so happy.

Mi. Make me so,
By your consent to my desire.

Pene. Pray name it.

Mi. I only ask your love, pray give it me.

Pene. My love? why do you mock my poor heart, which Poures all it has upon
you? you are possessed of that already.


Mi. You examine not
The extent of my request, for when you have
Given what I ask, your love, you must no more
Direct it, as you please, the power's in me
How to dispose it.

Pen. And you shall for ever,
I have no passion that shall not know obedience to you.

Mi. Your love by gift
Made mine, I give my husband you, love him.

Pene. I always did.

Mi. But in a nearer way:
Love him as I do, with a resolution
To give your self to him, if he desire it.

Pene. I understand you not, or if you do
Suspect I cherish any lawless fame --

Mi. Thou art to innocent; be less, and do
An act to endeare us both, I know he loves thee;
Meet it, dear coose, it is all I beg of thee;
I know you think it a most strange request,
But it will make fortunate.

Pene. Grief I fear
Has made her wild, do you know what you desire?

Mi. Yes, that you love my husband: modesty
Will not allow me to discourse my wish
In every circumstance, but think how desperate
My wound is, that would have so strange a cure,
He Will love me then, and trust me i will not study
Revenge, as other wives perhaps would do,
But thank thee, and indeed an act like this;
So full of love, with so much loss and shame too,
For mine and his sake, will deserve all duty,

Pene. I have no patience to hear more, and could
I let in a thought, you meant this earnest,
I should forget I knew you; but you cannot
Be fallen from so much goodness, I confess
I have no confidence in your husbands virtue,
He has attempted me; but shall hope sooner
To leave a stain upon the sun, then bribe
Me to so foul a guilt; I have no life
Without my innocence, and you cannot make
Your self more miserable, then to wish it from me:
Oh, do not loose the merit of your faith,
And truth to him, though he forget himself,
By thinking to releeve your self thus sinfullie,
But sure you do but try me all this while.

Mi. And I have found thee pure, be still preserved so,
But he will stragle further --

Pene. Cherish hope,
He rather will come back; your tears, and prayers
Cannot be lost.

Mi. I charge thee by thy love,
Yet be ruld by me; i will not be so wicked
To tempt thee in a thought shall blemish thee:
But as thou would desire my peace, and his
Conversion, if his wantonness last with him,
Appear more tractable, allow him so much
Favor, in smile, or language, that he may not
Think it impossible to prevail at last.

Pene. This may engage him further, and my self to a dishonor.

Mi. It shall work our happiness,
As I will manage things; it is but to seem:
A look will cost thee nothing, nor a syllable
To make his hopes more pleasing, on my life
Thou shall be safe both in thy fame, and person,
Will you do this for my sake?

Pene. I Will refuse no danger, if I suffer not in honor,
To do you any service.

Mi. I have cast it
Already, in my brain, but do not yet
Inquire my purpose, as his folly leads
Him to pursue you, let me know, and i will
By fair degrees acquaint you with my plot,
Which built on no foul ends, is like to prosper,
And see how aptly he presents himself,
Preethee seem kind, and leave the rest to me.
He shall not see me. Exit.

Enter Master Wilding. Wi. How now cooze? was that
My wife went off?

Pene. Yes, sir.

Wi. Let her go, what said she to thee?

Pene. Nothing.

Wi. Thou art troubled.

Pene. Pray to your knowledge, sir, wherein have I
Done injury to you, or her?

Wi. Has she abused thee?
I Will go kick her.

Pene. By no means, sir, I steal away your heart,
And meet at stolen embraces.

Wi. Does she twit thee? i will kick her like a football,
Say but the word.

Pene. By no means think upon it, I have forgiven her,
You shanot sir, so much as frown upon her.
Pray do not as you love me,
We may study a more convenient revenge.

Wi. How Is this?
I preethee if she have been peremptory,
Which was none of our articles, let me instruct thee,
How we shall be revenged.

Pene. Sir, I acknowledge
The groth and expectation of my fortune,
Is in your love, and though I wod not wrong her;
And yet to have my innocence accused
Is able to pervert it, sir, your pardon,
I have been passionate; pray love your wife,

Wi. No, no, i will love thee, indeed, indeed I will,
Is she jealous?

Pene. You know she has no cause.

Wi. Let us be wise; and give her cause, shall's coose,

Pene. Sir, if it be a trouble to your House,
Your breath shall soon discharge me, I had thought
The tie of blood might have gained some respect.

Wi. Discharge thee the house? i will discharge her,
And all her generation, thee excepted,
And thou shallt do it thy self, by this, thou shat;
Ha, she kisses with more freedom, this is better,
Then if my wife had pleaded for me, Pen,
Thou shall be mistress, woot? come thou shall,
She Is fit for drudgerie.

Pene. Oh, do not say so.

Wi. Then I wonot, but I love thee for thy spirit,
Cause thou woot be revenged, punish her jealozie
The right way, when it is done, I do not care
To tell her, it may kick up her heels too, another way.

Pene. Tell her what? you make me blush.

Wi. No, no, i will tell no body, by this hand.
Stay I have a Diamond will become this finger,
Wear it, and let my wife stare out her eyes upon it.

Pene. I wonot take it on such conditions.

Wi. Take it on any; she is come about.

Enter Page. Pa. Sir Master Hazard desires your company at Tavern, he says
there are none but gentlemen of your acquaintance, Master Acre-lesse, Master
Little-stocke, and Master Sell-away, the three Gamesters.


Wi. He must excuse me.

Pene. As you love me, go, sir.
Have no suspicion that I wish your absence,
I Will wear your gift, and study to be thankful. Exit.

Wi. Well, there is no great hurt in all this yet;
The Tides not strong against me, no talk now,
Of wives consent, i will not remove my seige,
She Will study to be thankful, she is mine own,
As sure as I were in her maidenhead,
Now to the Tavern boy, and drink to the purpose. Exeunt.

Enter Hazard, Acre-lesse Little-stocke, Sell-away, as in a Tavern. Drawers.
Ha. More wine, is not this better gentlemen,
Then spitting Constables? you wod have fought now,
And had your braine-pannes opened

Acr. Right noble Hazard,
Here Is to thee.

Ha. Let come boy, fill it me steeple-high,
I am in vain of mirth, and I ha cause
As you shall see in due time gentlemen.
Master Little stock thou art dreaming o'th Dice.

Sell. He Is melancholy.

Lit. Who I!

Ha. I Will play the farrier then, and drench thee for the sullens* a health to
all our Mistresses, we have had 'em single, letts shuffle 'em now together.

Master Acre-lesse.


Enter Fiddler. Fi. Wilt please you Gentlemen to have a Song.

Ha. You have not washed to day, go get clean manners;
You rascal we have no wenches.

Fi. I see no body, sir, you have washed my eyes out.

Ha. It is not necessary thou should have any:
Fill me again.

Acr, This fellow wod ha the other Cup.

Fi. I have had a Cup too much already gentlemen. Exit.

Ha. Let it go round, and then in hope you may
Look double, i will show you a sight, I wonder
Jacke wilding Stays.
Enter Master Wilding, and Page. He Is come in the nicke.

Wi. Save, save you gallants, may a man come in the reere?

Ha. Give him his garnish.

Wi. You Are not Prisoners for the reckning, I hope.

Ha. For the reckning? now you are altogether gentlemen,
I Will show you a wonder* but come not to near,
Keep out o'th Circle, whatsoever you think on it,
This is a hundred pound, nay, not so close,
These Picturs do show best at distance, gentlemen.
You see it, presto --

Wi. Nay lett's see it again.

Ha. Like to your cunning jugler, I never show
My trick but once you may hear more hereafter,
What think you of this Master Acre-lesse, Master Little-stocke,
And Master Sell-away?

Acr. We do not believe it is gold,

Ha. Perish then
In your infidelity.

Wi. Let me but touch it.

Ha. It will endure, take my word for it, why look you,
For your satisfactions, no Gloves off,
You have devices to defalke, preserve
Your talons, and your talents, till you meet
With more convenient Gamesters.

Lit. How came by it?

Wi. Tha'dst little or none this morning.

Ha. I have bought it gentlemen, and you in a mist
Shall see what I paid for it, thou have not drunk yet:
Nere fear the reckning man, more wine, you varletts,
And call your Mistress, your Scolopendia
If we like her complexion, we may dine here.

Wi. But hark thee, hark thee Will, did win it?

Ha. No, but I may loose it ere I go to bed,
Do think it shall mustie, what is a hundred pound?

Sell, A miracle, but they are ceast with me.

Acr. And me too, come lett's drink.

Wi. No matter, how it came Will, I congratulate
Thy fortune, and will quit thee now
With good news of my self, my coose I told thee on,
Is wheeled about, she has took a Ring of me,
We kissed, and talked, time out a mind.

Ha. I know it,
My Almanacke says it is a good day to woo in,
Confirmed by Erra Pater, that honest Jew too,
I Will pledge thee.

Enter Drawer. Dr. Master Hazard there are two gentlemen below,
Inquire for you.

Ha. For me?

Da. One's somewhat ancient, I heard him call
The the other Nephew.

Ha. Say I come to 'em presently,
Gentlemen, I do caution you before
To be fair conditiond: one of them, the Nephew
Is of a fiery constitution,
And sensible of any affront, let this
Character prepare him for you.

Wi. Bring him not hither.

Ha. There is a necessity in it, I wod not for
A hundred pound but entertain him, now
He knows I am here. Exit.

Enter Master Hazard again, with Barnacle, his Nephew, and Dwindle. Wi. This
is old Barnacle.

Acr. One that is to fine for Alderman.

Lit. And that is his Nephew, I have been in's company,

Sell. Is this the youth Hazard prepared us for?
How bussie they are?

Ha. You could not wish better opportunity,
These are all gentlemen of quality,
I Will call him cozen first, if it please you,
To endeare him to their acquaintance.

Bar. I Will not be a witness of your passages my self; these will report as
much as I desire, sir, if you be beaten I am satisfied.


Ne. But do you hear Uncle, are sure you have made
Your bargain wisely; they may cut my throat
When you are gone, and what are you the wiser,
Dwindle be you close to me.

Ha. I warrant you we shall do things with discretion,
If he have but grace, to look and talk courageously.

Bar. He may be valiant for ought I know,
Howsoever this will be a secure way
To have him thought so, if he beat you soundly.

Ne. I do not like the company;
But I have drunk wine too, and that is the best on it,
We may quarrel on even Terms, look to
Thy basket-hilt Dwindle, and have a stool ready;

Dw. I will give your worship a stool.

Ha. As I am gentleman, be confident
I Will wait on you down, sir.

Bar. By no means, let him beat you to purpose, sir.

Ne. Buy Uncle. Exit.

Ha. Come, sir, pray gentlemen, bid my kinsman welcome: a spark that will
deserve your knowledge.


Wi. His kinsman? you are welcome.

Acr. He has power to command your welcome.

Lit. If I mistake not, I have had the happiness
To ha been in your company before now.

Ne. Mine, sir? do you hear, what if I quarreled
With him first? 'twill prepare me the better.

Ha. Do as you please; that is without my conditions.

Ne. I Will but give him now and then a touch, i will close
Well enough I warrant you, you been in my
Company, sir?

Lit. Yes, and at the Tavern.

Ne. I paid the reckning then.

Lit. You came into our room --

Ne. Tell me of coming into your room,
I Will come again, you are a superfluous gentleman,

Will. How Is this?

Ha. Let him alone.

Lit. Sir, remember your self.

Ne. I Will remember what I please, i will forget what
I remember: tell me of a reckning, what is it?
I Will pay't, no man shall make an ass of me,
Further then I list my self, I care not a fiddle-
Stick for any man's thundering, he that affronts
Me, is the son of a Worm, and his father a
Whore, I care not a straw, nor a broken point
For you, if any man dare drink to me; I
Wonot go behind the door to pledge him.

Acr. Why here is to you, sir,

Ne. Why there is to you, sir.
Twit me with coming into a Room, I could -- find in my heart, to throw a
Pottle-pot, I name no body, I will kick any man down Stayres, that cannot
behave himself like a gentleman, none but a slave would offer to pay a
reckning before me, where is the Drawer? there is a piece at all adventures; he
that is my friend, I cars not a rush, if any man be my enemy, he is an idle
companion, and I honor him with all my heart.


Wi. This is a precious humor, is he used to these mistakes?

Lit. Your kinsman gives him privilege.

Ne. I desire no man's privilege, it skills not whether I be kin to any man
living.


Ha. Nay, nay, cozen, pray let me persuade you.


Ne. You persuade me? for what acquaintance, mind your business and speak with
your Tailor.


Ha. And you be thus rude --


Ne. Rude, sir, what then, sir, hold me Dwindle.


Dw. Are you ready to have a stool, sir?


Wi. Nay, nay, Will, we bear with him for your sake,
He is your kinsman.

Ha. I am calm again,
Cozen, I am sorry any person here
Has given you offense.

Ne. Perhapps, sir, you
Have given me offense, I do not fear you,
I have knocked as round a fellow in my days.

Ha. And may* again --

Wi. Be knocked, a pox upon him, I know not what to make on him.


Ha. Let me speak a word in private, sir.

Ne. I can be as private as you, sir.

Ha. Strike me a box o'th ear presently.

Ne. There Is my hand on it.

Wi. Nay, nay, gentlemen.

Acr. Master Wilding.

Ne. Let him call me to account, the recknings paid.
Come Dwindle. Exit.

Sell. I did not think the fool durst ha done this,
It Is a strange youth.

Ha. You shall hear more to morrow.

Dr. All Is paid, and you are welcome gentlemen. Exeunt.

Enter Leonara, Violante. Leo. Why should not we two live together, being
So equal in our passions? oh Violante,
Our knowledge grew from children, and our loves
Allie us in our natures.

Vio. It Is* my wish
To dwell with thee, I never knew that woman
In whom I took more pleasure to converse with,

Leo. But I have a father, and remembering him
A sorrow steals upon me, to betraie
My hopes of blessing; for although he love me,
And dearly as he says, for Children must not
Dispute with fathers, he affects not him
In whom I place all thoughts that can delight me,
He loves not Delamore, and what to me
Is all the World without him? I shall never
I fear, have his consent to be made happy
In marriage, and this, although our thoughts
Reflect with equal honor on our lovers,
Makes the distinction, and concludes me miserable,
Thy will depends upon no riged parent,
Thy path is strewn with Roses, while I clime
A ragged cliffe, to meet whom I affect.

Vio. Indeed, Leonara I much pity thee.

Leo, I prithee counsel me how shall I wrestle
With my sad destiny, and yet preserve
My filial obedience, I must loose
A father, or a husband.

Vio. Would I knew
Which way to bid thee steer, but lesson'd by
My own affection, I would have thy mind
Constant to him thou loust, time may correct
A fathers harshnes, and be confident
If poor Violante have a power to serve thee,
She will forget her own heart, ere prove false to thee.

Leo. Oh my dear soul, I know it.

Enter Servant. Ser. Oh mistress.

Leo. What Is the matter!

Vio. This face betraies some miserable accident.

Leo. Speak, and assure us, what disaster makes
Thy countenance so wild.

Ser. A friend of yours --

Leo. Is sick, is dead, what more? and yet I have
So few, I can spare none.

Ser. Is dead, sinee you appear so fortified.

Leo. Is my father living, and Delamore?

Ser. Your father is in health, but --

Leo. Stay, as thou would preserve thy mistress in
The number of the living.

Vio. How my fears increase!

Leo. Except Violante, whom I see
Enjoyes her health, I have no friend but Delamore,
I hope he is not dead.

Ser. Your Delamore is dead. She faints.

Vi. Friend, Leonora,
'Twas indiscreetlie done to open sorrow
So like a torrent, Leonora; friend.

Leo. Why do thou call me from him? sure I was
Going to meet my Delamore.

Vi. Give not such
Belief to these sad news, until you hear it
Confirmed, did see him dead?

Ser. I did not see him.

Vi. Have comfort then, this may
Be checked again.

Leo. Would I could hope it.

Vio. Have more courage friend,
Did hear the circumstance?

Ser. He was slain they say.

Vio. Nay then believe it not, he was so innocent,
He could provoke no angry sword against him.

Ser. I wish your confidence were not deceav'd,
The last part of my story will concern
Your faith, and sorrow.

Vio. Mine? in her I share
Too much, but prithee since thou have not been
Slow to wound her, let me know my affliction.

Ser. The general voice is, Master Beaumont slew him,
Your servant Lady.

Vio. Tell the general voice
It lies, my Beaumont prove a murderer?
And of his friend? he would not kill an enemy.

Ser. All I can say in proof of this, I saw him
Guarded to Prison, pardon my relation.

Vio. If thou beleevest thy eyes abused thee not,
Thou might with one breath spoken 'em both dead,
For the survivor lives, but to give up
His life with more shame, all my comfort is,
I shall not live to see it, oh Leonora,
Who is most wretched now? let thou, and I,
The few days that we have to live, be friends,
And die in perfect charity, I must leave you
To manage your own grief, I have enough
To break my poor heart too. Exit.

Leo. What Seas breake-in
Upon us? I that could have dyed within
A gentle wave, now struggle for my life,
My father?

Enter Sr. Richard Hurry. Hu. What, it seems you heard the news,
Come let your sorrows dry up, you may see
What it is to be so rash, when you choose next,
You Will consult me, I hope; wipe, wipe your eyes,
Your tears are vain, I could say more.

Leo. What sir?

Hu. They are more then he deserved, and yet it is better
Thou should bestow thy tears upon his Funeral,
Then I sighed at thy marriage; come, Heaven has
Been kind in this divorce, preparing thus
Thy better fortune, and preserving mine,
I am sorry for the gentleman that killed him.

Leo. Oh Murderer.

Hu. You are a fool, and know not
His provocation: in my youthful days,
I was not patient when affronts were offered me,
Nothing more dear to gentlemen, then honor.

Leo. Honor in murder?

Hu. This was otherwise:
In my own defense I would kill a family,
He showed his generous spirit, all the town
Speaks nobly of him, pity him, and pray for him,
And were he not desertfull, by this time
The general vote had hanged him.

Leo. Oh, my fate!

Hu. The Other a loose, and inconsiderate man,
Lost in estate, and would ha married thee,
To ha squees'd mine, it is better as it is.

Leo. Good sir, be charitable to the dead.

Hu. Be you first charitable to the living.
Speak well, and think so too, you do not know
What benefit may follow, and how ere
Your womanish sorrow for the present may
So mist your eyes, they will hereafter open,
To see, and thank my care.

Leo. Indeed your language,
Pardon my boldness, sir, is dark and mystical.

Hu. You have your wit to apprehend sometimes,
But it is not passion must excuse your duty to me.

Leo. I hope.

Hu. Your hopes may fail you if you do,
Be obedient hereafter, if you please,
And love my directions

Leo. I Will not have
A thought shall disobey you, and if ever
I love again.

Hu. If ever? why suppose
I should propound one to you, now in the heat
Of this misfortune, can your heart be obstinate
To me, and your own good?

Leo. This is too soon
A conscience, sir, before his blood be cold,
To whom I professed love, to like another?
The World would much condemn me.

Hu. Is the World
Or I to be preferred, this makes the act
Of your obedience perfect, and because
I Will have assurance of what power I hold,
This minute i will prefer one to your thoughts,
Dispose your heart to love the gentleman
That now is in Prison.

Leo. Whom do you mean dear sir?

Hu. He that killed Delamore, Master Beaumont:
Do not suspect I trifle, he is of
A noble house, of a fair expectation,
Handsome in every part.

Leo. Shall not he suffer
For the black deed already done?

Hu. Compose
Your self to love him, i will find a way how to
Secure his life, and bring him freely off.

Leo. Oh! consider ere you move to far;
If having slain my comfort, for I must
Give it no other name, call not your justice
To my revenge, yet let me not be forced,
To have a thought so full of shame to women,
That he should be my husband, it is a stain
Time nor repentance can wash off, I know
You cannot mean so cruelly, beside
I shall commit a sin, foul as his murder,
Upon poor Violante, and rob her:
Their heart's love has sealed up in the eye of Heaven,
'Twere sacrilege to part em, she is my friend too,
One that will rather die then injure me.
And he will rather suffer, if he be
Noble as you profess him, then consent to
So foul a guilt.

Hu. Let me alone for that,
If he refuse this offer for his life,
Why let him die, i will put him to it, consider,
In this I shall behold thy naked soul,
Be ruled, and prosper; disobey, and be
Thrown from my care and blood, at better leisure
I Will tell you more. Exit.

Leo. Has Heaven no pity for me?
What killing language does a father speak?
Poor heart prevent more grief, and quickly break. Exit.

Act. III.
Enter Master Wilding, and Penelope. Wi. This humor does become thee, I knew
when
Thou did consider, what was offered thee;
Thy sullennes wood shake off, now thou look
Fresher then morning, in thy melancholy
Thy clothes became thee not.

Pene. You Are in the right,
I blamed my Tailor for it, but I find now,
The fault was in my countenance, would we had
Some Music, I could dance now, la, la, la, bra, etc,

Wi. Excellent! and she be a bed but half so nimble,
I shall have a fine time on it; how she glides?
Thou wot not fail?

Pen. This night --

Wi. At the hour of twelve.

Pene. But you must be as punctual ith conditions
For my vows sake, not speak a syllable.

Wi. I Will rather cut my tongue out then offend thee,
Kissing is no language.

Pene. If it be not to loud;
We must not be seen together, to avoid
Suspicion, I would not for a world my cozen
Should know on it.

Wi. She shall die in ignorance.

Pene. No piece of a Candle.

Wi. The Devil shall not see us
With his sawcer eyes; and if he stumble in
The dark, there shanot be a stone ith Chamber,
To strike out fire with his horns; all things shall be
So close; no lightning shall peep in upon us,
Oh, how I long for midnight!

Pene. I have a scruple.

Wi. Oh, by no means, no scruples now.

Pene. When you
Have your desires upon me, you will soon
Grow cold in your affection, and neglect me.

Wi. Why hang me if I do, i will love thee ever:
I have cast already, to preserve thy honor,
Thou shall be married in a fortnight, cooze,
Let me alone to find thee out a husband,
Handsome and fit enough, we will love then too.

Pene. When I am married?

Wi. Without fear or wit
Cum privilegio, when thou have a husband,
Do think I will forsake thee Pen? 'twere pity
A my life, sweet, oh there is no pleasure
To those embraces; I shall love thee better,
And the assurance that thou have two fathers
Before thou have a child, will make thee spring
More active in my arms, and I tell thee,
It Is my ambition to make a Cuckold,
The only pleasure o'th World: I wod not
Wish to enjoy thee now, but in the hope
Of the other harvest, and to make thy husband
Hereafter cuckold, that imagination
Sweetness the rest, and I do love it mainely, mainely.

Pene. It Is double sin.

Wi. It Is treble pleasure wench;
But we loose time, and may endanger thus
My wife into a jealozie, if she see us,
Farewell, farewell dear Pen. at night remember,
I wonot loose my sport for half the country. Exit.

Enter Mistress Wilding. Mi. Wi. Thou have hit my instructions excellently.

Pene. I have made work for some body, you have put me
Upon a desperate service, if you do not
Releeve me, I am finely served.

Mi. All has succeeded to my wish, thy place
I will supply to night, if he observe
All the conditions, I may deceive
My husband into kindness; and we both
Live to reward thee better, oh, dear cooze!
Take heed by my example, upon whom
Thou placest thy affection.

Enter Hazard. Pene. Master Hazard.

Ha Save mistress Wilding.

Mi. Wi. You are welcome, sir.

Pene. He is a handsome gentleman.

Ha. Gone abroad?

Mi. I am not certain, i will inquire.

Ha. Your servant
Ha! this is the frostie gentlewoman, in good time,
I care not if I cast away some words on her,
And yet she is so precise, and over honest,
I had as good nere atempt her, your name is
Penelope, I take it Lady.

Pene. If you take it,
I hope you will give it me again.

Ha. What again?

Pene. My name.

Ha. What should I do wot?
No, no, keep thy name,
How ere thou do thy maidenhead.

Pene. Can you tell me
Of any honest man that I may trust with it?

Ha. I Will tell thee a hundred.

Pene. Take heed what you say, sir.
A hundred honest men, why if there were
So many in the City, 'twere enough to forfeit
Their Charter; but perhaps you live in the Suburbs.

Ha. This wench will jeere me.

Pene. I hope you are not one, sir.

Ha, One of what?

Pene. One of those honest men you talked of so,
One to whose trust, a Virgin might commit
A maidenhead, as you call it.

Ha. Yes, you may trust me,
I have possessed a hundred maiden-heads.

Pene. How long?

Ha. Nay, nay; they are no commodities to keep,
Noe fault of ours: truth is, they are not worth
Preserving, some of your own Sex acknowledge it,
And yet by your complexion, you have yours still,
Away with it, and in time.

Pene. Why you are modest.

Ha. Yave hit me Lady: come, i will give thee counsel;
And more, i will help thee to a chap-man too,
Besides what ere he paies for it, shall be at charge
To mold it of himself; how light thou 'lt be
Without thy maidenhead, do not spoil thy sleep
And breed the nightmare?

Pene. Who can help it, you
Gentlemen are such strange creatures, so unnatural,
So infinitilie chaste, so mortified
With Beef and Barly-water, such strange discipline,
And Haire-cloth.

Ha. Who wears Haire-cloth? gentlewoman?

Pene. Such severe ways to tame your flesh, such friends
To fry-dayes, Lent, and Ember-weekes; such enemies
To Sack, and marrow-Pies, Candles, and Crabs,
Fiddlers, and other warm restoratives,
A handsome woman can not reach your pity,
We may even grow to our Pillowes, ere you will comfort us; this was not wont.


Ha. Not wont to be, in my
Remembrance Lady.

Pene. You are a handsome gentleman
Why may not you drink Wine sometimes, or eat
Sturgion, or forage in your Iustie-pie
Of Aartichoke, or Potato; or why may not
Your learned Physician Dictate Ambergris,
Or Powders, and you obey him, in your Brothes?
Have you so strange antipathy to women?
To what end will gentlemen
Come to, if this frost hold?

Ha. You are witty*
But I suppose you have no cause of such
Complaint, how ever some men do want heat,
Their is no general winter; I know a gentleman
Can drink, and eat, and bear you company
A bed, for all your jeering: do not think
It Is I: thou shall recant this profane talk
And woo me for a kiss, ere i will stoop to thee.
Here Is none but friends, if Master wilding ha not
Told you already, I will justify
It Is possible, you may be got with Child.

Pene. By whom?

Ha. By him, you are but cozens a far off,
If you allow't, he need not travel far
For other dispensation, what say to him?

Pene. Was this at his entreatie?

Ha. My own mere motion
And good will toward him, cause I know his mind.

Pene. You are a fine gentleman, where is your land?
You may be Knight o'th Shire in time: farrewell, sir.

Ha. I know not what to make on her, she may be Exit.
A tumbler, for all this, i will to her again. Exit.

Enter old Barnacle, and Leonora. Ba. Nay, nay, be comforted, and mistake me
not,
I did not mention Delamore to provoke
These tears: he is gone, think on your living friends.

Leo. If you be one, good sir --

Ba. Yes, I am one:
And yet mistake me not, I do not come
Awooing for my self, I am past Tilting,
But for my Nephew, oh that Nephew of mine!
I know Sr. Richard Hurry, you wise father,
Will think well of him,
Nay, nay, weeping still.

Leo. It is too soon to think of any other.

Bar. To soon to think of any other, why,
What woman of discretion, but is furnished
With a second husband ere the first be coffend?
He that stays till the Funeral be past,
Is held a modest coxcombe, and why should not
Maids (...) as early in their provision?

Leo. I blush to think, my father of his mind,
Distressed Leonora good. sir loose
No more breath, I am resolved to die a Virgin
I know not what love is.
And yet these tears
Are shed for one you loved.

Leo. He that was all
My treasure living, being lost must needs
Be a great part of sorrow: but my eyes
Though they can never pay to many drops
To the sad memory of Delamore,
Shed not all these for him, there is another
That makes me weep.

Bar. Another whom you love?

Leo. Heaven knows I never let into my heart,
Affection to a second, I am so far
From loving him, I wish we may nere meet,
I am not safe in my own bosom, while
I think upon him, it begets new springs
Within my eyes; which will in little time,
Rise to a flood, and drown me.

Bar. I conceive
This is no friend of yours, come i will releeve you,
Nay, and there be any man that troubles you,
If there be any you would have talked withal,
I Will rid you of that care, he that shall offer
But to disturb you in a thought, do you mark me?
I Will take an order with him.

Leo. What will you do?

Bar. Do not mistake me neither, i will do nothing,
But send my Nephew, he shall top him,
And top him, and scourge him like a top too.
You know not how my Nephew is improved
Since you last saw him, valiant as Hercules,
He has knocked the flower of Chivalry, the very
Donzal del Phebo of the time. and all
The blades do reverence him; i will say no more,
Name but the man whom you do frown upon,
And let me send my Nephew to him.

Leo. Shanot need.
I have no enemy to engage his sword,
My discontents flow from a nearer person,
I grieve to say my father.

Bar. How? your father
Say but the word and I will send my Nephew
To him, and he were ten fathers he can mollify him,
To please you Lady, my Nephew never spare him,
Oh, had you seen him baffle a squire this morning!

Leo. Pray no more, you shall do me a noble office.
To leave me to my self.

Enter Servant. Ser. Mistress Violante
Is come to visit you.

Leo. I wait upon her,
Your gentle pardon. Exit.

Ba. Would my Nephew had her.
She is S. Richards heir, and here he is.
S. Richard?

Enter S. Richard Hurry, and Surgeon. Hu. Oh Master Barnacle, i will wait upon
you.

Bar. That Is Master Probe the Surgeon.

Hu. No more you know my meaning.

Pr. Yes, sir.

Hu. Let him be buried.

Pr. I understand you, sir. Exit.

Bar. I have been discoursing
With your fair daughter.

Hu. Where is Leonora?

Ser. She Is within, sir.

Hu. Bid her come hither,
Master Barnacle I am something troubled about a gentleman.

Bar. And I am glad I met with you:
If you be troubled with any gentleman,
I Will send my Nephew to him.

Hu. To whom, or whither?

Bar. To any man alive, I care not whether.

Hu. Send him to Jerusalem.

Bar. That Is something o'th furthest, I shall be
Unwilling he should travel out o'th Kingdom.

Enter Leonora, Violante aloof. Hu. Leonera? Nearer --

Ba. Who is that?
A pretty gentlewoman! save you mistress,
What is your name I pray?

Vio. I am called Violante.

Bar. Are you a maid?

Vio. I should be sorry else.

Bar. Do You know my Nephew?

Vio. Not I, sir.

Bar. Not my Nephew? how have you been bred?
Why he is the onley gallant o'th Town,
Please you i will send him to you.

Vio. What to do, sir.

Ba. He shall do any thing, the towns afraid on him.

Vio. Oh! pray keep him from me then.

Bar. He Will hurt no women, but for the men --

Vio. There Is one has hurt to much already.

Bar. What is he? i will send my Nephew to him Lady,
If you have any occasion, never spare him.

Vio. Not I, sir.

Hu. Look to it, and correct this humor.
I Will to him presently, Master Barnacle,
Let me entreat your company to a gentleman,
I Will wait as much on you.

Bar. You shall command me:
If It be to any man you care not for,
We Will take my Nephew along. Exeunt

Hu. It sha not need,

Leo. Oh Violante! I
Must now require some fruit of all thy promises.

Vio. You hold me not suspected.

Leo. Leonora
Cannot be so ungrateful: but we have
Small limit for discourse, my father means
To visit Beaumont, now in Prison, thou Will hear too soon the story, and without
Prevention find thy self more miserable.
Oh Violante: I will suffer with him
Rather then injure thee, I prithee go
Uisit thy friend, not mine, and as thou love me,
As thou love him, or thy own life, Violante,
Bid him be constant to thee, tell him what fame
Dwells upon noble lovers, that have sealed
Faith to their Mistresses in blood: what glory
Can perjured men expect, that loose their honor
To save a poor breath? bid him be assured,
If for the hope of life, his soul can be
So much corrupted to embrace a thought
That I shall ever love him --

Vio. You Leonora?

Leo. Never, oh, never; tell him so: by virtue,
And the cold blood of my slain Delamore,
Although my father threaten death.

Vio. Your father?

Leo. Make have sweet Violante, to the Prison;
There thou shall know all, there thou shall have proof
How much thou art beloved, and by my death,
If he prove false to thee, how much I love thee. Exit.

Vio. I am amazed, and my soul much distracted
Twixt grief, and wonder, it grows late in the morning,
I le visit the sad Prisoner, my heart trembles,
More can but kill me too, I Am, fit to die,
And woes but hasten immortality. Exit.

Enter Hazard, and a Box-keeper. Ha. How now? what Gamesters?

Bo. Little to any purpose yet, but we
Expect deep play to night.

Enter Wilding. Wi. Will Hazard, I have been seeking thee this
Two hours, and now I have found thee, avoid me.

Ha. Thar't not infectious.

Wi. No, but I swell with my imaginations
Like a tall Ship, bound for the fortunate Islands;
Top, and Top-gallant, my flags, and my figaries
Upon me with a lusty gale of wind
Able to rend my sails, I shall o'rerunne,
And sink thy little Bark of understanding
In my careere boy.

Ha. Pray heaven rather
You do not spring a leake, and forfit your
Ballast, my confident man of War, I
Have known as stout a Ship been cast away
In sight o'th Harbor.

Wi. The wench, the wench boy.

Ha. The Vessel you have been chasing.

Wi. Has struck Sail,
Is come in, and cries abord my new Lord of
The Mediterranean, we are agreed,
This is the precious night Will; twelve the hour;
That I must take possession of all,
Of all; there are some Articles agreed on.
Enter a Lord, and Sell-away. Whoe's this?

Ha. Oh! the Gamesters now come in:
That gaie man is a Lord, and with him Sell-away.

Wi. They are well coupled, a Lord and Sell-away.

Ha. He wears good clothes you see, and in the street
More looked at then the Pageants, he will talk little.

Wi. To purpose.

Ha. Right, he cannot walk
Out of his sincopace, and no man carries
Legs more in tune, he is danced now from his sempstresse.

Wi. A man much bound to his Tailor.

Ha. And his Barber.
He has a notable head.

Wi. Of hair thou mean.

Ha. Which is sometime hung in more Bride-laces
Then well would furnish out two Country weddings

Wi. Is he a Scholar?

Ha. It Is not necessary.
He is neither Scholar, nor a Courtier,
If report wrong him not.

Wi. Will. He plays money freely.

Ha. With more pride then he wears embrodery.
It Is his ambition to loose that: and
A wench mainetaines his swearing, let him pass.

Wi. What Is next.

Enter a Knight, and Acre-lesse. Ha. A Knight, and Acre-lesse.

Wi. Good again, a Knight and Acre-lesse, what is his condition.

Wi. A Gamester both ways.

Wi. Where be his Spurs?

Ha. Hang in his mistresses Peticote, for which he pawnd
His Knighthood too, till a good hand redeem it,
He will talk you nothing but postilions
Embroideries for his Coach, and Flanders Mares:
What several suits for the twelve days at Christmas,
How many Ladies dote upon his physnomy:
That he is limited but a hundred pound
A month for diet, which will scarce maintain him
In Phesant eggs an Turkey for his motion.
Now does his Barge attend him, if he came
By water, but if the Dice chance to run counter,
He stays till twelve in anger, devours smoke,
And desperately will shoot the Bridge at midnight
Without a waterman.

Wi. The house fills a pace
What are these ha?

Enter a Country gentleman, and Little-stocke. Ha. A Country gentleman, and
Little-stocke.

Wi. A Country gentleman? I have seen him sure
Appear in other shape, is he a Christian?

Ha. Why? do thou doubt him?

Wi. Cause I have met him with a Turbant once,
If I mistake not, but his linen was not
So handsome altogether as the Turks
In quirpo with a Crab-tree cudgel too,
Walking and canting broken Dutch for farthings.

Ha. The apparition of an Angel once
Brought him to this.

Wi. Do call him country gentleman?

Ha. His generation is not known in the Town,
You see what Dice can do, now he is admired.

Wi. For what I prithee?

Ha. For talking nonsense, when he has lost his money
You shall meet him going up and down the ordinary
To borrow money upon his head.

Wi. His head,
Will he go upon his head, or will he pawn it?

Ha. Pawn it, if any man will lend him money on it,
And says it is good security, because
He cannot be long without it, they shall have
The wit for the use too, he will talk desperately,
And swear he is the father of all the Bulls
Since Adam, if all fail he has a project
To print his jests.

Wi. His Bulls you mean,

Ha. You Are right,
And dedicate 'em to the Gamesters, yet he will
Seem wise sometimes, deliver his opinions
As on the Bench: in beer he utters sentences,
And after Sack Philosophy.

Wi. Let Us not be troubled with him, who are these?
Young Barnacle?
Enter Nephew, and Dwindle. Will you endure him.

Ha. Yes, and the Vineger-bottle his man too: but now I think on it he shall
excuse me, i will loose no time; if I win, I shall have less cause to repent,
if I loose, by these hilts i will make him the cause and beat him.

Enter Sell-away. Are they at play?


Sell, Deep, deep Gamesters.

Ha. Then luke with a hundred pieces.

Wi. I Will follow, how now Frank? what in the name of folly is he reading?


Ne. Save you gentlemen, save you noble gallants:
May a man loose any money? I honor, sir, your shadow.

Sell. This is another humor.

Ne. Do You here the news gentlemen?

Wi. What news I pray?

Ne. The new Curranto.

Sell. Good, sir, impart.

Ne. Be there no more gentlemen to hear it
Here? it is extraordinary fine news, in black and white,
From Terra incognita.

Wi. Terra incognita?

Ne. I, sir, the quintessence of the World: for our four parts
Europe, Asia, Affricke, and America, are as the four
Elements, and this, as the learned Geographers say, is
Like Coelum, a fifth essence or quintessence of the World.

Wi. Pray, Sir, what news from this quintessence, it must
Needs be refined novelties.

Ne. From Slavonia.

Wi. That Is no part of Terra incognita, we know that.

Ni. But you do not know that Slavonia I mean, it is
Inhabited by a Nation without a head.

Dwi. Without a head in? what part are their eyes?

Ne. Peace Dwindle: a cursed kind of people that have
Neither Law, nor Religion but for their own purposes:
Their Country is somewhat low, and open to the Sea.

Sell. Do they not fear drowning?

Ne. They are safest in a tempest, if they be taken at any time by their
enemies, and cast over-bord, they turn other creatures, some Rocks, some
Sharkes, some Crocadiles, and so retain part of their former nature.


Wi. What do those that dwell ashore?

Ne. They follow their work, and make nets not only to catch
Fish, but Towns and Provinces: the Jews
Are innocent to 'em, and the Divella dunce, of whose
Trade they are.

Sell. A dangerous generation.

Ne. In Perwiggana a fruitful Country, the moon shines
All day, and the Sun at night.

Sell. That Is strange, he has a moral in it have not we gentlemen that sit up
all night a drinking, and go to bed when the sun rises?


Ne. In this Province the King never comes out of his Palace.


Wi. How does the Court remove there?


Ne. When he does purpose to change the air, he has an Elephant richly
trapped, that carries the Court upon his back into what part of the Kingdom
he please.


Wi. I have heard of Elephants, that have carried Castles.


Ne. Snailes, Snailes in comparison: and to increase your wonder* this beast
does never drink.


Wi. I would be loath to keep him company.


Sell. How then?


Ne. Eat, eat altogether, and what nothing but men, and of what rank or
condition, none but great men, and the fattest nobility, but like your good
Mounsieur he cares for nothing but the head, and it is confidently reported
he has devoured more heads, within this three last years, then the Elephant
we had in England; eat Penny Loves in seven.


Dwi. The Devil choke him would he had London Bridge in his belly too.


Ne. The subjects of the great Duke of Lubber-land has been lately in
rebellion.


Wi. I am sorry it will be inconvenient to hear out your Curranto, I am weary
of a little money when that is lost I may be a suitor for the rest of your
news, and so I commend me to all your friends in Lubber-Land. Exit.


Ne. Dwindle, did hear this, now could I be angry.


Dwi. Go to play then, sir, if you loose your money, you may talk roundly to
'em for they cannot be so uncivil as not to give loosers leave to speak.


Ne. But if I win.


Dwi. Why then you may be drunk to night and i will -- the Caster to you.


Enter Little-Stocke, Acre-lesse. Lit. A curse upon these reeling Dice, that
last in, and in
Was out of my way ten pieces; can lend me any
Money, how have the cards dealt with thee.

Acr. Lost, lost -- I defy thee, if my Knight recover not
I must be sober to morrow.

Lit. Oh, for a hundred and all made now.

Enter Sell-away. Sell. Yonder Is -- winnes tirannically, without
Mercy, he came in but with hundred pieces.

Lit. I Will get a fancy presently.

Acr. And how thrive the bones with his Lordship

Sell. His Lordships bones are not well set they are maliciously bent against
him they will run him quite out of all.


Enter Nephew, and Dwindle. Ne. More money Dwindle call my Uncle: I must have
it, for my honor, two hundred pieces more Will serve my turn; in the mean
time I will play away my Cloak and some superfluous things about me.


Dwi. By that time you are come to your shirt, I shall be here.


Sell. He Is blown up too. Exit.


Enter Hazard. Ha. So, so, the Dice in two or three such nights will be out of
my debt, and I may live to be a landlord again.


Sell. You are fortunes minion Master.


Ha. You wod seem to be no fool, because she dotes not
Upon you gentlemen, I must take my chance; 'twas
A lucky hundred pown'd Jacke Wilding.
Enter Wilding gnawing a Box. What eating the Boxes.

Acr. Let us in again.

Wi. Chewing thy cud a little, I have lost all my money Will
Thou have made a fortunate night on it wot
Play no more.

Ha. It Is the first time I had the grace to give off a winner
I wonot tempt the Dice.

Wi. What have won?

Ha. You do not hear me complain
I have not been so warm
This tenn weeks.

Enter Acre-lesse. Wi. It Is frost in my breeches.


Acr. Master Hazard, I was afraid you had been gone, there is a fresh Gamester
come in with his pockets full of Gold; he dazeles the Gamesters, and no man has
stock to play with him.


Wi. What is he?


Acr. A Merchant he seems; he may be worth your retire.


Ha. Not for the Exchange to night, I am resolved.


Wi. Temptation! now have I an infinite itch to this Merchants pieces.


Ha. If thou wot have any money,
Speak before I launch out, and command it.

Wi. A hundred pieces.


Ha. Call to the Master o'th house by this token -- thou wot venture again then?


Wi. They may prove as luckie as thine -- but what do I forget? the wench, the
fairy at home, that expects me.


Ha. I had forgot too, you wonot play now.


Wi. It Is now upon the time.


Ha. By any means go.


Wi. Hum, I ha lost my money, and may recover a pretty wench. which hand? here
covetousnes, this letchery; money is the heavier. Will, do hear? i will
requite thy courtesy. Thou have lent me a hundred pownd, i will pay thee again,
and thou shat have for the use, the flesh device at home that expects, thou
shat supply my place Will.


Ha. You wonot loose this opportunity, and fool your self. Exit. Acre.


Wi. I am resolved; five hundred pieces say i will come to him, you love the
sport as well as I: to morrow you shall thank me for it; be secret, she will
never know thee, for our conditions are to -- Neither light nor -- and she must
needs conceive it is I.


Ha. Are you in earnest?


Wi. Have you wit to apprehend the courtesy?
Let me alone: the wench, and I shall meet
Hereafter and be merry, here is my Key
The Merchants money cooles away: be wise
And keep conditions to use her at thy pleasure,
There will be enough for me: nay no demurres,
You have not lost your stomach to this game
How ere I speed tonight, we will laugh to morrow
How the poor wench was cosen'd.

Ha. But would ha me go?

Wi. I wod ha thee ride boy, I must to the Gamester
Farewell, remember not to speak a word, but
Kiss and embrace thy belly full.

Ha. If I do not,
The punishment of an Eunuch light upon me.

Act. IIII.
Enter Hazard and Wilding. Wi. How now Will, thou lookst desperately this
morning.
Did sleep well to night?

Ha. Yes, it is very like
I went to sleep; but such a bedfellow!

Wi. What ailes she; was she dull?

Ha. Do not enquire
But curse your self till noone, I am charitable
I do not bid thee hang thy self, and yet
I have cause to thank thee, I would not have lost
The turn, for all the money I won last night Jacke,
Such a delicious thieft.

Wi. I think so.

Ha. I found it so and dare make my affidavit.

Wi. Thou did not see her?

Ha. Nor speak to her, to what purpose.
She was so handsome in the dark, you know
My meaning, had been pity any light
Or voice should interrupt us.

Wi. Now do I
Grow melancholy.

Ha. If thou do envy me
There is some reason for it, thou do imagine
I have had pleasure in my days, but never,
Never, so sweet a skirmish, how like joy
She grew to my embraces, not a kiss
But had Elisium in it.

Wi. I was a rascal.

Ha. If thou did know but half so much as I
Or could imagine it, thou would acknowledge
Thy self worse then a rascal on Record.
I have not words to express, how soft, how bountious
How every thing a man with full desires
Could wish a Lady, do not question me
Further; it is too much happiness to remember
I am sorry I have said so much.

Wi. Was not I cursed
To loose my money, and such delicate sport?

Ha. But that I love thee well shud'st nere enjoy her.

Wi. Why?

Ha. I would almost cut thy throat.

Wi. You wod not.

Ha. But take her, and if thou part'st with her, one night more for less then
both the Indies thou't loose by her, she has paid me for my service, I ask
nothing else.


Wi. If she be such aprecious armefull Will
I think you may be satisfied.

Ha. Take heed,
And understand thy self a little better:
I think you may be satisfied with what?
A handsome wench it is heresy recant it
I never shall be satisfied.

Wi. You do not purpose.
Purpose a new encounter.

Ha. For thy sake
It Is possible I may not, I would have
My game kept for me; what I have done
Was upon your entreatie, if you have
The like occasion hereafter I
Should have a hard heart to deny thee Jacke.

Wi. Thou have fired my blood, that I could call back time,
And be possessed of what my indiscretion
Gave up to thy enjoying, but I am comforted,
She thinks 'twas I, and we hereafter may
Be free in our delights: now, sir, the news
With you? Enter Page.

Pa. My mistress did command my diligence
To find you out and pray you come to speak with her.

Wi. When I am at leisure.

Pa. It Is of consequence,
She says, and much concerns you.

Wi. Is Penelope*
With her?

Pa. Not when she sent me forth.

Wi. Let her expect: wait you on me.

Ha. I spy my blustering Gamester.

Wi. The younger ferret.

Ha. I care not if I allow thee a fit of mirth
But your boy must be in comfort.

Enter Nephew and Dwindle. Dwi. Pray, sir, do not behave your self so
furiously,
Your breath is able to blow down a house, sir.

Ne. My Uncle shall build 'em up again, oh Dwindle,
Thou do not know what honor it is to be
So boisterous, I would take the wall now
Of my Lord Majors Giants.

Wi. Do as I bid you, sir.

Pa. Alas, sir, he will devour me.

Ha. He shanot hurt thee.

Pa. Be at my back then pray, sir, now I think on it
I have the beard here too with which I frighted
Our maids last night.

Dwi. You know these gentlemen.

Ne. Hazard, and Wilding? how is it? how is it Bulchins?
Wo'dye had been with us; I ha so mald a Captain
O'th train band yonder.

Pa. Is not your name Barnacle?

Ha. Ancient Pe^arre?

Ne. What Is this?

Wi. The admiration of the Town.

Ne. For what?

Wi. For valor.

Ne. This inch and a half?

Wi. There Is the wonder, oh the spirit, the tall spirit
Within him he has the soul of a Giant.

Ne. He has but a dwarfs body, ancient P^tarre.

Pa. Sir, how dare you name a Captain?
Thou tun of ignorance, he shall eat my Pistol^,
And save me the discharge.

Ne. Tell me of a tun? i will drink twenty tons to thy
Health, who shall hinder me if I have a
Mind to it, your Pistol's a Pepper-corne, I will eat
Up an armory, if my stomach serve, so long as I
Have money to pay for it, and you were as little again
As you are: fright me with your potguns, my name's
Barnacle, sir, call me what you please, and my
Man's name's Dwindle, and you go there to, do not
Think but I have seen fire-Dakes before now though
I never talked on it, and Rackets too, though my man
Be a Coxcombe here, and balls of wildfire, no dispraise
To you; do you think to thunder me with your Pick
Tooth by your side?

Pa. Let my sword show him but one flash of lightning
To singe the hair of his head off.

Ha. Good ancient Petarre.

Dwi. It Is a very devil in decimo sexto, Peter do you call him?

Pa. Thou dogbolt and cozen germane to Cerbenus.

Ha. Two heads once removed, he is somewhat like him.

Ne. I begin to think.

Dwi. And I begin to --

Pa. Again.

Wi. He does but think.

Pa. He think? is this a place for him to think in?
Minotaure, vanish immediately, or I will shoot death
From my Mustachios and kill thee like a Porcupine.

Ne. Ancient Petarre, I know thy name and I
Honor it, thar't one of the most vaineglorious
Pieces of fire-worke that ever water wet. I am a
Gentleman, and if I have said any thing to disgust
Thee, I can ask thee forgivenes, as well as the
Proudest vassell on 'em all, extend thy paw, thou
Invincible Epitome of Hercules, and let thy servant
Kiss it.

Wi. Come pray, sir, be reconciled; he submits.

Pa. I see thou have something in thee of a Soldier, to no Purpose, and I will
cherish it. Thou art a rascal in thy understanding, thou shat excuse me,
Turk, in honorable love: I remember thy great Grandfather was hanged for
robbing a Pedler-woman of six yards of inckle, and thou may, (mauger the
Herald) in a right line, challenge the gallows by his copy; mongrell of
mongrell Hall. I am thy humble servant, and will cut the throat of any man
that says thou have either wit or honesty more then is fit for a gentleman.
Command my sword, my lungs, my life, thou art a puff, a mulligrube, a
Metaphysicall Coxcombe, and I honor you with all my heart.


Ne. I thank you noble ancient, and kind gentlemen.
Come Dwindle, we will go rore somewhere else.

Wi. Was ever such an offe? Exit.

Ha. The boy ^id hit his humor excellently.
Here, cherish thy wit.

Pa. Now shall I tell my mistress you will come to her?

Wi. How officious you are for your mistress, sir?
What said she I came not home all night?

Pa. Nothing to me; but my eyes never beheld
Her look more pleasantly.

Ha. Now farewell Jacke, I need not urge your secrecy
Touching your mistres, I have mounted for you:
Only i will caution you, look when you meet
That you perform your business handsomely.
I ha begun so well she may suspect else,
And put thee out of service, if she do,
You know your wages* I shall laugh at thee,
And heartily; so farewell, farewell Jacke. Exit.

Wi. To say the truth I have showed my self a coxcombe.
A pox a play that made me double looser.
For ought I know, she may admit me never
To such a turn again, and then I ha punished
My self ingeniouslie.
Enter Mistress Wilding, Penelope, and Mistress Leonora, a Servant waiting upon
them. My wife.

Page My Mistress, sir.

Wi. Keep you at distance, Penelope, and Leonora,
She Is as the boy reported something more
Pleasant then ordinary.

Mi. It Is he good cozen,
Pretend some business* offer at some wares,
Or ask the Goldsmiths what your Diamond's worth,
Something to trifle time away, while I
Speak with my husband a few words.

Wi. She comes toward me.

Mi. I can contain no longer,
How do you sweete-hart?

Wi. Well, but a little melancholy.
You look more sprightfully wife, something has pleased you.

Mi. It has indeed, and if it be no stain
To modesty, I would enquire how you
Sped the last night.

Wi. I lost my money.

Mi. I do not mean that game.

Wi. I am not betrayed I hope; do not mean that game?

Mi. You Are a fine gentleman.

Wi. It Is so, could she not keep her own counsel?

Mi. And have behaved your self most wittily,
And I may say most wrongfully: this will
Be much for your honor, when it is known.

Wi. What will be known?

Mi. Do you not blush? oh fie.
Is there no modesty in man?

Wi. What riddle
Have you got now? I wonot yet seem conscious.

Mi. It Is time then to be plain, it was a wonder
I could be so long silent, did you like
Your last nights lodging?

Will. Very, very well;
I went not to bed all night.

Mi. You did not lie with
Mistress Penelope my kinswoman?

Wi. Refuse me if I did.

Mi. You need not swear;
But 'twas no fault of yours, no fault no virtue:
But it is no place to expostulate these actions.
In breife know 'twas my plott, for I observed
Which way your warm affection moved, and wrought
So with my honest cozen to supply
Her wanton place, that with some shame at last,
I might deceive your hard heart into kindness.

Wi. That, that again sweet wife, and be a little
Serious; was it your plott to excuse your cozen,
And be the bedfellow?

Mi. Heaven knows it is truth.

Wi. I am fitted, fitted with a pair of horns
Of my own making.

Mi. Thank, and think upon
That providence that would not have you lost
In such a Forest of loose thoughts, and be
Your self again; I am your handmaid still,
And have learned so much piety to conceal
What ever should dishonor you.

Wi. It budds,
It budds already. I shall turn stark mad,
Horn mad.

Mi. What aile you? are you vexed because
Your wantonness thrived so well?

Wi. Well with a vengance.

Mi. I did expect your thanks.

Wi. Yes, I do thank you, thank you heartily,
Most infinitely thank you.

Mi. Does this merit
No other payment but your scorn, then know
Bad man, it is in my power to be revenged,
And what I had a resolution
Should sleep in silent darkness, now shall look
Day in the face, i will publish to the World
How I am wronged, and with what stubbornness
You have despised the cure of your own fame;
Nor shall my Cozen suffer in her honor*
I stoop as low as earth to show my duty,
But too much trampled on I rise to tell
The World I am a woman.

Wi. No, no; hark you,
I do not mock you, I am taken with
The conceit, what a fine thing I have made my self.
Nere speak on it, thy device shall take; i will love thee.
And kiss thee for it, tha'st paid me handsomelie:
An admirable plot, and followed cunningly,
I Will see thee anon again, and lie with thee
To night, without a stratagemme. The gentlewomen
Expect thee; keep all close, dear wife, no sentences.
I am tricked and trimmed at my own charges rarely,
I Will seek out some body again. Exit.

Mi. I have presumed too much upon your patience,
I have discovered, and I hope it will take.

Pene. I wish it may.

Mi. You are sad still, Leonora.
Remove these thoughts: come i will wait on you now
To the Exchange: some toys may there strike off
Their sad remembrance.

Leo. I attend you.

Mi. Farewell.

Enter Beaumont, and his keeper. Ke. The gentleman that was yesterday to speak
with you
Is come again to visit you.

Beo. S. Richard Hurry?

Ke. The same, sir.

Bar. You may admit him.

Ke. Men of his quality
Do seldom court affliction, this, I must
Allow, is a most noble gratitude
For those good offices my father did him.

Enter S. Richard. Hu. Sir, the respects I owe you make me again
Solliciter for your saftie, and although
On the first proposition it appear
Strange to you, and perhapps incredible,
Which might dispose you to the slow embrace
Of what I tendered, yet again brought to you
After a time to examine and consider
What most concerns you, I am confident,
You will accept, and thank me*

Beo. Noble sir.
You do express so are is bounty, men
Will sloely imitate; I am not so
Lost in my wild misfortune, but my reason
Will guide me to acknowledge and pay back
My service and my self, for so much charity
As you have pleased to show me.

Enter Violante. Vio. Here Is for thy pains: they are the same; make good
Thy word, and place me where I may unseene
Hear their discourse.

Ke. This way.

Beo. But with your pardon,
I would desire to hear again how much
I shall be obliged that knowing the extent
Of your desert I may pay back a duty,
That may in every circumstance become
My fortune and the benefit.

Hu. Then thus: you are a Prisoner; that alone
Is misery,
But yours the greater, in that guilt of blood,
Not sums that may be recompensed, detain you.
I Will not dispute the circumstance, Delamore
Slain by your hand.

Beo. I have confessed,
The first jurie having found it murder.

Hu. His blood calls to the law for justice, and you cannot
Left to your self, and looking on the fact,
Expect with any comfort what must follow.
Yet I in pity of your sufferings,
In pity of your youth which would be else
Untimely blasted, offer to remove
Your sorrows, make you free and right again,
With clear satisfaction to the Law.

Beo. Good sir,
Pray give me leave to doubt here. I see not
How ere your will and charity may be active
In my desiresse to save me, that you can
Assure my life and freedom, since in causes
Of such high nature, laws must have their course,
Whose stream as it were wickedness to pollute,
It were vanity for any private man
To think he could resist. I speak not this
To have you imagine I despise my life,
But to express my fears your will does flatter you
Bove what your power can reach.

Pa. For that I urge not
My being a Commissioner alone
To do you service, I have friends in Court,
And great ones, when the rigor of the Law
Has sentenced you to mediate your pardon:
Nor takes it from the justice of a Prince,
Where provocation and not malice makes
Guilty, to save, whom the sharp letter doomes
Sometimes to execution: I am to far
From doubting your discharge, that I dare forfeit
My life if I secure not yours from any
Danger for this offense.

Beo. You speak all comfort
Which way can I deserve this?

Ha. That i will show you.
I had an obligation to your father
Whose love when all my fortunes were in the ebb,
And desperately, releev'd me with large sums;
By whose careful manage I arryu'd at what
I am, and I should be a rebel to
Nature and goodness not to love the son
Of such a friend by his misfortune made
Ripe for my gratitude.

Beo You speak your bounty,
But teach not all this while how to deserve it.

Hu. It Is done by your acceptance of my daughter
To be your Bride.

Be. To be my Bride? pray tell tell me
Is she deformed or wanton, what vice has she?

Ha. Vice, sir, she will deserve as good a husband,
She is handsome though I say it, and shall be rich too.

Beo. She is too good, if she be fair or virtuous.
Pardon, I know she is both: but you amaze me,
I did expect conditions of danger:
A good wife is a blessing above health;
You teach me to deserve my life first from you
By offering a happiness beyond it.

Hu. If you find love to accept, it is the reward
I look for, Leonora shall obey
Or quit a father.

Be. Ha goodness defend.
I know you do but mock me, and upbraid
My act, that killed her servant: wound me still,
I have deserved her curse: I see her weep,
And every tear accuse me.

Hu. May I never
Thrive in my Prayers to Heaven, if what I offer
I wish not heartily confirmed.

Bu. I now
Suspect you are not Leonora father,
'Twere better you dissembled, then made her
So past all hope of being cured again:
I marry Leonora! can her soul
Think on so foul a rape, she cannot sure.

Ha. She shall; I command.

Be. By virtue, but
She shanot, nor would I to graspe an Empire
Tempt her to so much stain, let her tell down
Her Virgin tears, on Delamores cold Marble,
Sigh to his dust, and call revenge upon
His head whose anger sent him to those shades,
From whence she nere must see him; this will justify
She loved the dead: it were impiety
One smile should bless her murderer, and how ere
You are pleased to complement with my affliction,
I know she cannot find one thought without her
So foul to look upon me.

Hu. Let it rest on that, will you confern and timely make provision for your
saftie?


Beo. For my life
You mean, now on the chance, then I may live
You are confident, and think it not impossible
Your daughter may affect me* there is at once
Two blessings, are they not and mighty ones,
Considering what I am, how low, how lost
T'oth common air?

Hu. Now you are wise.

Beo. But if
Your daughter would confirm this, and propound
Her self my victory.

Hu. What then?

Beo. I should condemn her, and despise the conquest*
These things may bribe an Atheist not a Lover.
But you perhaps are ignorant, I have given
My faith away irrevocablie, it is
The wealth of Violante, and I wonot
Basely steal back a thought, and yet I thank you,
I am not so inhumane.

Hu. Will you not
Prefer your life
To honor and religion?

Beo. For shame be silent could you make me Lord
Of my own destiny, and that Leonora
Had empires for her dower, and courted me
With all the flatteries of life, to quit
My vows to Violante, I would die
Upon her bosom to meet death*

Hu. And death
You must expect which will take off this braverie.

Beo. And I will kiss it, kiss it, like a Bride.

Hu. So resolute?

Beo. And if I cannot live
My Violantes, I will die her sacrifice.
Good sir, no more, you do not well to trouble
The quiet of a Prisoner thus that cannot
Be a too careful Steward of those minutes
Left him to make his peace, tempt me no further:
The Earth is not so fixed as my resolves,
Rather to die then in one thought transplant
My love from Violante.

Hu. Be undone,
And this contempt shall hasten the divorce
Of soul and love, die and be soon forgotten. Exit.

Enter Violante. Beo. My Violante, if there can be any joy
Neighbor too so much grief, i will power it out
To pay thy bounteous visit, if my eyes
Admit no fellowship in weeping, it is
Because my heart which saw thee first, would bid
Thee welcome thither, scorning; to acknowledge
There can be any thing but joy where thou art.

Vio. But sadness my dear Beaumont, while there is
A cause that maks thee Prisoner, I must weep
And empty many springs, my eyes are now
No prophets of thy sorrow but the witness,
And when I think of death that waits upon thee
I wither to a Ghost.

Beo. Why Violante,
We must all die, restrain these weeping Fountains,
Keepe'em till I am dead, dispense 'em then
Upon my grave, and I shall grow again,
And in the sweet disguise of a fair Garden
Salute the spring that gave me green and odor.
Why should not love transform us?

Vio. Be not lost
In these imaginations.

Beo. Or perhapps
Th*ast ambition, she whose love made up
A wonder to the World beside the pledge
Of duty to her Lord, famed Arthemisia
Shall be no more in story for her Tomb:
For on the Earth that weighes my body down
When I am dead, thy tears by the cold breath
Of Heaven congealed to Beaumonts memory,
Shall raise a monument of Pearl to our do
The great Mausolus Sepulcher.

Vio. No more
Of this vain language, if you have any pity
On the poor Violante.

Ber. I ha done,
And yet I am going now to a long silence;
Allow my sorrow to take leave Violante

Vio. It shall be so, be valiant my heart
Beaumont I come not to take leave of thee.

Be. Perhapps you will see me again.

Vio. Again and often,
Thy stars are gentle to thee, many days,
And years are yet between thee and that time
That threatens loss of breath; see, I can thus
Disperse the Clouds sat heavy on my brow,
Wipe the moisture hence, it is day again;
Take beams into thy eye, and let them sink
Upon thy better fortune, live, live happily.

Be. Is Delamore alive?

Vio. Dead and interred.

Be. From what can this hope rise?

Vio. From thy self Beaumont;
If thou will save thy self, I have heard all,
And by the duty of my love am bound
To hide your resolution, can you be
So merciles to your self to refuse life
When it is offered with the best advantage
Is Leonoras love? a price that should
Buy you from all the World? be counseled sir,
Oh, do not loose your self in a vain passion
For thought of me, I cancel all your vows,
And give you back your heart, be free again
If you will promise me to live and love.

Be. Leonora.

Vio. That best of woman-kinde, a mine of sweetness.

Be. But can you leave me then?

Vio. I justify
Thy choice of me in that, that to preserve thee
Dare give thee back again, be Leonoras,
For being mine thou art lost to all the World
Better a thousand times, thou be made hers
Then we both loose, i will pawn my faith she will love thee
I Will be content to hear my Beaumonts well,
And visit thee sometimes like a glad sister,
And never beg a kiss, but if I weep
At any time when we are together,
Do not believe it is sorrow makes my eyes
So wet, but joy to see my Beaumont living:
As it is now to hope.

Be. If thou do mean thus
Thou do the more to inflame me to be constant,
Be not a miracle and I may be tempted
To love my life above thee, by this kiss,
Oh, give me but another in my death
It will restore me by this innocent hand,
While as I wish my soul I wonot leave thee
For the Worlds Kingdom.

Vio. But you must, unless
You change for Leonora, think of that,
Think ere you be to rash.

Be. I Will think of thee,
And honor to be read, I love Violante
But never could deserve her, live thou happy,
And by thy virtue teach a nearer way
To heaven, we may meet yonder, do not make me
More miserable then I am, by adding perjurie
To my bloody sin, the memory of thee
Will at my execution advance
My spirit to a -- that men shall think
I have changed my cause for martyrdom.

Vio. Then here
As of a dying man I take my leave,
Farewell unhappie Beaumont, i will pray for thee.

Beo. It Is possible I may live yet and be thine.

Vio. These tears embalme thee
If in this World we never meet
My life is buried in thy winding sheet.

Beo. This exceeds all my sorrow.

Act. V.
Enter Wilding. Wi. I am justly punished now for all my tricks,
And pride o'th flesh, I had ambition
To make men cuckolds, now the devil has paid me,
Paid me in the same coin, and i will compare
My forehead with the broadest of my neighbors:
But ere it spreads too monstrous, I must have
Some plot upon this Hazard, he supposes
He has enjoyed Penelope, and my trick
To drive the opinion home, to get him marry her
And make her satisfaction: the wench
Has often commended him, he may be won to it,
I never meant to part with all her portion,
Perhaps heel thank me for the moytie.
And this disposed on she is conjured to silence.
It must be so.

Enter Hazard. Ha. Jacke Wilding how is it man?
How goes the Plough at home? what says the Lady
Guinever that was humbled in your absence?
You have the credit with her, all the glory
Of my nights work; does she not hide her eyes,
And blush, and cry you are a fine gentleman.
Turn a toside, or drop a handkercher,
And stoop, and take occasion to leere,
And laugh upon thee?

Wi. Nothing less, I know not
What tha'st done to her, but she is very sad.

Ha Sad; i will be hanged then.

Wi. Thou must imagine
I did the best to comfort her*

Ha. She Is melancholy
For my absence man, i will keep her company
Again to night.

Wi. She thinks 'twas I enjoyed her.

Ha. Let her think whom she will, so we may couple.

Wi. And nothing now but sighs, and cries I have
Undone her.

Ha. She Is a fool, I hurt her not,
She cried not out I am sure, and for my body
I defy the College of Physicians:
Let a jurie of Virgins search me.

Wi. To be plain,
Although she has no thought but I was her bedfellow,
You are the only argument of her sadness.

Ha. How can that be?

Wi. When I had merrily
Excused what had been done, she fetched a sight,
And with some tears revealed her love to you,
That she had loved you long, but by this act
Of mine, do you mark, she was become unworthie
To hope for so good fortune, I cannot tell,
But she is strangely passionate.

Ha. For me?

Wi. For you, but tho^ art soft and tenderhearted,
And in that confidence I did forbear
To tell her who had done the deed.

Ha. You did so:
'Twas wisely done* now I collect my self,
She has sometime smiled upon me.

Wi. Nay believe it
She is taken with thee above all the World.

Ha. And yet she was content you should
'Bove all the World.

Wi. But 'twas your better fate
To be the man, it was her destiny
To have the right performance, thou art a gentleman*
And can not but consider the poor gentlewoman.

Ha. What wod'st ha me do?

Wi. Make her amends, and marry her.

Ha. Marry a strumpet?

Wi. You had first possession,
And thao'st been married earlier could but had
Her maidenhead, besides no body knows but we our selves.

Ha. Be not abused I had
No maiden head.

Wi. My greater torment: come, come thou art modest;
Heaven knows she may be desperate.

Ha. A fair riddance,
We have enough o'th tribe, I am sorry I cannot
Furnish her expedition with a pair
Of my own Garters.

Wi. I -- of Athens grown,
I know thou art more charitable, she may prove
A happy wife, what woman but has frailty?

Ha. Let her make the best on it, set up shop
In The Strand, or Westminster, she may have custom,
And come to speak most learnedlie in the Nose
Bid her keep quarter with the Constable.
And Justices Clarke and she in time may purchase.

Wi. She has a portion will maintain her like
A gentlewoman and your wife.

Ha. Where is it?

Wi. In my possession, and I had rather thou
Should have it then another.

Ha. Thank you heartily,
A single life has single care, pray keep it.

Wi. Come thou shall know I love thee, thou shall have
More by a thousand pound, then I resolved
To part with cause I wod call thee cozen too;
A brace of thousands Will, she has to her Portion,
I hoped to put her off with half the sum;
That Is truth some younger brother wod ha thanked me,
And given my quietus tush, it is frequent
With men that are so trusted, is it a match,

Ha. Two thousand pound will make a maidenhead
That Is crooked straight again.

Wi. Thou Art in the right,
Or for the better sound, as the Grammarians
Say, I will call it twenty hundred pound
Belady a pretty stock, enough and need be,
To buy up half the maiden-heads in a County.

Ha. Here Is my hand i will consider on it no further,
Is she prepared?

Wi. Leave that to me.

Ha. No more.

Wi. I Will instantly about it. Exit.

Ha. Ha, ha.
The project moves better then I expected,
What pains he takes out of his ignorance?

Enter Barnacle. Ba. Oh! Sir I am glad I ha fonud you.

Ha. I was not lost.

Ba. My Nephew, sir, my Nephew.

Ha. What of him.

Un. He Is undone, he is undone, you have undone him.

Ba. What Is the matter?

Un. You have made him, sir, so valiant I am afraid
He Is not long lived, he quarrels now with every body
And rores and dominers and shak's the pen-houses.
A woman that sold pudding-pies, but took
The wall on him, and he trips up her heels,
And down fell all, the kennell ran pure white-pot
What shall I do I fear he will be killed:
I take a little privilege my self
Because I threaten to disinherite him,
But no body else dares talk or meddle with him
Is there no way to take him down again
And make him coward?

Ha. There are ways to tame him.

Ba. Now I wish heartily you had beaten him
For the hundred pound.

Ha. That may be done yet

Ba. Is It not to late? but do you think 'twill humble him?
I expect every minute he is abroad
To hear he has killed some body, or receive him
Brought home with half his brains or but one leg.
Good sir.

Ha. What wod you have me do?

Bar. I Will pay you for it
If you will beat him soundly, sir, and leave him
But as you found him; for if he continue
A blade and be not killed, he wonot escape
The gallows long, and it is not for my honor
He should be hanged

Ha. I shall deserve as much,
To allay this metal, as I did to quicken it.

Ba. Nay it is my meaning to content you, sir.
And I shall take it as a favor too,
If for the same price you made him valiant,
You will unblade him: here is the money sir,
As weighty gold as the other; cause you should not
Lay it on lightly; break no limb, and bruise him
Three-quarters dead, I care not; he may live
Many a fair day after it.

Ha. You show
An Uncles love in this, trust me to cure
His valor.

Ba. He is here; do but observe.
Enter Nephew. And beat him, sir, accordingly.

Ne. How now Uncle?

Ba. Thou art no Nephew of mine, tha'rta rascal
I Will be at no more charge to make thee a gentleman,
Pay for your Dice and drinkings, I shall have
The Surgeons bills brought shortly home to me,
Be troubled to bail thee from the Sessions,
And afterward make friends to the Recorder
For a Repreeve, yes, I will see thee hanged first.

Ne. And be at the charge to paint the gallows too;
If I have a mind the waits shall play before me,
And i will be hanged in state three stories high, Uncle:
But first i will cut your throat.

Bar. Bless me, defend me.

Enter Acre-lesse* Sell-away, Little-stocke. Acr How now, what*s the matter?

Sell Master Barnacle?

Bar. There Is an ungratious bird of mine own nest,
Will murder me.

Lit. He wonot sure?

Ha. Put up,
And ask your Uncle presently forgiveness;
Or I will hoffe thee.

Ne. Hoffe me? I will put up
At thy entreatie.

Ha. Gentlemen you remember
This noble gallant.

Acr. Cozen of yours I take it.

Ha. Cozen to a killing, in your company
Lent me a box o'th ear.

Ne. No, no, I gave it,
I gave it freely; keep it, never think on it,
I can make bold with thee another time,
Wo'd't'had been twenty.

Ha. One's too much to keep.
I am a Gamester, and remembered always
To pay the box; there is first your principal,
Take that for the use.

Ne. Use? wod thad'st given my Uncle.

Ha. They have cost him already two hundred pounds
And upwards, shotten Herring, thing of noise.

Ne. Oh, for my man Dwindle
And his basket-hilt now my Uncle shall rue this.

Ha. Down presently, and before these gentlemen
Desire his pardon.

Ne. How, desire his pardon?

Ha. Then let this go round.

Ne. I will ask his pardon, I beseech you Uncle.

Ha. And swear.

Ne. And do swear.

Ha. To be obedient, never more to quarrel.

Ne. Why look you gentlemen, I hope you are persuaded
By being kick so patiently, that I am
Not over valiant.

Bar. I suspect him still.

Ne. For more assurance do you kick me too.
Am not I patient and obedient now?
Will you have any more gentlemen, before I rise?

Ha. If ever he prove rebellious in act,
Or language, let me know it.

Ne. Will you not give
Me leave to roar abroad a little for
My credit?

Bar. Never, sir, now i will tame you.
I thank you gentlemen, command me for
This courtesy.

Ne. It Is possible I may
With less noise grow more valiant hereafter:
Till then I am in all your debts.

Bar Be ruld,
And be my Nephew again: this was my love,
My love dear Nephew.

Ne. If your love consist
In kicking Uncle, let me love you again,

Bar. Follow me, sir.

Acr. Then his Uncle paid for it?

Ha. Heartily, heartily.

Lit. I thought there was some trick.

Ha. And whether are you going gentlemen?

Sell. We are going to visit Beomont in the Prison.

Ha. It Is charity, but that I have deep engagements,
I Would wait upon you, but commend my service to him,
I Will visit him ere night; you saw not Wilding?

A.L.S. We saw his wife and kins-woman enter
Sr. Richard Hurries half an hour ago.

Ha* His kins-woman? I thank you.
You have saved me travail, farewell gentlemen,
Farewell.

Enter Leonora, and Violante, Mistress Wilding; and Penelope. Leo. My father has
some design, and bad me send for thee.

Wi. You Are both too sad, come, come, we must divert
This melancholy.

Vio. I beseech your pardon,
But is my Beomont sent for?

Leo. Yes: we are
Too private.

Vio. I much fear Leonora now,
She looks not sad enough, although I could*
Resign my interest freely to preserve him,
I would not willingly be present when
They enterchange hearts, sly will show too much
A tyrant, if she be not satisfied
With what was mine, but I must be moite
To be their triumph.

Enter Hazard. Mi. Master Hazard?

Ha. All things
Succeed beyond your thought, pray give me a little
Opportunity with your kins-woman. Exit. Mi. Leo. Vio.

Leo. We Will withdraw.

Ha. I know not how to woo her now, sweet Lady?

Pene. Your pleasure, sir?

Ha. Pray let me ask you a question.
If you had lost your way and met one,
A traviler like my self, that knew the coast
O'th country, would you thank him to direct you?

Pene. That common manners would instruct.

Ha. I think so.

Pene, But there are many ways to the wood, and which
Would you desire, the nearest path, and safest
Or that which leads about?
Without all question.
The nearest and the safest.

Ha. Can you love then?

Pene. I were a devil else:

Ha. And can you love a man?

Pene. A man, what else, sir?

Ha. You Are so far on your way. Now love but me,
You Are at your journies end, what say to me?

Pene. Nothing, sir.

Ha. That Is no answer, you must say something.

Pene. I hope you will not compel me.

Ha. Do You hear Lady?
Setting this foolerie aside: I know
You cannot choose but love me.

Pene. Why?

Ha. I have been told so.

Pene. You are easy of belief
I think I should be best acquainted with
My own thoughts, and I dare not be so desperate
To conclude.

Ha. Come you lie; I could have given't
In smother phrase: you are a dessembling gentlewoman.
I know your heart, you have loved me a great while.
What should I play the fool? if you remember
I urged some wild discourse in the behalf
Of your lewd kindsman, 'twas a trial of thee
That humor made me love thee; and since that thy virtue.

Pene. Indeed sir?

Ha. Indeed, sir? why I have been contracted to thee.

Pene. How long?

Ha. This half hour, know thy portion, and shall have it.

Pene. Strange.

Ha. Nay i will have thee too.

Pene. You will?

Ha. I cannot help it; thy kind cozen will have it so:
It Is his own plott, to make thee amends, is it not
Good mirth? but it is not love to thee or me,
But to have me possessed he is no cuckold:
I see through his device, thou art much beholding to him:
He meant to have put thee off with half thy portion,
But that if things come out we should keep counsel.
Say is it a match? I have two thousand pound too
I thank the Dice, lett's put our stocks together,
Children will follow; he is here already.

Enter Wilding. Wi. So close! I am glad on it, this prepares, Will Hazard,
And my young Cozen; a word Penelope.

Ha. Now will he make all sure.

Wi. You used me courselie,
But I have forgot it, what discourse have you
With this gentleman?

Pene. He would seem to be a Suitor.

Wi. Entertain him; do you hear, you may do worse, be ruled.
'Twas in my thought to move it, does he not
Talk strangely?

Pene. Of what?

Wi. Of nothing, let me counsel you
To love him, call him husband.

Pene. I resolve
Never to marry without your consent.

Enter Acre-lesse, Litle-stocke, Sell-away. Ha. Gentlemen, welcome.

Pene. If you bestow me, sir, I will be confident
I am not lost, I must confess I love him.

Wi. No more: then loose no time, kind gentlemen,
You Are come most seasonably to be the witnesses
Of my consent, I have examined both
Your hearts, and freely give thee here my kinswoman:
No sooner shall the Church pronounce your married
But challenge what is hers.

Ha. Two thousand pound.

Wi. I do confess it is her portion
You shanot stay to talk, nay gentlemen,
Pray see the business finished.

A.L.S. We attend you.

Wi. So, so, this will confirm him in the opinion,
Penelope was the creature he enjoyed,
And keep off all suspicion of my wife,
Who is still honest in the imagination
That only I embraced her, all secure,
And my brows smooth again, who can deride me?
But I my self, ha, that is too much I know it,
And spite of these tricks am a Cornelius.
Cannot I bribe my conscience to be ignorant?
Why then I ha done nothing, yes advanced
The man, that grafted shame upon my forehead:
Vexation, parted with two thousand pound,
And am no less a cuckold then before
Was I predestined to this shame and mockery?
Where were my brains? yet why am I impatient?
Unless betrayed he cannot reach the knowledge,
And then no matter -- yes I am cursed again,
My torment multiplies, how can he think
He played the wanton with Penelope
When he finds her a maid? that ruins all:
I wod she had been strumpeted, he knows
My wives Virginity to well, I am lost,
And must be desperate, kill him; no, my wife.
Not so good, death is over black and horrid,
And I am grown ridiculous to my self.
I must do some thing.

Enter Sr. Richard Hurry. Hu. Master Wilding, welcome,
You Have been a great a stranger.

Wi. Do you know me?

Hu. Know you?

Wi. They say I am much altered alate.

Hu. There is some alteration in your forehead.

Wi. My forehead?

Hu. It Is not smooth enough, you're troubled:
Your wife's within.

Wi. She loves your daughter, sir.

Hu. When saw you Master Beaumont?

Wi. Not to day.

Hu. I have sent for him; pray stay, and witness
His further examination, I propounded
A way to do him good but he is obstinate.
Would I could change condition with him!

Wi. He is not troubled now with being a cuckold,
You shall command.

Enter Mistress Wilding, and a Servant. Hu. Your husband Lady,

Wi. Wife you are a whore
You shall know more hereafter,
I must go live in the Forest.

Mi. And I in the Common.

Wi. She Will turn prostitute.

Hu. Attend him hither. Master Beaumont's come
Nay you shall favor me so much, here is the gentleman
Enter Master Beaumont with Officers. Already.

Bea. Sir, your pleasure? by your command I am brought hither,
I hope you have no more to charge me with
Then freely I have confessed.

Hu. Yes.

Bea. I must answer
You can have but my life to satisfy;
Pray speak my accusation.

Hu. Besides the offense known and examined
You are guilty
Of that which all good natures do abhor.

Bea. You have a privilege, but do not make me
Good sir, to appear monstrous, who are my
Accusers?

Hu. I am one.

Bea. And my judge too:
I have small hope to plead then, but proceed,
And name my trespass.

Hu. That which includes all
That man should hate; ingratitude.

Bea You have
Preferrd a large indictment, and are the first
That ever chargd me with it, it is a stain
My soul held most at distance, but descend
To some particular; this offense does rise
Or fall in the degree, or reference
To persons sinned against, to whom have I
Been so ungrateful?

Hu. Ingrate as high as murder.

Bea. To whom?

Hu. Thy self, to whom that life thou ought to cherish
Thou have undone

Bea. I am not so uncharitable
How ere you please to urge it, but I know
Why you conclude so, let me, sir, be honest
To heaven and my own heart, and then if life
Will follow, it shall be welcome.

Ha. Still perverse:
Stand forth my Leonora, look upon her.

Bea. I see a comely frame which cannot be
Without as fair a mind.

Hu. With her I make
Once more a tender of my wealth and thy
Enlargement.

Wi. How can you discharge him, sir?

Hu. Take you no care for that, it shall be secured
If he accept, it is the last time of asking,
Answer to purpose now.

Bea. There shall need none,
Sir, to forbid this marriage, but my self;
My resolution but warm before
Is now a flame I honor this fair Virgin,
And am too poor to thank your love, but must not
Buy life with so much shame, I am Violante,
My last breath shall confirm it.

Wi. Beaumont think on it
A little better, be not mad; if this be possible
Embrace her instantly.

Bea. She does not look
With any countenance of love upon me:
See, she does weep.

Wi. She Will love thee afterward.
And she do not, she can but cuckold thee
There be more in the Parish man.

Hu. Since you are so peremptory
So peremptory: here receave your sentence.
Live and love happily.

Vio. My Dearest Beaumont.

Wi. To what purpose is this? he must be hanged for Delamore.

Hu. Here Is one can clear the danger.

Wi. The Surgeon? did not you say he was dead?

Sur. I did, to serve his ends, which you see noble:
Delamore is past danger, but wants strength
To come abroad.

Leo. You give me another life.

Hu. I see heaven has decreed him for thy husband,
And shat have my consent too.

Leo. Now you bless me.

Hu. I wished to call thee son, pardon my trial
Joy ever in your bosoms.

Bea. I feel a blessing
That only can be thought, silence my tongue,
And let our hearts discourse.

Enter Hazard, Penelope, Acre-lesse, Little-stocke, and Sel-away Ha. You leave
gentlefolks; who wishes joy.
And a bundle of boys the first night?

Hu. Married.

Pene. Fast as the Priest could tie us.

A.S.L. We are witnesses.

Ha. Cozen two thousand pound, and Lady now
It Is time to clear all.

Wi. I Will be divorced now
Wife you are a Whore.

Ha. Ho there, no bug-words, come
We must tell something in your care. Be merry
You are no cuckold, make no noise, I know
That Is it, offends your stomach.

Wi. Ha!

Ha. I touched not her, nor this with one rude action.
We Will talk the circumstance when you come home.
Your wife expected you, but when I came
She had prepared light, and her Cozen here
To have made you blush and chide you into honesty
Seeing their chaste simplicities, was won
To silence, which brought on my better fortune.

Wi. Can this be real

Mi. By my hopes of peace
In The the other World you have no injury:
My plot was only to betraie you to
Love and repentance.

Pene. Be not troubled, sir,
I am a witness of my Cozens truth,
And hope you will make all prosper, in renewing
Your faith to her.

Ha. Be wise and no more words
Thou have a treasure in thy wife, make much on her:
For any act of mine, she is as chaste
As when she was newborn. Love love her Jacke.
As when she was newborn. Love; love her Jacke.

Wi. I am ashamed, pray give me all forgivenes*
I see my follies, heaven invites me gently
To thy chaste bed, be thou again my dearest,
Thy virtue shall instruct me: joy to all:
Here be more. -- Delamore is living,
And Leonora marked to enjoy him,
Violante is possessed of Beaumont too.

Ha. These be loves miracles: a spring tide flow
In every bosom.

Hu. This day let me feast you
Anon we will visit Delamore.

Leo. My soul
Longs to salute him.

Ha. Here all follyes die.
May never Gamester have worse fate then I.

FINIS
Imprimatur Tho. Wykes.


