CHRIST'S EXALTATION PVRCHAST BY HVMILIATION. Wherein you may see Mercy and
Misery meet together. Very Useful I. For Instructing the Ignorant. II. For
Comforting the Weak. III. For Confirming the Strong.
By R. Sibbs D. D. and Preacher of Grayes-Inne, London.

Published by T. G. and P. N.

1 Cor. 15. 45. The first man Adam was made a Living Soul, the last Adam was
made a Quickening Spirit. LONDON Printed by Tho. Cotes, and are to be sold by
John Bartlet at his shop, at the Sign of the guilt Cup, near S. Austins gate.
1639.

The Contents.
THe Coherence of the Text. p. 1. 2. etc. The Text divided. p. 6. 7 Christ's
death was voluntary. 10. 11 That Christ should dye is Admirable. 14. 15 That
Christ rose again as a public person. 16 What became of those that rose with
him. 18 The Spirit in heaven will supply all wants. 22 Justice must be
satisfied. 25 Why we are the Lords. 26 Excellent inferences from Christ's
Resurrection. 27. 28. etc. What a Lord Christ is. 32. etc. ad 40. He is a Lord
both of quick and dead. 41 God does all to some good Ends. 42 Divine truths
depend on one another. 46 Christ's Lordship full of security and comfort. 50.
51. etc. In the Lords Supper we have to deal with the Christ the Lord. 64 A
Christian man's aim good. 68 Christ rose to be Lord of the living. 72. 73 He
dyed to be Lord of his Church. 74. etc. And to be Lord of his Enemies. 76 And
to make good what by death he got. 78. His Lordship eternal both over the
living and the dead. 80 How great a happiness to be under the Lord Christ. 82.
83 Comforts against the fear of death. 84 We must look to Christ in life and
death. 86. 90 When we live to Christ. 88. 92. etc. Directions for our aiming at
Christ in all things. 96. 97 Helps to live to Christ. 100. 101. Diverse desire
him as Jesus, but not as Christ. 103. 104. 105. What it is to dye to Christ.
106. 107. Christ's dying implies duty in us. 110 Abilities to do duties, part
of the covenant. 113 A sign to know who is under Christ's government. 116. 117.
Christ's Lordship, assurance of our perseverance, 118. etc. What will make us
willing to dye. 122. There is more than an exemplary good in Christ's death. 132
The scope of Christ's humiliation and exaltation. 134 The studdy of this scope
is good. 138 By what title Christ is Lord 141 Diverse comforts from this title
of Christ's Lordship. 142. 143. etc. ad 152 An honor to be under Christ's
Lordship. 153 It is great security to be under it. 158 Christ's Lordship a
Spring of duties and that 1. One to another. 2. To those that are not
Christians. 3. To Christ himself. 160. 161.
We must give up our selves to this Lord. 166. etc. Christ's Lordship a stop
against Sin. 170. 171. It is also a comfort in affliction. 172. etc. Whether
Christ by dying, merited for himself. 178. 179. Christians must be always
projecting for his glory. 188. etc. Christ's Lordship comfortable in the hour
of death. 190. 191.
CHRIST'S EXALTATION PVRCHAST BY HV MILIATION.
ROMANS 14. 9. For, for this end Christ both dyed, and rose, and revived, that he
might be Lord both of the dead and of the living.
THe dependence of these words upon the former I take to be this; the scope of
the Apostle in this Chapter, is to stay the ridged censures of other,
concerning weaker Christians, especially about matters of indifferency, or at
the least of a less nature, In the 6. verse, says he, He that regards not a
day, regards it not to the Lord, he that eats, eats to the Lord, and he that
eats not to the Lord; he eats not, and gives God thanks, etc. His reason is
this, they that in eating or in not eating, do it with a religious respect to
the Lord: if they eat, it is to the Lord, if they eat not, it is to the Lord,
that is, in obedience to the Lord, they are to be borne withal, because they
do it with religious respects, though perhaps there may be a little error in
the matter, yet there be some things of such indifferency that they not give
denomination to the action, if it be to the Lord, howsoever the action be not
altogether to be excused, yet the person is to be excused, and is not to be
hardly censured: therefore considering that they that do it, and they that do
it not, do it to the Lord, be not hasty in your censures.

Quest. How does he prove that these holy Christians did eat, or not eat to
the Lord?

Answ. From this because they were the Lords they that are the Lords, they live
to him, and dye to him, and therefore they do particular actions to him, No
man, verse 7. lives to himself, nor no man dies to himself, which includes
all particular actions, Whether we live, we live to the Lord, or whether we dye
we dye to the Lord; whether we live therefore or dye, we are the Lords, he
proves therefore that they do eat, or not eat to the Lord, if they be good
Christians, because they are the Lords.

Those that are the Lords, live to the Lord, and do all particular actions to
the Lord, such must not be harshly censured, because they are the servants of
the Lord.

Quest.
In the third place^ how does he prove, that they are the Lords that live, and
dye to him?

Ans.
He prooves it from the maine ground in the text, For, for this end Christ both
dyed and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and of the
living. So you see the dependence of the reason, they eat, or eat not to the
Lord: why? because they are the Lords.

But how is it they are the Lords? It is the end of the three actions of Christ
here, Christ dyed, and rose again, and revived, for this end that he might be
Lord of the dead and of the living: so you see the connection of these words
with the former.

In the words you have argumentum and argumenti ratio, the argument, and the
reasoning from the argument, the ground and the inference from the ground, the
ground is, Christ dyed and rose again and revived; what is the inference from
that? that he might be Lord, of the dead and of the living.

In the words therefore we will consider the argument it self, the ground it
self, and then the inference.

For, for this end Christ both dyed, and rose, and revived. There are three
branches of the ground.

Christ Dyed. Rose. Revived.


Of the inference we will speak afterward, and show how these grounds
enforce that inference, that he should be Lord both of the dead and of the
living.

Christ dyed. First of all you must know that Christ dyed here as a public
person, or else the inference were not good, Christ took upon him the person
of no man, but the nature, for this end that he might be a public person; If
Christ had taken the person of any body, there had been two persons of Christ,
he had dyed in one person and not in another; now having the nature that is
common to all men, and not the person of Peter or James, etc. when he dyed the
person dyed in that nature, wherein he might dye, so when it is said Christ
dyed, we must consider Christ as a public person, not taking the particular
person of any man, but the general nature of man into union with the second
person, Christ dyed as a public person.

Secondly, Christ dyed as the second Adam; the spring of all misery and death
was from the first Adam, but the second Adam was a quickening Spirit, he dyed as
a public person, and the second Adam.

We must know moreover that he dyed as the great high Priest of the Church,
offering to God the Father a sacrifice that made him Lord over all, as we shall
see after: he dyed as a Priest, as indeed he that was fore-signifyed by all
the Sacrifices, and Priests, he was both Priest and Sacrifice, Heb. 9. 14. By
the eternal Spirit the Godhead, he offered himself to his Father.

Again he dyed a voluntary death: for else he had not dyed in obedience, his
death was violent in regard of them that forced it, but it was voluntary in
regard of them that he offered himself for, as a sweet Sacrifice to his
Father, that voluntarinesse made his death a sweet sacrifice: for whatsoever
the Father did to him, he joined with the Father in it, the Father gave him, he
gave himself, the Father appointed him to be so and so, and he joined with
the Father in all things, No man takes away my life from me says he himself.
It was a voluntary death, in regard of his freedom, nay he thirsted after it,
as you have it in the Gospel, he longed after it, upon higher considerations,
howsoever in a lower consideration, as it was a tormenting thing, and a bitter
cup, he had a desire that it might pass, but it was upon lower respects, upon
hi her respects the will of his Father, and the Salvation of mankind, he
thirsted to drink of that cup.

A man may will, and nill the same thing upon presenting of different objects,
and respects, and reasons, that which a man may decline as we say, in this
respect, looking to a particular end, that a man may desire looking to a higher
end; because man is framed so, to yield to the stronger reason always. Thereupon
that is no objection, he seemed sometime a little unwilling? It was, looking
upon something presented to him, that made him in that respect unwilling: but
looking upon other respects, he gave himself willingly, the Father and he
joined together.

And therefore by the way, when they talk of the active and passive obedience;
there was action, in all his passion; chiefly in his passion there was action;
for if it had been mere suffering without voluntary obedience, what obedience
had that been? a beast may so suffer, but against his will, but his voluntary
obedience was the chief, in all his passion, He humbled himself to the death
of the Cross, as it is Phil. 2.

Yet further, as he dyed voluntarily, so he dyed as our surety, therefore he
dyed a cursed death due to us, He was made a curse for us, that he might
remove the curse from us, these, and such like conclusions must be observed in
this, that the Apostle says, to this end Christ dyed, because we shall have
use of them afterward.

Here we might stay and admire, that life should dye! that glory should become
shame for us: And that he that is the Author of all blessing should become a
curse! Indeed it is a great mystery, that Christ being God, should stoop so
low that he could join together the infinite Majesty of God, and that low
degree of abasement, that he did condescend unto. Domine quo descendis, etc.
Lord how far go thou? he could not go lower, and be God. God to show his
love to us, showed himself God in this, that he could be God, and go so low
as to dye, and not only to dye, but to dye a shameful and cursed death for us,
but I pass to the particulars:

For this end Christ both dyed and rose, etc. He rose again, and indeed, it
was impossible, but he should rise again, because he is the Lord of life. Now
the Lord of life, and life it self could not long dye, it was but by
dispensation that he dyed, viz. to work our salvation, but he could not be
detained any longer by the sorrows of death, he dyed therefore, and rose, he
rose, even as he dyed, he rose a public person, and as a second Adam, to give
and infuse spiritual life into all his branches, he rose as our surety in our
room, he rose in spite of the Jews, that labored to keep him down, all
they could: By the way, this shows that he will rise in his Church, and in his
children, in his Religion, and in his cause, let the world, and all the devils
in hell lay a stone upon Christ, upon his cause, and Church, and children, they
will rise again, even as his blessed body did, in spite of all the
watchfullnesse of the Jews.

Again, as he rose, so he rose with many, not alone to show (as I said before)
that he rose as a public person, another man rises as himself, the rest
rise not with him, as caused by his rising. But Christ rose as a public
person: Therefore, many rose with him, the graves were opened, to show that he
rose as a public person, as our surety, as a spiritual head, and as the
second Adam, who could infuse life into others. What became of those bodies
that rose with him after? the Scripture says nothing of it, nor what became of
Moses body. They rose to do God a service, and Christ an honor, which when
they had done, they were content to be disposed of by God again, and it is
likely, to return from whence they came: for if the head of the Church,
himself was content to come from heaven into the Virgins womb, and from
thence to the cross, and from thence to the grave, and to be abased for us,
those that have the Spirit of Christ those blessed souls in heaven might well
be content for a time to be abased, to take bodies, to do a service for their
Lord and master; who was content to foregoe heaven thirty four years, and the
glory due to him.

Therefore by the way, if God will use us (though we be never so great) for a
particular service to the Church, shall we stand upon it, when the blessed
Saints in heaven, those blissful souls were content to come, and take bodies
for a time, to do God service, and then to sleep again?

Again, he rose on that day, which was ever after, and well may still be
called the Lords day: for a new world began with his rising, therefore a new
Sabbath; Saint John says, I was in the Spirit upon the Lords day. If a man be
ever in the Spirit, it is upon the Lords day, when the Lord of the day does
honor his people, giving them to enjoy his Ordinances, and joining effectually
with them, makes them full of the Spirit, and raises up our dead hearts after
him.

And revived. Why is this added to rising again? He revived?

To show that he rose never to dye again, and that indeed he never meant to
lay aside that body again, as once he had, to dye for us. Consonant hereunto
is that, Revel. 1. 18. Behold, I was dead, and am alive, and I live for
evermore, I have the keys of death, and of hell. He lives for evermore, as
Heb. 7. He sits for evermore at the right hand of God, there making
intercession for us. He dies no more.

Again, this (revived) is added, to show the kind of his life, differing from
that life he lived before, that life he lived, before he dyed, was supported
with meat, and drink, and refreshings: even as our poor lives are. It was a
life subject to death, that he dyed in, but after his Resurrection, except it
were for a particular dispensation to confirm the faith of his Disciples, he
needed no more to eat, or drink, or sleep, or any natural supports, and
helps, for he was enlivened immediately by the Spirit of God which flowed into
him, he was full of the Spirit, and that did supply all other things
whatsoever. Even as in heaven, God shall be all in all, that is, he shall be
so immediately to us, to supply all, as we shall neither eat, nor drink, nor
sleep, nor have magistrates, nor ministers, but the Spirit of God will be all
in all, so it was with this life of our blessed Savior, when he revived, the
Spirit supplied the absence of all other supports whatsoever, that he used
before he dyed. And indeed our Savior Christ came to bestow that life upon us,
that he lived after his Resurrection, not this natural life of ours, that
needs meat, and drink, and refreshing, this is not that life, that Christ
specially aimed at, when he came to dye, but that spiritual and eternal life,
that he lived after the Resurrection, a life not subject to death, a spiritual
life, not needing any created support whatsoever.

You see the grounds, the inference from these grounds, follow in these words,
That he might be Lord both of the dead and of the living. The ground has
three branches, death resurrection, and reviving, how all these do flow, and
give strength to this inference, I will touch in the particulars. First, then
Christ dyed that he might be Lord of the dead, and of the living.

Christ dyed, 1 Pet. 3. to offer himself a sacrifice to redeem us by his
precious blood, we are not redeemed with Gold or Silver, but with the blood of
Christ: he could not be our Lord till he had bought us, now his death was the
price of our redemption, I say redemption, not emption, a thing may be bought,
that was never sold away before: now we were sold to Satan, and under a
contrary government, now Christ satisfying divine justice, redeemes us, he
buys us again, we had subjected our selves to the devil, and put our selves
under his regiment, till we were ransomed by Christ, now Christ shall have no
right to us, till the price be paid to divine justice; for mercy must have
justice satisfied, the attributes of God must not fight one against another.
Christ therefore is Lord of us, because by death, he gave full content to
divine justice, so that now notwithstanding justice, yet we are Christ's, and
are saved, nay now the justice of God helps us, the most terrible attribute
justice, is a ground of comfort: for it stands not with justice to have the
same debt paid twice. For God is just and faithful, says the Apostle, so then
you see there is a ground from death, why we are the Lords, we are Christ's
because we cost him dear he has paid a price for us, that is worth more then
the whole world. Now God showed his love in nothing more then in this, that he
parted with that that is next himself, the greatest, his Son, who being God,
yet dyed in that nature, that could dye to redeem us, and hereupon becomes
Lord.

Secondly, He rose again, therefore he is Lord of the quick and dead.

First, because his rising again, was a manifestation that his death was a full
satisfaction to divine justice, or else our sins should have kept him in the
grave still, he being our surety: but our surety being out of prison, it is a
sign he has fully discharged all our debt, and the price is paid. If the
surety and the creditor be agreed, we know the debt is paid.

Secondly, in that he rose again, he is Lord: because in rising again, he
entered into the possession, and exercise of that Lordship, that he had
purchased. The right is one thing, and the use and possession of the right is
another. Christ was Lord of us before he dyed, he was Lord of us when he dyed:
but he did not enter into possession of this Lordship till he rose again.
Therefore he says, All power is given to me, both in heaven and earth; when
he was ready to go up to heaven, to show that by his resurrection, the right
he had by death, was manifest.

Lastly, because his rising again; showed that the father was fully pacified,
he obtained the gift of the Spirit, which next Christ himself, is the greatest
gift, God gave his Son first; and then the Spirit that comes from the Father
and the Son. The Spirit was not given till his resurrection and ascension, as
it is John 7. Why? because, till all enemies were fully subdued by his death,
and witnessed to be subdued, by his resurrection, the Spirit could not be so
fully given, the Spirit being a declaration of the good will of God that sent
it. Now when the enemies of Christ were tryumphed over, and God had showed by
the raising of his Son again, that he was fully satisfied. Then the Spirit
comes, as the Son of Gods favor, which Spirit does enable us to be subject to
Christ, and makes us come under Christ's Kingdom, which is a spiritual
government. Wherefore, because he obtained the Spirit for his members upon his
resurrection, thereupon is the inference good, he rose again, therefore he is
Lord of the quick and of the dead.

Thirdly, He revived, therefore he is Lord of the quick and of the dead?
reviving and taking such a life, as is not subject to death any more: he is
now in heaven, to make good that he purchased on earth. He revived I say, to be
a King, Priest, and Prophet, at the right hand of God for ever, there to rule
his Church, and to overrule all the enemies of it, till he has subdued all,
till he has gathered all the Elect, and brought his Church out of the world,
and made his enemies his footestoole. You see then the ground is good, and the
inference is good. Christ dyed, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord of
the quick and dead. I come now to the thing proved.

That he might be Lord both of the dead, and of the living. Christ is Lord,
both of the dead and of the living, for the better clearing of the point, let
us see what is Lordship?

Lordship properly is Ius in rem and personas, it is a right, and where it is
full, it is a right with possession, either in things or persons.

But what manner of Lordship is this?

Christ is an universal Lord of and over all, over all the world, both over
all the dead, and all the living, but more especially, and in a peculiar
manner, he is Lord of his Church; even as a husband is Lord over his wife,
which is a Lordship with sweetenes: So Christ's government is with unspeakeable,
with unconceiveable sweetness. He is Lord, as the elder brother, as the first
begotten is over the rest, for he is the first begotten among the dead, this
likewise is a sweet government. It is indeed a Lordship, of a King over his
subjects, as his Lordship is a branch of his Kingly office, but it is such a
Lordship as is for the good of his Subjects, It is not a derived happiness,
they enjoy the head, and the subjects; Christ accounts himself happy in his
Church, which is his fulness, the Church is the fullness of him that fills
all things. Ephe. 1. And more especially is the Church most happy in this
government, it is such a Lordship, as is indeed altogether for the good of the
Subjects. To us a Child is borne, to us a Son is given. He dyed, and rose,
and revived, and all is for us, a Christian may say of Christ, that he is totus
in meos usus expensus, as one well said, he is all mine, he is all expended
for my use and profit. It is such a Lordship, as makes all his subjects Kings,
therefore it is said, Rev. 1. He loved us, and gave himself for us, to purge
his Church, as it is Ephe. 5. and likewise to make us Kings and Priests; where
note, Christ has a notable attendance upon him; he is served with none but
Kings: All Gods children are Kings, even the meanest servant that is any where
in the world, in spiritual respects is a King, what a Lord and King is this,
that makes all his servants Kings. You see therefore, as Christ is an
universal Lord, and also he is a peculiar Lord over his Church.

Again, he is an independent 2. Independantly.
Lord, only his Father joins with him in all, he is subordinate to his Father
as mediator, but he is independent in respect of all humane authority
whatsoever, all humane authority is derived from him, By me Princes reign,
etc. His government in regard of all those governements, is altogether
independent, therefore he is called the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, he
is Lord Paramount as we say, over all, and they all are, or should be dependant
upon him.

And likewise he is a 3. Lord in the whole man
Lord of the whole man, body and soul, he is a Spiritual Lord: He commands
not the body only, but the Soul, he sits in the throne of conscience
especially, and there he subdues the conscience and the soul to him; there he
prescribes laws to the conscience, and pacifies the conscience, and
stablisheth conscience, and settles it against all fears and terrors
whatsoever, he is Lord of body and soul, especially of the soul, he bows the
neck of the inward man, and brings it wholly to be subject to him, he lays
his command upon the very soul it self.

And he is an eternal 4. An Eternal Lord.
Lord, you see here he is Lord of the quick and of the dead, all other Lords
have nothing to do with men, when they are dead they can do them no more
harm, they have some power indeed over their dead bodies, but alas that is
senseless; their government ends in death, because they are Lords over the
outward man only: but Christ's Lordship is when we are gone hence, and then
more especially; for then we are more immediately with him, we are nearer the
fountain, when our souls are gone to him, that gave them: I desire (says S.
Paul) to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all, especially
then he is Lord, when we are gone hence.

In a word, he is an excellent Lord, for he has 5. An Excellent Lord.
all things that a Lord should have: a Lord should have three things,
authority, suitable virtues and abilities, power and strength answerable to all:
Now the Lord Christ has all these; and first he has authority, for God the
Father gave him power over all, he purchased it, and his Father gave it him,
he gave him the heathen for his possession, and All power is given to me, in
heaven and earth; and he has full authority, as it is John 17. Thou have
given me power over all flesh, he has then authority. Secondly he has all
graces and virtues fit for a Lord and governor, he has Righteousness,
Wisdom, bounty, affections, etc. we need not make doubt of it, for he is the
spring of all these in others; his scepter is a Scepter of righteousness.
Thirdly, he has strength answerable to his authority, for he is a Lord that
is God; sometimes among men authority wants power, or other qualifications, but
in Christ is all: the utmost, and greatest fullness of all: These things
premised, let us make some use of all.

But first let us see why its said He is Lord both of Why the dead are put
before the living.
the dead and of the living, prefixing the dead before the living? To show I
conceive that Christ is Lord of those that were dead before, as well as of
those that are alive now. Christ is the Lord of all from the beginning of the
world, from Adam to the last man that shall stand upon the face of the earth;
therefore he is Lord of those that were dead before, as well as of those that
are alive now, and that shall dye after, he is Lord of the dead, and of the
living: Now for use, first where he says,

For this end. It is a point wondrous pregnant, and full of very comfortable
use: first showing that the grounds of a Christians faith and comfort, are very
strong, (as you see how the holy Ghost dwells upon the argument) For this end
(says he) Christ dyed and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord of
the quick and of the dead.

God does all to ends, it being a point of wisdom to prefixe an end, and
work to it: If God has an end, and providence in the hairs that fall from
our heads, has he not a far greater in disposing of things for the good of
the Church? His Son is given to death and raised again, it is for the
greatest end in the world, being the greatest work, the greatest work has
the greatest end, such was this end, the Lordship of the Church; For this end
(says he) Christ dyed, and rose again, that he might be Lord of the dead,
and of the living which is his Church.

And is this Christ's end to be Lord of the living and of the dead, we must have
it then our end too, to serve Christ, to live and dye to him, for being under
him, our ends must be answerable to his, as we shall see after.

For this end. Again where it is said Use 2.
he dyed, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord of the dead and of the
living. It is a profitable course (I speak it only in general) when we
think of the abasement of Christ, to think of the end why; so of his
exaltation, its good to keep these together to avoid scandal, that might
arise in our minds from either, though of by it self, that God should stoop
so low, least the thoughts of Christ dying and stouping so low should offend
us, its good also to think of the end that he might be Lord of quick and
dead, and if that dazell thee again, to think of our Savior now in glory,
full of majesty in heaven, and how shall thou have access to so glorious
majesty: oh come down again! and think of God incarnate, God going up and
down in our flesh, of God dying, dying a cursed death, and rising again, thus
in your meditations inter. weave these thoughts to avoid scandal, think of
his glory, and that you may not be amazed at the glory, so as to be deterred
from going boldly to him, think of bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh,
God dying in our nature, join these two together, For this end the Son of
God both dyed, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead,
and of the living.

Again you see here in general that the grand principal points of religion,
have an influence into all the particulars, and there is a homogeniall
deduction, (as we call it) of divine truths one from another, all depend one
upon another, and all divinity: for howsoever divine truth be contrary to
carnal reason sometimes, yet there is strong reason in all divine truth, for
one is the cause of another, and one depends upon another, as here, Christ
dyed, and rose, and revived, one follows another: what from all this: to be
Lord of quick and dead, how then prooves he that he is Lord of all? because he
dyed, and rose, and revived, one rises from another, so that though carnal
reason be one thing, and all divinity be another, yet there is reason, and
deduction, issuing of one thing from another, in divinity most wisely and
holily, and it is a part of wisdom to observe, how conclusions rise from
principles, as branches and buds do from roots: indeed if we would enter
into serious considerations of the grounds of religion, how they give life and
rise unto their particulars, they would have an influence into the whole course
of our life, as perhaps we shall see in the particulars more clearly.

For this end, etc. Again in general, when he says Christ is Lord of the
quick and of the dead, we see thence the truth of the Catholic Church, from
the first man living to the end of the Church, under one head Christ: Christ is
the Savior of those that were before the Law, under the Law, under the
Gospel, Christ was the Savior of all, he is the Savior of the dead as well
as of the living, all come under one head, which has no further use than to
inform us, in that one point of doctrine, to show that Christ is yesterday as
well as to day, to Morrow, and for ever, all that were saved before, that are
saved now, and that shall be for ever, are saved by Christ, there is no other
name under heaven, whereby we can be saved, he is the Lord of the dead and of
the living: Now therefore to come more particularly, Christ is Lord both of the
dead and of the living, what a Lord we heard before?

This is a point of wondrous comfort, and likewise a point informing us of our
duty, and withal showing us that Christ will work that duty in us, because he
is a Lord, not only that should rule over us, that we should be subject to
him, but to make us subject to him, it is a point of wondrous comfort, and of
duty, and of this issue that we under the covenant of grace, shall be enabled
to perform that duty to our Lord. And then it is a point of wondrous security,
in life, in death, as alas, sometime one thing amazeth us, sometime another,
sometime we are willing to dye, Elias was afraid to live, sometime we are
afraid of-death, as we are all naturally: why, come life, or death, come what
will come, we are under a Lord that is Lord of the dead, and of the living, so
it is a point of wondrous security and quiet to a Christian in all passages,
he sometimes lives, and sometimes dies, but his salvation is not at that
hazard to be off and on, but whether he live or dye, he is sure to be saved,
for he is under the Lord of the living, and the dead.

But to speak a little of the first; it is intended for comfort, as well as
direction, to duty, and to be subject, to submit to the Lord, it is a comfort
that we have a Lord that rules us for our good, while we are living, and when
we are dead, and for ever: and indeed we cannot have a greater comfort
beloved than this, that we are not our own, but that we are bought with a
price, that we are under Christ, why what a comfort is this, will you say? homo
non est natus, etc. as the natural man said, a man is not borne to subjection
but to honor, and government, what comfort is this, to be under Christ, to be
under a governor?

Answ.
Oh beloved know that it is the greatest comfort, as the rule is, every thing
is perfect if it be weak, by that whereby it is subject to a higher, the vine
is perfect by leaning to the Elm, it would lie on the Simil.
ground else, and be spoiled: the perfection of the weak creature the sheep,
is to have a shepherd, the perfection of a weak nature is to have a ruler for
their good; the perfection of the ship, is the Pylate, it would dash on every
rock, and be tossed with every wave else, and so it is our perfection that we
are under a Lord, such a Lord as this is, cui servire regnare est, etc. to whom
to serve is to reign, for all his servants are so many Kings, it is our
perfection to be subject to him, therefore it is a wondrous comfort that
Christ is become Lord of the living and of the dead: I beseech you therefore
think of it in your meditations, all the Scripture aims at this end to
comfort, whatsoever is written, is written for our comfort, and this is a
principle of divinity among the rest, that a Christian is not his own man now
but he is under Christ, and this is a comfort both in life, and death at all
times, as the Psalmist says, My times are in thy hands Lord, he says not my
time, but my times are in thy hand; so we may say our times are in Christ's
hands, our time of being borne, our time of living and dying, and when we are
dead, our time of rising again; our time, the whole current of our time is in
thy hands, not in the devils hands, not in our enemies hands, beloved, for
they would make short work with us then, but our times are in our Lords hands,
Christ is the Lord of our times, the Lord of our life, and death, and when we
are dead he is a Lord for ever, for he lives for ever, and therefore he is for
ever a Lord. Beloved we do not live and dye, at the devotion, and good
pleasure of any man whatsoever, they cannot stir so much as a hair from our
head without the will of this Lord, all the devils in hell cannot stir a
hair of our head, I say nor all men that are acted by the Spirit of the
devil, they may threaten punishment, but alas they can do no more, then this
Lord of Lords, will give them leave, therefore it is a point of wondrous
comfort.

Object.
Oh but will a poor soul say, Christ indeed is Lord of the living, and of the
dead, but I find a great deal of corruption in me, etc. and I am a sinner.

Answ.
Why he is Lord over thee, he has a sweet Lordship over thee, as well as a
commanding Lordship, he is not only a King but a husband as it is Ephesians. 5. He
gave him. self to purge his Church, and to make his Church fit by little and
little, thou have sin and corruption, but thou have a merciful husband that
will bear with the weaker vessel, does he command others to do that, and
will he not practice that that he enjoynes others? undoubtedly he will, and
therefore it is a comfort, it is a sweet government and subjection, as of the
husband over the wife, Christ purges, and cleanses his Church, he does not
cast it away.

For I beseech you consider, he that dyed for his Church and children, when
they were enemies, will he cast them away now they are poor friends, and
desire to please him? as Saint Paul divinely reasons, Romans 5. Much more shall
we be saved by his life, If he saved us by his death, much more now by his
life, being in heaven, consider he rose and lives for ever, therefore will he
cast us away for some imperfections, that dyed for us when we were enemies? he
that will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed, will he
cast away his poor children that strive against their corruptions? he will
not, nay he has promised where he has begun a good work, he will finish
it to the day of the Lord, though it go but slowly forward, yet that beginning
is a pledge of proceeding, God will never remove his hand from his own work,
till he have brought it to perfection; therefore let any soul comfort it
self, that will come under this Lord in a word what greater comfort can we
have than this, that he is such a Lord over us, as is Lord over all things in
the world besides: for he could not be Lord of his Church, except he were
Lord over hell, and all power were subject to him, now being so he is such a
Lord of the Church as can restrain the power of all other creatures
whatsoever, because else they might annoy the Church, and affront him in his
government by opposition, if he were not Lord of all things, else as well as of
the church, but this is the comfort of a Christian, he is under a Lord, that
is Lord of of all the enemies of the Church, and he is so Lord over them till
by little and little, he make them his footestoole, that that is begun in this
world, shall be consumate hereafter by that Lordship, nay he will make all the
enterprises of the very enemies of his Church whatsoever serviceable, to his
poor Church, for as the Apostle says, All things are yours because ye are
Christ's, he is such a Lord, as that besides himself, being ours, he makes all
the world ours, yea the devil is ours, for in spite of him whatsoever he
does, it is ordained to the salvation of the Church, the Churches enemies are
the servants of the Church, the unvoluntary servants, for they waken the
Church, and scour it, God ray seth them up for the exercise of the Church, and
when he has done, you know what course he takes with them, so then he is Lord,
not only over all, but he overrules their actions, for the good of the Church,
whatsoever they are, and he makes all the endeavors, and plots of the enemy
for the Churches good, all is yours, life, and death, though it be death by
tyrants, all kind of death whatsoever, it is yours, what a comfort is this,
that we are under such a Lord as this?

Especially, what a comfort is this at the hour of death, when Christ; that
has ruled us all our life time before, will take then the government and
possession, of that Jewel that he has bought with such a price, our precious
soul, that when we must part with friends, and part with this sweet body,
that the soul so much loved, and with the world, and all things in the world,
then Christ will owneus for his, when the world will own us no longer. Therefore
me thinks Christians should be at a point, for life or death, he never goes
out of the dominion of Christ, nay he is nearer Christ, he is more Christ's,
if there be any comparison to be made, when he is dead, then when he is
alive, Blessed are those that dye in the Lord.

To apply this a little to the present occasion, here in this Sacrament we are
to have Communion with this Lord, of his death and resurrection. For what is
the Sacrament but are presentation of his body broken, and of his blood powered
out for us, that he might be Lord over us? The more communion and fellowship
you have with Christ, the more assurance you shall have that you are his, which
is indeed the grand comfort of all, that we are Christ's, that Christ is ours,
for then heaven and earth is ours, all is ours. Now God has ordained these
Sacraments for this end, the word is the Scepter of his Kingdom, whereby he
rules, the Sacrament is the seal of the word, therefore all good subjects that
submit themselves to the Kingdom of Christ, must submit themselves to this
sweet ordinance of Christ, that he has ordained for our good, the word, and
Sacraments, thereby we shall find the effectual working of his Spirit in us,
subjecting the whole inward man to his gracious government, but having spoken
of this subject at large heretofore, I only desire you to raise up your
thoughts, to consider whom you have to deal with, with him that is Lord of the
quick, and of the dead, we have to deal with the mighty Monarch of heaven,
and earth, Christ; therefore come, as with faith, because he has ordained
these things to strengthen faith, so come with reverence, knowing with whom we
are to feast, and to deal, consider of these things, and then I hope that God
will vouchsafe a blessing answerable to the intendment of his ordinance.

THE SECOND SERMON ON
ROMANS 14. 9. For to this end Christ both dyed, and rose, and revived, that he
might be the Lord, both of the dead and of the living.
I Showed the dependence in the forenoone, a Christian by the Spirit of God in
him, he has a blessed aim at all times, howsoever he may fail in
particulars, yet his aim is right.

This doubt rose from difference of aims, whether he should please God or man?
his doubt rose in pleasing of God, what might please him most, and because he
sees not always what might please him, therefore he carries this honesty, that
whatsoever he does, he will do it to the Lord, and whatsoever he does not, he
will not do it to the Lord, his aim is for good at all times.

Now this is proved from the general disposition of Christians, they live, and
dye to the Lord, therefore their particular actions must be to the Lord, if
their whole life and death, be to the Lord, their actions must be to him.

Now he proves their whole life, and death are to the Lord, because they are
the Lords, how does he prove that they are the Lords? that is Jesus Christ's,
because the Text says here, For this end Christ both dyed, and revived, that
he might be Lord both of the dead, and of the living.

And surely he is Lord, he will not miss of his end; God never misseth of his
end, because he can remove all impediments between him and his end: Now it
being Christ's end to be Lord of the quick, and of the dead, he is Lord, if he
be Lord, then those that are under him, and led by his Spirit, aim both in
life and death, to glorify him in all things. This in a word be spoken, for
the inference of the words.

To this end Christ both dyed, and rose, and revived. Here you have a ground
and an inference: An argument and a reasoning from it.

The argument or ground is, Christ dyed, and rose, and revived.

That that rises thence is, that he might be Lord both of the dead of of the
living.

In the^ ground it self, I told you how Christ dyed as a public person, as
the second Adam, etc. and now here you are to take notice likewise that he
rose again as a public person, as the second Adam, etc.

And likewise he re^vived, not to dye again, as in his first life, when he
began to live, he began to dye, but when he revived he did not dye
again, he lives for ever to make intercession for us in heaven, Christ never
dies again, Romans 6. he rose to a life that shall never end, for the divine
nature does flow into his humane nature, and does immediately inspire such a
spiritual life into it, as it lives for ever, by virtue of the Spirit of
Christ, actuating, and stirring and moving him, as his natural life did here,
when he was upon the earth.

Christ dyed, and rose, and revived. To what end is all this, what is grounded
hence, that Christ therefore is Lord of quick, and dead, this is inferred from
all three.

Christ dyed, that he might reconcile us to God by his death, satisfying
justice, and so justice being fully satisfied, he might have his end in being
Lord of his Church, he had a mind to marry us, but he could not till he had
rescued us, therefore to rescue us out of divine justice, and from the tyranny
of Satan, Gods jailer, he made satisfaction to divine justice. As for Satan
he brought us out of his kingdom by strong hand, and so does continually by
the power of his Spirit. Now hereupon it must needs be that he must be Lord
of that he paid so dear a price for.

And then he rose again, for this end that he might be Lord, because,
howsoever he had a title to be Lord of the Church by the union of the humane
nature with the divine, he was Lord always, yet in regard of the exercise of his
Lordship, it was deferred till his glorious resurrection, and ascension, then
that that lay hid before Christ's divine power, majesty and Lordship, that
appeared, and manifested it self, as it is Romans 1. He was mightily declared to
be the Son of God by the resurrection from the dead, he was the Son of God
before, but then it was a kind of begetting, because it was then manifest:
things are said in Scripture and Divinity, to be when they are apparent to be,
so this day of the resurrection, Christ was begotten, because it was apparent
then by raising himself from the dead, that he was the only begotten Son of
God, now that made way for his Lordship, for after his resurrection God gave
him power over all things in heaven and earth, and then upon the resurrection
he had the Spirit in more abundance, having conquered all enemies between God
and us, therefore he was fit to be Lord by that, because he could give the
Spirit to them over whom he meant to rule.

But then in his own person he rising, triumphed over all opposite enemies
whatsoever, over death the last enemy, and over Satan, sin, and the Law,
having cancelled all, surely he has overruled all for himself, he will
overruled all for his Church and people, and therefore he rose again, to be
Lord of quick and dead: and he may well be, because he is Lord of quick and
dead in his own person, he is Lord over all in his own person; and therefore
he is Lord over the Church, and all the enemies of the Church, so far as the
enemies seized upon his person, so far he overcame them all, he has as much
care of his mystical person the Church, as he had on his own body, and more
too, for he gave that for the other.

And then he revived to be Lord over all, that is, he lives for ever to make
good what he has gotten by his death, he will not lose the price of his own
blood, he is in heaven to appear before God, and sits at the right hand of
God, and rules there till he have made all his enemies his footestoole, till he
draw his Church home to heaven, to himself, he lives for ever as the Apostle
says, to make intercession, hereupon it must needs be that by living for
ever he is fitly qualified to be Lord over all the quick: now I proceed.

That he might be Lord both of quick and dead. Christ is Lord both of the dead
and of the living, you see upon what ground he is Lord of all, as well as of
his Church, he is an eternal Lord over the dead and the living, he is a
transcendent Lord, above all other Lords whatsoever, and he is independent, he
is not obnoxious to any, all have power from him, and in some sort indeed
Christ has redeemed even all other creatures, they are Christ's, and in some
sort even proud wicked men, that live in the Church, that have perhaps some
parts (which are the occasion of their damnation, because of and by them, they
are proud and insolent,) they are redeemed by Christ, thus far to be
serviceable to his Church to use their parts to his own ends, they go a great
way in salvation, that so by their parts, they may be fit to do service to the
Church, so he is Lord, not only over the Church, but of others for the service
of the Church.

Now this point, that Christ is Lord of the dead and of the living, it yields
many comfortable uses, I spoke of some things in general, and then we came to
some particulars, as

First, seeing Christ is Lord of the quick and of the dead, we may comfort
our selves under the Sovereignty of Christ: To be Solomon's servant, was
accounted a great happiness, those that did observe the government of
Solomon, did think so, as the Queen of Sheba: Alas, what shall we think of
those that are under Christ, who is greater then Solomon? A most great, a most
wise, a most loving, a most gracious and powerful Lord over all, therefore it
is a most comfortable condition, here in this life, (to add a little to that
point) however it be service, it is against the nature of man to serve a man,
yet not to serve a more noble, to serve God is to reign.

Besides while we live here, such is our disposition, such is the weakness of
base sinners, that they must be ruled by another, and indeed our happiness
and security consists in being ruled by another higher than our selves, we are
not fit to be our own governors, S. Paul says to the Galatians, an heir in
his none-age differs little from a servant, so it is with Christians till
they be in heaven, they differ little from servants, and therefore they must
be under tutors, and government.

And as it is a comfortable, so it is an honorable condition, for Christ's
Servants are so many Kings, Christ is served of none but Kings, and such Kings
as do not rule over slaves, but such Kings as in Christ rule over the
greatest, and terriblest enemies of all, a Christian can think with comfort
and encouragement upon those enemies, that make the greatest tyrants of the
world to quake; he can think of death, of sin, of damnation, of judgment,
of the Law, of all these things: Christ's Kingdom is another manner of Kingdom
than the Kingdoms of the world, they are poor Kingdoms, their Monarchs heads
must lie as low as the basest subject they have, they know not how soon, and
perhaps have a more terrible account to give, than any other under them: it is
not so in Christ's Kingdom.

Therefore those Christians that are afraid of death, they forget their
dignity, they forget him on whom they depend; for Christ is Lord both of the
quick and of the dead, if so be Christ be their Lord when they dye, what need
they fear to dye, and therefore let us comfort our selves when God calls for
us, he is our Lord as well when we dye, as while we live, and more too: for
then our souls have more immediate communion with him, can there be more
comfort than this, that we have a Lord ever, that dyed for us, that rose for
us, and lives for ever, and does immortalize his subjects too? join these
together, an ever-living Lord, and ever-living subjects, coexistent I mean for
the time to come, we indeed have a beginning, (Christ had none as God) but we
have an eternal state to be for ever, and an eternal Lord to rule us for
ever, and to make us happy forever, what comfort is more than this, that
howsoever there be variety of conditions in this world, we live, we dye, we
are in prosperity, we are in misery, yet there is no variety in the state of
Salvation, Christ is not a Lord to day and none to morrow, but yesterday, to
day, and the same for ever.

Again as it is a point of comfort, so it is also of duty, if Christ be our
Lord in life and death, our duty is to look to him in life and death, to live
and dye to him: for our aim must answer his aim if we ever intend to come to
heaven: for we are understanding creatures, and have a communion with him in a
poor measure; therefore what he will make his end must be our end, his end was
that whether we live or dye, he might rule over us, our end should be in life
and death to be ruled by him.

How shall we live to Christ?

We live to Christ, (this is a ground of all other duties that follow) when we
know, and acknowledge Christ has a full interest in us, by being our head, by
being our husband, by being our King, our elder brother, he has all the sweet
interest to us, that any relation can inright him to, for all other relations
among men are but shadows of that grand relation, there only is the realty
of things, he is a true head, a true King, a true elder brother, a true husband
of his Church, all ours are but, poor representations of those glorious
things, then know and acknowledge so much, that is the ground of all living to
him.

Upon knowing and acknowledging, issues all other obedience in our life to
Christ, those that thus acknowledge Christ, they must be directed by his will,
and not their own, as a servant as far as he is a servant, and a wife so
far as she is a wife, they have no will of their own; so he that lives to
Christ, and acknowledges him to be a Lord, he must have no will of his own,
but he must live according to the will of Christ, as you have it excellently
set down, 1 Pet. 4. Christ suffered for us in the flesh, let us arm our
selves therefore with the same mind: for he that suffered in the flesh, has
ceased from sin that he should no longer live the rest of his time in the
flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God: It is a comment upon this
place, Christ dyed and rose and revived, that he might be Lord of the quick
and of the dead, that is, that we might live according to his will, and not
after our own, do you think our Savior Christ would so far deny himself,
to leave heaven, to take upon him our base nature, and be so far abased in
it, to let us live as we list? oh no, we must live the rest of our days, not
according to the lusts of men, or our own lusts, but according to the will of
God; and therefore as the Apostle admonishes, Romans 12. we must search what is
the acceptable will of God in all things: what is the end of our hearing
Sermons, of our reading, and all the pains we take in the means of
Salvation? not only to know what God will do to us, but what he will have of
us, he will have the directing of our lives, and therefore if we will live to
Christ, we must labor to know his good pleasure to us, what he means to do
for us, and so his good pleasure with us, what he will have us do again by
way of thankfulness, Christ squared his life immediately according to his
fathers will (It is written, in the volumne of thy book that I should do thy
will oh God) so all that are Christ's must have the same Spirit, to direct all
their lives according to his will; now the most grand things of his will (for
his will is in the Scriptures) are that we repent, he commands all to repent:
his will is that we believe in him, his will is our sanctification, as it is 1
These. 4. his will is that we suffer, and in suffering submit our selves to him,
and the Scripture is express in many other particulars, but these especially
are named, to show something, wherein we must direct our selves according to
his will, but (not to insist upon particulars) in all things we must labor to
direct our lives according to his will.

Secondly, that we may live to God, we must aim at the glory of Christ in all
things, and at the credit of religion, not at our own credit; if Christ be
Lord of the quick, and dead, while we live we must not seek our own glory
but his: the contrary to this the Apostle complains of, All seek their own,
says he, and not the things that are of the Lord Jesus Christ, we must
consider what is for the credit of religion, and the honor of Christ, and not
what is for our own advantage: is it not good reason that we should seek the
glory of him that is Lord over us, naturally proud man is lead with a Spirit of
self-love, and he seeks himself in all things, even in his religion, so far
as it stands with his own lusts he will be religious and no further, so long
as Gods will is not contrary to his, he will do God Service, but if it cross
his will once, then he will give God leave to seek him a servant.

Thus man makes himself an Idol, he sets up himself in the room of God, he
does all things, as from himself, so for himself, nor indeed can he do
otherwise, (till he put off himself wholly, and deny himself) a man cannot
go beyond himself but by grace, that ray seth a man above himself, it makes
him have an eye to some excellency, out of himself, conformity whereto, and
interest whereinto will make him happy.

Now that we may aim at Christ in all things, it is good to call our selves to
account for our aims, wherefore we live, and wherefore we have are, or do any
thing, either in grace or nature, it is or should be, not only that we may be
saved our selves, but that Christ in all may be glorified, we need not sever
these, for Christ joins them both together, and he that seeks his own
Salvation, seeks the glory of God, because God will be glorified in saving us,
the end has a maine influence into all actions, and as it differenceth man,
from other creatures, that though he does the same action as a beast, he eats,
and drinks and sleeps, all for another end, for an end beyond himself,
because he is a reasonable creature, whereas other creatures rest in
themselves, so it differenceth between natural men, and Christians, they
differ in their aims not in their actions, both do the same thing, one does
it for base ends of his own, keeps within the circle of those ends, the other
having a light discovering excellencies better than the world can afford, and
having another Spiritual life above, he is thereby directed to further aims
in all, yea even in his civil actions.

Saint Paul gives a rule, that Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we
do, we should do all to the glory of God: though the action be common and
civil not tending directly to the glory of God, as eating, etc. yet our aim
should be in it, at Christ and at God, that the body thereby being refreshed
may be fit to serve God.

And indeed there is not the commonest action of this life, but we may show
that we have a good end in it, and therein glorify God, therefore in
Scripture, it is put as a kind of limitation, Obey in the Lord, marry in the
Lord, do all things in the Lord, that is in Christ, he shows that we should
do all such things, intimating that as we must go about such enterprises with
invocation of the name of the Lord, etc. so chiefly we should do them so
far and no farther, as they may stand with the favor and glory of Christ: In
subordinate things, the rule of subordinate things is to do them so far as
they may help to the maine end: Now the Service of all other is subordinate to
the Service of Christ, and all other bonds are serviceable to the maine bond in
marriage, or whatsoever we may not prejudice the bond of marriage in the Lord,
marry not rich, nor honorable, but in the Lord, all things must have their
limitation to be done in the Lord, that is, so far as they may stand with
pleasing the Lord, thus we see what it is to live to the Lord with his good
pleasure and likening.

Now an assistant help (of living to the Lord) is a perpetual self-denial
of our own wisdom, will, and affections in all things, else we shall live
to our selves, and to the Lord we shall never attain.

But you will say this is a hard saying; True, but consider this one thing,
that we are the greatest enemies to our selves of all, and we carry in our
selves a cursed enmity to all that is divine, and supernatural, naturally we
are trained up to our own will, therefore we cannot endure the yoke of Christ
without: supernatural strength.

Again divine things perpetually cross the liking of the soul, whereupon
there is an antypathy between us and Christ, and divine things, therefore
there must be self-denial of necessity. Now the knowledge of this will be a
good means to enable us to the duty.

Another help to this, of living to Christ, is to complain of our selves to
Christ, as Saint Paul Romans 7. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me,
etc. To inform against our rebellions, that we live too much to the flesh, and
too little to the Spirit; too much to our selves, and too little to Christ, by
reason of that principle of flesh and blood, and to desire him to captivate
all, and bring all in subjection by his Spirit, this is always a sign, of a man
lead by the Spirit, that it directs him to Christ, the Spirit as it comes from
Christ, and the father, so it directs to Christ to the pleasing of the Father,
and of Christ in all things.

Here I might take just occasion, to reproove a company of men that live under
the Gospel, that will be saved by Christ forsooth, but will not have Christ a
Lord to rule over them, they will be ruled by rules of state, or rules of
flesh, and blood, and their own lusts, by the rules of hell sometimes, so that
they may have their own aims, their own ambition satisfied and
raisethemselves, to their own pitch a disposition cursed, and opposite to that
religion which they profess, for our life should be a living to Christ, and
under Christ a living to the Church and state: But say they Let us break their
bonds, and cast their coards from us, what do they think we will be awed
with a company of poor preachers, away with them, we will have our wills, let
us break their bonds in sunder. Christ sits in heaven, and laughes them all to
scorn, Psalm. 2. they shall know at length he will be no Savior, where he is
no Lord, if he may not rule them by his Spirit and holy directions while they
live, he will not own them when they dye, for you see the text joins both
here, he dyed, and he is Lord, when he dyed there came water and blood out of
his side, to show that he came not only to shed his blood, to dye, and to
satisfy divine justice, but by water to cleanse us, and to fit us to be subject
to his government, therefore those that take him as a Priest to dye and will
not have him as a Lord they rent his offices, I do but touch these now.

We see what it is to live to Christ, let us see: what is it to dye to the Lord?

To dye to the Lord is to know and acknowledge that Christ has power over us
when we dye, thereupon to submit our selves to him, and not to murmr and
fret, when he comes to call for our life and soul, as if we were unwilling to
part with them.

Then again to dye to Christ is when upon any good occasion, he calls for our
lives, in standing for a good cause, for the Church or state, to be ready to
lay it down; there is not the least tittle of truth, but it is better than a
man's life, a man may not only dye, in case of martyrdom, but in case of
justice and truth, and so he must be willing to do, if he will dye to Christ.

Again we dye to the Lord when we carry our selves so when death comes, as
we may express some graces to glorify God, even in our very death, when we
studdy to do all the good we can, that we may dye fruitefully, out of this
consideration, my time is short, I will labor to be sowing to the Spirit, as
much as I can, not to dye like fools but wisely, knowing that there is no
further opportunity, here is the time of seed, hereafter will be the time of
reaping: therefore there is no Christian, that is master of himself at the
hour of death, if some disease disable him not, but he studdies how to show
himself as fruitful as he can at that time; as you see our Savior when he
was to dye, what long chapters there are three together, of his demeanor how
he strengthened his Disciples, what an excellent prayer he made to God, see
Moses how he carried himself at his death, what excellent admonitions he
gives; and good Jacob what an excellent Will he made, and S. Peter knowing he
must put of his earthly tabernacle, he labors to put them in mind to glorify
God as Saint Paul says.

A Christian ought to end his days in faith, and obedience; in faith that God
will take his soul, when he commits it to him, and he shall reign for ever in
heaven: In obedience thereupon, because he believes, he dies in faith, he will
dye in obedience, I even offer my self to thee, because I believe thou will
care for me when I am gone hence, for thou art the Lord of life and death and
thou art the Lord of me when I live, and when I am dead.

Well, as it implies duty, so it implies a gracious effect, that we shall be
enabled to this duty, he indeed in himself is a Lord, we ought to acknowledge
him so, nay, we shall have the Spirit if we be his, to cause us to acknowledge
him, you have a notable place, 2 Cor. 5. 15. to this purpose, The love of
Christ constraines us, because we thus judge, If one dyed for all, then we are
all dead, if he dyed to redeem us from death, to what end did he dye? he dyed
for all, that they that live, might not live to themselves, but to him that
dyed, and rose again: It is nothing but this in the Text, we should live to
him. Now this that we should live to him, it is not an aim of ours only, but
an effect that he works in us, he dyed that we might live to him, for he
dyed, and rose, that he might obtain the Spirit; by this Spirit he inableth
us to live, and dye to God, as you have it, Romans 8. at large proved, those that
are Christ's, have the Spirit of Christ, and are led with it.

Beloved, it is a part of the new Covenant, that whatsoever ourduty is, we
shall have ability to perform it, by the Spirit of Christ, for all the
gracious promises of the Gospel, are not only promises upon condition, and so
a covenant, but likewise the covenant of grace is a te stament, and a will, a
will is made without conditions, a covenant with conditions, that as he has
made a covenant what he would have us to do, so his testament is, that we
shall have grace to do so, he will put his Spirit into us, and circumcise our
hearts, or else beloved, there would be no more strength of the covenant of
grace, then there was of that of nature in Adam, why did Adam fall? he had not
the Spirit to uphold him, nor had he the promise of it, to keep him that he
should not fall, therefore the covenant of works was frustrate, but now the
covenant of grace is this, that whatsoever God requires, he will give his
Spirit, to enable us to do it, that the covenant may not be frustrate, if God
should not make good our part as well as his, we should not be saved. Therefore,
now in the covenant of grace, we may boldly go to God, and Christ, and
allege unto him, when any duty is pressed upon us, and when we are about to
perform any duty, and find want of strength, Lord thou know I have no
strength of my self, I am a barren wilderness, but thou have entered into a
covenant of grace with me, which covenant now is a testament, a free will, that
thou will give what thou requirest Lord, in the use of means that thou have
ordained, in attending upon thee, and looking up to thee, I desire that thou
would give me strength to submit to thee, to live, and dye to thee, to direct
my course, as I should, this should be the course of a Christian, and not to
set upon things in his own strength, but when duty is discovered, look to the
promise of grace, and of the Spirit, and put them into suite, and allege them
to Christ, in the use of sanctified means, as reading, hearing, holy
conference and the like, and he will enable us to do that that is our duty.

Therefore a man may know, who is indeed under Christ's government, by this,
for he that is actually under Christ's government, and acknowledges him to be
his Lord, he has ability to live, and dye to him, in some comfortable
measure, to deny himself, to go out of himself, to live and to dye to the
glory of God. The Spirit of God has given him this victory, and triumph over
his own heart.

Last of all, if this be so, here see the wondrous secure state of a Christian,
Beloved, that as Christ is his Lord, both in life and death, and it is his duty
to subject himself, so Christ will give him grace, so to direct his life.
Therefore let us do our duty, attend upon the means, and lift up our hearts
to God, let God and Christ alone with all the rest, let Christ alone with
ruling us, and with inabling us to be ruled by him; he is Lord not only over
us, but in us, by his Spirit. But theSpirit breaths where it lists, there
must be waiting upon God in his Ordinances, till we find ability to holy
duties, and those that have so much patience to honor God and Christ, so far
as to attend in the use of good means, till the good hour come, till the
Spirit come to subject their spirits to duty, no doubt but God intends well to
them, but those that are so short spirited, that if they find not ability to
deny themselves, and to live to God, and to break off their course of sin,
but give over in a kind of base despair, it is just with God to leave them to
themselves, that they shall even live and die to themselves, that is, they
shall live without respect to Christ, and dye without respect to Christ at all,
as if there were no Christ to take care for them.

Now out of this branch of holy security, upon the care and power, and Lordship
that Christ has over us, for the time to come, it rises that a Christian may
be assured of his salvation, of his perseverance because Christ is Lord of all,
he is Lord of his heart, he is Lord not only of the things without us, but of
our spirits within us, and he will enable us to subject our selves to him,
that neither things present, nor things to come, or any thing, shall ever be
able to separate us from the love of God in Christ, not only from Gods love to
us, but from our love to God.

Beloved, let this encourage us, to come under the government of Christ: There
is no security or safety, but in his government, we are sure of nothing in
this world, but we are sure of this, that Christ, if he be our Lord, is our
Lord for ever, and that nothing in the world shall ever be able to separate us
from him.

I will close with this, you see Christ is ours, whether we live or dye, he
is Lord of quick and dead, let us labor to live to him, that he may rule
over us while we live, else when we come to dye, though we never so much
(perhaps out of principles of self love) desire him to be ours, it is to no
purpose: while we live, therefore let us submit to his government, and if we
live to him, we shall easily dye to him: if we do not inure our selves by
daily self deny all, and practicing of the duties of obedience to live to him,
how shall we come to dye to him? our life may be snatched from us against our
wills, we may dye with a kind of fretting and indignation, that we can live
no longer, that we can enjoy our pleasures no longer, but to dye meekely, and
quietly, as to a Lord, submitting our selves to him that is the Lord of life
and death, a man can never do it, that has not lived to the Lord Therefore I
beseech you every day be acquainted with the actions of living to the Lord,
whatsoever you do to men, do it as to the Lord, in the Lords strength, to
please him, and as it may stand with his favor and no further: And especially
take the advantage of your younger years, to root out lusts, that will grow
to that head else, that God in his judgment, giving you up to your selves,
(after long rebellion) you shall never be able to deny your selves to live to
Christ, and when death comes to dye to Christ, therefore let us inure our
selves, to deny our selves, in the practice of every holy duty, as to the Lord
betimes, that so we may get the upper hand of our flesh, in these holy
performances, that they may be easy and sweet to us, as indeed the yoke of
Christ is after it is worn a while, the subjection of Christ is the sweetest
subjection in the world, it breeds the greatest peace, and joy, and love, and
contentment to the soul, and which is more then all, a blessed hope, for the
time to come, he that is life, is inured to holy duties, and has overcome the
rebellions of his base flesh, when he comes to dye, he can say with Simeon,
Lord now let thy servant depart in peace, that is, thou Lord of life, now thou will have me dye, I am even content to dye, to resign my self to thee, who
can say so, but he that makes Christ his Lord, all his life time? then when
death comes, he is content to yield unto him as a Lord, else it will be just in
the hour of death for Christ, to say as it is Judge. 10. do you come to me,
and commend your souls to me? go to the lords you have served, you have
served the humors of such a one, you have alliena'ed your souls to such a
one, you have given your souls to sin, and to such men as are instruments of
the devil, you have denied your honesty, your faith, your religion, go to
him, go to the gods you have served, they are your lords, I am not your Lord,
I was not al your life time, though these speeches be not uttered, the effect
of them will, the soul will conclude, I have served mine own lusts, and the
humors of others all my life time, how can I look that the Lord should take
my Soul, therefore let it be our daily practice, to live to the Lord, to have
the chief aim of our life in our eye, to direct our actions so, as they may
be serviceable to the maine, else not to perform them.

Herein consists the maine happiness of a Christian, that whether he lives or
dies he is not his own, but he is his, that can dispose of him, better then
ever he could of himself, for if we had the disposing of our selves, as Adam
had, what would become of us? what became of Adam, when he was master of
himself? he lost himself, and all. The second Adam has bought us with his
blood, and life, to rule us for ever, will he then suffer us to be disposed
off by our selves? No, whether we live or dye, we are his, if we yield our
selves sweetly to his government, in life and death.

THE THIRD SERMON ON
ROMANS 14. 9. For to this end Christ both dyed, and rose, and revived, that he
might be the Lord, both of the dead and of the living.
IN these words, as you heard heretofore at large, the Apostle labors to stay
the thoughts, and affections of men, concerning the things of indifferency,
that they should not be hasty to censure another Servant, who stands or falls
to his own Master, as you have it in Verse. 4.

The reason is, because whatsoever they do, they do it to the Lord, He that
regards a day, regards it to the Lord, he that regards not a day, regards it
not to the Lord. Some things are of that nature, that the right aim puts a
qualification upon the actions, a good end cannot qualify many actions, but
some actions are of that nature, that a good aim does not altogether justify
it, but it frees the person from some censure, he does it to God, some upon
some conceit, may abstain from a thing for religious ends, and are not to be
censured, some again perform it, and are not to be censured, because they do
it to the Lord, that is, out of religious respects.

How does he prove that they do it to the Lord? he proves it more generally,
ver. 7. None of us live to our selves, nor none of us dye to our selves, which
I spoke of before.

Then he proves that we are the Lords, because it was the end of Christ's dying,
and rising, and reviving, that he might be Lord both of the dead and of the
living, and if he be the Lord, then we ought to live, to this Lord of the
quick and dead.

We see Saint Paul here makes use of a general truth, of a grand principle,
that we are the Lords, and therefore live to him, and dye to him, and do
particular actions to him, or not do them to him, to show that we should have
in mind, information of sound general truths, that are the ground of all
particular practice, as we shall see after.

For to this end Christ both dyed, rose, and revived, etc. The words, they are
Christ's universal government of the dead, and of the living, inferred from the
end of his death, reviving, and rising again, a comfortable inference, from a
strong ground.

We considered the particulars, Christ's death, rising, and reviving.

Christ dyed as a second Adam, as a public person, in whom dying all dyed,
when other men dyed, particular men dyed, when Paul was dead, Paul dyed, and
there was an end, only there was an exemplary good, in his death, but there is
more then an exemplary good, in the death of Christ, Christ dyed alone, and
singular in this respect, because in him dying, all dyed that were his, that
the Father gave him to dye for, for they go parallel, Gods gift, and Christ's
death, he did all by commission, and he would not transgress his commission,
and he dyed a violent and cursed death, because otherwise he could not have
saved us, that were under a curse, so as a second Adam, he rose, and as a
public person, therefore we see in the resurrection of Christ, many rose, it
is like enough they dyed again, it was for a particular dispensation, to show
that Christ rose as a public person; and it is not strange to think so, that
to honor God they should be content to live a w^^^e, when Christ himself that
was God, was content to be man, and to be abased to death, that grand mystery
makes all other things credible, he rose therefore as a public person, to
give life to all that he dyed for.

So he revived, that is more than to rise again, never again to lay down
his life, as you have it excellently set down among other places, Revel. 1.
18. I am he that lives and was dead, and behold I live for ever more, amen,
and he seals it too, I have the keys of hell and of death, that is, the
dominion of hell and death, for inde^^ christ is life it self, and life cannot
dye, as God he could not dye, and therefore he took upon him that nature,
wherein he might dye for us, and now having done that dispensation, that
office, there is a perpetual influence of life, from the fountain of life,
his Godhead, to his humanity, so he never dies any more; then here follows the
scope and end of all,

That he might be Lord of the dead and of the living. The three offices of
Christ they have this order, in regard of manifestation. First, he was a
Prophet to instruct, and teach his in himself, and likewise by his ministry:
And then a Priest to dye for those that are his, to make intercession now for
ever in heaven; and then a King: first a Prophet, then a Priest, and then a
King: He was all at once, the very union invested him in all these, but in
regard of manifestation, he was first a Prophet to in struct us of the end of
his coming into the world, and then a Priest to do that grand office, that we
have most comfort by, and then a King to rule us, he could not be otherwise,
for if he had manifested himself a King, and a Lord in his glory, where had
been his abasement, if they had known him to be the Lord of glory they would
never have curcified him; only some sparkles of his God. head, and Lordship,
and Kingdom, and royalty over all flesh, brake out in his miracles, yea in his
greatest abasement there were some sparkles I say, even when he lay in the
manger, Kings came to adore him, when he paid tribute, he had it out of a fish,
by a command, by majesty, when he was on the cross he converted the good
these; so somewhat brake out of him, that he was a person more than ordinary,
but that was for special ends, ordinarily he went on in a course of
abasement, and all that he might perform the great work of redemption,
therefore he made a stop of his glory and Kingly office, that he might not
manifest himself, in that relation and office; that he might do the office of
a Priest to dye for us: therefore you have it here in the due order; Christ
dyed and rose again, as the high Priest of his Church, that he might he Lord
of the dead and of the living, he was so before, but he was not manifest
before: therefore he is said to be manifest to be God by the resurrection, Romans
1. 4. he was God from e^ternity, but he was borne then, This day have I
begotten thee, it is spoken of the resurrection, so you see here Christ's
offices, the state, and condition of his humiliation, and of his exaltation,
and the use and end of all, That he might be Lord of the dead and of the living.

And if we be any thing offended with that abasement, that God should dye,
look to his rising, and reviving, and Lordship over all, both quick and dead,
and if we be dazelled with his glory, look back again to God in our flesh,
and God in our flesh abased, even to the death of the cross; oh it is a sweet
meditation beloved, to think that our flesh is now in heaven, at the right
hand of God, and that flesh that was borne of the Virgin, that was laid in the
manger, that went up and down doing good, that was made a curse for us, and
humbled to death, and lay under the bondage of death three days, that this
flesh is now glorious in heaven, that this person is Lord over the living and
the dead, it is an excellent book to studdy this, beloved studdy Christ in the
state of humiliation and exaltation.

That he might be Lord of the dead etc. How is Christ Lord? He is Lord of the
dead, those that dyed before he was borne; and of the living those that are
since, he is yesterday, that is, to those that were before he was, and to day,
that is, when he was, and to morrow and for ever the same, therefore he says
of the dead and of the living, of the dead, that is, in reference to former
times, Christ is the Lamb of God slain from the beginning of the world.

By what title is he Lord?

By a title beloved, not as God, but by a title of conquest as a redeemer: for
he dyed that he might be Lord, we are a bloody spouse to Christ, we are the
price of his blood, he dyed that he might be Lord, he must win us before he
could have us; thereupon dying and purchasing us, now he is Lord of his Church
and Children by marriage, before he could marry us he must be borne in our
nature, for the husband and wife must be of one nature: and being in bondage to
a contrary King, to Satan; he must redeem and purchase us out of Satan's
hands, so he is a Lord by conquest, and then he is a Lord in a nearer relation,
he is a Lord as a husband, He is Lord both of the dead and of the living.

But the point is sweetest in the use of it, only know for a ground that
Christ is Lord of the dead and of the living, as mediator Godman, not as God,
but as God man, God in our nature, and hereupon we have diverse sweet
comforts: as for example.

First of all it shows what we may expect from Christ, what Christ will do to
us, and what we ought to return to him again, for relations are bonds,
especially when they are so founded, as this of Christ's is, to be Lord over us
both in life and death, it is founded upon redemption, and upon our Spiritual
marriage, relations are bonds, and therefore they tie on his part to show what
we may expect from him, he is Lord of the living, and of the dead, we may
expect on his part, all that a gracious Lord should do, to provide for his
Church and children, we may expect that from him, that (we can from none else
that) he should not only be Lord over us, but that he should make us subject
that he should flow in to us by his holy Spirit: for here is the prerogative
of Christ, that he is such a head as quickens dead members, he is such a
husband as makes his spouse beautiful, he puts glory upon her, no other
husband can do it, Moses married a black woman, but he could not alter her
hue, much less her disposition, it is not in the power of any man, a King
cannot alter his subjects, but he is such a King as alters the nature of his
subjects, he makes them subject, he takes them out of a contrary kingdom, as
being not borne his subjects, but borne anew by the Spirit, he does all
provision, protection, the changing of our natures, the beginning of a good
work, and where this Lord begins a good work, he finisheth it to his own
day: for beloved know this for a ground, that now in the second covenant, we
are not left as Adam was, in the hands of our own free will, to stand or fall,
but now in the second covenant that is founded upon Christ's death, and
satisfaction for us, Christ gives grace, he gives his holy Spirit to bring us
within, the compass, and performs both our part and his too; he makes good
his own to be a gracious Savior to us, and he performs our part too, or else
the second covenant, the covenant of grace should be frustrate as the first
was, if it were left to our freedom, therefore that is that that we may expect
from this Lordship of Christ, the performance of the covenant of grace, in
writing his law in our hearts, other Kings give laws and write them in tables,
but they cannot write them in the hearts of their subjects, but he is such a
Law giver as writes his own will in the heart, he teaches the very heart
obedience, we are taught of God to love one another, I will write my law in
their bowels, and in their inward parts, that is, they shall not only know
what they should do, but they shall know the doing, the affecting, and
performing of the things; they shall be able to do the things, so Christ is a
Lord over us, not only teaching us what we should do, and injoyning us in a
kind of superiority, this is your duty, and not this, but inabling us to do
that that he commands, he gives us the very doing, the affections and loving,
he teaches our hearts to love. I say this we may expect from him, in the use
of means, and subjecting to his ordinances, which is a wondrous prerogative to
those that will submit to his law.

We may expect again from this Lord advancement, he is such a Lord as makes
all his subjects kings, the meanest man that is a subject to Christ that has
the Spirit of Christ is a King: Now he is a King over that that all others are
slaves to, that are not Christians, they rule over others, but they are in
thraldom, to their own lusts, but he is a spiritual King, a King over hell,
and death, and those things, that the very greatest of men are afraid off; as
who fears death most? and hell most? those that deserve it most, by reason of
their great place, sink most in sin and rebellion against God, and contract
more guilt than other men that that they are afraid of a true Christian as a
Christian, is most triumphant over, he is a King over those things, for every
subject of this Prince is a King.

Christ's manner of government is hid now, there is more reallity in this, then
can be expressed therefore wonder not: In a word Christ as our Lord binds
himself to bring us to glory, never to leave us till he has brought us to
that place that he is in himself, Father I will that where I am they be also,
and he purges his Church, Ephesians. 5. That he may make it a glorious Church, he
takes upon him not only to dye, to redeem us from hell, and damnation, and to
set us in a state of favor with his father, but to goe^ on in a course of
fitting us till he have brought us to the glorions condition that he is in, it
lies upon him to do it, therefore let us do our duty, as we shall see after,
and let him alone with that that belongs to him*

For our selves beloved this is our honor, that we are under such a King, such
a Lord both living and dying; it was the honor of those that lived in Solomon's
time, that they were under such a wise Prince, the Queen of Sheba judged it
so, but what an honor is it to a Christian now, that he is under such a
blessed Prince as Christ is: It is a great honor to be the Spouse of such a
husband, to be the subject of such a King, to be members of such a head: and
therefore we should often think of it, to put honorable thoughts into us, and I
know no greater way to keep us from sin, from base courses, than to have our
thoughts strayned to this high point, to think of the dignity of a Christian,
what a condition he is now brought unto in Christ, and what he shall be
brought unto ere long, this should make him honorable to himself, to make him
in a holy state, to think himself too good to defile his soul, or body, that
is so dearly bought, and so highly advanced shall such a man as I flee? says
Nehemiah, oh look to that, shall such a man as I flee. It is the honor
beloved of a Christian, that he is Christ's living and dying.

Object.
But you will say an honor, it is an honor to be free, the subject is bound,
non sumus nati, etc. as the heathen man said, we are not borne to slavery, but
to honor and liberty, and it is an appetite ingrafted in man, to desire
freedom above all things.

Answ.
It is true, In regno nati sumus Deo, etc. we are borne in a Kingdom, and to
serve Christ is to reign, for where there is a subordination, it is a
prerogative to be under a better: as for the body being baser than the soul,
it is for the good of it to be under the soul, because it is more excellent,
it has life, and wisdom, the body is a loathsome dead thing of it self: the
sheep being a weak simple creature, shiftlesse, to be guided by a
sheepeherd, who is of a superior nature, and wise to defend it, it is its
security and safety, for the Vine that is a weak plant of it self, to have
support, it is for the good of it, for man that is in a subordination to a
higher nature to God, for him to be under the government of Christ God man, of
God in our nature, it is a great honor: as they could say in the Schools,
every thing has its perfection, by being subject to a superior, except the
highest of all, which is not subordinate, but independent, whatsoever is
dependant has its perfection by dependence, therefore it is an honor that we
be under Christ, the greatest honor in the world, especially if we consider
what manner of government Christ's is, it is a rational government agreeable to
our principles: for he guides us as a Prophet, he is not only a King but a
Prophet, to teach us, he says not you shall do this, he stands not upon
terms of will, no he is a Prophet to teach us, what we should obey, he
convinces us, and then uses us, that we would not but be der such a
government: and then when he rules our will, he does it sweetly, he draws it
with the cords of a man as the Prophet speaks, that is, by allurements, he
brings us to heaven by way of love and intisements, what greater rewards can
there be thought of than those that Christ leads us by, and draws us to
subjection by, and therefore he works upon our will sweetly, by persuading
us by allurements in that kind.

In a word, he is such a King as is a husband, would you have a milder
government then that of a husband, which though it be not a parity, yet it
comes as near as can be, such a government is Christ's, as he is a King, so
he is a husband, he knows how to bear with the infirmities of his Church,
he that bids the husband to favor the wife as the weaker vessel, does not he
practice his own principles? will not he favor his own spouse as the weaker
vessel think you? that has promised not to quench the smoking flax, and
break the bruised reed, undoubtedly he will: Therefore it is an honor to be
under the government of Christ, so rationally, and sweetly he draws us with
the cords of a man, it is the government of a husband, and of a wise husband, I
do but give a taste, you may enlarge them in your own meditations.

And as it is our honor, so it is our security, and safety to be under him,
why? because when we come sweetly under Christ's government, we need fear
nothing, he that fears Christ, all things fear him, since Christ has taken
our nature upon him, the devil himself is afraid of man's nature, he trembles
to think God has appeared in our nature, now he is afraid of a Christian, God
has taken this nature. Then he is such a King as we may be secure under him,
as a universal King over all things, that he may be King over his Church; for
he has all power in heaven and earth, Mat. 28. All power is given to me in
heaven and earth, and all for the government of his Church, it is our security
to be under him that governes al things for the good of the Church, he says
John 17. Thou have given me power over all flesh. Christ has all power given
to him, in relation to his Church, therefore he has power over the devil,
over hell, and over all wicked men, and all Monarchs, and opposite power is
subject to him, that they shall serve the Church, when they do scourge the
Church, they are but Christ's rod, they are but isntrumental to Christ, they
do but his work, therefore it is a great security, and we need to fear none,
if we be under Christ.

Again, to go on, as it is our honor and security, so it is a Spring of
duty, Christ is our Lord, he is Lord of all. Therefore it teaches us our duty
every way.

Our duty One to another. To those that are not Christians. To Christ himself.

It teaches us in all standings, how to carry our selves. To give a taste of
this, the Apostle presses it often, that Christ is our Lord, and will be our
judge.

Therefore, for others we ought not to be hasty in judging or censuring, we
ought to love them, because we have all one Lord, this must force love: We
have all one Lord, one baptism, etc. We are many in our severals, but we are
all one under this bond, being all under one Lord.

Then again, it teaches us how to carry our selves to men, otherwise affected
not to be servants to the humors of men, Christ rules over us, both living and
dying, therefore be not the servants of men, but according to the scriptures
limitation, Marry in the Lord, obey in the Lord, walk in the Lord, do all in
the Lord, that is, so far as it may stand in the will and pleasure of him,
that is the Lord of Lords: For when the authority of any superior does
countermand against the will of this Lord, it cease to bind, when they
command any thing in subordination, that may stand with the pleasure of the
Lord, then the authority is divine, we obey Christ, in obeying them. As Christ
said to his own mother, when she commanded things, that she had no authority
to do, he calls her mother no longer, but Woman, she stretching then beyond
her compass.

Again, to go on, this should teach us, in that Christ is the Lord of the
living and of the dead, to account our selves not our own, it should teach us
perfect self denial in matters of religion, especially not to be overwhelmed
of our own conceits, in the great mysteries, that Saint Paul cries out of, Oh
the depth, you have many that quarrel with those things, and would bring them
to reason, they will go no further in religion then they can see reason,
whereas one says, I believe, because it is impossible, and too far above
reason, therefore I the rather believe it, it is often times good to stand at a
stay in God, as if we were at a nonplus, to admire at him in the mysteries of
Christ's governing the Church, why he suffers some part of the Church, that
perhaps is better then other parts, (that are quiet and exempt from the cross)
to be exercised, with afflictions, and others not, not to scandal at this, and
to be overbusie, in searching out the reason of this, Christ is our Lord and he
is infinite in wisdom, and it is his prerogative to do such things, as he
is not liable to give a reason of to us, so God will have mercy, upon whom he
will have mercy. In great mysteries, remember the sovereignty of this our Lord
he is Lord of quick and dead, let this stop our judgments, and teach us to
deny our selves, when we cannot give a reason of them, in a holy admiration,
say with Saint Paul, Oh the depth.

And so for our will, he is Lord of quick and dead, we say of a wife, she has
no will, and a servant is not a distinct person, as it were in law, he is
another we are Christ's servants, his subjects, and his spouse, and when we
begin to be Christ's, we have lost our own wills, we resign them up to
Christ, thy will shall be mine in all things, if thou will have me do this, I
will do it, if thou will have me suffer, I will suffer, if thou will honor
thy self with my goods, and with my life, thou shall have them: Of thee I had
this body, this soul, this state, this reputation; I have whatsoever I have
from thee, it is maintained by thee, thou art mine, and I am thine; therefore I
give up all to thee back again, it is a ground of perfect resignation, that
Christ is Lord of the quick and of the dead, therefore stand not upon terms
with Christ, when he calls for any thing, in case of suffering and sealing the
truth, let him have it, it is not lost, we have a better foundation in him,
then we have in our selves, when we give any thing to him, life, or state, or
credit, or whatsoever, we have a better life, a better state and condition in
him, because all is more eminently in him, the primitive fountain, then in the
derivation, and beams from him, when we lose any thing, it is but a beam from
the Sun, and whatsoever we lose in particulars, we have in the whole, in the
fountain, again, in Christ, therefore faith would help all this; in case of
suffering, and trial, what, is the cause good, or no? then I will resign my
self, and all that I have, and am to Christ, he is Lord both of the quick
and of the dead.

We must know beloved that we are redeemed from our selves, and therefore make
this use of it, when we are tempted to any sin, Christ is my Lord, I am
redeemed from my base lusts, what have I to do with this anger? what have I to
do with this ambition? I am no debtor to the flesh, I am under Christ, I am
under grace, he has redeemed me from my vain conversation, I owe it nothing
but mortification, and deny all, therefore in all solicitations of corruption,
learn this lesson, fetch arguments hence, Christ has done great matters for
me, he lived and dyed, and lives for ever, that is Lord of me living and dying,
there is no greater slave, then he that is a slave to his own flesh, and to
his own lusts, therefore when we are stirred to any thing by our base nature,
which must dye, or else we shall never live eternally, we must kill it more
and more daily, and death is the sum and accomplishment of mortification,
when we are stirred to any thing, go to Christ and complain to him, blessed
Savior, thou did dye, and rise, and revive, that thou might be Lord of the
living and of the dead, I beseech thee claim thine own interest in me, bring
all into captivity, to thine own Spirit, what has this base affection to do
with me? what have I to do with it? I am freed from it, I am redeemed from my
self, what have I to do with my self, but deny all? I am thine altogether,
therefore take thine own interest in me, possess me, fill me with thy Spirit,
be all in all in me, let pride, and ambition, and such things have no footing
in me. It is good pouring out the soul to God, to that purpose, to complain
to Christ, when it is thus with us, because it is his office to rule us. Now
Lord Jesus do thine office, thy office is to be King, to rule in me, other
lords would feign rule in me, pride, and lust, and base covetousness would
feign rule, as the Prophet says, but what has other lords to do with me?
thou art my Lord, and have right to me, living and dying.

It is a point of wondrous comfort likewise to us, in all afflictions
whatsoever, especially such, as concern the state of the Church, we are now in
ill times, if we look about us, however God continues better to us then we
deserve, we are as the three young men in the fiery furnace, untouched, when
all is in a combustion round about us, where is Christ's ruling now? his poor
Church is thus used, and trampled upon in France, in the Palatinate, in
Bohemia, and the Princes of Germany.

Beloved, it is our faults, perhaps we waken not Christ, as the Disciples,
they awaked Christ, when there was a mighty storm, and moved him to rebuke the
winds, and the waves, and there followed a calm, so should we. Christ loves to
be awaked by our prayers, and if the Church would join in forces, one Church
with another, altogether they might work wonders, let us offer a holy violence
to Christ by prayer, and the use of holy means; he is Lord still of the
Church, and take things at the worst as they are, he is but carrying things to
his own ends. Beloved, if we consider things aright, it can hardly be
otherwise with the Church then it is, if we consider the former security, and
dullness, and want of prizing the great things of Christ, the ministry of the
word, and the Sacraments, we live under the Gospel, in such deadness and such
sins, as a Turk would scarce commit, we are no more affected with it, then a
Jew, or a Turk, that has not the means, will Christ endure this that we
should come to be careless whether we have the Gospel, the blessed truth of
God, or no? and grow sinful, and have less conscience then a Turk or a Jew,
will Christ continue his blessed prerogatives, and privileges to such?
Therefore, if we do but look to the ordinary dispositions of most men, a man
would think it impossible, but that judgment should come, will there be a
reformation of these men without a Spirit of fire, without some purging flame.

Then again, Christ is humbling his Church for the advancement of it, and
suffers the enemies to triumph for their further abasement, he is compassing a
blessed work, there is a great wheel a going, but we do not see the issue
of things, all this great wheel the Lord rules and governes and moves, you
shall see at length what it will drive to, we see in a clock there are many
wheels one contrary to another, but all helps the clock to strik, all join
in that, so there is a stroke, there is somewhat that will come out of all
these troubles, that seem contrary one to another, some up, and some down,
but all these wheels, will help to bring out some stroke, some glorious
thing, that posterity perhaps may see that is now a working. Therefore let none
take scandal, Christ rules now in the midst of his enemies. We must not
catch at pieces of Christ's workmanship, as in a poem, we judge not by a piece,
but look to the Catastrophe, we look to the upshot, and closure of all
though all was in a combustion, there we see all things brought to an
excellent and wise issue: Therefore I beseech you suspend your judgments a
while, and then you shall see with a spirit of faith, all the enemies
overthrown, even as if we did see it with our eyes of sense, and in the mean
time persuade our selves, that Christ is about a blessed work, as he is King
of his Church.

One question the Papists moove upon such Texts as this, that I will assoyle
briefly, because it may trouble some, though it be of no great moment: It is
said here that Christ dyed, and rose again, and revived, that he might be
Lord of the dead, and of the living. Hence, not only Papists, but some others,
moove this question, which I will give a little light unto.

Whether Christ by his dying and abasement did merit any thing for himself?
because it is said here; he did this that he might be Lord of the dead, etc.

He abased himself to the death of the cross. Therefore, God gave him a name
above all names, Phil. 2.

The Papists they fall upon Calvin, that says, he did not, (and that makes me
the rather to touch it) Calvin, as he was a very holy man, so out of his
holiness, he avoided curious questions, as much as he might, therefore gives
an excellent answer, says he, whether he did or no, it is curious to search,
it is rash to define. For satisfaction, take these grounds and all is well.

First of all, that Christ is perfectly glorious now in heaven, both body and
soul, there is no question of that, and that he came to this glory, both of
body and soul, and the manifestation of it, after his abasement by his
humiliation, first, he must dye, and suffer, and then enter into glory.

Again remember this for a ground that Christ as man merited not the grace of
Union or unction, for how could he merit before he was? could Christ merit to
be united to the second person, that was the greatest grace that ever was? No,
nor the grace of unction, habitual grace in Christ whereby the humane nature
was filled with all grace, it was upon unction, presently they follow one
another, there was no meriting of that thing, because from the beginning of his
incarnation it was by union of his nature, these things being thought upon, for
other things they are not material, only it is best and safest, to think
that he did not for himself merit any thing: for if so be all glory was due to
him by virtue of union, which he had by grace, and by virtue of unction, if he
had dyed presently, he might have gone to heaven presently indeed without dying
if there had not been a dispensation laid upon him to dye for us, and
therefore by virtue of union and unction that was free, heaven was due to him
presently, and all that glory that he had afterward.

Why was there a stop of that glory? that his body being united to the divine
nature, was not presently glorified, as now it is in heaven, so that he lived
in abasement, and dyed a most cursed death.

Beloved all this was for us, and then after the dispensation was finished for
us, after Gods justice was satisfied for us, there was no more stop or stay
of his glory, but then his divine nature did flow into his humane nature, and
then his humane nature became glorious, so glorious as it was capable of what
he did was for us, Therefore it is good to think of the love of Christ, that
he considered us and not himself, in that his abasement as the Scripture runs
in that strain, To us a Son is given, for us a child is borne, he dyed for
us, he gave himself for us, he rose for us, he ascended for us, he sits at
the right hand of God for us, himself indeed has glory, but together with
us, and therefore when we think of the glory of Christ, think of us in him,
when we see him borne, think he was borne for me, when we see him dye, think
we dye with him, when we see him buried, think our selves buried with him;
so in the state of exaltation, when we see him rise, and sit at the right hand
of God, think he is there to prepare a place for me, whatsoever he has, or
whatsoever he did, he regards us in all; therefore it somewhat obscures the
glory and the love of Christ to us, to conceive that he had a selfe-respect in
these things, when he says in the text, For this end Christ dyed, and rose,
and revived, that he might be Lord of quick and dead, I beseech you consider
whose good he respects, in this Lordship: is it not a profitable Lordship for
us? is it not for our good, that he is our Lord in life and in death? and not
only our Lord, but the Lord of Satan, of death, and of all our enemies, he is
Lord over all says the Apostle, God over all, blessed for ever therefore he is
Lord over sin, over death, over hell, over all that we need to fear, it is
for us, therefore our good is intended, though there be a redundance of glory
in Christ, in all these things, yet think he respects our good, the best
meditation of Christ, is to think, all is for us.

Beloved is it not a great mercy, that he should stop the issue, and the
beams of glory that should otherwise have come upon his humane nature, that he
should be content to be in the shape of a servant? and be eclipsed, in regard
of manifestation, and abase himself to the death of the cross, and all for
our redemption, when he might have gone to glory another way? but as one of the
ancients says well, if he had gone to heaven another way, he might have come
thither himself, but he could not have helped us that way, therefore he would
go to heaven by way of abasement, and concealment, and stopping that of his
glory, that he might help us, and pay the price to God for us, and reconcile
us: I beseech you let us see his love to us in all this; enough for that
question, which I would not have mentioned, but that it has a special use and
comfort, and may be an incentive, to kindle love to Christ, regarding us in his
birth, and life, and death in his resurrection; in his ascension, in his glory,
in all.

To draw to a conclusion therefore, Christ is our Lord both in life and death,
it is for ever, oh beloved therefore I beseech you, let us project for his
glory for ever as much as we can, he is our Lord, when we are dead, he is the
Lord of our souls, of our happiness, we are nearer him then, than we are now,
he that is my Lord both living and dying, and for ever, shall not I labor
that when I am dead there may be a Church here? that when I am dead posterity
may serve him? and be subject to him, shall he for ever be Lord for my good,
and shall not I as much as lies in me, lay a foundation for ever in his
service? that when I can serve him no longer my self, then posterity may serve
him.

It was a cursed wish of a Pagan Emperor, when I am dead let heaven and earth
be mingled if they will: but a Christian thinks Christ is mine, and for my
good both living and dying, nay I have more good by him when I am dead than
alive, therefore I will labor that he may have glory in his Church by me and
mine, and all my counsels, and projects shall be, that it may be for ever and
ever world without end, therefore they desire that God may be served and
glorified in the Church for ever, as he is their Lord living and dying.

And let it be our comfort in the hour of death (that may be nearer us then
we are aware off) that he is not only Lord of the living but of those that are
dead, he has the keys both of hell and death, that is, he has the government
of death, and therefore shall I be afraid to commit my soul to Christ? what a
ground is this, comfortably to yield our souls to Christ, Lord take the soul,
thatthou dyedst to purchase, that thou did rise againe-to justify, that thou
do live now in heaven to make intercession for, that thou have given thy holy
Spirit, in some measure to sanctify, take this soul to thee, it is thy soul
as much and more than mine I am not mine own, nor my soul is not my own,
Into thy hands I commend even thy Spirit, for thou have redeemed me oh Lord of
truth, thou have redeemed this soul of mine, therefore now take this soul,
that thou by thy Spirit have wrought in some poor measure, to desire to please
thee, that soul that thou have sprinkled with thy own blood, take that soul,
for thou art Lord both living and dying, and what a comfort is it when death
shall close up our eyes, that we can look forward and see then our selves
nearer Christ, for then we go to Christ our husband, as Paul says, I desire
to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all, when a Christian
thinks at death: now I am changing for the better, Christ will not leave me at
the hour of death, neither dying nor living, butwill watch over my dust, my
dead body is a member of Christ, death may separate body and soul, but it
cannot separate soul or body from him, therefore take no thought for body, or
soul for my soul I know he will receive it, and my body as a good depositum
is laid up in the dust, he watches over all the dust and ashes, and every
thing and will make the earth faithful in giving up that depositum, he is Lord
of me dying as well as living, shall I be afraid to dye, when in death I
commend my soul to such a sweet Lord, and go to my husband and to my King?

And that is the end of the Sacrament, for the Word and Sacrament are parts of
the regiment of Christ, whereby he rules his Church, he rules his Church
outwardly by the Word and Sacraments, and inwardly by his Spirit, his holy
Spirit makes good his own good means, and therefore as the subjects of
Christ, I beseech you let us come to the ordinance of Christ, he is such a Lord
as does great things by despised means, bread and wine, poor means, but
consider what a mighty Lord uses them for our souls good, and it is his glory
to magnify himself by base and weak means, he goes contrary to the course
of the world, that stands all upon outward excellency, therefore let no man
stumble at the meannesse of the means, but consider what great things he
works, by the foolishness of Preaching, and the meannesse of his Ordinances
the Sacraments, he beats down strong holds, he builds us up in Christ to
Salvation, he communicates himself and all his benefits to us, therefore I
beseech you come with faith, come with this persuasion Christ will bless his
own Ordinance, and come with comfort, Christ communicates himself to us, the
nearer we come to the fountain, the more we draw. And come with preparation,
know with whom we have to deal, with him that is Lord of quick and dead,
come with reverence; but these things I have often upon this occasion stood upon:
so much for this Text.

FJNJS.

