The reverend faithful, and profitable Minister of Gods word Richard Sibbes,
D: D: master of Katherine Hall in Cambridge and preacher of Grayes Inn, London.
^



A BREATHING AFTER GOD. OR A CHRISTIANS DESIRE OF GODS PRESENCE.

BY The late Reverent and worthy Divine RICHARD SIBS, Doctor in Divinity,
Master of Katherine Hall in Cambridge, and sometime Preacher of Graies-Inne.

Psalm 42 1.

As the Heart pants after the water brooks; so pants my soul after thee, O
God.

Lam. 3. 56.

Hide not thne ear at my breathing.

LONDON Printed by John Dawson for ^. M. and are to be sold by Thomas Slater,
at the Swan in Duck lane. 1639.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
MAN in this world (especially since his defection from God) standing at a
distance from his happiness in respect of full possession; it is not the least
part of his bliss to be happy in expectation. Happiness being by all men
desirable, the desire of it is naturally ingrafted in every man, and is the
Center of all the searchings of his heart and turnings of his life. But the
most of men, like the men of Sodom grope and find not the right door: only
to a true Christian (by a supernatural light) is discovered both the right
object, and the right way to felicity. Upon this discovery, finding himself
(while he is here) a stranger to his happiness he desires to take leave of
this sublunary condition, that he may enjoy him who is The desire of all Hag.
2. 7.
Nations.

Now although God cast common blessings promiscuously upon good and bad, yet
he holds his best favors at a distance as Parents do Cherries or Apples from
their children, to whet their appetites the more after them. And indeed the
best perfection of a Christian in his military condition is, in desire and
expectation, and it is enough to him that, for that he has Gods acceptance,
who knowing whereof we are made, and how unable to hold wait in the balance
of the Sanctuary, takes his best Gold with grains of allowance.

The soul of man is like a Cipher, which is valued by that which is set before
it: if it weary it self in the desire of earthly things, like the Silke-worme,
it finisheth its work with its own destruction: but if on things above, when
this earthly Tabernacle is turned to Ashes, there shall result a glorious
Phoenix for immortality.

There are no Cha racters better distinguishing a Christian, then those that
are inward (hypocrisy like sale-worke may make a fair show outward, an
hypocrite may perform external works but cannot dissemble inward affections)
and amongst them, none better discovers his temper, then the beating of the
pulse of his desires, which this worthy Author (who departed not without being
much desired, and no less lamented has most lively set forth in the ensuing
Treatise, which a Christian holding as a Glass before him, may discern
whether he have life or no by these breathings.

For the object here propounded, what more desirable then the chief good? for
the place, where can it be more desired, then in his house, where his presence
is manifested? what better end to be in that house, then to behold God in the
beauty of holiness? what term of happiness better then for ever? This was
the desire of the holy Prophet David, and that it may be thy desire, is the
desire of

Thy Christian Friend,

H. I.

Imprimatur

Tho Wykes.

The Contents.
Difference of things in the world. page 20 The scope of a good heart in the
use of Gods ordinances, what it is. 25
Observation 1.
The object of a Christians desire what, 23 Why said to be one thing 27 In
respect of God, ibid In respect of the soul. 28 In respect of grace. 30

Use.
To show the folly of worldly men in the neglect of theone thing necessary. 35
Thoughts and desires the the primitive issues of the heart. 37 How they are
begotten 39
Obser. 2.
The spirit of God in the hearts of his children is effectual in stirring up
holy desires. 42 Trial of desires whether true By their object. 44 By their
fervencie. 45 By their constancy. ibid By their rise 47 By their end. 48 By
their endeavors. 54

Use.
Exhortation to examine our desires. 51 Strong desires how to know when they
are so. 57
Obser. 3,
Holy desires are to be turned into prayers. 66
Reas. 1.
Thereby we maintain acquaintance with God. ibid
Reas. 2.
Thereby we manifest a good conscience. 69
Obser. 4.
Perseverance and importunity requisite in prayer. 70 God does not presently
answer our desires and why 78 Because he loves to hear us pray. ibid To keep
us humble. ibid To exercise our graces. 79 To make us prize his blessings. 80
To teach us to use them better when we enjoy them ibid
The having the spirit of prayer, better then the enjoyment of particular
blessings. 81 Assurance before we pray to receive what we pray for, no
hinderance to prayer 84 Gods house what it is 91 Love of Gods children to good
things constant. 99
Observa. 5.
God is beautiful in himself 117 In his Church. 118 Especially in Christ. 121
Christ most lovely in his greatest abasement. 125 The Church beautiful. In
regard of the Angels 129 In regard of the ordinances. 13^ The word preached.
133 The sacraments. 1^8 Discipline. 141 Joint service of God. 143
In regard of the Evidences of Gods love. 146 Protection. 147 Effectual
calling. 148 Instification. 149 Sanctification. 150 Inward peace and joy. 152
The Church of God a Paradise. 157
Use.
Exhortation to be in love with the beauty of God and his house. 160 Carnal
men see not this beauty and why. 163 True delight wherein it consists. 166
Happiness of man what. 170 How to come to see the beauty of God. 172 Get
spiritual life ibid Beg the spirit of revelation. 173 Labor to see our own
deformity, 176 Consider Christ's relations to us. 177
A continual necessity of the ordinances, 183 Private duties must give way to
public. 186 Papists their error in addition. 192 There has always been a
Church. 198 Marks of the true Church. 199 Abuse of things takes not away their
use. 200 What estate they are in that are cast out of the Church. 202 Trials of
our love to the beauty of Gods house, 206 How to come to see the beauty of Gods
house. 213 Use Gods means. ibid Come in faith. ibid Compare the excellency of
Gods house with other things. 215
Desire God to reveal him. self in his ordinances. 225 Motives to labor to
see the beauty of God himself, and of his house. 228 It makes us glorious. 229
Our souls are made for these things. 231
Least God remove his ordinances. 234
A BREATHING after GOD.
PSALM. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will seek after;
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life; to behold
the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.
THis Psalm is partly a Prophecy; it was made after some great deliverance
out of some great trouble. The blessed Prophet David, having experience of Gods
goodness, suitable to the trouble he was Contents of the former part of the
Psalm.
in, in the first part of this excellent Psalm, he shows, His comfort, and
His courage, and
His care.


His comfort it was altogether 1 David's comfort.
in the Lord, 1 In Gods goodness to himself.
whom he sets out in all the beauties, and excellency of speech he can; he
propounds the Lord to him in borrowed terms. The Lord is my light, and my
salvation, the strength of my life. So he fetches comfort from God, the
spring of comfort, the Father of all comfort; he labors to present 2 Cor. 1.
4.
God to him in the sweetest manner that may be, he opposes him to every
difficulty, and distress; In darkness, he is my light; in danger he is my
salvation; in weakness he is my strength; in all my afflictions, and
streights, he is the strength of my life. Here is the Art of faith in all
perplexities whatsoever, to be able to set somewhat in God, against every
malady in our selves. And this is not simply set out, but likewise with a holy
insultation, The Lord is my light and salvation, whom shall I fear? It is a
question proceeding from a holy insultation, and daring of all other things.
The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? that is one
branch of his comfort.

The second branch, and ground of his comfort, is 2 In the destruction of his
enemies who are described.
the goodness of God, in the ruin and destruction of his enemies; when the
wicked, even mine enemies, and foes came upon me to eat up my flesh, they
stumbled and fell; he describes his enemies by their malice, and by their
ruin: his enemies were cruel 1 By their malice.
enemies, blood-suckers, eaters of flesh, we call them Canibals: As indeed men
that have not grace, if they have greatness, and be oppposed, their greatness
is inaceessible, oneman is a Devil to another: the Scripture calls them
Wolves, that leave nothing till morning. As the great fishes eat up the little
ones: so great men they make no more conscience of eating up other men, then
oseating bread; they make no more bones of overthrowing men, and undoing them,
thenof eating bread. They eateup my people as they eatebread.

But notwithstanding 2 By their ruin.
their cruelty, they were overthrown, says David, when my foes came upon me
to eat up my slesh, they stumbled and fell: for, indeed, Gods Children, when
they are delivered, it is usually with the confusion of their enemies; God does
two things at once, because the special grievance of Gods children it is from
inward and outward enemies; he seldom or never delivers them, but with the
confusion of their enemies; so he sets down his own comfort in the Lord, by
the confusion of his enemies. This will be most apparent at the day of
Judgment, when Satan, and all that are lead by his spirit, all the malignant
Church shall be sent to their own place, and the Church shall be for ever free
from all kind of enemies. When the Church is most free, then the enemies of the
Church are nearest to destruction; like a pair of Balance, when they are up
at the one end, they are down at the other: so when it is up with the Church
down go the enemies, so here are the two branches of his comfort.

Now his courage for 2 David's courage.
the time to come, that is in the third verse: Though an Host incampe against
me, my heart shall not fear: he puts the case of the greatest danger that can
be, though an Host of men should incompasse me, my heart should not fear;
though war rise against me, in this will I be confident. Here is great
courage for the time to come. Experience breeds hope and confidence. David was
not so courageous a man of himself; but upon experience of Gods former comfort
and assistance, his faith brake as fire out of the smoke, or as the Sun out
of a cloud: though I was in such, and such perplexities; yet for the time to
come, I have such confidence, and experience of Gods goodness, that I will not
fear. He that sees God, by a spirit of faith in his greatness and power; he
sees all other things below, as nothing, therefore he says here, he cares not
for the time to come for any opposition, no, not of an Army. If God be with us,
who can be against us? He saw God in his power, and then looking from God to
the creature, alas, who was he? as Michaia, when he had seen God sitting upon
his Throne, What was Achab to him, when he had seen God once? so when the
Prophet David had seen God once, then though an Host incampe against me, I
will not fear, etc. Thus you have his comfort in the double branch of it; his
courage also, and his confidence for the time to come.

What is his care? that is the next (I will not 3 His care.
analyze the Psalm farther then the Text) after his comfort in the Lord, and
in the confusion of his enemies, and his courage for the time to come, he sets
down his care, One thing have I desired of the Lord, and that will I seek
after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of my life,
etc. This was his care; he had so sweet experience of the goodness, and power
of God being light, and salvation, and strength to him in confounding his
enemies; that he studied with himself how to be thankful to God, and this he
thought fittest in the open great Congregation; in the Church of God, among
many others: therefore he says, one thing have I desired of the Lord, and
that will I seek after still, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all
the days of my life.

Now in the words of the Text that I have read, Division of the Text.
there is contained, the holy Prophets care, and desire set down first in
general, one thing have I desired of the Lord, and that I will seek after.

And then a specification of that desire he specifies, what is that one thing
he desired, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord: with the circumstance
of time, All the days of my life.

Now after the desire in general, set out here by the object, in general; the
transcendent object, one thing have I desired of the Lord: and likewise by the
frequency, and fervency of the desire, I will seek after it still: I have
desired it, and I will not cease: so my desire, it shall not be a flash soon
kindled, and soon put out; No, but one thing have I desired of the Lord, and
that I will seek still, I will not be quiet till my desire be accomplished,
there is the general desire, and the degrees of it.

The particular is, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord.

Then the grounds and ends of the particular desire, of dwelling in the house
of the Lord,

Because it is the house of God, there is a strong argument to moove him to
dwell in the house of God, it is good dwelling where God dwells, where his
Angels dwell, and where his Spirit dwells in the house of the Lord, there is
one argument that moved him, I desire to dwell there, because it is the house
of God, which is set out by the extent of time, that I may dwell in the house
of God, all the days of my life, till I be housed in heaven, where I shall
need none of these Ordinances that I stand in need of in this world I desire to
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life.

Then the secondend is, To behold the beauty of God, that was one end of his
desire, to dwell in the house of God, not to feed his eyes with speculations,
and goodly sights: (as indeed there were in the Tabernacle goodly things to be
seen,) no; he had a more spiritual sight then that; he saw the inward
spiritual beauty of those spiritual things, the other were but outward
things, as the Apostle calls them, I desire to dwell in the house of the Lord,
to behold the beauty of the Lord, the inward beauty of the Lord, especially.

And then the third end of his desire is, That I may enquire in his Temple, he
desired to dwell in the house of God, because it was the house of God; and to
see the beauty of God; the sweet alluring beauty of God, that appeared in his
Ordinances: and then his desire was to dwell in the house of God, that he
might enquire more and more, of the meaning of God still, because there is an
unsathomed bottom, and an endless depth of excel lency in divine things, that
the more we know, the more we may, and the more we seek, the more we may
seek; they are beyond our capacity, they do not only satisfy, but transcend
it, therefore he desires still further and further, to wade deeper into these
things, to enquire in Gods Temple. Thus ye see the stateof the verse. There is
a generaldesire propounded One thing have I desired of the Lord, and that will I
seek after.

And then the desire specified, To dwell in the house of the Lord. And to see
the beauty of the Lord, And to enquire in his Temple. These be the 3. ends.

One thing have I desired of the Lord, etc.
To speak first of this desire, generally propounded, One thing have I
desired, etc.

And then of the increase of it, in that he says, I will seek after it
still, he desired it, and he would seek more and more after it.

In the desire, consider,

First the object, One thing.

And then the desire or seeking it self.

First the object,

One thing.
Was there but one Quest.
thing for holy David to make the object of his desire? was there but one thing
needful? Alas this poor life of ours, it is a life of necessities; how many
things are needful for our bodies? how many things are needful for the
decency of our condition? how many things need we for our souls? it is a life
of necessities; how then does he say, One thing have I desired? yes; Answ.
his meaning is, comparatively, I seek for other things in their order, and
rank, and as they may stand with the main: but indeed one thing principally;
all the rest will follow: Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and all the rest
will be cast on you. The best way to have all other things, is to seek one
thing in the first place. Therefore in heavenly wisdom he says, I desire
unum uni^e, one thing after an entire manner, that I desire more then all
things else.

Hence we may see that, Difference of things in the world.


There is a difference of degrees of things. God has established in the world
degrees of things; there are some good, and some ill by his permission, and of
good, there are some that are greater goods, and some less, there are
spiritual goods, and outward goods; and of spiritual good, there are some
that are means leading to that which is spiritually good, and some that are
spiritual good things in their own essence, and nature: the leading preparing
things, are the means of salvation, the Word, and Sacraments, and being in the
visible Church; the true spiritual good, it he good that we get by these
things, faith and love, and spiritual inward strength. Now that there is
degrees of things, the Prophet here insinuates when he says, One thing have I
desired, that is, of all these variety of things, he desired the best that
includes all in it. God to exercise the wisdom that he has given to man,
has planted adifference in the creatures, and has given a faculty to man, to
make a right choice in those differences: and then man makes a right choice,
when he chooses as God chooses: Now God makes choice of spiritual things to
be the best things, and them he gives to his best friends; he knows they will
make us good, and supply all outward wants whatsoever, and sanctify all
estates, and conditions to us; and they are eternal, suitable to the spiritual
nature of oursoules. God knows this very well: therefore God has set
spiritual things, as the one only thing: and so the soul when it is made
spiritual, and has the Image of God upon it, it chooses as God chooses.

One thing have I desired.
But here it may be asked, why does he say, One Quest.
thing? he desired not only to live near the Tabernacle; but to hear and
see, to have the Word read, and he desired thereupon Grace, and then nearer
Communion with God by grace, to have more communion here, and fuller communion
in heaven, here is more then one thing.

I answer, it is all one, Answ.
as a chain that has many linkes, yet it is but one chain; so all these are
but one. I desire one thing; What is that? To live in the Church of God, to
enjoy the Ordinances of God, and they will draw on faith, and fear, etc. the
Spirit accompanying the Ordinances, it will be a spirit of faith, and
repentance, and grace, and by those graces of faith, and the rest that
accompany the Ordinances, I shall have nearer communion with God here, and
eternal, and everlasting communion with God in heaven, and all these are but
one; because they are all linkes of one chain. Therefore when he says, One
thing have I desired, he means that one thing that will draw on all other. The
scope of a good heart in the use of Gods Ordinances.


That is the scope of a gracious heart, when it attends upon the means of
salvation and lives in the Church; not to hear The scope of a good heart, in
the use of Gods Ordinances.
that it may hear, and there an end, and to read that it may read, to perform
it as a task, and all is done: but to have the work of the Spirit together
with it, to have the Ministry of the Spirit in the Gospel, and the spirit to
increase says, and faith to increase all other graces, and so by grace to grow
into nearer communion with God in Christ, that is the scope of every good
hearer: therefore he speaks to purpose, when he says, One thing have I
desired.

But to speak a little more of the object, why The Prophet says, One thing
have I desired.
does he say, One thing?

First, it is from the nature of God, we must have the whole bent, and sway of
our souls to 2 In respect of God.
him, he will have no halting. The Devil is content with half, if we will
sin, because then he is sure of all; but God will have the whole heart, My
son give me thy whole heart, and Thou shall love the Lord withal thy heart,
and withal thy soul; the bent, and sway of the soul must be that way: for it
is the nature of excellent things, except w^ desire them in the chief place,
they take state upon them, God takes state upon him in this case, he will not
have us serve him and Mammon, he will not have the heart divided.

Then again, it is from the nature of the soul, 2 In respect of the soul.
therefore he says, One thing. It is the nature of the soul, when it is upon
many things, it can do nothing well: therefore that I may be religious to
purpose, One thing have I desired. A stream cut into many channels runs
weakly, and is unfit to carry any thing. Babylon was so taken. They cut the
River into many channels, and then he that took it, easily passed over them.
When the soul is divided into many channels, to many things, that it looks
after this thing, and that thing, and that with expense and intention of care,
and endeavor. Alas, where is the desire of one thing necessary all the while?
For the soul cannot go with that strength as it should except it mind one
thing: the soul of man is a finite thing, therefore except it gather its
strength, as a stream that rises of many particular lesser rivers which makes
it run strongly: so the soul it cannot desire one thing as it should, except
it bring all other petty streams to it, and make that the main desire to be
saved in another world, and to have communion and fellowship with God in Christ
Jesus, by the Spirit of grace in this world, in the use of the means; unless
this be the maine care, the soul takes no good, when it is so much set on
other things.

Then thirdly he sets 3 In respect of grace.
down this One thing, (To dwell in the house of God, to grow in grace there,
as a Cedar, to be a Tree planted there) from the very nature of grace, which is
to unite things to the main; the Spirit of grace sets before the eye of the
soul, heavenly spiritual things in their greatness, and excellency: and the
Spirit of grace, seeing there are many useful things in this world, it has an
uniting, knitting subordinating power, to rank all things so, as they may
agree to, and help the main. Grace confines the soul to one thing: man after
his fall sought out many inventions, says the Wise man: he was not content
with his condition when he stood, but he sought out many inventions. When man
falls to the creature, he knows not where to stay; no creature can afford a
stay, and rest, for the soul long, the soul is never quiet till it come to
God again, and that is the one thing the soul desires. The soul being
sanctified by the Spirit of God, it subordinates all things to this one thing.
David desired many things besides this one thing, but not in that degree, but
as they might stand with the desire of this one thing necessary. Grace
subordinates, and ranckes all things, so as that the best things have the
pre-eminence. Therefore he might well say, One thing, from the disposition,
that grace has to rank all things to one. It is a promise in the Covenant of
grace, says God, I will give you one heart, as soon as a man becomes a
Christian, he has one heart, his heart before was divided, there was variety
of objects it was set upon, God had the least piece, the slesh had a piece, and
this delight, and that delight had a piece: but says God, I will give you one
heart, that is, a heart uniting it self in desire to the best things, and
regulating all things, so as all shall be but one, that a man shall use the
world as though he used it not; so as it shall help to the maine. As I said
little streams they help the main stream running into it, so grace has a
subordinating power over all things in the world, as they may help the main.
One thing have I desired; and I desire other things as they may help the
main; Grace will teach us that Art, it has a special Art that way. So we
see both in regard of God, and in regard of the soul being finite, and in
respect of the wise disposing of grace that aims at the main, and ranckes all
things as they may help the main, he does well say, One thing have I desired.

This shows the vanity, Use To show the vanlty of wordly men.
and baseness of every worldly man, that makes the main work and labor his
by-worke, and the by-worke, his main work: that that is the One thing
necessary, is set after all. Indeed without grace this is so: The first work
of grace is to set the soul in order, to subdue base affections, to sanctify
the judgment: and when it has set the soul in tune, and order, then it is
fitted to set a right price on things, to rank and order them as it should.
So much shall be sufficient to unfold the object it self in general,

One thing. Have I desired.
Now I come to the affection it self, set forth here by the degrees.

One thing have I desired, and that I will seek after.
I have desired it, and I Thoughts and desires the first issues of the heart.
will desire it still, desires are the issues of the heart: thoughts, and
desires are the two primitive issues of the heart: the birthes of the heart.
Thoughts breed desire; thoughts in the mind or brain, the brain strikes the
heart presently. It goes from the understanding to the will, and affections;
what we think of that we desire, if it be good. So thoughts and desires,
they, immediately spring from the soul. And where they Motion stirred up by
desire.
are in any efficacy and strength, they stir up motion in the outward man:
the desires of the soul, being the inward motion, they stir up outward
motion, till there be an attaining of the thing desired, and then there is
rest. Desire to the thing desired, is like motus ad quietem, as motionis to
rest: when motion coms once to rest it is quiet: so desire which is the inward
motion, it stirs up outward motion, till the thing desired be accomplished,
and then the soul rests in a loving content, and enjoying of the thing desired.

Now this desire it was a spituall desire One thing have I desired of the Lord.
Holy desires they issue from choice: a holy wise desire (when it is Holy
desires arise
not a mere notion) it 1 From Christ.
arises from a choice of a thing that is good: for desire is nothing but the
embracing, and closing with a thing that is good. The understanding must choose
the good first, before the soul embrace it. The will is but the carryage of
the soul, the furthering, and promotion of the soul, to the good things
discovered: so it supposes a choice of good things.

And choice supposes an esteem of the 2 Esteem.
things before we choose them. And that supposes 3 Deliberate judging.
a deliberate judging, that works an esteem. So that it was no hasty sudden
thing, this desire, but it rose from the sanctified judgment of David, that
bred a holy esteem of these excellent things; the means of salvation, having
the Spirit of God accompanying of them, containing such excellent comforts, as
they do. I say this desire supposes a right judgment, and thence an esteem,
thence a choice upon all, choosing these things above all other contentments,
and things in the world besides. For at this time he wanted in his family. the
comfort of his wife and house, etc. Tush, what do I regard these things? if I
could enjoy the sweet, and strong, and comfortable presence of God in his
Ordinances, other things I could bear well enough, the want of house, and
wife, and children, the pleasures, and contentments of my Country: therefore
One thing have I desired. It was a desire out of a high esteem and choice of
that one thing he speaks of.

The point of Doctrine that I will observe in brief, (because I hasten to the
maine thing) is this, that

That the spirit of God, in Observe. The spirit stirs up holy desires, in Gods
children.
the hearts of his children, is effectual in stirring up holy desires.

There is nothing tha charactizeth, and sets a stamp upon a Christian so much
as desires, All other things may be counterfeit, words and actions may be
counterfeit, but the desires and affections cannot, because they are the
immediate issues and productions of the soul, they ate that that comes
immediately from the Soul, as fire cannot be counterfeit. A man may ask his
desires what he is, according to the pulse of the desires, so is the temper of
the man: desires are better then actions a great deal: for a man may do a
good action, that he does not love, and he may abstain from an ill action
that he hates not: but God is a Spirit, and looks to the Spirit especially. It
is a good Character of a Christian, that his desire for the most part is to
good; the tenor and sway, and bent of his desire is to good. One things have I
desired: the spirit of God is effectual in stirring up these desires.

But how shall we know Quest.
that these desires are the chief things to distinguish an Hypocrite from a
true Christian, and whether they be true or no.

To go no farther than the Text: desires are holy, Answ. Desires are true.
and spiritual, if they be about holy and spiritual 1 By the object.
things, One thing have I desired says David, what was that? to be rich and
great in the World, and to be revenged on my enemies? No, no, that is not the
matter, I have many enemies; GOD will take a course that they shall fall; that
that I desire, is to have nearer Communion with God, I desire to enjoy the
Ordinances of God: so his desire it was set on spiritual objects, and that
argued it was a holy desire. 2 Fervency.


And then again his desire, it was a fervent desire, as he says, one thing
have I desired and thatwil I seek after. It was not a blaze or flash, that was
soon in, and soon out, it was not a mere veleitie, a kind of inefficacious
desire: fervency showed that his desire was sound, he would not be quieted
without the thing accomplished.

And then Constancy, 3 Constancy.
when a man will not be taken off, there is not the wickedest man in the Word,
but he has good flashes, good offers, and desires sometimes, Lord have Mercy
upon me, etc. he has good ejaculations sometimes: I but what is the bent and
sway of his desires? This was David's constant desire: as it was about
spiritual, and was a fervent, and eager desire, that he would not be quiet,
so it was constant: that that is natural is constant, and that that is
supernaturally natural, that that is natural in spiritual things it is
constant, nature is constant. For how does nature differ from Art? Artificial
things are for a time: teach a creature beyond his nature, he will show his
naturals, so let an Hypocrite act a part, if it be not his nature, he will
soon turn to his naturals, and show that he is an Hypocrite again. Constancy
and perpetuity in good things, a tenor of good desires show that the heart is
good, because it is costant.

And then again his 4 From Gods Love.
desire here of DAVID, it was kindled from the love of God, and not out of base
ends. Holy desires are kindled in the Soul from the love of God: for what
says he here? One thing have I desired, what was that? To dwell in the house
of the Lord, what to do? To behold the beauty of God: to see God in his
excellency and beauty, and worthiness. All his desire was from this, that his
soul was enamoured with the beauty of Gods house. The love of God stirred up
this blessed desire in the Prophet, therefore it was a holy and spiritual
desire.

Again, as they spring 5 Tend to Gods honor.
from the love of God, so they tend to the honor of God: for what comes from
heaven, goes to heaven back again: As waters that comes from a spring, they
go as high as the place they come from: so holy desires being kindled from
heaven, from a Spirit of love, they go to heaven again: the love of God
stirs them up, and he seeks Gods glory, and honor, and inward communion
with God in this. For a man out of a natural desire, may desire holy things
sometimes, to be free from such or such a sin, and to have such, and such a
grace, not out of a desire to honor God: but if he had grace, he sees he
might escape troubles, he might be free from temporal judgments, and he
might ingraciate himself, and commend himself to this or that person, whom
he desires to benefit by, therefore he desires as much grace as may help
forward his intentions in the world, he joins the world, and God together: oh
no, these are not the desires that distinguish a Christian from another man:
but those that spring from the love of God, that proceed inwardly from the
truth of the heart, and that the things themselves please God, and that there
is a loveliness in them, and that they tend to the honor of God especially,
and our own good in a secondary place, this is a character of good desires.
Thus we see, though I should go no further then the Text, how we may
distinguish holy and heavenly desires, from other desires. One thing have I
desired, and that will I seek, etc.

Therefore let us examine what our desires To examine our desires.
are, what our bent is* desires issue from the Will and affections, and they
show the frame of the soul, more then any thing in the world. As the springs
in low places Simile.
are discovered by the steames, and vapors that come out of the place: men
gather that there is a spring below, because of the ascent of vapors: so the
vapouring out of these desires, show that there is a spring of Grace in the
heart, they discover that there is a spring within.

And let those that mourn in Sion, that have some evidence, (though they are
not so good as they would be:) let them look to their hearts: what is thy
desire? what is the bent of thy soul? when a man is once converted and turned,
wherein is his turning? Especially, his mind and judgment, and esteem of
things as altered, there is a change of mind, and withal the desire, and bent
of the soul is altered: that if a man ask him, and examine what the bent is
of all the course of his life; oh that God might be glorified, that his Church
and cause might prosper, that others might be converted, this is the bent of
his soul: not that he might be great in the world, and ruin those that stand
in his way, (this shows that a man is a rotten hypocrite) the bent and sway of
the soul shows what a man is.

Because I would not Using all means and remooving all hindrances.
have any deceived in the point, take one evidence and sign more with you, and
that shall be in stead of all, and it is out of the Text too, One thing have I
desired, and that will I seek after; not by prayer only, but in the use of
all means: as indeed he was never quiet, till he was settled again in Sion;
nor then neither, till he had gotten materials for the Temple, and a place for
Gods honor to dwell in. If desires be not the desires of the sluggard, there
will be endeavor: as we see in the desire of David here, One thing have I
desired, and that will I seek: he used all means to enjoy communion with God
sweetly.

The Slug guard lusts and has nothing: so there are many spiritual sluggards
that lust, and have nothing: because they show not their desire in their
endeavors: there will be endeavor, where the desire is true. For desire
springs from the Will; the Will being the appetite of the whole man, Voluntas
appetitus, etc. The understanding carries not, but the Will: when the Will,
will have a thing, it caryes all the parts; hereupon when the desire is true,
it stirs up all the powers and faculties to do their duty, to seek to
attain the accomplishment, and possession of that that is desired.

Those therefore, that pretend they have good desires to God, and yet live
scandalously, and negligently, and will take no pains with their souls, alas
it is the sluggards desire, if they take not pains to remoove all lets, and
hindrances: for a man may know the desire of a thing is good, when he labors
to set the hindrances out of the way if he can; if the lets and hindrances be
not impossible, he will remove it if he can. Therefore those that pretend
this, and that, (There is a Lion in the way) when they might remoove it if they
would, there is no true desire: for desire is with the remooving of all
possible hindrances of the thing desired.

But to resolve one question. Quest.
How shall I know whether my desire be strong enough, and ripe enough or no, to
give me comfort?

I answer; if the desire Answ. How to know good desires are strong.
of grace be above the desire of any earthly thing, that a man may say with
David, One thing have I desired. I desire to be free from sin, as a greater
blessing to my soul, then to be free from any calamity: oh, it is a good
sign. And surely a man can never have comfort of his desire, till his desires
be raised to that pitch. For none ever shall come to heaven, that do not
desire the things that tend to heaven, above all earthly things, nor none shall
ever escape hell, that do not think it worse, and more terrible then all
earthly miseries. God brings no fools to heaven, that cannot discern the
difference of things. Therefore let us know, that our desires are to little
purpose if we have some desire to be good, etc. but we have a greater desire
to be rich, and great in the world, to have such, and such place: if the desire
of that be greater, then to be gracious with God. If we hate poverty, and
disgrace, and want, and this and that more then sin and hell, to which sin
leads, it is a sign that our judgments are rotten and corrupt, and that our
desire is no pure spiritual desire: for it is not answerable to the thing
desired; there is no proportion. David says here, One thing have I desired:
his desire carried him amain to One thing necessary, above all other things
whatsoever. Thus you see out of the Text, what are the distinguishing notes of
true desires from those that are false. I need name no more, if we consider
what has been spoken.

Now for, our comfort, if we find these holy desires: oh! let us take comfort
in our selves: for God will fulfill the desires of them that fear him: holy
desires, they are the birth of Gods Spirit, and there is not one of them that
shall be lost: for God regards those desires, My groanings are not hid from
thee; my groanings in trouble: and desires of grace. There is not the least
thing stirred up in the soul by the Spirit of God, but it prevayles with God
in some degree; answerable to the degree of worth in it: therefore if we have
holy desires stirred up by God, God promotes those desires, God will regard his
own work, and to him that has shall be given. Lord be merciful to thy
servants, that desire to fear thy Name, says Ezechias. It is a plea that we
may bring to God, Lord, I desire to please thee, as it is, Isay 26. 8. The
desire of our Isay 26. 8.
souls is to thy Name oh Lord; We fail sometimes, that we cannot perform
actions, with that zeal and earnestnes, as we should: but the desire, and
bent of our soul is to thy Name. A Christian may make it his plea to God,
truly our desires are toward thy Name, and we have some suitable endeavors:
and our desires are more that way, then to any thing in the world. It is a good
plea, though we be much hindered, and pulled back by our corruptions. So much
for that, the Act upon this object, One thing have I desired.

Of whom does he desire it?

Of the Lord.

One thing have I desired Object of David's desire, God.
of the Lord.
It was not a blind desire of the thing, but a desire directed to the right
object, to God to fulfill it. Holy desires are such as we are not ashamed of,
but dare open them to God himself, in prayer, and desires to God. A Christian,
what he desires as a Christian, he prays for; and what he prays for he
desires; he is an hypocrite else. If a man pray (as Saint Austin in his
confessions) August.
that God would free him from temptations, and yet is unwilling to have those
loving baits from him, he prays, but he does not desire. There are many that
pray, they say in their prayers. Lead us not in temptation; and yet they run
into Temptation; they feed their eyes, and ears, and senses with vain things:
you know what they are well enough, their lives are nothing but a satisfying of
their lusts, and yet they pray, Lead us not in temptation. And there are many
persons that desire that, that they dare not pray for, they desire to be so
bad. But a Christian what he desires, he prays for: I desire in earnest to be
in the house of the Lord, I desire it of the Lord, I put up my request to him;
and what I pray to him for, I earnestly desire indeed. Learn this in a word
hence, that,

When we have holy desires stirred up by God, turn Observe. To turn desires
into prayers.
them to prayers.

A prayer is more then To keep acquaintance with God.
a desire; it is a desire put up to God: let us turn our desires into prayers,
that is the way to have them speed.

One thing have I desired of the Lord.
The reason why we should in all our desires, make our desires known to God,
is, to keep our acquaintance continually with God. We have continual use of
desires of grace, and desires of mortification of corruptions, and of freedom
from this, and that evil that is upon us: as many desires as we have, let them
be so many prayers, turn our desires into prayers to God, and so maintain our
acquaintance with God. And we shall never come from God without a blessing and
comfort: he never sends any out of his presence empty, that come with a
gracious heart, that know what they desire. And it brings peace with it, when
we make our desires known to God by our prayer, It brings peace that passes
understanding; Ephesians. 4. Ephesians. 4.
Put case God does not hear our request, that he does not grant what we ask?
The peace of God which passes understanding, shall keep your hearts and
minds: So that when we put up our requests to God with thankefulnes for that
we have received, the soul will find peace: Therefore I say, let us turn
all our desires into prayers, to maintain perpetual communion, and
acquaintance with God: oh! it is a gainefull and comfortable acquaintance.

It is an argument, and Note of a good conscience.
sign of a good conscience, for a man to go often to God with his desires; it
is a sign that he is not in a wicked course: for then he dares not appeal to
the presence of God. Sore eyes cannot endure the light: and a galled conscience
cannot endure Gods presence. Therefore it is good to come often into the presence
of God: it shows that the heart does not regard iniquity. If I regard iniquity
in my heart, God will not hear my prayers. It is an argument of a good
conscience to come often into the presence of God: but I will not enter into the
common place of prayer.

We see next his earnestness I have desired it of the Lord, and

I will seek after it.

I will follow God still. David's importunity.
Here is his importunity in prayer, his fervency, his uncessancy and
perseverance, (as the Apostle exhorts,) he persevered in prayer. I will seek
after it. In prayer, and in the use of all good means, I will do what Observe.
Perseverance, and importunity requisite in prayer.
I can. So you see one qualification of prayer, it must be with perseverance,
and importunity. God loves importunate suitors: though we cannot endure to be
troubled with such persons, yet God loves importunate suitors.

As we see in Luke 18. Luke 18.
in the Parable of the Widow. God there vouch. safes to compare himself to an
unrighteous Judge, that cared neither for God, nor man: yet the importunity of
the Widow moved him to regard her. So the poor Church of God, she is like a
Widow, with her hair hanging about her. This is Sion, whom none regards: yet
this Widow, the poor Church of God, and every particular member of it, they
are importunate with the Judge of heaven, and earth, with God, and will not he
more regard the importunity of his children whom he loves, and delights in
that, Call upon him day and night? will not he regard their petitions; when an
unrighteous Judge shall care for the importunity of a poor Widow? Thus you see
the excellent fruit of importunity in our blessed Savior himself, and here in
David, I will seek after it, I will have no nay. Therefore we are exhorted in
the Scriptures, not to keep silence, to give God no rest, you that are the
Lords remembrancers, keep not silence, give him no rest: as Jacob with the
Angel, wrestle with him, leave him not till we have a blessing. As the woman
of Canaan, let us follow him still, and take no nay. Oh this is a blessed
violence (beloved) when we can set upon God, and will have no nay, but renew
suite upon suite, and desire on desire, and never leave till our petitions be
answered. Can the hypocrite pray always? Would you know a comfortable note to
distinguish an hypocrite from a true Christian? take it hence, Will the
hypocrite pray always? Sometimes he will pray; but if God answer him not
presently he gives over; but Gods children pray always; if the ground be good,
if they see the excellency of the thing, and the necessity, and withal join
at the amiablenesse of it, that it may be gotten. When they see the excellency,
and the necessity and usefulness of the thing, and the attainablenesse of it,
and that it is attainable in the use of means, they need no more, they will
never give over. That is the reason of that in the petitions, Thy Kingdom
come, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. But can we do the will of
God on earth as it is done in heaven? and does Gods glorious Kingdom of heaven
come while we are here in earth? No, it does not, but the soul that is guided
with the spirit of prayer, it rests not in this or that degree, but prays till
it be in heaven, Thy Kingdom come, I have grace now, but I desire glory, Thy
will be done, I desire to do it as thy Saints in heaven; though I cannot do
it: but I desire, and I will not give God rest, but pray, till all my prayers
be answered in heaven; and then I shall do the will of God as it is done in
heaven indeed. Thus we ought eagerly, and constantly to persevere in our
desires, till they be fully satisfied, or else we are but hypocrites.

Let us make conscience I beseech you of this duty more then we have done, and
never give God over for grace, for strength against our corruptions; for his
Church: for the prosperity of the means of salvation: for those things that we
have ground for; let us never give him over till we see he has answered our
desires. And when he has answered our desires, let us go on still to desire
more: for this life is a life of desires, the life of accomplishment is heaven,
then all our desires shall be accomplished, and all promises performed, and not
before then. This is a life of desires, and we must be in a state of desires,
and prayers still till we be in heaven.

What is the reason Quest.
that God does not presently accomplish our desires?

There be diverse reasons. Answ.
First of all he loves Answ. God does notanswer our desires presently.
to hear the desires of his servants, he loves to be sued unto: because he
knows it is for our good. 1 God loves to hear our prayers.
It is Music that best pleases Gods ears to hear a soul come to him to
request, especially spiritual things of him which he delights most to give,
which he knows is most useful, and best for us: this pleases him so
marvellously, that he will not presently grant it, but leads us along, and
along, that still he may hear more, and more from us. 2 To keep us humble.


And then to keep us in a perpetual humble subjection, and dependence on him,
he grants not all at once, but leads us a long, by yielding a little, and a
little, that so he may keep us in a humble dependence.

And then to exercise all our graces: for a spirit 3 To exercise our graces.
of prayer is a spirit of exercise of all grace, we cannot pray, but we must
exercise faith, and love to God and his Church; and a sanctified judgment to
esteem what are the best things to be prayed for: and to exercise
mortification, If I regardsinne, God will not regard my prayers. A spirit of
prayer is a spirit that puts all into exercise: therefore God, to keep us in
the exercise of all grace answers not at the first.

And then he would 4 To praise Gods blessings.
have us to set a high price upon what we desire, and seek after; if we had
it at the first, we should not set so high an esteem and price of it.

And then that, we 5 To use them better.
might better use it when we have it: then we use things as we should do
when we have gotten them with much ado, when we have won them from God with
great importunity, then we keep and preserve them as we should. These, and
the like reasons may be given, and you may easily conceive them your selves.
Therefore let us not be offended with Gods gracious dispensation if he answer
not our desires presently, but pray still: and if we have the spirit of prayer
continued to us, that spirit A spirit of prayer better then particular lessigs.
of prayer is better then the thing we beg a great deal. Oft-times God
answers us in a better kind, when he gives us a spirit of prayer: for
increasing a spirit of prayer in us, he increases all graces in us; what is it
we would have? This or that particular grace, but when God gives us a spirit of
prayer, he answers us better then in the thing we ask, for there is all
grace. He will answer in one kind or other. But I will not be large in these
points: you see then what was the affection of the holy Prophet, to that one
thing. One thing have I desired. And he did not only desire it, but turned his
desire into a prayer, he prayed to God, and he not only prayed once or
twice, but he seeks it still, till God vouchsafed to grant it.

Well, but that that he prayed for, he was assured Object,
of, and therefore what need he pray for it? he had a promise, Psalm 23. 5,
6. He shall prepare a Table before mine Psalm. 23. 5. 6.
enemies, my Cup does overflow. But what is that to this? these be things of
this life? Oh! but says he, God will be good to me in the things of another
life, and all the days of my life too: Doubtless the loving kindness of the
Lord shall follow me all the days of my life, and I shall dwell in the house
of the Lord: he takes in trust his dwelling in the house of God, and that the
loving kindness of God should follow him all the days of his life, he was
assured of it, and yet here he seeks it, and prays for it.

I note it, to show that the assurance of the thing Answ. Assurance of that we
pray for, no hinderance to prayer, Dan. 9.
takes not away the earnestness of prayer. Daniel was assured Dan. 9. That God
would deliver the Jews out of Babylon: he had read Ieremies Prophesies, he
knew the time was accomplished; yet we see what an earnest prayer he makes
there. Christ knew that God heard him in all his desires, that he should have
all good from God, being his only Son, yet he prayed whole nights sometimes,
and a whole Chapter Ioh. 17. is an excellent Ioh. 17.
prayer of his: so that the assurance of the thing, takes not away prayer to
God: nay it stablisheth it, for God so makes good his promises for the time to
come, as that he makes them good this way, he will be sought to by prayer.
And I may know hence that he will make good his promises for the time to come
to me, if I have a spirit of prayer for them: if I pray for perseverance to the
end, that God would vouchsafe me grace to live in the Church, and to grow up as
a Cedar; God surely means to grant this, because he has given me holy, and
gracious desires, which he would not have given me, but that he means to give
the thing. For this is an encouragement to pray, when I know I shall not loose
my labor, I pray, because I have a promise to have it, and I know the promise
runs upon this; But I will be sought unto of the house of Judah for this,
Ezekiel. 36. Ezech. 36.
For if we have it, and have not sought it by prayer, for the most part we
cannot have a comfortable use of it, unless we have things as the fruit of
our prayers: though there be not a particular prayer for every particular thing
we have of God: yet unless it be the fruit of the general prayer, that we
put up daily, we cannot have comfort in it: if God give it by a general
providence as he fills the bellies of the wicked with good things. But if we
will have things for our good in particular, we must receive them as the fruit
of our prayers from God, you see here he seeks, and desires that that he had
a promise to have, one thing have I desired of the Lord, and that will I seek.

That I may dwell in the House of the Lord.

It was generally propounded before, One Specification of David's desire.
thing have I desired, and that will I seek after, with all my might, and what
is that? the specification of it is this,

That I may dwell in the To dwell in the House of God.
House of the Lord for ever.

His desire is, not only to be in Gods house, but to dwell in it, to abide; and
not for a little while, but to dwell, and to dwell all the days of my life.

The House of God then was the Tabernacle, the Sanctuary, the Temple was not
yet built: he desired to be near the Tabernacle, to dwell in the Sanctuary,
the place of Gods worship. In the Tabernacle, which in those times was the
House of God, there was the Arc, and the mercyseate; types of many glorious
things in the new Testament, the Holy of holies, etc. And he desired to dwell
in the Tabernacle, to be near the Arc, the House of God, why? because God
manifested his presence there, more then in other places. The Arc has Gods
name in diverse places of Scripture; because God gave his answers in the Arc,
in the Propitiatory, or Mercie-seate, they came there to know his meaning, what
he would have; he gave his answers there. He is said to dwell between the
Cherubins: there were two Cherubins upon the Mercy-seate, and God is said to
dwell between the Cherubins: that is, there he was present to give answers to
the high Priest, when he came to ask. David knew this well enough, that God
had vouchsafed a more special presence in the Tabernacle, then in all the
places of the world, and therefore says he, I desire to dwell in the house of
the Lord all the days of my life.

House, we take for the persons that are in it, and House what.
persons that are ordered, or else it is a confusion, and not a house, it is a
company of those that are voluntary, they come, not by chance into our house,
those that are members of our Society: but there is an order, there is a
governor in a house, and some that are under government, and there is a
voluntary conjunction, and combination. So the Church is a voluntary company of
people that is orderly, some to teach, and some to be instructed, and thereupon
it is called a house.

And it is called the House of God, because House of God.
he is present there, as a man delights to be present in his house. It is the
place where God will be met withal. As a man will be found in his house, and
there he will have suitors come to him, where he reveals his secrets; A man
rests, he lies, and lodges in his house; where is a man so familiar as in his
house? And what other place has he such care to protect, and provide for as
his house? And he lays up his treasures, and his jewels in his house: so God
lays up all the treasures of grace and comfort in the visible Church. In the
Church he is to be spoken with as a man is in his house; there he gives us
sweet meetings; there are mutual spiritual kisses. Let him kiss me with the
kisses of his Cant. 1.
mouth, Cant. 1. A man's house is his Castle as we say, that he will protect
and provide for. God will be sure to protect, and provide for his Church.
Therefore he calls the Church of God, that is, the Tabernacle (that was the
Church at that time) the house of God. If we apply it to our times, that that
answers the Tabernacle now, is particular visible Churches under particular
Pastors, where the means of salvation are set up, particular visible Churches
now are Gods Tabernacle. The Church of the Jews was a National Church: there
was but one Church, but one place, and one Tabernacle: but now God has erected
particular Tabernacles, every particular Church and Congregation under one
Pastor* their meeting is the Church of God, a several Church independent. Our
National Church, that is, the Church of England: because it is under a
government Civil, which is not dependant upon any other foreign Prince, it is
a particular Church from other nations.

In that God calls the Gods respect to his Church.
Church his House, it shows the special respect that he has to his Church.
God though he be present every where, yet he is present in another manner in
his Church. As for instance, Simile.
the soul is present in all the parts of the body: but the soul as far as
it understands, is only in the brain, as far as it is the fountain of
life, it is in the heart: it has offices, and functions in all the parts: but
in the special function, the rational function of it, as it discourses, and
reasons, it is in the brain: so (for our apprehension sake) God is every
where: but as he sanctifies, and poures out his blessings, and opens, and
manifests his secrets, so he is in his Church especially. God is every where,
but he is in another way in heaven then in other places, he is there
gloriously: so in earth he is every where, but he is in another manner in the
Church, (the heaven upon earth) then in other places, he is there as in his
house to protect them, and provide for them, as his family, and there he
abides by his Ordinances, and takes solace, and delight; God delights himself
in his Church, and Children, that attend upon his Ordinances; where Two or
three are met together, I will be in the midst of them. When Gods people
meet together in the Church, God is present among them. So you see in what
respect, the Tabernacle then, and particular Churches now (which answer it) are
called the House of God.

Let us learn this for To carry our selves decently, in Gods. House,
our duty as well as consider our comfort, in that the Church is the House of
God, let us carry our selves as we should, decently in the house of God. Those
that are to look to the house of God, they should purge out all unclean
corners, that God may delight to dwell in his House still, that we give him no
cause to depart out of his House. That I may --

Dwell in the house of the Lord, etc.

The act here is, that I Love of Gods children to good things constant.
may dwell in the house of the Lord. He did not desire to be in it for a day
or a little time, to salute it, and so to leave it: but to dwell in the House
of the Lord, and to dwell there for ever. You see here that Christians have a
constant love to the best things, a constant desire to dwell in the house of
God. You may think it a strange desire of this holy man to dwell in the House
of God: but think then of the continuednesse of his desire, it was even to
heaven it self, he desired to dwell in the House of God for ever.

For what end? David desired to dwell,


I desire to dwell in the 1 In Gods love to him,
House of God, that I may dwell in the love of God, and in the care of God to
me in Christ for ever. I do not desire to dwell in the House of God, as it is
a meeting, and there an end: but I desire to dwell in the House of God, that I
may dwell in the love and 2 In his love to God.
care of God, and not only dwell in his care and love to me, and his care and
esteem of me, but that I may dwell in my love to him, that I may abide in his
love, and faith in him, that I may abide in Christ. It is not only for a man
to abide in the House of God, and go no further then so, but to abide in the
love of God, and in our love, and care, and faith, and dependence upon him, to
make God our house to live, and walk, and abide in, to dwell in God, as Saint
John says, not only in the House of God, but God himself. And the upshot of
all his


