A MIRACLE OF MIRACLES OR Christ in our nature.

Wherein is contained The Wonderful Conception, Birth, and Life of Christ, who
in the fullness of time became man to satisfy divine Justice, and to make
reconciliation between God and man.

Preached To the honorable Society of Grayes Inn, by that godly and faithful
minister of Jesus Christ, Richard Sibbes. D.D.

Phil. 2.5. He made himself of no reputation and took upon him the form of
a servant, and was made in the likeness of men.

LONDON Printed by E. G. for John Rothwell at the sign of the Sun in Paul's
Church yard, 1638.

THE FIRST SERMON.
Isaiah 7.14. The Lord himself shall give a sign, Behold a virgin shall
conceive and bare a Son, and shall call his name Imanuell.


THe Jews at this time were in a distressed condition by reason of the siege
of two kings, The scope of the Text.
Resin, and Pekah; the one the king of Syria, the other the king of Israel.
Whereupon the Prophet labors to comfort them, and tells them that these two
kings were but as two firebrarnds, that should waste and consume themselves,
and then go out. For confirmation thereof (because he saw the heart both of
King and people astonished,) He bids them ask a sign of things in heaven
or earth. No says king Ahaz, I will not tempt God, and making Religion his
pretense against Religion, (being a most wilful and wicked man) would not.

For He had framed an altar according to the altar which he had seen at
Damascus, neglecting Gods Altar at Jerusalem, as too plain and homely.

Wicked men admire their own devices.
Man unsubdued by the spirit of God, admires the devices of men, and the
fabric of his own brain.

And though this king was so fearful that his heart, and the rest of their
hearts, were as the leaves in the forest, shaking and trembling and quaking at
the presence of their enemies, and though he was surprised with fear and
horror, seeing God his enemy, and himself Gods enemy, and that God intended
him no good, yet he would go on in his own superstitious course, having some
secret confidence in league and affinity with other Kings, that were
superstitious like himself. This by the way.

Those that brag out of danger, are most cowardly in danger.
We may learn by this wretched King, That those that are least fearful before
danger, are most basely fearful in danger. He that was so confident and
wilful out of danger, in danger his heart was as the leaves of the forest.
For a wicked man in danger has no hope from God, and therefore is uncapeable
of any intercourse with him. He will trust the devil and his instruments, led
with a superstitious spirit rather then God. As this King had more confidence
in the King of Syria, that was his enemy, and so showed himself after, then in
God. It is the nature of flesh and blood (being not sanctified by God) to trust
in this means and that means: this carnal help, and that carnal help: a
reed of Egypt, yea the devil, and lies, rather then to God himself.

The Prophet in an holy indignation for the refusing of a sign, to confirm
his faith that these Kings should not do the Church harm, breaks forth
thus. Know O house of David, is it a small thing for you to weary men, but will
you weary my God also? God offers you a sign out of his love, and you dislike
and contemn his blessed bounty. Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a
sign. What is that? A virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call
his name Emanuell.

From the inference, Infinite mercy in God and stubbornness in man conflicting.
we may see the conflict between the Infinite goodness of God, and the
inflexible stubbornness of Man. Gods goodness striving with man's badnesse:
when they would have no sign, yet God will give them a sign: his goodness
overcommeth, and outwrastleth in the contention man's sinful strivings: his
mercy prevails against man's malice.

To come to the text it self. Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a
Son, and they shall call his name Emanuell. Meaning of the Text.
It was not so much a sign for the present, as a promise of a miraculous
benefit, which was to be presented almost eight hundred years after the
prophet spoke these words. Even the incarnation of Christ, a miracle of
miracles, a benefit of benefits, and the cause of all benefits. He fetches
comfort against the present distress, from a benefit to come. And to show how
this can be a ground of comfort, at this time of distress, That a virgin shall
conceive; We must know, That Christ was the Lamb slain from the beginning of
the world. All the godly of the Jews knew it well enough, the Messiah being
all their comfort, they knew that he was yesterday and to day, and shall be the
same for ever. The church had in all times comfort from Christ. Profuit
antequam fuit; He did good before he was exhibited in the world.

And thus the Prophet applies the comfort to the house of David, a virgin shall
conceive and bear a son. And they shall call his name Emanuell. Who shall be
of the family of David. And therefore the house of David shall not be extinct
and dissolved. The reason is strong: you of the house of David are in fear
that your Kingdom and nation shall be destroyed; but know that the Messiah
must come of a virgin, and of the house of David. And considering this must
certainly come to pass, Why do ye fear, ye house of David?

Reason.
Again it has force of a reason thus. The promise of our Messiah is the grand
promise of all, and the cause of all promises, for all promises made to the
church, are either promises of Christ himself, or promises in him, and for his
sake, because he takes all promises from God and conveyeth them, and makes
them good to us. God makes them and performs them in Christ, and for Christ.

Now the reason stands thus, if God will give a Messiah, He that will do the
greater he will do the lesser.
that shall be the son of a virgin, and Emanuell, certainly he will give
you deliverance. He that will do the greater, will do the less; what is the
deliverance you desire, to the promised deliverance from hell, and damnation,
and to the benefit by the Messiah, which you profess to hope for, and believe?

The Apostle himself Romans 2.8. reasons thus: God that spared not his own
Son, but gave him to death for us all, how shall not he with him give us all
things? If God will give Christ to be Emanuell and incarnate, he will not
stand upon any other inferior promises or mercies whatsoever.

But you will say, Object.
this promise was to come, and how could this confirm their faith, How this
can confirm their faith for present.
for the present, that they should not be destroyed?

I answer, Answ.
in regard of his taking our nature, he was to come, yet Christ was always
with his Church before. They understood him in the Manna, he was the Angel of
the covenant: They that were spiritually wise amongst the Jews, understood
that he was the Rock, that went before them.

And again it is usual in Scripture to give signs from things to come, as
37. Isaiah. The next year thou shall eat that which grows of it self, etc.
because where faith is, it makes things to come all one as if they were
present.

Make use of the Grand promises to comfort us in petty crosses.
And so we should make this use of the Grand promises of Christ to comfort us
against all petty matters and wants whatsoever. And to reason with the holy
Apostle, God spared not his only begotten son, but gave him to death. He has
given Christ, and will he not give all things needful? Has he given the
greater, and will he stand with thee for the less? This is a blessed kind of
reasoning; And so to reason from other Grand things promised. God shall raise
my body out of the dust, and the grave, and cannot he raise my body out of
sickness? and my state out of trouble? cannot he raise the Church out of
misery? So says Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 1. God that raised Christ, restored me
again, that had received the sentence of death: when we receive sentence of
death in our persons, look to him that raised Christ from the dead, and to the
grand promises to come. They before Christ comforted themselves in times of all
distress by the grand promise of Christ to come. But, now the Messiah is come.
And (which may much more strengthen our faith,) he has suffered and given his
body to death for us, and therefore why doubt we of Gods good will in any petty
matters whatsoever?

To come to the words more particularly. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and
bear a Son, etc.

You have diverse articles of our faith in these few words. Diverse Articles of
faith.
As Christ's conception by the holy Ghost, his being borne of the virgin Mary,
etc. you have here the humane nature of Christ. A virgin shall conceive, and
bare a son. And the divine nature of Christ; his name shall be called
Emanuell, which signifies also his office, God with us by nature, and God with
us by office, to set God and us at one. So you have diverse points of divinity
couched in the words which I will only open suitable to the occasion.

Behold. This is the usual Becon, set up, the Harbinger to require our
attendance, in all matters concerning Christ. And it has a threefold force
here. Behold, as being a thing presented to the eye of faith, He mounteth over
all the interim between the promise and the accomplishment; for faith knows
no difference of times.

And then it is to raise attention, behold it is

And not only attention, but likewise admiration, that a virgin should
conceive, Nothing more strange then a virgin to be a mother, and God a man.
that a virgin should be a mother: and that God should become man.

We had need of strong grace to apprehend these strange things. And therefore
God has provided a grace suitable, above reason, and above nature, and that is
faith. Reason mocketh at this. The devil knows it and envyeth it. The Angels
know, and wonder at it. The soul it self without a grace suitable to the
admirablenesse of the thing, can never apprehend it. And therefore well may it
be said, Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son.

Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear. and why a virgin? When God is to be
borne, it is fit for a virgin to be the mother. Christ was not to come by the
ordinary way of propagation; Christ conceived not by ordinary Propagation.
he was to come from Adam, but not by Adam, for he was to be sanctified by the
holy Ghost. Because he was indeed to be a Savior and a Sacrifice, and he must
be without spot, or sin himself, that was to offer himself for the sins
of others; Therefore the foundation, and ground of his nature must be pure,
and clean, and that is the foundation of all the purity of his life, and
conversation, and therefore a virgin.

This was typified in Aarous rod which budded though it had no root. No Juice
could come from a dry stick, yet by an Almighty power the rod did bud. And so
Moses bush, It burnt and did not consume; And that God that caused those
things, caused a virgin to be a mother.

He enters into the womb of a virgin, without any defilement at all,
considering the holy Ghost, from the Father and the Son, did purge and purify,
and sanctify that mass, The Mass whereof Christ was made, was sanctified by
the holy Ghost.
whereof the blessed body of our Savior was made. The virgin afforded the
matter, but the wise Framer was the holy Ghost. She was passive, the holy Ghost
was the Agent.

Now when did the virgin conceive? when upon the Angels coming to her, and
telling her, That she was greatly beloved, and that she should conceive, she
assented, be it so, as the Lord has spoken. When she assented to the word,
presently Christ was conceived: Christ conceived, upon Mary's assent to the
message by the holy Ghost.
her faith, and her womb conceived together. When her heart did conceive the
truth of the promise, and yielded assent thereunto, her womb conceived at the
same time also.

From hence learn something for our selves, It had been to little purpose,
though a virgin conceived Christ, Observe.
unless Christ had been conceived likewise in her heart. And there is no
benefit, by virtue of this conception to others, but to such as conceive Christ
in their hearts also.

To which end our hearts must be in some measure made virgin hearts, pure
hearts, hearts fit to receive Christ.

We must assent to promises of pardon, and of life everlasting, be it as the
Lord says. A Christian is a Christian, and Christ lives in his heart, at the
time of the assenting to the promise. So that if you ask, when does Christ
first live in a Christians heart? Quest.
I answer then, when the heart yields a firm assent to the gracious promises
made in Christ for the pardoning of sins, Answ.
and acceptance to the favor of God, and title, and interest to life
everlasting. For faith is the birth of the heart.

Christ was conceived in the womb of an humble and believing virgin. So that
heart that will conceive Christ aright, must be a humble, and believing heart,
humble, to deny himself in all things. And believing, to go out of it self,
to the promises of God in Christ. When God by his spirit has brought our
hearts to be humble, Christ is conceived in our hearts when we rest upon him
only.
and believing, to go out of themselves, and believe in him, rest upon him,
and his promises, then Christ is conceived in our hearts.

Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son. Here is the birth of Christ,
as well as the conception. Christ must not only be conceived in the womb, but
also brought forth, because God must be manifested in the flesh. As Saint Paul
says, 1 Timothy 3.
Great is the mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh. If he had
only been conceived, and not brought forth, he had not been manifested, he
was to do all things that befitted a Mediator.

And therefore he went along with us in all the passages of our lives. Christ's
conception, birth and life like ours.
He was conceived as we are, remained in the womb, so many months, borne as
we are borne, brought into the light as we are. Away therefore with idle
monkish devices, and fond conceits, that affirm the contrary.

He was like to us in all things, sin excepted, conceived, brought forth,
hung upon the breast as we, an infant as we, hungry and thirsty, and suffered as
we.

And as he was in all things like to us, In every thing in Christ, something
extraordinary.
so in every thing that was in him, there was something extraordinary; as he
was a man like to us, so he was an extraordinary man. He was conceived, but
of a virgin, which is extraordinary: he was borne, as we are, but there his
star appeared, Christ conceived, borne, lived, and dyed, eswe.
and the wise men came to adore and worship him. He was poor, as we are, but
there were beams of his Godhead appeared; when he was poor, he could command
a fish to furnish him: he dyed as we dye, but he made the earth to quake, the
veil of the temple to rend, when he tryumphed on the cross. All which
declared he was more then an ordinary person.

And so we must all conceive Christ, and bear Christ in our words, and
actions, it must appear that Christ lives in us. To show sorth Christ in all
our actions.
It must appear outwardly to man, what we are inwardly to God. Our whole
outward life must be nothing but a discovery of Christ living in us. I live,
yet not I, but Christ lives in me, says Saint Paul, which should appear, by
word, conversation and action. Our lives should be nothing, but an acting of
Christ, living in our souls.

This is not a mere analogicall truth, but it flows naturally: whosoever are
to have the benefit of his birth, and conception, Christ sends into their
heart, the same spirit that sanctified the mass, whereof he was made, and so
frames a disposition suitable to himself, he sets his own stamp upon the
heart: as the union of his humane nature to the divine, was the cause of all
other graces of his humane nature, so the spirit of God uniting us to Christ,
Union with Christ the cause of all grace.
is the cause of all grace in us. If we have not the spirit of Christ, we are
none of his.

And shall call his name Emanuel. Many things might be observed concerning the
ordinary reading of the words. Some read, she shall call his name Emanuel,
because he had no father. Others, his name shall be called Emanuel: but they
be doubtful, therefore I leave them.

But Jesus was his name. Therefore how is it said, he shall be called Emanuel?

The meaning is, he shall be Emanuel, and shall be accounted and believed to
be so, he shall be God with us indeed, and shall show himself to be so. For
in the Hebrew phrase, the meaning of a thing imports the being of the thing.
The like phrase is in Isaiah 9.6. To us a child is borne, to us a son is
given, and his name shall be called wonderful, Counselor, the Everlasting
father, the Prince of peace. That is, he shall be believed to be so, and
shall show himself to be so, and shall be so indeed. The like you have,
(because it is an answer to the cavil of the Jews,) which object he was not
called Emanuell, Ier. 2.3.
Judah shall be saved, Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his name,
whereby he shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness. For indeed he is
Jehovah our righteousness, and we have no righteousness to stand before God
with, but his: diverse other places of Scripture there be of the same nature,
but these two are pregnant; and therefore, I name them for all the rest.

Besides the conception and birth of Christ, you have here likewise, the divine
nature of Christ, Emanuel, a name of nature and office.
and the offices of Christ, for Emanuell is a name both of nature and office.

It is a name of his nature, God, and man, and of his office, which is to
reconcile God and man: we could not be with God, but God must first be Man with
us. We were once with God in Adam, before he fell; but there being a breach
made, we cannot be recovered again, till God be with us: he must take our
natures, that he may reconcile our persons.

Now Christ is Emanuell, first in regard of nature, Christ Emanuell in regard
of our nature.
God with us, or God in our nature. The pure nature of God, and the base nature
of man: that were strangers ever since the fall, are knit together in Christ.
What can be in a greater degree of strangeness (except the devils) then men's
unholinesse, and Gods pure nature? Yet the nature of man and of God, being so
severed before, are met together in one Christ. So that in this one word
Emanuell, there is heaven and earth, God and man, infinite and finite:
therefore we may well prefix, Behold.

A true Savior of the world must be God with man. Whether we consider the
greatness of the good we are to have by a Savior, or the greatness of the
evil we are to be freed from by a Savior: both which do enforce, that he must
be Emanuell, God with us.





of the enemies: and who is above the devil, and sin, and the wrath of God,
and all the oppositions, that stand between us and heaven, but God. So in
regard of the good, in regard of the evil, and in regard of the preservation,
to an Eternal good estate, and freedom from eternal evil, he must be
Emanuell, God with us.

These grand principles are enough to satisfy in this point.

And Secondly, as he must be God, so there Man. Man had sinned, and man must
suffer for sin, and without blood there was no remission; Without the blood of
Christ, noe remission.
and then, that he might be a merciful, and pitiful Savior, he must take
that nature on him, that he means to save, there must be a sutablenesse, and
sympathy. Sutablenesse, that the head, and the members. The sanctified, and the
Sanctifier, may be both of one nature. And a Sumpathy, that he might be
touched with humane infirmities.

Thirdly, this God and man must be one

As man dyed and shed his blood, it could not have been said that God dyed.
But because there was but one person, God is truly said to dye, though he
dyed in man's nature, for he took man's nature into unity with his person: and
whatsoever either nature did, the whole person is said to do, and therefore
Christ is a Savior according to both natures, as God, and as Man: for he was
to suffer, and he was to overcome and satisfy in suffering, he was not only
to hear our prayers, but to answer them. Both natures had an ingredience into
all the work of mediation.

God dyed, and God suffered, and supported the manhood, that it might uphold
the burden of the wrath of God, that it might not sink under it. And so in all
his actions, there was concurrence of divinity and humanity. The meaner works
being done by the Manhood, Meaner works acted by the manhood greater by the
Godhead.
the greater works by the Godhead, so making one, Emanuel God with us.

For God must bring us to heaven, by a way suitable to his holiness, and
therefore by way of satisfaction, and that cannot be but by God equal with
himself.

And that is the reason, why the Apostle joins together, without Christ,
without God. That is, Ephesians 5.
they that know not Christ God-man, to reconcile God and man, have nothing to
do with God. For the pure nature of God, what has it to do with the unpure
nature of man, without Emanuel, without him that is God man, to make
satisfaction?

But now that Christ has taken our nature, it is become pure in him, and
beloved of God in him. And God in him is become lovely, because he is in our
nature, yea in Christ, God is become a father I go to my father, God our
father.
and your father; his nature, is sweet to us in Christ, our nature is sweet to
him in Christ, God loves not our nature, but first in him, in whom it is pure.
And then he loves our nature in us, because by the spirit of Christ, he will
make our natures like to Christ's: and therefore we may conceive of God as
Emanuell, God well pleased with us, and we well pleased with him. Out of Christ
we are angry with God, and he angry with us. We could wish there were no
God, and choose rather to submit to the devil, to be led by his spirit, to
all profaneness and licentiousness. We have a rising against God, and his
Image, and what ever comes from God, the proud unmortified heart of man
swells against it. But when the heart once believes, that Christ Emanuell
God with us, has satisfied Gods justice; now God is taken by the believing
heart to be a father reconciled in Jesus Christ. And we are taught to be his
sons. And our nature is more and more purified and cleansed, and made like
the pure nature of Christ, and so by little and little, the terms between God
and us are more sweet, till we get to heaven, where our nature shall be
absolutely perfect and purged by the holy spirit. So that he is Emanuell God
with us, Christ Emanuell to make God and us friends.
to make God and us friends, which is two ways. First by satisfaction taking
By satisfaction.
for God sends his Spirit into our By the Spirit fitting us for communion
with God.
when we have something of God in us.

From hence many things may be spoken, partly for instruction, and comfort. I
will name a few.

First of all, it is to be wondered at, and we cannot wonder enough (though we
were Angels, and had natures larger then they are) at the mavelous mercies
and love of God, Gods love and mercy to man, to be wondered at.
that would stoop so low, as that God in the second person should take our
nature and become one with us. It is mavelous love that he would be one with
us, by such a means as his own son, to make peace between him and us. It
is a mavelous condescending, and stooping in the son to take our nature;
when there be better creatures above us, that he would let pass all above
us, and take our nature that is dust, into unity of his person, that earth,
flesh and blood, should be taken into one person with the Godhead, it is
wonderful and mavelous.

He took not the nature of Angels: so that we be above Angels, Man above
Angels by Christ's incarnation.
by the incarnation of Christ. Because he took not the Angels nature, they
are not the spouse of Christ: but every believing Christian is the spouse of
Christ; he is married to Christ, he is the head, we the members: he is the
husband, we the spouse, and therefore we may stand in admiration of the Love
of God, in taking our natures on him.

It requires hearts wounded by the spirit of God, to think of, and admire
these things answerable to their natures. The Angels when Christ was borne
could not contain, but break out, Glory to God on high, on earth peace, good
will toward men: because there was then peace, peace between God and us, and
by consequence with all the creatures, which do but take part with God and
revenge his quarrel.

These things be matters of admiration, and we shall spend eternity, in
admiration thereof in another world, though here our narrow hearts can hardly
conceive it. What we cannot believe by understanding, let us labor to
understand by believing.
But what we cannot believe by understanding (as things above nature,) let us
labor to understand them by believing, desire God we may believe them, and
then we shall understand them to our comfort.

Emanuel, God with us. If God be with us in our nature, then he is with us in
his love. And if God be with us, who shall be against us? For this Emanuel has
taken our nature for ever: Our nature in heaven.
he has taken it into heaven with him; God and we shall be for ever in good
terms, because God in our nature is for ever in heaven, as an Intercessour
appearing for us. There is no fear of a breach now; for our brother is in
heaven, our Husband is in heaven, to preserve an everlasting union and amity
between God and us. Now we may insult in an holy manner over all oppositions
whatsoever. For if God be with us in our nature, and by consequence in favor,
who shall be against us? and therefore with the Apostle, let us triumph, Romans
8.

Let us make use of this Emanuel in all troubles whatsoever, whether of the
Church, or of our own persons. In troubles of the Church, the Church has
enemies, hell, and the world, and Satan's factors, but we have one, Emanuel God
with us, and therefore we need not fear: you know whose ensign it is, whose
Motto; Deus nobiscum, is better than Sancta Maria. Sancta Maria will down,
when Deus nobiscum shall stand.

I beseech you therefore let us comfort our selves in regard of the Church, as
the Prophet in the next chapt. verse. 7. comforts the Church in distress, He
shall pass through Judah, he shall overflow and go over, he shall reach even
to the neck, and the stretching out of his wings, shall fill the breadth of thy
Church
land, O Emanuel. It may seem a kind of complaint. The enemy stretches out
their wings over thy land, O Emanuel: which may teach us in the person of the
Church, to go to Emanuel, Remember the enemies of thy Church spread their
wings over thy land, and people, O Emanuel, thou see the malice of the enemy,
the malice of Antichrist and his supporters. He is the true Michael that stands
for his Church. And then in the tenth verse, Take counsel together, and it
shall come to naught, speak the word, and it shall not stand for God is with
us. And as the Church before Christ came in the flesh, much more may we now he
is come in the flesh, No counsel against God shall stand.
insult over all. Let all the enemies consult together, this king and that
power; there is a counsel in heaven will disturb and dash all their
counsels. Emanuel in heaven laugheth them to scorn. And as Luther said, shall
we weep and cry, when God laugheth? He sees a company of idolatrous
wretches, that conspire together to root out all Protestants from the earth, if
it lay in their power. They that are inspired with Jesuiticall spirits, the
incendiaries of the world, have devoured all Israel, and Christendom in their
hopes: but the Church, which is Emanuels land, and freehold, sees it, and
laughs them to scorn. God can dash all their treacherous counsels.

And so in all personal trouble whatsoever, Emanuel, God with us, is fitted to
be a merciful Savior; he was poor, that he might be with the poor; he took
not on him an impassable nature, but he took our poverty, our miserable
nature. He is poor with the poor, afflicted with the afflicted, persecuted
with the persecuted, he is deserted with them that be deserted, My God, My God,
why have thou forsaken me? He suffers with them that suffer, he has gone
through all the passages of our lives. In the beginning of it he was conceived
and borne, Christ with us in poverty and bond.
and he has gone along with us, and is able to pity and succor us in our
poverty, in prison, in bonds, in disgrace, in our conflict with God, in our
terror of conscience, in all our temptations and assaults by Satan; he was
tempted himself by Satan, for this purpose, that Emanuel might in all these
be merciful.

Let us not lose the comforts of this sweet Name, in which you have couched so
many comforts. In the hour of death, when we are to dye, think of Emanuel.
When Jacob was to go into Egypt, says God, Fear not Jacob, go, I will go
with thee, and bring thee back again, and he did bring him back to be buried
in Canaan. So, fear not to dye, fear not to go to the grave, Emanuel has
been there, he will go into the grave, he will bring us out of the dust
again: for Emanuel is God with us, who is God over death, over sin, over the
wrath of God; God over all, blessed for evermore, and has triumphed over all, so
that what shall separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus?

Christ God in us, and for us.
He is not only God with us in our nature, but he is God for us in heaven at
this time; he is God in us by his spirit: he is God amongst us in our
meetings, Where two or three be gathered together in my name, I will be in the
midst of them. He is God for us to defend us, he is for us in earth, for us in
heaven, and wheresoever we be, specially in good causes. And therefore enlarge
our comforts as much as we can.

And shall not we then labor to be with him, as much as we can? All spirits
that have any comfort by this Emanuel they are touched on by his Spirit, to
have desires to be nearer and nearer to him.

How shall I know he is my Emanuel, How to know Emanuel to be ours.
not only God with us, but God with me? If by the same Spirit of his, that
sanctified his humane nature, I have desires to be nearer and nearer to him,
to be liker and liker him. If I am on his side, if I be near him in my
affections, desires, and understanding; if I side not against the Church, nor
join in opposition against the Gospel. If I find inwardly a desire to be
more and more with him, and like to him; if outwardly (in the place where I
live) I side with him, and take part with his cause, it is a sign I have
interest in him. And therefore let us labor to be more and more with Christ,
and with God, in love, and affections, in faith, in our whole inward man,
because he is with us.

We must know this Emanuel does trust us with his cause, Christ's cause to be
maintained,
to speak a good word for him now and then, to speak a word for his Church; and
he takes it ill if we neglect him. Curse ye Meroz, because he came not out to
help the Lord. God trusts us to see, if we will be on his side, and calls
to us, as Iehu did, Who is on my side, who? Now, if we have not a word for the
Church, not so much as a prayer for the Church, how can we say, God with us?
when we are not used to speak to God by way of prayer, nor to man but by way
of opposition and contestation? By this therefore examine the truth of our
interest in Christ.

Those that intend to receive the communion, must think, Now I am to be near
unto Christ, Christ with us in his Word and Sacraments.
and to feast with him. Christ is with us in his Word, in the Sacrament; there
is a near relation between the bread and the wine, and body and blood of
Christ. Now the true child of God is glad of this most special presence of
Christ. All true receivers come with joy to the Sacrament. Oh I shall have
communion with Emanuel, who left heaven, took my nature into a most near
hypostaticall union, the nearest union of all, and shall not I desire the
nearest union with him again that can be possible? Oh I am glad of the
occasion, that I can hear his word, pray to him, receive the Sacrament. Thus
let us come with joy, that we may have communion with this Emanuel, Communion
with Christ is sweet.
who has such sweet communion with our nature. That our hearts may be as the
virgins womb was to conceive Christ; I beseech you enlarge these things in
your meditations.

And because we know not how long we may live here, some of us be sick and
weak, and all of us may fall into danger, we know not how soon, let it be
our comfort, that God is Emanuell, he left heaven, and took our nature to
bring us thither, where himself is. When times of dissolution come, consider,
I am now going to him to heaven, that came down from thence, to bring me to
that eternal mansion of rest and glory. And shall not I desire an everlasting
communion with him. God became man, that he might make man like God, pertaking
of his divine nature, in grace here, and glory hereafter. Shall not I go to
him that suffered so much for me? Therefore says Saint Paul, I desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, which is the effect of Christ's prayer, Father
says he, my will is, that where I am, they may be also. And in this God
hears Christ, that all that believe in him shall be where Christ is; as he
came from heaven to be where we are. Lay up these things in your hearts, that
so you may receive benefit by them.

FINIS.
Page 19. line 6. for wounded, read warmed.

THE SECOND SERMON
ISAIAH. 7.14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call
his name Emanuell.


THe occasion of these words we have heard. The Church was in great distress
under two mighty Kings, that threatened great matters; but indeed were but two
smoking firebrarnds, that went out of themselves. Ahaz being a wicked King,
(and wickedness being always full of fears, fearful in trouble, though not
before trouble, for they that be least fearful of trouble, be most fearful
in trouble) and GOD intending comfort to the Church, the Prophet bids him ask
a sign. Ahaz out of guiltiness of conscience, and stubbournes together would
ask none. GOD intended to strengthen his faith, and he would not make
advantage of the offer. And therefore the Prophet promises a sign, the grand
sign, The sign of all signs, the miracle of all miracles, the Incarnation of
the Messiah.

By the way I beseech you let me observe this. Doctrine.
It is Atheistical profanesse to despice any help, that God in his wisdom
thinks necessary to proppe and shore our weak faith withal. And therefore
when many out of confidence of their own graces, and parts refuse the
Sacrament (God knowing better then our selves, we need it) unless it be at
one time of the year, and refuse the other ordinance of preaching, which God
has sanctified, they seem to know themselves better then God, who out of
knowledge of our weakness, has set apart these means for the strengthening of
our graces. Grace refused is turned into wrath
And as Ahaz refusing Gods help, provoked God by it, so these must know, they
shall not escape without judgment, for it is a tempting of God, and proceeds
from a bad spirit of pride and stubbornes.

How this promise of the Messiah could be a sign to them to comfort them, we
spoke at large, we will now deliver some thing by way of addition and
explication.

The house of David was afraid they should be extinct, by these two great
enemies of the Church, but says he, A Virgin of the house of David shall
conceive a Son, and how then can the house of David be extinct? What God
says man cannot disanull.
Secondly, Heaven has said it, earth can not disanull it. God has said it,
and all the Creatures in the World can not annihilate it. It was the promise
made to Adam, when he was fallen, it run along to Abraham, and afterward to
the Patriarchs, so that it must needs be so.

It was the custom of the men of God, Men of God, of old had recourse to the
promises of the Messiah.
led by the Spirit of God, in these times, in any distress to have recourse
to the promise of the Messiah, as for other ends, so for this, to raise
themselves up by an argument drawn from the greater to the less. God will
give the Messiah, GOD will become man. A virgin shall conceive a Son. And
therefore he will give you less mercies.

I note this by the way for this end to teach us a sanctified manner of
reasoning. How to reason with our selves in a sanctified manner.
Was it a strong argument before Christ's coming. The Messiah shall come, and
therefore we may expect inferior blessings. And shall not we make use of the
same reason now? Christ is come in the flesh, and is triumphant in Heaven, God
having given Christ, will he not give all things necessary whatsoever? Shall
the reasonings before Christ's coming be of more force, then these be, now
Christ is come, and is in glory, appearing in Heaven for us?

Beloved, it should be a shame to us, that we should not have the sanctified
art of reasoning, to argue from the gift of Christ, to the giving of all things
needful for us?

All promises founded in Christ.
The ground of this reason is this, All other promises whatsoever they are, are
secundary to the grand Fundamental promise of CHRIST. All promises issue from
a Covenant founded in God man. Now covenants come from love, and love is
founded in the first person, loved, and the foundation of all love. Therefore
if God gives Christ the foundation of love, and out of love makes a covenant,
and as branches of the covenant gives many promises: Then having made good the
maine promise of all, ( Jesus Christ) will he not make good all the rest? And
therefore we should have often in our hearts, and thoughts, the accomplishment
of all promises in Christ, and from thence make use of the expectation of all
inferior promises. For they issue from that love of God in Christ, which is
fully manifested already.

We have spoken of the Preface, Behold, which is a word usually prefixed
before all the passages of Christ, his Birth, his Resurrection, his coming
again. And great reason.

For what do we usually behold with earnestnes? rare things, new things,
great things, especially if they be great to admiration, and that concern us
nearly; useful things, especially if they be present. And is any thing rarer
then that, A Virgin shall conceive, and bear a son? then the Incarnation of
Christ? never was the like in nature, never the like in Heaven, or earth, that
God, and man, should be in one person. It is a rare thing, a new thing, it is
great to wonderment; and therefore in the 9. Chapter of this prophecy, His
name shall be called wonderful, Is. 9 6.
as in many other respects, so wonderful in his Conception and Birth.

And then all is for us. Christ's conception and incarnation mavelous and rare
To us a Child is borne, to us a Son is given, in the same Chapter. For us,
and for us men, he came down from Heaven. And then to the eye of Faith, all
these things are present: Faith knows no difference of time.

Christ is with us here by faith.
Christ is present to the eye of faith now. We see him sacrificed in the
Sacrament and in the word; faith knows no distance of place as well as no
distance of time: we see him in heaven, as St. Stephen sitting at the right
hand of God for the good of his Church, and therefore behold.

If ever any thing were, or shall be great from the beginning of the world, to
eternity, this is great, this is wonderful. And if any thing in the world be
fit for us, if any thing dignifieth the soul, and raises the soul above it
self, it is this wonderful object.

Man out of weakness wonders at poor things.
We out of our weakness, wonder at poor pety things, as the Disciples at the
building of the Temple, What stones are these? we wonder at the greatness of
birth and place, but alas, what is fit for the soul being a large and capable
thing to stand in admiration of? Here is that, that transcendeth admiration it
self. Behold a Virgin shall conceive a Son. And therefore attend to the
great matter in hand: this I thought good to add, to what, I formerly
delivered in that particular.

A Virgin shall conceive a Son etc. You need not go farther then the text
for wonders. For here are 2 great ones a Virgin, a Mother, and Godman.

So in the words, you have the conception and the birth of Christ his humane
nature, his divine nature, and his office to reconcile God and us in one.

As he is God in our nature (he took our nature into communion of person) so
his office is to bring God and man together, his two natures is to fit him for
his office; God and man were at much distant terms as could be, unless
between the Devil, and God. And therefore God man in one person must perform
the great office, of bringing such as were in such opposite terms together.

Of his conception by the Virgin Mary, we spoke sufficiently, only we will
add this for farther explication. A further type of this was in the birth of
Isaac. Isaacks birth a type of Christ's.
Isaac you know was borne of a dead womb. Christ was conceived of a Virgin,
and in a manner far more improbable then the other. Isaac was the Son of
the promise. Christ was the promised seed, both in some sort miraculously
borne. For indeed it was a true wonder, that Isaac should be borne of a dead
womb. And here that a Virgin should conceive. Sara had nothing to supply
moisture and juice to the fruit. And so here was nothing of a man to further
Christ's conception.

I will show why there must be this kind of conception of Christ, which will
help our faith exceedingly.

First Christ must be without all sin of necessity; Why Christ must be
without sin.
for else when he took our nature, stubble, and fire had joined together. God
is a consuming fire, and therefore the nature must be purified, and sanctified
by the holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin.

And then again in the conception, there must be a foundation of all obedience
active and passive, No blemish or defect of purity in the conception of Christ.
and of all that was afterward excellent in Christ. If there had been any
blemish in the foundation, which was his conception; if he had not been pure,
there had been defect in all that issued from him, his active obedience and
passive obedience, for every thing savours of the principle from whence it
comes. And therefore it was Gods great work in this strange conception that
sin might be stopped in the root and beginning, nature might be sanctified in
the foundation of it. And so that he might pursue sin from the beginnning to
the end, both in his life by living without sin, and also in his death by
making satisfaction for sin.

And therefore ground our faith on this, That our salvation is laid on one that
is mighty, Faith to be grounded on Christ, God man.
God man; and on one, that is pure and holy. And therefore in his obedience
active, holy; and in his obedience passive, holy.

Again he came to be a surety for us, Christ our surety.
and therefore he must pay our whole debt, he must pay the debt of obedience,
he must pay the debt of punishment. Now obedience must come from a pure nature,
and his death must extend to the satisfying of an infinite Justice. And
therefore he must be conceived of the holy Ghost in the womb of a pure Virgin.

And we must know that in this conception of Christ, there were 2. or 3.
things wherein there was a maine difference between Christ, and us.

Christ was in his humane nature altogether without sin, Christ without sin.
we are sinful in our nature. Again Christ's humane nature had always
subsistence in the divine, His humane nature had always subsistence in the
divine.
and it was never out of the divine

And then in manner of propagation: his was In manner of propagation.
Adam was of the earth, neither of man, nor woman. Eve of man without a woman.
All other of Adam, and Eve. Christ of a Virgin, and without a man. But setting
aside his subsistence in the second person, and extraordinary means of
propagation, Christ and we are all one, he had a true humane body, and soul,
and all things like our selves, sin, and the former differences excepted.

Why Christ must be man, we have already heard. He became man to be suitable to
us in our nature, and to sympathize in all our troubles.

And shall call his name Emanuell. He shall call his name Emanuel, Christ
became man for our sakes.
says the new Testament. That is, he shall be Emanuell indeed, and shall be
known to be, and published to be so. Whatsoever has a name is apparent.
Christ was before he took our flesh; but he was not called Emanuell. It did
not openly appear that he was God in our nature, he was not conceived in the
womb of a Virgin. They before Christ knew that he should come, but when he
was conceived and borne, he was then called Emanuell.

Christ by diverse signs showed himself before exhibited in the flesh.
There were diverse presences of Christ, before he came. He was in the bush as a
sign of his presence, he was in the Arc as a sign of his presence, he was in
the Prophets and Kings as a type of his presence. He took upon him the shape
of man as a representation of his presence, when he talked with Abraham and the
Patriarchs, but all this was not God with us, in our nature; he took it on him
for a time, and laid it aside again. But when he was Emanuell, and was
called, and declared so to be, he took on him our nature, never to lay it
aside again. He was borne in our nature, brought forth in our nature, lived in
our nature, dyed in our nature, was crucified in our nature, became a Curse for
us in our nature, buried in our nature, rose in our nature, is in heaven in our
nature, and for ever will abide there in our nature.

All their faith before he came in the flesh was in confidence that he should
take our flesh in the fullnes of time. Now came the time, when he was called
Emanuell, and then the word became flesh, and took our nature on him.

From hence that God took our nature upon him in the second person, come
diverse things considerable.

For first it appears, First things considerable.
that he has dignified and raised our nature above Angels, because he has
taken the seed of Abraham, and not of the Angels, a wonderful advancement of
our nature for God to be with us, to marry such a poor nature, as ours is;
for the great God of heaven and earth to take dust into the unity of his
person. If this may not have a behold, before it, I know not what may.

To join altogether* Consideration.
For the great God of heaven and earth before whom the Angels cover their
faces, the mountains tremble, and the earth quakes, to take our flesh, and
dust into unity of his person, and for such ends to save sinful man, and from
such misery, and eternal misery, from such great enemies; And then to advance
him to such great happiness, as we are advanced. to take Christ Emanuell in
the whole passage of his mediation, and there is ground of admiration indeed.

Considerations to defile our natures that God has dignified.
But consider it specially in the raising and advancing of our natures to be
one with God. Shall God be God with us in our nature in heaven, and shall we
defile our natures that GOD has so dignified? Shall we livelike beasts whom
God has raised above Angels Let swearers, beastly persons, and profane
hypocrites, either alter their courses, or else say they believe not these
truths. Shall a man believe, God has taken his nature into unity of his
person, and has raised it above all Angels, and can he turn beast, yea
devil incarnate in opposition of CHRIST, and his cause? What a shame is this?
can this be, where these things are believed? A Christian should have high
thoughts of himself, what shall I defile the nature, that God has taken into
unity of his person?

And as he has dignified, and raised, and advanced our nature so highly:
Consideration.
so likewise he has infused, and put all the riches of grace into our nature.
For all grace is in CHRIST, that a finite nature can be capable of. For CHRIST
is nearest the fountain. Now the humane nature being so near the fountain of
all good, that is God, it must needs be as rich as nature can possibly be
capable of: And is not this for our good? are not all his Riches for our use?

And therefore seeing our nature is dignified by Emanuell, and enriched
exceedingly by his graces next to infinite. (For our humane nature is not
turned to God, as some are conceited. It is not deified, and so made infinite)
yet as much as the creature can be capable of, there is in Christ-man, and so
shall we defile that nature?

And from hence that our nature is ingrafted into the Godhead, Consideration.
it follows that what was done in our nature, was of wonderful extention,
force, and dignity, because it was done, when our nature was knit to the God
head, and therefore it makes up all objections. As.

How could the death of one man satisfy for the deaths of many millions.
Objection answered.


Secondly it was the death of Christ, whose humane nature was ingrafted into
the second person of the Trinity. For (because they were but one person)
whatsoever the humane nature did or suffered, God did it. If they had been 2.
Persons God had not dyed, God had not suffered, God had not redeemed his Church.

And therefore the Scripture runs comfortably on this; Question.
God has redeemed the Church with his own blood: has GOD blood? Answer.
No, but the nature that GOD took into unity of persons has blood, and so
being one person with God, God, shed his blood. It is God that purchased a
Church with his blood, it is God that dyed. The Virgin Mary was Mother of GOD,
because she is the Mother of that nature which was taken into unity with God.

Hereupon comes the dignity of whatsoever Christ did, and suffered. Though he
did it in our nature, yet the Godhead gave it its worth, and not only worth,
but God put some activity, some vigor, and force into all that Christ did. It
does advance Christ Mediator according to both natures, And from hence arises
Communication of properties, as Divines call it, which I will not now speak
of. It is sufficient to see that whatsoever was done by Christ, What is done to
by Christ, is done by God
was done by God he being Emanuell, and therefore had its worth and dignity to
prevail with God. Hence comes a forcible reason. That God must satisfy
Divine Justice, Reason.
because it was the action of a God-man. His great sufferings were the
sufferings of the second person, in our nature. And hereupon from satisfaction,
and merit, comes reconciliation between Ged, and us. God being satisfied by
Christ, God, and we are at terms of peace: our peace is well founded, if it
be founded in God the Father, by God the Son, taking our nature into unity
of his person. These things must have influence into our comforts, and into our
lives, and conversations, being the grand Articles of Faith. And therefore we
ought to think often of them. We must fetch principles of comfort, and
holiness from hence, as from the greatest arguments that can be, therefore I
desire to be so punctual in them. God is Emanuell, especially to make God,
and us one. Christ is our Friend in taking our nature to make God, and us
friends again.

But how does friendship between God and us arise from hence? Quest.
that Christ is God in our nature. I will give 2. or 3. Reasons of it.

First it is good reason, that God should be at peace with us, 1. Reason.
because sin, (the cause of division) is taken away, It is sin, (the cause
of division) is taken away. It is sin that separateth between God, and us;
and if sin be taken away, God is mercy it self, and mercy will have a
current. What stops mercy but sin? Secondly, take away sin, it runs
amain. Christ therefore became Emanuell God with us. Because he is the Lamb
of God that takes away the sins of the World.

Before Adam had sinned, there was sweet agreement and communion between Adam
and God, but sin that divided between God and the creature; now Christ
having made satisfaction for all our sins there can be nothing but mercy.

2. Reason.
Again Christ is a fit person to knit God and us together, because our nature
is pure in Christ; and therefore in Christ, God loves us. After satisfaction
God looks on our nature in Christ, and sees it pure in him, Christ is the
glory of our nature. Now if our nature be pure in our head, (which is the
glory of our nature) God is reconciled to us, and loves us in him that is
pure, out of whom GOD can not love us.

As Christ is pure, and our nature in him, so he will make us pure at length.

3. Reason.
Thirdly, Christ being our head of influence, conveyeth the same spirit that is
in him, to all his members, and by little and little, by that spirit purges
his Church, and makes her fit for Communion with himself, for he makes us
partakers of the Divine nature; he took our frail humane nature, that we
might partake of his Divine nature, this is, of his Divine qualities, to be
holy, pure, humble, and obedient, as he was.

And thus Christ being a head not only of eminence to rule, and govern, but
of influence to flow by his spirit into all his members, is fit to be a
reconciler to bring God, and us together; partly because our nature is in him,
and partly because he does communicate the same spirit to us, that is in
himself, and by little and little makes us holy like himself.

I hasten to the maine use of all. Then God the father, and we are in good
terms, for the second person is God, in our nature, for this end to make God,
and us friends. Job 9 3.2.
There is a notable place, of Scripture which I note for the expressions sake
he speaking there of a Days man. There is no Dayes-man between us that might
lay his hand on us both, that is, a middle person to lay his hand on the one,
and the other. Now CHRIST is the middle person, as the second person in
Trinity. And then he is God, and man, and therefore he is fit to be
Mediator, to lay his hand on both sides, on man as man, on God as God. And
CHRIST is a friend to both, to GOD as GOD, to man as man; and therefore he is
fit to be an Vmpire, to be a Dayes-man, to be a Mediator. And he has done
it to purpose, making that good in Heaven, that he did on earth. And therefore
labor to make a gracious use of all this. I know nothing in the World more
useful, no point of Divinity more pregnant, no greater spring of sanctifying
duty, then that God and man were one, to make GOD, and us one. He married our
nature, that he might marry our persons.

Use.
And if it be so that God and man are brought to terms of reconciliation on
such a foundation as God-man, then ought not we to improve this comfort? have
we such a foundation of comfort, and shall not we make use of it? Shall we
have wisdom in the things of this World, and not make use of the grand
comforts, that concern

Use.
But how shall we improve it? In all our necessities and wantes go to God:
Improved.
how? through Christ, God-man, who is in Heaven making intercession and
appearing for us by virtue of his satisfaction made on earth, and therefore we
may go bouldly to the Throne of grace, to God being reconciled by God. God,
has God at his right hand, appearing for us, and shall we be afraid to go
to the Throne of grace? When we want strength, comforts, or any thing, go to
God, in the mediation of Emanuell, and then God can deny nothing to us, that we
ask with the spirit of Faith in the name of Christ.

I beseech you therefore, Use of improving our privileges by Emanuell.
let this be the maine use, continually to improve the gracious privileges
we have by Emanuell. Our nature is now acceptable to God in Christ, because
he has purified it in himself, and Gods nature is lovely to us, because he
has taken our nature. If God loved his own Son, he will love our nature as
joined to his Son, and Gods Nature is lovely to us, He took our flesh upon
him, and made himself Bone of our Bone. And shall not we like, and affect
that, which was so graciously procured by Emanuell.

Consider of it, and let it be ground of reverent and bold prayer, in all our
wants to God, Use.
in Emanuell.

Let us make use of it likewise in behalf In the behalf of the Church
of the Church. The Church is Emanuells Land as ye have it in the next
Chapter, Verse 8. Isa. 8.8
The stretching out of his wings, shall be the breath of thy land, O Emanuell.
The Church of the Jews was Emanuells land, but then it was impaled within the
pale of the Jews: but now the Gentiles are taken in; The Church is scattered,
and spread abroad over the whole earth. And there. fore go to God in behalf
of the Church. Thou tookest our nature into unity of thy person, that thou
might be a gracious, and a merciful head. And therefore look in mercy on
thine own mystical body, the Church. They before Christ came in the flesh,
who had the spirit of Faith, knew the Church of the Jews could not be
extinct, because Emanuell was to come of it.

And we may know, the Church shall never be destroyed, till the second
coming of CHRIST because those things are not yet performed, that God has
promised, and must be performed. And therefore we may go as bouldly to
Christ, and spread the cause of the Church before him now, as they spread the
cause of the Jews before him then: look upon thy Land, look upon thy Church
O Emanuell.

That there must be a Church, we must believe, and we can not believe a Non
ens. We must have ground for our faith, and therefore never fear that heresy
shall overspread the face of the Church; Emanuells land shall be preserved by
some way or other, though perhaps not by the way we expect. God must have a
Church to the end of the world, Gods Church shall (...) the end of the world.
the Gospel must get ground, Antichrist must fall. God has said it, and man
can not unsay it. And therefore in all estates of the Church spread its cause
before Emanuell.

When Emanuell came once, At Christ comeing the Jews Church wasted.
the Church of the Jews wasted. Therefore if you will have good arguments
against the Jews, this is a good one to convince them that Christ is come in
the flesh. The Church of the Jews was to continue till Emanuell, but the
Church of the Jews has ceased to continue and is now no Church, there is now
no family of David, and therefore Emanuell is come.

And for a further use let us have thoughts of the second coming of Emanuell as
they had thoughts of the the first. ^
Christ was called the consolation of Israel, at his first coming and in the
new Testament, it is every where expressed a sign of a gracious man to look
for the appearing of Jesus Christ, ^
and to love it. Now let us comfort our selves that this Emanuell will appear
in our flesh ere long let us wait for the consolation of Israel. Emanuell came
down to us, to take our nature upon him and to satisfy Gods wrath, that he
might take us to heaven with himself, and that we might be for ever with him
in glory. And therefore let us (if we would make a true use of Emanuell,)
desire to be with him. Christ delighted before he came in the flesh to be
with the sons of men, and he is with us now by his spirit, and so willbe
with his Church to the end of the world; and shall not we be with him as much
as we may? Indeed he loved our nature so much, that he descended from the
height of Majesty, to take our misery and business upon him, and shall not
we desire to be with him in glory?

There be diverse evidences whether we have any ground of comfort in this
Emanuell or no. This shall be one.

Evidence of comfort in Christ.
We may know we have benefit by the first coming of Emanuell, if we have a
serious desire of the second coming; if we have desire to be with him. If as
he came to us in love. We have desires to be with him in his Ordinances as
much as may be, and in humble resignation at the hour of death; Question.
how shall we be with him here? Answer.
be with him in thoughts, in meditation, in faith, and Prayer, meet with him
wheresoever he is, he is in the congregation; where two or three are gathered
together in his name, he is amongst them, be with them in all things where he
vouchsafes his gracious presence. It is the nature of love to desire perfect
union, and therefore the Christian soul touched with the spirit of God will
desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, Revel. 22.20
as best of all. Come Lord Jesus come quickly, and therefore in the hour of
death is willing to resign himself to God that he may go to Emanuell, and
enjoy his presence, that left the presence of his Father, to take our nature,
and to be with us on earth.

But the maine thing I desire you to observe, Evidence of comfort.
is matter of comfort from this Emanuell That now he having taken our nature
upon him, that he might take our persons into unity of his mystical body, we
might have comfort in all conditions. For he took our nature upon him,
(beside his other ends) that he might take our persons to make up mystical
Christ: he married our nature, to marry our persons. And therefore if he did
it for this end, that we might be near him as our nature is near him, shall
not we make it a ground of comfort? that our persons shall be near Christ as
well as our natures.

(...) of comfort.
As CHRIST has two natures in one person, so many persons make up one mystical
CHRIST, so that our persons are wonderfully near to Christ. The wife is not
nearer the husband, the members are not nearer the head, the building is not
nearer the foundation, then Christ and his Church are. And therefore comfort
our selves in this. Christ is Emanuell, God with us in our nature. And will he
suffer his Church to want, that he has taken so near to himself? can the
members want influence, when the head has it? can the wife be poor, when the
husband is rich? whatsoever Christ did to his own body, to his humane nature
taken into the unity of his person, that he will do in some proportion to his
mystical body.

As the humane (...).
I will show you some particulars. He sanctified his natural body, by the Holy
Ghost, and he will sanctify us by the same spirit. For there is the same
spirit in head, and members. He loves his natural body, and so, as never to
lay it aside to eternity. And loves his mystical body now in some sort more,
for he gave his natural body to death, for his mystical body. And therefore
as he will never lay aside his natural body, he will never lay aside his
Church, nor any member of his Church: for with the same love, that he loved
his natural body, he loves now his mystical members. As he rose to glory
in his natural body, and ascended to Heaven: so he will raise his mystical
body, that it shall ascend as he ascended. I beseech you therefore consider
what a ground of comfort this is, God took our nature on him, (besides the
grand end of satisfaction) that he might make us like himself in glory, that
he might draw us near to himself. And therefore now Christ being in Heaven,
having commission, and authority over all things put into his hand; he having
a Name above all names in Heaven, Psalm. 2*9, 10*
and earth, that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, that is, every
subjection should be given; will he suffer any member of his body to suffer
more then he thinks fit? No, seeing he is in Heaven, and glory, for his
Churches good. For all that he has done and suffered is for the Church, and
the Churches use.

To conclude all, Let us consider, what we are, Conclus: to consider what w^e
are.
let not a Christian be base minded, let him not be dastardly in any cause
that is good, or Gods; Let him be on Gods side. Who is on his side? a Christian
is an impregnable person, he is a person that can never be conquered.
Emanuell became man to make the Church, and every Christian to be one with him.
Christ's nature is out of danger of all that is hurtful. The Sun shall not
shine, the wind shall not blow, to the Churches hurt. For the Churches head
rules over all things, and has all things in subjection, Angels in heaven,
men on earth, Devils in hell, all bow to Christ; and shall any thing befall
them that he loves, unless for their greater good? Therefore though they may
kill a Christian and imprison him, yet hurt him they can not. If God be on our
side, who can be against us? but God is on our side, and on what grounds?
God-man has procured him to be our friend, he has satisfied God; and
therefore if we believe, we be one with Christ, and so one with God.

We have many against us, the Devils are against us, The Devil and the world
our enemies.
the world is against us to take away the favor of God, to hinder access to
him in prayer, to stop the Churches communion with God, and hinder the sweet
issue of all things that befall us as far as they can; but their malice is
greater, then their power. If God should let them loose, and give the chain
into their own hand, though they seem to hurt, yet hurt they cannot in the
issue. And shall not we make use of these things in times of distress?
wherefore serve they but to comfort us in all conflicts with Satan, and in all
doubtings that arise from our sinful hearts? Answer all with this. If God be
with us, who can be against us? If any be against us name them, if not, be
satisfied. And therefore come life, come death, Christ is our surety, he lays
up our dust, keeps our ashes in the grave, and will Christ loose any member?
Fear not Jacob to go into Egypt. For I will bring thee back again. So fear
not to go into the grave. The spirit of God will watch over our dust, and
bring us to heaven. Therefore fear nothing; God will be with us in life, and
death, yea for ever; and we shall be for ever with the Lord, as the Apostle
says in the Thessalonians. And that issue of all that Emanuell has done,
Christ was one in our nature, that he might bring God and us into favor, that
we may be for ever with him in heaven, that we may be for ever with the Lord,
which is the accomplishment of all the promises.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Tho. Wykes.
October. 26. 1638.

