A CENTVRIE OF SIMILIES.

BY THOMAS SHELTON.

PSALM. 78. 2. I will open my mouth in a parable.

decorative border

LONDON. Printed by John Dawson, 1640.

To the Reader.
CReatures inanimate, though they have motion, and operation, yet they are
deprived of the knowledge of what they do, The sea ebbs, and flows, the sun
shines, heates and moves continually: The wind goes his circuits, the fire
burns, the trees and plants grow, yet none of them have intelligence that they
do so, but are all carried by a secret impression of the first mover,
Creatures that are brutish, all the knowledge they have is bounded in the
satisfying of sensual appetite. Man, being endued with a reasonable soul,
with an indefatigable motion, reaches after knowledge of things, humane and
divine, and is then best apaid, when his knowledge is at once diverse ways
enriched, when several things concur to add to his stock. Beauty is
delightful being a mixture of different colors; proportion is comely being a
fit composure of different members: Music is pleasant being a harmony of
different sounds.

Now that man might at once both understand things that are divine, (and
therefore in their own knowledge above his reach) and might also reap both
profit and delight God has delivered truths in the old testament under types,
and figures; in the new by similitudes and comparisons. There is nothing
excellent in nature either in heaven or earth, but God has made use of it to
set forth the excellency of Christ, and the good things we have by him. Christ
himself is compared to the sun, to water, to bread, to a vine, etc. Grace by
Christ, to garments, a feast, gold, eye salve. Glory, to Throns, Crowns,
Kingdoms, etc* that together upon the sight, or thought of these things, we
might be raised up to contemplate the excellencies, in and by him. And as the
best so also the worst things are this way conveyed to our apprehension. Sin
is compated to filthiness, vomit, rags, etc. Sinners to Lions, tigers, bears,
serpents etc. The punishment of sin to chains, prison, etc. that by these
sensible evils we might the better conceive of those which are unutterable,

And for this purpose I have adventured these few similies to public view,
that the reader at once might have profit with pleasure. I intended a far
greater number; but considering how untowardly the left handed world reaches
things, I thought fit to pauze a while and for the present only send a few for
a taste, and as I see them relished, I shall (God willing) either increase their
number, or wish them in my closet again.

I thought it not very needful to observe a method in placing them under
several heads, being so few in number that they all require no long time to
peruse; yet those that will not be at that pains may ease themselves by a
small table annexed. I have also to each simile set down a text of scripture
agreeable to the scope of it, by all which that thou may be benefited, shall
be the desire of

THOMAS SHELTON.

A CENTVRIE OF SIMILIES.
1. Danger of secret sins,
THE ruin of a house is not usually by the Fire.
fire on the hearth, where the greatest ^ire is, but by some small spark that
lies hid in some corner. So ^he soul of man is not so much Psalm. 19.
^ndangered by sins that are known, and so may be repented of: but by those
that are hidden and no notice taken of them.

2. Sin brings judgment at the last.
A Piece of Match set to a train of Gunpowder it Gunpowder.
burns dim a great while but blows up all at the last. So a sinner may go
one securely for a time, but at length a dart will strike through his liver.
Prove. 7. 23.


3. Death of wicked men.
AS a madman after sleep Sleep of madmen.
is more outrageous when the malignant humor is concocted. So after death a
wicked Mat. 25. 46
man awakes with eternal horror.

4. Sin will be felt hereafter.
A Man that receives a wound Wound.
in his heat, feels it not, but when he comes to be cold ^t pains him. So
the sins where^y Pro 13. 25.
Satan wounds us, we are ^nsensible of them in the heat of our passion, but
when we ^re laid in the cold earth, we shall feel the hurt of them.

5. Why men are not offended with others sins.
A Company of prisoners that live together in a Prison.
Goal, they smell no ill savor, being accustomed to it. So wicked men living
in the same sins, they see no evil in Psalm. 50. 18
the sins of other men.

6. God merciful by nature.
A Flint yields not fire bu^ by force, but a spring sends Spring.
forth water naturally. So God shows not forth wrath but as provoked by sin:
but he Mi. 7. 18.
is merciful from his own nature.

7. Mercy of God supreme.
AS in a City or Corporation, Magistrates.
men otherwise equal are chosen to bear rule for a time. So though all Gods
attributes be equal: yet mercy is Psalm. 145. 9.
that which chiefly reigns in Christ.

8. How to instruct the weak.
A Bottle or vessel with a Bottle.
narrow mouth, liquor must be poured into it softly, or else more is spilt then
filled. So Jsa. 28. 10.
those of weaker capacities must be taught by degrees, and not surcharged.

9. The use of promises.
When Chirurgions cut off a leg or an arm, they use to give the Patient
strong water aforehand to Strong water.
comfort him. So when a judgment is approaching we should fortify our selves
with Gods Pro. 31. 6.
promises.

10. Cause of life's shortness.
A Vessel of wine kept for a man's own use or hi^ Wine.
friends may last a good while being moderately drank of, bu^ if those come
that are strong to drink strong drink, that may be spent in a day, which
would have lasted a month. So man's life which otherwise with Psalm. 90. 9.
temperance, and care might be spun out to 30. 40. 50. or 60. years, if God
let in great drinkers, as burning fever, plague, etc. it is spent on a sudden.

11. Curse of covetous men.
AS a woman's breast overcharged with milk, if it Milk.
be not drawn forth, not only pains the woman, but putrifies and becomes
unwholesome. So a man to whom God has given Iam. 5. 2.
ability, that improves it not for the good of others, it turns to his own
hurt and ruin.

12. How to use outward blessings.
A Man that walks by a river, if he follow the River River.
against the stream it will at length lead him to the spring from whence it
issues, but if he go along with the stream it will bring him to the salt
Ocean. So he that well improoveth outward blessings, they will lead him to God
the sweet Job. 29. 6.
fountain of them: but otherwise the abuse of them will bring him to the Mare
mortuum of perdition.

13. Argument of man's weakness.
IF a man come by a house that is shored up and underpropped House.
on every side, he will conclude certainly that house is weak of it self
that needs such stays. So when God has underpropped, and supported us with
so many helps, his Psalm. 119. 116.
word, sacraments, promises, and oath etc. it is an argument of weakness that
we cannot stand without them.

14. Defect of reason.
THe Sun by his light Sun.
shows us all things that are beneath him self, but hides those that are
above. So the light of natural reason shows 2 Cor. 2. 14.
us those things that are beneath, that are sensible, but hinders from those
above that are supernatural.

15. Death of wicked men untimely.
AN apple though it hang Apple.
long on the tree, yet if it be gathered before it be ripe it is plucked
untimely. So a wicked man though he live a long time, yet his death is
untimely, because Isay 66 2^.
he is taken away before he is fitted for death.

16. Contentment of the humble.
THe sheep can live upon Sheep.
the bare mountains where the fat Ox would be starved. Ezekiel. 34. 13.
So a humble heart is content with a mean condition, which a proud spirit
would murmr at.

17. Abundance of outward things a hindrance
A Man that is to travel, a great burden or pack at his Pack.
back hinders his journey. So worldly men hinder their progress Hab. 2. 6.
to heaven by loading themselves with thick clay.

18. Another.
ONe staff in a man's hand Staff.
may help him in his journey, but a bundle of staves would be troublesome. So
a competencie may help in the way to heaven; whereas abundance Mat. 10. 10
may be hurtful.

19. Another.
Prosperity, and abundance Long Garments.
are like long garments to a man that walks, they will trip up his heels if
he take not heed. 2 Kin. 4. 29.


(20) Another.
AS a weak brain cannot Strong drink.
bear strong waters but is intoxicated with it. So by reason of our weakness
prosperity becomes Hab. 2. 5.
a snare to us.

21. Wicked men enjoy plenty.
AN host may give better entertainment Host.
to a stranger that comes to his house for a night, then to his own child: but
Psalm. 17. 14
yet he keeps his inheritance for his child. So in this world God may give more
abundance of outward things to his enemies but he keeps the inheritance of 1
Pet. 1. 4.
heaven for his children.

22 Why good men's lives are prolonged.
THe Rivers of themselves would run the straitest and River.
directest way to the sea, but God has set mountains, and hills in the way,
that by winding and going further about, they might the more enrich the earth.
So a Christian having once tasted of Gods love desires to be dissolved Phil.,
1. 13 24
and to be with Christ; but God prolongs his life to do good to others.

23. Rewards and punishments.
When the hands of Moses were feeble Aaron and Hur.
Aaron and Hur supported them, that they might not fall. Rewards and
punishments are the Luke 23. 41.
two hands that support good laws that otherwise would fall to the ground.

24. A Christians carriage in all conditions,
AS men that are carried in a boat, they set themselves Boat.
some on one side, and some on the other to poize the boat even. So a
christian when he is ready to be overturned with prosperity should meditate on
that which may humble him, and when he is ready to sink Iam. 1. 9.
in affliction to think on that which may raise him up, that his carriage may
be equal.

25 Deformity of sin.
A Looking glass when it is whole, it represents, but Broken looking glass.
one face to him that looks in it, but being broken, there appears as many
faces as there are pieces. So sin being looked on in general, there is some
deformity in it, being a body of death; but being broken in pieces by serious
consideration, there is the Image of the Devil in every paricular sin.

26 Wicked men fear only punishment*
A Dog though he have an Dog.
appetite to a dish of meat, dares not meddle with it so long as one stands
over him 1 Samuel 1^. 24.
with a staff. So a wicked man sometimes abstaines from sin, but it is only
for fear of Gods judgments.

27. Infirmities in the Saints.
AS the best Gold goes current Gold.
with the grains of allowance: So the Saints are accepted Psalm. 103. 14.
with God notwithstanding their infirmities.

28. The nature of sin.
Sin is like to Missle-toe Missle-toe.
which commonly grows in fruit trees, yet has no root of its own. So sin
has no being of it self: yet is found only Jude 5. 6.
in the most excellent creatures, men and Angels.

29. God our strength.
A Nurse sometimes lets her child have a fall to let it Nurse.
know that it cannot stand by any strength of its own. So God lets his
children fall into sin that they may know, they Genesis 20. 6.
are no longer safe than they stand by his strength, and clapse about him.

30. Falls of Gods Children.
GOd sometimes suffers his Fall.
children to fall that they may grow in the root of graces, humility. As the
virtue of a plant is sometimes in the fruit, as in Summer: sometimes in 2 Kin.
22. 19.
the budas in the Spring: sometimes in the root, as in winter, and commonly
the sharpest winter makes the fruitfullest spring.

31. Growth after falls.
AS after a fit of sickness the Sickness.
body usually shootes up more: so a Christian after the sight of some sin he
has fallen 2 Samuel, 24. 10.
into, grows stronger in grace.

32 Strength from Christ.
AS the air is dark when the Sun is set though the Air.
stars shine: so though a Christian have a disposition to good, John 15. 5.
if Christ shine not on him, in the doing of every particular act, he is unable
to do it.

33. Uncertainty of riches.
A Man seeing a flock of birds Birds.
sitting on his ground, can make himself no promise of taking them: so though
a man Eccles. 4. 8.
be possessed of riches, he may so one be deprived of them: for riches have
wings, etc.

34. Unprofitable knowledge.
THe knowledge of every man but a Christian is like Beggar.
the knowledge of a beggar, who knows the road from place Prove. 15. 2.
to place, but has no settled home of his own.

35. Difference of men after death.
THe hawke flies high, and is much made of being alive, Hawke and hen.
but being dead is good for nothing but the dunghill. The hen scrapes in the
dust when she Pro. 14. 32
is alive, but being dead is brought as a choice dish to her masters table. So
wicked men prosper, and good men are abased in this life: but being dead the
one is cast into the dungeon the other advanced to the palace.

36. A Christians aim.
AS waters conveyed in Water.
pipes will rise as high as the spring from whence they Phil. 3. 19.
issue: so the soul of a Christian being touched from heaven, it will not rest
till it rise thither again.

37. False friends.
MAny men that pretend Shadow,
friendship they are like the shadow of the body, they follow a man while the
sun of prosperity shines: but if a cloud Jsa. 30. 2.
of adversity hide that sun, those shadows are gone.

38. Outward things variable
AS the shadow that follows Shadow.
the body it is sometimes longer, sometimes shorter, but the body still the
same, so Phil. 4. 12.
the honor and credit and wealth of a Christian may be sometimes less
sometimes more, but the body of grace is the same.

39. Different dispositions.
THe fire that is made of Green wood. 2 Cor. 8. 19.
green wood must have much blowing, but a fire made of charcoale is soon
kindled: so the heart of a carnal man receives not holy impressions without
much ado, but the heart of a Christian, like charcoale having been formerly
kindled is apt to take fire again.

40. Outward blessings how disposed.
AS the Almoner of a King, Alms.
or great man casts his alms among a company of beggars and one or two many
times Psalm. 10. 9.
carry all from the rest. So these outward blessings are promiscuously
bestowed, and some carry away all, and leave the rest destitute.

41. Benefit of afflictions.
AS water cast upon the smiths Smiths water,
coals make them burn hotter, and brighter: so the afflictions of Gods
children increase Ps. 119. 71
the luster of their graces.

42. How to understand Scriptures,
AS in tuning of a Lute, or other Lute.
instrument, the striking upon one or two strings help to tune the rest: so
comparing one scripture with another is a help 1 Cor. 2. 13.
to understand them.

43. Reward of sincerity.
A Physician does not loose Physician.
his fee though the patient miscarrie and die. So those that are sincere
hearted in the 1 Cor. 15.
work of the Lord shall not loose their reward, though the success be not
answerable to their pains.

44. Discovery of Gods love.
THe rivers a long time run Rivers.
under ground till at the last they break forth into streams, so Gods love in
election, and redemption it is Isay 31. 18
concealed from a man till it break forth in his regeneration, and effectual
calling.

45. Way to thankfulness.
A Traitor, though he have Traitor.
the liberty of the Tower to walk in, and provision of meat and drink and
all necessaries, yet he takes little pleasure Psalm. 32. 2.
in them because his treason is not pardoned, but he expects daily to be drawn
forth to execution. So a man that has all the comforts of this life, if he
want assurance of the pardon of his sins, and of Gods love, he cannot be truly
thankful for what he enjoys.

46. How sinners are brought to Christ
A Rebel, so long as the Hue and cry pursues him, he Hue and cry.
runs away and hides himself; but when proclamation of pardon comes forth he
comes in Psalm. 130. 4
and submits himself. So the denunciation of Gods Judgments affright men that
they run from God, but when pardon and mercy is offered, it makes them submit to
Christ as their King.

47 Infirmities to be borne with.
A Member that is distempered, Member.
or out of joint, is not presently to be cut off, but Psalm. 103. 23.
used tenderly and set in joyn^ again, so those that are froward and pettish,
and passionate, are not to be excluded, but reduced to a better temper.

(48) Gods purpose effected.
THe wheels in a watch, o^ clock, go contrary one to Wheels of a watch.
another, some one way, some another, yet all serve the intent of the workman,
to show the time, or to make the clock to strike. So in the world men Isay 46.
10.
take contrary courses, there are good men that go one way, and wicked men
another; but all in conclusion serve to accomplish the purpose of the great
workman God himself.

49. Difference of carnal and holy men.
AN Organ or wind instrument makes no music Organ.
till first there be breath put into it; but a stringed instrument yields
music with a touch: A carnal man being dead must 2 Timothy 12. 2.
have a new life breathed into him before he can walk holily, but a child of
God does good upon a touch, upon the least occasion.

50. End of persecutors.
A Shepherd sets his dog Shepherd*
upon the sheep to bring them in, and then he rates the dog, so God suffers
evil men to molest his children that they Psalm. 21. 20.
may cleave closer to him, and then he punishes those that troubled them.

51. Way to humility.
When Bees begin to swarm the casting Bees.
of dust upon them allaieth them: So when proud thoughts arise, the
consideration of mortality, Eccles. 12. 7
that we must lie in the dust will asswagethem.

52. Wickedness discovered.
A Snake while she is living winds and turns every Snake.
way, but being dead is laid out straight at length: so wicked subtle men have
many shifts and devises while they live, but Psalm. 10. 8.
when they die, all is discovered and laid open.

53. Difference of hypocrites and Christians.
A Piece of metal that is but Gilt.
gilt, the gilt wears off, and it is worse and worse: but that which is massy
gold wears brighter, and brighter. An hypocrite has a gilded outside, Pro.
10. 20.
which in time wears off, and he is discovered, but a true Christian, though
his outside may seem rustie, is pure Gold within.

54. Experience beyond knowledge.
A Physician knows not the Patient.
pain of the disease so well as his patient, though his learning be greater:
so experienced Phil. 1. 19.
Christians know the mysteries of God better than learned men that want
experience.

55. Faith and Love.
AS in making of a circle, one point of the compass is Compasses
fixed in the middle, the other is moved about to make the circle. 1 Timothy 6.
11.
Faith is as the one point of the compass that is fixed on Christ, and love
the other point that goes about and does the work.

56. Benefit of Consideration.
AS dust that being scattered Broom.
over the house, seems little, but being swept together becomes a heap: So
the sins we have committed being looked on with a careless eye, Psalm. 38. 4.
appear to be no great matters, by serious consideration they prove an
unsupportable burden.

57. Cause of Trouble.
AS a cloth that seems dry Cloth.
being held to the fire will be moist and smoke, the moisture being in the
cloth not in the fire. So when men come to Job. 42. 6.
Gods ordinances they are sometimes troubled, the cause is not in Gods ordinance
but from corruption in them.

58. Why God aflicts his Children.
AS a Chyrurgion desires to Surgeon
take way nothing but the wou^d, but sometimes it is festred Amos 49. 10.
so in the member, that he is forced to cut off the member with it: So God
intends we should part with nothing but sin: but it is so rivetted in us that
he is forced to take away other contentments that we may part with our sins.

59. Progress in our spiritual Journey.
A Man that traivaileth, those Traveller.
Towns and places that he has passed seem less and less, and those to
which he is approaching, to appear greater Heb. 11. 27.
and greater. So a Christian in his journey to heaven the things of the world
that he has left behind, they appear lesser and lesser; but the things of
heaven greater and greater.

60. Object of the soul.
A Cipher stands for nothing Cipher.
by it self, but by other figures placed before it, it makes a number. So the
soul of man, Romans 6. 11.
like a Cipher is valued by that which it sets before it whether it be God or
the world.

61. Efficacy of Gods love.
THe Sun casts light and Burning glass.
heat upon all the world in his general course: but his beams being
concenterate in Ephesians. 1. 18.
a burning glass, it sets fire upon the object. So God in the creation looked
upon all his works with a general love, but the beams of his love to his
elect, shining through Christ inflames their hearts.

62. Civil men discovered.
THe glow-worme appears Glow-worme.
bright in the night, but is not seen in the day time. So a civil Man is some
body in dark times among men of dark judgments: but shall be Mat. 19. 30
nothing when the day of God shall try him.

63. Means effectual by the Spirit,
AS the Arteries go along Arteries.
with the veins, without which the blood would be a dead, loathsome thing; so
the spirit of God must go along Ephesians. 6. 18.
with his ordinances and means or else they can effect nothing.

64. How to use good means
AS the Mariner that guides Mariner.
the ship, at the same time has his hand upon the rudder, and his eye on the
star: so Psalm. 118. 25.
we should be dilgent in the use of means but look up to heaven for a blessing.

65 Nature of worldly things.
AS a man that drinks salt Salt water.
water it quenches not his thirst but increases it, so the things of this
life being enjoyed, they satisfy not the desires Eccles. 5. 10
of men but enlarge them.

66. Lost labor,
AS a bad swimmer may Swimmer.
reach forth his hand to save another, and drown himself: so a man by his
parts and 1 Cor. 9. 27.
and gifts may do good to others and himself be a castaway.

67. God immutable.
AS the sun looks red sometimes Sun.
by reason of vapors and mists, but in it self is always alike: So God in
himself is unchangeable, though he appear Heb. 12. 29.
red to us in anger by the assending of our sins.

68. To serve God in serving men.
AS a Man that has a servant Servant.
sick, and sets another servant to attend him, he supplies him with those
things he calls for, but it is by virtue of his masters command. So in our
places though the duties we do be to men yet we must 1 Cor. 7. 22.
have an eye to the command of God.

69. Not to hoord up for our selves.
THe vapors that the Sun Vapor.
exhaleth from the sea are sent down again to moysten the earth. So the good
things Heb. 6. 7. 8.
that God bestows on us, should be dispensed to the necessity of others.

70. Cure of immoderate grief.
AS Physicians use, when men Bleeding.
bleed excessively to open a vein, in another palce, and so 2 Cor. 7. 10.
stanch excessive bleeding: so when we grieve immoderately for the loss of
outward things we turn our grief upon our sins.

71. Care in Gods ordinances.
THough a scholar may be Scholar.
playing when his Master walks up and down the school, yet he will be
careful and serious when he is saying his lesson: so though perhaps we be more
Heb. 12. 2.
remiss in our ordinary vocation, yet we should have a special eye to God,
when we are before him in his ordinances.

72. How to look on transcient thing.
IF a man stand and observe Dial.
the hand of a dyall he cannot perceive it moove, but if he come an hour or
two after, he shall see that it has moved and that so much time is past. So
if we look on the things of the world in their passing we 1 Cor. 7. 31.
shall see no great alteration, but if we see them past by the eye of faith
we will neglect them.

73. Flight of faith.
A Pigeon having her eyes put out flies directly upwards: Pigeon.
so the eye of reason being shut faith ascends more directly Heb. 11. 27.
to divine things.

74. Grace sanctifies all things.
AS meat may be wholesome of it self, yet salt makes Salt.
it more savorie: So though outward benefits be good in themselves, yet it is
grace that makes 1 Timothy, 5. 4.
them blessings to us.

75 Final obduration.
A Tree after it is cut down Tree.
may lie in the yard under the rain a long time before it be cast into the
fire. So after Hos. 4. 17.
God has forsaken a man he may continue a long time under the means of grace
before he be cast into hell fire.

76. Defect of worldly things.
IT is with the things of the Ducks.
world and the soul as with a hen that hatcheth ducks: the duckes after a
while go into the water, the hen may hover 1 Timothy 6. 7
about the brinke but cannot follow them. So the soul after a while takes her
flight into another world, and leaves these earthly things behind on the shore.

77. Faith and doubting consistent.
AS the Mariners needle, Mariners needle.
though it be truly touched it fixes not presently to the North Pole but
trembles and shakes a while, and then is fixed: So faith may be true, and 1 Cor
15. 58
yet at the first weak and full of trepidation and wavering.

78. Hypocrites behavior.
AS discontented lovers upon Love Tokens.
the least distaste send for all their love tokens back and will go on no
further. So when hipocrites are crossed in their aims, they repent of the good
^al. 1. 13.
duties they have done, and desist from Gods service, and embrace the world.

79. Another
AS a Curre dog when his Dog.
master beats him will either fly in his face, or run from him So an hipocrite
when God punishes Heb, 3. 12.
him, either murmurs a-against him, or forsakes his service.

80. The force of Custom.
CHildren at the first sight of a vizor are affrighted Vizor.
with it, but after a while they care not for it. So men that were sometimes
fearful of Heb. 5. 14.
death: by the frequent examples of mortality, they grow careless, and
fearelesse of it.

81. Different carriage in an evil man.
HOrses, and such wild Ferry-boat.
creatures, being in a Ferrie-boate on the water, stand still and are quiet,
but being once out of it, resume their former wildness. So those that are 2 Chronicles. 24 2.
brought up in good families are many times conformable, but being once at
liberty run into excess of riot.

82. Concealed grief double.
AN Oven being stopped when the fire is in it, it increases Oven.
the heat: So when men conceal their doubts and fears, and troubles from
others Eccles. 4. 9.
it doubleth their grief.

83. How to know we belong to heaven.
IT was wont to be a trial Venomous creatures.
whether Land belonged to England or Ireland, by putting toads, and snakes, and
other venomous creatures into it; and 2 Timothy 2. 21
if they lived there it was concluded it belonged to England; if they died; to
Ireland. So if venomous lusts live in us, we belong to hell; if they die by
mortification, to heaven.

84. The older the world the worse.
AS a sink, the further it Sinck.
runs, the more soil it gathers: so the world the older it grows the worse it
is: the sins 1 Timothy 4. 1.
of all former times meeting together in the latter.

85. Christian constancy.
AS the Kine of the Bethshemites that carried the Kine.
Arc, though they lowed after calves, yet they went right on Psalm. 119. 37.
theirway. So a Christian though his heart may linger after temporal things,
yet he keeps on in his course of Christianity.

86. How to regard our own prayers.
CHildren shoot arrows Arrows.
on purpose to loose them and never look after them, but men when they shoot
go after their arrows to see how near ^he mark they light. So wicked Psalm.
88. 1.
men when they have made their prayers have no more regard of them; but Gods
children look after their prayers and observe how God answers.

87. Efficacy of the Spirit.
AS in a Cordial potion, it is not the water or the beer Drug.
but the herb or drug conveyed in it that works the cure. So the ministry of
the word alone Psalm. 51. 12
cannot work upon the heart, but the spirit of God accompanying the ordinance.

88. Gods aim in afflictions.
THe Physician gives a bitter potion which some Potion.
times makes the patient sick then the disease it self, but hi^ end is to
restore him to healt^ by it: So the afflictions of God Heb. 12. 11.
children seem bitter potions but God aims at the health o^ their souls in
it.

89. Gods time the best.
THe Physician turns the glass, and resolves the Mour-glass.
physic shall work so long, the patient desires ease, and cries Psalm. 31. 15
out he is tormented, but the other knows the fittest time. So Gods children
cry out in afflictions, How long Lord: but the Lord knows the best time to
release them.

90 Corruption discovered.
A Man that stirs with a Puddle.
staff in a vessel or spring of fair water, though the water be stirred it
continues still Iam. 1. 13. 14.
in its clearenesse, but stirring in a puddle or finck it is presentlymuddy and
offensive. So when men provoked by others, are transported by their passions,
the cause is not from the provocation of others, but from the corruption in
themselves.

91. Hypocrite uncased.
When people go abroad Garments.
they put on their gay apparel, but when they go to bed they strip them off.
So an hipocrite in his life Romans 13. 14
may put on the garments of a fair profession, but when he comes to lie down
in the bed of death shall he be stripped of all and left naked.

92. How to reproove great men,
MEn that plough hilly Plowing.
ground they go not directly up and down, but side ways: so those that are
to tell 2 Samuel 12. 1
great men of their faults, must go about as we see Nathan did with David.

93. The wickedest men may be converted.
AS the earth that bears Weeds.
the strongest weeds, it has much heat in it, and 2 Timothy 1. 1^
if it were tilled and manured it would bear good corn. So those that are
vilest in their courses, when they are once converted become most excellent
instruments of his glory.

94. To keep in Gods ways
IF a man in the Kings highway Kings highway.
be robbed in the daytime, it is recoverable from the Country, but if he
travail at unseasonable times, it is at his own peril. So if a man keep in
Gods ways, he has promised Psalm. 91. 11
to guard, and protect him, but if he stray out from them, he exposes himself
to danger.

95. Delayed judgments heavy.
AS a man that shoots in a Shooting.
bow the further he draws the arrow back the faster and further it flies:
so though Mat. 24. 48. 49. 50.
God many times delay his judgments, yet the severity of them recompenceth his
forbearance.

96. Another.
THe rain it is long bottleing Rain.
in the clouds, but at the length it falls down speedily in showers: so God is
Rev. 16. 1.
long in providing his judgments, but at the last they are showred down
suddenly.

97. Long prayers sometimes dangerous.
IF a man shoot at a But or a short mark the arrow flies Butt.
point blanke, and with great force: but if he shoot at a long mark though it
go forth swiftly it flags, and falls at length. Mat. 6. 7.
So the fervencie of spirit in prayer is sometimes much abated, ere a long
prayer be ended.

98. Difference of knowledge in God and in man.
IN a sheet almanac, a man Almanac
at one view may see all the months in the year, both past, and to come, but
in a book almanac, as he turns to one Psalm. 139. 2. 6.
so he turns from another, and can look but on the present. So the knowledge
of God at one instant looks to things, past, present and future: but the
knowledge of man one-to a few things, past, and present, and that successively.

99. Cessation of miracles.
AS a gardener, when he first Tree.
planteth a tree, he digs the earth, and is careful to water it evening and
morning, but after the tree has taken root, he leaves it to the common
influences of the heavens, so in the first preaching of the Gospel it was
necessary that the gift of miracles should go along with the gift of
preaching; the people 1 Cor. 14.
then being Idolaters and unbelievers that never heard of Christ; but now the
Gospel is Aug. de Civit, dei. lib. 22. Cap. 8.
planted and stablished and believed miracles are superfluous.

100. Reward of Atheism.
IN the summer a man cannot Breath.
see his own breath. which in winter, he can easily discern, So he that will
not in the summer of this life believe Heb. 11. 6.
that there is a God shall feel it to his eternal torment in the winter of
hell.

FINIS.
The Names of the things from whence the Similies are taken.
FIre. 1 Gunpowder. 2 Sleep. 3 Wound. 4 Prison. 5 Spring. 6 Magistrates. 7
Bottle. 8 Strong water 9 Wine. 10 Milk* 11 River. 12 House. 13 Sun. 14 Apples.
15 Sheep. 16 Pack. 17 Staff. 18 Long Garment: 19 Strong drink. 20 Host. 21
River. 22 Aaron and Hur. 23 Boat. 24 Looking-glass. 25 Dog. 26 Gold. 27
Missletoe, 28 Nurse, 29 Fall. 30 Sickness. 31 Air. 32 Birds. 33 Beggar. 34
Hawke and hen. 35 Water. 36 Shadow. 37 Shadow. 38 Green wood, 39 Alms. 40
Smithes water. 41 Lute. 42 Physician. 43 Rivers. 44 Traitor. 45 Hue and cry.
46 Member. 47 Watch-wheeles. 48 Organ. 49 Shepherds dog. 50 Bees. 51 Snake. 52
Gilt. 53 Patient. 54 Compasses. 55 Broom. 56 Cloth. 57 Surgeon. 58
Traveller 59 Cipher. 60 Burning glass. 61 Gloe-worme. 62 Arteries. 63
Mariner. 64 Salt Water. 65 Swimmer. 66 Sun. 67 Servant. 68 Vapor. 69 Bleeding
70 Scholar. 71 Dial. 72 Pigeon. 73 Salt. 74 Tree. 75 Duck. 76 Mariners
needle. 77 Love Tokens. 78 Dog. 79 Vizor. 80 Ferrie-boat. 81 Oven. 82
Venomous creature. 83 Sinck. 84 Kine. 85 Arrows. 86 Drug. 87 Potion. 88
Houre-glasse. 89 Puddle. 90 Garments. 91 Plowing. 92 Weeds. 93 Highway. 94
Shooting. 95 Rain. 96 Butt. 97 Almanac. 98 Tree. 99 Breath. 100

An Alphabeticall Table of the matter to which the comparisons tend.
A
Simile. A Boundance of outward things a hinderance. 17. 18. 19, 20 Aim of a
Christian. 36 Afflictions their benefit. 41 Afflictions why sont. 58 Gods aim
in afflictions. 88 Atheism rewarded. 100 B
Blessings outward how to use them. 12 Blessings outward how disposed 40 C
Covetous man's curse. 11 Christians carriage. 24 Content see humble. Christ see
sinners. Christians and hypocrites differ, 53 Civil men discovered. 62
Consideration beneficial. 56 Care see ordinances. Custom forcible. 80
Constancy of a Christian. 85 Corruption discovered. 90 Conversion of wicked
men. 93 D
Death of wicked men. 3 Death of wicked men untimely. 15 Differe^^e of men
after death. 35 Dispositions different. 39 Doubting with faith. 77 E
Experience beyond knowledge. 54 F
Falls of Gods children. 30 False friends. 37 Faith and love. 55 Flight of
faith. 73 Faith see doubting. G
Growth after falls. 31 Grief immoderate cured. 70 Grace sanctifies all
things. 74 Grief concealed, double. 75 Great men reprooved how. 92 H
Humble men content. 16 Way to humility. 51 Hipocrite see Christian.
Hipocrites behavior. 78. 79 How to know we belong to heaven. 83 Hipocrite
uncased. 91 I
Judgment brought by sin. 2 Infirmities in the Saints. 27 Infirmities to be
borne with. 47 Progress in our spiritual journey. 59 God immutable. 67
Judgment delayed heavy. 96 K
Unprofitable Knowledge. 34 Knowledge see Experience. Knowledge different in
God and man. 98 L
Life, cause of the shortness of it. 10 Life of good men why prolonged. 22
Love of God discovered, 44 Love see faith Love of God efficacious. 61 Labor
lost, 66 M
Mercy in God by nature. 6 Mercy in God supreme, 7 Men different. 49 Means
how to use them. 64 Means see spirit. To serve God in serving men, 68
Different carriage in an evil man. 81 Miracles ceased. 99 O
Outward things variable. 38 Care in Gods ordinances. 71 Obduration final. 75 P
Promises the use of them, 9 Plenty enjoyed by wicked men. 21 Punishments. 21
Punishment feared by wicked men. ^^ Purpose of God effected. 4^ Persecutors
their end. 50 Prayers how to regard them. 86 Prayers long sometimes dangerous.
97 R
Reason the defect of it. 14 Rewards 23 Riches uncertain. 33 S
Secret sins dangerous. 1 Sin willbe felt at last. 4 Sins of others why not
offensive. 5 Sin the deformity of it. 25 Sin the nature of it. 28 God our
strength. 29 Strength from Christ, 32 Scriptures how understood. 42 Sincerity
the reward of it. 43 Sinners how brought to Christ. 46 Soul the object of it.
60 Means effectual by the Spirit. 63 Not to hoard up for our selves. 69
Effiicacie of the Spirit. 87 T
Thankfulness the way to it. 45 Trouble the cause of it. 57 Transcient things
how to see them. 72 Time of God the best. 89 V
Variable see outward.

W
Weak how to instruct them, 8 Weakness of man, 13 Wickedness discovered. 52
Worldly things the nature of them. ^^ Worldly things defective. 76 World the
older the worse. 84 Way of God to be kept in. 94

FINIS.

