A treatise of Schemes and Tropes very profitable for the better understanding
of good authors, gathered out of the best Grammarians and Orators by Rychard
Sherry Londoner.

Whereunto is added a declamacion, That children even strayt from their infancy
should be well and gently brought up in learning. Written first in Latin by
the most excellent and famous Clearke, Erasmus of Roterodame.

To the right worshypful Master Thomas Brook Esquire, Rychard Shyrrey wysheth
health everlasting
I Doubt not but that the title of this treatise all strange unto our English
ears, will cause some men at the first syghte to maruayle what the matter of it
should mean: The title of this work strange.
yea, and peradventure if they be rash of judgment, to call it some new
fangle, and so casting it hastily from the^, will not once vouch safe to read
it: and if they do, yet perceiving nothing to be therein that pleases their
phansy, will count it but a tryfle, and a tale of Robynhoode. But of this sort
as I doubt not to find many, so perhaps there will be other, which moved
with the noueltye thereof, will think it worthy to be looked upon, and se
what is contained therein. Sheme and Trope.
These words, Scheme and Trope, are not used in our English tongue, neither
been they English words. No more be many which now in our time be made by
continual use, Use makes strange things familier.
very familier to most men, and come so often in speaking, that as well is known
amongst us the meaning of them, as if they had been of our own native
brood. Who has not in his mouth now this word Paraphrasis, homelies,
usurped, abolyshed, with many other like? And what maruail is it if these
words have not been used here tofore, seeing there was no such thing in our
English tongue where unto they should be applied? Good cause have we therefore
to give thanks unto certain godly and well learned men, which by their
great study enrychynge our tongue both with matter and words, have
endeavored to make it so copyous and plentyfull that therein it may compare
with any other which so ever is the best. It is not unknown that our
language for the barbarousnes and lack of eloquence has been complained of,
Our language falsely accused of barbarousnes.
and yet not trewely, for any defaut in the toungue it self, but rather for
slackenes of our cou^trimen, which have always set light by searchyng out the
elegance and proper speeches that be full many in it: as plainly does appear not
only by the most excellent monumentes of our au^cie^t forewriters, Gower.
Chawcer. Lidgate.
Gower, Chawcer and Lydgate, but also by the famous works of many other later:
inespeciall of ye right worshipful knight sir Thomas Eliot, Sir Thomas Elyot.
which first in his dictionarye as it were generallye searchinge out the copye
of our language in all kind of words and phrases, after that setting abroad
good lie monumentes of his wit, learning and industrye, as well in historycall
knowledge, as of either the Philosophies, has herebi declared the
plentyfulnes of our mother tou^ge, love toward his country, his time not spent
in vanitye and tryfles. What should I speak of that ornamente Sir Thomas Wyat?
which beside most excellent gifts both of fortune and body, so flouryshed
in the eloquence of his native tongue, that as he passed therein those with
whom he lived, so was he lykelye to have been equal with any other before
him, had not envious death to hastily beriued us of this jewel: teaching al men
verily, no filicitie in this world to be so suer and stable, but that quick
lie it may be overthrown and brought to the ground. Many other there be yet
living whose excellent wrytynges do testifye with us to be words apt and
mete elogantly to declare our minds in all kinds of Sciences: and that, what
sentence soever we conceive, the same to have English oracion natural, and*
helped by art, where by it may most eloque^tly be uttered. Of the which thing
as I fortuned to talk with you, The occasion of this treaise.
Master Brook, among other matters this present argument of Schemes and Tropes
came in place, and offered it self, demed to be both profitable and
pleasant if they were gathered together, and handsomelye set in a plain
order, and with their descriptions hansomely put into our English tongue. And
because long ago, I was well acquaynted with them, when I red them to other in
ye Latin, and that they help me very much in the exposicion of good
authoures, I was so much the more ready to make them speak English: partli, to
renew the pleasure of mine old studies, and partelye to satysfy your request.

Beside this, I was moved also with the authorytye of that famous clarke
Rodulphus Agricola, Rodulphus Agricola.
which in a certain Epistle written unto a frynde of his, exhorts me^ what
soever they read in strange tongues* diligently to translate the same into
their own language: because that in it we sonar perceive if there be any fault
in our speaking, and how every thing either rightly hangs together or is
darkelye, ruggishly, and superfluously written. No learned nation has there
been but y^ learned in it have written of schemes and fygures, which they would
not have don, except they had perceived the valewe. Wherefore after their
example obtaynyng a little lesure, I red over sundry treatises, as well of those
which wrote long ago, as of others now in our days: finding among them some
to have written over brieflye, some confuselye, and falselye some. Mosellane
Mosellane has in his tables showed a few fygures of grammar, and so has
confounded them together, that his second order called of Loquucion pertayneth
rather to the rhetoricians then to his purpose. Quintilian.
Quintilian briefly has written both of the Gramatical and rhetorical
Shemes, but so that you may soon perceive he did it by the way, as much as
served his purpose. Cicero.
Cicero in his book of an orator with his incomperable eloquence has so hid
the precepts, that scarselye they may be tried out by their names, or by
their examples. Erasmus in his double copye of words and things, Erasmus.
has made as ye title declares but a comentarye of them both, and as it were
a little bil of remembrance. Wherefore to make these things more plain to ye
students that list to read them in our tongue, I have taken a little pain,
more thorowelye to try the definicions, to apply the examples more aptly, and
to make things defused more plain, as in deed it shall right well apere to the
dylygente. I have not translated them orderly out of any one author, but
runninge as I said through many, and vsyng mine own judgment, have brought
them into this body as you se, and set them in so plain an order, that redelye
may be found the figure, and the use whereunto it serves. Though unto
great wits occupied with weightye matters, they do not greatelye pertayne,
yet to such as perchance shall not have perfect instructoures, they may be
commodious to help them selves for ye better understanding of such good
authors as they read. For this darre I say, no eloquente writer may be
perceived as he should be, without the knowledge of them: for as much as al
togethers they belong to Eloquucion, which is the third and pryncipall part
of rhetorique. The common scholemasters be wont in reading, to say unto their
scholars: Hic est figura: and sometime to axe them, Per quam figuram? But what
profit is herein if they go no further? In speaking and writing nothing is
more folyshe than to affecte or fondly to labor to speak darkelye for the
nonce, sith the proper use of speech is to utter the meaning of our mind with
as plain words as may be. But sith it so chaunseth yt sometime either of
necessity, or to set out the matter more plai^ly we be compelled to speak
otherwise then after common facion, A figure not to be used but for a cause.
onles we will be ignorante in the sense or meaning of the matter that
excellent authors do wryghte of, we must needs run to the help of schemes
and fygures: which verily come no sildomer in the writing and speaking of
eloquente english men, then either of Grecians or Latins. Many things might I
bring in to prove not only a great profyt to be in them but that they are to
be learned even of necessity, for as much as not only profane authors
without them may not be well understand, but that also they greatelye profit us
in the readinge of holy scripture, where if you be ignoraunte in the
fyguratiue speches and Tropes, you are like in many great doubts to make but
a slender solucion: as right will do testefy Castelio Vestimerus and yt,
Westimerus
noble doctor saint Augustine. Augustinus
I confess I have not made the matter here so perfect as my will and desyer
is it should have been, and that I have but brieflye touched, and as it were
with my little finger poynted to these things, which require a le^ger
declaracion. For what can be hasted, and absolute to? But if God spare me life,
I trust hereafter to make it an introduccio^, wherbi our youth not only shall
save that most precious Jewel, Time, while they wander by them selves,
reading at all adventures sundry and varyous authors: but that also they
shall be able better to understand and judge of the goodlye gifts and
ornaments in most famous and eloquente oratoures. For as like pleasure is not
to him which gooeth into a goodlye garden garnyshed with diverse kinds of
herbs and flowers, And apt similitude.
and that there does no more but behold them, of whom it may be said that
he went in for nothing but that he would come out, and to him which be side
the corporal eye pleasure, knoeth of eueri one the name and propertye: so
verelye much difference is there in reading good authors, and in sundry
sorts of men that do it: and much more pleasure, and profit has he which
uses art and judgment, then the other, which with great study indede
turns them over but for lack of the knowledge of precepts wants also the
fruit and delectacyon that he more amplye might obtain. The living God from
whom all good gifts do proceed, give us grace so to order all our words and
speech, that it may be to his honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Given at London the.xiii. day of Decembre. Anno. M.D.L.
Schemes and Tropes. A brief note of eloqucio^, the third part of Rhetoric,
whereunto all Figures and Tropes be referred.
ELoquucion, which the Greeks call Phrase, Eloquucion
whereof also the name of eloquence does rise, as of al parts it is the good
lie, so also is it the most profitable and hardeste: in the which is seen
that divine might and virtue of an oratoure, which as Cicero in his oratorie
particions defines, is nothing else but wisdom speaking el^quently. For unto
the marvelous great inuencion of all things, both it adds a fulness, and
variety: it sets out and garnysheth with lyghtes of eloquent speech, the
things that be spoken of, and also with very grave sentences, choice words,
proper, aptly translated, and well soundyng, it brings that great fludde of
eloquence, unto a certain kind of style and indyghtyng. And out of this great
stream of eloquucion, not only must we chose apt, and mete words, but also
take heed of placinge, and settinge them in order. For the might and power of
eloquucion consists in words consideced by them selves, and when they be
joined together. Apt words by searchyng must be found out, and after by
diligence conveniently coupled. For there is a garnyshynge, even when they be
pure and fine by them selves, and an other, when they be joined together. To
chose the^ out finely, and handsomlye to bestow them in their places, after
the mind of Cicero and Quintilian, is no easy thing. So Marcus Antonius was
wont to say, that he had known many well spoken men, but none eloquente.
Tullye and Quintilian thought that inuencion and disposicio^ were the parts
of a wytty and prudent man, but eloquence of an orator. For how to find out
matter, and set it in order, may be comen to all men, which either make
abridgementes of the excellent works of aunciente writers, and put ^istories
in reme^^raunce, or that speak of any ma^ter themselves: but to utter the
mind aptely, distinctly, and ornately, is a gift given to ^ery few. And
because we have divided eloquucion into two parts, that is, words simple, or
considered by them selves, and compound or joined together in speech,
according to this we say, that every eloquente oracion must have in it three
points: evidence, which be longs to the fy^st part of eloquucion,
composicion and dignity, which belongs to the other.

Of Evidence and plainenes.
Of these things that we put in eloquucion, let this be the first care, to
speak euidentlye after the dignitye and nature of things, and to utter such
words, which as Cicero says in his orator, no man may justly reprehende.
The plain and evident speech is learned of Gramarians, and it keeps the
oracion pur^, and without all fault, and makes that every thing may seem to
be spoken purelye apettlye, and clerelye. Every speech stands by usual
words that be in use of daily talk, and proper words that belong to the
thing, of the which we shall speak. Neither be properties to be referred only
to the name of the thing, but much more to the strength and power of the
significacion: and must be considered not by hearing, but by understanding. So
translacion in the which commonly is the greatest use of eloquucio^, applies
words not the self proper things. But yet an unused word or poetical, has
also sometime in the oracion his dignity, and being put in place (as Cicero
says) oftentimes the oracion may seem greater, and of more antiquity, for
that Poets do speak in a manner as it were in a another tongue, it is right
sone perceived. Finally two fautes are committed in every language, whereby it
is not pure: Barbarism, and Solecisme. Of the which, that on is committed,
when any word is fautely spoken or written: that other, when in many words
joined together, the word that follows is not well applied to that that goes
before. Of composicion and dygnitye, we will speak here after, when we come to
the figures of rethoryque.

Of the three kinds of style or endyghtynge.
Before we come to the precepts of garnishing an oracio^, we think good,
brye^^ye to show you of the three kinds of style or endyghting, in the which
all the eloquucion of an oratoure is occupied. For that there be three sundry
kinds, called of the Greeks characters, of us figures, I trow there is no
man, though he be meanlye learned, but he knows, namely when we se so many
writers of sciences, both Greek and latin, which have been before time, to
have followed for the most part sundry sorts of writing, the one unlike to
the other. And there has been marked inespecially three kinds of endightynge:
The great, the small, the mean.

The great kind.
The great, the noble, the mighty, and the full kind of endyghtynge, with an
incredible, and a certain divine power of oracion, is used in wayghty causes:
for it has with an ample majesty very garnyshed words, proper, translated,
and grave sentences, which ar handled in amplificacion, and commiseracion, and
it has exornacions both of words and sentences, wherun^o in oracions they
ascribe very great strength and gravity. And they that use this kind, be
vehement, various, copious, grave, appointed and ready thorowlye to move and
turn men's minds. This kind did Cicero use in the oracion for Aulus Cluencius,
for Sylla, for Titus Annius Milo, for Caius Rabirius: against Cariline,
against Uerres, against Piso. But they that can not skyll of it oftentimes
fall into fautes, when unto them that seems a grave oracion, which swells,
and is puffed up, which uses strange words hardelye translated, or to old,
and that ^e now long sythens left of from use of daily talk, or more grave
then the thing requires.

The small kind.
The small kind of indighting, is in a subtle, pressed, and fyled oracion,
meet for causes that be a little sharper then are in the common use of
speaking. For it is a kind of oracion that is let down even to the most
used custume of pure and clear speaking. It has fine sentences, subtle,
sharp, teaching all things, and making them more plain, not more ample. And
in the same kind (as Cicero says in his oratoure) some be craftye, but
vnpolyshed, and of purpose like the rude and unskillful: Other in that lea^es
are trymme, that is somewhat floryshynge also and garnyshed. Cicero used this
kind in his philosophical disputacions, in the oracio^ for Quincius for
Roscius ye Comedy plaier, and Tece^ce, and Plautus in their Comedies. Such as
ca^ not ha^dsomly use them selves in that merry conceyted slende^nes of words,
fall into a dry and feeble kind of oracion.

The mean kind.
The mean and temperate kind of indyghting stands of the lower, and yet not
of the loweste, and most comen words and s^nte^ces. And it is ryghtly called
the temperate kind of speaking, because it is very nygh unto the small, and to
the great kind, following a moderacion and temper betwyxt the^. And it
follows as we say in one tenor, distinguyshyng all the oracion with small
ornaments b^th of words, and sentences. Cicero uses this for the law of
Manilius, for Aulus Cecinna, for Marcus Marcellus, and most of all in his
books of o^^ices. In this it is fautye to come to the kind that is nigh unto
it* which is called dissolute, because it waueth hither and thither, as it
were without senowes and joints, standing surely in no point. And s^che an
oracion can not ca^se the hea^er to take any heed, ^hen it goes so in and
out, and comprehends not any thing with perfect words

Of Schemes and Tropes. Scheme

Scheme is a Greek word, and signifies properlye the manner of gesture that
daunsers use to make, when they have won the best game, but by translacion is
taken for the form, fashion, and shape of any thing expressed in writing
or payntinge: and is taken here now of us for the fashion of a word, sayynge,
or sentence, otherwise written or spoken then after the vulgar and comen usage,
and that three sundry ways: by figure, fa^^e, virtue.

Figure.
Figure, of Scheme ye first part, is a behaueoure, manner, or fashion either of
sentence, oracion, or words after some new wise, other the^ men do commenlye
use to wry^e or speak: and is of two sorts. Dianoias, that is of sentence,
and Lexeos of word.

Figure of Dianoias, or sentence, because it properlye belongs to oratoures*
we will speak of it hereafter in place convenient, now will we entrete of the
figure Lexeos, or of word, as it perteyneth to the Gramarians.

Figure of word.
Figure Lexeos, or of word, is when in speaking or writing any thing
touching the words is made new or strange, otherwise then after ye comen
custume: and is of ii. kinds, diccion, and construccion.

Figure of Diccion.
Figure of diccion is the transformacion of one word, either written or
pronounced: and has these parts.

Appositio, apposicio^, the putting to, Prosthesis.
either of letter or syllable at the beginning of a word, as: He all to
bewretched him.

Ablatio, the taking away of a letter or syllable from the beginning of a
word, Apheresis
of a letter, when we say: The pe^thesis of this house is to low, for the
epenthesis. Where note this ye word pe^thesis is a greek word, and yet is used
as an english, as many mo be, and is called a pentis by these figures, Sincope
and Apheresis, the whole word being as is before, epenthesis, so called
because it is betwyxt ye light and us, as in all occupiers shops co^menli it is.

Interpositio, Epenthesis.
when a letter is added between the first syllable of a word and the last,
as: Relligio^ for religion, relliques for relics.

Consicio, Syncope.
contrary to Epenthesis, is when somewhat is cut of from the myddeste of the
word, as: Proparalepsis.
Idolatry for Idololat^y.

Preassumpcio, when a syllable is added to a word, the significacion of the
word thereby nothing altered, as: He uses to slacken his matters, for to
slack his matters.

Absissio, Apocope.
ye cuttyng away of a letter or syllable from the end of a word, as: She is a
well ^ayr may, for maid

Extensio, Ectasis.
the making long of a syllable which by nature is short, as: This was ordained
by act, for ordined.

Contractio, Systole.
the making short of a syllable which by nature is long, as He is a man of
good perseuerau^ce: where some men commit.ii. fautes at once, one yt they take
perseuerau^ce for knoweledge, which signifies alwais continuance, an other yt
they make this syllable (ue) short, where it is euerlonge: and so do they err
in this word, adherentes, also, making (he) short, when it is always long,
as when they say: I defye him, and all his adherentes.

Synolephe.
Delecio, put^ynge out, when.ii. vowels coming together, the first is as it
were put out: as the one and the other, for the one and the other.

Antisthecon.
Littera pro littera. One letter for an other, as akecorne for okecorne.

Transposicio. Transposing of letters in writing, as chamber, for chamber.

Figure of construccion.
Figure of construccion is when the order of construccion is otherwise then
after the comen manner. And the kinds be these.

Prolepsis.
Presumpcio, a taking before, or general speaking of those things which
afterward be declared more perticulerlye: as, in the mean season that king
Henry rode royally to Calais on a sumpteous courser, Jews in a gorgeous
chariot was cart^d to Boloygne.

Iunctio, Zengma.
ioynyng, as Linacer says, is when in like sentences a certain comen thing
that is put in the one, and not changed in the other is not expressed, but
left out: as in Uyrgyll. Before I forget Caesar, either the Parthian shall
drink of the flud Araris, or Germany of Tigris: here is left out, shall
drink. Or to define it more playnelye. Iniunctio, is when the verb in diverse
like sentences is referred to one: and that three manner of ways.

First when it is set before, and is called Preiunctio, Presozeugma.
as There did overcome in him, lechery, his chastity, saucines his fear,
madness his reason.

Secondlye when it is set in the miodes, Mesozeugma.
and is called, Media iunctio, as bewtye, either by age decaieth, or by
syckenes.

Thyrdly when it is put in the end and is called Postiunctio, as beauty by
syckenes, Rypozeugma.
by sorrow, or by age decays.

Diazeugma.
Disiunctio, disiunccion, when of those things of which we speak, either
both, or each one of them is concluded with their certain verb, thus: The
people of Rome destroyed Numance, overthrew Cartage, cast down Corinth, and
raced Fregels. Covetousness hurts the body, and corrupts the mind.

Silepsis.
Concepcio, when in unlike clauses a certain common thing that is put in one
of the^, can not agree with the other, except it be changed. But this is more
plain in the latin because of the concordes, albeit in english for the verb
we may use this example. The Nobles and the King was taken. His head and his
hands were cut of: In the which sentences the verb agrees with the next.

Epergesis^
Appositio, when two substa^tiues are put together immediately with out any
verb betwyxt, the one to declare the other, as in Uyrgyll. Corido^ loved fair
Alexis his masters darlynge.

Ryperbation
Transgressio, when the right order of words is troubled, and has these
kinds.

Reuersio, Anastrophe.
a preposterous order of the words contrary to the good order of speaking,
as: He fell from of the wall, for he fell of from the wall.

Prepostera loquutio, Hysterologia
when ye that is done afterward, is set in speaking in the former place, as:
pluck of my boots and spurs.

Dissectio, Tmesis
a cutting, when the ioynyng of a compound word is losed by putting somewhat
betwixt, as: His saying was true, as here shall appear after, for hereafter. He
shall be punyshed what man so ever offe^deth, for whatsoever man.

Interpositio, Interposicion, is a dissolucio^ of the order of the words by
putting a sentence betwixt, Parenthesis
as: The man (I speak it for no harm) will sometime have his own will.

Defectus, Eclipsis.
when somewhat lacks in speaking, but co^menlye used to be understand, as:
Good morrow, good night.

Casus pro casu, Antiptosis.
when one case is put for another, as me think it is so.

Fault.
Of Scheme, the second part is in speech as it we^e a fault, which though it
be pardoned in Poets, yet in prose it is not to be suffered. The kinds be
these: obscure, inordinate, barbarous.

Obscure and his parts.
Obscure is, when there is a darkness through faut, either of the words, or of
the setting of them, and these ben the parts.

Acyrologia.
Improprietas, when a word nothing at all in his proper significacion is
brought into a sentence as a cloud: as you shall have six strypes you long
for.

Pleonasmus
Super abundancia, when ye sentence is laden with superfluous words, as, he
spoke it with his mouth, he saw it with his eyes.

Perissologia
Sermo superfluus, when a sentence is added, ye matter thereby made never the
waightyer: as ye Ambassadors obteining no peace, returned back home, from
whence they came.

Inutilis repe^icio eiusdem, Tautologia.
is a vain repeting again of one word or more in all one sentence, which fault
by taking little heed, Cicero also fell into, as in the oracion for Aulus
Cluencius. Therefore that judgment was not like a judgment O Judges.

Sermo ubique sui similis, Romiologia.
a greater fault then the other, is when the whole matter is all alyke, and
has no variety to avoid tediousnes, as: He came thither to ye bath, yet he
said afterward. Here one servant bet me. Afterward he said unto him: I
will consider. Afterward he chyd with him, and cried more and more when many
were present. Such a folyshe tellyng of a tale shall you hear in many simple
and halle folyshe persons.

Ambiguitas, Amphibologia.
when through fault of ioynyng the words, it is doutefull to which the verb
belongs, as: His father loves him better then his mother.

Sedulitas superflua, Periergia.
when there i^ in speaking tomuch diligence and curiositye, and the sentence
ouerladen with super^^uous words, which fault is the same, or very like to
that, Macrologia
that is called Macrologia, which is when the sentence upon desire to seem fine
and eloquent, is longer then it should be.

Inordinate and his parts.
Inordinate is, when either order or dignity lacks in the words: and the
kinds ben these.

Tapinosis.
Humiliatio, when the dygnitye of the thing is diminyshed by baseness of the
word: as if we should say to a great prince or a king: If it please your
mastershyp.

Aschrologia.
Turpis loquutio, when the words be spoken, or joined together, that they may
be wrong into a filthy sense. Of this it needs not to put any example, when
lewd wanton persons will soon find in owe.

Cacozelia.
Mala affectatio, evil affectacio^ or leude following, when the wit lacks
judgment, and ^ondlye following a good manner of speaking, run into a fault,
as when affectyng copy, we fall into a vain babbling, or laboryng to be brief,
wax bare and dry. Also if we should say: a phrase of building, or an audience
of sheep, as a certain homely fellow did.

Male figuratum, Aschematisto^
when the oracion is all plain and simple, and lacks his figures, whereby as
it were with stars it might shine: which fault is counted of writers, not
among the least.

Male collocatum, Cacosintheton.
when words be naughtelye joined together, or set in a place where they should
not be

Cumulatio, Soraismus.
a mynglyng and heapyng together of words of diverse languages into one
speech: as of French, welche, spanyshe, into english: and an using of words
be they pure or barbarous. And although great authors sometime in long works
use some of these fautes, yet must not their examples be followed, nor brought
into a common usage of speaking.

Barbary and his parts.
Barbary is a fault, which turns the speech from his pureness, and makes it
foul and rude, and the parts be these.

Barbarismus.
Barbarismus is, when a word is either naughtely written or pronounced contrary
to the right law and manner of speakinge. And it is done by addicion,
detraccio^, changing, transposynge, either of a letter, a syllable, time,
accent, or aspiracio^. Hereof we have showed exampels partly where they be
called figures, and partly, doubt ye not, but both the speaking and writing of
barbarouse men, will give you mow. Hitherto be referred the fautes of evil
pronouncing certain letters, and of tomuch gapyng, or contrary of speaking in
the mouth.

Solecismus.
Inconueniens structura, is an unmeet and inconvenient ioynynge together the
parts of spech in construccion, which is ma^ked by all things that belong to
the parts of speech: as when one pa^^e is put for another, when gender for
gender, case for case, time for time, mode for mode, number for number, aduerbe
for aduerbe, preposicion for preposicio^: which because it is used of famous
authors, instead of fautes, be called figures.

Virtue.
Virtue, or as we say, a grace and dygnitye in speaking, the third kind of
Scheme, is when the sentence is bewtyfied and lift up above the comen manner of
speaking of the people. Of it be two kinds: Propriety, and garnyshyng.

Propriety and his parts.
Propriety, is when in writing and pronunciacion there be no fautes committed,
but things done as they should be. The parts be proposicion, and accenting.

Proportio, Analogia.
proporcion is, whereby the manner of true writing is conserved. By this the
barbarous tongue is separated from the very true and natural speech, as be the
fine metals from the grosser. To speak is no law, but an obseruacion or
markyng, not leanyng upon cause, but upon example. For in eloquence, the
judgment of excellent men stands for reason, as says Quintilian in his
first book.

Extensio, Tasis.
is that whereby a sweet and pleasant modulacion or tunablenes of words is
kept, because some are spoken with a sharp tenure or accent, some with a
flarre, some strayned out. This grace specially pertains to a turnyng of ye
voice in pleasant pronunciacion

Garnyshyng and his kinds.
Garnishyng as the word it self declares, is when the oracio^ is gaylye set
out and floryshed with diverse goodly figures, causyng much pleasauntnes and
delecracio^ to the hearer: and has two kinds, composicion, and exornacion.

Sinthesis.
Composicion is an apt settinge together of words, which causes all the
parts of an oracion to b^e trymmed al alyke. And in it must be considered
that we so order our words, that the sentence decrease not by putting a
weaker word after a stronger, but that it still go up ward and increase. There
is also a natural order, as to say: men and women, day and night, east, and
weste, rather then backewardes. In this must be avoided also to often coming
together of vowels, which make the oracion wide and gapyng. To much repetyng
of all one letter in the beginn^ng of words, to much repeting of one word, and
that they end not to much all alyke, that the sentence be not hold on to
long, which werieth the hearer, and the speaker: nor that many consona^tes
run not to harshely together, with many other, which Cicero speaks of in his
third book of his orator, and Quintilian in his nynth, whereof here to put
examples were to long.

Exornacion is a fine polyshinge of words and sentences by disseueryng the^ with
diverse goodly colors and tropes or chau^gings of speech.

Tropes.
Emonge authors many times under the name of figures, Tropes also be
comprehended: Nevertheless there is a notable difference betwixt the^. In
figure is no alteracion in the words from their proper significacions, but
only is the oracion and sentence made by the^ more plesau^t, sharp and
vehement, after ye affeccio^ of him that speaks or writes: to ye which use
although tropes also do serve, yet properlye be they so called, because in them
for necessitye or garnyshynge, there is a monynge and chaungynge of a word and
sentence, from their own significacio^ into another, which may agree with it by
a similitude. The former par^es ben these.

Metaphora.
Translatio, translacion, that is a word translated from the thing that it
properlye signifies, unto another which may agree with it by a similitude. And
among all virtues of speech, this is the chyefe. None persuades more
effecteouslye, none shows the thing before our eyes more evidently, none
moves more mightily the affeccions, none makes the oracio^ more goodlye,
pleasant, nor copious.

Translacions be diverse.


men, to bees.











Abusio, Catach^esis.
when for a certain and proper word, we abuse a like, or that is nie unto it,
as when we say: long counsel, little talk, small matter. Here may we soon
perceive that by abusion we take words that be somewhat nigh, which properly do
belong to unlike things.

Transsumptio, Metalepsis*
Transsu^pcion, is when by degrees we go to yt that is showed as: he hyd him
self in the black de^^e^. By black, is understand full of darkness and
consequently stepe down, and very deep.

Metonomia
Metonomya, Transnominacion, when a word that has a proper significacion of
his own, being referred to another thing, has another: and this is done
diverse ways.











Synec^oche
Intellectio, Intelleccion when one thing is understand by another yt is of the
same manner and kind, and this is done many ways.

















as: Lo, now the top of the chymneyes in the villages smoke a far of:
whereby Uyrgyl signifies night to be at hand.

Pronominacio.
Antonomasia, is, which for ye proper name puts some other word As the
Archebyshop confuted the error, for Cranmer. The Philosopher lied that the
world was eternal, for Aristotle. The Apostle says we be justified by
faith, for Paul.

Periphrasis.
Circuicio, is a larger descripcion either to garnyshe it, or if it be foul
to hyde it, or if it be brief to make it more plain: by etimology, by signs,
by definicion Example of the first. The providence of Scipio, overthrew ye
might of Carthago. Here save only for garnyshyng sake he might have said
plainly: Scipio overthrew Carthage: Of the next. When Saul was doing his
business, David might have killed him. Doing his business, ye wot what it
means. Of ye third, you have the larger exposicions upon the Gospels called
by the name of this figure.

By Etymology or showing the reason of the name. Well may he be called a
parasite, for a parasite is ye loves other because of his meat.

By signs, as: when by certain notes we describe any thing, as if a man
understanding anger will say that it is the boylynge of the mind, or color,
which brings in palenes into the cou^tenau^ce, fiersenes in the eyes, and
tre^blyng in the members.

By definicion. The art of well indyghting, for Rethorique.

The second part of Trope.
Allegoria, the second part of Trope is an inuersion of words, where it is
one in words, and another in sentence or meaning.

Sermo obscurus, Aenig^^a.
a riddle or dark allegory, as: The half is more the^ the hole.

Adagium, Parenna.
a saying much used and notable for some noueltye, as: The wolf is in our
tale.

Dissimulatio, is a mockyng which is not perceived by the words but either by
the pronu^ciacion, Ironia.
or by the behaueour of the person, or by the nature of the thing, as: You are
an honest man in deed.

Sarcasmus.
Amara irrisio, is a bitter sporting a mock of our enemy, or a manner of
iestyng or sco^^inge bytynglye, a nyppyng taw^te, as: The Jews said to
Christ, he saved other, but he could not save himself.

Astysmus.
Fes^iua urbanitas, is a certain merry conceyted speaking, as on a time a merry
fellow metynge with one that had a very white head, axed him if he had lain in the
snow al night.

Mycterismus.
Subsannatio, a skornyng by some testure of the face, as by wrythinge the nose,
putting out the tongue, pettyng, or such like.

Antiphrasis.
Dictio co^trariu^ significans, when the mock is in a word by a contrary
sense, as when we call a fustilugges, a minion?

Charicutismus.
Graciosa nugatio, when words roughly spoken be molified by pleasant words:
as when we say to him that threatens us: I pray you be good master to me.

The first order of the figures Rethoricall.
Repeticio, repeticion, when in like and diverse things, Epanaphora
we take our beginning continually at one and the self same word, thus: To you
this thing is to be ascribed, (...) you thank is to be given, to you this
thing shall be honor. In this exornacion is much plesautnes, gravity, and
sharpnes, and it is much used of al orators and notably sets out, and
garnysheth the oracion.

Conuersio, Antistrophe.
conversion is which taket^ nor his begynnynges at al one and the same word,
but with all one word still clos^th up the sentence, and it is contrary to that
other before, as: Sense the time yt concord was taken away from the city,
lyberty was taken away: fidelity was taken away: fre^ship was taken away

Co^plexio, Symploce.
complexion co^priseth both two exornacions, both this, and that which we
declared before, yt both all one first word should be often repeted, and we
should turn often to all one last word, as: Who t^ke Sedechias prisoner, and
put out both his eyes? Nabuchodonozer. Who put Daniell and his fellows into the
burning furnace? Nabuchodonozer. Who was transformed from a man into a beast,
and eat hay with oxen? Nabuchodonozer.

Anadiplosis.
Reduplicatio, is a continent rehearsyng again of all one word, or words,
for the more vehemence, and some effect of the mind. Cicero against Catiline.
Yet he lives, lives? yea comes also into the counsel house. It is thou, it
is thou that troublest all the household. Also, dareste thou now come into our
sight, you traitor of thy country? Thou traitor I say of thy contrei, dare
thou come into our syghte?

Epanodus.
Traduccio, Traduccion is, which makes that when all one word is oftentimes
used, that yet it does not only not displease the mind, but also make ye
oracion more trim in this wise: Suffer riches to belong to rich men but
prefer thou virtue before riches: For if you wylt compare riches with virtue,
thou shalt scarce think them meet to be called riches, which ar but hand
maidens to virtue. Also, we are unto God the sweet savor of Christ. To the one
part are we the savor of death unto death, and unto the other part are we the
savor of life unto life.ii. Cor. ii.

Nominis co^munio, Sinonimia
communion of the word, when we renew not the self same word by rehearsyng
again, but change that that is put with an other word of the same ^alewe,
thus: Thou have overthrown the common wealth even from the foundation, and cast
down the ^itye, even from the root. The just man shall floryshe as the palm
tree, and shall be multiplied as the Ceder tree. Cicero for. Q. Ligarius. Whose
side would that point of thy swerd have pricked? what meaned thy weapons? what
was thy mind? what meante thine eyes? hands, that burning of thy mind? what
desiredst you? what wyshedste thou? Little differs this figure from the other
before, only because the words be changed, the sentence remaining.

Sinathrismus.
Frequentacio, frequentacion is, when the things that be dispersed thorowout
all the cause, are gathered together into ^ne place, that ye oracion should be
the wayghtier, and rebukefuller, thus: What fault is he without? why should you
O Iu^ges be minded to deliver him? He is an harlot of his own body, he lies
in wait for others, gredy, in temperate, wanton, proud, unnatural ^o his
parents, unkind to his frindes, troubleous to his kynsefolke, stubburn to his
betters, dysdaynful to his equals, cruel to his inferiors, finally,
intolerable to all men.

Epiphonesis
Exclamacio, exclamacio^ is, which shows the significacion of sorrow, or of
anger, by calling upon either a man, a place, or a thing? Cicero in his
orator: O deceitful hope of men* and frail fortune: and our vain
contencions, which often times are broken in the myd way, rushe down, and in
the fall ar quite overthrown before they cause the haven. Hereunto belongs
expectacio^, obtestacio^, wishyng, rebuking.

Execracio, e^ecracion: O fie upon Idolatry, Areia.
that takes away the honor due unto God alone, and gives it to sinful
creatures, and Images made by man's hand.

Obtestacio, Deesis.
obtestacion, when for God, or for man's sake we vehemently desire to have any
thing As Cicero for Publius Sestius: O I pray you, and for the Gods sakes
most herteli beseech you, y^ as it was your wylles to save me, so you will
vouchsaf to save the^ through whose help you received me again.

Votum, Euche.
wyshynge: O would God that the adulterer had been drowned in the ragyng sea,
when with his nauye of ships he sailed to Lacedemonia.

Increpacio, Epiplexis,
Cicero against Catiline. Thynkest thou that thy counselles are not known? and
that we know not what thou dyddest the last night? and what the night
before?

Interrogacio, Every interrogacio^ is not of gravity, Erotesis.
neither yet a Scheme, but this which when those things de rehearsed up
which hur^e our adversaries cause, strengthens that thing that is gone
before, thus seeing then that he spoke all these words, and did all these
things, whether did he put away our fellows minds from the common wealth or
not?

Erotema.
Raciocinatio, raciocinacion is, by the which we our selves axe a reason of
our self, wherefore every thing should be spoken, and that oftentimes we
demand of our selves a declaracion of every proposicion after this manner: This
was well ordained of our elders to depryue no king of his life whom they had
taken in batayl. Why so? for the power which fortune had given us, it to
consume in the punyshement of them whom the same fortune a little before had set
in hyeste degree, were against reason. Yea but he brought a great army
against you? I will not remember it. Why so? For it is the point of a valiaunte
man, such as contend for the vyctorye, them to count enemies: such as be
overcome, those to count me^: so that fortitude may diminishe war, humanity
increase peace. But he if he had overcome, would he have done so? Uerelye he
would not have been so wise. Why should ye spare him then? because such folly I
am wont to despise, not to follow.

Subiectio, Prosapodosis.
when we axe of our self what can be said against us, and answer to
ourselves thus: Shall we tarry in sin? God forbid. Or compel our aduersarye
to answer thus: O Jews, what can you say for denial of Christ. Will you say
that you have not your Messiah? but your prophets say the contrary. Your
Types are confounded. Whom will you be judged by? by Hystories? Ours declare
that you be out of the way, and shall come again to Christ.

Tacit obiectioni responsio. Antiphora*
when we make answer to a thing that might privily be objected against us, as
in the first epistle of Ouide, Penelope wylling her husband Ulysses to come
home hyms^lfe, and write nothing unto her. Where he might have laid for his
tarying the wars, she privily took away yt excuse, saying: Troy is destroyed.

Aporia.
Dubitatio, dubitacion, when we doubt of two things, or of many, which we
should inespecially speak of. Much hurted the common wealth at that time,
whether I should say the folyshenesse of the consulles, or the malice, or
both, I can not tell.

^pophasis.
Expeditio, expedicion, when many reasons rehearsed up, whereby a thing might
be done or not, the other are taken away, and one left that we entende, thus:
It must needs be that this controversy touching the sacrament must stand
either upon the much pressyng and rigor of the words, or upon the meaning
and understanding of them. The words as they stand, bring with them grea^e
inconvenience, to wit, to expositoures, and the other textes. The meaning
does not so, but auoydeth al these inco^ueniences, and satisfies reason,
expositours, and texts of the scripture: wherefore wit, expositour, and
scripture thinks it better to take the sentence, then the word.

Conclusio, Epilogus.
conclusion is, which by a brief argume^tacion of these things that be spoken
before or done, infers that thing that necessarilye should follow, thus:
And if a reuelacion were given to the Trotanes, ye Troy might not be taken
without ye arowes of Philec^et^s, and they did nothing else but strike
Alexander to kyl him that in deed was Troy to be taken.

Permissio, Epitrope.
permission, when we show yt we give and grant any thing altogether to a man's
will, thus: Because al things taken away, only is left unto me my body and
mind, these things, which only ar left unto me of many, I grant the^ to to
you and to your power.

Co^municacio, Anacinosis.
co^municacion is, when we leave sumwhat to ye Judges to be esteemed, thus: I
leave unto you o judges to be thought what hurt ye commonwealth shall take
hereof Diuisio, division is which dividing one thing from another, Dialisis.
ends the^ both by showing a reason, thus: why should I lay any thing to thy
charge? if you be good, you haste not deserved it, if thou be naught, thou
carest not for it. Also, what should I speak of mine own good turns toward
the. If thou do remember them, I should but trouble you: If you have forgotten
them, when by deed I have profited nothing, what good can I do in words?

Antitheton.
Contentio, contencion, when the reason stands by contrary words or
contraries be rehearsed by comparison, thus: Flattery has pleasant
begynnynges, but the same has very bitter endynges. Cicero against Catiline:
when they could not live honestlye, they had rather dye shamefully. They that
be after the flesh, care for these things yt be of the flesh. They that be
after the spirit, care for the things of the spirit.

Antithesis.
Contrarium, contrary is, that of two diverse things confirms ye one
bryefely and easelye, thus: For he that always will be an enemy to his own
rekenyngs, how should a man trust that he would be a frind to other men's matters?
He that in familiare co^municacion and company of his friends will never say
truth, think the^ yt he will abstain from a lie in a common audience. Colon.


Membrum oracionis, a member of the reason is so called when a thing is showed
perfitely in few words the whole sentence not showed, but received again with
an other part, thus: Thou dyddest both profit thine enemy, and hurt thy
frynd. This exornacion may be made of two parts only, but the per^iteste is
made of three, thus: Thou did profit thine enemy, hurt thy frind, and dydst
no good to thy self.

Articulus, Dialyton.
article is, when each word is set a sunder by cutting the oracion thus. By
sharpnes, voice, countenance, thou madeste thine enemies afraid. Thou
destroyedst thine enemies with envy, wrongs, power, falsehead.

Compar, Isocolon.
even or equal, is when the oracion has in it the parts of the which we
spoke before, and that they be made of even number of sillables: but this
equality must not stand by numbryng of them, but by perceyuyng of it in ye
mind. Christ before the Judge was led, and on his head a croune of thorn was
put, in token that in deed, the king of Jews he was borne. Here be some mo
words in on member then in an other, yet sound they to the ear of like
length.

Romioptoto^
Similiter cadens, falling al alike is, when in the same construccion of words
there be two words or mo which be spoken alyke in the self same cases, thus:
Thou praysest a man nedye of virtue, plenteful of money. Cicero for Flaccus:
There is in the^ no variety of opinion, none of will, none of talk.

Romotele^to.
Similiter desinens, ending al alyke, when words or sentences have alyke
endyng, as: Thou dareste do fylthely, and studi^st to speak baudely. Content
thy self with thy state, in thy heart do no man hate, be not the cause of strife
and ba^e.

Climax.
Gradacio, is, when we rehearse again the word yt goth next before, and des^^d
to other things by degrees thus: To Affrican industry gat virtue, virtue
glory, glory hatered. Definicio, Orismus.
definicio^, whereby ye proper effect of any thing is declared briefly and
absolutely in this wise: This is not diligence but covetousness, because ye
diligence is a ^edy saving of thine own: covetousness is a wrongful desyr^ of
othermens. Transicio, Metabasis.
transicio^ is, whereby briefly we monyshe what has been spoken, and what may
follow, as: What he has been to his country I have told, now ye shall hear how
he has showed him self to his pare^tes. Also Cicero for the law of Manilius:
Because we have spoken of ye kind of the war, now will we show a few
things of the greatness of it. Occupatia, Paralepsis.
occupacion is, when we make as though we do not know, or will not know of yt
thing yt we speak of most of al, in this wise: I will not say that you tokest
money of our fellows, I will not stand much in this that you robbedst kingdoms,
cities, and al men's houses: I pass over thy theftes, and al thy ^auyns.
Dissolutio, Asindeton.
when the oracion lacks coniu^ccions, thus: Obey thy pare^tes, be ruled by
thy kinsfolk, follow thy fryndes* obey the laws.

Apostrophe.
Auersio, auersion, when we turn our speech from them to whom we did speak to
another person, either present or absent, or to a thing to the which we feign
a person, as a precher, speaking of priests, that feed not the flock, may
fytly turn his speech unto Peter, saying: O Peter, I would thou liuedst, and
saw what thy brethren do, how far they be gone from that thou prescribedst
them to do. Again: O world, how pleasant be the things that thou do
promise, how bitter ben they that thou geuest.

Anangeon.
Necessum, necessity, when we confess the thing to be done, but excuse it by
necessitye, either of ye person or time, thus: I confess that this I did. But
the woman that thou gave me, did deceive me. Also, sometime I was in that
opinion, but the time so required.

Anaclasis.
Refractio, that is the turninge back again of a word into a contrary
significacion, thus: I know king Ezechias that all this life is but
bitterness, but I pray thee give me such bytternes.

Verborum bombus, when small and triflyng things are set out with great gasyng
words. Bomphiologia.
Example of this name you in Ter^nce of ye boasting soldier, and creping smell
feast.

Diminutio, Miosis.
when great matters are made light of by words, as when he was well beaten by
a knave, that knave will say he did but a little stryke him.

Extenuatio, Liptote.
the making less of a thing to avoid arrogance, thus: If I have any wit O
Judges, if any e^ercyse of endyghtyng, al may I thank Archias the Poet of.
Cicero for Archias.

Eleuacio, Diasirmus.
when we make light of, and despise great arguments brought against us, which
to answer unto it is labor, and we say they perteyne not to the purpose, or
that they are unworthy to be answered unto, or that we keep them till another
time: Of this there needs none example.

AS out of little springs arises great fluddes: so now these precepts of
grammar finyshed, and the first order of the Rethorical figures: We now come
unto that great declaracion of eloquence, called of Quintilian and Cicero, the
ornamete^s of sentence.

Figures of sentence.
Particio.
Particion called also ^iuision and distribucion rethoricall, is when a thing
that may be generally spoken, is more largely declared, and divided into
parts. Example: He is perfi^ely seen in all the sciences. This sentence
spoken as it were in a su^me, may be enlarged, if severally you rehearse up all the kinds of learning. There is no kind of doctrine at al but he is
exquisitely seen in it. There is no science, but he has learned it thoroughly,
and so learned it, that you w^lde think he had labor^d only in it. So
maruelouslye he knows all the ^ables of all the Poets, he so abounds in the
flowers of the Rethoricians: He has so boulted out the paynefull rules of the
gramarians. So perfitely knows he the subtilnesse of the Logicians, and has
so sought out the priuities of natural things, and overcome the hard
points of supernatural wisdom: he has passed through the secrets of the
divines, and has thorowlie perceived the mathematical demo^stracions. He so
knows the mocions of the stars, the reasons of numbers, the measurynges of
the earth the situacions, names and spaces of cities, mountains, fluddes, and
fountaynes, he so knows the difference and harmonies of tunes: He so
reme^breth all hystoryes old and late: So knows all good authors, all
antiquities and novelties, and also is perfitelye well seen as well in Greek as
latyne. Finallye whatsoever learning has been found and taught of good
authors, all that thorowlye ^ath be perceived, known and remembered. Here these
words, ^e is perfitelye seen in all the sciences, be declared in their
parts.

Enumeracion is much like unto this, Enumeracio
when not being content at once to declare the end of the matter,
Enumeracio^ of things that go before
we rehearse up all yt went before it was done. Example: Cicero oppressed the
mischeuous purposes of Catiline. Thus may you set it forth: The myscheuous
enterpryses of Catiline by most ungracious young men, which went about the
destruction of the city of Rome, M Tullius the consul did quickelye smell out
by his foresyghte, and by his singular vigilancye sought the^ out, by his
high prudence espied them, by his incredible eloquence convinced them, and by
his grave authority repressed the^, by force of arms subdued them, and with
great happiness took them quyte away.

Hitherto also apperteineth, when we expound a thing not barely, but repete the
causes also sumwhat before, Enumeracio^ of the causes.
and of what begynnynges it came of. As if not content to have said, that the
^renchmen made bataile with the Neapolitans, we rehearse also what were the
causes of their strife, who was the setter forward, and what was the occasion
of the war, what hope and trust either of them had to the victory. Of these
ar many examples in Saluste and Liuie. From this differs not when we do not
simplye show forth the matter, Enumeracio^ of effects* and conseque^tes.
but rehearse also those things that either go with it, or follow it, as thus:
We thank the of this war. Thus may you dilate the matter. The treasure
spente upon the Barbariens, the youth broken with labors, the corn croden
down, the cattle driven away, streets and vyllages every where set on fire,
fields left desolate, walls overthrown, houses robbed, temples spoiled, so
many old men chylderles, so many orphans, so many wyddowes, so many virgins
shamefully defiled, ye manners of so many young me^ made worse by le^de liberty,
so many me^ slain, so great mourning, so many good arts lost, laws
oppressed, religion blotted, al things of god and man confounded, all good
order of the city corrupted: I say all this heap of myschiefs that rises of
war, we may thank the only of it, which wast ye beginner of this war

Energia.
Enargia, evidence or perspicuitie called also descripcion rethoricall, is when
a thing is so described that it seems to the reader or hearer yt he beholds
it as it were in doing. Of this figure ben many kinds.

The first, called effiguracion or descripcion of a thing, whereby the figure
and form of it is set out: as of the universal flud.

The second, the descripcion of a person, when a man is described, as are
the noble men in Plutarch, and the Emperors in Suetonius. How be it the
rethoricianes use this word Prosopopcia, that is descripcion of a person to
comprehend the six kinds folowinge.

The third kind is called Charactirismus, Charactirsmus.
that is the efficcion or pycture of the body or mind, as Dauus describes
Crito, and Mitio describes Demea.

The.iiii. is the fainyng of a person called Prosopographia, and is of.i^
sorts. Prosopographia.
First ye descripcio^ of a fained person, as Uyrgyl in the syxt of Eneid,
faineth Sibil to be mad, and fayneth the persons in hell. An other form is
when we feign person, co^municacion, or affecte of a man or of a beast, to a
dumme thing, or that has no body, or to a dead man: as to the Harpies,
furies, devils, sleep hongar, envy, fame, virtue, justice, and such like, the
poets feign a person, and communicacion. This second fashion the Poets do
call Prosopop^y. The first kind is called AEtopeia, that is an expressio^ of
manners or mylde affeccions, Aetopeia.
and has three kinds: of the which the first is a significacion or expression
of of manners somewhat longer, as of wits, arts, virtues, vices. Thus we
express Thraso a boaster, and Demea a sour fellow.

The second form, is an expression of natural propensi^ie, and inclinacions
to natural affeccions, as of the fathers love toward the children. etc. of
fryendshyppe, neyghbourhod and cet^. as you may se in hystoryes.

The third kind is the expression of lighter affeccions, as when we go about
by fair means to get the merry affeccions of men to us ward or to other,
and when the mind is lift up into hope, mirth, and laughter, and as be loving
salutations, promises, and co^munynges together in familiar epistles and
dialogues, and the getting of love and favor in the begynnynges, and finallye
this figure does teach, that Rethorique is a part of flattery. The sixth kind
of rethoricall descripcion is Pathopeia, Pathopeia.
that is expressyng of vehement affeccions and perturbacions, of yt which there
be two sorts. The first called Donysis, or intencion, and some call it
imaginacion, whereby fear, anger, madness, hatered, envy, and like other
perturbacions of mind is showed and described, as in Ciceros inuectiues.
Another form is called ^i^tros, or co^mise^acion, whereby tears be pyked out,
or pyty is moved, or forgeuenes, as in Ciceros peroracio^s, and complaints in
Poets: And to be short there is gotten no greater admiracion or commendacion of
eloquence then of these two, AEtopeia, and Pathopeia, if they be used in place.
dialogismus
The.vii. kind is Dialogismus which is how often a short or long communicacion
is feigned to a person, according to the comelines of it. Such be the concions
in Liuie, and other historians. The.viii. kind is called Mimisis, Mimisis.
that is a following either of the words or manoures whereby we express not
only the words of the person, but also the gesture: and these foresaid six
kinds Quintiliane does put under Prosopopeia. The.ix. kind is the
descripcion of a place, as of Carthage in the first of Eneid. Refer hither
Cosmographie and Geographie. The.x. kind is called Topotesia, that is ficcion
of a place, when a place is described such one peradventure as is not, as of
the fields called Elisii in Uirgil: refer hither Astrothesiam, that is the
descripcio^ of stars. The.xi. kind is Chronographia, that is the descripcion
of the time, as of night, day, and the fo^re times of the year.

A great part of eloquence is set in increasing and diminyshing, Amplificacio
and serves for this purpose, that the thing should seem as great as it is in
deed, lesser or greater then it seems to many. For the rude people have
commonly a preposterous judgment, and take the worst things for the best,
and the best for the worst. Al amplificacion and dimmucion is taken either of
things, or of words. Of things rise effeccions, of words those fashions that
now I will show. The first way of increasyng or diminishing is by chaungynge
the word of the thing, when in encreasynge we use a more cruel word, and a
softer in diminyshynge, as when we call an evil man a thief, and say he
has killed us, when he has beaten us. And it is more veheme^te if by
correccion we compare greater words with those that we put before: As thou
haste brought not a thyefe, but an extorcioner, no^ an adulterer, but a
rauysher. etc. Like unto this is Hyperbole, which says more then the truth
is in deed, as when we say: The cry was heard to heaven, meaning it was a
great cry. An other kind is by increase, which is when the things going
before being exaggerate, we come from them to the hyeste: As against Uerres.
It is a myscheuous deed to bind a Citizen of Rome, heinous to beat him,
what? shall I say to hang him? Another way of increase is, when without
disstinccion in the context and course of the oracion, the circumstaunces set
in order, somewhat always is added bygger then the first, and that we come to
the highest by a swyfte pace. As he was not ashamed to play at dyce with iesters
in the common cokerye, being a priest, a Person, a Divine, and a Monk. There
is another kind of amplyfienge that is by comparison contrary to increase. For
as in increase the things that go before being exaggerat, we go from them to
the highest, so comparison takes increase of the lesser, which if they be
greater in all men's opinions, that must needs appear very great that we will
have amplifie^: And comparison is made by ficcion, and by putting to an
example. By ficcion, either in one degree, or in many. As in the first part of
the amplifiyng of Automes vomit, for he fayneth it had happened unto him at
supper being but a private person. If at supper in these great bowls of thine
this happened unto thee, who would not have counted it a shame: But now in ye
sight of the people of Rome being a common officer, master of the horse, to
whom it was shame once to belch* he with his gobbets of meat that stanke al of
wine, filled al his lap, and the judgment seat. Here amplificacion is taken
of smaller things, and is made by one degree of many degrees, this may be an
example. If a man gave the every year xl. pound, would you not thank him? If
a friend had redeemed the out of prison with his money, would thou not love him?
If either in battle or shypwracke a man by his valiantnes had saved the,
would thou not worship him as God, and say thou were never able to make him
amends? What ingratitude is it then that Christ God and man, which has made
the, to whom thou do owe all that thou have, etc. so to dispyse him, so with
daily fautes to anger him, and for so great beniuole^ce to give him again so
great contumelye and despyte? Neither skylleth it that we have rehearsed
ficcion and comparacion among arguments, for there is no cause why that
amplificacion and ornacion should not be taken out of the same places from
whence there comes probacion. Nor it is no news the self same things to be
applied to diverse uses. As of all circumstaunces both of the thing, and of the
person are taken arguments, but even out of the self same are fe^ affeccions
and e^aggeracions, which is manifest in the kind demonstra^iue: As when we
praise chastity in a young man, we go not about to persuade that he was
chaste, but that that virtue should appear greater in floryshyng age. To like
use serve examples and similitudes, as in Esaye: The Ox knew his owner, and
the Ass the maunger of his master, but Israel has not known me. The example
of the Ox and the Ass is not used for this to prove that the Hebrews did not
know their God, but that the impiety and folishnes of that nation should be
amplified. The same may be applied to proof after this manner. If the Ox and
Ass knowledge their masters, of who^ they are norished and do serve them, how
much more conueniente is it, that man should knowledge his maker and norisher,
and serve him both in body and mind. Contrary, when Paul says: no man
serves in war on his own wages, he proves by similitudes, that it is not
comelye, that they that war under the gospel, should be compelled to be
careful for their living. He should have applied it to amplifiyng, if he had
propouned it thus. They that serve under a captain be not careful for their
living, but lokinge for the sustenaunce of their captain, only study for this
to do him faithful service, how much more shame is it that some men that
have promised to fight under Christ in the gospel, to distrust such a capteyne,
and study all they can to gather riches. Comparison by puttyng to example is,
when by setting out as it were a like example, we bring to pass that that we
exaggerate may be thought either very like, either equal, either bygger. And in
this kind both the whole is compared to the whole, and the parts to parts: as
in the oracion of ^icero for Milo. Did I pray you yt noble man Scipio being a
private person kill Tiberius Gracchus which shaked the common wealth but a
little, and shall we being consulles suffer Catiline, that gothe about to
wast the whole world with murder and fire? Here both Catiline is compared to
Gracchus, and the estate of the common wealth to the whole world, and a little
shaking to slaughter, fire and wastyng, and a private person to the consuls.
There is an amplificacion also when contraries be set together, whereby both the
parts seem bygger, and more euidente. As when exhorting men to liberality, we
show how foul a fault couetousenes is, that the foulnes of the fault being
exaggerate, the goodlines of the virtue should be more increased. There is
another kind of amplifiyng called reasonynge, when of those things that either
follow or go before, the hearer does gather how great that thing is that we
would to be amplified. By things that go before, as when Homer armeth
Achylles, or Hector to battle, by the great preparacion, we gather how sore
ye fight shall be. Of things yt follow: How much wine Antony drank, when yt
having such a strong body he was not able to digeste it, but spewed it up the
next day after. Of things joined to: as when Maro says to Poliphemus: He
had the body of a pineapple tree for a staff in his hand. Many other kinds
ben there of amplifiynge, which who so will se more at large, may read that
right excellent book of the famous doctor Erasmus, which he entitled the
preacher.

The inuencion of many proposicions is, when the chyefe state or principal
proposion of the cause is declared and proved by many other proposicions and
arguments, so set in just order that there be no confusion of proposions. And
proposicions be taken partly of those that be common, and partly of those
things that belong properlye to the cause: As if a man would counsel Tullye
not to take the condition offered of Antony, that is, that by burning of his
books called philippia, he should have his life, he might use commonly these
proposicions. First yt no man ought to by his life so dear, that thereby he
should lose his immortal name. To this general may serve a particular taken
out of circumstaunces, that it ought not to be done, inespe^ialy of Cicero,
which by so many labors has gotten unto him self an excellent and
everlasting name, and that has showed most eloquently by putting out so many
noble works that death ought to be despised, inespeciallye seeing that now he
has not much time to ly^e being an old man. Again, another principal
proposicion shall be taken of the circu^stau^ces. That nothing is worse, then
that Cicero being a very good man should owe his life to Antonye the worst man
of the world. The third proposicion shall be co^iectural: how that Antony
craftily goes about that the books being burned, in the which he perceives
both his own immortal infamye to be, and the immortal glory of Cicero, when
he has afterward taken away his life, he may utterly extinguyshe Cicero.

A copious heaping of probacions.

Proves.
So when proposicions be found, remains argume^tacio^ or proves, called in
Greek Pistis, because they make suretye of a doutefull thing. Of proves some be
artificial, Two sorts of proves.
some vnartificial. Unartificial be, foreiudgeme^tes, rumoures, torments,
tabelles, oath, witnesses, diuinacion, oracles. Signs be referred to proves
vnartificial, and why?
To these be referred which the Greeks call Symeia or signs: For they also
commonly are not fer by the wit of him that disputes, but are ministered
otherwise. Signs wherefore*
They be called signs properlye, which rysynge of the thing it self that is
in question come under the senses of men, Signs be referred to time.
as threatninges, which be of the time that is paste, cryinge herd out of a
place, which is of the time present, pa^enesse of him which is ared of the
murder, which is of the time following, or that blood leapte out of the
body latelye s^ayne, when he came that did the murder. Two manner of signs.
Also of signs some be necessary, as that he lives which does breathe, and
some probable, as blood in the garmente, which might also come out of the
nose, or otherwise. Also proves and arguments are taken out of
circu^staunces, Proves taken out of circu^staunces.
partly of the person, partlye of the cause or thing it self, and be called
also of the Rethoricians places, neither clean contrary to those that
Aristotle has taught, How proves of circu^stau^ces differ from Aristotels
places.
neither the very same: for some agree with them, some be all one, and some
diverse. Only differs the manor of teaching, because the Rethoricianes do
teach a patron, the philosopher generally helps judgment. Circumstaunces
of the person ben these. Circu^sta^ces of person.
Kindred, nation, country, kind, age, bringing up, or discipline, hau^oure of
the body, fortune, condition, nature of the mind, studies, affectacion, words
forespoken, and deeds done before, commocion, counsel, name. Kynred monisheth
us to consider of what progeny a man does come. Kynred.
For it is semely, and happens co^monlye that the sons belyke the
forefathers, and thereof proceeds causes to live well or evil: Nation*
Nacio^ shows what disposicion and manners every nation has peculiarly of
their own. ^ynd.
The difference of kind is known to every man: To diverse ages diverse
things be conueniente. Age. Educacion.
It skylleth more by whom, and by what ways men be brought up, then of whom
they be begotten. The hautoure of the body comprehends fayrnes or foulnes,
strength or weakness: ^auiour of the bo^^^.
^or more credible is the accusacion of lecherye in a fair body then in a
foul, and violence more probable in the strong, then in the weak. Fortune
pertains to riches, Fortune
kynred, friends, seruitures, dignities, honors. Condition comprehends
many things: Condition.
as whether he be noble or not noble, an officer, or a private person, a father
or a son, a citizen or a stranger, a fre man, or a servant, a married manne,
or a single man, a father or none, having had but one wife, The natu^^ of the
mind
or two. The nature of the mind has manifold varieties in men. Some be
fearful, some strong some gentle, some vehement, chaste, lecherous, glorious,
modes^e etc. Studies, for other be the manners of the rustical, Studi^s
then of the lawyer, of the marchaunte, then of the Soldier, of the shipman
then of the physician. To these they add affectacion: Affectacion.
For it skylleth much what manner man every one would seem to be, whether he
be ye same or not: as rich, or eloquent, just or mighty, merry or sad, a
fauorer of the people, or of the great men. Both words that be spoken before
time, and deeds that be done, be also considered. Words spoken, and deeds
done before Commocion
For of things that be paste, the present be esteemed, and also things that be
to come. Co^mocion in this differe^h from the nature of the mind, because that
one is perpetual that other for a while: as anger is commocion, rancour the
nature of the mind, and fear a co^mocion, fearfulness nature. To these they
add the name of the person, Name.
of whence many times an argument is taken: as Cicero rests much upon
Uerres, or sweepers name, because being a strong thief, he swepte altogether.
Thus have we showed that much matter may be taken of things belongyng to a
person, so may be also of those that belong to a thing or cause, which
places be so handeled of Quintil^ane, that he myngleth the^ with the places
which Aristotle has comprehended in his ^yghte books of Topyckes.
Circumstances of the things be these: Circu^staunces of things be these.
Cause, place, time, chance, faculty, instrumente, manor. And first of
every thing there be four causes, efficient, material, formal and final.
Matter is the receptacle of al forms. The form causes it to be this, and not
another thing: as the reasonable soul gives to the body that it is a man,
and the soul because it is a substance has her unnamed form, whereby she
is a soul, Fine or^^de.
and not an aungel. And what soever is made, is made to a certain end, and one
thing may have diverse ends: as nature has given breasts unto women to
give milk, and also for comlynesse of their bodies, neither does any man that
is of a sound mind take upon him any business, but for that he desires to
have some thing: nor there is nothing desired, but under the consideracion of
good or profit. So the end which is last in effect, and first in
intencion, looks upon the gettinge of profits, increase, and co^firmacion of
them, and also upon them, eschuynge of disprofites, diminyshynge, or puttyng
them away. But in chosyng them, false perswacion deceyueth many, whylest by
error they believe that to be good yt is naught. This place therefore serves
for many things, to make more or less. Greatly happy should men be, if every
man would look upon the mark, not the which desire has set before him,
but which God and honest reason has prefixed. And of such strength is the
end, that hereof is taken the felicity of every thing. To fast that the body
may obey the mind, to do good works is an holy deed. To fast to be counted
holy, is hypocrisy. To fast to increase thy good, is couetousenesse. To
fast to be whole in thy body is phisycke, and so of praiynge, almose, and
other laudable works. After like manner must be wayed the secondarie ends. An
other circumstaunce of a thing, is the place, Place.
whose quality oftentimes makes the fault either greter or lesser: as to
steal an holy thing out of an holy place, is worse then some other kind of
theft. No less matter of argumentacion ministers the quality of time, Time.
which signifies two things. First it is taken plainly for the time present,
past, Time has two significacions.
or to come: Second it signifies opportunity to do a thing, and so when a
man comes as we would have it, we say he comes in time. And in the seventh of
Ihon, when Christ says: My time is not yet come, time is taken for opportunity
of time. And likewise in the syxt to the Galat. Therefore while we have time.
Chance.
etc. The Rethoricianes put chance under time, because the end of a thing
perteyneth to the time that follows: but of this will we speak in the place
called Event. Faculty is a power to do the thing that is taken in hand: and
in conjectures two things specially be considered: whether he could or would.
Will is gathered of hope to perform it, and is made more probable when the
nature of the mind is joined to it: as it is not like he will abide in his
glory, because he is envious and ambicious. Also when we counsel one to leave
of vain mourning, when it is not in his power to get again that is gone.

Instrument seems to be a part of faculty: Instrument.
for instruments sometime are cause of our hablenes to do a thing: and it is
a more mischeuous deed to kyl with venom the^ with swearde. And to instrument
so^e is the manor of doing, that almost it is all one. But more properlye
perteyne to the manor or fashion, those things that be either excused, or
made greater by will: As less fault is it to fall into a vice by ignorance or
frailty, then of a purpose and full deliberacion. The use of circumstances
profits to amplify, to extenuate, to evidence, to confirmacion, and
probability. And hitherto be referred also the common places that
indifferentlye apperteyne to all kinds and parts of causes, of the which
Rodulphe entreats, and Aristotle in his Topyckes. But before we speak of
them, it is to be noted, that this word place, is taken four manner of ways.
They are called common places, because they be entreated of, of both parts,
although not in all one cause: as he that is sore spoken against by
witnesses, swadeth that we should not give credit to witnesses. Contrary, he
that is hol^en by them speaks in defense of witnesses, and so of other that
we spoke of before, when we entreated of vnartificial arguments. Like to this
sort be sentences, which we e^aggerate as it were without the cause, but so
that they serve to the cause which we have in hand: as be the
amplificacions of virtues, and the exaggeracions of vices. As when we accuse
any manne that by evil companions he was brought to do also the mischeuouse
deed, A common place shall be, with words to exaggerate how much it
profits to keep goodness, to be in company with good men, and contrary
how great myschyefe the company of evil men does cause.

In the third sense places be called seats of arguments, which the
Rethoricianes do apply to ech^ kinds of causes: As in the kind suasorie,
honest, profitable, pleasant easy, necessary. etc. In demonstratiue kind,
kynred, country, goods of the body and of the mind. In the Judicial kind,
inespecial denial, those that we spoke of even now. The fourth places be
general, which declare what belongs to every thing, and how out of each
of them there be taken arguments, partly necessary, and partlye probable.
These be commen to the Orators with the Logicians, albeit Aristotle has
seperatelye written of them in his Topickes, and in his Rethorickes has not
touched the^, and they profit much both to judgment, and to endightynge, but
the variety of authors has made the handlynge of them sumwhat dark, because
among them selves they can not well agree, neither of the names, neither of the
number, neither of the order.

Examples.
An example is a rehearsal of a thing that is done, and an applyynge of it
unto our cause, either for similitude or dissimilitude, profitable to persuade,
garnyshe, and delyght. Examples, some be taken out of hystories, some of tales,
some of feigned arguments, in comedies, and both sorts be dilated by parable
and comparacion. Comparacion shows it equal, less, or bygger. Parable is a
feet similitude, which shows ye example that is brought, either like, unlike
or contrary. Like as Camillus restored the common wealth of the Romans that
was oppressed by the Frenchmen, and when it was brought into extreme loss, by
their valiantness expelled the Barbariens: So Ualla, when through the
ignorance of ye Barbarians, learning was destroyed, restored it again, as it
were from death into his former brightness. Unlike. As not like thank is done to
Laurence and Camillus, because that the one moved by virtue with the ieopardie
of his life delivered his country from the ungracious, that other styrred up by
desire of fame, or rather with an evil lust to check many, no^ restored
again the latte^t^ng oppressed, but brought it as it were into certain rules.
Contrary, Brutus killed his children going about treason, Manlius punished by
death the valiauntnes of his son. Comparacion shows ye thing yt is brought,
either equal, less, or bigger: Less, as our elders have warred oftentimes,
because their merchants and mariners were evil entreated. What mind ought you
to be in, so many thousand citizens of Rome slain at one message, and one
time? Equal, as in the same Cicero. For it happed unto me to stand for an
office with two gentlemenne, that one very naught, that other very gentle, yet
overcame I Catiline by dignity, and Galba by favor. Bygger: As for Milo,
they say he should not live that confesses he has killed a man, when M.
Horacius was quitte, which killed his own sister.

Parable.
Parable, which some call similitude, some co^paracion, is a comparyng of a
thing yt has no life, or no body to our cause and purpose, for some thing
that is like or unlike. And as example is taken of ye deed of a man, and the
person of an hystorye, or that is fabulous and feigned, so is comparison taken
of things that be done, or that be joined to them by nature, or by chance. As
Attilius retournyng again to his enemies is an example of keeping faith and
promise: But a ship in the which the sails be ^oysed up, or taken down after
the blowyng of the wind, is a parable which reaches a wise man to give place
to time, and apply himself to the world that is present. And like fashion is
of dila^yng a parable, as we have showed in example. For sometime it is noted
in a word as: Do thou not understand that the sails must be turned?
Sometime it is more largelye declared, as in the oracion for Mu^ena. And if
unto men that sail out of the haven. etc. Analogia.

Icon, called of the latins Imago, an Image in English, is much like to a
similitude, and if you declare it is a similitude: as if you say: As an Ass
will not be driven from her meat, no not with a club, until she be full: no
more will a warrior rest from murder vntyil he has filled his mind with it.
This is a similitude: but if you say that a man flewe upon his enemies like a
dragon, or like a lion, it is an Image. Howbeit an Image serves rather to
evidence or gravity, or iocunditie, then to a proof. There is also a general
comparacion, specially in the kind demonstratiue, person with person, and one
thing with an other, for praise or dispraise

Indicacio.
Indicacio, or authority, is the co^paring of an other man's saying or sentence
unto our cause: of the which there be seven principal kinds. The first a common
moral sentence, as a common principle perteyning to manners: as continual
labor overcomes all things, and as be the sentences of Solomon and Cato:
and all moral philosophy is full of such sentences. The second are common
rules, which be called dignities in every science. The.iii. a proverb. The
fourth called Chria, which is a very short exposicion of any deed or word with
the name of the author recited. The fyfte an Enthimeme, which is a sentence of
contraries: as if it be a great praise to please good men, surely to please
evil men it is a great shame. The syx^e called AEnos, that is a saying or a
sentence, taken out of a tale, as be the interpretacions of fables, and their
allegories. The seven is any answer taken out of the mouth of God, or taken
out of the commandment of God.

Expolicion is, when we tarry in one thing, Exergasia.
speaking the same in diverse words and fashions, as though it were not one
matter but diverse. A goodlye example of the most largest expolicion is
rehearsed in Erasmus, which, because it is very profitable, I will wholye
rehearse it. A wise man for the common wealth sake shall eschew no peril: even
for this cause that it happens often, that where he would not dye for the
common wealth, he perysheth yet of necessity with the common wealth. And
because all the commodities we have be taken of our country, there ought no
inco^modit^e to be counted paynfull, taken for our country. They therefore that
fly that peril which must be taken for the common wealth, do folyshely: for
neither can they avoid it, and they be found ungrate to the city. But they
that by their own peril put away the perils of their co^trei, they are to be
counted wise, seeing that both they give to the common wealth that honor yt
they should give, and had rather dye for many, the^ with many. For it is much
against reason that receiving thy natural life by thy country, to deliver it
again to nature when she compels the, and not to give it to thy country
when she desires the. And where you may with hye valiauntnes and honor die
for thy contrei, to have rather like a cowarde to live in shame. And for thy
fryndes and parents, and other acquayntance to put thy self in peril: for
the common wealth in the which both it and that most reverend name of the
country is contained, not to be willing to come in ieopardye. Wherefore as he
is to be dyspised which being upon the sea had rather have him self safe,
then the ship: so is he to be rebuked, which in ieopardye of the commen
wealth, provides more for his own then for ye common wealth. When the ship
has been broken, many have been saved: But after the shypwrake of the country
no man can escape. Which thing me thinks Decius did well perceive, which
reported wholly to have bestowed him self, and for the sauegard of his men of
war to have run among the myddest of his enemies. Wherefore he lost no^ his
life, but let it go: for he redeemed for a thing of very small price a right
dear thing. He gave his life, but he received his contrei. He lost his life,
but he inioyed glory, which written to his great praise, shyneth every day
more and more. Wherefore if we have proved both by reason and by example, that
we be bound to put our self in peril for the common wealth, they are to be
counted wise men, which for the sauegarde of the country avoid no peril. It
would be meet to exercise children in such themes, whereby shall be gotten
both wisdom and eloquence. And here me thinks I may right well end
these Rethoricall precepts, although I be not ignorant that much helps
both to persuasions and copye, the proper handlyng of tales taken out of the
nature of beasts, dreams, feigned narracions, sumwhat like unto the truth, with
allegories much used of divines. But because they require a longer treaty, for
this time I leave them of, adding unto these before written rules of oratory,
a declamacion both profitable and very eloquente, written by Erasmus unto the
most noble Duke of Cleue, as here appears after.

That children ought to be taught and brought up ge^tly in virtue and
learning, and that even forthwyth from their nativity: A declamacion of a
brief theme, by Erasmus of ^o^erodame.
IF thou will harken unto me, or rather to Chrisippus, the sharpeste v^tred of
Philosophers, yt shalt provide yt thine infant and young babe be forthewyth
instructed in good learning, whylest his wit is yet void from cares and vices,
whilst his age is tender and tractable, and his mind flexible and ready to
follow every thing, and also will keep fast good lessons and precepts. For we
remember nothing so well when we be old, as those things yt we learn in
young years. Care not thou for those fools words which charter that this age,
Division of ye confutacio^
partly is not hable enough to receive discipline, and partlye unmeet to abide
the labors of studies. For first, the beginninges of learning, stand specially
by memory, which as I said, in yo^g ones is very holdfast. Secondly because
nature has made us to knowledge the study of yt thing can not be to hasty,
whereof ye author of al thing her self has graffed in us y^ seeds. Beside this
some things be necessary to be known when we be su^what elder, which by a
certain peculier readiness of nature, ye tender age perceives both much more
quickly, and also more esily the^ does ye elder, as ye first beginnings of
letters, ye knowledge of to^ges, tales and fabels of poets. Finallye, why
should ye age he though^ vnmere to lerning, which is apt to learn manners? Or
what other thing should children do rather when they be more able to speak,
seeing needs they must do sumwhat? How much more profit is it ye age to sport
in letters, then in triffes? Thou will say yt it is but of little value yt is
done in those first years. Why is it despised as a small thing, which is
necessary to a very great matter? And why is yt lucre, ^e it never so little,
yet a lucre, despised of purpose? Now if you often put a little to a little,
there rises a great heap. Herewith consider this also, if being an infant he
learn smaller things, he shall learn greter, growing vpwardes in those years,
in which those smaller should have been learned. Finally while he does these
things, at ye least he shall be kept from those fautes, wherwt we se come^ly yt
age to be infected. For nothing does better occupy ye whole mind of man, the^
studies. Uerely this lucre ought not to be set light by. But if we should
grant that by these labors y^ strength of ye body is sumwhat diminished, yet
think I this loss well reco^pensed by winnynge of wit. For the mind by
moderate labors is made more quycke and lustye. And if there be any ieopardy in
this point, it may be avoided by our diligence. You must have for this tender
age a teacher to enter it by fair means, and not discorage it by foul. And
there be also some things both plesau^t to be known, and as it were sibbe to
childre^s wits, which to learn is rather a play the^ a labor. Howbeit
childehod is not so weak which eue^ for this is ye more mete to take pains
and labor, because they fe^e not what labor is. Therefore if thou will
remember how far unworthy he is to be counted a man which is void of learning,
and how flitting the life of man is, how slypper youth is to myschiefe, and
man's age how it desires to ^e occupied, how baren old age is, and further
how few come unto it, thou wylt not suffer thy young babe in the which thou
shalt live still as it were borne again, to let go any part of his time
unoccupied, in the which any thing may be gotten that either may do much
good to all ye whole life afterward, or keep it away from hurtes, and
mischiefs.

The self same matter enlarged by copye.
After the long despayred fruitfulnes of thy wife, I hearsay thou art made a
father, and that with a man child, which shows in it self a marvelous
towardnes, and even to be like the parents: and that if so be we may by such
marks and tokens prouosticate any thing, may seem to promise perfect
virtue. And that therefore thou do entend, to se this child of so great
hope, ass^ne as he sh^lde some what of age to be begone in good letters, and
to be taught in very honest learning, to be instructed and fashioned with the
very wholesome precepts of philosophy. In deed you will be the whole father,
and you will have him your very son, and to look like you, not only in the
fashion of his face, and liniame^tes of his body, but also in the gifts of
his wit. Uerely as I am hertelye glad for the good fortune of mine especial
friend, so I greatly allow your wise entente. This one thing I would warn
you of boldlye in deed, but louinglye, not to suffer after the judgment and
example of the common people, that the first age of your infant should flytte
away without all fruit of good instruccio^, and then at the last to set him
to learn his first letters, when both his age will not so well be handled,
and his wy^^e shall be more ready to evil, and peradventure possessed
already with the fast holdyng briars of vices. Yea rather eue^ now look about
for some man, as of manners pure and vncorrupt, so also well learned: and into
his lap deliver your little child, as it were to a nurse of his tender mind, that
eue^ with his milk he may suck in sweet lerning: and divide the care of thy
little son to his nurses and teacher that they should suckun the little body with
very good juice, and so indue his mind with very wholesome opinions, and very
honest learning. For I think it not convenient that you one of all the best
learned, and also wysest should give ear to those piuyshe women, or unto me^
very like to the^ the beard excepted, which by a cruel pytie, and hateful
love, judge that the children even until they wax springoldes, should be kept
at home kyssyng their mothers, and among the sweet words of their nurses
pastymes, and unchaste tryflynges of servants and maidens. And think that
they ought utterly to be kept away from learning as from venom, saying that
the first age is so rude that it can receive no discipline, and so tender that
it is not mete for the la^ours of studies: and finally that the profit of that
age is so little worth, that neither any cost should be made upon it, neither
yt the weakness of the children should be ^e^ed. While I prove every of these
things false, I pray you a little while take heed, countyng as the truth is,
first that these things be written of him which loves you as well as any man
does, and inespecially of yt thing which so pertains to you, yt none can do
more. For what is more derer to you the^ your son, inespecial having but him
alone, upon who^ we would be glad if we might bestow yea our life, not only our
substance. Wherefore who may not se yt they do leudly and also vntowardli which
in tilling their la^d building their houses, keeping their horse, use ye gretest
diligence they ca^, and take to counsel men yt be wise, and of great
experience: in bringing up and teaching their children, for whose sakes al
other things ar gotten, take so little regard that nether they once council with
their own mind, not seek for the judgments of wise men, but as though there
were a tri^^e in hand, give ear to folyshe women, and to every rascal
wretch, which is no less shame to hear, then if a man taking thought for the
shoe, would set naught by the foot, or with great study would provide that
there should be no faut in the garmente, naught recking for the health of the
body. Good sir, I will not here cause you to tarry with common places, how
much the strength of nature, how much fatherly love, the law of god, men's
constitucions require the parents to owe unto the children, through whom
as much as we may we escape to dye, and be made to live ever. But some think
they have gaylye done the office of a father, when they have only begotten
children, where as this is the least portion of love that the name of a father
requires. What great thought take the mothers comenlye lest the infant
should look a gogle or a squint, lest he should be puff cheked, wrie necked,
croke shuldred, croke legged, splaye footed, and lest that the proporcion of
his body should not be trim in every point: whereunto beside other things,
they be wont to use swadel bonds, and keep in their chekes with little miters.
They have regard also to their milk, their meat, their bathes, and their
mouinges, by which things the phisicions in many books, and inespeciall
Galene has taught that the children get good health of their body: neither
do they differ this diligence unto the seventh or tenth year, but eue^ as soon
as the child comes out of the mothers womb, they take great charge of
this. And they do well, for the infancy not regarded, oftentimes causes men
to have a syckely and sore disseased old age, if they happen to come to it.
Yea moreover or ever the child be born, yet does the mother take great heed:
They eat not of every meat when they be great with child, they take heed
that they move not their body to hurt them: and if there happen any thing to
fall upon their face, by and by they take it away with their hand, and lay it
upon the privy part of their body. It has been proved by many experimentes,
that by this remedy the deformity which would have been on that part of ye
body that is seen, has lain hyd in the secret place. No man calls this to
hasty a care which is used for the worser part of man. Why then is that part
of man, whereby we be properly called men, neglected so many years? Should he
not do all against gods forbod which would trim his cap, lettyng his head be
unkempt, and all scabbed? Yet much more unreasonable is it that we should bestow
just labors upon the mortal body, and to have no regard of the immortal
soul. Further, if a man have at home an horse colte, or a whelpe of a good
kind, will he not straight way begin to fashion him to do sumwhat, and will
do that so much the more gladlye, the readyer the young age is to follow the
teachers mind? We will teach a popiniaye while time is, to speak as a man
does, knowing well that the elder he waxes, the less apt he will be to be
taught, yea the common proverb geuyng warning of this thing: That an old
popiniaye cares not for the rod. And what a thing is it to be diligente in a
bird, and ^^owe in teaching thy son? What do the wytty husbandmen? Do they
not teach even straight way the pla^tes while they be yet tender, to put away
their wild nature by graffynge, and will net tarry till they be waxen bygge
and mighty? And they do not only take heed that the little tree grow not
crooked or have any other fault, but if there be any, they make haste to amend
it, while it will yet bow, and follow the hand of the fashioner. And what
living thing, or what plant will be as the owener or or housebande manne
would have it to serve for, except our dylygence help nature? The sooner it
is done, the better will it come to pass,

Indede to many dumme beasts, nature the mother of all things, has given
more help to do their natural offices, but because the providence of God has
of al creatures unto men only given the strength of reason, she has left the
greatest part to educacion, in so much that one has written very well the
first point, the middle, and the third, that is the chyefe of all man's
felicitye, to be good instruccion, and right bringing up. Which praise
Demosthenes gave to right pronunciacion, and that in deed not falsely, but
right bringing up helps much more to wisdom, then pronunciacion to
eloquence. For diligente and holy bringing up, is the founteyne of al virtue:
As to folly and myschief, the first, second, and third point is vndiligente
and corrupt educacion. This is the thing that is chiefelye left unto us.
That is the cause why unto other beasts nature has given swyftnes, flight,
sharpnes of sight, greatness, and strength of body, scales, flyshes, hears,
horns, nails, venom, whereby they may both defend their health, and provide
for their living, and bring up their young: and brings forth man only
soft, naked, and vnfensed: but instead of all this, has given him a mind
hable to receive all discipline, because in this only are all things, if a
man will exercise it. And every living thing, the less mete it is to
learning, so much the more it has of native prudence. Bees learn not to
make their celles, to gathe^ iu^e, and to make honye. The ^mets are not taught
to gather into their holes in somer, whereby they should live in winter, but all
these things be done by instruccion of nature. But man neither can eat, nor
go, nor speak, except he be taught. Then if the tree bring forth either no
fruit or unsavory, without the diligence of graf^ing, if the dog be unmeet
to hunte, the horse unapt to just, the ox to the plowe, except our
diligence be put to, how wild and unprofitable a creature would man
become, except dilige^tlye, and in dew time he should be fashioned by good
bringing up. I will not here rehearse unto you the example of Lycurgus known
of every man, which bringing out two whelps, one of a gentle kind, but
evil taught, that ran to the mea^e, that other of sluggyshe syres, but
diligently brought up, that lea^te the meat and leapt upon the beast. Nature
is an effectual thing, but educacion more effectual, overcomes it. Men
take heed that they may have a good dog to hunte, to have a good horse to
iournei with, and here they think no diligence to be to hasty, but to have a
son that should be both worship and profit to the parents, upon whom they
might ^aye a good part of the charges of their household, whose love might
noryshe and bear up their unwieldy age, and yt should show him self a trustye
and healpynge son in a law, a good husband to his wife, a valiaunte and
profitable citizen to the common wealth, I say to have such eve, either they
take no care, or else they care to late. For who^ do they plant? for who^ do
they plowe? for who^ do they build? for who^ do they hunt for riches both by
land and by sea? not for their children? But what profit or worship is in
these things, if he yt shall be heir of the^ can not use the^? With
unmeasurable study be possessions gotten, but of the possessor we take no keep
Who prepares an harp for the unskillful of musycke? Who garnysheth a library
for him that can skyl of no books? And are so great riches gotten for him
which can not tell how to use them? If thou gettest these things to him that
is well brought up, thou geueste him instruments of virtue: but if thou get
them for a rude and rusticall wit, what other thing do thou then minister
a matter of wantonness and mischief? What can be thought more folyshe
then this kind of fathers? They provide that the body of the son may be
without fault, and should be made apt to do all manner things comelye, but
the mind, by whose moderacion all honest wyrkes do stand, that they care not
for. It needs me not here to rehearse that riches, dignity, authority, and
also health^^lnes of body, which men so desirouslye wyshe to their children,
nothing does more get them unto man, the^ virtue and learning. They wyshe
unto them a pray, but they will not give the^ a net to take it with all.
That thing which is of al most excellent, thou can not give thy son, but
thou may store him with those good sciences, whereby the best things be
gotten. Now is this a great inconvenience, but it is yet a greater, that they
leave at home their dog well taught, their horse well broken and taught, and
their son enstructed with no learning. They have land well tylled, and their
son shameful rude. They have their house goodly trimmed, and their son
void of all garnyshyng. Further, they which after the peoples estimacion seem
to be meruelouse wise, do prolong the diligence to garnyshe the mind either
into an age unapt to be taught, or else take no care at all for it, and are
meruelouse thoughtfull of external goods of fortune, yea or eue^ he be borne,
whom they have appointed to be lord of the^ all. For what se we not them to
do? When their wife is great with child, then call they for a searcher of
natiuities, the parents are whether it shall be a man or a woman kind. They
search out the destenye. If the astrologer by the birth hour have said that
the child should be fortunate in war: we will, say they, dedicate this
child to the kings court. If he shall promise ecclesiastical dygnitie, we
will, say they, hunte for him by some means, a Byshoprycke, or a fat
Abbotshyp. This child will we make a president or a deane. This seems not to
them to hasty a care when they preuente even the very birth: and seems it to
hastye that is used in fashioning your childrens minds? So quyclye you provide
to have your son a capt^ine or an officer, and therewyth will thou not
provide that he may be a profitable captayn or officer of the common wealth?
Before the time come you go about this, to have your son a bishop, or an
abbot, and wylt thou not fashion him to this well, to bear the office of a
bishop, or an abbot? Thou se^^este him to a chariot, and show him not the
manner to guide it. Thou put him to the ster^e, and passest not that he
should learn those things that becomes a shypmaster to know. Finally in all
thy possessions thou regardest nothing less then that, that is most precious,
and for whose sake al other things be gotten. Thy corn fields be goodly, thy
houses be fair, thy vessel is bright, thy garments, and al thy household
stuff, thy horses be well kept, thy servants well taught, only thy sons wit
is foul, filthy and all sluttishe. Thou have perchance bought by the dru^me a
bond slave, vile, and barbarous, if he be rude and ignorant, you markest to
what use he is good, and trimly thou bryngest him up to some craft, either of
the kytchen, physic, husbandrye, or stewardshyp: only thy son thou se^^est
light by, as an i^le thing. They will say: He shall have enough to live on, but
he shall not have to live well on. Commonly the rycher that men be, the less
they care for the bryngyng up of their children. What need is it, say they, of
any learning, they shall have inoughe? Yea the more need have they of the
help of philosophy and learning. The greater the ship is, and the more
marchandyse it carries about, the more need it has of a conning ship
master. How greatly do Princes go about this, to leave unto their sons as
large a dominion as they ca^, and yet do none care less that they should be
brought up in those good ways, without the which, principality can not well
be ordered. How much more does he give, that gives us to live well, then to
live? Uerye little do children owe unto their fathers of wh^me they be no more
but begotten, and not also brought up to live verteouslye.

The saying of Alexander is much spoken of: except I were Alexander, I would
wish to be Diogenes. But very worthily does Plutarch rebuke it, because that
so much the more he should have wyshed to have had Diogenes philosophye, how
much the greater his dominion was. But much more shameful is their sluggardy,
which not only bring not up their children aright, but also corrupt them to
wickedness. When Crates the Thebane did perceive this abhominacion, not
without a cause he would go in to ye highest place of the city, and there cry
out as loud as he could, and cast them in the teeth with their madness in
this wise. You wretches what madness drives you? Take you such thought to
get money and possessions, and take you ^o care for your children for whom
you get these things? As they be scante half mothers which only bring
forth, and not up their children, so be they scante half fathers, whith when
they provide necessaries for their chyldrens bodies, eue^ so much that they may
riot wythall, provide not that their minds may be garnyshed with honest
disciplines. Trees per adventure will grow though either baren, or with wild
fruit: horses are foled, though perchance they be good for nothing: but men
(trust me) be not borne, but fashioned. Men in old time which by no laws,
nor good order led their lives in woods, in wa^derynge lusts of body, were
rather wild beasts then men. Reason makes a man: that has no place where
all things are governed after affeccion. If shape and fashion should make a
man, Images also should be counted among men. Elegantly said Aristippus when a
certain rich man a^ed him what profit learning should bring to a young man: and
it be no more but this quod he, yt in the playing place one stone sytte not
upon an other. Uery properly another Philosopher Diogenes I trow, bearing in
the myd day a candle in his hand, walked about the market place that was full
of men: being axed what thing he sought: I seek quod he, a man. He knew
that there was a great company, but of beasts, and not men. The same man on a
day, when standing on an hye place he had called a great ^ort together, and
said nothing else but come hither men, come hither men. Some half angrye
cried again: we are here men, say what thou have. The^ quod he: I would have
men come hither and not you which are nothing less then men, and therwyth
drove them away with his staff. Surely it is very true, that a man not
instructed with Phylosophye nor other good sciences, is a creature somewhat
worse then brute beasts. For beasts follow only the affectes of nature, a man except he be fashioned wych learning, and precepts of philosophy, is
^awght into affeccions more the^ beastlike. For there is no beast more wild,
or more hurtefull then a man, whom ambicion dryuethe, desire, anger, envy,
riot, and lust. Therefore he that provides not that his son may by and by be
instructed in the best learning, neither is he a man, nor the son of a
man. Were it not an abominable sight that the mind of a man should be in a
beasts body? As we have read that ^i^^es when she had enchau^ted men with her
wytchcraft, did turn them into Lions, bears, and swyne, so that yet there
should be still in them the mind of a man, which thing Apuleus wrote to have
happened to him self, and Austin also has believed that men have been turned
into wolves. Who could abide to be called the father of such a monster. But it
is a more merueylous monster that a beasts mind should be in a man's body,
and yet do very many please themselves in such children, and both the fathers
seem, and the common people think such to be very wise. It is said that
bears cast out a lump of flesh without any fashion, which with long
lyckyng, they form and bring into a fashyon, but there is no bears young one
so evil favored as a man is, borne of a rude mind.

Except with much study you form and fashion this, thou shall be a father of a
monster and not of a man. If thy son be borne with a copped head or crocke
shuldred, or splay footed, or with six fingers in one hand, how loathe
would thou be for it, how art thou ashamed to be called the father not of a
man, but of a monster: and art thou not ashamed of so moustruous a mind? How
discoraged be the fathers in their hertes if their wife bring forth a
natural, and an infant of a brute mind? For they think they have begotten
not a man, but a monster, and except fear of the law did let them, they
would kill that that is borne. Thou blameste nature which has denied the mind
of a man to thy child, and thou causest by thine own negligence, that thy
son should be without the mind of a man. But thou will say: Better it is
to be of a brutishe rather the^ of an ungracious mind. Nay better it is to be
a swyne, the^ an unlearned and evil man. Nature, when she gives the a son,
she gives nothing else, the^ a rude lump of flesh. It is thy part to
fashion after ye best manner, that matter that will obey and follow in every
point. If thou wylt slack to do it, thou have a beast: if thou take heed thou
have, as I might say, a God. Srayght way as soon as thy infa^te is borne, it
is apt to be taught those things which properly belong to a man. Therefore
after the saying of Uyrgyll, bestow diligente labor upon him, even from his
tender age. Handle the wax straight way while it is very soft, fashion this
claie while it is moist, season this earthen vessel with very good liquour;
while it is new, dye your wolle while it comes white from the fuller, and
is not defiled with any spots. Antisthenes did very merilye show the same,
which when he had taken a certain man's son to be taught, and was axed of his
father what things he had need of: a new book quod he, a new pensyle, and
a new table. Uerelye the philosopher required a rude and emptye mind. Thou
can not have a rude lump, but and if thou fashyon it not like a man, of it
self it will wax naught, into monstrous forms of wild ^eastes. Seeing thou
do owe this service to God and nature, although there were no hope that thou
should have any profit thereby, count in thy mind, how great comfort, how
great profit, how much worship the children that be well brought up bring
to their fathers. Children evil brought up, bring shame to their pare^tes
Again into what shames and great sorrows they cast their parents that be
evil brought up. There is no need to bring here unto the examples out of old
chronicles: do no more but remember in thy mind the housholdes of thine own
city, how many examples shall you have in eueri place? I know thou do often
hear such words. O happy man that I were, if my children were buried. O
fortunate mother, if I had never brought forth child. It is a waygh^y
matter to bring up children well, I grant: but no man is borne to him self,
no man borne to be idle. Thou would needs be a father, you must be a good
father, you haste gotten the^ to the common wealth, not to thy self only, or to
speak more like a christen man, you have begotten the^ to god, not to thy
self. Paul writes that so in deed women be saved, if they bring forth
children, and so bring the^ up that they continue in ye study of virtue. God
will straightly charge the parents with the childre^s fautes. Therefore except yt
even forthwith thou bring up honestly yt, that is borne, first you do thy
self wrong, which through thy negligence, gettest yt to thy self, then the
which no enemy could wyshe to an other, either more grievous or paynful.
Dionisius did effeminat with delyghtes of the court Dions young son yt was run
away from him: he knew yt this should be more careful to ye father, then if he
had killed him with a sword. A litel while after when the young manne was forced
of his father that was come to him, to return again to his old virtue, he
brake his neck out of a garret. In deed a certain wise hebricio^ wrote very
wisely. A wise child makes the father glad, and a folish son is sorrow to ye
mother. But a wise child not only is pleasure to his father, but also worship
and succoure, and finallye his fathers life. Contrary a folyshe and leude
child, not only brings heaviness to his parents, but also shame and
pouertye, and old before the time: and at last causes death to them, of whom
he had the beginning of life. What need me to rehearse up? daily are in our
eyes the examples of citizens, whom the evil manners of their children have
brought to beggarye, whom either the son being hanged, or their daughter an
whore of the stews, have tormented with intolerable shame and vylany. I know
great men, which of many children have scante one left alive. One consumed
with the abominable leprie, called by diminucion ye french pockes, bears his
death about with him: a another has burste by drinking for the best game,
an other going a whorehuntynge in the night with a visar, was pitifullye
killed. What was the cause? Because their parents thinking it enough to have
begotten them, and enryched them, took no heed of their bringing up. They
shall dye by the law, which lay away their children, and cast them into some
wood to be devoured of wild beasts. But there is no kind of putting them
away more cruel, then to give up that to beastlye affeccions, which nature
has given to be fashioned by very good ways. If there were any witch could with
evil crafts, and would go about to turn thy son into a swyne or a wolf,
would thou not think that there were no punyshemente to sore for her
myscheuouse deed? But that which thou abhorrest in her, thou of purpose do
it thy self. How huge a beast is lechery? how ravenous and insaciable is
^yot? how wild a beast is dronken ship? how hurtful a thing is anger? how
horrible is ambicion? To these beasts does he set over his son, whosoever
from his tender youth does not accustume him to love that, that is honest: to
abhor sin: yea rather not only he casts him to wyld beasts, which the
most cruel casters away are wont to do, but also which is more greuouse, he
norisheth this great and perilous beast, even to his own destruction. It is
a kind of men most to be abhorred, which hurts the body of infantes with
bewitchyng: and what shall we say of those parents which through their
negligence and evil educacion be witch the mind? They are called murderers
that kill their children being new borne, and yet kill but the body: ^owe
great wyckednes is it to kill the mind? For what other thing is the death of
the soul, then folly and wickedness. And he does also no less wrong to his
country, to whom as much as lies in him, he gives a pestilente citize^. He is
naught to godwards, of whom he has received a child for this purpose, to
bring him up to virtue. Hereby you may se, how great and manifold mischiefs
they commit which regard not the bringing up of tender age. But as I
touched a little before, they sin more greuouslie then do these, which not
only do not fashion them to honestye, but also season the tender and soft
vessel of the infant to myschiefe and wickedness, and teaches him vice
before he know what vice is. How should he be a modeste man and dyspyser of
pride, that creeps in purple? He can not yet sound his first letters, and
yet he now knows what crimosine and purple sylke means, he knows what a
mullet is, and o^ her dayntie fyshes, and disdainfullye with a proud look
casts away common dyshes. How can he be shamefast when he is grown up, which
being a litel infa^t was begone to be fashioned to lecherye? How shall he wax
liberal when he is old, which being so litel has learned to meruell at money
and gold? If there be any kind of garment lately found out, as daili ye ta^lers
craft, as in time paste did Africa, brings forth some new mo^ster, yt we put
upon our infa^t. He is taught to stand in his own co^ceite: and if it be taken
a way, he angerly axeth for it again. How shall he being old hate dru^kennes,
which when he is an infa^t is taught to love wine? They teach them by little and
little such filthy words which are scant to be suffered, as says Quintilian,
of the delicious Alexandrians. And if the child speak any such after them,
they kiss him for his labor. I warant you they knew their young, growing
nothing out of kind, when their own life is nothing else then an example of
naughtynes. Being an infant, he learneth the unchaste flattering words of
nurses, and as we say, he is fashioned with the hand to wanton touching. He
sees his father well whetteled with drink, and hears him babbling out
that, that should be kept in. He sytteth at great, and not very honest
feasts, he hears the house full of iesters, harpes, mynstrels and daunsers.
To these manners the child is so accustumed, that custume goes into nature.
The^ be na^ions that fashion their children to fiersenesse of war while they
be yet read from the mother. They learn to look fierslie, the learn to love
the swearde, and to give a strype. From such beginninges they are delivered to
the master: and do we merueyle if we find them unapt to learn virtue, which
have drunk in vices, even with the milk? But I hear some men defending their
folly thus, and sat that by this pleasure which is taken of the wanto^nes of
infantes, the tediousnes of nou^syng is reco^pe^sed. What is this? Should it be
to the very father more pleasant if the child follow an evil deed, or
express a leude word, the^ if with his little stutryng tongue, he spoke a good
sentence, or follow any deed that is well done? Nature specially has given to
the first age an easines to follow and do after, but yet this following is some
what more prove to naughtynesse then to goodness. Is vice more plesaunte to a
good man then virtue, specially in his children? If any fylthe fall upon the
young chyldes skyn, thou put it away, and do thou infect the mind with so
foul spots? Nothing stycketh faster then that that is learned in young
minds. I pray you what motherlye hertes have those women, which dandle in
their lap their children till they be almost seven years old, and in manner make
the^ fools? If they be so much disposed to play why do they not rather get
apes, and little puppets to play wythall? O say they: they be but children.
They be in deed: but it ca^ scant be told how much those first beginninges
of our young age do help us to guide all our life after, and how hard and
intractable a wanton and dissolute bryngyng up, makes the child to the
teacher, calling the same gentleness, when in deed it is a marring. Might not
an accion of evil handlyng children marvelous iustli be laid against such
mothers? for it is plainly a kind of witchcraft and of murder. They be
punyshed by the law, y^ bewitche their children, or hurt their weak bodies
with poisons: what do they deserve which corrupt ye chief part of the infa^t
with most ungracious venom? It is a lighter matter to kyl the body then the
mind? If a child should be brought up among the gogle eied stutters, or
haltyng, the body would be hurt with infeccio^: but in deed fautes of the mind
cr^pe upon us more privily, and also more quickly, and settel deper. The
^postle Paul worthily gave this honor unto the verse of Mena^der, y^ he would
recite it in his epistels: Evil comunicacio^, corrupts good manners: but this
is never truer the^ in infantes. Aristotle when he was axed of a certain man by
what means he might bring to pas, to have a goodly horse: If he be brought
up quod he* among horses of good kind. And yt if neither love nor reason can
teach us how great care we ought to take for ye first years of our children,
at ye least ways let us take example of brute beasts. For it ought not to
grieve us to learn of the^ a thing yt shall be so profitable, of whom
ma^kinde now long ago has learned so many fruitful things: seuce a beast called
Hippopotamus has showed ye cutting of veins, and a bird of egypt called Ibis
has showed ye use of a clister, which ye phisicio^s greatly allow. The herb
called dictamum which is good to draw out arrows, we have known it by
hearts. They also have taught us that the eatinge of crabs is a remedy against
the poison of spyders. And also we have learned by the teaching of lysa^des,
that dictamum does confort us against the biting of serpents. For this kind
of beasts fight naturally against serpents, of whom when they be hurt, they
have been espied to fetch their remedy of that herb. Swallows have showed us
salandine, and have given the name unto the herb. The wesyll has showed us
that rewe is good in medicines. The Storke has showed us the herb organye:
and the wild bores have declared yt Iuy helps sickenesses. Serpents have
showed that fenel is good for the eye sight. That vomit of the stomach is
stopped by lettise, the Dragon money sheth us. And that man's donge helps
against poison, the Panthers have taught us, and many mo remedies we have
learned of Brute beasts: yea and craf^es also that be very profitable for
man's life. Swine have showed us the manner to plow the land, and the Swalowe
to te^per mud walls. To be short, there is in manner nothing profitable for the
life of man, but y^ nature has showed us an example in brute beasts, that
they that have not learned philosophy and other sciences, may be warned at the
least way by them what they should do. ^o we not se how that every beast,
not only does beget young, but also fashion them to do their natural office?
The bird is borne to fly. Do thou not se how he is taught thereunto and
fashioned by his da^me? We see at home how the cattes go before their
kytlynges, and exercise them to catch myse and birds, because they must live
by them. They show them the pray while it is yet alive, and teach them to
catch it by leapyng, and at last to eat them. What do hearts? Do they not
forth with exercise their ^awnes to swyftnes, and teach the^ how to run?
they bring them to hye stiepe down places, and show them how to leap,
because by these means they be sure against the trains of the hunters. There
is put in writing as it were a certain rule of techyng elepha^tes and dolphins
in brynginge up their young. In Nyghtingales, we perceive the offices of the
techer and learner, how the elder goth before, calls back, and corrects,
and how the younger follows and obeys. And as the dog is borne to huntyng,
the bird is flyinge, the horse to runnyng, the ox to plowynge, so man is
borne to philosophy and honest doings: and as every living thing lerneth very
easly that, to the which he is borne, so man with very little pain perceives
the lernyng of virtue and honestye, to the which nature has graffed certain
vehemente seeds and principles: so that to the readiness of nature, is joined
the diligence of the teacher. What is a greater inconvenience then beasts that
be without reason to know and remember their duetye toward their young: Man
which is divided from brute beasts by prerogative of reason, not to know what
he owes to nature, what to virtue, and what to God? And yet no kind of brute
beasts looks for any reward of their young for their noursynge and
teaching, except we lust to ^eleue that the Storkes noryshe again their
da^mes for worn with age, and bear them upon their backs. But among men,
because no continuance of time takes away the thank of natural love: what
comfort, what worship, what succoure does he prepare for him self, that sees
his child to be well brought up? Nature has given into thy hands a new
falowed field, nothing in it in deed, but of a fruitful ground: and thou
through negligence suffer it to he over grown with briars and thorns,
which afterward can not be pulled up with any diligence. In a little grain,
how great a tree is hyd, what fruit will it give if it spring out.

All this profit is l^st except thou cast seed into the forowe, except thou
noryshe with thy labor this tender plant as it grows, and as it were make it
tame by graffyng. Thou awakest in tamyng thy pla^t, and slepeste thou in thy
son? All the sta^e of man's felicity stands specially in three points:
nature, good orderyng, and exercise. I call nature an aptnes to be taught, and a
readiness that is graffed within us to honestye. Good ordering or teaching, I
call doctrine, which stondeth in monicions and precepts. I call exercise the
use of that perfitenes which nature has graffed in us, and that reason has
furthered. Nature requires good order and fashionynge: exercise, except it be
governed by reason, is in danger to many perils and erroures. They be
greatly therefore deceived, which think it sufficient to be borne, and no
less do they err which believe that wisdom is got by handelynge matters and
great affairs without the precepts of philosophye. Tell me I pray you, when
shall he be a good runner which runs lustelye in deed, but either runs
in the dark, or knows not the way? When shall he be a good sword player,
which shakes his sword up and down wynkyng? Precepts of philosophye be as
it were the eyes of the mind, and in manner give light before us that you may
see what is needful to be done and what not. Long experience of diverse
things profit much in deed, I confess, but to a wise man that is diligently
instructed in precepts of well doing. Count what they have done, and what
they have suffered all their life, which have gotten them by experience of
things a sely small prudence and think whether you would wyshe so great
myschiues to thy son. Moreover philosophye teaches more in one year, then
does any experience in thyrty, and it teaches safely, when by experience mo
men wax miserable then prudent, in so much that the old fathers not without a
cause said: a man to make a peril or be in ieopardy, which assayed a thing by
experience. Go to, if a man would have his son well seen in physycke, whether
would he rather he should read the books of phisicions or learn by
experience what thing would hurt by poysonyng, or help by a remedy. How
unhappy prudence is it, when the shypman has learned the art of saylynge by
often shypwrackes, when the prince by continual batayles and tumultes, and by
common myschieues has learned to bear his office? This is the prudence of
fools, and that is bought to dearlye, that men should be wise after they be
strycken with myschief. He learneth very costely, which by wanderyng lerneth
not to wander. Philippus wyselye learned his son Alexander to show him self
glad to learn of Aristotle: and to learn philosophy perfectlye of him to the
intent he should not do that he should repent him of. And yet was Phylyp
co^mend^d for his singular towardnes of wit. What think ye then is to de
looked for of the common sort. But the manner of teachinge does briefly show
what we should follow, what we should avoid: neither does it after we have
taken hurt monyshe us, this came evil to pass, hereafter take heed: but or
ever ye take the matter in hand, it cries: If thou do this, thou shall get
unto the evil name and myschiefe. Let us knytte therefore this threfolde cord,
that both good teaching lead nature, and exercise make perfect good teaching.
Moreover in other beasts we do perceive that every one does sonest learn that
that is most properly belonging to his nature, and which is first to the
sauegarde of his health: and that stands in those things whith bring
either pain or destruccio^. Not only living things but plants also have this
sense. For we se that trees also in that part where the sea does savor, or
the northen wind blow, to shrynke in their branches and boughs: and where
the wether is more gentle, there to spread them farther out.

And what is that that properly be longs unto man? Uerelye to live according
to reason, and for that is called a reasonable creature, and divided from those
that ca^ not speak And what is most destruccio^ to man? Folyshenes. He will
therefore be taught nothing sooner then virtue, and abhor from nothing sooner
then folyshnesse, if so be the diligence of the parents will incontinent set a
work the nature while it is emty. But we here marvelous complantes of the
common people, how ready the nature of children is to fall to vice, and how
hard it is to draw them to the love of honesty. They accuse nature
wrongfullye. The greatest part of this evil is through our own fault,
which mar the wits with vices, before we teach them virtues. And it is no
marvel if we have them not very apt to learn honestye, seeing they are now
already taught to myschiefe. And who is ignorant, that the labor to
vnteache, is both harder, and also goth before teaching. Also the common sort
of men do amysse in this point three manner of ways: either because they
utterly neglecte the bringing up of children, or because they begin to
fashion their minds to knoweledge to late, or because they put them to those
men of whom they may learn that that must be unlearned again. We have
showed those first manner of men vnworthi to be called fathers, and that they
very little differ from such as ser^e their infantes out abroad to be
destroyed, and that they ought worthily to be punyshed by the law, which does
prescribe this also diligently by what means children should be brought up,
and afterward youth. The second sort be very many, with whom now I
specially entend to st^iue. The third does amysse two ways, partly through
ignorance, partly through retchlesnes. And sith it is a rare thing and a
shame to be ignoraunte to whom thou should put out thy horse, or thy
ground to be kept, how much more shameful is it not to know whom thou
shuldeste put thy child in trust wythal, being the dearest part of thy
possessions? There thou beginnest to learn that, that thou can not skyll well
of thy self, thou axest counsel of the best seen: here thou thynkeste it
makes no matter to whom thou commit^est thy son. Thou assignest to thy
servants, eueri man his office that is metest for him. Thou tryest whom thou
may make ouersear of thy husbandry, whom to appoint to the kitchen, and
who should ouersee thy household. And if there be any good for nothing, a
slug, a dulhead, a fool, a waster, to him we commit our child to be taught:
and that thing which requires the cunningest man of all, is put to ye worst
of our servants. What is untoward, if here men have not an untoward mind?
There be some which for their covetous mind be a feared to hyre a good master,
and give more to an horskeper then a teacher of the child. And yet for all that
they spare no costly feasts, night and day they play at dice, and bestow
much upon hounds and fools. In this thing only they be sparers and
nigardes, for whose cause spa^inge in other things might be excused. I would
there were fewer which bestow more upon a rotten whore, then upon bringyng up of
their child. Nothing says the Satir writer stands the father in less cost
then the son. Peradventure it will not be much amiss here to speak of ye
day diet, which long ago was much spoken of in ye name of Crates. They report
it after this fashion. Allow to thy coke x. pound, to thy physician a grote, to
thy flatterer.v. tale^ts, to thy cou^seller smoke, to thy harlot a talent, to
thy philosopher.iii. halfpe^s. What lacks to this preposterous count, but to
put to it yt the teacher have iii. farthings: Howbeit I think yt the master is
meant under ye name of philosopher. When one that was rich in money, but ned^
of wit axed Aristippus wharwages he would axe for teching his son, and he
answered.v. C. grotes. You a^e quod he^o great a su^me: for with this much money
a man may bye a seruaunce. Then the philosopher very properly again: but now,
quod he, for one thou shall have two: a son mete to do the service, and a
philosopher to teach thy son. Further if a man should be axed, whether he
would have his only son dead to win an hundred horses, if he had any ^rum^e
of wisdom, he would answer (I think:) in no wise. Whi geuest thou then more
for ^hi horse? why is he more diligently taken head to then thy son? why
geuest thou more for a fool, then for the bringyng up of thy child? Be frugall
and sparynge in other things, in this point to be thryfty, is no sparynge but
a madness. There be other again that take good heed in chosyng a master, but
that is at the desire of their friends. They let pass a mere and cunninge
man to reach children, and take one that can no skyll, for none other cause,
but that he is set forwards at the desires of their friends. Thou mad man,
what meanest thou? In saylynge thou regardest not the affeccion of the^ yt
speak good words for a man, but thou secteste him to the helm, which can
best skyll to govern the ship: in the son, when not only he himself is in
ieopardy, but the father and mother and all the household, yea and the common
wealth it self, will thou no^ use like judgment? Thy horse is sick, whether
will thou send for a ^eche at the good word of thy friend, or for his cu^nyng
in lechcraft. What? Is thy son of less price unto the then thy horse? Yea
set thou less by thy self then by thy horse? This being a foul thing in
mean citizens, how much more shameful is it in great men? At one supper a
dashynge against the mischeuous rock of dice, and so having shypwrake, they
lose two hundred pound, and yet they say they be a^ cost, i^ upon their son
they bestow above xx. pound. No man can give nature, either to himself, or
to other: howbeit in this point also the diligence of the pare^tes helps
much. The first point is, that a man chose to him self a wife that is good,
come of a good kynred, and well brought up, also of an healthful body. For
seeing the kynred of the body and mind is very stray^lye knytte, it can not be
but that the one thing either must be ^o^^en or h^rte of the other. The next
is, that when the husband^ does his duetye to get children, ^e do it neither
being moved with anger, nor yet ^runk^n, for these aff^c^^^ns go into the
child by a secret (...). A ce^^en philosopher seemed to have ma^ked that
thing proper^y, w^ych seeing a young man b^^a^^n^e him self not very
^oderlie, it is meruell quod he, but if thy father ^egat the when he was
dr^nke. Uerily I think this also makes greatli to the matter, if the mother
at all times, but specially at ye time of concepcion and birth, have her mind
free from all cr^mes, and be of a good conscience. For there can be nothing
either more quiet or more merye then such a mind. The third point is yt the
mother noryshe with her own breasts her infa^t, or if there hap any necessity
that it may not so be, let be chose^ a nurse of a wholesome body, of pure
milk, go^d conditions, nether drunke^, nor brauler, nor lecherous. For the
vices that be taken even in ye very beginninges of life, both of the body and
of the mind, abide fast until we be old. Some men also write yt it skilleth
much who be his sucking fellows and who be his playfelowes. Fourthlye that in
due season he be set to a chosen scholemaster allowed by all men's witness, and
many ways tried. You must be dilligent in chosyng, and after go through with
it. Homer disaloweth where many bear rule: and after the old proverb of the
greeks. The multitude of captains did lose Caria. And the often chaunginge of
phisicions has destroyed many. There is nothing more unprofitable, then
often to change ye master. For by that means the web of Penelopes is woue^
and vnwouen. But I have known children, which before they were.xii. year old,
had more the^.xii. masters, and that through the rechelesnesse of their
pare^tes. And yet after this is done must the pare^tes be dilligent. They shall
take heed both to the master and to the son, neither shall they so cast
away al care from the^ as they are wont to lay all the charge of the daughter
upon the spouse, but the father shall oftentyme look upon them, and mark
whether he profit, remembrynge those things which the old men spoke both
sage^y and wittely, that the fore^ead is set before the hinder part of the
head: and that nothing sooner fatteth the horse then the masters eye, nor that
no dunge makes the ground more fruitful then the masters footyng. I speak of
young one. For as for the elders it is meet sometime that they be sent far
out of our sight, which thing as it were a graffing, is inespecially wont to
^ame yongemens wits. Emonge the excellent virtues of Paulus Emilius, this
also is praised, that as often as he might for his business in the common wealth
he would be at the exercises of his sons. And Pliny the nepheu was content
now and then ^o go into the schole for his friends sons sake, whom he had
taken upon him to bring up in good learning. Furthermore, that that we have
spoken of nature is not to be understand one ways. For there is a nature of a
common kind, as the nature of a man is to use reason. But there is a nature
peculier, either to him or him, that properly belongs either to this man or
that, as if a man would say some men to be borne to disciplines mathematical
some to divinity, some to rethorike some to poetry, and some to war. So
myghtely disposed they be and pulled to these studies, that by no means they
can be discoraged from them, or so greatly they abhor them, that they will
sooner go into the fire, then apply their mind to a science that they hate. I
knew one familierlye which was very well seen both in greek and latin, and
well learned in all liberal sciences, when an archbishop by w^^ he was found,
had send hither by his letters, that he should begin to hear the readers of
the law against his nature. After he had co^playned of this to me (for we lay
both together) I exhorted him to be ruled by his patron, saying that it would
wexe more easy, that at the beginning was hard, and that at the least way he
should give some part of his time to that study. After he had brought out
certain places wonderful folyshe, which yet those professors half gods did
teach their hearers with great authority, I answered, he should set light by
them, and take out that which they taught well: and after I had preased upon
him with many arguments, I am quod he so minded, that as often as I turn my
self to these studies, me thinks a sword runs through my heart. Men
that be thus naturallye borne, I think they be not to be compelled against
their nature, lest after the common saying we should lead an Ox to
wreastlynge, or an Ass to the harp. Peradventure of this inclinacion you may
perceive certain marks in little ons. There be that can pronosticate such
things by the hour of his birthe, to whose judgment how much ought to be
given, I leave i^ to every man's e^^macion. It molde yet much ^rofite to have
espied the same as soon as can be, because we learn those things most
easelie, to the which nature has made ^s. I think it not a very vain thing
to conjecture by ye figure of the f^ce and the behaueour of the rest of the
body, what disposicion a man is of. Certes Aristotle so great a philosopher
v^^chsaued to put out a book of phisiognomye very cunning and well
labored. As saylyng is more pleasant when we have both the wynd and the
tide, so be we sooner taught those things to the which we be inclined by redines
of wit. Uirgyll has showed marks whereby a man may know an ox good for y^
plough, or a cow meet for generation and increase of cattle. Best is y^ ox
that looks grimly. He techeth by what tokens you may epsy a young colte mete
for ^usting. Sraight way the colt of a l^sty courage tra^plethgaylie in the
fields. etc. for you know the verses. They are deceived which believe that
nature has given unto man no marks, whereby his disposicio^ may be
gathered, and they do amiss, that do not mark them that be given. Albeit in
my judgment there is scante any discipline, but that the wit of man is apt
to learn it, if we continue in precepts and exercise. For what may not a man
learn, when an Eliphant may be taught to walk upon a cord, a bear to
daunse, and an ass to play the fool. As nature therefore is in no man's
own hand, so we have taught wherein by some means we ma^e help nature. But
good ordering and exercise is altogether of our own wit and diligence. How
much the way to teach does help, this specially declares, that we se daily,
burdens to be lift up by engi^s and art, which otherwise could be moved by
no strength. And how greatly exercise avails that notable saying of the old
wise man, inespeciallye proves, that he ascribes all things to diligence and
study. But labor, say they, is not meet for a tender age, and what readiness
to learn can be in children which yet scarce know that they are men: I will
answer to both these things in few words. How agrees it that that age
should be counted unmeet for learning, which is now apt to learn good
manners? But as there be rudimentes of virtue, so be there also of scicences.
Philosophy has his infancy, his youth, and ripe age. An horsecolt, which
forthwyth shows his gentle kind, is not straight way forced with the bytte to
carry on his back an armed manne, but with easy exercises he learneth the
fashion of war. The calfe that is appointed to the plowghe, is not straight
ways laden with werye yockes, nor prycked with sharp gods, but as Uirgyl
has elegantlye taught: First they knyt about his neck circles made of tender
twigs, and after when his free neck has been accustumed to do service,
they make round hoopes mete, and when they be wrythe^, join a pair of meet
ons together, and so cause the young heyfe^s to gooe forwards, and often times
they make them to draw an empty cart, and slightly go away, but afterward
they set on a great heavy a^el^ree of beeche, and make them to draw a great
plough beam of yro^. Plowmen can skyll how to handell oxen in youth, and
attemper their exercises after their strength much more diligently ought this
to be done in bringing up our children. Furthermore the providence of nature
has given unto li^le ons a certain mere ability. An infant is not yet mee^e
to whom thou should read ye offices of Cicero, or the Ethickes of
Aristotle, or the moral books of Seneca or Plutarche, or the epistels of Paul,
I confess, but yet if he do any thing uncomely at the table, he is monyshed,
and when he is monyshed, he fashioneth him self to do as he is taught. He is
brought into the temple, he lerneth to bow his kne, to hold his hands
manerly, to put of his cap, and to fashion all the behaueour of his body to
worship God, he is commanded to hold his peace when mysteries be in doing,
and to turn his eyes to the alter. These rudimentes of modestye and virtue the
child lerneth before he can speak, which because they stick fast until he be
elder, they profit somewhat to true religion. There is no difference to a child
when he is first borne, between his pare^tes and strangers. A non after ^e
learneth to know his mother, and after his father. He learneth by little and
little to reverence the^, he learneth to obey them, and to love the^. He
vnlerneth to be angrye, to be aue^ged, and when he is bidde^ kiss the^ that he
is a^gry withal, he does it, and vnlerneth to babble out of measure. He lerneth
to rise up, and give reverence to an old man, and to put of his cap at ye image
of the crucifix. They that think yt these little rudime^tes help nothing to
virtue, in my mind be greatly deceived. A certain young man when he was rebuked
of Plato because he had played at dice complained yt he was so bitterly
chidde^* for so little harm. The^ quod Plato, although it be but small hurt to
play at dice, yet is it great hurt to use it. As it is therefore a great evil
to accustume thy self to evil, so to use thy self to small good things is a
great good. And that tender age is so much the more apt to learn these
things, because of it self it is plyaunt unto all fashions, because it is not
yet occupied with vice, and is glad to follow, if you show it to do any
thing. And as co^monlye it accustumeth it self to vice, or ever it understand
what vice is, so with like easynes may it be accustumed to virtue. And it is
best to use best things even at the first. That fashion will endure long, to
the which you make the empty and tender mind. Horace wrote that if you thruste
out nature with a forke, yet will it still come again. He wrote it and that
very truly, but he wrote it of an old tree. Therefore the wise husband man will
straight way fashion the plant after that manner which he will have tarry for
ever when it is a tree. It will soon turn in to nature, that you power in
first of all. Claye if it be to moist will not keep the fashion that is
prynted in it: the wax may be so soft that nothing can be made of it. But
scarce is there any age so tender that is not able to receive learning. No age
says Seneca, is to late to learn: whether that be true or no I wot not,
surely elderly age is very hard to learn some things. This is doutles, that
no age is so young but it is apt to be taught, inespecially those things unto
the which nature has made us, for as I said: for this purpose she has given
a certain peculier desire of following, that what so ever they have herd or
seen, they desire to do the like, and rejoice when they think they can do any
thing: a man would say they were apes. And of this ryseth the first conjecture
of their wit and aptnes to be taught. Therefore as soon as the man child is
borne, anon be is apt to learn manners. After when he has begone to speak, he
is mete to be taught letters. Of what thing regard is first to be had, a
readiness by and by is given to learn it. For learning although it have infinite
commodities, yet except it wait upon virtue, it brings more harm then
good. Worth^lye was refused of wise men their sentence, which thought that
children under seven year old should not be set to lernyng: and of this
saying many believed Hesiodus to be the author, albeit Aristophanes the
gramarian said, that those moral precepts in the which work it was written,
were not made by Hesiodus Yet needs must he be some excellent writer, which put
forth such a book that even learned men thought it to be of Hesiodus doing
But in case it were Hesiodus, with out doubt yet no man's authority ought to
be of such force unto us, that we should not follow the better if it be
showed us. Howebeit who soever were of this mind, they meant not this, that all
this time until seven years should be quite void of teaching, but that
before that time children should not be troubled with the labor of studies,
in the which certain tediousnes must be devoured, as of cannyng without
book, saying the lesson again, and with wrytinge it, for scant may a man
find any that has so apt a wytie to be taught, so tractable and that so
will follow, which will accustume it self to these things without prickyng
forward. Chrisippus appointed three years to the nou^ses, not that in the mean
space there should be no teaching of manners, and speech, but that the infame
should be prepared by fair means to lern virtue and letters, either of the
nurses, or of the parents, whose manners without peradventure do help very much
to the good fashiony^ge of children. And because the first teaching of
children is, to speak plainly and without fault, in this before time the
nourses and the parents help not a little. This beginning, not only very much
profits to eloquence, but also to judgment, and to the knowledge of all
disciplines: for the ignorance of tongues, either has marred all the sciences,
or greatly hurt the^, eue^ divinity it self also, physic and law. The
eloquence of the Gracchians was much merueyled at in time paste, but for the
most they might thank their mother Cornelia for it, as Tullie judges. It
apeareth says he, that the children were not so much brought up in the mothers
lap, as in the mothers co^municacion. So their first scholyng was to them
the mothers lap. Lelia also expressed in her goodly talk the eloquence of her
father Caius. And what marvel. While she was yet young she was dyed with her
fathers communicacion, even when she was borne in his arms. The same happened
to the two sisters, Mucia and Licinia, neeces unto Caius. Specially is praised
the elegance of Licinia in speaking, which was the daughter of Lucius Crassus,
one Sc^pios wife as I ween. What needs many words? All the house and all the
kynred even to the nepheus, and their cosyns did often express elegance of
their fore fathers in artificial and cunnyng speaking. The daughter of Quintus
Hortencius so expressed her fathers eloquence, that there was long ago an
oracion of hers to se, that she made before the officers called Triumuiri, not
only (as Fabius says) to the praise of womankynd. To speak without fa^^ no
little help ^rynge also the nourses, tutors, and play fellows. For as touching
the tongues, so great is the readiness of that age to learn them, that within a
few months a child of Germany may learn French, and that while he does
other things also: neither does that thing come ever better to pass then in
rude and very young years. And if this come to pass in a barbarous and
unruled tongue, which writes otherwise then it speaks, and the which has
his schriches and words scarce of a man, how much more easily will it be done
in the Greek or Latin tongue? King Mithridates is read to have perfitly
known.xxii. tongues, so that he could plead the law to every nation in their
own tongues without any interpreter. The mistocles within a years space
learned perfitely the Persians tongue because he would the better common with the
king. If su^what old age can do that, what is to be hoped for of a child? And
all this business stands specially in two things, memory, and imitacion.
We have showed before already that there is a certain natural great desire in
children to follow other, and very wise men write that memory in children is
very sure in holdinge fast: and if we distrust their authority, experience
it self will prove it unto us. Those things that we have seen being
children, they so abide in our minds, as though we had seen them yesterdaie.
Things that we read to day when we be old, within two days after if we read
the^ again they seem new unto us. Furthermore how few have we seen which
have had good success in learning the tongues when they were old? And if some
have well spedde them in knoweledge, yet the right sound and pronunciacion has
chaunsed either to none, or to very few. For rare examples be no common rules.
Neither for this must we call children to learn the tongues after sixtene year
old, because that the elder Cato learned latin, and Greek, when he was three
score and ten years old. But Cato of Utica much better learned then the other
and more eloquent, when he was a child was continuallye with his master
Sarpedo. And here we ought so much the more to take heed, because that young
age led rather by sense then judgment, will as soon or peradventure sooner learn
leudnes and things yt be naught Yea we forget sooner good things the^ naught.
Gentile philosophers espied that, and merueyled at it, and could not search out
the cause, which christian philosophers have showed unto us: which tells yt
this redines to mischief is setteled in us of Adam the first father of
mankind. This thing as it can not be false, so is it very true, that the
greateste part of this evil comes of leude and naughty bryngyng up,
inespeciallye of tender youth, which is plyeable to every thing.

We find in writing that great Alexander learned certain fautes of his master
Leonides, which he could not leave when he was well growe^ v^, and a great
Emperor. Therefore as long as among the latins floryshed that old
vertuousnes of good manners, children were not committed to an hyrelynge to be
taught, but were taught of the parents them selves and their kinsfolk, as of
their uncles both by father and mother, of the graundfathers, as Plutarch
says: For they thought it especially perteyned to the honor of their kynred,
if they had very many excellentlye well seen in liberal knowledge, where as
now adays all nobility almost stands in pain^ed and graven arms, dancing,
hunting, and dicynge. Spurius Carbilius of a bond man made free, whose patron
Carbilius brought in the first example of divorce, is reported to be the
first that taught an open gra^mer schole. Before this time it was counted a
very virtuous office if every man taught his kynsefolke in virtue and
lernyng. Now is this their only care, to seek for their child a wife with a
good dowrye. That done, they think they have done all that belongs to a
father. But as the world is always ready to be worse and worse, day n^^nes
has persuaded us to comm^e this office to a tuter that is one of our
householde, and a gentleman is put to be taught of a servant. In which
thing in deed, if we would take heed whom we chose, the ieopardy were so
much the less, because the teacher lived not only in ye fathers sight, but
also were under his power if he did amysse. They that were very wise, either
bought learned servants, or provided they might be learned, that they might
be teachers to their children. But how much wyser were it, if the parents
would get lernyng for this intent, that they them selves might teach their own
children. Uerelye by this means the profit would be double, as the commodity
is double if the Bishop show him self a good man, to the entente he may
encourage very many to the love of virtue. Thou wylt say: every me^ has not
leisure, and they be loathe to take so great pain. But go to good sir, Let
us cast with our self how much time we lose at dice, bankertynge, and
beholdynge gaye syghtes, and playinge with fools, and I ween we shall be
ashamed to say we lack leisure to that thing which ought to be done, all
other set aside. We have time sufficient to do all we should do, if we bestow
it so thriftelye as we should do. But the day is short to us, when we lose the
greater part thereof. Consider this also, how great a portion of time is
given now and then to the fo^lyshe business of our friends. If we can not do as
they all would have us, verelye we ought chiefly to regard our children.
What pain refuse we to leave unto our children a rich patrimonye and well
stablished: and to get that for them which is better then all this, should it
yrke us to take labor? namelye when natural love and the profit of them
which be most neareste unto us, makes sweet all the grief and pain. If
that were not, when would the mothers bear so long tediousenes of chyldbyrth
and nursyng. He loves his son lyghtlye which is grieved to teach him. But
the manner to enstructe them was the more easy to them in old time, because
the learned and unlearned people spoke all one tongue, save that the learned
spoke more truly, more elegantly, more wiselye, and more cop^ousely. I
confess that, and it were a very short way to learning, if it were so now a
days. And there have been some that have gone about to renew and bring
again those old examples, and to do as those old fathers have done before
time, as in Phrisia, Canterians, in Spain Queen Elisabeth the wife of
Fardinandus, out of whose familye there have come forth very many womenne
both merueylouselye well learned and verteouse. Among the english men, it
grieved not the right worshypful Thomas More, although being much occupied in
the kings matters, to be a teacher to his wife, daughters, and son, first
in virtue, and after to knowledge of Greek and Latin. Uerely this ought to be
done in those that we have appointed to learning. Neither is there any
ieopardie that they should be ignorant in the peoples tongue, for they shall
learn that whether they will or not by company of men. And if there be none in
our house that is learned, anon we should provide for some cunnyng man, but
tried both in manners and lernyng. It is a folyshe thing to make a proof in thy
son, as in a slave of little value, whether his teacher be learned or not, and
whether he be a good man that thou haste gotten him or not. In other things
pardon may be given to negligence, but here thou must have as many eyes as
Argus had, and must be as vigilant as is possible. They say: a man may not
twyse do a fault in war: here it is not laweful to do once amiss. Moreover the
sooner the child shall be set to a master, so much shall his brynginge up come
the better to pass. I know some men find this excuse, that it is ieopardy
lest the labor of studies make ye good health of the tender body weaker. Here
I might ensure, yt although the strength of the body were sumwhat taken away,
that this inco^moditie is well recompensed by so goodly gifts of the mind. For
we fashion not a wrestler, but a philosopher, a governor of the common wealth,
to who^ it is sufficient to be healthful, although he have not the strength of
Milo: yet do I confess that somewhat we must tender the age, that it may wax
the more lustye. But there be many that foolyshely do fear lest their
children should catch harm by learning, which yet fear not the much greater
peryl^ that comes of to much meat, whereby the wits of the little ons no
less be hurted then be their bodies by kinds of meats and drynkes that be
not meet for that age. They bring their little children to great and long
feasts, yea feastyng sometime until far forth nyghtes, they fyl them with
salt and hot meats, sometime eue^ till they vomit. They bind in and load the
tender bodies with unhandsome garments to set them out, as some trym apes, in
man's apparel, and otherwise they weaken their children, and they never more
tenderlye be afraid of their health, then when co^municacion is begone to be
had of learning, that is of that thing which of al other is most wholesome and
necessary. That which we have spoken touching health, that same pertains to
the care of his bewety, which as I confess is not to be light set bye, so to
carefully to be regarded, is not very meet for a man. A wayward fear for
hurting childre^s bewtye.
Neither do we more weywardlye fear any other thing then the hurt of it to come
by study, where it is hurt a great deal more by surfeit, dronkennes,
vntymelye watchynge, by fyghtyng and wounds, finally by ungracious pockes,
which scarce any man escapes that lives intemperatly. From these things
rather let the^ see they keep their children then from lernyng, which so
carefully take thought for the health and beauty. Howbeit this also may be
provided for by our care and diligence that there should be very little labor and
therf^re little loss. Provision for easinge chyldrens labor
This shall be if neither many things, neither every light thing be taught them
when they be young, but the best only and that be mete for their age, which is
delighted rather in pleasant things then in subtle. Secondly, a fair
manoure of teaching shall cause yt it may seem rather a play then a labor,
for here the age must be beguiled with sweet flattering words, which yet ca^
not tell what fruit, what honor, what pleasure lernyng shall bring unto them
in time to come. And this partly shall be done by the teachers ge^tlenes, and
courteous behaueour, and partlye by his wit and subtle practice, wherbi he shall
devise diverse pretty means to make lerning plesau^t to ye child, and pull him
away from feling of labor. For there is nothing worse then when the
waywardnes of the master causes the children to hate lernyng before they know
wherefore it should be loved. The first degree of lerning, is the love of the
master. In process of time it shall come to pass that the child which first
began to love lernyng for the masters sake, afterward shall love the master
because of lernyng. For as many gifts are very dear unto us eue^ for this
cause, that they come from them whom we love hertelye: so lernyng, to whom it
can not yet be pleasant through discrescion, yet to them it is acceptable for
the love they bear to the teacher. It was very wellspoken of Isocrates that he
lerneth very much, which is desirous of lernyng. And we gladlye learn of them
whom we love. But some be of so unpleasant manners that they can not be
loved, no not of their wives, their countenance lowryng, their company
currishe, they seem angrye even when they be bestepleased, they can not speak
fair, scarce can they laughe when men laugh upon them, a man would say they
were borne in an angrye hour. These men I judge scant worthy to whom we
should put ou^e wild horses to be broken, much less wuld I think that this
tender and almost suckynge age should be committed to them. Yet be there some
that think that these kind of men, even inespecyally worthy to be set to
teach young children, whylest they think their sturdynes in lookynge is
holiness. But it is not good trustyng the looks, under that frowning face
lurk often times most unchaste and wan^on manners, neither is to be spoken
among honest men, to what shamefulnes these vouchers abuse children by
fearyng them. No nor the parents themselves can well bring up their children,
if they be no more but feared. The first care is to be beloved, by little and
little follows after, not fear, but a certain liberal and gentle reverence
which is more of value then fear. How properly then I pray you be those
children provided for, which being yet scante four year old are sent to
schole, where sy^teth an unknown scholemaster, rude of manners, not very
sober, and sometime not well in his wit, often lunatike, or having the
falling sycknes, or french pockes? For there is none so vile, so naught, so
wretched, whom the common people thinks not sufficient enough to teach a
grammar schole. And they thynkyng they have gotten a kingdom, it is marueyle
to s^e how they set up the brystels because they have rule, not upon beasts,
as says Terence, but upon that age which ought to be cheryshed with all
gentleness. You would say it were not a schole, but a tormentynge place:
nothing is heard there beside the flappynge upon the hand, beside yorkynge
of rods, beside howlynge and sobbinge and cruel threatenings. What other
thing may children learn hereof, then to hate learning? When this hatered
has once setteled in the tender minds* yea when they be old they abhor
study. It is also much more foolyshe, that some men send their little
children to a pynyshe dronken woman to learn to read and write. It is
against nature that women should have rule upon men: beside that, nothing
is more cruel then that kind, if they be moved with anger, as it will soon
be, and will not cease till it be full revenged. Monasteries also, and colleges
of brethern, for so they call themselves, seek for their living hereof, and in
their dark corners teach the ignorant children commenlye by men that be
but a little learned, or rather leudlye learned, although we grant they be
both wise and honest. This kind of teaching how so ever other men allow
it, by my counsel no man shall use it, who soever entendeth to have his
child well brought up. It behooves that either there were no schole, or else to
have it openly abroad. It is a short way in deed that co^monlye is used: for
many be compelled of one more easelye by fear, that one brought up of one
liberallye.

But it is no great thing to bear rule upon Asses or Swyne, but to bring up
children liberallye as it is very hard, so is it a goodly thing. It is tyranny
to oppress citizens by fear, to keep them in good order, by love, moderacion
and prudence, it is princely. Diogenes being taken of the Agenites, and
brought out to be sold, the crier axed him by what title he would be set out
to the byer. Axe quod he if any will bye a man that can rule children. At this
strange praise many laughed. One that had children at home communed with
the philosopher, whether he could do in deed that he professed. He said he
could. By short communicacion he perceived he was not of the common sort,
but under a pore cloak, there was hydden great wisdom: he bought him, and
brought him home, and put his children to him to be taught. As ye Scots say,
there be no greater beaters then french scholemasters. When they be told
thereof, they be wont to answer, that that nacio^ even like the Phrigians is
not amended but by stripes. Whether this be true let other me^ judge. Yet I
grant that there is some difference in the nation, but much more in the
property of every sever al wit. Some you shall sooner kyl, then amend with
stripes: but the same in love and gentle monicions you may lead whither ye
will. Truth it is that of this disposicion I my self was when I was a child,
and when my master which loved me above all other, because he said he conceived
a certain great hope of me, took more heed, watched me well, and at last to
prove how I could abide the rod, and laying a fault unto my charge which I
never thought of, did bear me, that thing so put away from me all the love of
study, and so discouraged my chyldyshe mind, that for sorrow I had almost
consumed away, and in deed followed thereof a quartaine ag^e. When at last he
had perceived his fault, among his friends he bewailed it. This wit (quod he)
I had almost destroyed before I knew it. For he was a man both wyttye and
well learned, and as I think, a good man. He repented him, but to late for my
part. Here now (good sir) conjecture me how many froward wits these
unlearned great beaters do destroy, yet proud in their own conceit of
learning, wayeward, dronken, cruel, and that will beat for their pleasure: them
selves of such a cruel nature, that they take pleasure of other men's
torments. These kind of men should have been ^ouchers or hangme^, not teachers
of youth. Neither do any torment children more cruelly, the^ they that can
not teach them. What should they do in schools but pass the day in chydyng
and beatynge? I knew a divine and that familierly, a man of great name, which
was never satisfied with crudelity against his scholars, when he him self had
masters that were very great beaters. He thought yt did much help to cast
down the fiersnes of their wits, and tame the wa^tonnes of their youth. He
never feasted among his flock, but as Comedies be wont to have a merry endyng,
so contrary when they had eaten their meat, one or other was haled out to be
beaten with rods: and sometime he raged against them that had deserved
nothing, even because they should be accustumed to stripes. I my self on a
time stood next him, when after diner he called out a boie as he was wo^t to
do, as I trow ten year old. And he was but new come from his mother into
that compani* He told us before that the child had a very good woman to his
mother, and was earnestly committed of her unto him: anon to have an occacion
to beat him, he began to lay to his charge I wotte not what wa^tonnesse:
When the child showed him self to have nothing less, and beckened to him to
whom he committed the chyefe rule of his college, surnamed of the thing, a
tormentoure, to beat, him ne by and by cast down the child, and beat him
as though he had done sacrilege. The divine said once or twyse, it is
inoughe, it is inoughe* But that tormentour deaffe with feruentnes, made no
end of his bochery, till the child was almost in a sound: Anon the divine
t^rninge to us, he has deserved nothing quod he, but that he must be made
low. Who ever after that manner has taught his slave, or his Ass? A ge^^le
horse is better tamed with puping of the mouth or soft handlyng, then with
whyp or spurs. And if you handle him hard, he will whynche, he will kycke, he
will byte, and go bacwardes. An ox if you prick him to hard with gods, will
cast of his yocke, and run upon him that pricked him. So must a gentle nature
be handled as is the whelpe of a Lion. Only art tameth Elephantes, not
violence, neither is there any beast so wild, but that it will be tamed by
gentleness, neither any so tame, but immoderate cruelnes will anger it. It is a
seruyle thing to be chastened by fear, and common custume calls children
free men, because liberal and gentle bringyng up becomes them, much unlike
to servile. Yet they that be wise do this rather, that servants by gentelnes
and benefits leave of their slauyshe conditions: reme^bryng that they also be
men, and not beasts. There be rehearsed marvelous examples of servant toward
their masters, whom verily they should not have found such if they had kept
them under only by strypes. A servant if he be corrigible is better amended by
monicions, by honesty, and good turns, then by stripes: if he be paste
amendment, he is hardened to extreme mischief and either will run away and
rob his master, or by some craft go about his masters death. Sometime he is
revenged on his masters cruelty, though it cost him his life. And there is
no creature more fereful the^ man, who^ cruel injury has taught to dispyse
his own life. Therefore the common proverb that says a man has as many
enemies as he has servants, If it be true, I think it may be chiefly
imputed to the unreasonableness of the master: for it is a point of art, and
not of chance to rule well servants. And if the wyser masters go about this
thing, so to use their servants, that they should serve them well and gently,
and instead of servants had rather have them fre men, how shameful is it by
bryngyng up, to make servants of those that be gentle and free by nature? Not
without cause does the old manne in the comedy think that there is great
difference betwixt a master and a father. The master only compels, the
father by honesty and gentelnes accustumeth h^s son, to do well of his own
mind, rather then by fear of an other: and that he should be all one in his
presence and behind his back. He that can not do this says he, let him
confess that he can not rule children. But there ought to be a little more
difference betwyxte a father and the master, then betwixt a king and a tirant.
We put away a tiraunte from the common wealth and we chose tirauntes, yea
for our sons, either we our selfs exercise tirannye upon them. Howebeit
this vile name of servitude ought utterly to be taken away out of the life
of christen men. Saint Paul desires Philo to be good to Onesimus, not
now as a servant, but as a dear brother in steed of a servant. And
writing to the Ephesians, he monysheth the masters to remitte their bytternesse
against their servants, and their threatenings,, remembrynge that they are
rather fellow servants then masters, because they both have a common master in
heaven, which as well will punyshe the masters if they do amysse, as the
servants. The Apostle would not have the masters full of threatening, much
less full of beatynge: for he says not, pardonynge your strypes, but
pardonynge your threatenynges, and yet we would have our children nothing
but beaten, which scarce the Baleye masters or Sea robbers do against their
slaves and rowers. But of children, what does the same Apostle command us?

In so much he will not have them beaten slauyshely, he commands all crueltye
and bytternes to be away from our monicions and chydyng. You fathers says
he, provoke not your children to anger, but bring them up in discipline and
chastisyng of the Lord. And what the discipline of the lord is, he shall soon
se that will consider, with what gentleness, what meekenes, what charity the
Lord Jesus has taught, suffered, and noryshed and brought up by little and
little his disciples. The laws of man do temper the fathers power: the same
also permit unto the servants an accion of evil handlyng, and from whence
then comes this crueltye among christen men? In time paste one Auxon a
knight of Rome, whylest he went about to amend his son by beatynge him
immeasurably, he killed him. That crueltye so moved the people, that the fathers
and children haled him in to the market place, and al to be pri^ked him, thrust
him in with their writing pinnes, nothing regarding the dignity of his
knighthod, and Octauus Augustus had much a do to save him. but now a days how
many Auxons do we see which through cruel beatynge, hur^e the chyldrens
health, make them one eyed, weaken them, and sometime kill them. Rods serve
not to some men's cru^ltie, they turn them and beat the^ with the great end,
they give them buffettes, and stryke the young ons with their fistes, or
whatsoever is next at hand they snatche it, and dashe it upon them. It is told
in the law, that a certain sowter, when he laid one of his sow^ers upon the
hinder part of the head with a last, he stroke out one of his eyes, and
that for that deed he was punyshed by the law. What shall we say of them
which beside their beatinges, do the^ shameful despite also? I wo^de never
have believed it, except both I had known the child, and the doer of this
cruelty perf^^elye. A child yet scant^.^ii. year old, whose honest paren^es
had done good to his master, they handled so cruellye, that scarce any such
tiraunt as was Mezencius or Phalaris could do more cruelly. They cast so much
man's donge in to the childs mouth ye scarsely he could spit, but was
compelled to swallowe down a great part of it. What tiraunt did ever such
kind of despyght? After such daynties, they exercysed such lordelynes. The
child naked was hanged up with cords by ye armeholes, as though he had been
a strong thyefe, and there is among the Germans no kind of punishment more
abhorred then this. Anon as he honge, they all to beat him with rods,
almost even till death. For the more the child denied the thing that he did
not, so much the more did they beat him. Put also to this, the tormentour him
self almost more to be feared then the veri^ punyshemente, his eyes like a
ser^ente, his narowe and wrythen mouth, his sharp voice like a spirit, his
face wanne and pale, his head roul^ng about, threatninges and rebukes s^che as
they lusted in their anger: a man would have thought it a fury out of hell.
What followed? anon after this punishment the child fell sick, with great
ieopardye both of mind and life. Then this tormentour began first to
complain, he wrote to his father to take away his son as soon as could be,
and that he had bestowed as much physic upon him as he could, but in vain
upon the child that was paste remedy. When the sickens of the body was
somewhat put away by medicines, yet was the mind so astonished, that we feared
lest he would never come again to the old strength of his mind. Neither was
this ye cruelty of one day, as long as the child dwelte with him there
passed no day but he was cruelly beaten once or twice. I know you suspectest o
reader, that it was an haynouse fault, whereunto so cruel remedy was used. I
will show you in few words. There was found both of his yt was beaten, and of two
others, their books blotted with ynke, their garments cut, and their hose
arrayed with man's donge.

He that played this play was a child borne to all myschiefe, which by other
ungracious deeds afterward, made men believe the either to be true that were
done before. And he was nephewe by the systers side to this mad docter: eue^
then playing a part before to ^hese things which soldiers are wont to do in
bataile or robbynge. At an hosts house of his, he pulled out the faucet, and
let the wine run upon the ground, and as one to show a pleasure, he said
that he felt the savor of the wine: with an other of his fellows he daily
played at the sword, not in sport, but in earnest, that even then you might
well perceive he would be a thyefe or a murderer, or which is very like to
them, that he would be an hired soldier. Although the teacher favored him, yet
fearing lest they should one kill an other, he sent away his cosen. For he
had for that other a good reward: and he was of this sort of gospellers, to
whom nothing is more sweet then monei. His godfather was made surely to believe
that the child was with a good and diligent master, when in deed he dwelte with
a boucher, and was continually in company, and made drudge with a man that was
half mad, and continually sick. Thus fauoringe more his kynseman then him by
whom he had so much profit, the suspicion was laid upon the harmeles, to whom
they ascribed so much malice that he would tear and defile his own garments
to avoid suspicion if any such thing had been done. But the child coming
both of good father and mother, did never show any to^e^ of such a naughty
disposicion: and at this day there is nothing farther from all malice then are
his manners, which now free from all fear tells all the matter in order as
it was done.

To such tutors do honest citizens commit their children whom they most
love, and such do complain that they be not well rewarded for their pains.
And this tormentour would not once knoweledge he had done amiss, but had
rather play the stark mad man, then confess his fault: and yet against such
is not taken an action of evil handlyng, neither has the rigor of the law
any power against such huge cruelty. There is no anger worse to be pleased
the^ theirs that be like to have the falling sycknes. How many things be
crepte in, into the life of christen men, not meet neither for the Phrigians
nor ye Scithians, of ye which I will show one much like this matter. The young
gentleman is send in to ye university to learn the liberal sciences. But with
how ungentle despightes is he begun in them? First they rub his chyn, as though
they would shave his bearde: hereunto they use piss, or if there be any fouler
thing. This liquour is dashed into his mouth, and he may not spit it out. With
paynfull bobbes they make as though they drew horns from him: so^time be is
compelled to drink a great deal of vinegre or salt, or whatsoever it lists
ye wyld company of young me^ to give him: for when they begin the play, they
make him swear yt he shall obey all that they command him. At last they hoyse
him up, and dashe his back against a post as often as they list. After these
so rustical despightes su^time ^oloweth an ague or a pain of ye back yt never
ca^ be remedied. Certes this foolish play ends in a dro^ken ba^ket: with such
beginninges enter they into ye studies of liberal sciences. But it were mete
that after this sort they should begin a boucher, a torme^tour a baud or a
bo^de slave or a botema^, not a child appointed to ye holy studies of lerning.
It is a meruel that yongme^ given to liberal studies be mad after this fashion,
but it is more meruel yt these things be allowed of such is have the rule of
youth. To so foul and cru^l folyshenes is prete^sed the name of custume, as
though the custume of an evil thing were any thing else the^ an old error,
which ought so much the more diligently to be pulled up because it is crept
among many. So continues among the divines y^ manner of a vesper, for they note
an evil thing with a like name, more mete for scoffers the^ diu^nes. But they yt
profess liberal sci^ces, should have also liberal sports. But I come again to
children, to whom nothing is more unprofitable, then to be used to stripes,
which enormi^tie cau^e^^ that the gentle nature is intractable, and the ^^ler
driven to desperacion: and co^tinuaunce of the^ makes that both the body is
hardened to stripes, and the mind to words. Nay we may not oftentimes chyde
the^ to sharplye. A medicine naugh^elye used, ma^eth the sickness worse,
helps it not, and if (...) be laid to continuallye, by little and little, it
cease to be a medicine, and does nothing else then does stinkynge and
unwholesome meat. But here some man will say unto us the godly sayings of
the Hebrews. He that spares the rod hates his child and he that loves his
son, bears him much. Again: Bow down the neck of thy child in youth,
and (...) his sides while he is an infant very young. Such chastisemente
peradventure was mete in time paste for the Jews. Now must the saying be
expounded more ciuil^ly. And if a man will be hard to us with letters and
sillables, what is more cruel then to bend the neck of a child, and to beat
the sides of an infant? would thou not believe that a bull were taught to ye
plowgh, or an ass to bear paniars, and not a man to virtue? And what reward
does he promise us? That he grope not after other me^nes doors. He is afeard
lest his son should be poor, as the greateste of all mischief. What is more
coldly spoken then this sentence? Let gentle admonicion be our rod, and
sometime chydyng also, but sauced with mekenes, not bitterness. Let us use this
whyp continuallye in our children, yt being well brought up, they may have at
home a means to live well, and not be compelled to beg counsel at their
neighbors how to do their business. Licon the philosopher has showed.ii sharp
spurs to quicken up chyldrens wits, shame, and praise: shame is the fear
of a just reproach, praise is the norysher of all verteous acts: with these
pricks let us quicken our chyldrens wits* Also if you will, I will show you
a club to beat their sides wythall. Continual labor vanquysheth all things
says the best of al poets. Let us wake, let us prycke the^ forwards, and
still call upon them, by requitinge, repetynge, and often teaching: With this
club let us beat the sides of our infantes. First let them learn to love, and
marvel at virtue and lernyng, to abhor sin and ignorance. Let them hear some
praised for their well doings, and some rebuked for their evil. Let examples
be brought in of those men to whom lernyng has gotten high glory, riches,
dignity, and authority. And again of them to whom their evil conditions and
wyc without all lernyng has brought infamy, contempt, pouertye and myschiefe.
These verily be the clubbes meet for christians, that make disciples of Jesus.
And if we cannot profit by monicions, nor prayers, neither by emulacion,
Emulacion is an envy without malice* for desire to be as good as an other, and
to be as much praised.
nor shame, nor praise, nor by other means, even the chastenyng with the rod, if
it so require, ought to be gentle and honest. For even this that the bodies of
gentle children should be made bare, is a kind of despite. Howbeit Fabius
utterly condemns al ye custume to beat gentle children. Some man will say,
what shall be done to them if they can not be driven to ^^udy but by stripes? I
answer rou^dly, what would ye do to asses or to oxen if they went to schole?
Would thou not drive them in to the country, and put the one to the
backhouse, the other to the plowe. For there be men as well borne to the plowe
and to the backehouse, as oxen and asses be. But they will say: then decreseth
my flock. What then? Yea and mine advantage to. This is an hard matter: this
makes them to weep. They set more by money then by the profit of the
children. But such are all the common sort of folyshe teachers. ^ grant. As
the philosophers describe a wise man, ye rethoricians an orator, such one as
scarce may be found in any place: So much more easy it is to prescribe what
manner of man a scholmaster should be, the^ to find many yt will be as you would
have the^. But this ought to be a publyque care and charge, Civil officers
and prelates should se that there were good schole masters. Vespasian. Pliny.
and belongs to the ciuyle officer, and chyef prelates of the church: that as
there be men appointed to serve in war, to singe in churches, so much more
there should be ordained that should teach citizens children well and gently.
Uespasianus out of his own cofers gave yearly six hundred pound to Latin
and Greek rethoricians. Pliny the nephew of his own liberality bestowed a
great su^me of money to the same purpose. And if the come^ty in this point be
slack, certainly every man ought to take heed at home for his own house. Thou
wylt say: what shall poor men do which can scarce find their children, much
less hyre a master to teach them? Here I have nothing to say, but this out
of the comedy: We must do as we may do, when we can not as we would. We do
show the best way of teaching, we be not able to give fortune: Save that
here also the liberality of rich men ought to help good wyt^es, which can
not show forth the strength of natural inclinacion because of pouertye.
Poverty hurts good wits.
I will that the gentleness of the master should be so tempered, that
familiarity, the companion of contempt, put not away honest reverence, such
one as men say Sarpedo was, tutour to Cato of Utica, which through his gentle
manners gat great love, and by his virtue as like authority, causynge the
child to have a great reverence, and to set much by him without any fear of
rods. But these yt can do nothing else but beat, what would they do if
they had taken up on them to teach Emperoures or kings children, whom it
were not lefull to beat? They will say that great men's sons must be
excepted from this fashion. What is that? Be not the children of citizens, men
as well as kings children be? Should not every manne as well love his child
as if he were a kings son? If his estate be su^what base, so much the more
need has he to be taught, and helped by learning, that he may come up, from
his pore case. But he be of hye degree, philosophy and lernyng is necessary to
govern his matters well. Further not a few be called from low degree to hye
estate, yea sometime to be great bishops. All men come not to this, yet ought
al men to be brought up to come to it. I wll braule no more with these great
beaters, after I have told you this one thing: How that those laws and
officers ^e condemned of wise men, which can no more but fear men with
punyshement, and do not also entyse men by rewards: and the which punyshe
fautes, and provide not also yt nothing be done worthy punishment. The same
must be thought of the common sort of teachers, which only beat for fautes,
and do not also teach ye mind that it do not amysse. They straightly require
their lesson of them: if the child fail, he is beaten: and when this is done
daily because the child should be more accustumed to it, they think they have
played the part of a gaye scholemaster. But the child should first have been
encoraged to love lernyng, and to be afearde to displease his teacher. But of
these things peradventure some man will think I have spoken to much and so
might I worthily be thought, except that almost all men did in this point so
greatly offend, that hereof a man ca^ never speak enough. Furthermore it will
help very much, if he that has taken upon him to teach a child, so set
his mind upon him, that he bear a fatherlye love unto him. By this it shall
come to pass, yt both the child will learn more gladly, and he shall feel less
^ediousnes of his labor. For in every business love takes away ye greatest
part of hardness. A sentence to be marked.
And because after the old proverb: Like reioyseth in like, ye master must
in manner play the child again, that he may be loved of the child. Yet this
lyketh me not, y^ men set their children to be tought their first beginnings of
letters unto those that be of extreme and dotyng old age, for they be children
in very deed, they feign not, they cou^terfait not, stuttinge, but stutte in
deed.

I would wyshe to have one of a lustye young age, whom the child might
delyght in, and which would not be loathe to play every part. This man should
do in fashionyng his wit, A lykenynge of scholemasters and nurses together.
that parents and nurses be wont to do in formynge the body. How do they
first teach the infant to speak like a man? They apply their words by
lyspyng according to the chyldes tatlynge. How do they teach them to eat?
They chaw first their milk soppes, and when they have done, by little and little
put it in to the chyldes mouth. How do they teach the^ to go? They bow
down their own bodies, and draw in their own strides after the measure of
the infantes. Neither do they feed them with every meat, nor put more in
then they be able to take: and as they increase in age, they lead them to
bigger things. First they seek for noryshemente that is meet for them, not
differyng much from milk, which yet if it be thrust into the mouth to much,
either it choketh the child, or being cast out defiles his garmente. When
it is softelye and pretelye put in, it does good. Which self thing we se
comes to pass in vessels that have narowe mouths: if you pour in much,
it bubbleth out again, but if you power in a little, and as it were by drops,
in deed it is a while, and fair and softely erste, but yet then filled, The
fedyng of the body and mind c^pared together.
So then as by small morsels, and given now and then, the little tender bodies
are noryshed: in like manner chyldrens wits by instruccions mere for them
taught easily, and as it were by play by little and little accustume themselves
to greater things: and the weariness in the mean season, is not felt,
because that small encreasynges so deceive the feeling of labor, that
nevertheless they help much to great profit. As it is told of a certain
wrestler, which, accustumed to bear a calfe by certain furlonges, bare him
when he was waxen a bull, without any pain: for the increase was not felt,
which every day was put to the burden. But there be some that look that
children should strayghtwaye become old men, having no regard of their age,
but measure the tender wits, by their own strength. Straight way they call
upon them bytterly, straightway they straightly require perfect diligence, by and
by they frown with the forhead if the child do not as well as he would have
him, and they be so moved as though they had to do with an elder body,
forgettyng you may be sure yt they themselves were once children. How much more
curteouse is it that Pliny warns a certain master that was to sore. Remember
says he, that both he is a young man, and that thou ^ast ben one thy self.
But many be so cruel against the tender children, as though they remembered not
neither them selves, neither their scolers to be men. Thou would that I
should show the those things that be meet for the inclinacio^ of that age,
What things ly^le young children should be first taught.
and which should by and by be taught the little yong^ns. First the use of
tongues which comes to them without any great study, there as old folks can
scarce be hab^e to learn them with great labor. Children desire naturally to
follow and do as other do.
And here to as we said, moves the children a certain desire to follow and do
as they se other do^ of the which thing we see a certain like fashion in p^es
and popiniayes. What is more delectable then the fabels of poets, which with
their sweet entisynge plesures so delight childrens ears that they profit us
very much when we be old also, not only to ye knowledge of the tongue, but also
to judgment and copye of elegant speech? What will a child hear more glad l^e
then Esops fabels, which in sport and play teach earnest precepts of
philosophy? and the same fruit is also in the fabels of other poets. The
child hears that Ulisses fellows were turned into swyne, and other fashions
of beasts. The tale is laughed at, and yet for all that he lerneth that thing
that is the chiefest point in all moral philosophye: Those which be not
governed by right reason, but are carried after the will of affeccions, not to
be men, but beasts. What could a stoycke say more sagely? and yet does a
merye tale teach the same. In a thing that is manifest I will not make the
tarry with many examples. Also what is more merry conceited the^ the verses
called Bucolicall? Bucolicall, where ye herdmen do speak of nete and sheep.
what is sweter then a comedy, which standing by moral manners, deliteth both
the unlearned and children? And hear how great a part of philosophye is
learned by play? Add unto this the names of all things, in the which it is
meruell to see how now a days, yea eue^ they be blind which are taken for well
learned me^. Finally, short and merry conceited sentences, as commonly be
proverbs, and quick short sayings of noble men, in the which only in time
paste philosophy was wont to be taught to the people. There appears also in
the very children a certain peculier redines to some sciences, as unto music,
arithmetique, or cosmographie. For I have proved that they which were very dull
to learn the precepts of grammar and rethorique, were found very apt to
learn the subtle arts. Nature therefore must be helped to that part whereunto
of it self it is inclined. And down the hill is very little labor, as contrary
is great. Thou shall nether do nor say any thing against thy natural
inclinacion. I knew a child that could not yet speak which had no greater
pleasure, than to open a book, and make as though he read. And when he did
that sometime many hours, yet was he not weery. And he never wept so bitterli,
but if you had offered him a book, he would be pleased. That thing made his
friends hope that in time to come he would be a well learned manne. His name
also brought some good luck: That is a teacher of holy learning.
for he was called Hierome. And what he is now I can not tell, for I saw him
not being growe^ up. To the knowledge of the tongue it will help very much
if he be brought up among them that be talkatiue. Fabels and tales will the
child learn so much the more gladly, and remember the better, if he may see
before his eyes the arguments properlye painted, and what soever is told in
the oracion be showed him in a table. The same shall help as much to learn
without book the names of trees, herbs, and beasts, and also their properties,
inespecially of these which be not common to be seen in every place, as is
Rhinoceros, which is a beast that has a horn in his nose, natural enemy
to the Elephant: Tragelaphus, a goat heart, Onocrotalus, a byrd like to a swa^,
which puttyng his head into the water brayeth like an ass, an ass of Jude
and an Elephant. The table may have an Elephant whom a Dragon claspeth hard
about, wrapping in his former feet with his tail. The little child laugheth
at the sight of this strange paintynge, what shall the master do then? He
shall show him that there is a great beast called in Greek an Elephante, and
in Latin likewise, save that sometime it is declined after the latin fashion.
He shall show, that that which the greeks call proboscida, or his snout, the
latins call his hand, because with that he reaches his meat. He shall tell
him that that beast does not take breath at the mouth as we do, but at the
snoute: and tha^ he has teth standing out on both sides, and they be iuory,
which rich me^ set much price by, and therewith shall show him an iuory comb.
Afterward he shall declare that in Jude there be dragons as great as they.
And that dragon is both a greek word and a latin also, save that the greeks
say dracontes in the genitive case. He shall show that naturally betwyxte
the dragons and the Elephantes is great fight. And if the child be somewhat
gredy of learning, he may rehearse many other things of the nature of
Elephantes and dragons. Many rejoice to see huntinges painted. Here how many
kinds of trees, herbs, birds, four footed beasts may he learn and play?
I will not hold you long with examples, seeing it is easy by one to
conjecture all. The master shall be diligent in choosing them out, and what he
shall judge most pleasant to children, most me^e for them, what they love
best, and is most floryshyng, that in especially let him set before them. The
first age like unto the spring time, stands in pleasant sweet flowers, and
goodly grene herbs, until the heruest time of ripe man's age fill the barn
full of corn. Then as it were against reason in ver or spring time to seek
for a ripe grape, and a rose in autumn, so must the master mark what is mere
for every age. Autumn is the time betwyxt somer and winter.
Merry and plesaunte things be conueniente for chyldehod, howbeit all
soreness and sadness must be clean away from all studies. The meaning of ye
poets de^^le touching the muses and Charites.
And I am deceived except the old men meant that also, which ascribed to the
muses being virgins, excellent bewtye, harp, songs, daunses, and plays in
the pleasant fields, and joined to them as fellows the Ladies of love: and
that increase of studies did stand specially in mutual love of minds, and
therefore the old men called it the lernyng that perteined to man. And there is
no cause why profit may not follow pleasure, and honesty joined to
delectacion. Wherefore le^nyng is called humanity
For what lets that they should not learn either a proper fable, art of
poets, or a sentence, or a notable pretty history, or a learned tale, as well
as they learn and can without book a pi^yshe song, and oftentimes a baudy one
to, and folishe old wives tatlynges, and very trif^es of triflyng women? What a
su^me of dreams, vain ryddels, and unprofitable trif^es of spirits,
hobgoblines, fayries, witches, nightmares wood men and gyauntes, how many
naughty lies, how many evil sayings remember we, yea even when we be men,
which being little children we learned of our dadies, grau^dmothers, nurses, and
maidens while they were spynnynge, and heard the^ when they kissed and played
with us? And what a profit should it have been to learning, if instead of
these most vain garringes, not only folyshe, but also hurtful, we had
learned those things that we rehearsed a little before. Thou wylt say, what
learned man will lowly his wit to these so small things? Yet Aristotle him
self being so great a philosopher was not grieved to take upon him the office
of a teacher, to instruct Alexander. Chiron fashioned the infancy of Achilles,
and Phoenix succeeded him. Hely the priest brought up ye child Samuel. And there
be now a days which either for a little money, or for their pleasure take almost
more pain in teaching a pie or a popiniay. There be some that for deuocions
sake take upon them iourneys that both be far of and ieoperdeous, and other
labors beside almost intolerable. Why does not holiness cause us to do this
office seeing nothing can please god better? Howbeit in teachinge those things
that we have rehearsed, the master must neither be to much calling upon,
neither to sharp: but use a continuance rather then be without measure.
Continuance hurts not so it be mesurable, and spiced also with variety and
plesau^tnes. Finally if these things be so taught, that imaginacio^ of labor
be away, and that the child do thynk al things be done in play. Here the
course of our talkyng puts us in remembrance briefly to show by what
means it may be brought to pass that lernyng should wax sweet unto the
child, How learning may be made sweet unto ye child.
which before we somewhat touched. To be able to speak redely, as I told you is
easily gotten by use. After this comes the care to read and write why^h of
it self is somewhat tedious, but the grief is taken away a great part by the
cu^nyng handling of the master, if it be sauced with some pleasant aliurementes.
For you shall find some which tarry long and take great pain in knowing and
ioynynge their letters and in those first rudime^tes of grammar, when they will
quyckely learn greater things. The yrkeso^nes of these things must be helped
by some pretty craft, of the which ye old fathers have showed certain fashions.
Some have made the letters in sweet crustes and cakes that children love well,
the so in manner they might eat up their letters. When they tell the letters
name, they give the letter it self for a reward. Other have made the fashion
of iuorie, that the child should play with them, The practice of a certain
english man to teach his child his letters by shootyng.
or if there were any other thing wherein that age is specially delited. The
english me^ delight principally in shotynge, and teach it their children first
of all: wherefore a certain father that had a good quick wit perceiuinge his
son to have a great pleasure in shotyng, bought him a pretty bow and very
fair arrows, and in all parts both of his bow and arrows were letters
painted. Afterward in sted of marks, he set up the fashion of letters, first
of Greek, and after of late^: when he hit, and told the name of the letter,
beside a great reioysinge, he had for a reward a cherye, or some other thing
that children delight in. Of that play comes more fruit, if two or three
matches play together. For then the hope of victory and fear of rebuke
makes them to take more heed, and to be more chereful. By this devise it was
brought about that the child within a few days playynge, had perfitely
learned to know and sound all his letters which ye common sort of teachers be
scarce able to bring to pass in three whole years with their bea^ynges
threatyngs, and brawlynges. Yet do not I allow the diligence of some to
painful, which draw out these things by playinge at chesses or dyce. For when
the plays them selves pass the capacity of children, how shall they learn the
letters by them? This is not to help the chyldrens wits, but to put one
labor to an other. As there be certain engines so full of work and so curious,
that they hinder the doing of the business. Of this sort commonly be all those
things which some have devised of the art of memory for to get money, or
for a vain boastynge, rather then for profit: for they do rather hurt the
memory. The best craft for memory.
The best craft for memory, is thorowlye to understand, and then to bring
into an order, last of al often to r^pete that thou would remember. And in
litleous there is a natural great desire to have the mastry inespecially of
such as be of lustye courage, and lively towardnes. The teacher shall abuse
these inclinacions to the profit of his study. If he shall profit nothing by
prayers, and fair means, neither by gifts mete for children, nor praises, he
shall make a contencion with his equales. His fellow shall be praised in the
presence of the duller. Desire to be as good shall quicken forwards, whom only
adhortacion could not do. Yet it is not meet so to give the mastrie to the
victor, as though he should have it for ever: but sometime he shall show hope
to him that is overcome, that by taking head he may recover ye shame: which
thing capteynes be wont to do in battle. And sometime we shall suffer that
the child should think he had gotten the better, when he is worse in deed*
Finally by enterchaungyng, praise and disprayse, he shall noryshe in them, as
Hesiodus says, a strife who shall do best. Perchance one of a sad wit will
be loath so to play the child among children. And yet the same is not grieved,
neither yet ashamed to spend a great part of the day in playing with little
puppies and marinesettes, or to babble with a pie or popin^ay, or to play the
fool with a fool. By these tryfles, a very sad matter is brought to
pass, and it is meruell that good men have little pleasure herein, seeing ye
natural love of our children, and hope of great profit is wunt to make those
things also pleasau^te, which of them selves be sharp, sour and bitter. I
confess that the precepts of grammar be at the beginnynge somewhat sour, and
more necessary then pleasant. But the handsomnes of the teacher shall take from
them also a great part of the pain. The best thing and playnest must be
taught first. But now with what compasses, and hardenesse be children
troubeled while they learn without the book the names of the letters before
they know what manner letters they be?

While they be compelled in the declinynge of nownes and verbes to can by toote
in how many cases, moodes and tenses one word is put: as muse in the
genetiue and dative singular, the nominative and vocative plurel? Legeris of
legor, and of legerim, and legero? What a beatyng is the^ in the schole, when
children be axed these things? Some light teachers to boast their learning are
wont of purpose to make these things somewhat harder. Which fault makes the
beginnings almost of all sciences in doubt, and paynfull, specially in
logic. And if you show them a better way, they answer they were brought up
after this fashion, and will not suffer that any children should be in better
case, then they them selves were when they were children. All difficultye
either therefore must be avoided, which is not necessary, or that is used
out of time. It is made soft and easy, that is done when it should be. But
when time is, that of necessity an hard doubt must be learned, than a
cunning teacher of a child shall study as much as he may to follow the good
and frendlye Phisicians, A good scholmaster in teaching, must follow a
physician in medicines.
which when they shall give a bitter medicyne do anoint, as Lucrecius says,
the brimmes of their cups with honye, that the child entised by pleasure of
the swetenes should not fear the wholesome bytternes, or else put sugar into ye
medicine it self, or some other sweet sauoryng thing. Yea they will not be
known that it is a medicine, for the only imaginacion sometime makes us quake
for fear. Finally this tediousenes is sone overcome, if things be taught them
not to much at once, but by little and little, and at sundry times. Howebeit we
ought not to distrust to much chyldrens strength, if perhaps they must take
some pains. A child is not mighty in strength of body, but he is strong to
continue, and in ability strong enough. He is not mighty as a bull, but he is
strong as an emet. Note the sentence.
In some things a fly passes an elephant. Every thing is mighty in that, to
the which nature has made him. Do we not se tender children tu^ne
merueylouse swyftlye all the day long, and feel no werinesse. What is the
cause? Because play is fit for that age, and they imagine it a play and no
labor. And in every thing the gretest part of pain is imaginacion, which
sometime makes us feel harm, when there is no harm at all. Therefore seeing
that the providence of nature has taken away imaginacion of labor from
children, And how much they lack in strength, so much they be helped in
this part, that is, that they feel not labor, It shall be the masters part,
as we said before, to put away the same by as many ways as he can, and of
purpose to make a play of it. There be also certain kinds of sportes meet for
children, wherwyth their earnest study must somewhat be eased after they be
come to that, they must learn those higher things which can not be perceived
without diligence and labor: as are the handling of Themes, to turn latin
into Greek, or greek into latin, or to learn cosmographie without book.
But most of all shall profit, if the child accustume to love and reverence
his master, to love and make much of learning, to feace rebuke, and delyght in
praise. The last obieccion touching the profit of ye c^yld in his young years.
There remains one doubt, wont to be objected by those which say: The
profit that the child gerteth in those three or four years to be so little,
that it is not worth the labor, either to take so much pain in teaching,
or bestow so much cost. And these in deed seem unto me, not so much to care
for to profit the children, as for the sparyng of their money, or the teachers
labor. But I will say he is no father, which when the matter is of teaching
his child, takes so great care for expenses. Also it is a folyshe pity, to
the intent the master should save his labor, to make his son lose certain years.
I grant it to be true in deed ye Fabius says, yt more good is done in.i. year
after, then in those.iii. or.iiii. why should we set light by this little yt is
won in a thing far more precious. Let us grant that it is but a very little,
yet were it better the child to do it, then either nothing at al, or learn
somewhat that after must be unlearned. With what business shall that age be
better occupied as soon as he begins to speak, which in no wise can be
unoccupied? Also how little soever it be that the former age does bring, yet
shall the child learn greater things, even in the same years, when smaller
should have been learned, if he had not learned them before. This says Fabius,
every year furthered and increased profits to a great sum and as much time
as is taken before in the infancy, is gotten to the elder age. It needs not
to rehearse that in those first years certain things be easily learned, which be
more hard to be learned when we be elder. For it is very easily learned, that is
learned in time conueniente. Let us grant that they be small and little things,
so we confess them to be necessary. Yet to me in deed it seems not so little
a furtheraunce to lerning to have gotten though not a perfect knowledge, yet at
the least way a taste of both the tongues, besides so many vocables and names
of things, and finally to have begun to be able to read and write pro^ptly.
It greueth us not in things much more vile, to get all the vauntage we can,
be it never so little. A diligente merchant sets not light by winning of a
farthing, thinkyng thus in his mind: it is in deed of it self but a little,
but it grows to a sum, and a little often put to a little, will quyckelye
make a great heap. The Smithes rise before day, to win as it were part of
the day. Husband men upon the holy day do some things at home, to make an
end of more work the other days. And do we regard as nothing the loss
of.iiii years in our children, when there is nothing more costly then time,
nor no possession better the^ lerning? It is never learned tymely inoughe that
never is ^nded. For we must ever learn as long as we live. And in other
things the lucre that is lost by slacken^s, may be recovered by diligence.
Time when it is once flowen away (and it flies away very quickly) may be
called again by no inchauntmentes. For the poets do trifle which tell of a
fountain, whereby old men do as it were wa^e young again: and the phisicions
deceive you, which promise a gay floryshyng youth to old men through a certain
folishe fy^t essence I wot not what. Here therefore we ought to be very
sparyng, because the loss of time may by no means be recovered. Beside this
the first part of our life is counted to be best, and therefore should be
bestowed more warelye. Hesiodus aloweth not sparynge, neither at the highest, nor
at the lowest, because when the tun is full it seems to hasty, and to late
when it is spente: and therefore byddeth us spare in the mids. But of time we
must nowher cast away the sparing, and if we should spare when the tun is full
for this cause that wine is best in the myddest, then should we most of all
save our young years, because it is the best part of the life, if you exercise
it, but yet yt goes swyftest away. The husband manne if he be any thing
diligente, will not suffer any part of his land to lie vacant, and that
that is not meet to bring forth corn, he sets it either with young
graffes, or leaves it for pasture, or storeth it with pot herbs. And shall
we suffer the best part of our life to pass away with out all fruit of
lerning? New falowed ground must be preuen^ed with some fruitful thing,
lest being untilled, it bring forth of it self naughty cockle. For needs
must it bring for the somewhat. Likewise the tender mind of the infant,
except it be strayghte ways occupied with fruitful teachynges, it will be
ouercoued with vice. An earthen pot will keep long the sauoure of the
liquore that it is first seasoned with, and it will be long or it go out. But
as for an earthen vessel being new and emptye, you may keep it for what
liquore ye will.

The mind either brings forth good fruit, if you cast into it good seed,
or if ye regard it not, it is filled with naughtines, which afterward must be
pulled up. And not a little has he won which has escaped the loss, neither
has he brought small help to virtue, which has excluded vice. But what
need many words? Wylt thou see how much it avails, whether one be brought
up in learning or not? Behold how excellently learned in the old time men
were in their youth, and how in our days they that be aged be hable to do
nothing in study? Ouide being a very young man wrote his verses of love. ^uide.
What old man is hable to do like? What manner of man Lucane was in his youth
his works declare. Lucane.
How came thy^? Because that being but.vi. months old he was brought to
Rome, and straight way delivered to be taught of two the best gramarians,
Palemo^, and Cornutus. Bassus. Persius.
His companions in study were Saleius Bassus, and Aulus Persius: that one
excellent in historye, that other in a Satyr.

Doubtless hereof came that most perfect knoweledge that he had in all the seven
sciences, and his so marvelous eloquence, that in verse he was both an
excellent oratoure, and also a Poet. In this our time there wa^teth not
exemples of good bringing up (although they be very few) and yt as well in women
as me^. Politia^ praised ye wit of ye maide^ Cassa^dra. And what is more
marvelous tha^ Ursinus a child of.xii. years old? for the remembrance of
him, he also in a very eliga^te epistle put in eternal memory. How sewe men
shall you now find, which at one time be able to endite two epistles to so
many notaries, that the sentence in every one do agree, and that there
should happen no inconvenience speech. That child did it in five epistles
and gave the arguments without any study, and was not prepared before hand to do
it. Some men when they se these things, thinking that they pass al men's
strength, ascribe it to witchcraft. It is done in deed by witchcrafte, but it
is an effectual enchau^ting, to be set in time to a learned, good, and vigilant
master. It is a strong medicine to learn the best things of learned men, and
emonge the learned.

By such wytchcrafte Alexander the great, Alexander.
when he was a young man, besides eloquence, was perfect in all the parts of
Philosophy, and except the love of wars, and swetenes to raygne had quite
raught away his inclination, he might have been counted the chief among the
best Philosophers. By the same means Caius Caesar being but a young man, was
so eloquent and well seen in the mathematical sciences. So well seen also were
many Emperors: Marcus Tullius* also Uirgil, and Horace in their lus^y youth
were so excellent in learning and Eloquence, all because they were straight
way in their tender age learned of their parents and nourses the elogancy of
the tongues, and of the best masters the liberal sciences: as Poetry,
Rhetorique, Histories, the knowledge of antiquities, Arithmetique, Geographye,
Philosophye, moral and political. And what do we I ^raye you? we keep out
children at home till they be past fourtene or fiftene year old, and when they
be corrupted with idleness, riot, and delicatenes, with much work at the last
we send them to the common schools. There to further ye matter well, they taste
a little grammar: after, when they can declyne words, and join the adjective
and the substa^tiue together, they have learned all the grammar, and tha^ be set
to that troubled Logike, where they must forget again if they have learned to
speak any thing well. But more unhappy was the time when I was a child
which al to vexed the youth with modes of signif^inge, and other folyshe
questions, and teching nothing else then to speak folishelye. Uerely those
masters because they would not be thought to teach folish things, darckened
grammar with diffic^lties of Logike and Metaphisi^e: even for this verelye,
that afterward they should return backwardelye to learn grammar, wh^ they
were old, which we see happens now to some divines that be wyser, that
after so many hye degrees and all their titles, whereby they may be ignoraunte
in nothing, they be feign to come again to those books, which are wont to
be read unto children. I blame the^ not, for it is better to learn late then
never, that thing which is necessary to be known.

Good Lord what a world was that, when with great boastynge John Garlandes
verses were read to young men, and that with long and painful commentaries?
wha^ a great part of time was consumed in folyshe verses* in saying the^ to
other, repetynge them, and hearing them again? when Florista and Florius
were learned without book? for as for Alexander, I think him worthy to be
received among the meaner sort. Moreover how much time was lost in
Sophistrye, and in the superfluous mases of Logyke? And because I will not be
to long, how troublesomelye were all sciences taught? how paynefullye?
whiles every reader to auaunce him self, would even straighte way in the
beginning stuff in the hardest things of all, and sometime very folyshe
things to. For a thing is not therefore goodly because it is hard, as to stand
a far of, and to cast a mustarde seed through a nedles eye and miss not, it
is hard in deed, but ye^ it is a very trifle: and to undo a pair of tariers,
it is much work, but yet a vain and idle subtiltye.

Add here unto, that oftentimes these things be taught of unlearned men, and
that is worse, of lewd learned men, sometime also of sluggardes and unthrifts,
which more regard taking of money tha^ the profit of their scholars. Wha^
the commune bringing up is such, yet do we maruayle that few be perfitly
learned before they be old. The best part of our life is lost with idleness,
Nota.
with vices, wherewith when we be infected, we give a little part of our time
to studies, and a great part to feasts and plays. And to an ill matter is
taken as evil a crafts manne, either teaching that is folyshe, or that which
must be unlearned again. And after this we make our excuse that the age is
weak, the wit not yet apt to learn, the profit to be very small, and many
other things, when in deed the fault is to be ascribed to evil brynginge up.
I will not trouble you any le^ger, only will I speak to your wisdom which is
in other things very sharp and quycke of sight. Consider how dear a
possession your son is, A goodli brief rehearsal of the things before
spoken.
how diverse a thing it is and a matter of much work to come by learning,
and how noble also the same is, what a redines is in all childrens wits to
learn, what agilitie is in the mind of man how easily those things be
learned which be best and agreeable to nature, inespeciallye if they be taught
of learned and gentle maiste^s by the way of play: further how fast those
things abide with us, wherewt we season first of all the emptye and rude
minds, which self things an elder age p^rceyueth boeth more hardelye, and
sooner forgets: Beside this how dear and the loss never recovered, time is,
how much it avails to begin in season, and to learn every thing when it
should be, how much continuance is able to do, and how greatly the heap that
Hesiodus speaks of, does increase by puttinge to little and little, how
swiftly the time flies away, how youth will always ^e occupied, and how
unapt old age is to be taught: If thou consider these things thou will never
suffer that thy little child should pass away (I will not say) seven year but
not so much as three days, in the which he may be either prepared or
instructed to learning though the profit be never so little.

FINIS.
Imprynted at London by John Day dwellinge over Aldersgate, beneth saint
Martyns. And are to be sold at his shop by the little conduit in Chepesyde at
the sign of the Resur^ection.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Per septennium.


