CHANGES: OR, Love in a Maze.

A COMEDY, As it was presented at the Private House in Salisbury Court, by the
Company of His Majesty's Revels.

Written by JAMES SHIRLEY, Gent.

-- Deserta per avia dulcis
Raptat Amor. --
LONDON: Printed by G. P. for William Cook, and are to be sold at his shop
near Furnivals Inn gate in Holborne, 1632.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LADY DOROTHIE SHIRLEY.
MAdame, who make the glory of your blood
No privilege at all to be less good;
Pardon the rudeness of a Comedy,
That (taught too great ambition) would fly
To kiss your white hand, and receive from thence
Both an authority, and innocence.
It Is not this great man* nor that Prince, whose fame
Can more advance a Poem, than your name,
To whose clear virtue truth is bound, and we,
That there is so much left for History.
I do acknowledge custom, that to men
Such Poems are presented; but my pen
Is not engaged nor can allow too far
A Salick Law in Poetry, to bar
Ladies the inheritance of wit, whose soul
Is active, and as able to control,
As some 'usurpe the Chair, which write a style
To breath the Reader better than a mile;
But no such empty titles but my flame;
Nor will I sin so much, to show their name
In print; some servile Muses be their drudge,
That sweat to find a Patron, not a Judge.
To you, great Lady, then, in whom do meet
Candor and Judgment, humble as your feet
I vow these Papers, wishing you may see
Joys multiplied, to your eternity.
Your Honors devoted Servant, I A. SHIRLEY.

Prologus.
THat Muse whose Song within another Sphere
Has pleased some, and of the best, whose ear
Is able to distinguish strains that are
Clear, and Phebean, from the popular;
And sinful dregs of the adulterate brain,
By me salutes your Candor once again;
And begs this noble favor, that this place,
And weak performances may not disgrace
His fresh Thalia; alas our Poet knows
We have no name, a torrent overflowes*
Our little Island, miserable we,
Do every day play our own Tragedy:
But it is more noble to create than kill,
He says, and if but with his flame, your will
Would join, we may obtain some warmth, and prove
Next them that now do surfeit with your love*
Encourage our beginning, nothing grew
Famous at first, and Gentlemen, if you
Smile on this barren Mountain, soon it will,
Become both fruitful and the Muses hill.
The Actors names.
Master Goldsworth, father to Chrysolina and Aurelia. Master Woodhamore, Uncle
to Eugenia. Master Thornay Gentlemen Lovers of Chrysolina, Aurelia and Eugenia.
Master Gerard Gentlemen Lovers of Chrysolina, Aurelia and Eugenia. Master
Yongrave Gentlemen Lovers of Chrysolina, Aurelia and Eugenia. Master Caperwit,
a Poetaster. Sir Gervace Simple. Bird, Caperwits Page. Thumpe, Sir Gervaces
Man. Servants. Dancer. Mistress Goldsworth. Chrysolina. Aurelia. Eugenia.
CHANGES OR, Love in a Maze.
Actus primus, Scena primas.
Enter at one door Sir John Wood-hamore, and Master Goldsworth, at the other
M. Gerard, and Master Yongrave. Golds. I Heard your Niece, Sir, was not well,
you should encourage her to take the air some times.


Woo. Indeed she is somewhat melancholy, and keeps
Her chamber:

Gol. 'T may prove inconvenient for
Her health, does she not languish for a husband?
Take heed oth' green disease*

Woo. I Will find a cure,
If that will do it; your daughters are not yet
Disposed of?

Gol. No, but we have clients daily
That visit their affections; and while
We are speaking, here is one.

Woo. Ha, which of them? I hope not Master Yongrave*
He would engage his service to my Niece,
I shall not think him worthy, if he have
Two Hares afoot.

Gol. He is a stranger to me,
But Master Gerard that holds conference with him,
Maintains some correspondence with my daughters:
Pray let us observe.

Ge. Prithee come, venture in.

Yon. No farther, you have obligation,
Excuse me, I have affairs, some other time
I Will wait on you.

Ge. What needs this ceremony?
The fair ones will not blast you.

Yon. 'Twere a sin,
To think their beams could hurt*

Ge. Faith, I could wish
Thy affection not engaged, there is so much beauty
And goodness in this pair of sisters*

Yon. Do not
Make me suspect your friendship, you would wish
Me miserable, not that I dispute
Their merit, but I must not yield to that
Will bring my faith and honor into question;
I have a Mistress, be you happy Sir in yours.

Woo. I like this well, lets interrupt them;
Good fortune Master Yongrave.

Yon. You are Sir,
Most opportunely met.

Gol. Kind Master Gerard.

Yon. I had a present resolution,
To visit you at home, and your fair kins-woman.

Ge. I shall be bold.

Gol. Pray enter.

Woo. We Will together: I take my leave.

Go. I am your humble servant,

Woo. Come Master Yongrave. Exuent.

Go. This Gerard is a Gentleman of handsome parts,
And they say fortuned, diligent in's courtship:
But it concerns me to be careful in
Disposing of my children.

Enter Servant. Ser. Sir Gervace Simple Sir, is newly entered,

Gol. His wisdom must be welcome: there is a Knight
With Lordships, but no manors, one that has
But newly cast his country skin, came up
To see the fashions of the Town, has crept
Into a Knighthood which he paid for heartily
And in his best clothes is suspected for
A Gentleman.

Enter Sir Ger. Simple, and his man Thumpe. Sim. Thumpe, I have not yet the
face to speak to her, but
It Is no matter, and I can get her fathers and mothers good will.

Thu. You have her mothers already.

Sim. I, I, she is a Matron as they say, I came over her with
My Knighthood, and begot a consent upon her quickly: I
Perceive it is an advantage for a man to wear spurs,
The rowell of Knighthood does gingle in the ear of their
Understanding.

Thu. I do wonder Sir, that you speak so well now, and
Want the audacity as they say to talk to your Mistress.

Sim. So do I too, but I cannot help it: I was a Gentleman
Thou know but the other day. I have yet but a few
Complements, within a while I shall get more impudence
And then have at her.

Thu. The father.

Sim. Pray heaven you may besav'd, Sir.

Go. You Are charitable.

Sim. I am come Sir to do my business.

Go. How Sir?

Sim. You may imagine as they say, and so forth your
Daughter is a very fine Gentlewoman, and may in due time be a Lady,
For I do love her by this Mullet, there is a touch of my Heraldry.

Gol. Have you acquainted her,
How much you mean to honor us, how far
Have you engaged her liking?

Sim. Nay, I never spoke to her in my life, nor do not mean in have.


Gol. How Sir?


Sim. Not in have Sir, 'twere no good manners to speak hastily to a
Gentlewoman, to talk post (as they say) to his Mistress; I am resolved to
have your consent first, and then.


Gol. It argues your discretion;


Sim. I think so, some wiser than some, faith how do y'like my face.


Gol. I have seen worse in a beard,


Sim. Oh, ho, I took my choice of forty, this morning.


Gol. Did you so?


Sim. My man knows I broke a Looking* glass into forty pieces,
I am sure, and this was the best face I could find among
'Em all, look in my forehead, have any skill in Palmistry?

Gol. Not I, Sir.

Sim. But this is nothing to the purpose (as they say,)
Where is my beautiful Mistress, your Daughter?

Gol. Which of them?

Sim. No matter which.

Gol. They are both within.

Sim. Oh, it is well, I will not speak with her, I told you
Before, but I hope I shall have your good Will.

Gol. You mean to marry her.

Sim. My Chaplain shall.

Gol. You are witty; I hope Sir, you will give me leave (as
They say) to deliberate, for after your example, I would
Do nothing rashly, I will not give you my consent in
Have Sir.

Sim. It Is wisdom, I can tarry, it is fit I should, commend
Me to the Virgin.

As he goes forth he meets Mistress Goldsworth. Mis. What, leaving us already,
noble Sir?
Why husband, what do y'meane? no more respect
To a man honorable? you are not going Sir?

Sim. Yes faith, I love to be going, I cannot abide to stand
Still, Thumpe, take off my cloak; does my Rapier become Me?

Thu. Excellent well.

Sim. This it is to be a complete Gentleman, what a coxcombe was I before I came
to town, the country breeds so many Clownes; do think my tenants will know
me now I am disguised


Go. But what assurance can he give me, wife,
That he is able to get children?
For that is a thing material; I would not
Willingly sacrifice my daughter to
An Eunuch, and such a one may that Knight be,
For ought I know.

Mis. What do you talk of children?
Is he not honorable, a proper Knight?

Sim. She does commend me; do not put on my cloak yet, let her survey my
person.


Mis. Shall not our daughter be a Lady, and I a
Ladies mother? And the Heralds know
That is some privilege; you have seen many Eunuchs
With a black beard; he is a man I warrant him,
He has the right hair, Husband, for a woman,
I know it by experience: tell not me,
Suppose he were an Eunuch, he I say
Is honorable, and any body can get children,
That Is the least thing of a hundred
And the woman be but fruitful.

Sim. Now I Will take my leave.

Mis. Will It please you Sir, to walk in, and speak to my daughter?

Sim. No, I think it not the best way to speak to her, as I said,
In have, what if I had an inventory of my good parts
First drawn to prepare her.

Gol. And his father had not left him more land than brain,
His worship had been but a poor fool.

Sim. Well, if she understand signs, have at her.

Mis. Come, I will direct you. Exeunt.

Gol. My wife is passionate and affects this Knight
For's title, but I hope my daughter will
Enter Servant. Submit to my election: how now:

Ser. Here is a Gentleman desires access to you.

Gol. A Gentleman?

Ser. He may be a Lord by his train,
A Page waits on him.

Gol. Some fresh Inamorato.

Enter Caperwit, and his Page. Cap. Save you Sir.

Gol. And you Sir.

Cap. You do not know me?

Gol. Not I Sir.

Cap. It Is very likely: you have a daughter.

Gol. I have two:

Cap. Two? the better, there is more choice,
They want husbands.

Gol. 'Twill become my care to provide 'm good ones.

Cap. You say well, what do y' think of me?

Gol. I know you not.

Cap. You told me that before: may I see'm?

Gol. They are not to be let out Sir by lease,
Or yearly rent.

Cap. You mistake me; I come not for a lodging.

Gol. Nor to lie with them?

Cap. I come to take'm Sir, another way:
What portions have they?

Go. You should be a purse-taker, by your inquiry
After their money, they have a round portion, Sir.

Cap. What Is that?

Go. A cipher.

Cap. How?

Go. Nothing. I hope you have no mind to marry.

Cap. Ex nihilo nihil fit. I came to offer my self a
Servant in affection to one of your daughters, but
Nothing has converted me.

Go. Do y'heare Sir, a fine humorist: if they marry with
My consent, I can make figures, which added to
Their ciphers, may make up 2000 pound apiece: what
Is your name?

Cap. My name is Caperwit.

Go. You Have a dancing Name, I do not think, but you
Write all the Coranto's.

Ca. Wit! wit by Mercury! I shall love thy daughters the
Better for that: do they affect Poetry?

Go. They read nothing else.

Ca. Then they are wise; it is a Seraphicke contemplation*
I Will furnish them with the most excellent Poems --

Go. Of your own composition?

Ca. That is intimated, when I say excellent;
Your daughters shall be judge, let 'm vouchsafe
A subject to my muse, and prove the height
Of my imaginations.

Go. They are entering.

Enter Gerard, Chrisolina, Aurelia. Cap. Thus breaks Aurora from the Eastern
hills,
And chaseth night away, let me salute
Your rosy cheek --

Chapter Good morrow to you Sir, there is but one Aurora,
What do y' make my Sister pray?

Cap, She is the Sun it self.

Au. No Sir, I am the daughter of that Gentleman,
No sun I Will assure you.

Ca. Whose golden beams do gild this lower world,
Transfixing hearts, converting ribs of ice
Into a flame.

Ge. What buffonry is this?

Chapter Lets hear his speech out, and my Sister be the Sun,
We shall have day enough: a pretty Pageant!

Au. Prithee do not mind him.

Cap. Virgins, that equal all the graces, and
Only in this, that you are two, beneath them.
The miracles of beauty! for whose eyes
The Persians might forsake their god, and pay
Religious honor to this flame -- what is he?

Go. A Gentleman, that would endeare himself.

Cap. Has he any fancies in him? Can he ravish
The Ladies?

Go. Ravish Ladies Sir? that is a dangerous matter.

Ca. How many raptures does he talk a day?
Is he transported with Poeticke rage?
When was he styled Imperial wit? who are
The Prince Electors in his Monarchy?
Can he like Celtick Hercules, with chains
Of his divine tongue, draw the gallant tribe
Through every street, whilst the grave senator
Points at him; as he walks in triumph, and
Does wish, with half his wealth, he might be young,
To spend it all in Sack, to hear him talk
Eternal Sonnets to his Mistress? ha?
Who loves not verse is damned --

Go. How Sir? This Gentleman dares fight.

Cap. Who will fight with him?

Go. You do not know his disposition.

Cap. But I will, Sir; I have a great ambition to be of your acquaintance, I
hope you will excuse these fancies of mine, though I were borne a Poet I will
study to be your servant in Prose, yet if now and then my brains do sparkle,
I cannot help it, raptures will out, my Motto is Quicquid conabor* the midwife
wrapped my head up in a sheet of Sir Philip Sidney that inspired me, and my nurse
descended from old Chaucer, my conversation has been among the furies, and if
I meet you in Apollo, a pottle of the best Ambrosia in the house, shall wait
upon you.


Enter Sir Gervase Simple, and Mistress Goldsworth. Mis. They are here Sir, at
full view.


Cap. What Is he?


Mis. A Knight I Will assure you.


Cap. Does he come
A wooing to the Ladies?

Gol. After the Spanish fashion --
A far off.

Mis. Daughter, I must counsel you to respect
This honorable man, you do not know
What it is to be a Lady, and take place,
Such titles come not every day, observe
With what a comely garb he walks, and how
He bends his subtle body, take him a my word,
A man of his complexion loves a woman naturally.

Cap. A pretty motion.

Mis. Pray come nearer Sir.

Sim. You shall pardon me for that, I know
My distance.

Cap. Will he not speak to her?

Gol. You should do well to furnish him with an oration, a spoonefull of
Aganippe's well, and a little of your Salt, would season, if not pickle him.


Cap. Should I so wast the bright Minerva's dew, to pickle a Mushrome?


Sim. Thumpe, she looks upon me, to say truth, I am but a bashful puppy.


Thu. Your worship is more than a puppy.


Sim. I, I know I am an old dog at her mother, but and I should be hanged, I
have not impudence enough to speak to her: does not that Gentleman laugh at me?


Thu. He is very merry with her father.


Sim. It Is very suspicious, would I had a good jest to get of withal.


Au. You shall command the duty of a daughter,
But I hope mother, you will give me leave
To love before I marry I have yet
No argument of his affection,
But what you please to bring me it becomes not
My modesty to court him, and give up
My heart before I hear him say, he means
To meet and entertain it.

Mis. It Is a fault, and I must blame him, that he is no forwarder.

Ca. I will accuse him --

Gol. Do so.

Au. Love, forgive me this excuse, my heart is fixed,
I find another written here.

Ca. I do salute you, venerable Sir.


Sim. You may salute me at your pleasures, but you are mistaken, I am no more
venerable than your self; my name is Sir Gervace Simple.


Thu. And I am one of his Gentleman Vshers* Sir, that follow him.


Ca. Heroic Sir, I do adore your physnomy. Now by the dust of my Progenitors
--


Sim. There Is a fine oath!


Ca. You look like the Nine Worthies.


Sim. I have been taken for 'em a hundred times.


Cap. Fairer than Plutos self king of the shades.


Sim. That King was a poor kinsman of mine, and indeed We had one complexion.


Ca. The Devil you had?


Sim. Sir, I am sorry, I cannot stay wi'y, but pray if you meet any of the
nine Worthies, or my Cosen Pluto, commend me to 'em, I shall be glad to meet
you, or them, at any Tavern, between Cheap and Charingcrosse, and so I
remain yours, or not his own, sau's complement.


Mis. When will you please Sir Gervace, to visit us again? Nay, it shall be
yours. He complements, Exeunt.


Sim. Now my foot's in.


Ca. But that I see it, I should not have believed there were such a fool in
nature.


Ge. In this variety of servantss, I
Acknowledge you greatly honor me, and in the presence
Of both your parents to vouchsafe this favor,
Doubly obliges me.

Chapter You are most welcome.

Au. You may believe my sister, she never speaks
But by direction of her heart.

Ger. I am confident,
Nor has she any virtue, which you do not
Divide with her; your twins in birth and goodness!

Au. You Are bountiful in character.

Gol. I Will not oppose you Sir, and you can win their opinion.

Cap. It Is enough, I shall be proud to serve you;
But at this present, with your noble license,
I take my leave, there is a Lord expects
To meet me at a Tavern, that has come
Fourscore and nineteen mile, to hear an elegy of
My composition

Gol. He deserves to enjoy you.

Cap. I Will attend the Ladies, when my stars will be more propitious, in the
interim wearing your beautiful figures in my heart, I kiss your white hand --
Exit.


Ger. I think the stock of his discourse be wasted,
And he returns to take up more on's credit,
Until he break again, the Town is full
Of these vaineglorious flashes.

Gol. Chrisolina,
You see what store of servants ye attract,
Plenty of lovers but I hope you will
Be ruld, and take my counsel: which of all
And be plain wi'mee, hold you best opinion of?

Chapter You will not Sir, be angry, if I answer you justly.

Gol. No no, tell me.

Chapter I confess,
I now do feel the power of love, until
That Gentleman --

Gol. Which, which Gentleman?

Chapter By his fair merit, won my hearts consent,
I had my freedom.

Gol. Master Gerard?

Chapter The same, oh Sir, there is no comparison
With him and those that proffer us their service:
Sir Gervace is but title, the other noise,
Empty of all reality and worth,
There is my choice, more precious to my thoughts, Pointing to Ger.
Than all mankind without him, and I hope
You will be kind in your allowance Sir.

Gol. You might have used less haste in your election,
Or first acquainted me, you shall do well
To keep possession of your heart awhile;
But I Will consider; send your sister to me:
What say you daughter to Sir Gervace?

Au. Nothing, as much as he has said to me.
I affect worth, not show; and in my choice
I hope your judgment Sir will meet.

Gol. I like this well, be obedient.

Au. What think you Sir, of Master Gerard?

Gol. You do not love him?

Au. I should then belly
My heart when I deny him my best love,
He needs not boast his worth, like those whom Nature
And Art have left unfurnished, he is a man
For birth, for education, for his fortune,
Worthy a nobler wife, than she that now
Commends him to you.

Gol. Would you marry him?

Au. I know not that man in the world beside,
I would call husband, in my soul I am
Already his, and if you will not be
Held cruel to your daughter --

Gol. How Is this?
Both in love with the same man? my care will be
To a great purpose, this is very strange;
Send your sister to me; come hither, come hither,
You are not yet contracted to that Gentleman.

Ch No such thing has past.

Go. But you are content to take him for your bridegroom, I mean Master
Gerard.


Chapter And call it happiness;


Go. Your mother calls: so, so, do you hear? Aurelia, do you love that
Gentleman?


Au. Yes.


Gol. Very good* when your wedding clothes come home, pray give me leave to pay
for 'em, and the dinner too. I say nothing of a portion, go after your sister:
hum, this is very pretty, faith, let me be bold to ask you a question Sir.


Ger. My answer shall be just, and free.


Gol. Which of my daughters do you love best?
As you are a Gentleman the truth, if you affect either, it
Is quickly answered.

Ge. The truth is, as you ask, I love neither.

Gol. How, do you love none of 'em both, they are very well rewarded.


Ge. Love neither of them best, they are so equal in beauty, and desert, by
both I swear, I cannot prefer any.


Gol. You Would not have two wives against the Statute?


Ge. When I have the happiness to speak with one alone*
There Is so much sweetness in her, such a troop
Of graces waiting on her words and actions,
I love her infinitely, and think it blessing
To see her smile, but when the the other comes
In presence, in her eye she brings a charm
To make me dote on her; I am divided,
And like the trembling Needle of a Dyall,
My heart's afraid to fix, in such a plenty
I have no star to sail by.

Gol. This is stranger.
Than all the rest, but do you love them both?

Ger. I dare not call it my misfortune Sir,
And yet I know not. --

Gol. What will become of this?
Is It possible? My daughter will be mad if this humor
Hold, and I am little better while I think on it:
I Will to them again. Exit.

Ger. On whom shall I complain for my hard fate?
Love is not innocent enough to be
A child, yet Poets give him Deity,
Fond men! prove it in me, thou quiverd Boy,
That love with equal flame two Mistresses,
I will believe thee a god, and kiss thy dart,
Furnish my bosom with another heart. Exit.

Actus Secundus.
Enter Sir John Woodhamore, Master Yongrave. Woodhamore. I Am her Keeper;
expect here a while,
And I Will prepare her. Exit.

Yon. I Will attend; poor Gentlewoman,
Borne with more freedom than thou live, thy parents
Left thee not rich to be a prisoner,
Nay worse, a prey to this hard man, who has
Sold thee already, for if I obtain
Thy love -- I hear them coming.

Enter Eugenia. Woodham. Wood. Gentle Niece,
Misconster not my actions, it is my care
Of thee, and to satisfy the duty
I owe to my dead Brother, thy kind parent:
I thus restrain thee, thou art young, and can not.
Being so good thy self, suspect the world
Has any false men in it; I know there are
Gallants, that study to undo such Virgins
As thou art, that will flatter and betray
Thy fortunes to their riot, this unhappiness
I would prevent, and have new found a man,
Into whose arms I may deliver up
The wealth that I am trusted with.

Eug. He Is welcome: Pray what is your business?

Yon. You may understand, partly by what your Uncle has delivered.


Eug. You come a wooing do ye not? Heigho!

Yon. How Is this?

Woo. I Will leave you at opportunity. Exit.

Eug. Troth, if you be a good man, be not tedious,
I do not love set speeches nor long praises,
I hope you have made no verses of my hair,
Acrosticks of my name, I hate them worse
Than witchcraft, or the place I live in: if
You be a suitor, put me out of my pain,
Quickly I beseech you.

Yon. I am one would be your servant.

Eug. My servant? what can you do?

Yon. I can love you.

Eug. I cannot help it, it is none of my fault.

Yon. Your beauty makes me,
Which cannot be without as fair a soul.
I dare believe my eyes, which till this present,
Could never reach more than your face, and that
At too unkind a distance, from your window;
I have enquired your fortune, and lamenting
With loving pity, such a noble creature
Should be confind to narrow limits, come
To bring you freedom, make you mistress of
Your liberty, and my self, if you can think
Me worthy of your love: I do not court
Your fortune, but your self, and if I urge
With too much haste, what great ones might be proud
To expect, after much suit, and that you cannot
Find in your tongue consent, encourage me,
But for the present with one smile.

Eug. I cannot,
Unless I counterfeit, I have not smiled
These ten months; if a sigh will pleasure you,
I can afford enough to break your heart,
And yet I live. Walk into the other room,
You Will find an alteration in the air,
And think you come into a mist, which I
Made all with my own sighs, but I would not
Infect you so; you seem an honest Gentleman.

Yon. Her sorrows help the growth of my affection;
What will she be in peace, that is so lovely
In her distress; I wish you would impose
Something on me, to settle your sad thoughts,
I would embrace a danger, to assure
The quiet of your mind.

Eug. It Is in the power
Of one, that would be kind to help me, but --

Yon. Make me that friend.

Eug. You may love me too much,
To undertake that task.

Yon. Too much I cannot.

Eug. Oh yes, for though I should esteem him dear,
And call him my true friend, that in this storm
Would lend a cord to save me, yet such is
The misery of the employment, he must not
Love me too well that does it.

Yon. Be more plain
And let me never hope to be called yours,
If I refuse any command, that may
Or profit, or delight you.

Eug. I release these hasty
Protestations.

Yon. I pray trust me.

Eug. I will, athough
Every syllable you speak, makes me suspect,
You will repent this freedom. If you will do
A grateful Office to me, in your person*
Give this paper to a Gentleman. gives him a letter.

Yon. Your name?

Eug. In the direction
You Will find it, with all necessary circumstance
To meet with him

Yon. This all: you do not well.
To mock my honest heart with this cheap service.
I was in earnest, when I promisd more,
Than carriage of a letter.

Eug. If you please
To make it then a perfect act of Nobleness,
You may take notice, that I long have loved him,
And if you find him cold, in the perusal:
Tell him I had the promise of his faith,
When I gave up my heart, in the presence of
A thousand Angels, that will witness it:
If yet he be not soft to stir up his
Compassion, tell him how I live, and languish,
You may report you saw me weep, I have not
Much more to say, if you will do this favor,
Twill be an argument of your respect,
I see your resolution cooles already.

Yon. It Is a severe employment, but I Will do
Something, pray honor me to kiss your hand,
I have not yet deserved to reach your lip:
Content dwell in your bosom.

Enter Woodhamore. Wood. What success?

Yon. I hope well, some affairs
Call me away. Exit.

Wood. Good Master Yongrave: how do you like this Gentleman.

Eug. I shall desire to see him again, my heart
Is light upon sudden, please you Uncle
I Will in, and play a lesson of my Lute. Exit.

Wood. Do what you please, I relish not your air,
That's only sweet to me that profit brings,
There is no music without golden strings.

Enter Chrisolina, Aurelia. Chapter Was ever Maid so miserable in her affection?

Au. Is not my fate as cruel?
Cannot we love him still, and yet be sisters?
I hope we may; the love I bear to him
Shall not destroy my piety to you:
Nature has framed us two in person, but we are both one in heart.

Chapter Indeed we are; We are too much one,
And both love one too much, for either to enjoy him.

Au Say not so, give me a little time and I will try
How I can give him you; I will persuade
My heart to let him go.

Chapter Alas poor sister,
Why should you give him me? it is no argument;
Because I came one minute into life
Before you, therefore you should render first
To me, what is so precious to your self;
Rather let me begin, that was first made
Acquainted to the world, resign to thee,
And make thee happy by enjoying him.

Au. But do you know the miserable consequence?
For if you love him with that truth, and fervor
You speak of, (as it were a sin in me
Not to believe it,) can you look for less
Than death, to see me mistress of his faith,
And lead in nuptial triumph to the Church?

Chapter I cannot tell --

Au. Or if it did not kill you
So soon, I know the sorrow would distract you.
How can I smile to see my sister weep,
Away her eyes, and tell the jarring minutes
With hasty sighs to know her self forsaken?

Chapter And can it be, you could do less, that love him
As well as I, to see him made my husband,
Would it not make you melancholy sister,
And often retire into the dark to weep,
Could you behold us freely kiss, embrace
And go to bed together, remembering that
You gave this friend to me from your own
Heart, and live?

Au. Why let me dye then,
Rather than you, I shall perhaps obtain
Some charitable Epitaph, to tell
The world, I died to save my sisters life;
It Is no such thing to dye.

Chapter This is again
Our misery, it is not in our power
Be resignation, to assure to either
His love, he only must determine it*
We cannot guide his passion.

Au. Nor himself
Direct it, as he now appears divided,
May be, it would be fortunate for both,
Would he be more particular.

Chapter That makes
Our flame increase, that he protests he loves
Us both, so equally.

Au. It Is very strange.

Chapter Let us then join our argument to persuade him,
To point out one of us to be his Bride,
The Other in time, may hope to gain her freedom;
I know not what I say -- we both must plead
Enter Gerard. Against our selves: see, he is come already.

Ge. The scales are even still, that one had less
Perfection, to make the doubtful balance
Give difference in their value; but I wrong
Their virtues to wish either any want,
That equally incline my soul to love 'em.
Justice I now consent, thou should be blind,
My eyes are but the cause I cannot see,
And will not give my judgment leave to make
Distinction of these two Democritus,
I do allow thy rashness, ad confess
Then thou did rectify thy contemplation
When thou did lose thy sight. Which of these two
Instruct me love, that the other? both? what fate
Hovers about my choice? Were it not sin
I would be blind, as Poets fancy love,
Into whom now I am transformed, that then
My soul not looking through these glasses, might
With inward speculation aim at her,
That is the happiest, if one can be so.

Chapter Sir, if we be not troublesome --

Ge. You cannot.

Au. To interrupt your meditations, we have a suit.

Ge. Both? it must needs be granted,

Chapter Nor let us suffer in our modesties,
If our request seem strange.

Ge. It Is a command,
And I must needs obey; you two divide this Empires

Chapter You prepare; we dispute not
The strangeness of your love, but pity it,
And are so ready in our own affection
To answer your opinion of us both,
That if you can collect, what devide
On two, and place it fairly upon one,
Choose whom you will make happy.

Au. We expect not
Your hasty answer, though we both desire
A swift end to your trouble.

Ge. I pray stay. Exit.
I would determine now, but cannot -- fair ones,
Was ever lover so perplexed? I must resolve.

Enter Master Thornay. Tho. Why how now Frank? what melancholy?

Ger. How came you hither?

Tho. Why of my feet:
I was at your lodging to enquire for you,
And here they told me I should find you.

Ge. Yes,
Here I am lost indeed; prithee excuse my dullness.

Tho. What Is the matter, come I guess
The cause, which of these Gentlewomen is it? I saw 'em*

Ge. Did? and how do like 'em prithee?

Tho. I do like 'em so well, that I could wish --

Ge. Which, which of them?

Tho. Faith I cannot tell, the worst of 'em both a-bed wi'me.

Ge. Thy wishes are
Not modest: could thou love one of them nobly?
Ha? thou have a person and fortune to invite thy
Entertainment, come let me counsel you.

Tho. To what?

Ge. To love, and to a blessing: could thou see
So sweet a pair, and feel no burning shaft?
Have thou a soul about thee, that is capable
Of knowledge and delight? did ever love?

Tho. Yes once, and I think heartily, for the time,
But I ha'drowned her.

Ge. How?

Tho. In Sack, I think as gallants lose their Mistresses,
By drinking their health too often.

Ge. Prithee do not trifle.

Tho. What would have me answer? I can love.

Ge. A woman?

Tho. What do make of me?

Ge. With honor?

Tho. And honesty, if I see cause.

Ge. Enough; thou shall have cause
Within two minutes, shall but see again
These sisters, and be proud to be a servant,
I prophecy already; oh my friend!

Tho. Pray take me wi'you.

Ge. Yes, thou shall go with me
And speak to 'em, and be amazed as I am,
To know there are such creatures.

Tho. I ha'seene a multitude of fair ones.

Ge. All other women
Are but like pictures in a gallery,
Set off to the eye, and have no excellency
But in their distance; but these two, far off
Shall tempt thee to just wonder, and drawn near
Can satisfy thy narrowest curiosity:
The stock of woman has not two more left,
To rival them in graces.

Tho. You speak for 'em,
I may go farther, and fare worse, --. I Will not
Consider more on it, lets to 'em, stay --
Which of these two's your mistress? let me know*
Where to direct my service.

Ge. That question
Has puzzled me already.

Tho. Say, which is it you best affect*

Ge. I love em both, so equally,
I know not which to name.

Tho. How, both? what then
Should I do with em? art thou mad?

Ge. A little,
Contain thy self, and call thy reason to thee,
Although it be the cruelty of my fate,
(...) can be no bar to thee; I can enjoy
But one, and yet thou shall have choice
Of both, thou art not thus my rival,
But my friend, relief of my distraction for she
Whom thou refusest, if thou can endeare thy self to either,
In my heart shall meet a clear and perfect entertainment.

Tho. Hum.

Ger. Can thou resolve? win either,
And we both grow happy at once.

Tho. You say well, this is fair --

Ger. They are here.

Enter Simple and M. Golds. at one door, and Thump, Chris. and Aurel. at the
other. Mis. With your favor I must chide you Sir, not once speak to My
daughter, she expects to be courted with kisses and embraces.


Sim. I, I, I could kiss her all over, and embrace her too, but I have an
imperfediment, I cannot speak as I would do; but let me alone a little, I Will
try, let me see, and I hanot forgot my verses.


Mis. Here they are, I Will not trouble you. Exit.


Ger. I will leave this Gentleman;
He is my best friend Ladies.

Chapter You oblige us more to respect him.


Ger. I hope you will be just,
At my return, when I declare my self.

Au. Sir, you sh'anot need to urge it.


Ger. I am your honourer. Exit.


Sim. Now Thump, I am resolved to speak to her, whatsoever Come on it; hum, hum.
Enter Mr. Goldsworth.


Gol. What another suitor?

I were best lock up my daughters, they will be smothered with Gentlemen: Sir
Gervace you are a welcome man.


Sim. You shall see, if I do not speak to her, now
Now, and to the purpose, in spite of the devil.

Thump Stroke me o'th back. He plucks Aur. by the gown.
There Is something in my head, and it were out.

Thu. I hope you do not mean your brains.


Sim. Would somebody loved me, but as well, as I loved Somebody.


Au. Now it is out.


Sim. La you there, I think I talked to her.


Gol. But in my opinion you were quickly daunted.


Sim. Was I so? well mark me now, now, I will wincke As hard as I can, and
then I Am sure she cannot put me out.


Enter Caperwit. Sim. takes Cap. by the hand. Sim. Beauty --

Cap. How now? what means this?

Sim. Let me but kiss thy hand, and tell
How much I love thee; I know very well
Thou art a Phoenix, beauteous and bright,
And do burn every man for thy delight
Thy eyes are Sun and Moon, not to be matched.

Chapter This was intended for you sister.

Sim. Thy hair is fine as gold, thy chin is hatched
With silver, needs must brazen be my face,
That cannot come into thee with a grace.

Cap. Before or after meat.

Sim. Sweet, hear me out.
But this I know, I am thy faithful Lover,
Oh quench my fire.

Cap. Or else the pot run's over.

Sim. You Are in the right:
Accept me for thy servant, not thy foe,
For I do love thee better than any man in the whole world can do.

Cap. Come kiss me then, and open thy fair eyne.

Sim. With all my heart.

Om. Ha, ha.

Sim. Gentlemen, rest you merry; Thump,
By this hand I Will be drunk presently.

Thu. And you had taken my counsel, you had done so
Before you came hither: Wine is armor of proof. Exeunt.

Cap. Ladies I am sorry, this rude fellow has
Abused your ear, with harsh, and untuned numbers.

Gol. Your verses have a tune belike

Cap. I came a purpose, to present a copy
Of verses that should make your genius stand
O'th tip-toe, list to me, and grow immortal.

Chapter We shall be troubled now.

Tho. If please you Lady
Weel walk a side, I have something of more weight
I would impart. Ex.

Au. I Will leave him too. Exit.

Gol. Master Caperwit, before you read, pray tell me,
Have your verses any adjectives?

Cap. Adjectives, would you have a Poem without
Adjectives? they are the flowers, the grace of al our language:
A well chosen Epithete does give new soul
To fainting Poesy, and makes every verse
A bride, with Adjectives we bait our lines,
When we do fish for Gentlewomens loves,
And with their sweetness catch the nibling ear
Of amorous Ladies, with the music of
These ravishing Nownes, we charm the silken Tribe,
And make the Gallant melt with apprehension
Of the rare word: I will maintain t against
A bundle of Grammarians, in Poetry,
The Substantive it self, cannot subsist
Without an Adjective.

Gol. But for all that,
Those words would sound more full, me thinks, that are not*
So larded, and if I might counsel you,
You should compose a Sonnet clean without them:
A row of stately Substantives, would march
Like Switzers, and bear all the field before them;
Carry their weight, show fair like Deeds enrold,
Not Writs, that are first made, and after filled.
Thence first came up the title of blancke verse,
You know Sir, what blancke signifies? when the sense
First framed, is tied with Adjectives like points,
And could not hold together without wedges:
Hanged it is pedanticke, vulgar Poetry,
Let children when they versifie, stick here,
And there these pidling words for want of matter:
Poets write Masculine numbers.

Cap. You have given me a pretty hint, it is new.

Gol. And will be grateful,
My daughter will affect it much the better,
And twill be honor, if she be the first,
To whom so choice a Poem is presented.
I wish you well Sir. Exit*

Cap. You oblige my service,
I will bestow these verses of my footman;
They Will serve a Chambermaid, let me see
I want a little quickening, two or three
Infusions of sack will heighten me,
And make my Genius dance, then Lady, Lady -- Gone?
She Is hard of Soul, but I must supple her,
And there is a conceit new struck upon my brain
Will do it, (...) forces united conquer,
Lady grow soft, if merit cannot prove
Happy, we must use policy in love. Exit.

Enter Chrisalina and Thornay. Chapter No more; you do not well to wrong your
friend,
That trusts you with his bosom.

Tho. Fair one, hear me.

Chapter He gave you welcome hither, and you practice
Unworthily to supplant him.

Tho. You are too
Severe, I have no thought so wicked Lady,
Deny me not that liberty, which all
The Creatures have, to wish their own felicity;
Which cannot be without you, he will not
Repine to see me happy in your love.

Chapter In seeming to extenuate your error,
You thus enlarge it, and bring into question
The honor of your friend, for whom I must
Though weak, rise up a Champion for his virtue,
And to beat off all argument, on your part
To move for my affection, know, he is next heaven,
The only object of my heart, nor can it know a change.

Tho. And yet if you collect your self, you are not
The only Mistress of his heart, your sister he loves
As well as you; your pardon fairest, it is possible,
He may prefer her too, since neither piety nor law allows*
He can be husband at one time, to both.
Then let discretion guide you first to freedom,
I love you not with half a heart, but all;
Heaven knows with all, at every look you do
Transfixe me, and can only cure the wound
With the same eyes, if they but smile upon it.

Chapter I must not hear you plead thus, you appear
Nor friend to him, nor me; so fare you well. Exit.

Thor. I am caught, by this good day I am, and know not
How now to help my self: a hansome thing!
What a blind buzzard is this Iackanapes Cupid?
Pox of his bird-bolt, I Will not leave her:
Yet I may be too forward; I am punished:
Venus, thy pardon, I beseech thee,
If thou be not hard-hearted, as the Poets feine,
Speak to thy Boy to fetch his Arrow back,
Or strike her with a sharp one, make her squeake,
And I Will allow thee a Goddess. Ha, it is he.

Enter Gerard. Ger. Before thou speak to me, let me peruse
Thy face, I Will tell my self how thou have sped:
Well? is it not so? Yet do not answer me,
That smile does not show clear, there is some cloud
In The corner of thy forehead, that would spread,
And darken all thy face.

Thor. Your Physiognomy is quite discredited.

Ger. Have prevailed? With which? why now thou art to tedious.

Thor. With the eldest, Chrysolina.

Ger. Ha, what sound was that? With Chrysolina?
I prithee what of her, I love her dearly;
Thou have not filcht away her heart, it grew with mine.

Thor. How Is this?

Ger. Have thou not seen the Woodbine,
That honey-dropping tree, and the loved Bryer,
Embrace with their chaste bonghs, twisting themselves,
And weaving a green net to catch the birds,
Till it do seem one body, while the flowers
Wantonly run to meet and kiss each other?
So 'twas betwixt us two.

Thor. I mean the youngest.

Ger. What my Aurelia?
Thou can not rob me so: the amorous Turtles
Have but their imitation from our love;
The Pelican loves not her young so well,
That digs upon her breast an hundred springs,
When in her blood she bathes the innocent birds,
As I do my Aurelia.

Thor. Godbewi'y', -- I know not how to please you, nor to answer.

Ger. I prithee stay.

Thor. Engage me in a business?
Nay, thrust me oth' lime-twigs, to set you
At liberty, when your own wings were glu'd
Toth'bush, and do you reward me at his fashion?
And I had known it, you should ha'fluttered.

Ger. I forgot my self, I prithee pardon me,
I will excuse thee when thou art in love.

Thor. Then do so now, and you will be temperate and hear me.

Ger. Speak, I am recollected.

Thor. And I am in love.

Ger. Thou did name both, thou art so unhappy.

Thor. Your humors lead me to it, but I shall tell you?

Ger. Which, which of them did most encourage thee?

Thor. Be not you passionate still, but give me thanks,
And call me fortunate, she has half consented.

Ger. I shall be lost in the dark: declare which.

Thor. Which? why the eldest; which? Chrysolina,
Now be you advised, and court the other.

Ger. Half consenting.

Thor. I may say three quarters, and not lie.

Ger. It Is false; and such a stain thou throwest upon that Virgin,
Thy blood deserves to purge.

Thor. You do not mean to play the fool thus:
Pox upon this madness: I woe not fight with you,
And I will love that Gentlewoman:
I thought I had done you a courtesy.

Ger. So thou have, if it be true.

Thor. Have you a mind to be the everlasting madcap?
And you can couple with both, I can resign;
Poor Gentlewoman, shel have the worst on it.

Ger. But I prithee tell me,
With what Art did thou so soon win her to thee?
It was some months 'ere I prevailed; and were I not
Confident of thy honesty, I should
Suspect some witchcraft.

Thor. There is an Art
In wooing, not revealed to every man,
Which he that knows, shall do more with a Maid
In some minute, than others in a twelve-moneth.

Ger. 'T must be a luckie minute.

Thor. I, he must take her in the nicke; and court her
In the precise minute: yet it may be, she
In pity of my sufferings or mistrusting
She might not be the first in your election,
Inclined the sooner: Now would I have you,
Without more ceremony, neglect the wench
That I have chosed: Do You mark? neglect her,
And address all your courtship to the youngest,
Your meaning will be clearly understood
A both sides; so you shall with ease, enlarge
Your own heart, fix on one whose arms already
Are open to ye, and make my path direct,
Without any rub to the other. Is this sense?
Obey it then; set on before with your Mistress
A hand gallop, if I overtake you not, let me swing
In The bridle, and set a saddle of my back, and let all the
Fools in the Town ride me.

Ger. We must not be too rash, lets walk, and think on it. Exeunt.

Sic explicit Actus secundus.
Actus Tertius.
Enter Simple and Aurelia. Sim. Thou Art a brave Wench.


Aur. You are grown bold of late.


Sim. I think so, gramercy Sack: Come kiss me, wo't thou be a Lady?


Aur. I have no great ambition.


Sim. I Will buy thee a Parrat to morrow, and a Monkey:
Here, take this Ring.

Aur. Pray keep it, and let me tell you Sir my mind.


Sim. And I Will tell thee mine, that is one for another.


Aur. Briefly then.


Sim. Be as brief as you please, I can be as brief as you, and tedious too: I
know thou love me: Sir, did think I was such a fearful coxcombe as I
made my self? No, I know when to be Lion, and when to be a Hare. But prithee
tell me plainly, when shall we matrimony it, ha? thou dot'st upon my good
parts; come, speak to me, prithee be not bashful.


Aur. I fear you wo'not understand me.


Sim. Speak no language, and I warrant, I know Greek and Latin, I learned my
Accidence.


Aur. Then know, I do not love you, Sir.


Sim. You do not love me, Sir: then I have lost my labor, Sir*


Aur. I make no doubt it will appear so,
I could be of the humor of some Mistrisses,
By some slight favors to encourage you,
Accept your gifts, extol your wit, invent
New ways to melt your gold, beside the Exchange,
And petticoat imbroyderies.

Sim. Thou shall have smock imbroyderies; nay, thy very skin shall be
imbroydered.


Aur. Have every day some progress for your Coach,
And tire you worse than your fou^e Flanders Ma^es*
And then laugh at you too: but I am honest,
And will deserve your nobler character:
I tell you what you must expect, in troth
I cannot love you, pray leave off in time,
And let this satisfy you.

Sim. This satisfy? why this is even as good nothing.

Aur. It is all that I can promise you.

Sim. Though you cannot love me,
It shall be for your honor to marry me.

Aur. By no means.

Sim. What, not marry me neither?
Then be no Lady, that I first pronounce:
Secondly know, I am resolved, your Mother
Shall understand it, by these Hilts.

Aur. I would advise you rather to be silent,
And take your leave like a good Christian Lover:
If you betray my honest meaning so,
And move her to impatience, I shall wish you
In The West Indiaes. Enter Mistress Golds.

Sim. Here she comes.

Mis. Sir I hope, you and my Daughter are agreed,

Aur. And the conditions please me infinitely;
Mother you never placed your commendation
Upon a Gentleman so Noble, such
Plenty of honor dwells in him, I must
Be happy in his embraces.

Sim. Oh ho! is it come about again?

Mis. Nay nay, I told you, you should find him honorable*

Aur. We understand each other perfectly,
He has so sweet a soul, I may have any thing;
He has promised me the finest Parrats.

Sim. Oh I, and Madgehowlets that can speak all languages*

Mis. Nay, and he will perform:
Well, for this act of duty, I shall find
Some gold beside thy portion, in the mean time
I Will move thy father to conclude the marriage:
And here he is already.

Enter Golds. Caperw. and Chrysol. Aur. Look you Sir,
These turns you put me too; do not believe
I bear one thought more of good will for this*
If you suspect it otherwise; because
I carry it sweet and pleasing to my mother,
Who is so zealous in your cause, I Will swear
Your worship is the most unwelcomm'st man
In The world to me.

Sim. I Am glad she is not gone yet.

Au. What need you distrust?
He Will know precisely when we must be married,
Is jealous of delays, wo'not believe I love him,
Till the Priest has sealed me his in the Church, he says.

Sim. These are tricks, demurres, your daughter is not sober.

Au. He means serious.

Sim. She does but mock --

Au. Who would think you could dissemble.

Mis. Sir have patience, I have not been so hasty,
To become tedious at last, refer that to my care;
Since you have made a marriage in your hearts,
The Church shall soon confirm it.

Au. What doey' think of this?
Faith yet be wise and leave this wooing,
I shall maintain this humor to my mother,
And find a crotchet to come off with honor, you have not
Yet my hate, pray let us be friends, and never meet again,

Sim. This is very fine in faith, if I do not study some mischief.

Au. Conceal for your own shame.

Cap. How doe'y like 'em Lady? 'tpleasd your father
To impose somewhat severely on my Muse,
But your Divine acceptance shall declare it
A Crowned Poem, most illustrious Simple,

Sim. Simple me no more than I simple thee.

Enter servant. Ser. Sir, there is a Lady enquires for Master Caperwit.

Cap. A Lady out of complement? it is he.

Ser. She seems of Noble quality, she has Coach and fair
Attendants, and calls her self the Lady Bird.

Cap. Good Cupid is it she?
Who gave her direction to find me here?
An honorable Lady, I confess, and has a fortune
Noble like her birth, it is the rich Aldermans widow,
The great Bird that dyed at's Country house, a Kinsman
To the Ravens of the City; by no means admit her,
She Will betray her foolish Passion.

Gol. What is the matter?

Cap. Some few days ago
I did by chance, but drop a complement,
How much I was her servant, and she took it
To The heart, and ever since has sought occasion
To express her love to me, poor Gentlewoman,

Gol. You cannot help it.

Cap. It Is one, but of the myriad of Ladies
That have been taken --

Chr. With your tropes and figures,

Gol. No matter, let her come, it were not civil
Sir to deny your self.

Cap. She Will tire all patience*
But Lady, be assured my heart is dedicate
To you, and were all women kind in balance
With your divinest person, their light scale
Would kick the Firmament, or coming down,
Be lost in the middle Region of the air,
Or be converted to a Cloud to weep
Upon the earth, for being so much excelled.

Enter Lady Bird. Bir. Where Is this Footman?

Ser. Trot my Ladies Footman,

Bir. Go pray my Uncle Sir Walter Cormorant
To dine with me to morrow -- And do y'heare?
It Is in your way to ask if my Cousin Bulfinch,
The Steward of my Land, be come to Town,
He lies in Fleetstreet between Hawke and Buzzard.
In The afternoon, remember Sirrah, that
You go to Master Kite, that lives in the Poultry,
And say I shall expect the thousand pound,
Was lent him upon morgage:
Sir, beseech your Nobleness excuse me,
The affairs so nearly do concern me, with
A Gentleman, (now your guest,) that I presumed
It should not be offense, if I took hold
Of this occasion, to speak with him.

Gol. Madame, you need plead no excuse for that,
Command your freedom here: Daughters, my Lady
Would have some private conference,

Bir. By no means
Let me appear so troublesome, your presence
Will be no hurt to my design, you shall
Command a great deal more.

Cap. 'Twas cunningly prepared,

By. Sir, after all, let me obtain your privilege.

Ca. Proceed. --

By. I shall accuse my self of too much boldness,
If you neglect me Sir before all these;
I come not to disturb you, nor to publish
What you have taken from me.

Go. I hope she will lay some felony to his charge.

By. But Sir, you might have been so kind, to have seen your friend once in
three days.


Ca. I must be pardoned Widow,
The glass that tells the hour, has not more sands,
Than there be Ladies wait to catch me up
To spend my time with 'em, they break my dreams,
With importunity, and allow me but
One minute in a week, to say my prayers.

By. Among them all, there is not one
That more desires your happiness.

Ca. It Is more your goodness Lady, than desert,
Or provocation in me.

By. You Are modest,
And thus increase your value.

Ca. Your favors are acknowledged, and take up
Much of my studies, how I may be active
In service to reward 'em, still preserving
My liberty, I must not be confind
Or wedged in; all that is good in nature ought
To be communicable, if you have
Promised your self more of me, than as you are
Allowd, an excellent part o'th commonwealth,
It Is justice you correct the imagination,
Perhaps you will say, you love me.

Go. A fine Dialogue:

By. My blushes speak me guilty, and I fear
Betray my frailty to these Gentlewomen:
You Will sin against your knowledge Sir, to make
A question how much I esteem you, be not
A tyrant, if my opinion of your worth
Prevail against my modesty, to say
I cannot choose but love you, it is my fate,
My breeding never suffered, but in this,
That I should lose my self to court a man,
Ambitious of my favor; it is in vain
To tell you, with what art, my eyes have been
Courted by great ones for their smile, for you
Will turn them all to tears.

Chr. Alas poor Lady*
I pity her, what does she see in him,
To draw this passion?

Cap. May be, I am engaged
To another beauty.

Bir. That Is my fear indeed;
For who can look with eyes like mine upon you,
And not be tempted to the same desires?
But be not Sir deceived, all forheads are not
True glasses of the mind, and beauty alone
Deserves not such a blessing* young men do
Too hastily betray themselves to misery,
That think no heaven but in their Mistress face,
Look on my fortune, which does spread more riches,
Than pleasure can instruct thee ways to spend,
Delights shall stream themselves into thy bosom,
Honor and titles of the state shall woe
Thy name to put them on and not be thine
But thou their ornament.

Cap. Affection must
Flow uncompeld, you may be pleased to take
Some other time to finish this discourse.

Bir. I may suspect I have offended these;
But pray interpret fairly, noble Sir, to Simple.
I do beseech you pardon
The errors that you find in us frail women,
Yet I believe you would not use me so
Neglectfully: it is time, I take my leave.

Gol. We are your humble servants.

Sim. Sir, if you will not affect this Lady,
I hope some other may.

Ca. And write himself the happiest man alive;
She is Widow for a Lord; but I am fixed,
I would you had her Sir, I say no more;
She has an estate of twenty Exchequers, and*
Is of so gentle soul.

Bir. I leave you to repent
Your cruelty, my Coach --

Sim. Please you Madam,
Do me the grace to let me wait upon you.

Cap. Now do I expect she will dote upon me: Ex. Gol. Bird, Simple.
Ladies, you see what fortunes I neglect,
She is a pretty handsome creature too.

Aur. In my opinion Sir, you have not been
So kind as she deserves, and for my part
I have so much compassion of her sufferings,
Were all the wit of younger brothers in you,
And could you make me jointure of a Province,
I would rather marry my fathers serving man
And stand at livery my self than be
Wife to a man so ungrateful. Ex. Au.

Cap. How, sweet Lady?

Chr. My sister, Sir, is just, can you expect
An entertainment here after your scorn
Of one that nobly loves you? Ex. Chr.

Cap. I have usd a precious policy to supplant my self,
She has a scruple in her conscience,
And will not wrong the Lady Bird, a pox
Upon his Rhetoric.

Enter Goldsworth. Gol. Your Lady Bird is Coach'd, and she has took
Sir Gervace with her.

Ca. How?

Gol. Their legs do just^^
In the same boot.

Cap. Ha, ha, ha.

Gol. Why do you laugh? What humor's this?

Cap. Sir Gervace: Ha, ha, he thinks, ha, ha --

Gol. You have a merry spleen, I know not what
He thinks, but if he mean to retrive the Lady Bird.

Cap Ha, ha.

Gol. Pray let me know, whence springs this sudden mirth; I will laugh wi'yee.


Cap. Hold my sides, my buttons!

Gol. It Is well your doublet's slashed

Cap. Ha, ha, next time I come, I Will discover -- I shall not
Contain my self in the street, ha, ha.

Gol. The Poet's mad indeed, farewell Democritus. Ex.

Enter Thornay, Yongrave. Yon. By your favor Sir.

Tho. Your business?

Yon. I understand your name is Thornay.

Tho. It was my fathers, and it is, upon record, that I was christened Thomas,
does that concern you Sir?


Yon. I bring commends from a friend of yours.


Tho. I crave you mercy,
I am your servant. Reads the letter*

Yon. He appears unmoved.

Tho. Thank you Sir, Godbe-wi'y'.

Yon. Although I am confident
You think it not my office to convey
Letters so much respect I bear the Gentlewoman
That sent it, I would think it Sir no burden
To carry an answer to her.

Tho. It requires none.

Yon. Shall I return, you will visit her in person?

Tho. I cannot promise.

Yon. Why?

Tho. I may forget it.

Yon. With your pardon Sir, she did impose on me.
To know some resolution.

Tho. She did?
Are you acquainted with her?

Yon. I do bear
No great age in her knowledge.

Tho. Perhaps she has imparted the contents.

Yon. I could conjecture
By circumstance she much desires to see you.

Tho. Cannot come; that is all --

Yon. I must have more.

Tho. How Sir?

Yon. It Is a neglect becomes you not.

Tho. You are not sent a Champion to defy me.

Yon. I have no title from her blood, and yet
Her virtue is so near me, I must tell you,
She has deserved your best esteem.

Tho. She has told you belike some story.

Yon. I pray see her, I Will wait upon you.

Tho. To what purpose?

Yon. To love and cherish her, that claims your heart,
The office of your soul to honor her,
Does not your conscience tremble yet? what reason
Can you allege you should not love her?

Tho. Reason? I Will show you a reason, walk a little further.

Yon. I shall expect it. Ex.

Enter Gerard. Ger. It must be so, and yet me thinks I move
Without a soul, she is the first apostate
From loves religion, in that my honor
Is safe, and it is justice, my Aurelia,
This heart to thee, should now alone be sacred.

Enter Chrysolina. Chapter Sir, you are welcome, what not speak to me?
This is a strange neglect; I have news for you:
Your friend --

Ger. It Is so, he has prevaild with her,
And she will boast her change.

Chr. He cannot be
So fixed in meditation; with your favor.

Ger. Reserve your news, I do not thirst to hear it.

Chr. Sure he mistakes me all this while, it is I.

Ge. But it is not I, I see you are a woman,
I have nothing else to say. Exit.

Ch I have not used him so: was there no way to express his purpose, without
this scorn? it is not discreetly done, I could be very angry he returns, Enter
Gerard; Aurelia. With him Aurelia.


Aur. I am ignorant
With what words I should meet this noble love.

Ger. I was created for this happiness,
To these embraces which do more than twist
Our bodies, every circle of thy arms
Enchaines my soul, that does forget all freedom,
And willingly submit to be thy prisoner.

Chr. It do not grieve me that he loves my sister,

Ge. I am too little to contain my joy,
It flows above the narrow banks Aurelia:
What shall I say let me bath here eternally,
And study new Arithmetic, to count
Our blessings.

Au. Can you Sir be constant?

Chr. I, touch him there Aurelia.

Ger. You do ill
To interrupt our joys upon this lip
That deserves all should open to commend it,
I seal the contract of my heart for ever,
I will be nothing when I am not thine:
Suspect the stars may lose themselves in heaven,
But never I this vow, thy sister has
No part in my affection; she usurped
Some title, but I now have canceld all
The thoughts of her, and offer thee my self,
My self thy perfect honourer. Ex. Ger. Aur.

Chr. Wherein have I deserved to be thus slighted?
Is there no conflict in my blood? Can love
I bear a sister, take away all sense
Of this indignity?

Enter Thornay and Yongrave. Tho. Look you Sir, I promised you a reason, why I
could
Not love Eugenia; there is my reason, I
Do love that Gentlewoman.

Chr. It Is Master Thornay:
I am resolved, I have no other way
To punish his disdain, than to pretend
I love this Gentleman, that he may see
I have the freedom of my soul, to mock
His triumph, and with as much facility
Meet his neglect. Oh Master Thornay,
You are very welcome, I was wishing for you.

Thor. Hum? this entertainment is a little better
Than I expected.

Chr. You absent your self too much believe, your visits shall not be more
frequent, than your person grateful hither.


Thor. do y' hear, you may return, and tell this story
Unto the Lady in the enchanted Castle:
You see my fate, I cannot come; Godbe-wi'yi'.

Yon. You shall acquit your self more Nobly Sir,
And better satisfy her in your person.

Thor. I wo'not take the pains to see her, and
She were a dying.

Yon. How?

Thor. Not to recover her.

Chr. Shall you and I Sir, walk a turn in the Garden.

Thor. Yes Lady, Heaven vouchsafe I grow not mad
Wi'my good fortune.

Yon. With your pardon Mistress,
I must take privilege to tell this man
He is not worthy of your favors.

Thor. How Sir?
You do not know my temper:

Yon. Nor regard it. draw.

Chr. Hold as you bear respect to me.

Thor. I am charmed.

Yon. I should be guilty of some sin to you
Not to reveal, this Gentleman has made
A forfeit of his honor.

Thor. Will you hear him?
Pox of my dullness, what meant I to bring
Him hither? do not credit any thing,
We are old enemies, and he has studied this
Device to poison your opinion of me,
A mere trick; do not believe a word sweet Lady.

Chapter I am not easy Sir to entertain
Malicious accusation of your fame,
Your virtue in my thoughts, is not so soon
Shaken with one report.

Thor. That Is comfort yet.

Yon. Then you provoke me to be plain, know Lady,
You Are in the way to be most miserable,
Abused by this false man, that will betray
Your innocent beauty to so great a shame,
Repentance is not able to restore you:
He has a wife already.

Chapter How a wife?

Yon. A wife, if holy vows have power to bind you:

Tho. Do you believe this? were you by
When I was married.

Yon. No, but heaven and Angels
Are witnesses you did exchange a faith
With one that mournes a Virgin, and a Widow:
Have you no earthquake in you? does thy soul
It self not feel an ague, to remember
How many kisses sealed the amorous contract?
She meant it so, and every day her eyes
Weep in the memory of her self forsaken:
And cause her grief will not at once destroy her,
Despairing of your love, to show how willing
She is to dye, does every hour distill
Part of her soul in tears.

Chr. This cannot be.

Thor. Be: no, no, it is impossible: shall we walk sweet Lady?

Yon. Will not this excite your pity, mercy shines bright in women.

Chr. I have heard you Sir,
And doubt not, when he comes to answer
These imputations, he may quit himself.

Thor. Would we were both on's but to skirmish in
A saw-pit, I must cut his throat.

Chr. Admit he promised love,
Obliged himself by oath to her you plead for,
This binds him not to undo himself for ever.

Yon. Undo himself.

Chr. Yes, marriage is an act,
That does concern his whole life, and in something
May mar, or profit his eternity:
Perhaps the Gentlewoman, since he gave
His faith is fallen from virtue.

Thor. I have heard so.

Chr May be turned prostitute.

Thor. I, who will swear for her?

Yon. I must not hear her named with the suspicion
Of such a stain.

Chr. We do not Sir accuse her.

Thor. Not absolutely.

Yon. Did you but know the Creature, it would call
A blush into your face, for talking thus;
She has purity enough for all her sex,
And this attended with so many virtues,
As but to wish her more, it self were sin.

Chr. This Gentleman pleades for her.

Thor. Will you please to walk?

Chr. Dismiss him first.

Thor. Do y' hear; this Lady
Is weary of your company; you have
Not used me like a Gentleman, indeed
Scurvily, it is no time nor place to expostulate,
But we shall meet again; in the mean time,
Return, and tell the Virgin you so magnify,
I do not find my self in any humor
To see her again; pray her neglect no fortune,
For my sake, there be many younger brothers
In The Town, will be content to marry her:
You may resolve her what is become of me,
There is no wrestling with our fate.

Yon. Thou art not worth my answer. Exit Yon.

Chr. I Will not question Sir, this Gentleman's relation.

Tho. You are wise.

Chr. But in my confidence, he has spoke all truth:
I must desire you visit me no more.

Thor. You do but jest I hope.

Chr. Ungrateful man! how are poor women coozen'd?
With what impudence could thou desire my favor?
Go and make a satisfaction to the injured Maid,
Borne the dishonor of a man. Exit.

Thor. Am I awake? Or do I dream,
I am made a Coxcombe thus?
I am a Rascal, and deserve no mercy,
For abusing that poor Gentlewoman, that sent
So kindly to me; would the Messenger were here again.
Enter Gerard and Aurelia. It Is Master Gerard, how has he sped?

Ger. You are sad Aurelia; what on the sudden
Can beget this change? Are you in health?

Aur. Yes Sir.

Ger. Your blood methinkes
Is wandering from your cheek, your eyes have lost
Their lightning too, call back your smiles, and bless
Him that is now your creature.

Aur. Mine? excuse me if I suspect.

Ger. Ha.

Aur. I have heard you Sir.
And have considered all that you have said
To make me think you are now wholly mine:
I must confess you have expressed a Lover,
Wanted no Art to flourish your warm passion:
But language is no clew to guide us to
The knowledge of your heart.

Ge. Nor is suspicion a cause enough in justice to condemn.

Aur. It is not; but where circumstances meet,
They may be thought on.

Ger. By your beauty,
By those fair eyes, that never killed till now,
Make me so happy, but to know what cause
Inclines you to suspect, and I will take it
The greatest argument of love, that ever
A Virgin showed to man; then I Will be bold,
And with the whiteness of my soul make such
Assurance of you, that not malice, aided
With all the devils cunning, shall be able
To interpose one scruple more against me.

Aur. You loved my Sister.

Ger. I did once, my Aurelia.

Aur. And you declare you can neglect her now,
Look on her like a stranger.

Ger. It Is most true.

Aur. She loved you well, most nobly, with as much
Fervor as ever I did or can love;
Should I think to be more secure than she?
Promise that firm to me, which in so fresh
A sight and memory you have violated
To her, that placed you in as dear a bosom?
Discretion bids me pause, I may be rash,
Either you loved her not at all, and so
You may play false with both, or loving her
With as much levity, I suppose you may
Forsake me too. Therefore I bid you first farewell. Exit.

Ge. I am blasted.

Thor. We are both undone, I dare not see him. Exit.

Ger. Was ever man so miserably lost?
Is there a balm can cure me? Oh, I bleed:
The sword wounds gently but love kills indeed. Exit.

Sic explicit Actus Tertius.
Actus Quartus.
Enter Eugenia and her Maid. Eug. Has truth forsook mankind? or is it my
Fate only to converse with those that are
So cruel and neglectfull of our sex?
Unhappy Maid is he not yet returned?

Maid. None yet appears.

Eug. Then I despair to see him:
And when I think indeed of the employment,
That it is against himself, I may with justice
Accuse my want of judgment, to expect
He should perform so hard an imposition:
I would I could not think of any man,
They rob me of my peace: I prithee try
Thy voice, to put my heart in better tune;
There is a power in harmony, some say,
To charm the unruly motions of the brain:
Love is itself a melancholy madness:
Why should not Music cure the wound of love?
Melancholy hence, go get
Some piece of earth to be thy seat,
Here the air and nimble fire,
Would shoot up to meet desire:
Sullen humor, leave her blood,
Mix not with the purer flood,
But let pleasures swelling there,
Make a Springtide all the year.

Enter Chrysolina. Chry. How does my dear Eugenia?

Eug. As well
As this restraint will give me leave, and yet
It does appear a part of my enlargement
To have your company: I hope your sister
Enjoyes her health.

Chry. And more felicity
Than I can boast mine own, she is half a Bride.
Happy in the embraces of her wished servant;
You know our story; he has chosen her,
And most uncivilly neglects me.
Thus laden with his scorn, I come to practice
A scene of sorrow w'ye; sure thy fate
Has spun a thread for me, we are so like
In our misfortunes: Have you heard no new*
Of your ungrateful servant, for I know
No other name, and he indeed deserves
To have no other memory* that takes
A pride in his disdain.

Eug. Nothing as yet.
But I have met occasion to convey
A Letter to him, yet I cannot promise:
Enter Yongrave. But here is the messenger.

Chr. That Gentleman?
I know the man you love then, is it not Thornay?

Eug. The same, I did conceal him for his shame.

Chr. Why he is a zealous suitor for my love.

Yon. It makes for me that he continues cruel;
I was not able to command his passion.
But will she not mistrust I have not been
So careful in advancing her desires,
But satisfied my self with any answer,
As knowing what must bring comfort to her,
Must needs be killing to my hopes? In what
A narrow path I tread; her spring must be
My frost, and when her tree carries the pride
And bloome of summer, I retain no sap,
But wither and creep backward into earth,
Like a forsaken plant.

Chr. Here I Will obscure. Chrysolina withdrawes.

Eug. You are welcome, Sir.

Yon. I would I were.

Eug. Shall I believe you have been faithful to
My griefs request?

Yon. Yes, and bring comfort back.

Chrysostom. How Is that?

Eug. Pronounce those words again.

Yon. I bring you comfort.

Eug. He did say so: What meant she
To mock me with another sad relation?
Was It a device in her to increase my joy
At meeting, he did talk of comfort; is it
A thing restored in nature? Oh, before
You bless my ear again with that wished sound,
Excuse my modesty, if my heart present
A kiss to thank you.

Yon. I drink in my poison.

Eug. Now let your comforts flow.

Yon. I have returned you
As true a lover as yet ever Mistress
Could boast possession of, one so resolved
To honor you.

Eug. Can this be possible?

Yon. I have examined every secret thought
Within his foul, concerning you, and dare
Thus boldly justify, he is your own.

Eug. Let me but live to see him, and I write
My ambition satisfied

Yon. He Is here.

Eug. Where?

Yo. Here,
In me your truest servant is returned.

Chr. Does he affect her?

Yon. I call all that's good
To witness with me, I discharged with zeal
The unkind office to my self, but could not
Incline him to return to any softness:
In brief, he has unworthily engaged
That heart belonging to you, and would not be
Provoked to see you again.

Chr. Eugenia. Chr. leads in Eug.

Yon. Is all this waking? Have I seen her faint?
And did not she that cherishes her enemy,
Haste to her relief, and seem to suffer with her?
While I, as one had grown here, did not move?
I did not well, to exalt her with a hope:
To meet a blessing, and then ruin her.
If death has whispered her aside, I shall
Be accused, and I will take my preferment
To be sent after her to tell her ghost
I loved her best; when we are both immortal
She Will understand me better.
Enter Chrysolina. Is Eugenia alive again?

Chr, There is no danger to be feared; aqualme.
Pray let me ask you Sir one question,
Do you affect this Virgin really?
I move it not for any harm.

Yon. Would she had sent hither,
But with desire to be resolved.

Chr. May be she has.

Yon. Then tell her I do love her better
Than I can express, but when she has
Numbered all things are excellent on earth
She is to me above 'em infinitely.

Chr. This carries no probability.

Yon. Would thou were a man
Then I durst tell thee, I do love her so
I durst be wicked for her, and kill thee.

Chr. With all this, it does not appear you love her so
And be an instrument, nay plead to put another in possession
Of your loved treasure; for if I mistake not
You late did urge a man, whom she esteemed
Better, to return and marry her:
Can any man that loves a woman truly,
Strive to supplant himself and give away
His comfort?

Yon. There Is the honor of my service,
When I am dead, the story shall remember
I loved a maid so well that I preferred
Whatever she desired above my self,
And cause she loved one better, was content,
To serve her wishes with my banishment:
He does not love a Virgin nobly, whose
Affection walks not just to her desires,
To like e'm'bove his own.

Chr. If this can be,
Thou art the noblest lover in the world,
With what affection shall she be blessed
That loves him, when the mistress that esteems
Him not, is thus rewarded?

Enter Eugenia. Eug. Indeed I love him still and shall do ever,
Nor had I now returned to life, but that
I had not took my leave of him

Yon. More corrosive.

Eug. If you will oblige a Virgin,
For ever to you once more visit him,
Tell him I lie like one that's desperate sick,
Oppressed with grief of body, and of mind,
But cannot be so fortunate to quit
The world till he vouchsafe to visit me.
Bid him not fear I will detain him long*
With idle talk, six words and I am dead.
Although he love me not, he may do this:
If you will add this to your other work,
I will impose no more, indeed I will not:
So farewell noble Sir. Exit.

Chr. If you will please to join with me, I doubt not
To effect her wishes.

Yon. No.

Chr. You do not know what power I have with him.

Yon. You have too much

Chr. I Will undertake --

Yon. You shall not rob me of the reward.

Chr. What reward?

Yon. Perhaps another kiss; pray tell her, I
Went cheerfully to finish her command. Exit.

Chr. I do admire and love this noble temper,
What flames are these? Suppress 'em, they grow high,
If he affect her so, what hope have I? Ex.

Enter Gerard and Thornay. Tho. Mad? why you still enjoy discourse.

Ger. What then? may not a man be mad, and yet talk wisely?

Tho. But few in my experience.

Ger. Do not abuse thy knowledge, at the worst*
Thou can but say, our senses are depraved,
Thrown off o'th'hinge; the tongue is none I hope,
Though some would have the titillation
Joined to make up a sixth in the grave Synod:
Believe then I am mad; I Will prov't by reason.

Thor. By reason? that is a new way to prove it;
But I Will hear no reason.

Ger. Then thou art mad thy self.

Thor. Nay, I think I am madder o'th two,
And have as much reason, if there be reason
Able to make one mad; but let us be wise:
Or if it must be that you have lost your wits,
Let Us see and we can recover them by drinking;
For he that is not sober after drunkenness,
Is no man of this world.

Ger. Now thou talkest wildly.

Thor. I talk wildly, that would justify my self to be in my wits, and you
that talk reason and sense wo'not believe you have any.


Ger. If it be so, that may conclude I have lost 'em,
And do not understand my self.

Thor. So, so, I should believe another in that argument,
But not you, for in knowing that, you prove
You are no madman.

Ger. Prithee tell me, thou art a piece of a Philosopher,
And know the natural causes.

Thor. Hold in that; I must confess, you are little
Beside your self: I a Philosopher?
I studied Titelman sometimes in the College,
As others did, and wanting Epictetus
Lantern, slept always with a watching Candle
In my study window, and might very well
Dream over learning of my Deske, or so;
What Aristotle might infuse into
My sleeps I know not, but waking I nere troubled
My self to understand him; true I loved
His Book De Coelo, for the heavenly Title,
And made my Father buy it, for my study
Of Divinity, told him I would be a Bishop;
That brought me threescore pound a year for sack:
I prithee do not talk of learning.

Ger. Why then acknowledge, I am mad, and I have done.

Thor. Well for this once I will allow it, thou art mad.

Ger. But wherefore do y'allow it, what is the cause?

Thor. Nay, nay, I know not that.

Ger. I Will tell thee then.

Thor. It Is come about again.

Ger. And let thy judgment censure me
If I produce not able reasons --

Thor. To prove madness, he makes me mad to hear him;
Now I consider better on it, I confess
You have some cause to be a little mad,
The loss of such a Mistress.

Ger. But of one?
Did they not both affect me, and I them
With such equality of honor.

Thor. Grant it.

Ger. And I to lose 'em both? faith speak but honestly;
Is It not a wonder that I do not rave
And kill my self? how many have run mad
For one that never loved 'em? and shall I
Be so unmannerly not to lose my wits
For two and two such creatures? twere a Solecisme
In love: I prithee do not flatter me
With an opinion that I have my reason;
It cannot be, it is against all sense,
I should have any; such an expectation
Lost, is enough to make the genius
Of all the world run mad, and I will straight.

Thor. Whither?

Ger. To Bedlem, whether should I go?
I must not live in this community of fools and wisemen.

Thor. There be Knaves among us.

Ger. Here all are happy, there I shall not meet
With lovers that are fortunate, but with men
Of my complexion, that look twenty ways
At once, that sigh and curse, and sing mad Carols:
If I can get to be their Prince, I Will make
A law it shall be death to smile or kiss
A woman.

Thor. Now I fear him.

Ger. Nay, we will have
An excellent well governd Common wealth,
A delicate Eutopia, there shall be
Lectures and public readings shall put down
Gressams foundation for the liberal Arts,
And make the Citizens bring their Shop-bookes hither
To take fine notes, how to be paid their debts,
And yet trust none but younger brothers: then
We will have penal Statutes against eating,
Live all by the air of commendations.
No idle man shall live within our State:
Do y' mark? they are the mouths of the Republike:
And therefore he that has no other work
To prevent slothfulness, may employ his time
In picking strawes, there will be a great plenty.
Here will we live together, and be mad
Perpetually, we wo'not be recovered;
For if at any time we incline to be
Sober, and coming to our wits again,
The lash will whip us into new distempers
And mad fugaries.

Thor. Do y' know all this while
What you have said, you correct me for speaking
Extravagantly, and yet talk wild your self.

Ger. I prithee pardon and instruct me better; I am not well.

Thor. Will you walk to your Chamber, I Will bear you company.

Ger. No, I am well again.
Upon condition you will tell Aurelia
She did not use me kindly.

Thor. I will.

Ger. She did not use me kindly, nothing else, Farewell. Exit.

Thor. I know not what to think on him,
The unhappiness was so sudden, and unlooked for,
It might disturb his fancy, but I hope
The worst is past, a little rest will settle him.
But which way shall I recompense the injury:
I have done him? and I had not been ungrateful
To Eugenia, we might have both been happy.
Enter Yongrave. Ha? it is he: Save you most Noble Sir;
Ift please you now, I Will go along with you
Toth' Gentlewoman.

Yon. What Gentlewoman?

Thor. Eugenia, that wrote the Letter to me, I mean her.

Yon. For what?

Tho. I have considered better, and do mean
To make her satisfaction.

Yon. It Is too late:
You might have done this earlier, your love
Will appear now unseasonable, I assure you.

Thor. Pray give me a reason.

Yon. Do You not blush to ask it?
I told her what you said, and now we are
Resolved; you cannot blame her, she was covetous
To embrace you; but your answer being returned
So peremptorily in her neglect, we both agreed.

Thor. You both? Why what was that to you?

Yon. That doubt will clear it self when we are married.

Tho. Why, did you love her?

Yon. And deserve her best
Of all the world: and yet she would give me no
Assurance till she knew your resolution,
Which I was able to inform her, and
It Is now a bargain; upon monday next. --

Thor. Your wedding day.

Yon. Right.

Thor. In very good time. You wear a sword.

Yon. What then?

Thor. I Will only try how you can fence, I must not lose her so.

Yon. You lose her? you despised her, would not see her,
Not to recover her from death. Do You not
Remember such a saying, In the Town
Were many younger brothers, that might be
Content to marry her; let her use her fortune,
For your own part, you were engaged, there was
No wrestling with your fate: Was it not so?

Thor. It Is all one for that, my mind is altered,
I Am of another humor now, and will
Maintain, I love her better than you dare.

Yo. Then I must tell you.

Tho. Tell me no tellings:
Either resign her to me again, or --

Yon. Resolve me, pray, can you affect her heartily?

Thor. Else let me perish on your sword.

Yon. I heard
You court another Mistress, that did answer it with entertainment.

Thor. She was a very Gypsy.
You were no sooner parted, but she used me
Basely; it is true, I did sufficiently
Deserve it, for my breach of vow to her
I now alone do honor, and for whom,
(Changed into honesty) I will rather dye
Than live without her.

Yo. Heaven does hear all this.

Thor. I make no doubt, and while my heart to her
Is reconciled, cannot despair of mercy.

Yon. You shall have her.

Thor. Shall I? then I Will love thee too.

Yon. And know, she has no thought but to be yours,
There has no obligation past betwixt us two:
I came for this: yet I must tell you, Sir,
I love her too, and shall do ever.

Thor. How? not when
She is my wife, I hope.

Yon. Yes then.

Thor. If you have cut her up, and left her cold meat,
I shall lose my stomach.

Yon. With a holy flame,
Her virtue keeps a Vestall fire within me,
But she affects not me, yet I might challenge her:
Nor can you ever, but in right of me,
Glory your self possessed; I have bought her.

Thor. I hope she has not sold her maidenhead.

Yo. Her uncle
(Whose aim is only profit) has concluded
With me a price for her, and therefore gives
Access to none, till I have proved my fortune;
But I find her devoted to you only,
And have conformed my wishes unto hers;
She loves you best, and I prefer you too,
Return, and be her husband, I Will direct you.

Enter Caperwit and Dancer. Cap. You understand my purpose, you shall make
The Dance, let me alone to write the songs.

Dan. A Mask will be delightful to the Ladies.

Cap. Oh Sir, what Plays are taking without these
Pretty devices? Many Gentlemen
Are not, as in the days of understanding.
Now satisfied without a ^igge, which since
They cannot, with their honor, call for, after
The play, they look to be served up in the middle:
Your dance is the best language of some Comedies,
And footing runs away with all; a Scene
Expressed with life of Art, and squared to nature,
Is dull and phlegmatic Poetry.

Tho. Enough;
I am bound to honor thee, command my life,
Thou excellent young man.

Yon. I wish you happiness and never after her will love a woman.

Cap. You know my lodging.

Dan. I Will attend you Sir. Exit.

Cap. I wonder what is become of my hermophrodyte?
Yongrave, how is it man? what art melancholy?
What has hung plummets on thy nimble soul,
What sleepie rod has charmd thy mounting spirit?

Yon. Prithee enjoy thy self.

Cap. By Parnassus
You must not be so head hung, why do peep --
Under thy cloak as thou did fear a Sergeant?
Enter Simple and Lady Bird. Who are these? my wish! fortune has sent thee a
cure,
The rarest mirth! you shall not lose it, ha, ha.

Bir. You have strangely won me to obey you Sir,
I refuse nothing you command.

Sim. Shall go,
And hear how I will talk, and baffle 'em:
But what if we meet Caperwit?

Bir. No matter.

Sim. No: w'y then let him go hang himself in his own verses, if the lines
be strong enough, come my Nightingale, my Bird of Paradise. Exit.


Cap. If ever thou did love me, lets follow 'em;
Feed not this sullen humor, I Will promise excellent sport.

Yon. You shall prevail. Ex.

Enter Chrysolina, Aurelia. Chr. It was not kindly done, believe me sister,
He did perform but our request.

Aur. It Is granted;
But his neglect of you afflicted me.

Chr. He could not make you happy, and remain
Servant to me.

Aur. Nor make me blessed, while you
Seemed discontented.

Chr. Do not think I was,
I did but carry trouble in my face,
When he declared himself withdrew my smiles,
For your sake, to make you appear most lovely,
And worthy of his choice; and could you be
So cruel to reject him, when he came
To be confirmed your own without a rival?
It seems he did not know who loved him best.

Aur. Best?

Chr. Yes, and I in this, will mak't appear,
That now you have exild him from your love,
I Will sue for his affection.

Aur. He is mine.

Chr. But you Aurelia are not his; I will
Appeal to his modest reason, that shall guide
His eye to look on both again, I do not
See what in me should not invite him hither,
With as much ardor, rather more, since he
Has proved already your too much unkindnesse;
What if this noble Gentleman should lose
His wits upon 't, will all your beauty call
His straggling senses to their seat again?
I Will seek him out betimes and comfort him.

Aur. It Is more than will become you sister.

Chr. How?

Aur. And it must bring your modesty in question,
To follow one that cares not for you

Chr. Thus
I may awake his noble flame, nor is it
Any dishonor when the world shall know
How you have used him, if I make return,
To what I loved so dearly.

Aur. Not while I may challeng interest; here are company
Enter Simple, Bird, Yongrave, Caperwit aloof. Let us withdraw, I have
something more to tell you.

Chr. Defer it rather now; here comes my hope.

Aur. How Is this? nay then I Will stay a little longer.

Sim. By your leave Gentlewomen, I should mock you
To call you Ladies; perhaps you may wonder at me.

Chr. I see no cause.

Sim. Have you no eyes?

Aur. Such as you see?

Sim. Oh eyes no eyes but Mountains fraught with tears!

Chr. He Is turned Ieronymo.

Sim Go by, Ieronymo, go by, go by. He passes by them with disdain.

Chr. Do y' know where you are?

Sim. Yes, and to whom I speak I hope.

Aur. Noble Sir, I hope you do not scorn us.

Sim. Scorn you, no; but I do not care a rush for you, you might have had me
when I was offered, it is none of my fault, and you do fall to eating of chalk,
and dye oth' black jaundise, I cannot help it now for I proclaim, here is the
what do y' call it, of my heart.


Aur. Has he won this Lady? I suspect her:
I hope you have not quite forsaken me;
Virgins for custom sake, sometimes deny,
Believe me Sir, when you did plead for love
My heart did not so much as think on it.

Sim. Nay it is no matter, I have took my course, yet I
Have a suit to you that you would not break your heart,
Nor you, to see us kiss. Nectar! immortal nectar! He kisses Bird.
Oh let this Diamond purchase such another,
It Is pity that my lips should ever open,
To let the breath she gave me, out again.

Chr. Do y' pay so much for every kiss? a Diamond?

Sim. I never offer less to touch her lip; marry her hand, or her a -- or
foot or so, I may salute for a ruby, or an emrode or a satire; or so, but I
have stones -- now do thou speak a little for their further mortification.


Bir. I did not think to have returned so soon
A trouble to you but the importunity
Of this most worthy Gentleman prevailed,
I think there was some Magic in his tongue.

Sim. Nay you may swear that, the wisest in the country, thought my mother a
Witch.


Bir. He did no sooner open his desires,
But he did wound my heart, you see his bounty,
What jewels he has given me.

Sim. All thine own; somebody else might have been wise and had'em.

Cap. Somebody else might have been wise, and kept 'em.

Bir. I must confess, I loved another lately, but his affection's frozen up --

Cap. Bless you bevy of Ladies.

Bir. Sir, you are come most seasonably, before
These Gentlewomen, I release your promise,
My thoughts are fixed upon this Noble Knight,
Affect now where you please; here is my husband.

Cap. You are not married?

Sim. No, but I came to bid you all to my wedding, I have
Bespoke Gloves, and Points, and knacks, and knaveries.

Cap. I will dye Hymen's Saffron robe in blood,
Put out the Torches with the tears of Virgins,
And make the Temple quake.

Sim. Will you so Sir?

Cap. Excellent Rascal!

Bir. There is no way but to acknowledge it,
It is no shame in love, there is no disgrace,
For else by Law he may recover me.

Sim. Do y' hear Sir, you may take her if you please, but if she be troubled
with a timpany, there is a man within a mile of an Oak, I name nobody, that
has had, -- some earnest of her body.


Cap. I hope you do but jest.

Sim. I Will make all sure; what a loving Lady is this?

Cap. Then I require you give me back this Diamond,
The token once I gave of my devotion.

Sim. Why that is mine, I gave it her but now before all this company.

Bir. Be wise and let him have it, it is like his within my Cabinet, let us be
quit on him, *this will secure our marriage.


Sim. Let him have it there be more in Cheapeside, but let us not tarry any
longer Bird, he will challenge all the rest of thy feathers.


Bir. I will obey you Sir.


Sim. Farewell beauties and kind Gentleman, if you come to my wedding, I name
no time, nor place, we will be very merry, excellent cheer I Will promise you, your
belly full of Fiddlers.


Cap. Ha, Ha. Exit Sim. and Bir.


Aur. What did you mean? that Ring was his.


Cap. The Boy shall have it again: ha, ha, you do not know the mystery, this Lady
is a boy, a very crackrope boy.


Au. Is It possible?


Cap. I made him first disguise himself.


Aur. Indeed?


Cap. Yes faith, to come to you.


Aur. Then I must tell you Sir, you have not used us civilly, to make our
conversation ridiculous, To talk and complement with a Boy.


Cap. Sweet Lady, by Hyppocrene --


Aur. Doey' not think your wit found out a precious device to make me love you
by a president; is this your great Lady?


Cap. Do but hear me speak.


Aur. Not now, I know you have art enough to excuse it,
Yet I am not merciless, let me entreat
Your absence, without ceremony, when
You come again, your talk will be more musical.

Cap. Does she not prophecy the conceit, I go
The Mask will do it, more musical? it is so. Exit.

Chr. Then he is gone to her

Yon. He did promise me.

Chr. Let other Virgins when they hear this story
Wonder, but give me leave to love you for it,
Indeed I do; look not so strange, your virtue
Compels me to reaveale it, it is no shame
To own a passion, kindled by such goodness.

Yon. If I do understand you, give me pardon,
To think you are not perfectly advised;
I am a prisoner still to my Eugenia.

Chr. She is satisfied, and you are disingaged.

Yon. But she has not yet resignd the heart I gave,
Nor can I think of any other Mistress;
Choose in a plenty of more happy men,
I gave too much away to love again. Exit.

Chr. I will retire to blush and weep.

Aur. Not so.
Alas poor sister, now I fear you not,
I see your purpose was to make me kind:
I would he were my brother, but let us in
And join our heads, some counsel would do well,
It Is pity we two should lead Apes in hell. Exit.

Sic explicit Actus Quartus.
Actus Quintus.
Enter Eugenia and Thornay. Eug. MAy I believe my self so fortunate?
Art thou returned, or do I dream thus happily?
Are these my Thornays arms? are those his lips?
Can he repent his cruelty and love?
How soon are all my tears dried up? I do
Forgive my griefs, and think they have been modest,
And gentle sufferings, who can merit such
A joy, that has not felt a world of sorrow?
Let us embrace again, and if thou can
Confirm me yet more, that I am awake,
And taste my true delight.

Thor. By this, and this: Kisses.
Through which, if it were possible, I durst
Convey my soul, I am for ever thine,
Created new to be made worthy of thee,
I have been dead too long to thee, and virtue,
Committed sin enough, in my neglect
Of thee, to plant a fierce, and deep antipathy
In every woman's heart against mankind*
But you are merciful, and imitate
The eternal nature.

Enter Woodhamore. Woo. Ha? how is this? a kissing?

Eug. We are betrayed.

Tho. So now it is done; I would not
Be engaged to kiss you again, for all the estate.
Your father left you.

Eug. I hope my breath has not offended you.

Tho. I cannot tell, I have not kissed a woman this twelve-moneth, and had not
done this, but that he had my oath to perform it; well you have the lip labor
he sent you, Master Yongrave is well, will see you again shortly -- Godbe-wi'y'.


Eug. Pray stay a little.


Tho. You Will send him such another token; employ your waiting woman, I am no
common kisse-carrier.


Woo. Oh ho, is it not otherwise, he is a messenger from Master Yongrave, you are
welcome Sir.


Tho. And I be not, I am going Sir, to the place from whence I came Sir?


Woo. How does Master Yongrave?


Tho. As foolish as ever, he is still in love --


Woo. I pray commend me to him.


Enter Yongrave. Tho. You may now commend your self, he is here.

Eug. Oh let me fly into his arms and boast
Never had woman such a noble servant,
Blessed was that minute Uncle, in which you
First knew this Gentleman; more blessed I,
That do enjoy by him, that which my heart
Next heaven affects most; 'twill be an age
Till holy Church confirms our vows, I cannot*
Manage the comforts you have given me,
I did not think I should so soon have met
A husband, Uncle.

Woo. I am glad to hear it.

Tho. Command thy truest servant, nothing wants
But how to get her forth, 'twere soon dispatched.

Yon. Sir, we resolve not to lose any time,
We Will marry instantly.

Woo. With all my heart.

Yon. The license will be at Church, as soon as we,
Then I shall quickly make you perfect owner,
Of all those lands, that lie so near your Lordship;
You have security, I shall perform
When we are man and wise.

Woo. Right, Master Yongrave*
You are an honest Gentleman, my Niece
May glory in such a choice, I have some business,
Excuse three minutes, I Will dispatch, and go
Along with you my self. Exit.

Tho. How Is that? he go? we must prevent that mischief.

Eug. Noble Sir, what service can reward this goodness in you?

Yon. If you acknowledge any benefit
From me, in that I am enough rewarded,
I wish you, what I cannot hope for, joy,
But yet we have not finished.

Tho. What do y' think? if*
It Is gone again, we must have some trick,
To get off without him.

Enter Servant with a letter to Eugenia. Eug. From Mistress Chrysolina?

Tho. What and we should set some on's house a-fire,
Do y' think he would stay to quench it? how has he
Lived all this while, and has no more diseases?
No honest Gout to keep him warm at home,
In furs, no charitable Ague, fall
Into his legs to stay him, no Sciatica?
He is no Gentleman he scapes so well.

Eugenia reads. I love him above my life, but you have only his heart, he
says; for which I languish, if you have power to dispose it, I will cherish
some hope, he will love me, at least for your sake.


Tho. If he should with us, is it not possible
He may have a fall, and break a leg, and it were but his neck, why may not
some prentice throw a stone, and put an eye out, that he may go to the
Surgeons, or some horse, or cart-wheele squeeze his toe, and stay his journey?


Eugenia reads. His noble carriage to you, made me first affect him, then
sinnce you are happy in another, let me owe to your virtue for his affection,
without whom I am the most miserable -- Chrysolina.


Eug. Let me entreat you Sir, peruse that paper.
Sir you know Chrysolina?

Tho. I do know her.

Eug. Poor Gentlewoman is in love with Yongrave:
We have arrived at our desires already,
And want but the Church sealing, she is lost,
Unless he meet her wishes, 'twill become
Our piety to advance, in what we may
The common cause of love, then briefly thus --

Yon. Can any Virgin affect me so much?
She did prepare this argument before.

Eug. As you are charitable, go presently.

Tho. And leave you thus?

Eug. We Will get off* well enough: Eug. and Thor. whisper.
Pray her to meet us.

Yon. I do pity her,
And I have learned it from my sufferings;
But I must keep my word, Eugenia
Has still my heart, and only can dispose it.

Eug. Then I resign to her, in this alone,
I will deserve these noble offices.
You know the place.

Tho. I Am perfect.

Eug. Love her, and let us all be happy.

Enter Woodhamore. Wood. Sir, I must desire
You would excuse me, I would go with you,
But that I have considered, 'twill be better
That I should not appear, since you intend
To have it private, there will be less notice
If I be absent, and it may be thought
You by some trick stole her away: Do You mark?

Yon. Well thought on.

Wood. Then, sir, that opinion
Will save our credit, and excuse the want
Of ceremony, and the fruitless charge,
Which is expected at her marriage:
Is it not best?

Yon. You show your providence.

Eug. Though I could wish your presence.

Wood. You Are not wise,
Eugenia, go to the Church, and let me
Salute you quickly happy bride and bridegroom:
Away, I say.

Eug. He has prevented us. Exeunt.

Wood. The Land's my own, you wrong your joys to tarry,
I would I had more Neeces thus to marry. Exit.

Enter Thornay and Chrysolina. Thor. Nay, never blush, but haste and meet the
Gentleman.
You have no reason to distrust me, Lady,
After this circumstance.

Chr. Can I be so happy?

Thor. Have a strong faith, and find it so,
Though once I was guilty of some wrong to thee.

Chry. Never to me: or if you had this news
Is recompense enough.

Thor. I Will tell thee now:
I was the cause that Gerard did neglect thee,
In hope to gain thee for my self; I told him
Thou had half consented to be mine.

Chr. This truth?

Thor. Bade him direct his Courtship to Aurelia,
And so be sure of one: poor Gentleman
Believed, and after lost thy sister too:
But if no cure be seasonably applied,
Gerard, I fear, will sink beneath his loss.

Chr. Was this the cause?

Thor. I must accuse my self.

Chr. I Will tell Aurelia this.

Tho. Do so.

Chr. She meant to visit him, but this will give her wings.

Thor. I will entreat her pardon, but make haste,
I would not willingly be seen.

Chr. I feel
Another soul, what raptures are distilled
Upon my heart? Enter Caperwit.

Cap. She cannot choose but take it.

Thor. You know how to direct her, but be swift
In your return. -- Mr. Caperwit?

Cap. Your servant*
Sir, if my sight be not unfaithful, I have seen you.

Thor. I owe much to your eyes,
It was my happiness to see you here.

Cap. I do remember.

Thor. I observed your courtship
To fair Aurelia.

Cap. Pray sir, can you dance?

Tho. Dance?

Cap. I presume you are a friend to her,
Whose name made sweet your breath so late.

Thor. It did not stink before.

Ca. Excuse my Poetry.

Thor. Cry you mercy.

Cap. I know you have heard wherein consists my excellence.

Th. You are a Prince in Poetry, and please your Excellence.

Cap. The phrase in Latine's modest, use no reverence,
To tell you true, you are a friend, I am upon a Mask --

Tho. That made you ask if I could dance.

Cap. It Is right, and you should do me honor
To lend your person to it, but I would
Have it this night, before my Mistress, whose
Mention perfumed your lips so late.

Thor. Sweet language!
Wy' your favor, Mr. Caperwit, who are the
Principal Maskers?

Cap. Faith I have none yet,
Beside my self, but a foolish Knight, one Sir Gervace,
And's Lady, I want persons.

Thor. Let me furnish you.

Cap. And tie my everlasting friendship to you.

Th. They shall be of quality, most of your acquaintance*
What if Aurelia be one? she loves you,
I have discovered that; I know she will do it,
Her Sister for another, and my self,
Frank Gerard and Jack Yongrave, with his Mistress.

Cap. The number I desire.

Thor. I know your lodging, say no more, I Will bring 'em,
This afternoon to practice, we may soon
Perfect a dance.

Cap. Shall I trust to you?

Thor. Here Is my hand.

Cap. I kiss it.

Thor. I may give you a hint perhaps for the device too.

Cap. I have no other gratitude but this,
Live but a week, I Will send you an Ode; or dye,
I Will write your Epitaph. Exit.

Thor. I have no purpose to put your Muse
To such expense. Farewell Phantasma.

Enter Chrysolina. Chr. Have I not been tedious?
I told my sister all, and she is gone
To Mr. Gerard, if their meeting prosper,
I have directed where to find us.

Thor. Excellent, come, let us away,
A thousand joys expect us. Exeunt.

Enter Gerard in his gown and cap. Ger. I once believed women were full of
pity,
Of soft and gentle constitutions:
But I have found 'em cruel: for Aurelia,
One of the best of all her sex, does own
A hard and tyrannous nature. Enter servant.

Ser. Sir, it is done.

Ger. I prithee let it be undone, as I am.

Ser. The Song,

Ger. I gave to be taught Music? I Will hear't anon:
I prithee go --

Ser. Whither?

Ger. To Prison.

Ser. How Sir?

Ger. Yes, and ask when are the Sessions.

Ser. They are every month.

Ger. I would 'twere execution day to morrow.

Ser. Why, with your pardon, do you wish it, Sir?

Ger. I would entreat the Surgeons to beg
Some Woman for Anatomy, nothing else:
I have heard their Lectures very much commended,
And I Would be present when they read upon
Her heart: for sure there is much difference
Between a Woman and a Man, in that
Same thing we call a heart, they do not love
As we do; we are fools, indeed we are,
To dote so much upon 'em, and betray
The glory of our creation, to serve
A female pride; we were borne free, and had
From the great Maker Royal privilege,
Most brave immunities: but since have made
Tame forfeit of our Charter. Let me see it,
It is the same, first read it, reach the chair:
It Is yet no Song, infuse a soul into it.

Song.
If Love his Arrows shoot so fast,
Soon his feathered stock will waste:
But I mistake in thinking so,
Love's Arrows in his Quiver grow*
How can he want Artillery?
That appears too true in me:
Two shafts feed upon my breast,
Oh, make it Quiver for the rest,
Kill me with love, thou angry son
Of Cytherea, or let one,
One sharp golden Arrow fly,
To wound her heart for whom I dye.
Cupid, if thou be a Child,
Be no god, or be more mild.
Enter Aurelia and Servant. Ser. I have not, since I served him, known him so
Oppressed with melancholy; he is asleep,
I dare not wake him.

Aur. I Will expect a while.

Ser. This quiet will much benefit him, he
Began to talk idly.

Aur* Heaven preserve the temper of his brain.

Ser. He wakes.

Ger. Ha, it is not she, do I dream still;
Come hither, do thou see nothing?

Ser. Yes, a Gentlewoman that came to visit you.

Ger. Do not abuse thy master, it is not possible Aurelia
Will do me so much honor; in my sleep
Me thought I parled with her, and my fancy
Has not yet lost her shape; Oh my Aurelia!

Aur. I come to ask thy pardon.

Ger. Do not mock me*
Thou wo't be cruel when I wake again;
And then I shall repent I dreamed so sweetly.

Aur. You Are now awake, and I am your Aurelia,
That if you can forgive her past neglect,
Will give you proof of her repentance,
But these tears --

Ger. Let not the ground be hallowed with
Such water, I have a heart to drink this Balsome:
Enough Aurelia, do not make thy eyes
Poor, to enrich thy bosom, where the drops
Show like a Carkanet of Pearl upon it,
Thou have enough restored me.

Aur. Oh my Gerard!
Thou art too merciful, and do forgive
Too soon the injury I did thy love;
But I am come to make thee satisfaction;
And this is but a shadow of those joys,
We must divide, if you vouchsafe to follow,
As I direct.

Ger. It Is sin not to obey.

Aur. You must walk then.

Ger. It is to heaven thou go.
Convey me swiftly thither.

Aur. Nay, it is have is now required.

Ger. What bliss can be denied,
A man that follows such an Angell-guide? Exeunt.

Enter Thumpe. Thum. Where in the name of simplicity, should my Master be all
this while? I have been at six Ordinaries, twelve Tavernes, and I think four
and twenty Bawdy-houses, places that Gentlemen use to frequent, and yet cannot
find him: well, I am resolved to ask every man I meet; and if I cannot hear
of him the sooner, I Will have him cried.

Enter Yongrave and Eugenia. Pray did you see my Master?


Yon. Thy Master? I know him not.


Thump. Nay Sir, did you see him? for if you see him, you cannot choose but
know him; for he had a hundred marks brought him warm out of the Country
this morning.


Yon. Much good do it him next his heart, I see him not. Ex.


Thump. No, no; there is no hope, it is but an unmannerly trick of any Master,
to leave his man of this fashion; it is well there is no press abroad, no
disguised Constables twelve pence, and the Kings name would put me into a
pitiful Fever, and I should curse Sir Gervace in another Country, as often
as I heard the report of a Musket, for bringing me up no better, that might have
hv'd quietly at home, and gone a feasting with the trained Band without any
danger.

Enter Thornay, Chrysol. Here is another youth, and his commodity, I Will enquire
of him, Pray did you see my Master?


Thor. Thy Master, what is he.


Thum. A Knight Sir, I Will assure you, of the last edition that Was my foolish
Master, for want of a better.


Thor. His name?


Thum. Sir Gervace Simple.


Thor. Something of a black complexion, with a weezell face.


Thum. The same Sir.


Thor. In a doublet of Orange-tawny Satin, richly laced? and blew trunk hose
very suitable?


Thum. Very right Sir.


Thor. A long Italian Cloak came down to his elbowes, a Spanish Ruff, and
long French stockings.


Thump. Just the same, how happy was I to meet with this Gentleman.


Thor. Faith honest friend, I saw none such.


Thum. Pox of these questions.


Thor. But if thou wilt go with me, I may chance help to a sight of this
Pageant.


Thum. Heaven bless your worship, and the sweet faced modicum in your company.
Exeunt.


Enter Master Golds. Mistress Golds. Mis. To prison with your servants
Husband; hang
Them all, unless they find our daughters.

Gol. And I have sent to Sir John Woodhamores,
They may be with his Niece.

Mis. They never used
Thus to absent themselves; Oh me unhappy!

Gol. We have been too indulgent.

Mis. I would have had them more restrained, young wenches
That have so many suitors, grow soon wanton,
And throw off their obedience; had you been
Forward as I, they had been married;
And then we had not suffered this perplexity.
I did commend an honorable man,
But your deliberation has marred all,
And they were here again --

Gol. Have patience wife,
They are not lost for ever.

Mis. No, no, lost?
They Will come again, double I warrant you,
And perhaps treble, with some unthrift husbands,
Of their own choosing.

Gol. It does trouble me.
They were not used to walk abroad without
A servant, to wait on 'em.

Mis. You must think
They have servants of their own, for such a business,
Young maids have plenty of such waiting men,
And this has been a long conspiracy, I Will lay my life.

Enter Servant. Gol. What have found 'em yet?

Ser. I can hear no news,
And Sir John Woodhamore is much troubled Sir,
His Niece is gone too.

Gol. Hey day!

Ser. She Has been absent*
Ever since morning.

Gol. Precious, precious thieves!
Eugenias gone, lets have 'em cried together.

Mis. They that have found em, will too soon I fear,
Alter the property.

Gol. We shall keep no virgins ith town shortly.
Enter Woodhamore. Welcome Sir John.

Wood. Is not my Niece Eugenia here?

Gol. Not here.

Mis. We have lost our daughters, and that is two for one.

Gol. Ours have been absent ever since the morning.
Nor can we study what is become on 'em

Wood. Is It possible? is there no plot in this?

Gol. Our servants have enquired in every place.
Of our acquaintance.

Wood. I will tell you Sir,
You do remember Master Yongrave.

Gol. A servant of your Neeces;

Woo. The same Sir
With my consent, he took her forth this morning.
To marry her, I do believe he has don't,
But it does wrack my brain, why they should stay thus,
They might have married, forty times by this.

Gol. You did perhaps desire it private.

Woo. And he too.

Gol. I will engage my life they are all together.

Woo. Do you think so?

Gol. I am confident, lets in to supper, and expect the best.
Enter Servant, and whispers Mistress Goldsworth. What news with him?

Mis. It Is something that he says.

Ser. I cannot find em.

Gol. How?

Ser. But I have met a Gentleman, that can
Tell you some news.

Gol. That does concern my daughters?

Ser. So he reports, he is a cunning man, I think a conjurer,
He talks of art, and spirits.
Enter Caperwit like a Coniurer. This is he Sir.

Cap. Gentles in your troubled brow,
I read what you desire to know,
Let no fear invade your heart;
I will tell by powerful art,
Your Childrens fate, and where they are:
Know then, they are wandered far,
Led by Cupid God of loves,
They have now arrived those groves,
Where no happy soul can sleep,
Venus does there revels keep.
Consecrating day and night,
To song, to kisses, and delight:
They in Elysium breath, chsue whether,
They shall move thence, or you go thither.

Woo. This is some Poetical business.

Mis. Sweet husband let us go to 'em, I have heard Poets talk much of
Elysium, I would feign see whither they be honest of their words or no.


Gol. No it will befit them to come to us.


Cap. It shall be so: harmonious strains,
That do bless those happy plains;
Usher them forth, and shame the spheres,
Charm with heavenlier notes our ears,
Recorders. That when we see the lovers come,
We may believe Elysium
It self come hither, all those bowers,
And the shades of pleasure ours.

Enter masked Yongrave, Chrysolina, Gerard, Aurelia, Thornay Eugenia, Simple
Bird, between every couple a torch carried, they march over the Stage, and
Exeunt. Gol. Who are all these?

Mis. I guess some of them, oh that I were in Elysium

VVood. What are they vanished? Another turn of your art Good Sir.

Cap. Chime other music.

Enter the Maskers, and dance. VVoo. Now they will discover. Master Yongrave? I
rejoice Yon. discovers. To see you here, this is the Gentleman I praised so
much, he has Married now my Niece.


Chr. But I must ask your blessing, we are married,


Wood. Chris. unveiles. Ha, another Sweetheart; I am abused, he is a very
Knave; where is my Niece?


Gol. Is he worse for marrying of my child? nay, then my Blessing on you both,
my son and daughter.


Mis. Aur. unveiles. Where Is Aurelia?


Aur. Here Mother, I have met a Husband too, let us divide your Prayers -- soft
Master Caperwit Ger. discovers. we are married Sir already.


Cap. How married? did not you promise me?


Gol. Master Gerard? nay and it be no worse I care not (...) to my heart.


Ger. My duty shall deserve it, it is ene so, good Master Caperwit you must dance
without her.


Cap. Have I made verses and studied speeches for this?


Mis. Since there^ no remedy, I bless you both, but I did Eug. unveiles. wish
--


Eug. Sir: if you will acknowledge your Niece.
You must accept a Nephew too: we are as fast as they.

Woo. Death! I am coozend, cheated, there is law.

Yon. And there is conscience.

Th. I Will not give you a penny.

Yon. I will not publish Sir your avarice,
Wish em good joy.

Woo. Well, it is done.

Tho. Yes faith Uncle, we are coupled, man and wise.

Woo. I Will enquire how this came about hereafter;
Look you love her Sir.

Tho. As I will do my soul.

Sim. Gentlemen, all is not yet discovered; there are a pair behind, worth
taking notice of; do y know Sir Gervace Simple, I am the man.


Thu. Simple as he stands there.


Sim. And this is my Lady -- what does thy hair come off already.


Page Your worship is a most egregious coxcombe.


Sim. A boy? Gentlemen, have I married a boy, or is she metamorphis'd?


Yon. Ha, ha, Master Caperwits Page.


Om. Give you joy Sir.


Page The Bird is flowne indeed law.


Sim. Bird? they make a coxcombe of me.


Cap. I am glad somebody else is coozend beside my self;
Nay, nay take her, there is a man within a mile of an Oak,
I name no body, has had earnest of her body.

Sim. Bawdy quoth a Thumpe, I will sell thee my Knighthood for half the money
it cost me, and turn Yeoman in the Country again; why there is neither wit nor
honesty in this.


Thu. Be ruld by me, lets to some Tavern, and
Drink away melancholy.

Sim. I, and then we may steal away disguisd, a match!


Tho. Nay, nay, lets all together, and make a merry night on t, Sim. Why how
now Thumpe, are you sneaking away?


Gol. Lets all together.


Ge. But first we must the license of these Gentlemen.


Epilogus.
Our Poet knows you will be just, but we
Appeal to mercy, he desires that ye
Would not distaste his Muse, because of late
Transplanted, which would grow here, if no fate
Have an unlucky bode opinion
Comes hither but on crutches yet, the Sun
Has lent no beam to warm us, if this Play
Proceed more fortunate, we shall bless the day,
And love that brought you hither; it is in you
To make a little sprigge of Laurel grow,
And spread into a grove, where you may sit,
And hear soft stories, when by blasting it,
You gain no honor, though our ruins lie
To tell the spoils of your offended eye:
If not for what we are, for alas here
No Roscious moves to charm your eyes, or ear,
Yet as you hope hereafter to see Plays,
Encourage us and give our Poet bays. Exeunt.
FINIS.

