DOVVNEFALL OF SHEBNA: Together with AN APPLICATION to the bloody GOWRIE of
SCOTLAND.

As it was delivered in two several Sermons of that occasion, in S. MARY'S
Church IN OXFORD.

And now published for a warning to all ill-affected OGILVIESTS: Vt quorum
exitus perhorrescunt, e^^^^ facta non imiten^^^.

BY J. S.

PSALM. 37.28. The Lord loves Judgment, and forsakes not his Saints. They
shall be preserved for evermore: but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.

LONDON Printed for John Bill. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, my very especial good Lord and Patron,
JOHN KING, Bishop of London, J. S. Wishes all true happiness in CHRIST JESUS.
May it please your Lordship,
I Have (according to the received ceremony) made bold to recommend this
Treatise of SHEBNA his Downfall to your patronage, as a testimony of mine
unfeigned thankfulness for your many favors and beneficence. In accepting
whereof, I humbly pray you to imitate the goodness of Almighty God, who, as a
learned Father says, Coronat voluntatem, vbi non inuenit facultatem. For
otherwise had not I this strong confidence, I so well understand mine own
disabilitie, and take so little pleasure in proclaiming the same, as that this
lively representation of my many defects had never come to your Lordships view,
much less patronage. I know it needs a Patron; I dare not trust mine own eye:
the object is too near to be well discerned. And I cannot but remember in this
bookish age the complaint of Andromache. (...) Eurip. An. drom.
O opinion, opinion: thou have made many to think well of themselves, who were
nothing indeed. Right Reverend; let it have your countenance, and as for
others, if any man know more concerning the Subject here handled, either
Shebna, or Gowrie, my pains may serve to stir up in him a desire to profit
more, that so what he knows, sciat and alter. If any know less, I trust he
will rather thank me, then censure me. There is none I assure my self so
rigid and deuoid of ingenuitie, that will deny exiguis hunc addere rebus
honorem.

Now the Lord that made heaven and earth bless you out of Sion: the Lord guide
and prosper you in all your ways: the Lord establish your house and family,
that you may see your childrens children, and an happy addition of many good
and comfortable days in this life, and this life ended, eternal happiness in
the kingdom of heaven.

Your Lordships Chaplain in all humble duty and service to be commanded,
ISAAC SINGLETON.

THE DOWNFALL OF SHEBNA.
ISAY 22.15. Go get thee unto this Treasurer even unto Shebna, which is over
the house, and say.


THough it be true that the Judge of all the world must needs do right Genesis
18.25.
, and that he who is of infinite majesty, power, and justice, can do no less
then avenge himself of sin and sinful men; yet such is his patience and
longanimitie, that now and then, as the wise man says, dissimulat peccata
hominum Wisd. 7.
, he dissembleth and seems not to see the sins of men. And as S. Austin
observes, there is not always apertio oculorum, when as this God sees with
the open eye, and takes apparent notice of the mischievous practices of evil
doers; but sometime opertio, when he considers (as I may so say) with the
eie-lid, and appears unto the wicked as one that sleeps, and winkes at their
impieties.

Insomuch that the cry of Sodom Genesis 18.25.
came up to the very gates of heaven ere he came down to them: the wickedness
of the Amorites 13.16.
was rotten ripe ere he began to lance; and the day of trouble and time Isai.
22.15.
prefixed expired, ere he proceeded in judgment with the Princes of Judah. And
Shebna in my text by his many impieties and wicked machinations even turned his
patience into fury ere he sent our Prophet unto him to threaten his ruin. Till
at length the sins of Shebna began to cry, and the measure of his iniquity
waxed full, and the day of his trouble came; and then when he thought himself
most strong, and flourished like the bay tree Psalm.
, when he dwelt in the cliffes of the rock Ier. 49.16.
, and kept the height of the hills, and was (to use our Prophets words in the
five and twentieth verse Isai. 22.25.
of this Chapter) as a nail fastened in a sure place, lo, even then comes a
fearful mesage and most direful prediction of his utter ruin and
destruction, Go get thee unto this Treasurer, even unto Shebna which is over
the house and say.

Which parcel of holy Writ may very well be entitled, The Downefull of
Shebna. Occidit vna domus, sed enim domus illa perire Digna fuit. For the
better unfolding whereof consider with me I beseech you these three proposals.

First, What this Shebna was. Secondly, What was his offense. And thirdly, How
it was punished.
As touching the first, what this Shebna was; go we no further then to the
title here given him, and the bare signification of the name it self, we
shall find, that as was his name, so was he: for the word (...) which our
English renders Treasurer, Musculus.
as Musculus very well observes, is not so much a name of office, as
parentage: and he was called (...) Socuite, from the City wherein he was
borne. Now the Verb (...) either signifies to impouerish; so that Shebna as
it should seem, was one that was given to wrong and hurt others, and set light
hy all such as had not relation to him, and favored his proceedings: and
therefore among his other vices, which doubtless were many and great (as you
shall hear anon) the holy Ghost Isa. 22.21.
in the one and twentieth verse of this Chapter, plalnly specifieth the malice
and spleen which he bare unto good Eliachim; and to regret and gall him the
more, it is recorded as a parcel of his punishment, that whereas he labored
to supplant Eliachim, and bring him into disgrace with the Prince and State,
Eliachim should be advanced, and that in Shebna room: For with thy garments
will I cloth him, and with thy girdle will I strengthen him: thy power also
will I commit into his hand, and he shall be a father of the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, Isai. 22.21.
and of the house of Judah.

Or else it signifies to entertain, to warm and cherish. In which sense it is
used the first of Kings, the first Chapter, and second verse, 1 Reg. 1.2.
where it is said that the servants of David perceiving a decay of nature, and
that his vital heat was well-nigh spent, they brought a young Virgin unto him,
(...) and sit ei proficiens, foueat cum, let her cherish him. Which
signification of the word if we will follow in this title, then we may
conceive Shebna was a great feaster, and by his reuelling and banqueting and
royal entertainment and other his more secret practices indeered the loves and
affections of the Assyrians and Egyptians, but especially of the false and
hollow-hearted people and natural subjects of Ezechia unto him, in such sort,
as that all men stood in awe of him.

Howsoever, certain it is, Tacitus hist. 1. sect. 13.
he was a man of special regard and eminency in the common wealth: For though
he were an Egyptian borne and a mere stranger to the Jewish nation, and a
man who was besides those disaduantages of birth and life: the one, being
mean, base and obscure, the other, lewd, wicked and ungodly, no way likely to
rise in so good and well ordered an estate, as this of Judah.

Yet had he by some such virtues, as Tacitus mentions in Tigellinus, Luxury
and Cruelty, and such other their inseparable companions, so humored the
wicked King Ahaz, and by his favor wrought himself into such place and
general employment in the common wealth, as that Ezechiah, though he were a
good and a pious Prince, and without all question made choice of his servants
thereafter, yet he not only continued Shebna in that present greatness,
whereunto Ahaz had advanced him: But seconded what Ahaz had begun, and followed
Shebna with many an addition and fresh supply of future favor and preferment.
For whereas there are but two courses, which Princes generally take with such
as hold not correspondence with them, either to disgrace and casheir them
quite, or else to win them by conferring favors and honors upon them: you
have many embrace the former, and David himself though abused by a false and
slandering fugitive could hardly brook Mephibosheth: 2 Samuel 19.25.
wherefore wentest not thou with me Mephibosheth? Yet this good King took the
fairest and most charitable course, and heaped coals of fire upon this wicked
Shebna his head. And this will evidently appear, if you will be pleased to
take a view of the place which Shebna now held under Ezechiah, and of the great
account which this good King made of him and of his service. For, to omit all
busy discourse touching his office, whether he were Steward of the house, as
some Writers read: or as Iunius renders it, praefectus praetorio, one that had
the ordering of the men of war and marshall affairs: or whether he were
Scriba honorarius, principal Secretary, as the story has it, the 2 of Kings
at the 18. or, 2 Kings 18.
whether he were keeper of the Rolls, or, Master of Requests, as elsewhere
our Prophet seems to imply, Isay 36.3.
Isaiah 36.3. we may boldly rest on this, that he was a prime man in that
state, and indeed raised to that height of honor, or at least continued at that
height of honor (until he deserved the contrary) as that higher he could not
go, Junius.
even so high quantum potuit esse viri says one, as possibly a subject could
be capable of. He was secundus a Rege, the Kings right hand, and as it should
seem by the description of Eliachims power and authority, who succeeded
Shebna both in place and greatness, Isay 22.22.
he had the very key of David, and bare such sway, as that all men sought unto
him, all, even from him that sat upon the throne, to him that grinded at the
mill, relied on him: The King for advice, the people for dependence, and there
was no one thing done, either in Church or Common wealth, either at home or
abroad, that Shebna was not privy too: nay, such account made Ezechiah of this
one Shebna, and such trust and confidence he reposed in him, as that when
Zenacherib threatened the ruin and destruction both of Ezechiah and Jerusalem,
why, Shebna was a man, and a chief man sent from Ezechiah to appease
Zenacherib and divert him from his bloody design. In a word: when I consider
either the place that Shebna bare in the common wealth, or the good opinion
shall I say? nay, the strong confidence, trust and repose, which Ezechiah had
in him; me thinks I hear Ezechiah speak unto Shebna as Pharaoh unto Joseph,
Genesis 41.40.
Thou shall be over mine house and of thy word shall all my people be armed,
only in the Kings throne will I be above thee. Genesis 41.40. Me thinks he no
less respected him, Ester 6.8.
then Assuerus did Mordecay in the sixth of Ester at the 8 verse: or Balthazar
him that could interpret the dream Dan: 5.7. For, Dan: 5.7.
Ecce (as Iunius has it) Jehovah contegit to in tegumento, and amiciendo
amicit te belle. and what possibly can you name should be done to the man whom
the King would honor, that was not done to Shebna. He had honor, wealth,
power, command, and which is equal, nay above all the rest, he had the favor
and good opinion of his Sovereign, and what could the large and vaste heart of
any reasonable subject desire more?

But O ignominia domus Domini! you would wonder to see how soon this base
fellow and earthly meteor, but now drawn aloft by the beams of the Princes
favor, vanished; and how quickly his good service (as Lewis the XI. King of
France was wont to say) utterly undid him (so that, Phil. de Com. lib. 3.
quem vidit veniens dies superbum, Hunc vidit fugiens dies iacentem.

For, Shebna looking upon these blessings of God and favors of his Prince, as
Swine upon maste, never lifting up his heart or entertayning so much as a
thankful thought from whence they fell, so exasperated God the author and
doner of them, that he seems here, as sometime he did upon a serious view
and consideration of the old world, even to repent that ever he made Shebna a
man, or at least so great a man; and therefore he sends our Prophet here, and
gives him in charge without any the least delay or preadmonition whatsoever, to
lay the axe unto the root of the tree and smite home.

Go get thee unto this Treasurer, even unto Shebna which is over the house,
and say. But of Gods round and peremptory dealing with Shebna, I shall have
occasion to speak, when I come to the punishment of his offense: I am yet come
no further, then the quality of his person, what he was, a man, who kept all
other in awe, a man, of royal entertainment: a man, of prime note and
eminency, a pillar of the state, a patron of the people, a favorite of the
King.

The use whereof may be that in the Psalmist, Man being in honor has no
understanding, Psalm: 49.13.
he is like to beasts that perish. Psalm. 49.13. especially that man that
rises from a low and mean estate, none more insolent, none more ungrateful,
none greater despisers of others, magnifiers of themselves.

And it may serve to admonish such as rise from mean parentage, birth and
estate, to look unto the rock from whence they were hewn, and in all
humility and hearty acknowledgment of Gods goodness toward them, to carry
themselves fairly and respectively to others. Whereas such is the impotencie
and weakness of many, that observe it when you will, you shall seldom see men
base by birth, base by descent, base by education, but if once they get into
the stirrup and climb to any place of honor, preferment, means, command,
why, presently they begin to play the Shebna, and as the Poet says of drunken
men, and what greater drunkenness then this of the mind? Tum veniunt risus,
tum pauper cornua sumit. And this shall suffice to have been spoken of the
quality of his person, what he was. I come now by your good favor, to the
nature of his offense, what he did. Go get thee unto this Treasurer even unto
Shebna which is over the house, and say. What was his offense.
As touching the offense of Shebna, it will ask some time to find it out, but
being found out it will appear to be a marvelous great one, no less then
Treason, a transcendent Treason, and every way deserving the seuerest
punishment.

There are that have taken great pains to find out the sin of Shebna, and
they stick not to charge him with arrogancy, vainglory, security, contempt
of God and his Prophets, exaction, extortion, oppression, scandal, and bad
example, with which, as one says, he did more hurt, then with all the rest.

Cyrill describes him to be, elato animo, superciliosum admodum ac saenum in
eos a quibus erat offensus, rapinis exultantem, sordido quoestui mancipatum,
ostentabundum, and honores ab alijs semper venantem.

Whether Shebna were guilty of any one or all these, I will not say, but sure I
am when we shall lay all these together, they will not make up the full
measure of Shebna his impiety, they will not amount to the offense of Shebna,
somewhat else there was in all likely hood, which did exasperate God so greatly
against him.

If you please to go no further then our Prophets commission here, to the very
words of my text, it will appear without any the least strayning, even from
the bare letter thereof, that there was another notorious sin in Shebna,
besides all those which now were named, and that is his sin of Hypocrisy, in
that God says here, Go get thee unto this, this Treasurer. (...) where the
particle (...) is put for contempt says Calvin. As if it had been said. Go
get thee to this Cercops (as they called Julian) to this subtle and wily fox,
to this Amphisbaena, this two headed and double-hearted serpent Shebna. So that
did we go no farther then his hypocrisy, why here you see is fuel enough
for Gods fierce and unquenchable wrath to work upon. For we are but of
yesterday, and are ignorant. Inquire therefore I pray you of the former age,
and call to mind ancient experiments, and they will tell you the guerdon and
reward of an Hypocrite at the hands of Gods, did you ever see a rush grow
without mire? or can the grass grow without water, though it were in green,
and not cut down, yet it shall wither before any other herb: So are the
paths of all that forget God, and the hypocrites hope shall perish. His
confidence also shall be cut off and his trust shall be as the house of a
spider. Job 8. ver: 11.12.13.14.15.
He shall lean upon his house but it shall not stand: he shall hold him fast
by it, yet shall it not endure. Lo here the reward of an hypocrite, and Shebna
was an hypocrite: but yet this was not the sin of Shebna. Add unto his
hypocrisy, Esaias 22.16.
what we find in the 16 verse, to wit, his notorious ambition. In that Shebna
being homo nouus, ignobilis, a mere stranger, and which is more an Egyptian
stranger, with whom neither Ezechiah himself, nor any of his subjects ought to
have had the least commerce, or intercourse, and who by the law was excluded
from all title of honor, or place of government in that common wealth; yet
notwithstanding this stranger, this Egyptian, this Shebna, presumed to rank
himself with the blood royal, the nobles and princes of Judah, and omitted no
one point of pomp and magnificence, whereby he might support himself in the
eyes of the world during his natural life, and that once ended aeternize his
name among them for ever. And therefore our Prophet begins with him as Achilles
with that brauing and cracking (...), Homer: Iliad ^.
after a round and rough manner, by way of high indignation and great disdain,
(...)? quis vnde hominum es? What have thou to do here? And whom have thou
here? that here of all other coasts and countries, where thou have least
interest, and can not entitle thy self to any the least clod of earth, that
here I say, thou should prepare and erect so rich and so sumptuous a tomb
in so high and eminent a place above others.

Add unto his Ambition, verse. 18.
his Ingratitude in the 18 verse, where our Prophet calls ignominia domus
Domini, the shame and scandal and dishonor of his Lord and Master: now,
ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris, there is no fault, no vice whatsoever, but you
shall find it more or less in an ungrateful person, and Shebna was
ungrateful, but yet this was not now the sin of Shebna.

Add therefore I pray you one sin more, and then we shall come near the
sin of Shebna: and that is, the unreconcilable hatred, despite, envy,
detraction, wherewith he daily and hourly hunted, and persecuted honest and
harmless Eliachim, still whispering and bussing in the ears of the King,
some infamous slander or unchristian surmise, whereby he might bring innocent
Eliachim in disgrace both with Prince and people, as we may gather out of the
20. verse. O this is a sin of all sins! verse: 20.
when a cursed Belial and slandering Shebna shall hate goodness in any for no
other reason but because he will hate, when he shall carry a throat as wide as
an open sepulcher, and tip his tongue with the poison of Aspes, when he shall
bend his bow and make ready his arrows, of detractrion, malice, slander,
reports, suggestions, lies, and all to devour poison, and shoot secretly (Lord
into their secret let not my soul come) at the simple and upright of life, and
that when his fury is over, his passion settled and he come unto himself,
neither he nor the devil that set him a work is able to say, what has the
righteous done? O this is one and a principal one, of those peccata clamantia,
which as they oft-times pierce the tender hearts of Gods dear children, (the
more their weakness and want of true Christian fortitude) so do they with all
importunity knock at the gates of heaven, and cry aloud for Gods heavy and
unsupportable vengeance on the doers of them. And thus have ye at length a
list of Shebnaes foul sins and offenses. Shebna was an hypocrite, Shebna was
ambitious, Shebna was ungrateful, Shebna was envious and given over to those
crying sins of detraction, supplanting, slandering, lying, and what not, but
yet we have not named the sin of Shebna, the particular capital crime, the
predominant sin of Shebna which awaked Gods justice and provoked him thus in
all severity to proceed against him. For all these which but now I named,
hypocrifie, ambition, ingratitude, envy, why they were rather peccata hominum,
peccata Iudaeorum, then any appropriated sins of Shebna, they were sins
incident to the corrupt nature of man: familiar to the people of the Jews and
cannot by way of denomination be termed the sins of Shebna. Insita est
mortalibus natura, says he, men by nature are wholly given to tax and malign
virtue and goodness in others and pari dolor aliena commoda, ac proprias
iniurias metiri and to take other men's benefits and blessings as much to heart
as their own proper injuries. But especially the Jews, no people, no nation
so given over to hypocrisy, ambition, ingratitude and envy as the Jews.

Besides, it is worth the noting, that God proceeds after another fashion
with the Princes of Judah, and the rest of the inferior sort of people, and
punishes their offenses in another kind, as he that will peruse the former
part of this Chapter may easily perceive, and I as easily show you, could I now
stay. But when he calls to mind the sin of Shebna, he bids our Prophet
address himself to Shebna in particular, as unto a supereminent notorious
offender above all the rest: Go get thee unto this Treasurer, even unto
Shebna, which is over the house, and say. It was not then his hypocrisy, it
was not his ambition, nor yet his ingratitude, no nor yet his envy: it was a
sin of a deeper die, accomcompanied I grant you with all these, but yet not
any one of all these.

And that was his sin of Treason. Shebna was a Traitor, patriae proditor,
which (as one says) comes a prodendis consilijs hostibus: so that Shebna (as I
verily think) revealed both arcana dominationis and domus, secrets of State,
and secrets of Court, and most treacherously combined to betray Ezechiah and
Jerusalem into the hands of a professed enemy and atheall miscreant
Zenacherib, as hoping forsooth that when once Zenacherib should be vested in
the Throne of Judah, he would think on Shebna, and make him King over his own
Country at the least. And this I take to be the sin of Shebna. As for those
other sins, I make no doubt but Shebna had of a long time nourished them, and
God might say unto him as it is in the Psalmist, Psalm. 49.21.
Haec fecisti and tacui: These things have thou done, Shebna, and I held my
peace. But when once he committed the sin of treason, then was it high time
for God, who as the son of Siracke says, patient est etiam and redditor,
Wisdom.
to come down and visit Shebna with a rod of iron.

Go get thee unto this Treasurer, even unto Shebna, that is over the house;
and say. Shebna then was a Traitor, his offense Treason, nay, I added more, a
transcendent Treason: For look upon the most heinous Treasons and bloody
assassinats in the books of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah, and other
faithful stories in the word of God, you shall find somewhat that will lessen
them, and give occasion of extenuation. In all of them you shall observe that
flesh and blood will have some Sanctuary to fly unto; and an indulgent
obseruer will easily invent arguments to mitigate, if not quite to purge the
foulness of each offense. But Shebna his treason was so dangerous and
inexcusable, that it will admit of no extenuation.

In the second of Ester you shall read of a dangerous treason attempted by
Bigthan and Teresh, Ester 2.
upon the body of an anointed King, the King Assuerus; where, if we look upon
the authors of the treason, it was very dangerous and inexcusable: for what
could not these mischievous villains do, that were Squires of the body, and
had the life and being of the King in their own custody? But yet if we cast
our eye upon the object of their treason, why surely it extended no farther,
neither had they any other object, then the bare life only of Assuerus at the
most.

In the third of that book you shall find recorded a barbarous massacre
intended by Haman against the person, not of one or two, but even of Mordecay
and the people of Mordecay. Here now if you look narrowly upon the latitude
of the object, Mordecay and all the Jews, verily the cruelty of merciless
Haman can no way be extenuated: but yet if you will search a little farther,
and enquire after the end he proposed unto himself, we cannot say that the
life of his liege Lord, or that the welfare of the proper inhabitants of that
Country, or that the preservation of the state wherein he lived, and whereof
he was a principal member, was any way put in hazard: only Mordecay and
certain Jews dispersed up and down thorowout the Kings provinces were aimed
at.

In the second of Samuel at the 15 we have storied a foul and unnatural
treachery of Absolon against his father David; 2. Sam. 15.
where if we mark well the end he proposed unto himself, to wit, the
usurpation of the Kingdom, or the means he used for the atchieuing of this
his end, namely by stealing away the hearts of the people, sollicitando,
pollicitando, (as Simo charge Crito in the Comedy) feeding their fancies
with affable gestures and fair promises, by getting arms and military forces
into his hands, by quarrelling the execution of justice and course of
government, by deluding his father with a pretense of performing his vow, and
the more free serving of God, and a world of such like traitorous lies and
devices, nothing can be said for it. But yet if you will weigh the issue and
event which in probability must needs have followed, you will not think it so
heinous: for the worst that can be said or feared, was but the change of a
Prince, of the father for the son, of an old for a new: the Law should have
remained the same, the Religion the same, the government the same, and there
would have ensued little or no inuersion, much less euersion of the state. So
that in all these, though dangerous and inexcusable treasons and murders in
themselves, yet somewhat there is that a man partially affected may pick out
to allege, if not for defense, yet for excuse and extenuation of them. But
Shebna his treason here is like a strong poison composed of whatsoever was
most bad in the worst of these. And it was dangerous and inexcusable, not only
in regard of the author, as that of the Eunuchs; nor yet of the object, as
that of Hamans; nor yet of the end and means which he used, as that of
Absolon: but in all these respects, both of author, object, end, event, every
way.

First then, it was dangerous and inexcusable in regard of the author who
committed it, Shebna.

And here I must entreat you to conceive of Shebna not as now we find him,
dismantled and detected by our Prophet, but as then he was when he first
hatched and conceived this treason. For conspiracies and treasons are like
sparks of fire, which in the dark and deep hearts of Traitors glitter, and
are lightsome, probable, and very likely to take effect: but when as they Sun
shines on them, and that they are discovered, they fall to ashes. Every child
can pass a judgment upon the event and success of a design. But we must not
think Traitors so foolish as the event, or rather God (whose glory it is to
rain snares, fire and brimstone, Psalm. 11.6.
and stormy tempest upon the mischievous machinations of treacherous wretches)
in the event and conclusion makes them. He replied with great indignation, when
led to the Tower a friend told him, Ah my Lord, I am sorry you had no more wit:
Tush (quoth he) thou know not what thou say; When saw thou a fool
come hither?

And you shall never read of any treason, especially such a complete treason
as this of Shebnaes, but it was attempted by such as were great promisers unto
themselves, confident of their wit, secure of the success, and such as made no
more difficulty to effect then to affect a treason: and such a one was Shebna.
Wherefore let us take Shebna as he was when he first plotted and contrived
this treason, and then tell me if he carried not the matter dangerously, if he
did not as much a any man of his spirit and working disposition could have done
for the utter overthrow of Ezechiah and the whole Land of Judah.

For first, he took the same course that all deep Traitors ever have and will
take, whose manner is to pretend one thing, when in heart they intend another;
and like Lapwings, to flutter most and cry loudest, when they are farthest
from their nest; or with bote-men, to look one way, and row another.

Thus to omit all foreign instances, whereof there is no story so barren, but
it has store and plenty, thus I say the Traitor Digbie pretends a match of
hunting, while his heart lay among the crows of iron, the piles of billets,
and barrels of powder in the nethermost vault. Thus Parry, more to prepare
access and credit, then for any care had of her Majesty's person, the late
Queen Elizabeth of ever blessed memory, came to the Court, prayed audience,
discovered the coniuration, but yet (as himself confessed) covered with all
the skill he had, he disclosed only so much as he thought good and necessary
to ground in her Highness a settled confidence toward him, whereby he might
effect his traitorous intent with better opportunity, and his own safety.

Right so, Shebna tenders his service to the King his Master, ioines in
commission with Eliachim and Ioah, parlies with Rabshakeh chief Coronell of
Zenacheribs host, lays out an huge sum of money upon a costly and glorious
Tomb, and all to divert the observation of the state, and bear them in hand
he minded nothing more then to live and die amongst them, when notwithstanding
he held intelligence with the enemy, and under these pretenses took the more
liberty to play the professed Traitor, and recommend his love and service to
Zenacherib.

Again, Shebna was not alone, he was not singular and selfe-conceited: it is
probable a great part of the people ( for the leaudest men, Tacit.
says Tacitus, misdoubting the present, and fearing the change, prepare before
hand friends) they also held it safest to do as Shebna did, and close with
Zenacherib, as being perhaps animated thereunto partly by the submission of
Ahaz, who had sworn fealty and homage to Tiglath Pileser King of Ashur, 2.
Reg. 16.7.
the second of Kings, the sixteenth chapter and seventh verse: and partly also
by the dishonorable carriage of Ezechiah himself, who upon the first assault,
brake out into a most base and unbeseeming acknowledgement, I have offended,
depart from me, and what thou laiest upon me I will bear it: the second of
Kings, 2. Reg. 18.14.
the eighteenth.

And now I pray help me. Wherein tro you lay Ezechiahs strength, or what was
there in Ezechiah, or the fence and munition of Judah, that could encourage any
man of that experience and understanding that Shebna was, to stand out against
Zenacherib? Lay it in the multitude of his people? Zenacherib had two for one.
Lay it in their firm adherence and constancy? which is the chiefest thing a
King can take comfort in in the time of w^^re, where, as David said, the sword
deuoureth the one as well as the other, the second of Samuel, the eleventh; and
where, 2. Sam. 11.25.
as Hannibal in Liuie tells us, nusquam minus euentus solent respondere, only if
the people be firm and constant, and carry themselves like loyal and loving
subjects, there is some comfort. But alas who knows not populi mobilem animum,
and fi se ducem prabnisset Zenacherib, as he says of Vespasian, they would
have borne the same affection and demonstration of love and loyalty to
Zenacherib, which now they made show of to Ezechiah: it being true of the
common people in general, that they do nothing upon judgment or any true
meaning, but upon a received habitual kind of timorousness to sway with the
Prince whatsoever he be; especially of this people, who were as timorous as
Hearts, and as wavering as the wind: and therefore upon a slighter occasion,
and less danger, the Prophet says, all were overtaken with such astonishment,
that none could hold a joint still, but quiuered and trembled like so many
aspen leaves, Isay. 7.2. As also in the original story it self, Isay 7.2.
1. Reg. 18. and in our Prophet at the 36. chapter you shall find that
Ezechiahs Ambassadors craved this as an especial favor of Rabshekeh, that he
would not speak unto them in the Jews tongue in the audience of the people
that were on the wall, because they were naturally mutable, says Calvin, and
inconstant, and suddenly drawn to revolt. So that had Zenacherib sped and got
the upper hand, there was no doubt but the common people illa ipsa diceret hora
Augustum. Add heereunto the greatness of Shebnaes place and power to do
mischief, being (as was said) praefectus praetorio, or principal Secretary,
and therefore privy to all the secrets of State, those arcana Imperij, and
might give Zenacherib perfect intelligence. Add his strength of wit to invent
mischief, and secure himself: his knowledge of the State, how weak and
unable to resist: the opportunity he now had (being the only man of trust,
Eliachim and Ioah excepted) to deal with the enemy.

And lastly this plausiblenesse with the people, being (as Iunitus calls him)
fautor and magister impiorum, and (as in all good confirmation we may guess)
pullus and puppus, the minion and darling of the multitude. So that though he
entered into a desperate piece of service, where his life and honor and all lay
at stake, yet he did nothing but what he saw and knew they would second.

And now tell me whether this were not a dangerous treason, if we go no
farther then the author, who you see had made all so sure, that it was even
tempus faciendi Domino, high time for God to put his helping hand; otherwise
the power of Zenacherib without, the inconstancy of the leauder sort of people
within, considered, Shebna went as near as the wit of a man, actuated by the
devil himself, the author of all mischievous subtlety and deep devices,
could go, to compass the ruin and destruction, not of one Assuerus, or a
Mordecay, and those of his Religion; but of his liege Lord and master Ezechiah,
and the whole Land of Judah.

Here now the object and the latitude of the object much aggrauates Shebna his
treason.

For Shebna aimed not at the ruin of a private man, which had been bad and
inexcusable, since (as one says) domestica and familiaris Deo est hominis
natura: and quicunque effuderit humanum sanguinem, Genesis 9.6.
per hominem fundetur sanguis illius: Genesis 9.6.

Neither leueld Shebna at Eliachim alone, at some chief Magistrate or
Sentinel of the state, which had been worse, since public Ministers stand for
thousands and hundreds: they are the charets and horsemen of a commonwealth, 2
Regu^ 2.12.
they are Gods Lieutenants and Vicegerents on earth, and therefore the least
contempt, the least sinister thought tending to their hurt, God takes as done
unto himself.

But as those two and thirty Captains in the 1 of Kings and the two and
twentieth, 1 Regu^ 22.31.
did Shoot neither at small nor great, save at the King himself: so Shebnah
his chief aim was at the King, and this King was Ezechiah, I say Ezechiah, so
that here Shebna his treason appears in it is full bigness, since there was
more in Ezechiah then can be verified of many, I had almost said of any King
besides, and therefore the more eminent and worthy the Prince, the more vile
and inexcusable the traitor, the more goodly the object, the fouler the treason.

For first, had Ezechiah been a King only by conquest, without just title to
the crown: this fact of Shebna had been the less, since Kings by conquest are
no better than great thieves. Augustine.
Elegant and excellent was the Pirates answer to the great Macedonian Alexander
says St Austin in his 4th book de ciuitate Dei and 4th chapter. The King
asking him, how he durst molest the sea so? he replied with a free spirit
says the Father, how dare thou molest the whole world? but because I do it
with one only Galley-foist, I am called a theife, thou doing it with a great
Navy art called an Emperor. And Lucan makes no scruple to term Alexander a
happy theife of the earth,

-- Terrarum fatale malum.
Earths fatal mischief and a cloud of thunder
Renting the world: a star that struck in sunder
The Nations.
Conquerors then, whose right is their power, are thieves, and there is such an
antipathie between the Conqueror and the conquered, that it is impossible for
subjects of any good blood truly and in heart to love a Conqueror; whereupon it
is, that the Politiques give a precept, and their scholars put it in practice,
A Conqueror, say they, must subvert and destroy all such as suffer great loss
in that Conquest, and altogether root out the blood and the race of such as
before governed there.

This doctrine Thrasibulus taught, when he led a Messenger into a field of
corn and bruised the tallest ears between his hands, and this from him
Periander practiced, when he took out of the way the chief and noblest men
of Corinth. This Tarquin the proud commended to Sextus his son, when he cut
off summa papauerum capita, and this Sextus accordingly put in ure, when he
caused to be massacred in their houses, all the greatest and noblest of the
town of Gabium. But Ezechiah was no such bloody conqueror. He was an absolute
Monarch and free borne King. Secondly, had Ezechiah been offensive or
burdensome to his subjects, or dissolute in his government, Shebna might have
had some pretense. Bellar: de Rom: Pon^: lib. 5. c. 7.
For though I am not of their opinion who teach that Kings receive their
Crowns from men, and hold them at their dispose, yet I rest assured that the
virtue, worth and affable usage of a Prince are they that gain and keep the
affections of the people; whereas on the other side, the enormious defects and
harsh usage of a King alienates their minds from him, as from one that abuses
his Sovereignty, and causes them to fly to others, whom they hold more fit
to command, and unto whom they are more willing to yield obedience. A Prince,
as he is above others in place, so he should shine above others in virtue;
petty blemishes in a Prince breed a loathing in the subject: their least
defects are soon spied and as soon censured. Qui magno imperio praediti, in
excelso aetatem agunt, eorum facta cuncti mortales nouere. Ita in maxima
fortuna minima licentia est (says Caesar in Salust.) neque studere, neque
odisse sed minime ^asci debet. Quae apud alios Iracundia dicitur, ea imperij
superbia atque crudelitas appellatur.

The ill-willers of Pompey the great, observing that now and then he scratched
his head with one finger, thought the worse of him for that. The Athenians
found fault with Simon because he loved to drink a cup of good wine. And the
Romans finding no other thing in that famous Leader Scipio, Plutarch: precep:
pol.
took occasion to blame him (says Plutarch in his precepts of policy) only
for sleeping. For like as a little freckle, a little mole or pendant wart in
the face of a man or woman is more offensive then black and blew marks, then
scarrs and maimes in all the rest of the body; even so, small and light faults
otherwise of themselves, show great in the lives of Princes, says that author.
Now if men be so apt to take offense at such petty scapes as these, what will
they not do, when they descry those prints of tyranny, murders, breach of
promises and oaths, frauds and deceit, and all kind of injustice; he will tell
you Qui sceptra duro saeuus imperio regit, timet timentes. And Tully, No force
or power of Empire be it never so great, can long stand, if it be pressed with
continual fear and hatred of the subjects. Comminaeus.
Memorable is that which Comminaeus sets down at large in his 7 book and 11.
chapter, of Alphonso a rich and potent King, who for that he forced his
subjects to feed and fat his hoggs, for that he bought up all the oil, and
grain in the country before it was ripe, sold Bishoprics, gave away Abbeyes
to Falconers, and committed a many the like insolences, grew in the end
despicable in the sight of his people, and was forsaken of all.

The like befell Lodouic Sforza Duke of Millan, Guice: Inventory of France,
vita Lewis the 12.
who by his great exactions and impositions (says Guicciardin) so exasperated
his subjects, that when Lewis the 12. came against him, they forthwith took
arms, killed his Treasurer, forced him to fly, called in the French and
yielded the town and themselves to their obedience.

And lastly, Matthew of W^stminster tells us of King John, Matthew Westminster.
how that exosum se praebuit, he made himself hateful unto his people, as
well for the murder of his nephew Arthur, as for his adulteries, his tyranny,
his exactions, and the like, in respect whereof Vix alicuius meruit
lamentatione deplorari, he deserved not to be lamented scarcely of any.

How well and warrantably the subjects of these Kings demeaned themselves, I
leave to your judgment, I like it not. By these few examples you may see how
apt the people are to grow in dislike with their King, when he once cease to
be truly royal and by hard usage alienateth their minds and affections from
him. But here was no such matter, Shebna could not implead his Prince of any
such outrage. Ezechiah was a good and godly King, unto whom the Scripture still
gives thi^ testimony, that he did uprightly in the sight of the Lord,
according to all that David his father had done, he trusted in the Lord God of
Israel. So that after him was none like unto him among all the Kings of Judah,
neither were there any such before him, 2 Reg: 18.5.
2 Kings 18.5.

But this is not all, maius opus moueo and mayor mihi nascitur ordo rerum,
there was more in Ezechiah then all this. Ezechiah was a King, and a King of
the line of David. A King and a King of the tribe of Judah, unto both which God
had bound himself by so many promises and covenants as that he might as well
fail to be what he is, as not to be a faithful protector of Judah, and of
the stock of David, saying, I have sworn once by my holiness that I will not
fail David, Psalm: 89.63.
His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne shall be as the sun before
me. Psalm. 89.36.

His ego nec metas rerum, nec tempora pono
Imperium sine fine dedi.
So that here as in a mirror you may see Shebna his more then Luciferian
pride, his Gygantomachia, in that being a poor finite wretch, a Typhon, a
vassal, a bramble, he durst attempt that, which he could not but know called
in question, all those holy and faithful promises of that neuer-fayling keeper
of Judah and of the line of David.

cui bono? that I may let go those two former circumstances the Author and the
Object, and come to his end which he proposed to himself, and the means
whereby he must obtain this his end, to wit, that Shebna might be a King.

Here may you observe a strange point of nature in this Traitor, in that he so
impotently affected his own private advancement, as that he cared not what
became of Ezechiah or of Jerusalem, or of the whole land of Judah, so he might
be a King. Nay, God himself must go from his word, fall from his promise,
forsake his anointed abandon his own peculium and proper people, and all that
Shebna may be a King.

Dear Christ! what is this heart of man, how boundless the desires thereof?
was it not enough for Shebna to be glutted with the favors of his Prince? was
it enough for him (to speak in the phrase of the Poet) to detain fortune
captive with all her treasures, and carry in triumph the felicities of this
world, glory, honor, riches, but Shebna must needs be a King. I, that's it,
Shebna must be a King. Otherwise his ambitious heart would pant and bray, and
all this present greatness and honor wherewith he wa^ now invested, would but
increase his grief, sink him in Melancholy, and drive him into a consumption
or worse disease, so long as he was deprived of that which must crown and
actuate all the rest, and give unto his aspiring mind her full complacencie
and contentment, and that's a kingdom. Shebna must be a King.

Ah poor Shebna: quid hoc putemus esse? qui modo scurra aut si quid hae re
tricius videbatur. Must he now needs be a King? was it ever heard that a
traitor was rewarded? did ever wise man think him worthy of any reward, but
such as is truly due unto him, the gallows? yet Shebna must be a King.

Alexander the great (says Justin) at his Fathers obsequies, commanded
public (...) done upon those whom he had himself secretly employed to kill
him.

Tiberius (says Tacitus in the first of his Annals) disavowed his commission
given to a soldier to kill Agrippa, telling him that he should answer the
matter before the Senate. And howsoever men or rather monsters of men many
times are contented to take the benefit of a service done by evil means: yet
ever after they hold the instrument suspected, and hate the malicious nature
and disposition of him that does it. Yet Shebna must be a King.

Inuentor: of France, vita Henry the 3.
James Clement a Iacobine voweth to kill Henry the third of France, he imparts
his damnable project to Doctor Bourgoing Prior of his Covent, to Father Comelet
and other Jesuits, and to all the chief of the sixteen, and to the forty of
Paris. All encourage him to his happy design, they promise him Abbeyes and
Bishoprics, and if he chance to be made a Martyr, no less then a place in
heaven above the Apostles. This traitor thus encouraged, goes on, kills the
King, and Paulus, Quintus spends a great deal of wit and invention in
commendation of the murder, it was rarum (says he) inauditum, memorabile
facinus.

There is abroad in the world that shames not to justify Rauillacs stabbing of
Henry the fourth, late King of France, and says it was not so much Rauillacs
fault, as stoliditas Regis ob susceptum haereticorum patrocinium.

And I know there are that mince that superlatiue sulphurious treason. Alas it
was but the attempt of some few, and those unfortunate Gentlemen, and that when
they held the King, for no King or not their King, and lastly, expectanda erat
diuturna persecutio: and what will you never give over, says Parsons, that
personated traitor, your clamors and exaggerations, the Powder treason, the
Powder treason: But tell me if ever you read or heard of any that truly and in
heart loved the traitor; yet Shebna must be a King.

Shebna be a King? why, sollicitando, pollicitando, which was Absolons course,
and many traitors have taken the like, and yet this is not all neither: a
kingdom is not so easily gotten. But how then? Marry how have greater spirits
risen from nothing, or how grew the Roman Empire, to that magnitude and
greatness, or how have high attempts been compassed beyond the expectation and
reach of shallow and narrow wits?

Ask Liuie, and he will tell you Agendo, Lib: 22.
audendoque res Romana creuit etc. by doing and by daring the affairs of Rome
increased, not by these dull and heavy counsels which timorous men term wary.
A wit too curious and cautelous in casting of doubts for the most part hurts,
and he that omitteth an opportunity present, upon supposed dangers, shall
never advance his own fortune.

Go to Catesby hear what he says: Will thou be a Traitor Tom? aude aliquid.
Venture not thy self to small purpose. If thou will be a traitor, there is a
plot to greater advantage, and such a one as nere can be discovered.

Good God! of what mould are these traitors made? or what womb bare them? what
difference and disparitie there is between them and all good men? how
infinitely come they short of the cruellest heathens? We read that the elected
Saints of God have wished themselves Anathemised razed out of the book of
life, and utterly excluded from the kingdom of heaven, for the public good
and preservation of Gods dear people: but Shebna here wishes and plotteth the
destruction and extirpation of Gods own chosen peculiar people, and all that
he may get a silly kingdom on earth.

The most ambitious among the heathen, though they took an extraordinary
felicity to imbrue their hands in blood, to pill and depopulate whole towns
and countries, yet they shook not off all humanity, they forgot not to be
men, but had a feeling and were sensible of others calamities and distress.
Alexander wept for Darius, Julius Caesar for Pompeius, Marcellus for Siracusa,
and Scipio for Numantia. But so Shebna may be a King, Ezechiah, Jerusalem, and
that g^orious kingdom of Judah must be exposed to cruelty it self, to sack
and pillage, and all kind of spoil and deuastation.

Event of Shebna his treason, which was the fourth circumstance, and comes now
in it due place to aggrauate the foul inexcusable treason of Shebna. For
howsoever Shebna was not so wise as to foresee, nor so honest as to fear what
could not choose but follow, though Shebna proposing to himself his own
advancement run on blindfold and spied not the many many inconveniences and
mischiefs which would have ensued, no nor cared not what might ensue, so he
might be a King: yet succeeding ages saw and Judah feared, and howbeit a sin
once committed be but one and the same, yet the hurt that arises thereby much
augments the venomous quality thereof, and thereafter as it does dilate and
spread and multiply to the prejudice and damage of others, the more vile and
dangerous and inexcusable must it needs be.

Let us therefore see what hurt would have insued. And that will appear by the
predictions, threats, and forewarnings of that pseudo prophet Rabshekeh, who to
make the people quake and tremble the more, sets before them the miseries and
calamities into which they plunged themselves, if they harkned to Ezechiah and
stood out against Zenacherib.

Has my Master sent me to thy Master, and to thee to speak these words, Isai.
36.12.
and not to the men that sit on the wall. Vt comedant stercus suum and bibant
aquas pedum suorum. Isai. 36.12. now

Dura quidem miseris mors est mortalibus omnis:
At perijsse fame, res vna miserrima long est.
But we shall not need to argue the event from Rabshekeh his threats, though I
think he said no more then what Zenacherib would have made good, and what
Ezechiah and his people should have felt.

You all know what are the proper immediate effects of war and conquest; and
therefore if you will needs have me set down what would have ensued, I most
earnestly desire you to remember (as Tullie sometimes said in his oration for
Flaccus) the rashness of the multitude, and how the Grecian Victors handled
the matter at the sack of Troy.

Virgil. Aen. ^.
Scilicet ignis edax summa ad vestigia vento
Voluitur, exuperant flammae, furit aestus ad aras.
And then, as there Aeneas tells you,

To Iunoes Sanctuaerie
Comes all the prey, and what they thither carry,
Is kept by choice men, the Phoenician,
And dire Ulysses. Thither the whole state
Of Troies wealth swarms, the Gods, their Temples plate.
There lies the gold in heaps, and robes of worth
Snatched from the flaming Coffers.
Or, if you will have a more particular description of the dismal event and
bloody effects which the vanquished of all sorts are sure to feel, take those
which Caesar reckons up as undoubted fruits of Catilines conspiracy, in
Salust: Salust.
Rapiuntur Virgins, etc. The Virgins are ravished, the children torn from
their parents bosoms, the Matrons made the object of all the Victors lust, the
Temples and houses spoiled, all things turned to burning and slaughter, all
places stopped full of weapons, carcases, blood, and lamentation.

Or if this content you not, take that of Quintilian in his eighth book: The
flames were spread through the Temples, Quint.
a terrible cracking of falling houses is heard, and one confused sound of a
thousand several clamours. Some fly they know not whither: some stick fast
in the last embraces of their friends. The children and the women howl, and
the old men (unluckily spared until that fatal day.) Then follows the
tearing away of all the goods out of house and Temple, and the talk of those
that have carried away one burden, and run for another: and the poor
prisoners are driven in chains before their takers, and the mother endeavoring
to carry her fillie infant with her. And where the most gain is, there go
the Victors together by the ears.

But what need we illustrate the effects of bloody war and victory out of
heathenish authors? Who has not heard of the weeping voice of Elizeus unto
Hazael King of Syria, 2. King. 8.12.10.32.33.13.7.
the second of Kings 8.12. I know the evil that thou shall do unto the
children of Israel: their strong Cities shall thou set on fire: their young men
shall thou slay with the sword: thou shall dash their infants against the
stones, and rent in pieces their women with child.

And this, if I conceive any thing, had been the deplored case of Judah: this
(if not far worse) the event of Shebna his treason, who all this while, as
Dionysius (of whom Tullie reports in his third book De natura Deorum) who
having spoiled the Temple of Proserpina at Locris, Tully.
of Jupiter in Peloponesus, of Aesculapius at Epidaurus, because Proserpina
drowned him not as he sailed to Syracusa, nor yet Jupiter struck him in pieces
with his thunderbolts, nor Aesculapius made an end of him by some long and
miserable consumption, thought himself secure and past danger, and that he
had done nothing but what was lawful and warrantable, and what very well
sorted with his great spirit and high imagination.

But beloved, I beseech God of his infinite mercy, give me grace, and as many
as hear me this day (forasmuch as we are all of us in proportion of the same
mind, we all of us in our iollitie think we may do what we list, and so
long as God forbeares to punish, we will never forbear to sin.) But God
grant, which shall be all the use I will now make, and with which I will shut
up this point, God grant (I say) we may remember and lay unto our hearts what
that good Father S. Austin says: Nihil est infelicius: Augustine.
Nothing is more unfortunate then the felicity of sinners, whereby their
penal impunitie is nourished, and their malice strengthened and increased. When
God suffers sinners to prosper, then his indignation is the greater toward
them (says that Father) and when he leaves them unpunished, then he punishes
them most of all. Witness this spectacle of Gods vengeance, Shebna, who not
long since I my self saw, in the course and passage of my meditations, strong
and in great power, spreading himself like a green bay tree: Vidi eum super
exaltatum, as the vulgar has it, honored and exalted above measure, elevated
and lifted up far higher then the Cedar trees of Libanus. And yet now again
I passed by, and lo he was gone: I sought him, but he could not be found,
Psalm. 37.
Psalm. 37.

And so I come to his punishment, which is set down by our Prophet here in so
full and ample manner, as more cannot be said. All that I shall need to do,
will be to recommend unto your further consideration two special traces and
steps of Gods justice in punishing Shebna: whereof the first is the suddenness
of it; Potentes potenter tormenta patientur, Wisdom 6.7. The second, the
manner of it; Wisd. 6.7.
In quo peccamus, in eodem plectimur.

Touching the suddenness of it; lend me your attention, and you shall find in
our Prophets commission here, what you shall seldom or never find in any of
the like nature. All other commissions given to Prophets when they were sent to
denounce the ruin of any one man or nation, run for the most part with a
prouiso, and mercy is joined with judgment, as Fabius with Marcellus, to
temper and allay the fierceness of it. Nouit enim Deus suas comminationes
conditionaliter esse intelligendas, nempe nisi resipiscant, says learned
Zanchius. Zanchius de Not. Dei. sect. 2. c. 4.


As Jonas the third at the fourth verse: Yet forty days, and Niniue shall be
overthrown: true, if ye will not repent, Jonah 3.4.
and amend your lives by my preaching. Isay 38.1.
So Isay the 38. at the first, which commination some think came just at the
very time of Zenacheribs fearful expedition: Put thy house in order, for thou
shall die, and not live: true, unless God may hear thy prayers, and see thy
tears, and then his heart is turned within him: his repentings are rolled
together, and he will not execute the fierceness of his wrath, as it is Hos.
11. Hos. 11.9.


But most pregnant of all other is that of God himself, Ier. 18. at the 7.
Ierem. 18.7.
I will speak suddenly concerning a nation or concerning a kingdom, to pluck
it up, and to root it out, and to destroy it. But if this nation against whom I
have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I will repent of the plague that
I thought to bring upon them.

Nay Divines say, that if Judas (whom I may term the Traitor) could have
repented, he might have found mercy. Judas had time, though not grace to
repent.

But Shebna his case here is far more lamentable and desperate: here is no
respite for repentance, no hope of mercy, all judgment. Transportando
transportabit te: Volutando volutabit te. Behold, the Lord will carry thee
away, and will surely cover thee; he will surely roll and turn thee like a
ball in a large Country: there shall thou die, and there shall the Chariots of
thy glory cease, O thou scandal and dishonor of thy Lord and Master.



Adoni-bezek caused seventy Kings having the thumbes of their hands and of
their feet cut off, to gather crummes under his Table: and the thumbes of
Adoni-bezeks hands and of his feet were cut off, Judge. 1.7.
Judge. 1.7. Agags sword made women childlesse: and his mother was hewn in
pieces and made childlesse among other women, 1. Sam. 15.33.
1. Sam. 15.33.

Ralphe Lardein (says M. Fox) betrayed George Eagles, a good and a just man:
and the same Ralphe afterward was attached himself, arraigned, and hanged.

The chief of the Vault-pioners resolved to blow up the Parliament with
powder: and the same Vault-pioners were maimed, disfigured, shot, wounded, and
blown up with powder. Right so fares it with Shebna. Shebna to refresh his
reputation and uphold his greatness, suppresseth Eliachim: God suppresseth
Shebna, and raises up Eliachim.

Shebna resolves to live and die in Jerusalem: God drives him out of
Jerusalem. Shebna looks for grace, relief, and countenance from the enemy:
the enemy disgraceth, hangs, executes Shebna.

Psalm. 83.13.14.15.17.18.
Psalm. 83.13 O my God, make them like unto a wheel, and as the stubble before
the wind. Psalm. 83.14 Like as the fire that burns up the wood, and as the
flame that consumes the mountains. Psalm. 83.15 Persecute them even so with
thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm. Psalm. 83.17 Let them be
confounded and vexed ever more and more: let them be put to shame and perish.
Psalm. 83.18 And they shall know that thou whose name is Jehovah, art only the
most high over all the earth. Shebna with Gowrie, and Shebnaes treason with the
treason of Gowrie so far as my knowledge of their like condition can
parallel them together: I must crave leave to fly to that old refuge,
Similitudes hold not in all things. Neither shall I be able to parallel Gowrie
with Shebna, nor his treason with Shebnaes treason in each particular.

Howsoever, certain it is (to begin with that I first observed in Shebna) he
was a man of note and eminency, a man of marvelous comely deportment and
behavior, a man that had conquered the affections both of his own Countrymen
and strangers in such sort, as that notwithstanding a cloud of witnesses, the
clear and laudable depositions of sundry examinants, the Act of Parliament for
the forfeiting of his estate, and of his heirs for ever, and which is instar
mill testium, the all-prouident hand of God in opening the mouth of Sprot, and
hailing him to the Ministers of justice, and causing him to be his own
accuser, and that an eight years after, when Bour and Logan^, two other
Conspirators, were dead and putrified in their graves, and devoured of worms,
and no mortal creature could detect him but his own witness, Judge, and
executioner, the Conscience of his own breast. Yet notwithstanding there are
not a few who shame not to take up that of the Prophet: Quis credet auditui?
Who will believe your report?

But this I will boldly say, and it shall stand incontroleable till the day of
doom, to the eternal confusion of Gowrie, that he was as much tied unto his
Majesty, as a subject in his case and of his quality could possibly be unto
his Sovereign: neither shall it be any amplification at all, or any the least
strain of wit, to tell you that his Highness proceeding and carriage toward
Gowrie was far more gracious and charitable then that of Ezechiah unto
Shebna. Shebna by the means of Ahaz was now thoroughly acquainted with the
course of government, and happily Ezechiah might have especial use of his
advice, and could not be without him, and that the children of God are driven
often times to rely upon the wise in their generation, is not Ezechiah his
case alone.

Shebna (for ought we find) during the time of Ahaz, and until this terrible
invasion of Zenacherib, remained in his allegiance sound and vncorrupt: whereas
Gowrie, bloody Gowrie (for I shall ever call him so: he was a man of blood,
his heart was died as red as scarlet with the royal blood of an anointed King)
could stand his Majesty in no such stead. look for no gracious aspect from
his Majesty, since of so bad a kind as Traitors are, it is true the soldiers
said at the death of Maximinus son, there ought not to be saved so much as a
whelpe.

A pardon, an indulgence, a conniuencie, does never change the cankred and
festered distemper of a wicked wretch. There are benefits which are odious,
which exasperate, and cause the heart of an unthankful malicious miscreant to
swell and burst again, when he is as it were conquered and overcome of love
and fair usage.

All instances and allegations omitted whatsoever, take that of Parrie for a
pregnant president, from whom in despite of Pope or Devil, the very aspect of
our late right illustrious Queen extorted this fervent acknowledgement: When I
looked upon her Majesty, says he, (and what marvel? for she was the most
glorious creature of her sex that then breathed) and remembered her many
excellencies, I was troubled, and yet I saw no remedy: for my vows were in
heaven, my letters and promises in earth; and had she preferred me never so
greatly, yet must my enterprise have held.

But what should we go further then his Majesty's own experience? who thought
by being gracious at the beginning, (...) p. 31.
to win all men's hearts to a loving and willing obedience, but found by the
contrary the disorder of the Country, and the loss of his thanks to be all
his reward.

Yet notwithstanding so graciously dealt he with this ungracious Traitor, that
for his sake he was content to dispense with the principles of moral wisdom,
and after a sort to offer violence to his own princely knowledge and
experience. Whereupon it was that he heaped so many coals of fire upon this
bloody Gowries head, and that beyond all example.

True it is that Saul, for reasons best known unto himself, could not endure
that any of his subjects that were diffident and doubtful of his title, should
so much as be called in question. There shall not a man die this day: for to
day the Lord has saved Israel, 1. Sam. 11.14. 1. Sam. 11.14.
And David, so far forth as it concerned his own person, was well pleased
to pardon Shimei: Thou shall not die; and the King swear unto him, 2. Sam.
19.23.
2. Sam. 19.23.

And Solomon dealt so mercifully with him, that he confessed, The thing is
good: as my Lord the King has said, so will thy servant do, 1. Reg. 2.38.
1. Reg. 2.38. But here his Majesty, upon no one motive in the world, neither
upon the apprehension of an extraordinary blessing, as Saul; nor upon a
passion of joy, as David; nor upon a point of policy for a spirt, and after
three years to meet with him for good and all, as Solomon: but freely and
voluntarily, of his own benign nature and regal clemency, forgiueth and
acquitteth Gowrie, he restores him to his land, he restores him to his
dignities, he nourishes and brings up two or three of his sisters, as it
were in his own bosom, by a continual attendance upon his dearest bedfellow
in her privy chamber. And if all this had been too little, he would have
given him (as it was said to David) such and such things, 1. Sam. 12.18.
1. Sam. 12.18.

-- Quorum si singula duram
Flectere non poterant, potuissent omnia mentem.
But O ignominia domus Domini! It is more then stupendous to see how all this
wholesome nourishment, which should have bred good blood, turned to venom, and
how strangely that which would have dissolved an heart of flint, and wrought
remorse, made this villain more retchlesse and obdurate: all this loving
commemoration of so many binding benefits, no more moved the bloody butcher
Alexander, then the ruthful moan of Lycaon, fierce Achilles: but all this he
heard, and (as there the Poet says) replied:

Homer. Il. ph.
(...). For now, after a little pause, and conference had with his bloody
brother, he begins afresh:

Ingrediturque domum, luctus comitantur euntem,
Et pauor and terror, trepidoque insania vultu.
Now, no one word falls from his black mouth, but dismal death; tell not me
of thy gifts, nor of thy good turns, nor of any price of redemption
whatsoever, die, die thou must: the death of Patr^clus, says Achilles; the
death of my Father, says bloody Alexander will not suffer me to think on
mercy.

Now Antaeus-like he renues his strength, Tusc: quest. l. 5.
and as a furious Rambe upon recoyle, comes with the greater force: or as
Balistae lapidum and reliqua tormenta, telorum (as Tully says) eo grauiores
ictus habent, quo sunt contenta and obducta vehementius, so grew this bloody
Alexander more violent and outrageous.

Never did ravenous wolf so insult and prey upon a silly lamb, never did
doting she-Beare robbed of her whelps, so fret and foame as now this bloody
Alexander did. Where (though I confess it adds little to what has been
already said) yet to the dishonor of bloody Alexander, I beseech you note how
devoide he was of all manhood and common civility. For first; whereas Lions
and Bears will take some compassion on a prostrated creature, this bloody
villain, shakes of nature it self and sets upon him as a bird in the snare,
upon all the disadvantage that possibly may be, (...), Homer: Iliad ph.
naked of helmet, shield, sword or lance, which none but a bloody Alexander
devoide of all manhood, would ever have done.

Secondly, he threatens a King descended from as honorable predecessors as
any Prince living, with a reproachful and inglorious kind of death: he must
not die by the hands of a woman, which Abimilech held dishonorable, Judges 9.
Nor yet by the sword of his Page, Judges 9.54.
which had been a thought better, but he must die as a fool dies, as an ox
goes unto the slaughter, Prou: 7.22.
and as a fool goes to the stocks bound hand and foot, so must he go with
all ignominy and dishonor unto his grave.

It behooves you to be bound, says he; 2 Samuel: 3.34.
but died Abner as a fool^ dies? his hands were not bound nor his feet tied
in fetters of brass, but as a man falls before wicked men, so should he have
fallen as on this day.

Now let us go on and see whether bloody Gowry came any whit short of Shebna,
for now all those circumstances, the end only excepted, must be renewed again,
and brought in by way of application to aggrauate the foul inexcusable treason
of Gowrie. Gow: conspir: c. 3.
For, I will not now dally out the time, or tire your patience, or spend my
breath in charging him with all those sins of Shebna, though I make no doubt
but he that was so given to Magique operative by birth and many years descent
and much practice, was guilty of all or more, or worse then those.

Neither shall I be able to say any thing of his end, of the vltimate end which
Gowrie aimed at, being as yet unknown. Howbeit that he looked no further then
the life of an innocent and harmless King, or that he proiected no other
thing then the bare revenge of his Fathers death, I for my part shall never
believe. His traveling beyond the seas, especially in Italy, the mint, and;
but I forbear to speak what we all know, for what have I to do with other
nations? Gowries consp: D. 1. col. 2.
Only by the way you may remember what Rind under his hand sets down, that in
those parts where Gowrie was they would give sundry folks Breues.

His secret conference with Jesuits, men by profession disposers of Kings and
kingdoms; men, whom that triple-crowned Monarch uses as the Roman Emperors
those they called agentes in rebus all his spies, intelligencers and informers,
with whom an honest heart cannot well converse.

And lastly, his plausibilitie with the people, who upon the report of Gowries
death grew so tumultuous and stirring, as that his Majesty was feign to cause
the Bailiffs, and the rest of the honest men of the town to be brought into
the chamber, and made eyewitnesses of that which their hearts could not
believe ( Plausibilitie being as you know always the forerunner and harbinger
of ambitious and swelling thoughts) these and the like, as the lowing of the
Oxen which Samuel heard, and as the bleating of the Sheep, 1 Samuel: 15.14.
crying in mine ears, makes me more then suspicious, that there was in Gowries
treason somewhat that the world cannot as yet judge of, nor the wit of man
certainly determine. Wherefore, not to speak of the end which Gowrie aimed at,
nor yet to recommend unto you conjectures and presumptions only; may it please
you to remember what was said touching Shebna his treason in regard of the
Author, Object, Event: all these present themselves again, and come (as I
said) by way of Application to aggrauate the foul inexcusable treason of
Gowrie.

First, in regard of the Author. Gowrie: Gowries conspir: D. 2. col. 1.
Gowrie was no fool. For first, he lays this down for a ground. A wise man
intending an high and dangerous purpose must communicate the same to none but
himself.

Secondly, Exam: of George Spro^ page 41.
Restalrig (that is to say a perfect Gowrie) (for they two had but one heart
between them) he calls upon him, My Lord you must be circumspect with your
brother, that he be not rash in any speeches; such a purpose as your Lordship
intends cannot be done rashly, but with deliberation.

My Lord if you will come over to my house, persuade your self you shall be as
safe and quiet here, while we have settled our plot, as if you were in your own
chamber. I doubt not my Lord but all things shall be well.

My Lord I am resolved to peril life, lands, honor, goods, yea and the hazard
of hell shall not frey me, though the scaffold were already set up.

What? such secrecies? such vows? such coniurations? such protestations? as
far as their souls and the damnation of their souls came to? and yet this a
silly plot? no, no, I will grant as much as he that is most incredulous shall
or can urge, and yet this no silly plot. There must be a concursus fortuitorum
over and beyond the project, or else the best laid plot may easily miscarry. I
grant it was senseless for Alexander to think that a pot of dross should
have any adamantine virtue in it to draw bounty it self to Gowrie his house: I
grant, it was senseless for him to think that Courtesy or rather Glauering,
bowing his head under his Majesty's knee could work upon the affection of a
King, who is as an Angel of God, and can well distinguish semblance and bare
complement, from truth and realtie.

Moreover; his unmannerly importunity, his unseasonable interrupting his
Majesty in his game, his deiection of countenance, his deep oaths, his
faultring in his speech, his impatience of delay: all these I grant were
arguments of Alexanders weakness and ill managing of the plot, but the plot
was still the same and lay in Gowries breast, concealed and unknown to any,
save God, and the Devil, with whom he dealt, and who was his chief counselor.
Alexander was but instrumentum animatum, all that he was to act and play in
this bloody Tragedy, was to get the King to Gowries house, and into the
chamber, and then let him and the Devil alone.

Again, that the King should use Alexander so lovingly, as to lay his hand on
his shoulder, that notwithstanding his many conjectures he could never suspect
any harm to be intended, or that when he did suspect he should presently
check himself, as being ashamed in respect of the clearenesse of his own
conscience, to give way thereunto; these were not of the essence of the plot,
neither can they be ascribed to any wisdom or forecast in Gowrie or his
brother Alexander, but to his Majesty's open simplicity and harmlesnesse,
Chrysostom.
there being (as Saint Chrysostom says in his Homily de Sancta Susanna, if
the Tract be his) suspiciones malenolae calumniantium and suspitiones beneuolae
Gubernantium: malicious suspicions, proper to calumniators, beneuolous and
friendly suspicions proper to Governors. If my friend betray me, I beshrew him,
but if my enemy betray me, I beshrew my self, said he.

But go we on, and follow his Majesty into the dark chamber of death, and
then tell me if Zenacheribs army, Rabsaches threats, the inconstancy of the
people, the disloyalty of Shebna, could put Ezechiah in such danger, or that
it was ever higher time for God to put to his helping hand then now? no
beloved, here, here stand you still, and behold the salvation of the Lord,
which he showed as on this day; open the book of his works, read the doctrine
of providence; Exodus: 14.13.
did ever God show himself to be a God almighty and a God of power, did he
ever manifest his particular providence more articulatly beyond the strength of
reason and compass of second causes then now?

Was it not strange and miraculous, that he, that was appointed to be the
murderer should presently upon the sight of the King (as Baltashar, when he
saw the handwriting on the wall) stand trembling and quaking rather like one
condemned then an excutioner of such an enterprise?

Was it not strange and miraculous that the King should dragg Alexander to the
window, and that his Nobles at the self same instant should be under that and
the very same window?

Lastly, was it not strange and miraculous that that blessed Angel and
messenger of the Lord, that Iosuah, and mighty Deliverer, Sr John Ramsey should
find the turnepicke door open, follow it up to the head, enter into the
chamber, rescue the King from Alexander, and strike bloody Gowry himself stone
dead in the place?

All these are as so many books, wherein he that runs may read, Gods
especial providence over his anointed. Turn over the leaf again.

That he that should have been the murderer should now stand as one that was
to be murdered.

That the King should dragg Alexander to the window: That his train should be
at that very time under that very window: That Sir John Ramsay should lite upon
that dark, unused, unknown by-way, free him from Alexander, and strike bloody
Gowrie dead in the very room: read it advisedly, and then awake all antiquity
and show me the like instance of Gods especial providence again.

I know you will tell me of Noah in the Arc: for what in the eye of reason
should become of Noah in the Arc, in the Arc, without Anchor to stay her,
without mast to poize her, without stern to move her, without Pilot to guide
her, had not the same God, who forgets nothing that he has made, both shut him
in with his own hands, and preserved him being in, which otherwise in reason
could never have been.

I know you will tell me of the Israelites deliverance from 70 years
captivity, Psalm. 126.
which the Prophet David says, struck such an amazement in them, that they
were like them that dream, Liuius 33.
Psalm 126. and as Liuie says in a case of great joy, much liberty and
freedom, Maius gaudium fuit, quam quod vniuersum homines caperent, vix satis
credere se quisque audiuisse, alij alios intueri mirabundi velut somni vanam
speciem.

I know you will tell of Peter's enlargement out of prison, which so
maruellously affected the blessed Apostle, that he was scarce his own man,
he knew not that it was true which was done by the Angel, but thought he had
seen a vision. Acts 12.9. Acts 12.9.
But what was there in all these or any one of them, that you shall not read in
some one page or other of this most omnipotent and all powerful deliverance of
his sacred Majesty. Reg: 12.9.
Great is the Lord and most worthy to be praised, and his greatness is
incomprehensible. Psalm 145.
Generation shall praise thy works unto generation, and declare thy power.

Gowries.

For they (miscreants as they were) thirsted not after the blood of a private
man, nor any subordinate Magistrate, but of the King himself. A King not
precario, or by conquest; page 29.
read his (...), but an absolute Monarch, and free borne King, the which with
undaunted presence of mind he told pale Alexander (for the righteous are as
bold as a Lion) he was borne a free King, and should die a free King.

A King; not offensive or grievous unto his subjects, but a King surnamed by
the voice of all his people, of all humors, of all factions, of all religions,
the geude King. A King, and a King of the line of David, a King and a King of
the tribe of Judah.

a King and a free borne King, a King and a geud King, a King and a King of the
line of David, a King and a King of the tribe of Judah; what of all this? It
was a foul treason, they were bloody villains, what of all this? did you
never hear of a treason before? did you never hear of a King murdered? and
what a quoyle here is about one Gowrie, seduced happily by pestilent firebrands
abroad in Italy? or what if his deep Melancholy now brake forth and growing
stark mad as Ajax offended with Ulysses, Agamemnon and Menelaus, wreckt his
malice upon a silly and a harmless sheep, thinking it had been Ulysses; So
he, instead of those that had done him wrong (as he thought) and proceeded
against his Father, missed his aim and fell upon the King as upon a silly and
harmless sheep, who was in his minority, and wholly passive in all that
business? why what of all this?

Beloved, shall a Prince and a great man fall in Israel, the second of Samuel
at the third, 2 Samuel 3.38.
and will the sons of Zeruiah stand still? will no tumults, no vprores, no
alteration follow? And shall an absolute Monarch, though but now in Hebron, as
David, yet in expectation and sight of all the world (to the joy and comfort of
Gods Saints, to the terror and amazement of the enemies of God and his Gospel)
the puissant Monarch of Great BRITAIN and of all Israel, shall he I say, be
bloudily mangled, and hewn in pieces, and no horror, no murders, no massacres
follow? Yes, yes for (to omit what thousands ^^e observed, ho^ about that very
same year, nay within the compass of one month and week almost, many
subjects of principal note miscarried, and grew corrupt in their allegiance,
many treacheries were attempted, many Protestant Princes miraculously
preserved) what meant, what meant that posting to Rome, that gadding to Doway?
what meant that hissing of the Be of Ashur? that buzzing of the fly of
Egypt? and all about this time. Whereunto tended those many pasquils and
pamphlets touching the doctrine of Succession? Whereto tended those confident
predictions of the Romish Rabshakehs? Nondum completa est iniquitas Anglorum,
says Pererius.

Dabit Deus tempus quando vetula illa anus, says another, and all about this
time. But of all other, whereto tended, or what construction can you make of
Pope Clements Bull? to wit: After the death of the Queen, whether by course of
nature, or otherwise, whosoever should lay claim or title to the Crown of
England, though never so directly and nearly interessed therein by descent and
bloud-royall, yet unless he were such a one as would not only tolerate the
Catholic Romish Religion, but by all best endeavors and force promote it, they
should admit or receive none to be King of England.

Surely when I consider this in mine heart, as it is Lam. 3. I resolve it was
the Lords mercy that we were not consumed. For had not God (his unspeakable
rich mercy be praised for it) upon the decease of the late euer-blessed Queen
Elizabeth, reserved a seed, and a seed of a right generous kind, for ought
that we can gather from the predictions, Bulls and Briefes of those Romish
Rabshekehs, our Land (as the Prophet Isay says) had lien waste, Isai. 1.
our Cities had been burned with fire, strangers had devoured our Land in our
presence, and it would have become desolate as the overthrow of foreign
enemies. Had not God reserved a seed, and a seed of a right generous kind, the
daughter of Sion should have remained like a Cottage in a Vineyard, like a
lodge in a garden of Cucumbers, and like a besieged City. Had not God reserved
a seed, and a seed of a right generous kind, we had been as Sodom and
Gomorrah, all in combustion and hurly burly: then should you have seen here a
Bonner whipping and broiling of poor innocents, there a Gardener proscribing,
imprisoning, murdering of the right heirs and zealous professors of Gods
truth. Then should you have seen the very channels in our streets swell with
the blood of Martyrs, as Jordan in the time of harvest, Iosuah 3.15.
and their bodies piled up for fuel, for beacons and bonefires, in vsum
nocturni luminis. And which is a misery, which the heathen, the sublimatest
wit among the heathens could not express, no sacking, no rifling, no razing of
Cities, no burning of whole towns and villages comes any whit near it. Then
should you have seen cleanness of teeth in all your Cities, and scarceness
of bread in all your places: I mean the spiritual famine of Gods word, when
the people and sheep of Christ's fold should have been turned out to graze on
the naked pasture of an implicit faith, and should never have come to the
sight of that holy Manna, that pabulum animae, the sacred word of God; but
happily once in the year you should have had a Ducking Friar step up into this
or the like holy Mount, and fed them with the saliua, the froth and foame of an
allegorical and tropologicall Postiller.

But why do I argue the event from the threats and Bulls and Briefes of those
Romish Rabshakehs? or why should we fear their fears, or be afraid of them?
Isai. 8.12.


Who sees not? nay, as S. Austin says, speaking of the blessings which the
name of Christ and the Christian profession brought into the world, in his
first book De Ciuitate Dei, and sixth chapter: He that sees not this, is
blind: August.
he that sees it, and praises it not, is thanklesse: he that hinders him
that praises it, is mad.

How that if violence had prevailed in the day of blood, we had been bereft of
all those blessings which his Majesty as a ricke of corn came laden with into
this Land, even in number as many as the benedictions of Abraham, especially
(...) which ^^^^^^dually acco^^anied his (...) person, and depended not so much
upon the change of the Prince, and death of Queen Elizabeth, as upon his and
his only succession in the Throne. I shall not need to reckon them; I assure my
self there is not any thankful heart or true Israelite indeed, but has them
in a table before him. Sure I am, had we wanted the least of them, and had not
God as on this day avenged himself on bloody Gowrie, ^^th suddenly, and in
the same manner as it was said of Shebna, we had wanted them, very babes and
sucklings would have been eloquent in the commemoration of them, and that now
we have them in their height and perfection, we are not sensible of them.

But beloved I beseech you in the bowels of Christ Jesus, let us in the day of
wealth and all kind of happiness, so comfort our selves, as that we quite
forget not the day of affliction.

Let us so solace our selves with remembrance of what we now are, as that we
abandon not all thought of what we might have been, and of what God, had he
not been the more merciful, might well have deprived us of. Now, O Lord God,
let thy name be magnified for ever by them that shall say. The Lord of hosts is
God over Judah, and let the house of thy servant the King be established before
thee. 2. Sam. 7.
Let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may continue
for ever, and let the house of thy servant and of his seed be blessed with thy
best blessings. Amen.

FINIS.

