THE DEFENSE OF Poesy.

By Sir Phillip Sidney, Knight.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed for William Ponsonby. 1595.

The defense of Poesy, by Sir Philip Sidney Knight.
WHen the right virtuous E.VV. and I, were at the Emperors Court together, we
gave our selves to learn horsemanship of Ion Pietro Pugliano, one that with
great commendation had the place of an Esquire in his stable: and he according
to the fertilnes of the Italian wit, did not only afford us the demonstration
of his practice, but sought to enrich our minds with the contemplations
therein, which he thought most precious. But with none I remember mine ears
were at any time more laden, then when (either angered with slow payment, or
moved with our learner like admiration) he exercised his speech in the praise
of his faculty. He said soldiers were the noblest estate of mankind, and
horsemen the noblest of soldiers. He said they were the masters of war, and
ornaments of peace, speedy goers, and strong abiders, triumphers both in Camps
and Courts: nay to so vnbleeued a point he proceeded, as that no earthly thing
bred such wonder to a Prince, as to be a good horseman. Skill of government was
but a Pedanteria, in comparison, then would he add certain praises by telling
what a peerlesse beast the horse was, the only serviceable Courtier without
flattery, the beast of most beauty, faithfulness, courage, and such more, that
if I had not been a piece of a Logician before I came to him, I think he would
have persuaded me to have wished my self a horse. But thus much at least, with
his no few words he drove into me, that selfeloue is better then any guilding,
to make that seem gorgious wherein our selves be parties. Wherein if Pulianos
strong affection and weak arguments will not satisfy you, I will give you a
nearer example of my self, who I know not by what mischance in these my not
old years and idlest times, having slipped into the title of a Poet, am provoked
to say something unto you in the defense of that my vnelected vocation, which if
I handle with more good will, then good reasons bear with me, since the
scholar is to be pardoned that follows the steps of his master. And yet I
must say, that as I have more just cause to make a pitiful defense of poor
Poetry, which from almost the highest estimation of learning, is fallen to be
the laughing stock of children, so have I need to bring some more available
proofs, since the former is by no man bard of his deserved credit, the silly
later, has had even the names of Philosophers used to the defacing of it, with
great danger of civil war among the Muses. And first truly to all them that
professing learning enuey against Poetry, may justly be objected, that they go
very near to ungratefulness, to seek to deface that which in the noblest
nations and languages that are known, has been the first light giver to
ignorance, and first nurse whose milk little and little enabled them to feed
afterward of tougher knowledges. And will you play the Hedge-hogge, that being
received into the den, drove out his host? Or rather the Vipers, that with
their birth kill their parents? Let learned Greece in any of his manifold
Sciences, be able to show me one book before Musaeus, Homer, and Hesiod, all
three nothing else but Poets. Nay let any History be brought, that can say
any writers were there before them, if they were not men of the same skill, as
Orpheus, Linus, and some other are named, who having been the first of that
country that made pens deliuerers of their knowledge to the posterity, nay
justly challenge to be called their Fathers in learning. For not only in time
they had this prioritie, (although in it self antiquity be venerable) but
went before them, as causes to draw with their charming sweetness the wild
untamed wits to an admiration of knowledge. So as Amphion, was said to move
stones with his Poetry, to build Thebes, and Orpheus to be listened to by
beasts, indeed stony and beastly people. So among the Romans, were Liuius,
Andronicus, and Ennius, so in the Italian language, the first that made it
aspire to be a treasure-house of Science, were the Poets Dante, Bocace, and
Petrach. So in our English, were Gower, and Chawcer, after whom, encoraged and
delighted with their excellent foregoing, others have followed to beautify our
mother tongue, as well in the same kind as other arts. This did so notably show it
self, yt the Philosophers of Greece durst not a long time apear to ye world,
but under ye mask of poets. So Thales, Empedocles, and Parmenides, sang their
natural Philosophy in verses. So did Pithagoras and Phocillides, their moral
Councels. So did Tirteus in war matters, and Solon in matters of policy, or
rather they being Poets, did exercise their delightful vain in those points
of highest knowledge, which before them lay hidden to the world. For, that
wise Solon was directly a Poet, it is manifest, having written in verse the
notable Fable of the Atlantic Island, which was continued by Plato. And truly
even Plato who so ever well considers, shall find that in the body of his
work though the inside and strength were Philosophy, the skin as it were and
beauty, depended most of Poetry. For all stands upon Dialogues, wherein he
faines many honest Burgesses of Athens speak of such matters, that if they had
been set on the Rack, they would never have confessed them: besides his
Poetical describing the circumstances of their meetings, as the well ordering
of a banquet, the delicacie of a walk, with enterlacing mere Tales, as Gyges
Ring and others, which, who knows not to be flowers of Poetry, did never
walk into Appollos Garden. And even Historiographers, although their lips
sound of things done, and verity be written in their foreheads, have been glad
to borrow both fashion and perchance weight of the Poets. So Herodotus
entitled his History, by the name of the nine Muses, and both he and all the
rest that followed him, either stale, or usurped of Poetry, their passionate
describing of passions, the many particularities of battles which no man could
affirm, or if that be denied me, long Orations put in the mouths of great
Kings and Captains, which it is certain they never pronounced. So that truly
neither Philosopher, nor Historiographer, could at the first have entered into
the gates of populer judgments, if they had not taken a great pasport of
Poetry, which in all nations at this day where learning flourishes not, is
plain to be seen: in all which, they have some feeling of Poetry. In Turkey,
besides their law giving Divines, they have no other writers but Poets. In our
neighbor Country Ireland, where truly learning goes very bare, yet are their
Poets held in a devout reverence. Even among the most barbarous and simple
Indians, where no writing is, yet have they their Poets who make and sing songs
which they call Arentos, both of their Ancestors deeds, and praises of their
Gods. A sufficient probability, that if ever learning come among them, it must
be by having their hard dull wits softened and sharpened with the sweet
delights of Poetry, for until they find a pleasure in the exercise of the
mind, great promises of much knowledge, will little persuade them that know not
the fruits of knowledge. In Wales, the true remnant of the ancient Brittons,
as there are good authorities to show, the long time they had Poets which they
called Bardes: so through all the co^quests of Romans, Saxons, Danes, and
Normans, some of whom, did seek to ruin all memory of learning from among
them, yet do their Poets even to this day last: so as it is not more notable in
the soon beginning, then in long continuing. But since the Authors of most of
our Sciences, were the Romans, and before them the Greeks, let us a little
stand upon their authorities, but even so far as to see what names they have
given unto this now scorned skill. Among the Romans a Poet was called Vares,
which is as much as a diuiner, foreseer, or Prophet, as by his conjoined words
Vaticinium, and Vaticinari, is manifest, so heavenly a title did that excellent
people bestow upon this hart-rauishing knowledge, and so far were they
carried into the admiration thereof, that they thoughin the chanceable hitting
upon any of such verses, great foretokens of their following fortunes, were
placed. Whereupon grew the word of Sorts Vergilianae, when by sudden opening
Virgils book, they lighted upon some verse of his, as it is reported by many,
whereof the Histories of the Emperors lives are full. As of Albinus the
Governor of our Island, who in his childhood met with this verse Arma amens
capio, nec sat rationis in armis: and in his age performed it, although it were
a very vain and godless superstition, as also it was, to think spirits were
commanded by such verses, whereupon this word Charms derived of Carmina,
comes: so yet serves it to show the great reverence those wits were held
in, and altogether not without ground, since both by the Oracles of Delphos and
Sybillas prophesies, were wholly delivered in verses, for that same exquisite
observing of number and measure in the words, and that high flying liberty of
conceit propper to the Poet, did seem to have some divine force in it. And may
not I presume a little farther, to show the reasonableness of this word
Vatis, and say that the holy David's Psalms are a divine Poem? If I do, I shall
not do it without the testimony of great learned me^ both ancient and modern.
But even the name of Psalms will speak for me, which being interpreted, is
nothing but Songs: then that it is fully written in meeter as all learned
Hebritians agree, although the rules be not yet fully found. Lastly and
principally, his handling his prophecy, which is merely Poetical. For what
else is the awaking his musical Instruments, the often and free changing of
persons, his notable Prosopopeias, when he makes you as it were see God
coming in his majesty, his telling of the beasts ioyfulnesse, and hills
leaping, but a heavenly poesy, wherein almost he shows himself a passionate
lover of that unspeakable and everlasting beauty, to be seen by the eyes of
the mind, only cleared by faith? But truly now having named him, I fear I
seem to profane that holy name, applying it to Poetry, which is among us
thrown down to so ridiculous an estimation. But they that with quiet
judgments will look a little deeper into it, shall find the end and working of
it such, as being rightly applied, deserves not to be scourged out of the
Church of God. But now let us see how the Greeks have named it, and how they
deemed of it. The Greeks named him (...), which name, has as the most
excellent, gone through other languages, it comes of this word (...) which is
to make: wherein I know not whether by luck or wisdom, we Englishmen have met
with the Greeks in calling him a Maker. Which name, how high and incomparable
a title it is, I had rather were known by marking the scope of other sciences,
the^ by any partial allegatio^. There is no Art delivered unto mankind that
has not the works of nature for his principal object, without which they
could not consist, and on which they so depend, as they become Actors and
Plaiers, as it were of what nature will have set forth. So does the Astronomer
look upon the stars, and by that he sees set down what order nature has
taken therein. So does the Geometritian and Arithmititian, in their diverse
sorts of quantities. So does the Musicians in times tell you, which by nature
agree, which not. The natural Philosopher thereon has his name, and the
(moral Philosopher stands upon the natural virtues, vices, or passions of
man: and follow nature says he therein, and thou shall not err. The Lawier
says, what men have determined. The Historian, what men have done. The
Gramarian, speaks only of the rules of speech, and the Rhetoritian and
Logitian, considering what in nature will soonest prove, and persuade thereon,
give artificial rules, which still are compassed within the circle of a
question, according to the proposed matter. The Physician wayeth the nature of
man's body, and the nature of things helpful, or hurtful unto it. And the
Metaphisicke though it be in the second and abstract Notions, and therefore be
counted supernatural, yet does he indeed build upon the depth of nature. Only
the Poet disdeining to be tied to any such subjection, lifted up with the vigor
of his own invention, does grow in effect into an other nature: in making
things either better then nature brings forth, or quite a new, forms such
as never were in nature: as the Heroes, Demigods, Cyclops, Chymeras, Furies,
and such like; so as he goes hand in hand with nature, not enclosed within the
narrow warrant of her gifts, but freely raunging within the Zodiac of his own
wit. Nature never set forth the earth in so rich Tapistry as diverse Poets
have done, neither with so pleasant rivers, fruitful trees, sweet smelling
flowers, nor whatsoever else may make the too much loved earth more lonely: her
world is brazen, the Poets only deliver a golden. But let those things alone
and go to man, for whom as the other things are, so it seems in him her
uttermost coming is employed: and know whether she have brought forth so true
a lover as Theagenes, so constant a friend as Pylades, so valiant a man as
Orlando, so right a Prince as Xenophons Cyrus, so excellent a man every way as
Virgils Aeneas. Neither let this be iestingly conceived, because the works of
the one be essenciall, the other in imitation or fiction: for every
understanding, knows the skill of each Artificer stands in that Idea, or
fore conceit of the work, and not in the work it self. And that the Poet
has that Idea, is manifest, by delivering them forth in such excellency as
he had imagined them: which delivering forth, also is not wholly imaginatiue,
as we are wont to say by the^ that build Castles in the air: but so far
substancially it works, not only to make a Cyrus, which had been but a
particular excellency as nature might have done, but to bestow a Cyrus upon the
world to make many Cyrusses, if they will learn aright, why and how that maker
made him. Neither let it be deemed too saucy a comparison, to balance the
highest point of man's wit, with the efficacy of nature: but rather give right
honor to the heavenly maker of that maker, who having made man to his own
likeness, set him beyond and over all the works of that second nature, which in
nothing he shows so much as in Poetry; when with the force of a divine
breath, he brings things forth surpassing her doings: with no small
arguments to the incredulous of that first accursed fall of Adam, since our
erected wit makes us know what perfection is, and yet our infected will keeps
us from reaching unto it. But these arguments will by few be understood, and by
fewer granted: thus much I hope will be given me, that the Greeks with some
probability of reason, gave him the name above all names of learning. Now let
us go to a more ordinary opening of him, that the truth may be the more
palpable: and so I hope though we get not so unmatched a praise as the
Etimologie of his names will grant, yet his very description which no man
will deny, shall not justly be barred from a principal commendation. Poesy
therefore, is an Art of Imitation: for so Aristotle terms it in the word
(...), that is to say, a representing, counterfeiting, or figuring forth to
speak Metaphorically. A speaking Picture, with this end to teach and delight.
Of this have been three general kinds, the chief both in antiquity and
excellency, were they that did imitate the vnco^ceiueable excellencies of God.
Such were David in his Psalms, Solomon in his song of songs, in his
Ecclesiastes and Proverbs. Moses and Debora, in their Hymns, and the writer
of Iobe: Which beside other, the learned Emanuell, Tremelius, and F. Iunius,
do entitle the Poetical part of the scripture: against these none will speak
that has the holy Ghost in due holy reverence. In this kind, though in a
full wrong divinity, were Orpheus, Amphion, Homer in his himnes, and many
other both Greek and Romans. And this Poesy must be used by whosoever will
follow S. Paul's counsel, in singing Psalms when they are merry, and I know
is used with the fruit of comfort by some, when in sorrowful panges of their
death bringing sins, they find the consolation of the never leaving goodness.
The second kind, is of them that deal with matters Philosophical, either
moral as Tirteus, Phocilides, Cato; or natural, as Lucretius, and Virgils
Georgikes; or Astronomicall as Manilius and Pontanus; or Historical as Lucan:
which who mislike the fault, is in their judgment quite out of taste, and not
in the sweet food of sweetly uttered knowledge. But because this second sort is
wrapped within the fold of the proposed subject, and takes not the free course
of his own invention, whether they properly be Poets or no, let Gramarians
dispute; and go to the third indeed right Poets, of whom chiefly this question
arises: betwixt whom and these second, is such a kind of difference, as
betwixt the meaner sort of Painters, who counterfeyt only such faces as are
set before them, and the more excelent, who having no law but wit, bestow that
in colors upon you, which is fittest for the eye to see, as the constant,
though lamenting look of Lucretia, when she punished in her self another
fault: wherein he painteth not Lucretia whom he never saw, but painteth the
outward bewty of such a virtue. For these third be they which most properly do
imitate to teach and delight: and to imitate, borrow nothing of what is, has
bin, or shall be, but range only reined with learned discretion, into the
divine consideration of what may be and should be. These be they that as the
first and most noble sort, may justly be termed Vates: so these are waited on
in the excellentest languages and best understandings, with the fore described
name of Poets. For these indeed do merely make to imitate, and imitate both to
delight and teach, and delight to move men to take that goodness in hand,
which without delight they would fly as from a stranger; and teach to make
them know that goodness whereunto they are moved: which being the noblest scope
to which ever any learning was directed, yet want there not idle tongues to
bark at them. These be subdivided into sundry more special denominations. The
most notable be the Heroic, Lyrick, Tragic, Comic, Satyrick, Iambick,
Elegiack, Pastoral, and certain others: some of these being termed according
to the matter they deal with, some by the sort of verse they liked best to
write in, for indeed the greatest part of Poets, have apparelled their
poetical inventions, in that numbrous kind of writing which is called verse.
Indeed but apparelled verse: being but an ornament and no cause to Poetry,
since there have been many most excellent Poets that never versefied, and now
swarm many versefiers that need never answer to the name of Poets. For
Xenophon who did imitate so excellently as to give us effigiem iusti imperii,
the pourtraiture of a just Empire under the name of Cyrus, as Cicero says of
him, made therein an absolute heroical Poem. So did Heliodorus, in his sugared
invention of that picture of love in Theagenes and Chariclea, and yet both
these wrote in prose, which I speak to show, that it is not ryming and versing
that makes a Poet, (no more then a long gown makes an Advocate, who though he
pleaded in Armor, should be an Aduocat and no soldier) but it is that faining
notable images of virtues, vices, or what else, with that delightful teaching,
which must be the right describing note to know a Poet by. Although indeed the
Senate of Poets has chosen verse as their fittest raiment: meaning as in
matter, they passed all in all, so in manner, to go beyond them: not speaking
table talk fashion, or like men in a dream, words as they chanceably fall
from the mouth, but peasing each syllable of each word by just proportion,
according to the dignity of the subject. Now therefore it shall not be amiss,
first to way this latter sort of poetry by his works, and then by his parts,
and if in neither of these Anatomies he be condemnable, I hope we shall
obtain a more favorable sentence. This purifying of wit, this enriching of
memory, enabling of judgment, and enlarging of conceit, which commonly we call
learning, under what name so ever it come forth, or to what immediate end
soever it be directed, the final end is, to lead and draw us to as high a
perfection, as our degenerate souls made worse by their clay-lodgings, can be
capable of. This according to the inclination of man, bred many formed
impressions. For some that thought this felicity principally to be gotten by
knowledge, and no knowledge to be so high or heavenly, as acquaintance with the
stars; gave themselves to Astronomy: others persuading themselves to be
Demygods, if they knew the causes of things, became natural and supernatural
Philosophers. Some an admirable delight drew to Music; and some the
certainty of demonstration to the Mathematics: but all one and other having
this scope to know, and by knowledge to lift up the mind from the dungeon of
the body, to the enjoying his own divine essence. But when by the balance of
experience it was found, that the Astronomer looking to the stars might fall in
a ditch, that the inquiring Philosopher might be blind in him self, and the
Mathematician, might draw forth a straight line with a crooked heart. Then lo
did proof, the ouerruler of opinions make manifest, that all these are but
serving sciences; which as they have a private end in themselves, so yet are
they all directed to the highest end of the mistress knowledge by ye Greeks
(...), which stands as I think, in the knowledge of a man's self, in the
Ethike and Politic consideration, with the end of well doing, and not of well
knowing only. Even as the Sadlers next end is to make a good Saddle, but his
further end, to serve a nobler faculty, which is horsmanship, so the
horsemans to soldiery: and the soldier not only to have the skill, but to
perform the practice of a soldier. So that the ending end of all earthly
learning, being verteous action, those skils that most serve to bring forth
that, have a most just title to be Princes over all the rest: wherein if we ca^
show, the Poet is worthy to have it before any other competitors: among who^
principally to challenge it, step forth the moral Philosophers, whom me thinks
I see coming toward me, with a sullain gravity, as though they could not
abide vice by daylight, rudely clothed, for to witness outwardly their
contempt of outward things, with books in their hands against glory, whereto
they set their names: sophistically speaking against subtlety, and angry with
any man in whom they see the foul fault of anger. These men casting larges as
they go of definitions, diuitions, and distinctions, with a scornful
interrogatiue, do soberly ask, whether it be possible to find any path so
ready to lead a man to virtue, as that which teaches what virtue is, and
teaches it not only by delivering forth his very being, his causes and
effects, but also by making known his enemy vice, which must be destroyed,
and his combersome servant passion, which must be mastred: by showing the
generalities that contains it, and the specialities that are derived from it.
Lastly by plain setting down, how it extends it self out of the limits of a
man's own little world, to the government of families, and mainteining of
public societies. The Historian scarsely gives leisure to the Moralist to say
so much, but that he laden with old Mouse-eaten Records, authorizing himself
for the most part upon other Histories, whose greatest authorities are built
upon the notable foundation Heresay, having much ado to accord differing
writers, and to pick truth out of partiality: better acquainted with a 1000.
years ago, the^ with the present age, and yet better knowing how this world
goes, then how his own wit runs, curious for Antiquities, and inquisitiue of
Novelties, a wonder to young folks, and a Tyrant in table talk; denies in a
great chafe, that any man for teaching of virtue, and virtues actions, is
comparable to him. I am Testis temporum, lux veritatis, vita memoriae, magistra
vitae, nuncia vetustatis. The Philosopher says he, teaches a disputatiue
virtue, but I do an active. His virtue is excellent in the dangerlesse Academy
of Plato: but mine shows forth her honorable face in the battles of
Marathon, Pharsalia, Poietiers, and Agincourt. He teaches virtue by certain
abstract considerations: but I only bid you follow the footing of them that
have gone before you. Old aged experience, goes beyond the fine witted
Philosopher: but I give the experience of many ages. Lastly, if he make the
song Book, I put the learners hand to the Lute, and if he be the guide, I am
the light. Then would he allege you innumerable examples, confirming story by
stories, how much the wisest Senators and Princes, have been directed by the
credit of History, as Brutus, Alphonsus of Aragon, (and who not if need be.)
At length, the long line of their disputation makes a point in this, that the
one gives the precept, and the other the example. Now whom shall we find,
since the question stands for the highest form in the school of learning to
be moderator? Truly as me seems, the Poet, and if not a moderator, even the
man that ought to carry the title from them both: and much more from all other
serving sciences. Therefore compare we the Poet with the Historian, and with the
moral Philosopher: and if he go beyond them both, no other human skill can
match him. For as for the divine, with all reverence it is ever to be excepted,
not only for having his scope as far beyond any of these, as Eternity
exceeds a moment: but even for passing each of these in themselves. And for
the Lawier, though Ius be the daughter of Justice, the chief of virtues, yet
because he seeks to make men good, rather formidine panae, then virtutis amore:
or to say righter, does not endeavor to make men good, but that their evil hurt
not others, having no care so he be a good citizen, how bad a man he be.
Therefore as our wickedness makes him necessary, and necessity makes him
honorable, so is he not in the deepest truth to stand in rank with these, who
al endeavor to take naughtiness away, and plant goodness even in the
secretest cabinet of our souls: and these four are all that any way deal in
the consideration of men's manners, which being the supreme knowledge, they that
best breed it, deserve the best commendation. The Philosopher therefore, and
the Historian, are they which would win the goal, the one by precept, the
other by example: but both, not having both, do both halt. For the Philosopher
setting down with thornie arguments, the bare rule, is so hard of utterance,
and so mistie to be conceived, that one that has no other guide but him, shall
wade in him till he be old, before he shall find sufficient cause to be
honest. For his knowledge stands so upon the abstract and general, that
happy is that man who may understand him, and more happy, that can apply what
he does understand. On the other side, the Historian wanting the precept, is so
tied, not to what should be, but to what is, to the particular truth of things,
and not to the general reason of things, that his example draws no necessary
consequence, and therefore a less fruitful doctrine. Now does the peerlesse
Poet perform both, for whatsoever the Philosopher says should be done, he
gives a perfect picture of it by some one, by who^ he presupposes it was done,
so as he coupleth the general notion with the particular example. A perfect
picture I say, for he yields to the powers of the mind an image of that
whereof the Philosopher bestows but a wordish description, which does neither
strike, pearce, nor possess, the sight of the soul so much, as that other
does. For as in outward things to a man that had never seen an Elephant, or a
Rinoceros, who should tell him most exquisitely all their shape, color,
bigness, and particular marks, or of a gorgious palace an Architecture, who
declaring the full bewties, might well make the hearer able to repeat as it
were by roat all he had heard, yet should never satisfy his inward conceit,
with being witness to it self of a true lively knowledge: but the same man,
as soon as he might see those beasts well painted, or that house well in model,
should straightwaies grow without need of any description to a judicial
comprehending of them, so no doubt the Philosopher with his learned
definitions, be it of virtues or vices, matters of public policy or private
government, replenisheth the memory with many infallible grounds of wisdom,
which notwithstanding lie dark before the imaginatiue and judging power, if
they be not illuminated or figured forth by the speaking picture of Poesy.
Tully takes much pains, and many times not without Poetical helps to make
us know the force, love of our country has in us. Let us but hear old
Anchices, speaking in the midst of Troies flames, or see Ulysses in the
fullness of all Calipsoes delights, bewail his absence from barraine and
beggarly Ithecae. Anger the Stoickes said, was a short madness: let but
Sophocles bring you Ajax on a stage, killing or whipping sheep and oxen,
thinking them the Army of Greeks, with their Chieftaines Agamemnon, and
Menelaus: and tell me if you have not a more familiar insight into Anger, then
finding in the schoolmen his Genus and Difference. See whether wisdom and
temperance in Ulysses and Diomedes, valor in Achilles, friendship in Nisus and
Eurialus, even to an ignorant man carry not an apparent shining: and
contrarily, the remorse of conscience in Oedipus; the soon repenting pride in
Agamemnon; the self devouring cruelty in his father Atreus; the violence of
ambition in the two Theban brothers; the sower sweetness of revenge in Medea;
and to fall lower, the Terentian Gnato, and our Chawcers Pander so expressed,
that we now use their names, to signify their Trades: And finally, all
virtues, vices, and passions, so in their own natural states, laid to the
view, that we seem not to hear of them, but clearly to see through them. But
even in the most excellent determination of goodness, what Philosophers
counsel can so readely direct a Prince, as the feined Cirus in Xenophon, or a
virtuous man in all fortunes: as Aeneas in Virgill, or a whole Commonwealth,
as the Way of Sir Thomas Moors Eutopia. I say the Way, because where Sir
Thomas Moore erred, it was the fault of the man and not of the Poet: for that
Way of patterning a Commonwealth, was most absolute though he perchance has
not so absolutely performed it. For the question is, whether the fained Image
of Poetry, or the reguler instruction of Philosophy, has the more force in
teaching? Wherein if the Philosophers have more rightly showed themselves
Philosophers then the Poets, have atteined to the high top of their
profession (as in truth Mediocribus esse poetis non Dii, non homines, non
concessere columnae,) it is (I say again) not the fault of the Art, but that
by few men that Art can be accomplished. Certainly even our Savior Christ
could as well have given the moral common places of uncharitableness and
humbleness, as the divine narration of Dives and Lazarus, or of disobedience
and mercy, as that heavenly discourse of the lost child and the gracious
Father, but that his through searching wisdom, knew the estate of Dives
burning in hell, and of Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, would more constantly as it
were, inhabit both the memory and judgment. Truly for my self (me seems) I
see before mine eyes, the lost child's disdainful prodigality, turned to envy a
Swines dinner: which by the learned Divines are thought not Historical acts,
but instructing Parables. For conclusion, I say the Philosopher teaches, but
he teaches obscurely, so as the learned only can understand him, that is to
say, he teaches them that are already taught. But the Poet is the food for
the tendrest stomachs, the Poet is indeed, the right populer Philosopher.
Whereof Esops Tales give good proof, whose pretty Allegories stealing under
the formal Tales of beasts, makes many more beastly then beasts: begin to
hear the sound of virtue from those dumb speakers. But now may it be
alleged, that if this imagining of matters be so fit for the imagination,
then must the Historian needs surpass, who brings you images of true matters,
such as indeed were done, and not such as fantastically or falsely may be
suggested to have bin done. Truly Aristotle himself in his discourse of
Poesy, plainly determines this question, saying; that Poetry is (...), and
(...), that is to say, it is more Philosophical and more then History. His
reason is, because Poesy deals with (...), that is to say, with the
universal consideration, and the History with (...), the particular. Now
says he, the universal ways what is fit to be said or done, either in
likelihood or necessity, which the Poesy considers in his imposed names:
and the particular only marketh whether Alcibiades did or suffered this or
that. Thus far Aristotle. Which reason of his, as all his is most full of
reason. For indeed if the question were, whether it were better to have a
particular act truly or falsely set down, there is no doubt which is to be
chosen, no more then whether you had rather have Vespacians Picture right as he
was, or at the Painters pleasure nothing resembling. But if the question be for
your own use and learning, whether it be better to have it set down as it
should be, or as it was; then certainly is more doctrinable, the fained Cyrus
in Xenophon, then the true Cyrus in Justin: and the fained Aeneas in Virgill,
then the right Aeneas in Dares Phrigius: as to a Lady that desired to fashion
her countenance to the best grace: a Painter should more benefit her to
pourtrait a most sweet face, writing Canidia upon it, then to paint Canidia
as she was, who Horace swears was full ill favored. If the Poet do his part
aright, he will show you in Tantalus Atreus, and such like, nothing that is not
to be shunned; in Cyrus, Aeneas, Ulysses, each thing to be followed: where the
Historian bound to tell things as things were, cannot be liberal, without he
will be Poetical of a perfect pattern, but as in Alexander or Scipio
himself, show doings, some to be liked, some to be misliked; and then how will
you discern what to follow, but by your own discretion which you had without
reading Q. Curtius. And whereas a man may say, though in universal
consideration of doctrine, the Poet prevails, yet that the History in his
saying such a thing was done, does warrant a man more in that he shall follow.
The answer is manifest, that if he stand upon that was, as if he should argue,
because it rained yesterday, therefore it should rain to day, then indeed has
it some advantage to a gross conceit. But if he know an example only
enformes a coniectured likelihood, and so go by reason, the Poet does so far
exceed him, as he is to frame his example to that which is most reasonable, be
it in warlike, politic, or private matters, where the Historian in his bare,
was, has many times that which we call fortune, to ouerrule the best wisdom.
Many times he must tell events, whereof he can yield no cause, or if he do, it
must be poetically. For that a fained example has as much force to teach, as a
true example (for as for to move, it is clear, since the fained may be tuned
to the highest key of passion) let us take one example wherein an Historian and
a Poet did concur. Herodotus and Justin does both testify, that Zopirus,
King Darius faithful servant, seeing his master long resisted by the
rebellious Babilonians, fained himself in extreme disgrace of his King, for
verifying of which, he caused his own nose and ears to be cut off, and so
flying to the Babylonians was received, and for his known valor so far
creadited, that he did find means to deliver them over to Darius. Much like
matter does Liuy record of Tarquinius, and his son. Xenophon excellently
faineth such an other Stratageme, performed by Abradates in Cyrus behalf. Now
would I feign know, if occasion be presented unto you, to serve your Prince by
such an honest dissimulation, why you do not as well learn it of Xenophons
fiction, as of the others verity: and truly so much the better, as you shall
save your nose by the bargain. For Abradates did not counterfeyt so far. So
then the best of the Historian is subject to the Poet, for whatsoever action or
faction, whatsoever counsel, policy, or war, stratageme, the Historian is
bound to recite, that may the Poet if he lift with his imitation make his
own; bewtifying it both for further teaching, and more delighting as it please
him: having all from Dante his heaven to his hell, under the authority of his
pen. Which if I be asked what Poets have don so? as I might well name some, so
yet say I, and say again, I speak of the Art and not of the Artificer. Now to
that which commonly is attributed to the praise of History, in respect of the
notable learning, is got by marking the success, as though therein a man should
see virtue exalted, and vice punished: truly that commendation is peculier to
Poetry, and far off from History; for indeed Poetry ever sets virtue so
out in her best colors, making fortune her well-wayting handmayd, that one
must needs be enamoured of her. Well may you see Ulysses in a storm and in
other hard plights, but they are but exercises of patience and magnanimity, to
make the^ shine the more in the near following prosperity. And of the
contrary part, if evil men come to the stage, they ever go out (as the
Tragedy writer answered to one that misliked the show of such persons) so
manicled as they little animate folks to follow them. But the History being
captiued to the truth of a foolish world, is many times a terror from
well-doing, and an encouragement to unbridled wickedness. For see we not
valiant Milciades rot in his fetters? The just Phocion and the accomplished
Socrates, put to death like Traitors? The cruel Seuerus, live prosperously?
The excellent Seuerus miserably murdered? Sylla and Marius dying in their
beds? Pompey and Cicero slain then when they would have thought exile a
happiness? See we not virtuous Cato driven to kill himself, and Rebel Caesar
so advanced, that his name yet after 1600. years lasts in the highest honor?
And mark but even Caesar's own words of the forenamed Sylla, (who in that
only, did honestly to put down his dishonest Tyranny) Litteras nesciuit: as
if want of learning caused him to do well. He meant it not by Poetry, which
not content with earthly plagues, deuiseth new punishments in hell for Tyrants:
nor yet by Philosophy, which teaches Occidentos esse, but no doubt by skill in
History, for that indeed can afford you Cipselus, Periander, Phalaris,
Dionisius, and I know not how many more of the same kennell, that speed well
enough in their abominable injustice of usurpation. I conclude therefore that
he excels history, not only in furnishing the mind with knowledge, but in
setting it forward to that which deserves to be called and accounted good:
which setting forward and moving to well doing, indeed sets the Laurel
Crown upon the Poets as victorious, not only of the Historian, but over the
Philosopher, howsoever in teaching it may be questionable. For suppose it be
granted, that which I suppose with great reason may be denied, that the
Philosopher in respect of his methodical proceeding, teach more perfectly then
the Poet, yet do I think, that no man is so much (...), as to compare the
Philosopher in moving with the Poet. And that moving is of a higher degree
then teaching, it may by this appear, that it is well nigh both the cause and
effect of teaching. For who will be taught, if he be not moved with desire to
be taught? And what so much good does that teaching bring forth, (I speak
still of moral doctrine) as that it moves one to do that which it does
teach. For as Aristotle says, it is not (...), but (...) must be the fruit:
and how (...), can be without being moved to practice, it is no hard matter to
consider. The Philosopher shows you the way, he enformeth you of the
particularities, as well of the tediousnes of the way, as of the pleasant
lodging you shall have when your journey is ended, as of the many by turnings
that may divert you from your way. But this is to no man but to him that will
read him, and read him with attentive studious painfulnesse, which constant
desire, whosoever has in him, has already past half the hardness of the
way: and therefore is beholding to the Philosopher, but for the other half.
Nay truly learned men have learnedly thought, that where once reason has so
much ouer-mastered passion, as that the mind has a free desire to do well,
the inward light each mind has in it self, is as good as a Philosophers
book, since in Nature we know it is well, to do well, and what is well, and
what is evil, although not in the words of Art which Philosophers bestow
upon us: for out of natural conceit the Philosophers drew it; but to be moved
to do that which we know, or to be moved with desire to know. Hoc opus, hic
labor est. Now therein of all Sciences I speak still of humane (and according
to the humane conceit) is our Poet the Monarch. For he does not only show the
way, but gives so sweet a prospect into the way, as will entice any man to
enter into it: Nay he does as if your journey should lie through a fair
vineyard, at the very first, give you a cluster of grapes, that full of that
taste, you may long to pass further. He begins not with obscure
definitions, which must blurre the margent with interpretations, and load the
memory with doubtfulnesse: but he comes to you with words set in
delightful proportion, either accompanied with, or prepared for the well
enchanting skill of Music, and with a tale forsooth he comes unto you, with
a tale, which holds children from play, and old men from the Chimney corner;
and pretending no more, does intend the winning of the mind from wickedness to
virtue; even as the child is often brought to take most wholesome things by
hiding them in such other as have a pleasant taste: which if one should begin
to tell them the nature of the Alloes or Rhabarbarum they should receive, would
sooner take their physic at their ears then at their mouth, so is it in men
(most of which, are childish in the best things, til they be cradled in their
graves) glad they will be to hear the tales of Hercules, Achilles, Cyrus,
Aeneas, and hearing them, must needs hear the right description of wisdom,
value, and justice; which if they had been barely (that is to say
Philosophically) set out, they would swear they be brought to school again;
that imitation whereof Poetry is, has the most conueniencie to nature of al
other: insomuch that as Aristotle says, those things which in themselves are
horrible, as cruel battles, unnatural monsters, are made in poetical
imitation, delightful. Truly I have known men, that even with reading Amadis
de gaul, which God knows, wants much of a perfect Poesy, have found their
hearts moved to the exercise of courtesy, liberality, and especially courage.
Who reads Aeneas carrying old Anchises on his back, that wishes not it were
his fortune to perform so excellent an Act? Whom does not those words of
Turnus move, (the Tale of Turnus having planted his image in the imagination)
fugientem haec terra videbit? Vsqueadeone mori miserum est? Where the
Philosophers as they think scorn to delight, so must they be content little to
move; saving wrangling whether Virtus be the chief or the only good; whether
the contemplative or the active life do excel; which Plato and Poetius well
knew: and therefore made mistress Philosophy very often borrow the masking
raiment of Poesy. For even those hard hearted evil men who think virtue a
school name, and know no other good but indulgere genio, and therefore despise
the austere admonitions of the Philosopher, and feel not the inward reason
they stand upon, yet will be content to be delighted, which is all the good,
fellow Poet seems to promise; and so steal to see the form of goodness, (which
seen, they cannot but love) ere themselves be aware, as if they took a
medicine of Cheries. Infinite proofs of the strange effects of this Poetical
invention, might be alleged: only two shall serve, which are so often
remembered, as I think all men know them. The one of Menemus Agrippa, who when
the whole people of Rome had resolutely divided themselves from the Senate,
with apparent show of utter ruin, though he were for that time an excellent
Orator, came not among them upon trust either of figurative speeches, or
cunning insinuations, and much less with far set Maxims of Philosophy,
which especially if they were Platonike, they must have learned Geometry
before they could well have conceived: but forsooth, he behaueth himself like
a homely and familiar Poet. He tells them a tale, that there was a time, when
all the parts of the body made a mutinous conspiracy against the belly, which
they thought devoured the fruits of each others labor: they concluded they
would let so unprofitable a spender starve. In the end, to be short, for the
tale is notorious, and as notorious that it was a tale, with punishing the
belly they plagued themselves; this applied by him, wrought such effect in the
people, as I never red, that only words brought forth: but then so sudden
and so good an alteration, for upon reasonable conditions, a perfect
reconcilement ensued. The other is of Nathan the Prophet, who when the holy
David, had so far forsaken God, as to confirm Adultery with murder, when
he was to do the tendrest office of a friend, in laying his own shame before
his eyes; sent by God to call again so chosen a servant, how does he it? but
by telling of a man whose beloved lamb was ungratefully taken from his bosom.
The Application most divinely true, but the discourse it self fained; which
made David (I speak of the second and isntrumental cause) as in a glass see
his own filthiness, as that heavenly Psalm of mercy well testifies. By
these therefore examples and reasons. I think it may be manifest, that the
Poet with that same hand of delight, does draw the mind more effectually then
any other Art does. And so a conclusion not unfitly ensue, that as virtue is
the most excellent resting place for all worldly learning to make his end of, so
Poetry being the most familiar to teach it, and most Princely to move toward
it, in the most excellent work, is the most excellent workman. But I am
content not only to decipher him by his works (although works in
commendation and dispraise, must ever hold a high authority) but more narrowly
will examine his parts, so that (as in a man) though altogether may carry a
presence full of majesty and beauty, perchance in some one defectuous piece we
may find blemish: Now in his parts, kinds, or species, as you list to term
them, it is to be noted, that some Poesies have coupled together two or three
kinds, as the Tragical and Comicall, whereupon is risen the Tragicomicall,
some in the manner have mingled prose and verse, as Sanazara and Boethius; some
have mingled matters Heroical and Pastoral, but that comes all to one in
this question, for if severed they be good, the conjunction cannot be hurtful:
therefore perchance forgetting some, and leaving some as needless to be
remembered. It shall not be amiss, in a word to cite the special kinds, to
see what faults may be found in the right use of them. Is it then the Pastoral
Poem which is misliked? (For perchance where the hedge is lowest they will
soonest leap over) is the poor pipe disdained, which sometimes out of
Maelibeus mouth, can show the misery of people, under hard Lords and ravening
soldiers? And again by Titerus, what blessedness is derived, to them that lie
lowest, from the goodness of them that fit highest? Sometimes under the
pretty tales of Woolues and sheep, can ^nclude the whole considerations of
wrong doing and patience; sometimes show that contentions for trifles, can get
but a trifling victory, where perchance a man may see, that even Alexander and
Darius, when they straue who should be Cock of this worlds dunghill, the
benefit they got, was, that the afterliuers may say, Haec memini and victum
frustra contendere Thirsim. Ex illo Coridon, Coridon est tempore nobis. Or is
it the lamenting Elegiack, which in a kind heart would move rather pity
then blame, who bewaileth with the great Philosopher Heraclitus, the weakness
of mankind, and the wretchedness of the world: who surely is to be praised
either for compassionate accompanying just causes of lamentations, or for
rightly painting out how weak be the passions of woefulness? Is it the bitter
but wholesome Iambick, who rubbes the galled mind, in making shame the Trumpet
of villainy, with bold and open crying out against naughtiness? Or the
Satirick, who Omne vafer vitium ridenti tangit amico, who sportingly, never
leaves, till he make a man laugh at folly; and at length ashamed, to laugh at
himself; which he cannot avoid, without avoiding the folly? who while Circum
praecordia ludit, gives us to feel how many headaches a passionate life
brings us to? How when all is done, Est Vlubris animus si nos non deficit
aequus. No perchance it is the Comic, whom naughty Play-makers and
stage-keepers, have justly made odious. To the arguments of abuse, I will after
answer, only thus much now is to be said, that the Comedy is an imitatio^ of
the common errors of our life, which he represents in the most ridiculous and
scornful sort that may be: so as it is impossible that any beholder can be
content to be such a one. Now as in Geometry, the oblique must be known as
well as the right, and in Arithmetic, the odd as well as the even, so in the
actions of our life, who sees not the filthiness of evil, wants a great
foil to perceive the beauty of virtue. This does the Comaedie handle so in our
private and domestical matters, as with hearing it, we get as it were an
experience what is to be looked for of a niggardly Demea, of a crafty Dauus,
of a flattering Gnato, of a vainglorious Thraso: and not only to know what
effects are to be expected, but to know who be such, by the signifying badge
given them by the Comaedient. And little reason has any man to say, that men
learn the evil by seeing it so set out, since as I said before, there is no
man living, but by the force truth has in nature, no sooner sees these men
play their parts, but wishes them in Pistrinum, although perchance the sack of
his own faults lie so behind his back, that he sees not himself to dance
the same measure: whereto yet nothing can more open his eyes, then to see his
own actions contemptibly set forth. So that the right use of Comaedie, will I
think, by no body be blamed; and much less of the high and excellent
Tragedy, that opens the greatest wounds, and shows forth the Ulcers that
are covered with Tissue, that makes Kings fear to be Tyrants, and Tyrants
manifest their tyrannical humors, that with sturring the affects of
Admiration and Comiseration, teaches the uncertainty of this world, and upon
how weak foundations guilden roofes are builded: that makes us know, Qui
scaeptra saeuus duro imperio regit, Timet timentes, metus in authorem redit.
But how much it can move, Plutarch yields a notable testimony of the
abominable Tyrant Alexander Pheraeus, from whose eyes a Tragedy well made and
represented, drew abundance of tears, who without all pity had murdered
infinite numbers, and some of his own blood: so as he that was not ashamed to
make matters for Tragedies, yet could not resist the sweet violence of a
Tragedy. And if it wrought no further good in him, it was, that he in despite
of himself, withdrew himself from hearkening to that which might mollify his
hardened heart. But it is not the Tragedy they do mislike, for it were too
absurd to cast our so excellent a representation of whatsoever is most worthy
to be learned. Is it the Lyricke that most displeases, who with his tuned
Lyre and well accorded voice, gives praise, the reward of virtue, to virtuous
acts? who gives moral precepts and natural Problemes, who sometime raises
up his voice to the height of the heavens, in singing the lauds of the
immortal God? Certainly I must confess mine own barbarousnesse, I never
heard the old Song of Percy and Duglas, that I found not my heart moved more
then with a Trumpet; and yet is it sung but by some blind Crowder, with no
rougher voice, then rude style: which being so evil apparelled in the dust and
Cobwebbes of that uncivil age, what would it work, trimmed in the gorgious
eloquence of Pindare? In Hungary I have seen it the manner at all Feasts and
other such like meetings, to have songs of their ancestors valor, which that
right souldierlike nation, think one of the chiefest kindlers of brave courage.
The incomperable Lacedaemonians, did not only carry that kind of Music
ever with them to the field, but even at home, as such songs were made, so were
they all content to be singers of them: when the lusty men were to tell what
they did, the old men what they had done, and the young what they would do.
And where a man may say that Pindare many times praises highly Victories of
small moment, rather matters of sport then virtue, as it may be answered, it
was the fault of the Poet, and not of the Poetry; so indeed the chief fault
was, in the time and custom of the Greeks, who set those toys at so high a
price, that Phillip of Macedon reckoned a horse-race won at Olympus, among
his three fearful felicities. But as the inimitable Pindare often did, so is
that kind most capable and most fit, to awake the thoughts from the sleep of
idleness, to embrace honorable enterprises. Their rests the Heroical, whose
very name I think should daunt all backbiters. For by what conceit can a
tongue be directed to speak evil of that which draws with him no less
champions then Achilles, Cirus, Aeneas, Turnus, Tideus, Rinaldo, who does not
only teach and move to a truth, but teaches and moves to the most high
and excellent truth: who makes magnanimity and justice, shine through all
mistie fearfulness and foggie desires. Who if the saying of Plato and Tully
be true, that who could see virtue, would be woonderfullie ravished with the
love of her beauty. This man sets her out to make her more lovely in her
holliday apparel, to the eye of any that will daine, not to disdain until
they understand. But if any thing be already said in the defense of sweet
Poetry, all concurreth to the mainteining the Heroical, which is not only a
kind, but the best and most accomplished kinds of Poetry. For as the Image
of each Action stirs and instructs the mind, so the lostie Image of such
woorthies, most enflameth the mind with desire to be worthy: and enformes
with counsel how to be worthy. Only let Aeneas be worn in the Tablet of
your memory, how he governs himself in the ruin of his Country, in the
preserving his old Father, and carrying away his religious Ceremonies, in
obeying Gods Commaunment, to leave Dido, though not only all passionate
kindness, but even the humane consideration of virtuous gratefulness, would
have craved other of him: how in storms, how in sports, how in war, how in
peace, how a fugitive, how victorious, how besieged, how besieging, how to
strangers, how to Allies, how to enemies, how to his own. Lastly, how in his
inward self, and how in his outward government, and I think in a mind
most prejudiced with a preiudicating humor, He will be found in
excellency fruitful. Yea as Horace says, Melius Chrisippo and Grantore: but
truly I imagine it falls out with these Poet-whippers, as with some good women
who often are sick, but in faith they cannot tell where. So the name of Poetry
is odious to them, but neither his cause nor effects, neither the sum that
contains him, nor the particularities descending from him, give any fast
handle to their carping dispraise. Since then Poetry is of al humane learnings
the most ancient, and of most fatherly antiquity, as from whence other
learnings have taken their beginnings; Since it is so universal, that no
learned nation does despise it, nor barbarous nation is without it; Since both
Roman and Greek gave such divine names unto it, the one of prophesying, the
other of making; and that indeed that name of making is fit for him,
considering, that where all other Arts retain themselves within their subject,
and receive as it were their being from it. The Poet only, only brings his
own stuff, and does not learn a Conceit out of a matter, but makes matter for
a Conceit. Since neither his description, nor end, containing any evil, the
thing described cannot be evil; since his effects be so good as to teach
goodness, and delight the learners of it; since therein (namely in moral
doctrine the chief of all knowledges) he does not only far pass the
Historian, but for instructing is well nigh comparable to the Philosopher, for
moving, leaves him behind him. Since the holy scripture (wherein there is no
uncleanness) has whole parts in it Poetical, and that even our Savior Christ
vouchsafed to use the flowers of it: since all his kinds are not only in
their united forms, but in their severed dissections fully commendable, I
think, (and think I think rightly) the Laurel Crown appointed for
tryumphant Captains, does worthily of all other learnings, honor the Poets
triumph. But because we have ears as well as toongs, and that the lightest
reasons that may be, will seem to weigh greatly, if nothing be put in the
counter-ballance, let us hear, and as well as we can, ponder what objections
be made against this Art, which may be worthy either of yielding, or
answering. First truly I note, not only in these (...), Poet-haters, but in
all that kind of people who seek a praise, by dispraising others, that they do
prodigally spend a great many wandering words in quips and scoffs, carping and
taunting at each thing, which by sturring the spleen, may stay the brain from
a through beholding the worthiness of the subject. Those kind of objections,
as they are full of a very idle easiness, since there is nothing of so sacred
a majesty, but that an itching tongue may rub it self upon it, so deserve they
no other answer, but in steed of laughing at the jest, to laugh at the
ieaster. We know a playing wit can praise the discretion of an Ass, the
comfortablenes of being in debt, and the jolly commodities of being sick of
the plague. So of the contrary side, if we will turn Ouids verse, Vt lateat
virtus, prox imitate mali, that good lie hid, in nearness of the evil.
Agrippa will be as merry in showing the vanity of Science, as Erasmus was in
the commending of folly: neither shall any man or matter, escape some touch of
these smiling Raylers. But for Erasmus and Agrippa, they had an other
foundation then the superficial part would promise. Marry these other
pleasant fault-finders, who will correct the Verb, before they understand the
Nowne, and confute others knowledge, before they confirm their own, I would
have them only remember, that scoffing comes not of wisdom; so as the best
title in true English they get with their meriments, is to be called good
fools: for so have our grave forefathers ever termed that humorous kind of
iesters. But that which gives greatest scope to their scorning humor, is
ryming and versing. It is already said (and as I think truly said) it is not
ryming and versing that makes Poesy: One may be a Poet without versing, and a
versefier without Poetry. But yet presuppose it were inseparable, as indeed it
seems Scalliger judges truly, it were an inseparable commendation. For if
Oration, next to Ratio, Speech next to Reason, be the greatest gift bestowed
upon Mortality, that cannot be praiselesse, which does most polish that
blessing of speech; which considers each word not only as a man may say by
his forcible quality, but by his best measured quantity: carrying even in
themselves a Harmony, without perchance number, measure, order, proportion, be
in our time grown odious. But lay aside the just praise it has, by being the
only fit speech for Music, (Music I say the most divine striker of the
senses) Thus much is undoubtedly true, that if reading be foolish without
remembering, Memory being the only treasure of knowledge, those words which
are fittest for memory, are likewise most convenient for knowledge. Now that
Verse far exceeds Prose, in the knitting up of the memory, the reason is
manifest, the words (besides their delight, which has a great affinity to
memory) being so set as one cannot be lost, but the whole work fails: which
accusing it self, calls the remembrance back to it self, and so most
strongly confirms it. Besides one word, so as it were begetting an other, as
be it in rhyme or measured verse, by the former a man shall have a near guess
to the follower. Lastly even they that have taught the Art of memory, have
showed nothing so apt for it, as a certain room divided into many places, well
and thoroughly known: Now that has the verse in effect perfectly, every word
having his natural seat, which seat must needs make the word remembered. But
what needs more in a thing so known to all men. Who is it that ever was
scholar, that does not carry away some verses of Virgil, Horace, or Cato, which
in his youth he learned, and eue^ to his old age serve him for hourly
lessons; as Percontatorem fugito nam garrulus idem est, Dum tibi quisque placet
credula turba sumas. But the fitnes it has for memory, is notably proved by
all delivery of Arts, wherein for the most part, from Grammar, to Logic,
Mathematickes, Physic, and the rest, the Rules chiefly necessaie to be borne
away, are compiled in verses. So that verse being in it self sweet and
orderly, and being best for memory, the only handle of knowledge, it must be
in jest that any man can speak against it. Now then go we to the most
important imputations laid to the poor Poets, for ought I can yet learn, they
are these. First, that there being many other more fruitful knowledges, a
man might better spend his time in them, then in this. Secondly, that it is the
mother of lies. Thirdly, that it is the nurse of abuse, infecting us with many
pestilent desires, with a Sirens sweetness, drawing the mind to the Serpents
tail of sinful fancies; and herein especially Comedies give the largest field
to ear, as Chawcer says, how both in other nations and in ours, before Poets
did soften us, we were full of courage given to martial exercises, the pillars
of manlike liberty, and not lulled a sleep in shadie idleness, with Poets
pastimes. And lastly and chiefly, they cry out with open mouth as if they had
ouershot Robinhood, that Plato banished them out of his Commonwealth. Truly
this is much, if there be much truth in it. First to the first. That a man
might better spend his time, is a reason indeed: but it does as they say, but
petere principium. For if it be, as I affirm, that no learning is so good, as
that which teaches and moves to virtue, and that none can both teach and move
thereto so much as Poesy, then is the conclusion manifest; that incke and
paper cannot be to a more profitable purpose employed. And certainly though a
man should grant their first assumption, it should follow (me thinks) very
unwillingly, that good is not good, because better is better. But I still and
utterly deny, that there is sprung out of earth a more fruitful knowledge. To
the second therefore, that they should be the principal liars, I answer
Paradoxically, but truly, I think truly: that of all writers under the Sun,
the Poet is the least liar: and though he would, as a Poet can scarcely be a
liar. The Astronomer with his cousin the Geometrician, can hardly escape, when
they take upon them to measure the height of the stars. How often think you
do the Physicians lie, when they auerre things good for sicknesses, which
afterward send Charon a great number of souls drowned in a potion, before they
come to his Ferrie? And no less of the rest, which take upon them to affirm.
Now for the Poet, he nothing affirms, and therefore never lies: for as I
take it, to lie, is to affirm that to be true, which is false. So as the
other Artistes, and especially the Historian, affirming many things, can in
the clowdie knowledge of mankind, hardly escape from many lies. But the Poet
as I said before, never affirms, the Poet never makes any Circles about your
imagination, to conjure you to believe for true, what he writes: he cites not
authorities of other histories, but eue^ for his entry, calls the sweet
Muses to inspire unto him a good invention. In troth, not laboring to tell you
what is, or is not, but what should, or should not be. And therefore though he
recount things not true, yet because he tells them not for true, he lies
not: without we will say, that Nathan lied in his speech before alleged to
David, which as a wicked man durst scarce say, so think I none so simple, would
say, that Esope lied, in the tales of his beasts: for who thinks that Esope
wrote it for actually true, were well worthy to have his name Cronicled among
the beasts he writes of. What child is there, that coming to a play, and
seeing Thebes written in great letters upon an old door, does believe that it
is Thebes? If then a man can arrive to the childs age, to know that the Poets
persons and doings, are but pictures, what should be, and not stories what
have bin, they will never give the lie to things not Affirmatively, but
Allegorically and figuratively written; and therefore as in history looking
for truth, they may go away full fraught with falsehood: So in Poesy, looking
but for fiction, they shall use the narration but as an imaginatiue ground plat
of a profitable invention. But hereto is replied, that the Poets give names to
men they write of, which argues a conceit of an actual truth, and so not
being true, proves a falsehood. And does the Lawier lie, then when under the
names of John of the Style, and John of the Nokes, he puts his Case? But
that is easily answered, their naming of men, is but to make their picture the
more lively, and not to build any History. Painting men, they cannot leave
men namelesse: we see, we cannot play at Chestes, but that we must give
names to our Chessemen; and yet me thinks he were a very partial Champion
of truth, that would say we lied, for giving a piece of wood the reverend
title of a Bishop. The Poet names Cyrus and Aeneas, no other way, then to
show what men of their fames, fortunes, and estares, should do. Their third
is, how much it abuses men's wit, training it to wanton sinfulness, and
lustful love. For indeed that is the principal if not only abuse, I can
hear alleged. They say the Comedies rather teach then reprehend amorous
co^ceits. They say the Lirick is larded with passionat Sonets, the Elegiack
weeps the want of his mistress, and that even to the Heroical, Cupid has
ambitiously climed. Alas Love, I would thou could as well defend thy self,
as thou can offend others: I would those on whom thou do attend, could
either put thee away, or yield good reason why they keep thee. But grant love
of beauty to be a beastly fault, although it be very hard, since only man and
no beast has that gift to discern beauty, grant that lovely name of love to
deserve all hateful reproaches, although even some of my masters the
Philosophers spent a good deal of their Lampoyle in setting forth the
excellency of it, grant I say, what they will have granted, that not only
love, but lust, but vanity, but if they list scurrilitie, possess many
leaves of the Poets books, yet think I, when this is granted, they will
find their sentence may with good manners put the last words foremost; and not
say, that Poetry abuses man's wit, but that man's wit abuses Poetry. For I
will not deny, but that man's wit may make Poesy, which should be (...), which
some learned have defined figuring forth good things to be (...) which does
contrariwise infect the fancy with unworthy objects, as the Painter should
give to the eye either some excellent perspectiue, or some fine Picture fit for
building or fortification, or containing in it some notable example, as Abraham
sacrificing his son Isaac, Judith killing Holofernes, David fighting with
Golias, may leave those, and please an ill pleased eye with wanton shows of
better hidden matters. But what, shall the abuse of a thing, make the right use
odious? Nay truly though I yield, that Poesy may not only be abused, but that
being abused by the reason of his sweet charming force, it can do more hurt
then any other army of words: yet shall it be so far from concluding, that
the abuse should give reproach to the abused, that contrariwise, it is a good
reason, that whatsoever being abused, does most harm, being rightly used (and
upon the right use, each thing receives his title) does most good. Do we not see
skill of Physic the best ramper to our often assaulted bodies, being abused,
teach poison the most violent destroyer? Does not knowledge of Law, whose end
is, to even and right all things, being abused, grow the crooked fosterer of
horrible injuries? Does not (to go to the highest) Gods word abused, breed
heresy, and his name abused, become blasphemy? Truly a Needle cannot do much
hurt, and as truly (with leave of Ladies be it spoken) it cannot do much good.
With a sword thou may kill thy Father, and with a sword thou may defend
thy Prince and Country: so that, as in their calling Poets, fathers of lies,
they said nothing, so in this their argument of abuse, they prove the
commendation. They allege herewith, that before Poets began to be in price,
our Nation had set their hearts delight upon action, and not imagination,
rather doing things worthy to be written, the^ writing things fit to be done.
What that before time was, I think scarcely Spinx can tell: since no memerie is
so ancient, that has not the precedens of Poetry. And certain it is, that in
our plainest homelines, yet never was the Albion Nation without Poetry. Marry
this Argument, though it be leuiled against Poetry, yet is it indeed a
chain-shot against all learning or bookishnes, as they commonly term it. Of
such mind were certain Goths, of whom it is written, that having in the
spoil of a famous City, taken a fair Library, one hangman belike fit to
execute the fruits of their wits, who had murdered a great number of bodies,
would have set fire in it. No said an other very gravely, take heed what you
do, for while they are busy about those toys, we shall with more leisure
conquer their Countries. This indeed is the ordinary doctrine of ignorance,
and many words sometimes I have heard spent in it: but because this reason is
generally against al learning, as well as Poetry, or rather all learning but
Poetry, because it were too large a digression to handle it, or at least too
superfluous, since it is manifest that all government of action is to be gotten
by knowledge, and knowledge best, by gathering many knowledges, which is
reading; I only with Horace, to him that is of that opinion, Iubio stultum
esse libenter: for as for Poetry it self, it is the freest from this
objection, for Poetry is the Companion of Camps. I dare undertake, Orlando
Furioso, or honest king Arthure, will never displease a soldier: but the
quidditie of Ens and Prima materia, will hardly agree with a Corcelet. And
therefore as I said in the beginning, even Turks and Tartars, are delighted
with Poets. Homer a Creek, flourished, before Greece flourished: and if to a
slight conjecture, a conjecture may be apposed, truly it may seem, that as by
him their learned me^ took almost their first light of knowledge, so their
active men, received their first motions of courage. Only Alexanders example
may serve, who by Plutarche is accounted of such virtue, that fortune was not
his guide, but his footestoole, whose Acts speak for him, though Plutarche did
not: indeed the Phaenix of warlike Princes. This Alexander, left his
Schoolemaister living Aristotle behind him, but took dead Homer with him. He
put the Philosopher Callisthenes to death, for his seeming Philosophical,
indeed mutinous stubbornness, but the chief thing he was ever heard to wish
for, was, that Homer had been alive. He well found he received more bravery
of mind by the pattern of Achilles, then by hearing the definition of
fortitude. And therefore if Cato misliked Fuluius for carrying Ennius with him
to the field, It may be answered, that if Cato misliked it, the Noble Fuluius
liked it, or else he had not done it; for it was not the excellent Cato
Vticencis, whose authority I would much more have reverenced: But it was the
former, in truth a bitter punisher of faults, but else a man that had never
sacrificed to the Graces. He misliked and cried out against all Greek
learning, and yet being four score years old began to learn it, belike
fearing that Pluto understood not Latin. Indeed the Roman laws allowed no
person to be carried to the wars, but he that was in the soldiers Role.
And therefore though Cato misliked his vnmustred person, he misliked not his
work. And if he had, Scipio Nasica (judged by common consent the best Roman)
loved him: both the other Scipio brothers, who had by their virtues no less
surnames then of Asia and Affricke, so loved him, that they caused his body to
be buried in their Sepulture. So as Catoes authority being but against his
person, and that answered with so far greater then himself, is herein of no
validity. But now indeed my burden is great, that Plato his name is laid
upon me, whom I must confess of all Philosophers, I have ever esteemed most
worthy of reverence; and with good reason, since of all Philosophers he is
the most Poetical: yet if he will defile the fountain out of which his
flowing streams have proceeded, let us boldly examine with what reasons he
did it. First truly a man might maliciously object, that Plato being a
Philosopher, was a natural enemy of Poets. For indeed after the Philosophers
had picked out of the sweet mysteries of Poetry, the right discerning true
points of knowledge: they forthwith putting it in method, and making a
School Art of that which the Poets did only teach by a divine delightfulnes,
beginning to spurn at their guides, like ungrateful Prentices, were not
content to set up shop for themselves, but sought by all means to discredit
their masters, which by the force of delight being barred them, the less they
could overthrow them, the more they hated them. For indeed they found for
Homer, seven Cities straue who should have him for their Citizen, where many
Cities banished Philosophers, as not fit members to live among them. For only
repeating certain of Euripides verses, many Atheniens had their lives saved of
the Siracusans, where the Atheniens themselves thought many Philosophers
unworthy to live. Certain Poets, as Simonides, and Pindarus, had so prevailed
with Hiero the first, that of a Tyrant they made him a just King: where Plato
could do so little with Dionisius, that he himself of a Philosopher, was made
a slave. But who should do thus, I confess should requite the objections made
against Poets, with like cauillations against Philosophers: as likewise one
should do, that should bid one read Phaedrus or Simposium in Plato, or the
discourse of love in Plutarch, and see whether any Poet do authorize
abominable filthiness as they do. Again, a man might ask, out of what
Commonwealth Plato does banish them, in sooth, thence where he himself
allows community of women. So as belike this banishment grew not for
effeminate wantonness, since little should Poetical Sonnets be hurtful, when a
man might have what woman he listed. But I honor Philosophical instructions,
and bless the wits which bred them: so as they be not abused, which is
likewise stretched to Poetry. S. Paul himself sets a watchword upon
Philosophy, indeed upon the abuse. So does Plato upon the abuse, not upon
Poetry. Plato found fault that the Poettes of his time, filled the world with
wrng opinions of the Gods, making light tales of that unspotted essence; and
therefore would not have the youth depraved with such opinions: herein may much
be said; let this suffice. The Poets did not induce such opinions, but did
imitate those opinions already induced. For all the Greek stories can well
testify, that the very religion of that time, stood upon many, and many
fashioned Gods: Not taught so by Poets, but followed according to their nature
of imitation. Who list may read in Plutarch, the discourses of Isis and Osiris,
of the cause why Oracles ceased, of the divine providence, and see whether the
Theology of that nation, stood not upon such dreams, which the Poets indeed
superstitiously observed. And truly since they had not the light of Christ, did
much better in it, then the Philosophers, who shaking off superstition, brought
in Atheism. Plato therefore, whose authority, I had much rather justly
co^sture, then unjustly resist: meant not in general of Poets, in those words
of which Julius Scaliger says; Qua authoritate barbari quidam atque hispidi
abuti velint ad poetas e rep. Exigendos. But only meant to drive out those wrong
opinions of the Deity: whereof now without further law, Christianity has
taken away all the hurtful belief, perchance as he thought nourished by then
esteemed Poets. And a man need go no further then to Plato himself to know
his meaning: who in his Dialogue called Ion, gives high, and rightly, divine
commendation unto Poetry. So as Plato banishing the abuse, not the thing, not
banishing it, but giving due honor to it, shall be our Patron, and not our
adversary. For indeed, I had much rather, since truly I may do it, show their
mistaking of Plato, under whose Lions skin, they would make an Aslike braying
against Poesy, then go about to overthrow his authority; whom the wiser a
man is, the more just cause he shall find to have in admiration: especially
since he attributes unto Poesy, more then my self do; namely, to be a very
inspiring of a divine force, far above man's wit, as in the forenamed Dialogue
is apparent. Of the other side, who would show the honors have been by the
best sort of judgments granted them, a whole sea of examples would present
themselves; Alexanders, Caesar's, Scipioes, all favorers of Poets: Laelius,
called the Roman Socrates himself a Poet; so as part of Heautontimoroumenon
in Terence, was supposed to be made by him. And even the Greek Socrates,
whom Appollo confirmed to be the only wise man, is said to have spent part
of his old time in putting Esopes Fables into verses. And therefore full evil
should it become his scholar Plato, to put such words in his masters mouth
against Poets. But what needs more? Aristotle writes the Art of Poesy, and
why, if it should not be written? Plutarche teaches the use to be gathered
of them, and how, if they should not be read? And who reads Plutarches
either History or Philosophy, shall find he trimmeth both their garments
with gardes of Poesy. But I list not to defend Poesy with the help of his
underling Historiographie. Let it suffice to have showed, it is a fit soil for
praise to dwell upon: and what dispraise may set upon it, is either easily
overcome, or transformed into just commendation. So that since the excellencies
of it, may be so easily and so justly confirmed, and the low creeping
objections so soon trodden down, it not being an Art of lies, but of true
doctrine; not of effoeminatenesse, but of notable stirring of courage; not of
abusing man's wit, but of strengthening man's wit; not banished, but honored by
Plato; Let us rather plant more Laurels for to ingarland the Poets heads (which
honor of being Lawreate, as besides them only triumphant Captains were, is a
sufficient authority to show the price they ought to be held in) then suffer
the ill sauoured breath of such wrong speakers once to blow upon the clear
springs of Poesy. But since I have run so long a Carrier in this matter, me
thinks before I give my pen a full stop, it shall be but a little more lost
time, to enquire why England the Mother of excellent minds should be grown so
hard a stepmother to Poets, who certainly in wit ought to pass all others,
since all only proceeds from their wit, being indeed makers of themselves,
not takers of others. How can I but exclaim. Musa mihi causas memoria quo
numine laeso, Sweet Poesy that has aunciently had Kings, Emperors,
Senators, great Captains, such as besides a thousands others, David, Adrian,
Sophocles, Germanicus, not only to favor Poets, but to be Poets: and of our
nearer times, can present for her Patrons, a Robert King of Scicill, the great
King Fraunces of France, King James of Scotland; such Cardinals as Bembus,
and Bibiena; such famous Preachers and Teachers, as Beza and Melanchchon; so
learned Philosophers, as Fracastorius, and Scaliger; so great Orators, as
Pontanus, and Muretus; so pearcing wits, as George Buchanan; so grave
Counsailours, as besides many, but before all, that Hospital of France; then
whom I think that Realm never brought forth a more accomplished judgment,
more firmly builded upon virtue: I say these with numbers of others, not only
to read others Poesies, but to poetise for others reading; that Poesy thus
embraced in all other places, should only find in our time a hard welcome in
England. I think the very earth laments it, and therefore deckes our soil
with fewer Laurels then it was accustomed. For heretofore, Poets have in
England also flourished: and which is to be noted, even in those times when the
Trumpet of Mars did sonnd lowdest. And now that an over faint quietness should
seem to strowe the house for Poets. They are almost in as good reputation, as
the Mountebanckes at Venice. Truly even that, as of the one side it gives
great praise to Poesy, which like Venus (but to better purpose) had rather be
troubled in the net with Mars, then enjoy the homely quiet of Vulcan. So
serves it for a piece of a reason, why they are less grateful to idle
England, which now can scarce endure the pain of a pen. Upon this
necessarily follows, that base men with seruill wits undertake it, who think
it enough if they can be rewarded of the Printer: and so as Epaminandas is said
with the honor of his virtue to have made an Office, by his exercising it,
which before was contemtible, to become highly respected: so these men no more
but setting their names to it, by their own disgracefulnesse, disgrace the most
graceful Poesy. For now as if all the Muses were got with child, to bring
forth bastard Poets: without any commission, they do pass over the Banks of
Helicon, till they make the Readers more weary then Posthorses: while in the
mean time, they Queis meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan, are better content
to suppress the out-flowings of their wit, then by publishing them, to be
accounted Knights of the same order. But I that before ever I durst aspire unto
the dignity, am admitted into the company of the Paper-blurrers, do find the
very true cause of our wanting estimation, is want of desert, taking upon us
to be Poets, in despite of Palla^. Now wherein we want desert, were a thank
worthy labor to express. But if I knew I should have mended my self, but
as I never desired the title, so have I neglected the means to come by it,
only ouer-mastered by some thoughts, I yielded an inckie tribute unto them.
Marry they that delight in Poesy it self, should seek to know what they do,
and how they do: and especially look themselves in an vnflattering glass of
reason, if they be enclinable unto it. For Poesy must not be drawn by the
ears, it must be gently led, or rather it must lead, which was partly the
cause that made the ancient learned affirm, it was a divine gift and no
humane skill; since all other knowledges lie ready for any that have strength
of wit: A Poet no industry can make, if his own Genius be not carried into
it. And therefore is an old Proverb, Orator fit, Paeta nascitur. Yet
conconfesse I always, that as the fertilest ground must be manured, so must
the highest flying wit have a Dedalus to guide him. That Dedalus they say both
in this and in other, has three wrings to bear it self up into the air of
due commendation: that is Art, Imitation, and Exercise. But these neither
Artificial Rules, nor imitatiue paternes, we much comber ourselves withal.
Exercise indeed we do, but that very fore-backwardly; for where we should
exercise to know, we exercise as having known: and so is our brain delivered
of much matter, which never was begotten by knowledge. For there being two
principal parts, Matter to be expressed by words, and words to express the
matter: In neither, we use Art or imitation rightly. Our matter is, Quodlibet,
indeed though wrongly performing, Ouids Verse. Quicquid conabor dicere, Versus
erit: never marshalling it into any assured rank, that almost the Readers
cannot tell where to find themselves. Chawcer undoubtedly did excellently in
his Troilus and Creseid: of whom truly I know not whether to marvel more,
either that he in that mistie time could see so clearly, or that we in this
clear age, go so stumblingly after him. Yet had he great wants, fit to be
forgiven in so reverent an Antiquity. I account the Mirror of Magistrates,
meetly furnished of bewtiful parts. And in the Earl of Surreis Lirickes,
many things tasting of a Noble birth, and worthy of a Noble mind. The
Sheepheards Kallender, has much Poetry in his Egloges, indeed worthy the
reading, if I be not deceived. That same framing of his style to an old
rusticke language, I dare not allow: since neither Theocritus in Greek,
Virgill in Latin, nor Sanazara in Italian, did affect it. Besides these, I do
not remember to have seen but few (to speak boldly) printed, that have
poetical sinnewes in them. For proof whereof, let but most of the Verses be
put in prose, and then ask the meaning, and it will be found, that one Verse
did but beget an other, without ordering at the first, what should be at the
last, which becomes a confused mass of words, with a tingling sound of ryme,
barely accompanied with reasons. Our Tragidies and Commedies, not without cause
cried out against, observing rules neither of honest civility, nor skillful
Poetry. Excepting Gorboducke, (again I say of those that I have seen) which
notwithstanding as it is full of stately speeches, and well sounding phrases,
clyming to the height of Seneca his style, and as full of notable morallitie,
which it does most delightfully teach, and so obtain the very end of
Poesy. Yet in truth, it is very defectious in the circumstaunces, which
greeues me, because it might not remain as an exact moddell of all Tragidies.
For it is faulty both in place and time, the two necessary Companions of all
corporal actions. For where the Stage should always represent but one place,
and the vttermoste time presupposed in it, should be both by Aristotle's
precept, and common reason, but one day; there is both many days and places,
inartificially imagined. But if it be so in Gorboducke, how much more in all
the the rest, where you shall have Asia of the one side, and Affricke of the
other, and so many other under Kingdoms, that the Player when he comes in,
must ever begin with telling where he is, or else the tale will not be
conceived. Now you shall have three Ladies walk to gather flowers, and then we
must believe the stage to be a garden. By and by we hear news of shipwreck in
the same place, then we are too blame if we accept it not for a Rock. Upon the
back of that, comes out a hidious monster with fire and smoke, and then the
miserable beholders are bound to take it for a Cave: while in the mean time
two Armies fly in, represented with sour swords and bucklers, and the^ what
hard heart will not receive it for a pitched field. Now of time, they are much
more liberal. For ordinary it is, that two young Princes fall in love, after
many trauerses she is got with child, delivered of a fair boy: he is lost,
grows a man, falls in love, and is ready to get an other child, and all
this in two hours space: which how absurd it is in sense, even sense may
imagine: and Art has taught, and all ancient examples justified, and at this
day the ordinary players in Italy will not err in. Yet will some bring in an
example of Eunuche in Terence, that contains matter of two days, yet far
short of twenty years. True it is, and so was it to be played in two days,
and so fitted to the time it set forth. And though Plautus have in one place
done amiss, let us hit it with him, and not miss with him. But they will say,
how then shall we set forth a story, which contains both many places, and
many times? And do they not know that a Tragidie is tied to the laws of Poesy
and not of History: not bound to follow the story, but having liberty
either to feign a quite new matter, or to frame the History to the most
Tragical conueniencie. Again, many things may be told which cannot be showed:
if they know the difference betwixt reporting and representing. As for example,
I may speak though I am here, of Peru, and in speech digress from that, to
the description of Calecut: But in action, I cannot represent it without
Pacolets Horse. And so was the manner the Ancients took, by some Nuntius, to
recount things done in former time or other place. Lastly, if they will
represent an History, they must not (as Horace says) begin ab ouo, but they
must come to the principal point of that one action which they will
represent. By example this will be best expressed. I have a story of young
Polidorus, delivered for safeties sake with great riches, by his Father
Priamus, to Polminester King of Thrace, in the Troyan war time. He after some
years, hearing the overthrow of Priamus, for to make the treasure his own,
murthereth the Child, the body of the Child is taken up, Hecuba, she the
same day, finds a slight to be revenged most cruelly of the Tyrant. Where
now would one of our Tragedy writers begin, but with the delivery of the
Child? Then should he sail over into Thrace, and so spend I know not how
many years, and travail numbers of places. But where does Euripides? even
with the finding of the body, the rest leaving to be told by the spirit of
Polidorus. This needs no further to be enlarged, the dullest wit may
conceive it. But besides these gross absurdities, how all their Plays be
neither right Tragedies, nor right Comedies, mingling Kings and Clownes, not
because the matter so carries it, but thrust in the Clown by head and
shoulders to play a part in maiesticall matters, with neither decency nor
discretion: so as neither the admiration and Commiseration, nor the right
sportfulness is by their mongrell Tragicomedie obtained. I know Apuleius did
somewhat so, but that is a thing recounted with space of time, not represented
in one moment: and I know the Ancients have one or two examples of
Tragicomedies, as Plautus has Amphitrio. But if we mark them well, we shall
find that they never or very daintily match horn Pipes and Funerals. So
falls it out, that having indeed no right Comedy in that Comicall part of
our Tragidie, we have nothing but scurrillitie unworthy of any chaste
ears, or some extreme show of doltishnesse, indeed fit to lift up a loud
laughter and nothing else: where the whole tract of a Comedy should be full of
delight, as the Tragidie should be still maintained in a well raised
admiration. But our Comedients think there is no delight without laughter,
which is very wrong, for though laughter may come with delight, yet comes it
not of delight, as though delight should be the cause of laughter. But well may
one thing breed both together. Nay rather in themselves, they have as it were a
kind of contrariety: For delight we scarcely do, but in things that have a
conueniencie to our selves, or to the general nature: Laughter almost ever
comes of things most disproportioned to our selves, and nature. Delight
has a joy in it either permanent or present. Laughter has only a scornful
tickling. For example, we are ravished with delight to see a fair woman, and
yet are far from being moved to laughter. We laugh at deformed creatures,
wherein certainly we cannot delight. We delight in good chances, we laugh at
mischaunces. We delight to hear the happiness of our friends and Country,
at which he were worthy to be laughed at, that would laugh: we shall
contrarily laugh sometimes to find a matter quite mistaken, and go down the
hill against the byas, in the mouth of some such men as for the respect of
them, one shall be heartily sorry, he cannot choose but laugh, and so is rather
pained, then delighted with laughter. Yet deny I not, but that they may go
well together, for as in Alexanders picture well set out, we delight without
laughter, and in twenty mad Antiques, we laugh without delight. So in
Hercules, painted with his great beard and furious countenance, in a woman's
attire, spinning, at Omphales commandment, it breeds both delight and
laughter: for the representing of so strange a power in Love, procures
delight, and the scornefulnesse of the action, stirs laughter. But I speak
to this purpose, that all the end of the Comicall part, be not upon such
scornful matters as stir laughter only, but mix with it, that
delightful teaching which is the end of Poesy. And the great fault even in
that point of laughter, and forbidden plainly by Aristotle, is, that they
stir laughter in sinful things, which are rather execrable then ridiculous:
or in miserable, which are rather to be pitied then scorned. For what is it to
make folks gape at a wretched beggar, and a beggarly Clown: or against law
of hospitality, to least at strangers, because they speak not English so
well as we do? What do we learn, since it is certain, Nil habet infoelix
paupertas durius in se, Quam quod ridiculos homines facit. But rather a busy
loving Courtier, and a hartlesse threatening Thraso; a selfe-wise seeming
Schoolemaister, a wry transformed Traveler: these if we saw walk in Stage
names, which we play naturally, therein were delightful laughter, and
teaching delightfulness, as in the other the Tragidies of Buchanan do justly
bring forth a a divine admiration. But I have lauished out too many words of
this Play-matter; I do it, because as they are excelling parts of Poesy, so is
there none so much used in England, and none can be more pitifully abused:
which like an unmannerly daughter, showing a bad education, causes her mother
Poesies honesty to be called in question. Other sort of Poetry, almost have
we none, but that Lyricall kind of Songs and Sonets; which Lord, if he gave us
so good minds, how well it might be employed, and with how heavenly fruits,
both private and public, in singing the praises of the immortal beauty, the
immortal goodness of that God, who gives us hands to write, and wits to
conceive: of which we might well want words, but never matter, of which we could
turn our eyes to nothing, but we should ever have new budding occasions. But
truly many of such writings as come under the banner of irresistable love, if I
were a mistress, would never persuade me they were in love: so coldly they
apply fiery speeches, as men that had rather read lovers writings, and so
caught up certain swelling Phrases, which hang together like a man that once
told me the wind was at Northwest and by South, because he would be sure to
name winds enough, then that in truth they feel those passions, which easily
as I think, may be bewraied by that same forciblenesse or Euergia, (as the
Greeks call it of the writer). But let this be a sufficient, though short note,
that we miss the right use of the material point of Poesy. Now for the
outside of it, which is words, or (as I may term it) Diction, it is even well
worse: so is it that hony-flowing Matrone Eloquence, apparrelled, or rather
disguised, in a Courtisanlike painted affectation. One time with so far set
words, that many seem monsters, but must seem strangers to any poor
Englishman: an other time with coursing of a letter, as if they were bound to
follow the method of a Dictionary: an other time with figures and flowers,
extreemly winter-starued. But I would this fault were only peculiar to
Versefiers, and had not as large possession among Prose-Printers: and which is
to be meruailed among many Scholars, and which is to be pitied among some
Preachers. Truly I could wish, if at least I might be so bold to wish, in a
thing beyond the reach of my capacity, the diligent Imitators of Tully and
Demosthenes, most worthy to be imitated, did not so much keep Nizolian paper
books, of their figures and phrases, as by attentive translation, as it were,
devour them whole, and make them wholly theirs. For now they cast Sugar and
spice upon every dish that is served to the table: like those Indians, not
content to wear eare-rings at the fit and natural place of the ears, but
they will thrust Jewels through their nose and lips, because they will be
sure to be fine. Tully when he was to drive out Catiline, as it were with a
thunderbolt of eloquence, often uses the figure of repitition, as Viuit and
vincit, imo insenatum, Venit imo, insenatum venit, etc. Indeed enflamed, with
a well grounded rage, he would have his words (as it were) double out of his
mouth, and so do that artificially, which we see men in choler do naturally.
And we having noted the grace of those words, hale them in sometimes to a
familiar Epistle, when it were too much choler to be chollericke. How well
store of Similiter Cadenses, does sound with the gravity of the Pulpit, I
would but inuoke Demosthenes soul to tell: who with a rare daintiness uses
them. Truly they have made me think of the Sophister, that with too much
subtlety would prove two Eggs three, and though he might be counted a
Sophister, had none for his labor. So these men bringing in such a kind of
eloquence, well may they obtain an opinion of a seeming finenesse, but
persuade few, which should be the end of their finenesse. Now for similitudes
in certain Printed discourses, I think all Herberists, all stories of beasts,
fowls, and fishes, are rifled up, that they may come in multitudes to wait
upon any of our conceits, which certainly is as absurd a surfeit to the ears as
is possible. For the force of a similitude not being to prove any thing to a
contrary disputer, but only to explain to a willing hearer, when that is
done, the rest is a most tedious prattling, rather ouerswaying the memory from
the purpose whereto they were applied, then any whit enforming the judgment
already either satisfied, or by similitudes not to be satisfied. For my part,
I do not doubt, when Antonius and Crassus, the great forefathers of Cicero in
eloquence, the one (as Cicero testifies of them) pretended not to know Art,
the other not to set by it, (because with a plain sensiblenesse, they might
win credit of popular ears, which credit, is the nearest step to
persuasion, which persuasion, is the chief mark of Oratorie) I do not doubt I
say, but that they used these knacks very sparingly, which who does generally
use, any man may see does dance to his own music, and so to be noted by the
audience, more careful to speak curiously then truly. Undoubtedly (at least to
my opinion undoubtedly) I have found in diverse small learned Courtiers, a more
sound style, then in some professors of learning, of which I can guess no other
cause, but that the Courtier following that which by practice he finds
fittest to nature, therein (though he know it not) does according to art, though
not by art: where the other using art to show art and not hide art (as in these
cases he should do) flies from nature, and indeed abuses art. But what?
methinks I deserve to be pou^ded for straying from Poetry, to Oratory: but
both have such an affinity in the wordish consideration, that I think this
digression will make my meaning receive the fuller understanding: which is not
to take upon me to teach Poets how they should do, but only finding my self
sick among the rest, to show some one or two spots of the common infection
grown among the most part of writers; that acknowledging our selves somewhat
awry, we may bend to the right use both of matter and manner. Whereto our
language gives us great occasion, being indeed capable of any excellent
exercising of it. I know some will say it is a mingled language: And why not,
so much the better, taking the best of both the other? Another will say, it
wants Grammar. Nay truly it has that praise that it wants not Grammar; for
Grammar it might have, but it needs it not, being so easy in it self, and so
void of those combersome differences of Cases, Genders, Moods, and Tenses,
which I think was a piece of the Tower of Babilons curse, that a man should be
put to school to learn his mother tongue. But for the uttering sweetly and
properly the conceit of the mind, which is the end of speech, that has it
equally with any other tongue in the world. And is perticularly happy in
compositions of two or three words together, near the Greek, far beyond
the Latin, which is one of the greatest bewties can be in a language. Now of
versefying, there are two sorts, the one ancient, the other modern. The
ancient marked the quantity of each syllable, and according to that, framed
his verse: The modern, observing only number, with some regard of the accent;
the chief life of it, stands in that like sounding of the words, which we
call Rhyme. Whether of these be the more excellent, would bear many speeches, the
ancient no doubt more fit for Music, both words and time observing quantity,
and more fit, lively to express diverse passions by the low or lofty sound of
the well-wayed syllable. The latter likewise with his rhyme strikes a certain
Music to the ear: and in fine, since it does delight, though by an other
way, it obtains the same purpose, there being in eitner sweetness, and
wanting in neither, majesty. Truly the English before any Vulgar language, I
know is fit for both sorts: for, for the ancient, the Italian is so full of
Vowels, that it must ever be combred with Elisions. The Duch so of the other
side with Consonants, that they cannot yield the sweet slyding, fit for a
Verse. The French in his whole language, has not one word that has his accent
in the last syllable, saving two, called Antepenultima; and little more has
the Spanish, and therefore very gracelesly may they use Dactiles. The English
is subject to none of these defects. Now for Rhyme, though we do not observe
quantie, yet we observe the Accent very precisely, which other languages
either cannot do, or will not do so absolutely. That Caesura, or breathing
place in the midst of the Verse, neither Italian nor Spanish have: the French
and we, never almost fail off. Lastly, even the very Rhyme it self, the
Italian cannot put it in the last syllable, by the French named the Masculine
Rhyme; but still in the next to the last, which the French call the Female; or
the next before that, which the Italian Sdrucciola: the example of the former,
is Buono, Suono, of the Sdrucciola, is Femina, Semina. The French of the other
side, has both the Male as Bon, Son; and the Female, as Plaise, Taise; but the
Sdrucciola he has not: where the English has all three, as Du, True, Father,
Rather, Motion, Potion, with much more which might be said, but that already I
find the triflings of this discourse is much too much enlarged. So that since
the euer-praise worthy Poesy is full of virtue breeding delightfulness, and
void of no gift that ought to be in the noble name of learning, since the
blames laid against it, are either false or feeble, since the cause why it is
not esteemed in England, is the fault of Poet-apes, not Poets. Since lastly our
tongue is most fit to honor Poesy, and to be honored by Poesy, I conjure
you all that have had the evil luck to read this inck-wasting toy of mine,
even in the name of the nine Muses, no more to scorn the sacred mysteries of
Poesy. No more to laugh at the name of Poets, as though they were next
inheritors to fools; no more to jest at the reverent title of a Rimer, but to
believe with Aristotle, that they were the ancient Treasurers of the Grecians
divinity; to believe with Bembus, that they were first bringers in of all
Civility; to believe with Scalliger that no Philosophers precepts can sooner
make you an honest man, then the reading of Virgil; to believe with Clauserus,
the Translator of Cornutus, that it pleased the heavenly deity by Hesiod and
Homer, under the veil of Fables to give us all knowledge, Logic, Rhetoric,
Philosophy, natural and moral, and Quid non? To believe with me, that there
are many mysteries contained in Poetry, which of purpose were written darkly,
least by profane wits it should be abused: To believe with Landin, that they
are so beloved of the Gods, that whatsoever they write, proceeds of a divine
fury. Lastly, to believe themselves when they tell you they will make you
immortal by their verses. Thus doing, your name shall flourish in the Printers
shops. Thus doing you shall be of kin to many a Poetical Preface. Thus doing,
you shall be most fair, most rich, most wise, most all: you shall dwell upon
Superlatiues. Thus doing, though you be Libertino patre natus, you shall
sodeinly grow Herculea proles. Si quid mea Carmina possunt. Thus doing, your
soul shall be placed with Dantes Beatrix, or Virgils Anchises. But if (fie of
such a but) you be borne so near the dull-making Cataract of Nilus, that you
cannot hear the Planet-like Music of Poetry; if you have so earth-creeping
a mind that it cannot lift it self up to look to the sky of Poetry, or
rather by a certain rusticall disdain, will become such a mome, as to be a
Momus of Poetry: then though I will not wish unto you the Asses ears of
Midas, nor to be driven by a Poets verses as Bubonax was, to hang himself, nor
to be rimed to death as is said to be done in Ireland, yet thus much Curse I
must send you in the behalf of all Poets, that while you live, you live in
love, and never get savor, for lacking skill of a Sonet, and when you die,
your memory die from the earth for want of an Epitaphe.

FINIS.

