YEA and AMEN: OR, PRECIOUS PROMISES, AND PRIVILEGES. Spiritually unfolded in
their Nature and Use. Driving at the assurance and establishing of weak
Believers.

By R. SIBBS D. D. Master of Katherine Hall in Cambridge, and Preacher of
Grayes Inn London.

Reviewed by himself in his life time, and since perused by T. G. and P. N.

LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop for R Dawlman and are to be sold by Humphrey
Mosley at the Princes Arms in Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

YEA and AMEN. OR, PRETIOVS PROMISES, Laid open out of 2 COR. 1. 19, 20, 21,
22, 23.
But as God is true, our word toward you was not yea and nay; for the Son of
God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, was not yea and nay, but
in him was yea.

For all the promises of God are in him yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of
God by us.

THE blessed Apostle, that he might have the better place in the hearts of his
hearers, endeavors here with all diligence to wipe off any imputation, which
they might have against him, that so his doctrine might come home to their
souls, and have the freer access to work upon their consciences.

We have therefore in these words S. Paul's Apology, for not coming unto the
Chorinthians according to his promise. Wherein he alleges that it was not
from any inconstancy in him; but indeed from corruption in manners among them.
verse 23. I call God to record, that to spare you I came not. The Apostle as a
man, and as a holy man, might promise many things common to this life, and
might lawfully vary afterward, upon the appearance of real impediments.

But the things which he promises, and speaks of as an Apostle, they admit of
no such uncertainty. Therefore his care is to decline all thoughts of wavering
therein, and to maintain the credit of the Gospel, which he had taught to
the uttermost: knowing well, how ready false teachers would be to persuade the
people, that Paul was as light in his preaching, as he was in keeping his word
with them, therefore our Word is true, as God is true, says he.

There is the same ground of the certainty of Evangelicall truths, as there is
of God himself. Jesus Christ whom I preached among you was not yea and nay,
says the Apostle, but yesterday and to day, and the same for ever. Whence may
be observed:

That the object of preaching Doct. 1.
now in the time of the Gospel, is especially Jesus Christ. This is the Rock
upon which the Church is built. Christ should be the subject matter of our
teaching, in his Nature, Offices, and Benefits, in the duties which we owe to
him, and the instrument whereby we receive all from him, which is faith.

If we preach the Law, and discover men's corruption, it is but to make way for
the Gospels freer passage into their souls. And if we press holy duties, it
is to make you walk worthy of the Lord Jesus. All teaching is reductive to the
Gospel of Christ, either to make way as John Baptist did, to level all proud
thoughts, and make us stoop to him, or to make us walk worthy of the grace we
receive from him.

The Bread of life must be broken, the Sacrifice must be anatomized and laid
open; the riches of Christ, even his unsearchable riches, must be unfolded.
The Son of God must be preached to all, and therefore God who has appointed
us to be saved by Christ, has also ordained preaching, to lay open the Lord
Jesus, with the heavenly treasures of his grace and glory. But to go forward.

Jesus Christ who was preached among you, by me, and Sylvanus, and Tymotheus,
was not yea and nay.

Here observe: That the Observe.
consent of Preachers in the mysteries of salvation, is an excellent means to
strengthen faith in their hearers: not in regard of the truth it self, but in
regard of men. So it pleases God to condescend to our weakness, in adding
Sacraments and Oath unto his promises, thereby to show the more stablenesse of
his counsel toward us.

By yea here is meant Certain, Constant, Vnvariable. The times vary, but not
the faith of the times. The same fundamental truth is in all ages. Sometimes
indeed it is more explicated, and unfolded; as we have in the the New Testament
diverse truths more clearly revealed than in the Old. There is not a new faith,
but a larger explication of the old faith. Divine truth is always the same. If
there has been a Church always, there has ever been a Divine truth. Now it
is an Article of our faith in all times to believe a Catholic Church,
certainly then there must be a Catholic truth, to be the seed of this Church.
Therefore we should search out, what was that yea, that positive Doctrine in
those Apostolical times of the Churches purity before it was corrupted.

The Church was not long a Virgin, yet some there were that held the truth of
Christ in all ages. Our present Church holds the same positive truths, with the
Apostles before us. Therefore we say, Our Church was before Luther, because our
Doctrine is Apostolical, as also is our Church that is continued thereby,
because it is built upon Apostolical doctrine. Put the case we cannot show the
men as they rediculously urge; what is that to the purpose? From an ignorance
of particular men, will they conclude us to be ignorant of the Church of
Christ, which has ever been.

Hence the true Church may easily be discerned: the points of Religion wherein
our adversaries differ from us, be but patcheries of their own, they were not
yea. In the Apostles times, their Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, and
Sacraments, of diverse kinds were devised by themselves afterward. And indeed
for a thousand years after Christ, many of the differences betwixt us and the
Papists were never heard of; neither were they ever established by any
Counsel, till the Counsel of Trent.

Our positive points are grounded upon the holy Scriptures; we seek the Old
way, and the best way, as Jeremy advises us. There was no popish trash in
Abraham's time, among the blessed Patriarchs, nor in Christ's time. No, nor many
hundred years after; they came in by little and little, by humane invention,
for their own advantage; a mere policy to get money and abuse the people.
Indeed they hold many of our truths, but they add something of their own to
them; they add necessity of tradition to the Scriptures, merits to faith; they
add Saints to Christ in Divine Worship: they have seven Sacraments to our two.
They may safelier therefore come to us, than we to them; we hold all that they
should hold, only their own additions we hold not, we leave them to
themselves. So much for that.

To touch only another point, that borders a little Doct.
upon it. Divine truth is of an inflexible nature; this crosses another rule
of theirs; for they hold, they may give what sense of Scripture they will: and
that the current of the present Church, must judge of all former counsels.
What? Does the truth vary according to men's judgments? must we bring the
strait Rule to the crooked Timber for to be measured? Shall the judgment of
any man, be the rule of Gods unerring truth? Shall present men interpret it
thus, and say, it is so now? And shall others that succeed after say, what ever
it was then, now it is thus: and must we believe all? God forbid.

This declares, That no Doct. 4.
man can dispense with Gods Law: this written Word is alike in all: truth is
truth, and error error, whether men think it to be so or no. Reason is
reason, in Turks, as well as amongst us. The light of nature, is the light of
nature, in any Country as well as here. Principles of nature vary not as
Languages do: they are inbred things. And if Principles of nature be
inviolable, and indispensable, much more is Divinity. Filth is filth we all
confess: opinion ought not to be the rule of things, but the nature of the
thing it self.

Therefore what is against nature, none can dispense withal. God cannot deny
himself. What is naught in one age, is naught in another, and for ever naught.
There is no Monarch in the World can dispense with the Law of nature, or with
the Divine Law of God. For the opinion of any man in the World, is not the rule
which he may comfortably live by, but the undoubted light of Christ's written
Word.

I speak this the rather to cross their base practices, who when God calls
them to stand for his cause and truth, they will bend and bow the sacred truth,
which is always Yea and Amen, to their own by ends and base respects. As if
the opinion of any man in the world were the rule of their faith and obedience.
This is to make God no God. Is not right, right? Is not the Law the Law? Is not
the Word of Christ a word that alters not, but remains steadfast to all
eternity?

Assure your selves there is a truth of God, that we must maintain to the
death, not only in opposing Heresy, but resisting of impiety wheresoever we
meet it. John Baptist was a Martyr when he stood out against Herod and said,
Thou must not have thy Brother Philips Wife. He would not be mealy-mouthed in
reprooving his sin, but cried out against the unlawfulness of it, though it
cost him his life. Men ought to suffer for the truth, and not for base ends
deny the least word of God, because it is a divine sparkle from himself.

For all the promises of God, in him are yea, and in him are Amen.

This comes in after this manner: the word that I preached (says Paul) is
unvariable, because Christ himself is always yea, and I have preached nothing
but Jesus Christ among you; my preaching then must needs be a certain and
immutable truth.

There are diverse readings of the words, but the most material is (as this
Translation and the best Expositors have it) All the promises of God in Christ
are yea, (that is,) they are certain and constant in him. And then they are
Amen, that is, in Christ they are fulfilled. In him they are made, and in him
they are accomplished. The whole carriage of the promises are in Christ: for
his sake they were first given, and in him they shall be performed. As Christ
himself was yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever: so are all Gods
promises made in him, undoubtedly, eternally, and unchangably true to all
posterities.

Here are diverse truths which offer themselves to our consideration. First take
notice, that since the fall of man, it has pleased our good God to establish a
Covenant of grace in Jesus Christ, and to make him a second Adam, by whom we
might be restored to a better estate, than ever we had in the first Adam. In
which happy condition there can be no intercourse betwixt God and man, without
some promise in his Christ: so that God now deals all by promises with us. The
reason is this, how can poor dust and ashes dare to challenge any thing of the
great Majesty of Heaven, without a warrant from himself? How can the
Conscience be satisfied? Conscience, what.
(Conscience you know is a knowledge together with God.) How can that rest
quiet in any thing, but in what it is assured comes from God? And therefore Why
God rules his Church by promises.
for any good I hope for from God, it behooves me to have some promise, and
word of his mouth for it, this being his constant course of dispensation to his
people. While we live in this world we are always under hope. We rejoice in
hope of the glory of God. Now hope looks still to the promise, whereof some
part is unperformed.

How does Heaven differ from Earth? but in this: Heaven is a place all for
performances: here we have some performances to encourage us, but are always
under some promise not yet accomplished. And therefore the manner of our
apprehension of God in this world, exceedingly differs from that in Heaven.

Here it is by faith and hope, there it is by vision: vision is fit for
performance. Faith and Hope look always to a word revealed: God therefore
rules his Church in this manner for their greater good. Alas what can we have
from God, but by the manifestation of hiis own good will? May we look for
favor from God for any thing in our selves? It is a fond conceit.

Again, God will have his Church ruled by promises Reas. 2.
in all ages, to exercise the faithful in prayer and dependence upon him. God
will see of what credit is amongst men, whether they will rely upon his bare
promise or no. He might do us good, and give us no promise; but he will try
his graces in us, by arming us against all difficulties and discouragements
till the thing promised be performed to us. Promises are (as it were) the stay
of the soul in an imperfect condition, and so is faith in them, until our
hopes shall end in full possession: and we must know, that Divine Promises The
excellency of Divine Promises.
are better than earthly performances. Let God give man never so much in the
world, if he have not a promise of better things, all will come to nothing at
the last. And therefore God supports the spirits of his servants against all
temptations, both on the right hand and on the left by sweet promises. He will
have them live by faith, which always has relation to a Promise. This is a
general ground then, that God now in Christ Jesus has appointed to govern
his Church by way of promises.

But what is a Promise?

A Promise is nothing but a manifestation of Definition of a promise.
love; an intendment of bestowing some good, and removing some evil from us. A
declaring of a man's free engagement in this kind, is a Promise; it always
comes from love in the party promising, and conveighs goodness to the
believing soul. Now what love can there be in God to us (since the fall,)
which must not be grounded on a better foundation than our selves? If God love
us, it must be in one that is, first beloved; hereupon comes the ground of the
promises to be in Jesus Christ: all intercourse between God and us must be in
him that is able to satisfy God for us. The Almighty Creator will have our
debts discharged before he enters into a covenant of peace with us.

Now this Christ has perfectly done, and thereby reconciled lost sinners;
hereupon the promise immediately issues (from Gods love in Christ) to believing
souls: He must first receive all good for us, and we must have it at the
second hand from him. The promises in Christ are as the spirits in the body,
they run through all the ages of the Church; without him there is no mercy nor
comfort to be had. God cannot look on this cursed nature of ours out of Christ;
and therefore whosoever apprehends any mercy from God, he must apprehend it in
Christ the promised seed. To make it clearer; our nature since the fall is
odious to God, (a sinful cursed nature remains in the best of us) and
therefore that God may look peaceably upon it, he must look upon it in him
that has it undefiled, and in him whom he loves, even his only Son, like unto
himself, that has taken our nature upon him.

Now our nature in Christ must needs be lovely and acceptable; and if ever God
love us, it is for Christ alone, who was predestined before all worlds, to be
a Sacrifice for us, to be the Head of 1 Pet. 1. 10
his Church: he was ordained to do us good, before we our selves were
ordained. Christ is the first Beloved, and then we: God loves us in his beloved
one: This is my beloved Mark 1. 11
Son in whom I am well pleased. As if the Lord had said, I am pleased in him,
and in all his, in his whole mystical body. Christ is the Son of God by
nature, we by adoption; what ever good is in us, is first and principally in
him. God conveighs all by the natural Son to the adopted sons: therefore all
the promises are made to us in Christ, he takes them from God for us. He
himself is the first Promise, and all are Yea and Amen in him: they are not
directed to us, abstracted from him; but we are elected in Christ, sanctified
in him, acquitted from sin through him: by his stripes we are healed. If Christ
had not satisfied the wrath of God, by bearing our iniquities upon the cross,
we had been liable every moment to condemnation. If he had not been free from
our sins, we had for ever lain under the burden of them. You are yet in your
sins (says Saint Paul) if Christ be not risen. We are 1 Cor. 15. 17.
freed from our debts, because Christ our surety is out of prison; he is in
Heaven, and therefore we are at liberty.

The Promises are a deed of gift, which we have from and by Christ, who is the
first object of all the respect that God has to us. Why are the Angels
attendants on us? Because they attend upon Jacobs Ladder, (that is,) upon
Christ, that knits Heaven and Earth together. So that the Angels because they
attend upon Christ first, become likewise our attendants: we have a promise of
eternal life: but this life is in his Son; God blesses us with all spiritual
blessings in him, and makes us sons in him the natural Son: whatsoever
prerogative we enjoy, it is in Christ first, and so belongs to us, but no
further than we by faith are made one with him. How dare thou think of God
who is a Consuming fire? and not think of him as he is pleased and pacified
with thy person in Christ, who took thy nature upon him, to be a foundation of
comfort, and a second Adam; a public person satisfying Divine Justice for all
that are members of his body?

We may think upon God with comfort, when we see him appeased in his Christ.
As long as he loves Christ, he cannot but love us. Never think to have grace,
or salvation, or any thing without Christ. Does God love me, does he do good
to my soul for my own sake (abstracted from his Son?) no surely: then
should I fly from his presence. But he looks upon me in his beloved, and in
him accepts of my person, therefore our Savior prays, I desire thee bles sed
Father, that the love wherewith thou love me, may be in them, and I in them.

This should direct us in our dealing with God, not to go directly to him, but
by a Promise, And when we have a Promise, look to Christ in whom it is
performed; If we ask any thing of God in Christ's name, he will give it us; If
we thank God for any thing, thank him in Christ, that we have it in him. What
a comfort is this, that we may go to God in Christ, and claim the Promises
boldly? because he loves us with the same love he bears to his only beloved
Son. If we get fast hold on Christ, and cleave there, God can as soon alter
his love to him, as alter his love to us; his love is every whit as
unchangeable to a believing member, as to Christ the head of the body. The
Promises are as sure as the love of God in Christ is, upon which they are
founded, and from which nothing can separate us. For Promises being the fruit
of Gods love, and Gods love being founded first upon Christ: it must needs
follow, that all the Promises are both made, and made good to us through him.

If a Prince should love a man, and his love should be founded upon the love he
bears to his own Son; surely such a one may have comfort, that love will never
fail him: because it is an affection natural, and therefore unalterable, he
will always love his Son, and therefore will always delight in him, in whom
his Son delights. Now Christ is the everlasting Son of the Father; his
dear and only Son, in whom he is ever well pleased, and through whom he
cannot be offended with those that are his. So surely as God loves Christ, so
surely he loves all that are united to him. There is nothing in the world can
separate his love from his own Son, neither is there any thing able to
separate his love from us Romans 8.
that are one with him. God loves Christ's mystical body, as well as his
natural body; he has advanced that to glory at his right hand in heaven, and
will he (think you) leave his mystical body the Church in a state of
abasement here on earth? No certainly: God loves every member of his Son; for
as he gave us to Christ, so Him has he sealed and anointed to be a Savior
for his people.

This is the reason why God looks upon us with a forbearing eye
(notwithstanding the continual matter of displeasure he finds in us) he
looks on us in his Son, his love to us is grounded on his love to Christ. And
hereupon comes our boldness with God the Father, that we can go to him in
all distresses with comfort, and say, Lord look on thy Son who^ thou have given
for us, and in him behold his poor members now before thee: In our selves we
have dread, but in thy dearly beloved we have joy in thy presence. If we come
in the garments of our Elder brother, we are sure to get a blessing, but in
our selves God cannot endure to behold us: If we bring Benjamin to our Father;
if we carry Christ along with us, then come and welcome.

Upon what unchangeable grounds is the love of God and the faith of a Christian
builded? How can the gates of hell prevail against the faith of a true
believer, when it is carried to the promise, and from the promise to Gods love?
the love of God to Christ shall as soon fail, as the faith of a sincere
Christian shall be shaken. The promises else should be of no effect, they
should be Yea and Nay, and not Yea and Amen.

If the promises could be shaken, the love of God and Christ should be
uncertain. Overturn heaven and earth, if we overturne the faith of a true
persevering Christian. There is nothing in the world of that firmness as a
believing soul is, the ground he stands upon makes him unmovable. Our union
with the Lord Jesus makes us like Mount Sinai, that cannot be shaken. But we
must know there are three degrees or steps of love, whereof a promise is the
last.

1. Inward love. 2. Real performance. 3. A manifestation of performance
intended before it be done.
Love concealed does not comfort in the interim; therefore God who is love, does
not only affect us for the present, and intend us mercy hereafter: but because
he will have us rest sweetly in his bosom, and settle our selves on his
gracious purposes, he gives us in the mean time many rich and precious
promises. He not only loves us, and shows the same in deeds now, but he
expresses his future care of us, that we may build on him, as surely as if we
had the thing performed already.

By this we see how God loves us, he has not only an inward liking and good
will to us in his breast, but manifests the same by word; he reveals the
tenderness of his bowels toward us, that we may have the comfort of it
beforehand: God would have us live by faith, and establish our selves in hope,
because these graces fit us for the promise. If there were no Promises, there
could be no faith nor hope.

What is Hope, but the expectation of those Faith and Hope what they are, and
of what use.
things that the word says? And what is faith, but a building on the promise
of God? Faith looks to the word of the thing, Hope to the thing in the word.
Faith looks to the thing promised, Hope to the possession and performance of
it. Faith is the evidence of good not seen, Heb. 11. 1.
(making that which is absent as present to us) Hope waits for the
accomplishment of that good contained in the word; if we had nothing promised,
what need hope? and where were the foundation of faith? But God being willing
to satisfy both, (that we may be heavenly-wise, in relying upon a firm
foundation; and not as fools, trust in vanity) in mercy gives us promises, and
seals them with an oath for our greater supportment. That love which engaged
the Almighty to bind himself to us in precious promises, will furnish us
likewise with grace needful, till we be possessed of them. He will give us
leave to depend upon him, both for happiness and all quieting graces which may
support the soul till it come to its perfect rest in himself.

Now these gracious expressions of our good God may be reduced into diverse
ranks. I will but touch some few particulars, and show how we should carry
our selves to make a comfortable use of them.

First, there are some Division of the Promises.
universal Promises for the good of all mankind, as that God would never
destroy the World again, etc.

Secondly, there are other Promises that more particularly concern the Church,
and these are Promises.

1. Either of outward things. 2. Or of spiritual and eternal things of Grace.
and Glory.

In the manner of promising, they admit of this distinction. All the Promises
of God are made to us, either

Absolutely, without any condition; so was the Promise of sending Christ into
the world, and his glorious coming again to judgment: let the world be as it
will, yet Christ did come, and will come again with thousands of Angels, to
judge us at the last.

Or 2. conditional. As the Promise of Grace and Glory to Gods children that he
will forgive their sins, if they repent, etc. God deals with men (as we do
by way of commerce one with another) propounding mercy by covenant and
condition: yet his covenant of grace is always a gracious covenant. For he not
only gives the good things, but helps us in performing the condition by his
Spirit, he works our hearts to believe and to repent.

Thus all Promises for Temporal promises conditional.
outward things are conditional: as thus, God has promised protection from
contagious sickness, and from trouble and war, that he will be an hiding
place, and a Deliverer of his people in time of danger, that he will do this
and that good for them. But these are conditional, so far forth as in his wise
providence he sees they may help to preserve spiritual good things in them,
and advance the graces of the inward man. For God takes liberty in our outward
estate, to afflict us or do us good, as may best further our souls welfare.
Because do what we can with these bodies, they will turn to dust and vanity ere
long. We must, leave the world behind us; therefore he looks to our main
estate in Christ, to the new creature; and so far as outward blessings may
cherish and increase that, so far he grants them, or else he denies them to
his dearest ones.

For we cannot still enjoy the blessings of this life, but our corrupt nature
is such, that (except we have somewhat to season the same) we shall surfeit, and
not digest them; therefore they are all given with exception of the Cross, as
Christ says, he that does for him any thing, shall have a hundred Mark 10. 20.
fold here, but with Persecution, be sure of that, whatsoever else he has: let
Christians look for crosses, to season those good things they enjoy in this
life.

To come now to some Use.
use of the point. Are all the Promises of what kind soever, whether spiritual
and outward, temporal or eternal, are they all made to us in Jesus Christ?
And are they certainly true, Yea and Amen in him? Then I beseech you get into
Christ betimes, strengthen your intrest in him by all means, out of whom we
have nothing that is savingly good: rest not in any thing abstracted from him,
so as to be accepted with God.

But you will say, does Object.
not God do many good things to them that are out of Christ? does not the
Sun shine, and the rain fall, upon the just and the unjust, upon the evil,
as well as the good? does he not cloth, and feed, and protect wicked men daily?

He does indeed, it cannot be denied; but are Answ.
they blessings? are these favors to them? No, but as God says by Moses, if
thou sin against me, Cursed shall thou be in thy Basket, Deuteronomy 28. 16.
and thy store. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body and the fruit of thy
Land, the increase of thy Kine, and the flocks of thy Sheep: cursed at home,
cursed abroad: they are cursed in their very blessings. A graceless brutish
person, though he swim with worldly pleasures, and have never such revennewes,
and commings in to maintain his bravery, is yet an accursed creature in the
midst of all. For what are we made for, think you? To live here only? Oh no:
then we were of all others the most miserable: there is an eternity of time a
coming, wherein (after a few days spent in the flesh) we shall live either in
perpetual bliss, or unspeakable torment. The very best things beneath have a
snare in them, they rather hinder, than further our eternal welfare.

How does that appear? Quest.


Because for the most Answ.
part they make men secure and careless in the worship of God, so as to
despise the power of godliness, and follow iniquity with greediness; we may
see by men's conversations that outward things are snares to them. They are not
Promises in Christ for then they would come out of Gods love only, which alone
makes mercies to be mercies indeed ^o us, and without which, ^he best of
blessings will prove but a curse in the end.

If I have any thing in this world (any deliverance from evil, or any positive
good thing) I may know it is for my benefit, when my heart is made more
spiritual thereby, so as to value grace and holiness at the highest rate, I
esteeming my being in Christ above all transitory things whatsoever; above
riches and honor, and the favor of great persons, which at the best is
fading. Our intrest in him will stand by us, when all these things are withered
and shrunk to nothing, Christ is a Fountain never drawn dry, his comforts are
permanent: the good in the creature soon vanishes, and leaves the soul
empty; therefore get into Christ speedily, it concerns thee nearly.

For this purpose attend upon the means of salvation, How to get in Christ.
and beg of God that he would make his own ordinances (by his Spirit
accompanying the same) effectual to thy soul, that he would open the
excellencies of Christ to thee, and draw thy affections to close with him.

How are we in Christ?

When by knowing of Quest.
him, our knowledge carries Answ.
our hearts unto him; John 17. 3
when our wills cleave to that which we know to be excellent and necessary for
us: when I firmly adhere to Christ, as the only good for me, then I love him,
then I rest on him, then I have peace in him.

I may discern that I am in Christ, if upon my knowledge of him, my heart is
united to him, and I find peace of conscience in him. Faith has a quieting and
establishing power. If I be in Christ, my soul will be cheered and satisfied
with him alone. I know all is Yea and Amen in him, therefore my soul rests
securely here. How ever our outward condition be various and perplexed, yet
our estate in Christ is firm and constant.

What is a man out of Quest.
Christ?

As a man in a storm Answ.
that has no clothes to hide his nakedness, or to shelter his body from the
violence of the weather. As one in a tempest, that has not house nor harbor
to cover him. As a stone out of the foundation, set light by, and scattered up
and down here and there. As a branch out of the root; what sap is there is
such a thing? it being good for nothing but to be cast into the fire.

A man that is not built up in Christ, planted in him, nor clothed with him, is
the most destitute, despicable creature in all the world; and if we look with a
single eye, we shall so discern him: such a man's case is deeply to be
bewailed: had we but hearts to judge righteously, we would prefer the
meanest condition of Gods child, before the greatest estate of any earthly
Monarch, be their flourishing felicity never so resplendant. Oh the miserable
and woeful plight that all profane wretches are in, who neglect grace and the
mysteries of Christ to gratify their base lusts: such an one, there is but a
step between him and Hell, he has no portion in the Lord Jesus. I ac count
all dung and dross Phil. 3. 8.
(says St Paul) in comparison of Christ to be found in Phil. 3. 8.
him, not having on mine own righteousness. Happy is that man at the day of
judgment, who thus appears.

Again, if so be that all promises are Yea, and The stability of a Christian
having promises.
Amen in Christ, then here take notice of the stability of a Christian, that
has promises to uphold him. Compare him with a man that has present things
only, with an Esau that abounds with worldly goods, and how great is the
difference? God gives them their portion here as he says to Dives, thou had
thy good things, that thou chiefly caredst for, thou had them here, but
Lazarus had pain, misery, and poverty: Now therefore the case is altered, he
is advanced, and thou art tormented.

A believing Christian enjoyes the sweetness of many promises in this life
(for God is still delivering, comforting, and perfecting of him; renewing of his
spirit, and supplying him with inward peace) but the greatest part is yet to be
accomplished; perfection of grace and glory is to come, he is a Child, he is a
Son, the promise here is his chief estate.

Another man has present payment, and that is all he cares for, he has
something in hand, and fwells with a conceit of happiness thereby; Alas, what
are we the better to have a great deal of nothing? Solomon that had tried all
the world, resolves it to vanity and vexation of spirit. All things below are
uncertain, and we are uncertain in the use of them; if we have no better a
life than a natural one, eternal joy appertains not to us. Take a Christian
and strip him in your thoughts, from all the good things in the world, he is
yet a happier man than the greatest worldly favorite out of Christ, for the
one has nothing but present things, with a great deal of addition of misery,
which his ease and contentment, makes him more sensible of, as being more
tender and apprehensive of an evil than other men. The other though he want
many comforts of this life, and enjoyes not present performances, yet he is
rich in bills and bonds, God is bound to him who has Heb. 13. 5.
promised he will never forsake him, but be his por tion for ever. He has a
title to every communicable good, Godliness has the promise of this 1 Timothy 4.
8
life, and that which is to come. A happy man; what ever is most useful for
his safe conduct to heaven, he is sure to have it; He that will give us a
Kingdom, will not deny us daily bread; he that has prepared a Country for
us, will certainly preserve us safe, till we come there.

Besides that we have here in performance, we have many excellent promises of
a greater good in expectation, which in Christ are all Yea and Amen. They are
certain, though our life be uncertain, and the comforts of our life (less
then life it self) mutable and perishing; If life the foundation of outward
comforts be but a vapor, what are all the comforts themselves think you?

It is a Christians rejoicing in the midst of all changes beneath, that he
has promises invested into him from above, that are lodged in his heart, and
made his own by faith, which have a wondrous peculiarizing virtue, to make
that a man's own, that is otherwise generally propounded in the Gospel; A
Christian, take him at all uncertainties, he has somewhat to build on, that is
Yea and Amen, undoubtedly sure that will stick by him.

I speak this to commend the estate of a believing Christian, to make you in
love with it, seeing in all the changes and varieties of this world, he has
somewhat to take to. In all the dangers of this life, he has a Rock, and
chamber of Providence to go unto, as it is Esaias 26. God has secret rooms to
hide his children in, in times of public disturbance, when there is a
confusion of all things. God has a safe abiding place for thee: I have many
troubles (says David) but God is my defense Psalm. 88. 4.
continually. He i^ my shield and strong Tower, whatsoever I want, I have it
in him. What a comfort is this?

A Christian knows either he shall be safe here or in heaven, and therefore
rests securely. He that dwells in the secret place of the most High, shall
abide Psalm. 91.
under the shadow of the Almighty (that is) in the love and protection of God
above; As Moses says, Lord thou have binour habitation from everlasting to
everlasting (that is) thou art our sure help in the greatest extremity that can
befall us in any age of the world.

Therefore build on his promise: for God and his Word are all one. If we have
nothing to take to when troubles come, woe unto us: In our selves considered,
we are even as grass, and as a tale that is told, soon vanishing. But our
estate in God is durable; we have here no continuing City, sickness may
come, and death may environ us the next moment, happy are they that have God
for their habitation, we dwell in him, when we are dead; when we leave this
world, we shall live with God for ever: The righteous is not troubled for
evil tidings, Psalm. 112. 7
he is not shaken from his Rock and stay, he fears no danger, because his
heart is fixed.

What a blessed estate is it to be in Christ? to have promises in him to be
protected, and preserved, not only whilst we are in this vale of tears, but
when this earthly tabernacle shall be dissolved, even to all eternity. If our
hearts be fixed on God, let us hear evil tidings of War, or Famine, or
Pestilence, let it be what it will, blessed men are we. Every word of God is
tried Psalm. 12.
as silver in the fire (says the Psalmist) the promises are tried promises;
we may safely rest upon them: But if we have nothing to take to when troubles
arise, we are as a naked man in a storm without any shelter, encompassed round
with distress and misery.

The promises are our inheritance, yea our best inheritance in this life;
though the Lord should strip us naked, and take away all things else, yet if
the promises remain ours, we are rich men; and may say with the Psalmist, My
lot is fallen into a good Psalm. 119.
ground, thy testimonies are better unto me, than thousands of gold and silver.
For the promises are as so many obligations, whereby God is bound to his poor
creature; And if wretched men think themselves as rich as they have bonds
(though they have never a penny in their purses) much more may a true Christian,
who has the promises of Christ for his security, esteem himself a wealthy
person, as having many bonds whereby (not man but) God is engaged to him, and
that not only for temporal good things, but for heavenly favors and
spiritual blessings, for all which he may sue God at his pleasure, and desire
him to make good his word of truth.

There is little difference betwixt a poor Christian, and him that abounds in
this worlds riches, only this, the one has wealth in his own possession, the
other has it in Gods bond, the one has it in hand, the other in trust. As for
the worldling, he has but a cisterne when he has most, whereas every faithful
soul has the Spring head, even God himself to fly unto in all distresses,
who will never fail him, but be a Sun and a Shield, to defend us from all
evil, and preserve us in all goodness all our days. But I go on.

Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has also anointed us, is
God.

Here observe, That the Obser. 1. A Christian needs stablishing grace.
Christian needs not only converting but establishing grace: he that has
begun any good work in us must perfect it: the God of strength must give us
his promise to support our weakness, without which we cannot stand. Peter was
in the state of grace, and yet when God did not stablish him, we see how he
fell. The weakest believer with the establishing grace of God will stand: and
the strongest Christian, without Divine assistance, will sink and fall away.

Whence this may be Obser. 2. The life of a Christian fullof dependancy.
further considered, That the life of a Christian is a perpetual dependant
life: he not only lives by faith in his first conversion, but ever after: he
depends upon God for protection and strength throughout his whole course. God
does establish us in Christ; the ignorance of this makes men subject to
backsliding For when we trust to grace received, and seek not for new supply,
we are straight of Peter's condition, Though all for sake thee, yet will not I,
which occasioned his shameful fall; he had too much confidence in grace
received.

God is therefore feign to humble his children to teach them dependence. And
usually, where any special grace is bestowed upon sinners, God joins
something therewith to put them in mind that they do not stand by their own
strength. Peter makes a glorious confession, Thou art Christ the Son of the
living God; and Christ honored Mar. 16. 17, 18, 19*
him exceedingly, saying, Upon this Rock will I build my Church; but yet by and
by, we see he calls him, Satan, get thee behind me; to teach us that we stand
not by our own power: when we are strong it is of God, and when we are weak,
it is of our selves. Jacob Wrest led with the Almighty, and was a prevailer,
but he was fain to halt for it; though he had the victory, and overcame at
last, yet he was stricken with lamenesse all his days. God did this to mind
him, that he had that strength whereby he prevailed out of himself.

A Christian then should Use.
set upon nothing in his own strength: Hannah 1 Samuel 2. 9.
says comfortably, No man shall be strong in his own might, God is all our
sufficiency: man naturally affects a kind of divinity, and will set upon
things in confidence of his own abilities, without prayer and seeking of Gods
help; he thinks to compass great matters, and bring things to a good issue
by his own wit and discretion. Oh delude not your selves, this cannot be.
Acknowledge God in all thy ways, and he shall direct Prove. 3.
thy paths: seek unto the Lord in every enterprise thou go about;
acknowledge him in the beginning, progress, and issue of all thy employments:
what do we but make our selves gods, when we set upon business without
invocation and dependence? A Christian is wondrous weak, even vanity of
himself; but take him as he is built upon the Promises, and as he is in God,
and then he is a kind of almighty person; ^e can do all things through Christ
that strengthens him. A Christian is in sort omnipotent, whilst he commits his
ways to God, and depends upon the Promise; otherwise he is weakness it self,
the most impotent creature in the World.

Let God therefore have all the glory of our establi shing, and depend on him by
prayer for the same. As all comes of his mere grace, so let all return to his
mere glory; Not to us Lord, not to us, but to thy Psalm. 115.
Name he given the praise; it is the song of the Church militant on Earth, and
it is the song of the Church triumphant in Heaven; that all glory is to God in
the whole carriage of our salvation. The Promises are in him; he only made the
covenant, and he must perform it to us: without him we can do nothing, labor
therefore to be wise in his wisdom, strong in his strength, to be all in all
in Christ Jesus.

How shall we know Object.
that a man has establishing grace?

His assurance is firm, Answ.
when his temptations are How to discern establishing grace.
great, and his strength to resist, little, and yet notwithstanding he
prevails over them: Satan is strong and subtle, now if we can stand against
his snares, it is a clear evidence of greater strength than is in our selves.
In great afflictions, when Go^ seems an enemy, and clouds appear between him
and us, if then a man's faith can break through all, and in the midst of
darkness see God shining in Christ upon him, and resolve, Though thou kill me,
yet I will trust in thee; here is a strong establishing.

In the times of martyrdom, there was fire and faggot, and the frowns of
bloody men; but who were the persons suffering? Even many Children, Old men,
and Women, the weakest of creatures: notwithstanding the Spirit of God was so
strong in these feeble ones, as their lives were not precious to them; but the
torments and threatenings of their cruel Persecutors were cheerfully undergone
by them, as Heb. 11. Here was Gods power in man's infirmity. If we have not
something above nature, how is it possible we should hold out in great trials?

Means to obtain stablishing grace.

By what means may a Christian obtain this stablishing grace.

First, labor for fundamental Helps to obt^ine confirming grace.
graces: if the root be strengthened, the Tree will stand fast. Humiliation is
a special radical Humility is an emptying grace, and acknowledges that in
our selves there is nothing. If God withhold his influence, I am gone; if he
withdraw his grace, I shall be like another man, as Sampson was when his hair
was cutoff. Selfe-emptinesse prepares for spiritual fullness: When I am weak
(says blessed Paul) then I am strong; that is, when I feel and acknowledge my
weakness, then my strength increases; otherwise a man is not strong when he is
weak, but when he is sensible and groans under the burden of his
infirmities, then is he inwardly strong.

Another fundamental dependence upon God; for considering our own
insufficiency, and that faith is a grace that goes out of our selves, and lays
hold of the righteousness of another to justi fie us, nothing can be more
necessary to quiet the soul: Believe and you shall be established: as the
Promises are sure in themselves, so should we repose firm confidence in them.

But how does God establish Object.
us by faith?

By working sound Answ.
knowledge in us; This is life eternal to know thee, John 17. When we know the
truth of Gods word aright, we have a firm ground to depend on: for the more a
man knows God in Covenant, the more he knows Christ and the promises, the
more he will trust and rely upon them. They that know Psalm. 9. 10.
thy name will trust in thee; says the Prophet. Therefore labor for certainty
of knowledge, that thou may have a certainty of faith: What is the reason our
faith is weak? Because we are careless to increase in knowledge. The more we
know of God, the morewe shall trust in him. The more we know of a man that he
is able and just of his word, the more safely we put confidence in him. So the
more our security is in Gods promises, as his bonds increase, so our trust will
be strengthened.

Thirdly, if thou would have stablishing grace, beg Sue the Promises in
Prayer.
it earnestly of God. Our strength in him is altogether by prayer, bind him
therefore with his own promise; beseech him to do unto thee according to his
good Word, he is the God of strength, desire of him the spirit of strength;
alledg to him thy own weakness and in ability without him, and that if he
helps not, thou shall soon be overcome: lay open thy wants in Gods presence,
show him how unable thou art of thy self, to withstand temptations, to bear
crosses, to perform duties, to do or suffer any thing aright, turn his
gracious promises into prayers, desire God that he would stablish thee by his
grace, that he would prop and uphold thy soul in all extremities.

What is the reason that Quest.
Christians are so daunted and fly off in time of danger?

They have no faith in the promise. The righteous Answ.
is as Mount Sinah that Why troubles are so irksome.
shall not be moved, he builds on a foundation that can never be shaken, for
the heart is never drawn to any sinful vanity, or frighted with any terror
of trouble, till faith lets go its hold, out of God, there is nothing for the
soul safely to stay it self upon.

No marvel to see men fall that rest on a broken Reed: Alas! whatsoever is
besides God, is but a creature, and can the creature be other than changeable?
The comfort that we have in God never fades, it is an abiding lasting comfort,
such as contents the soul, and satisfies all the wants and desires of it,
which things beneath can never accomplish.

We see that the heavens continue, and the earth (without any other
foundation) hangs in the midst of the world by the bare word of the Almighty,
therefore well may the soul stay it self on that, when it has nothing else
in sight to rely upon.

In this case Christians should look, 1. That their principles and foundations
be good: And secondly, builded strongly upon them, for the soul is as that
which it relies on; if upon empty things, it self becomes poor and empty;
which the Devil knowing, strives to unloose our hearts from our Maker, and draw
us to rely upon false objects. He sees full well, that whilst our souls
cleave close to God, there is no prevailing against us by any malice, or
subtilty of men or devils. The Saints in him, are bold, and undaunted in the
midst of troubles and torments; Indeed the sweetest communion with God is, when
we are beaten off from other helps; Though misery upon misery encounters us
below, yet there is still succor issuing from above to a believing soul; If
God has it in heaven, faith will fetch it down, and enjoy the sweetness of
it here. That man can never do amiss, that has his dependancie upon the
Almighty, there being no communion like that of a faithful heart with the Lord.

It is the office of faith to quiet our souls in all distresses, for it relies
upon God for heaven it self, and all necessary provision, till we come thither;
strengthen faith therefore and you strengthen all; what can daunt that soul,
which in the sorest affliction has the great God for his friend? Such a spirit
dares bid defiance to all the powers of darkness: Satan may for a time
exercise, but he can never wholly depresse a gracious heart. True believers
can triumph over that which others are slaves unto; they can set upon
spiritual conflicts, and endure fiery trials, which others tremble to think
of; they can put off themselves, and be content to be nothing, so their God may
appear the greater, and dare undertake or undergo any thing for the glory of
their Maker; considering they are not their own, but have given up themselves
unto Christ, they count not their lives, or any thing that is theirs dear for
him.

He that stablisheth us with you, is God, who has anointed us, etc.

Messiah signifies anointed; our nature is enriched in Christ with all graces.
He is anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, for us, that
we might have a spring of grace in our own nature, that God and Christ being
one, and we being in the Lord Jesus, might have all our anointing of the first
anointed, for of his fullness we receive grace for grace.

What are those graces which we receive from Quest.
Christ's fullness?

First, the grace of favor and acceptance, for Answ.
the same love that God bears to Christ, he bears to all his, though not in
so high a degree.

Secondly, the Grace of sanctification answerable in him; every renewed work in
us comes from Christ.

Thirdly, the rich privileges and prerogatives, ointment that was powered upon
Aaron, ran down to the skirts of his garment; so the weakest Christian is
stablished with grace by Christ, grace runs from the Head to poorest member,
the hem of the garment; every one that does but touch Christ, draws virtue and
strength from him.

Why is it called here Quest.
an anointing?

Because as the Holy anointing, Answ.
Exodus 30. was not to be applied to profane uses, so neither are the graces of
the spirit, God being the Author of them, to be slighted and undervalued by the
Professors of them.

What are the virtues of Quest.
this ointment?

First, it has a cherishing power, it revives the drooping Answ.
soul, and cheares a fainting spirit, when men are ready to sink under the
burden of their sins: this eases them.

2. Anointing has a strengthening power, it makes our limbs vigorous, so does
grace fortify the soul, nothing more. Our life is a combating life wi^h
Satan, and temptations of all sorts, therefore we need continual anointing
to make us nimble, and active in resisting our enemy; Oil has a suppling
quality, so the Spirit of God makes pliable the joints of the soul, it
supports us with hidden strength, and enables us to encounter great
oppositions, and to be victorious through Christ over all.

Grace is little in quantity, but it is mighty in operation, it carries the
soul through difficulties, nothing can stand in the way of a gracious man, no
not the Gates of Hell. The spirit of grace that is in a Christian, is stronger
than he that is in the world, A grain of Mustard seed, the very least measure
of true Holiness, is stronger than the greatest measure of opposition. A
Christians strength lies out of himself: he never overcomes by his own power,
he can do all things through Christ assisting him, otherwise he is a most
impotent creature, unable to do or suffer any thing, ready to give over at the
least trouble, and sink under every pressure of affliction.

Again, ointment does exceedingly delight and refresh ourspirits; as we see
the Box in the Gospel, when it was opened, the whole House smelt of it. So
grace is a wondrous sweet thing. Before we are anointed with the Spirit of
Christ, with stablishing grace, what are we but a company of nasty abominable
persons in the eyes of God? All things are accursed to us, and we are accursed
in what ever we do. God cannot look on us but as loathsome creatures, as the
Prophet says, I would not so much as look on thee, if it were not for
Iehoshaphats sake.

That which makes a man, sweet is grace; this makes our nature that is noisome
and offensive in the nostrils of the Almighty, in it self, to become pleasant
and amiable. A wicked man is a vile man, an ulcerous deformed creature: grace
is of a healing nature wheresoever it is: this cures our spiritual distempers,
beautifying the inner man, and making the whole frame of a Christians carriage,
sweet and delectable.

First to God, who loves the sent of his own grace

Secondly to Angels; the conversion of sinners rejoices delighted with the
beauty of holiness shining in us? The graces of God in his Saints are a Feast
to them: the very name of a godly and gracious man, is as a sweet ointment
every where.

Holy men when they Church: so far as a Christian is a New Creature it makes
him in love with himself, scorning to be so undervalued as to defile himself
with base services: so far as a man is gracious, he gives himself to
honorable employments; being a vessel of grace he improves his abilities to
glorious uses, esteeming things below too mean for him.

Grace is a wondrous pleasant thing, offensive to none, but to wicked men, that
have no savor of God or goodness, it sweetens the soul, makes it delectable
for Christ and his holy Spirit to lodge in, as in a Garden of spices* A
gracious man that has subdued his corruptions, is wondrous amiable both to
himself, and to the Communion of Saints; his heart is as fine silver, every
thing is sweet that comes from him: grace is full of comfort to a man's own
conscience, the sense of which enlarges the soul to all holy services.

Fourthly, an ointment has another property, it consecrates persons to holy
uses? Anointed persons are raised above the ordinary rank. The graces of Gods
spirit elevate men above the condition of others with whom they live. Anointed
persons are sacred persons, they are inviolable. Touch not mine anointed, and
do my Prophets Psalm. 105. 15
no harm: we wrong the apple of Gods eye, we offer indignity to Christ
himself, if we hurt these. Indeed nothing can hurt them, but God by his over
ruling power turns all for their good.

Lastly, an ointment is a royal liquor, it will be above all; so the graces
of Gods Spirit where they are, will be uppermost, they will guide and govern
all. As if a man have excellent parts, grace will rule these, and make them
serviceable to Christ, his truth and members. If we have weakness and
corruption, grace will subdue it by little and little, and never leave
conflicting till it has got the victory.

What are our souls without Gods anointing? Dead stinking, offensive to God, to
good men, and to our selves: we cannot see with peace the visage of our own
souls: who can reflect seriously into his heart and life without horror, that
has no grace? A man that sees his conscience awakened without this anointing,
what is he? surely as the body without the soul: it is not all the
excellencies of the soul laid upon a dead body, or all the goodly ornaments
that bedeckt it, can keep it from stinking and being a loathsome object,
because it wants the soul to quicken and enliven it to good employments: of it
self it is but a piece of earth: all the vigor and life that the body has, is
communicated from the soul, they are beholding to our souls for many things.
Put the richest ornaments whatsoever upon the body, and not the Spirit of grace
upon the soul (to cherish and refresh the same that it may appear lovely in
Gods sight) all is to no purpose.

Likewise this anointing has relation to the persons anointed, Kings, Priests,
and Prophets. Christ is primarily anointed, and all our grace is derived from
him; he teaches us divine things by a Divine light. The poorest Christian in
the world (whose heart is right with God) sees good things with such convincing
love, that he embraces them, and ill things with such a convincing hatred, that
he abhors them. A man that lives without God in the world, may talk, but he
cannot do; he may speak of death, but he dares not die, he trembles to think
of the last tribunal, and of resigning his soul into the hands of his Maker:
such an one may discourse of suffering, but when it comes to the point, his
heart fails him: oh how he shrinkes when danger approaches, what indirect
courses will he take to save his skin? how hardly is corrupt self brought
under? how heavily do men come off in this point, of doing and suffering for
Christ, laying down all at his feet, and resolving to be disposed of at his
pleasure in every thing? Men speak much of patience, and self-denial, but
they do not practice them, these virtues shine not forth in their conversation,
which is the shame of Religion: only a true Christian has the right knowledge
of the doing of things, and is able to speak a word in due season, to reprove,
to admonish, to comfort every member in the communion of Saints, has some
qualification for the good of the whole body.

A faithful man is likewise spiritually anointed a Priest, to stand before God
Almighty, he poures out his soul for himself and for others, having Gods ear
open at all times to his suits Every sincere Christi an is a favorite in
heaven, he has much credit there which he improves for the welfare of the
Church here below. And he keeps himself as a Priest unspotted of the world:
a true Christian is taught of God, and knows the meaning of that Law of his
which prohibiteth Priests so much as to touch defiled things; therefore he
studies innocence, he runs not after the course of the multitude, neither is
carried away with the streams of the times: he will not converse familiarly
with those that may stain him, (but so far as his calling leads him) lest he
should thereby contaminate his spirit. A Christian Priest has his heart always
to the Holy of Holies, that so he may offer up thanks and praise to God, and
offer up himself a sacrifice to him; his endeavor is to kill and slay those
beasts (those lusts) that lurk in his heart, contrary to the Almighty.

Lastly, he that is anointed by the Spirit, is a King, in regard of his great
possessions, for all are ours, things present, and things to come, life and
death, prosperity, and adversity, all help us to Heaven. Evil things are ours
in advantage and success, though in disposition they be not ours, but have a
hostil disposition in the^. God overpowers the evil of things, and gives a
Christian a living principle of grace, to suck sweet out of sour, and draw
good out of evil. What a King is this, that even the most terrible things are
at his command and work for the best unto him? He conquers and brings under his
greatest enemies, and fears neither death or judgment, nor the vengeance to
come, knowing God in Christ to be his reconciled Father, he rests assured, all
things else will be will be at peace with him. Others have Kingdoms out of
themselves, but in themselves they are slaves, Every lust leads them away
Captive: A Christian is such a King, as has a Kingdom within himself, he
has peace, and joy, and rest from base allurements, and terrors of
conscience, he walks by rule, and therefore knows how to govern all? the
glory of his Maker is the chief thing he eyes, and to that he referres every
action.

Who has anointed us, and sealed us.

Anointing and sealing go together, the same God annoints us, does also The
Spirits sealing.
seal us. Both are to secure us of our happy condition. Now Christ is the
first sealed, John 6. Him has God the Father sealed: God has set Christ a
part from others, has distinguished him, and set a stamp upon him to be the
Messiah, by the graces of the spirit, whereof he was richly beautified; and by
many miracles, whereby he showed that he was the Son of God; by his
resurrection from the dead: by his calling of the Gen tiles, and many other
things.

Christ being sealed himself, he sealed all that he did for our Redemption
with his blood, and has added for the strengthening of our faith, outward
seals, the Sacraments to secure his love more firmly to us.

But in this place another manner of sealing is to be understood. For here is
not meant the sealing of Christ, but the sealing of us that have communion with
him. The same spirit that seals the Redeemer, seals the redeemed.

What is the manner of Quest.
our sealing by the spirit?

Sealing we know has Answ.
diverse uses. First of all, It What our sealing is, and the use of it.
does imprint a likeness of him that does seal: when the Kings Image is
stamped upon the wax, every thing in the wax answers to that in the seal, face
to face, eye to eye, body to body. So we are said to be sealed, when we carry
in our souls, the Image of the Lord Jesus, for the spirit sets the stamp of
Christ upon every true Convert, there is the likeness of Christ in all things
to be found in him: As the Child answers the Father, foot for foot, finger for
finger in proportion, but not in quantity.

So it is in the sealing of a believer, there is a likeness in the soul that
is sealed by the spirit to the Lord Jesus, there is understanding of the same
heavenly supernatural truths; there is a judging of things as Christ judges,
a loving of that which he loves, and a hating of that which he hates, a
rejoicing to do that which he delights in, and a grief to commit any thing
that displeases his Majesty; every affection of the soul is carried that way,
that the affections of our blessed Savior are carried in proportion, every
thing in the soul is answerable to him in its degree.

There is no grace in Christ, but there is the like in every Christian in some
measure: The obedience of Christ to his Father, even to the death, is to be
found in every true Christian. The humility whereby Christ abased himself, it
is in every renewed heart. Christ works in the soul that receives him, a
conformity to himself. The soul that believe; that Christ has loved him; and
done such great things for him, is ambitious to express Christ in all his
ways. Being once in Christ, we shall delight to be transformed more and more
into him. To bear the Image of the second Adam upon our breasts, to make it
appear that Jesus Christ lives in us, and that we live not to our selves, but
to him that died for us, to be meek and heavenly minded as he was, talking
and discoursing of spiritual things, going about doing good every where,
active for God, fruitful in holiness, doing and receiving all the good we are
able, drawing others from this world to meditate of a better estate, laboring
for the advancement of Gods Kingdom, and approving our selves to him; this is
one use of sealing, to imprint a likeness.

A second use of a Seal distinction; Sealing is a stamp upon one thing among
many, it distinguishes christians from others, as we shall see after.

Again, it serves for appropriation; men seal those things that are their
own; Merchants we see set their stamp on those Wares which they have, or mean
to have a right unto: It pleases God thus to condescend unto us, by applying
himself to humane contracts. He appropriates his own, to show that he has
chosen and singled them out, for himself to delight in.

Sealing further serves to make things authentical, Seal of the Prince, is
the authority of the Prince: This gives validity to things answerable to the
dignity and esteem of him that seals.

These are the four principal uses of sealing. And God by his spirit does al
theseto his. 1. He stamps his own Image upon us, he distinguishes us from
others, even from the great refuse of the world. God by his spirit appropriates
us to himself, he makes us to be his, and shows that we are his, he
likewise authorizethus, and puts an excellency upon us, to secure us against
all temptations; when we have Gods seal on us, we stand firm in the greatest
trial: who shall separate us from the love of God? we dare defy all
objections of Satan, and accusations of conscience whatsoever. A man that has
Gods seal, stands impregnable in the most tempestuous season. For it is given
for our assu rance, and not for Gods, the Lord knows who are his, he seals
not because he is ignorant, but for our comfort and establishment.

Whether is the spirit it self this seal, or the work Quest.
of the spirit, and the graces thereof wrought in us?

I answer, the Spirit of Answ.
God where it is, is a sufficient seal that God has set us out for himself,
for whosoever has the Spirit of Christ, the same is his. He is the Author of
our sealing, so that except you take the Spirit for that which is wrought by
the Spirit, you have not the comprehension of sealing, for, that which the
Spirit works, is the seal; the spirit goes always with his own mark and
impression; Other seals when they are removed from the stamp, the stamp
remains still; but the Spirit of God dwells, and keeps a perpetual residence
in the heart of a Christian, guiding him, moving him, enlightening him,
governing him, comforting him, doing all offices of a seal in his heart, till
he has brought him to heaven. The Holy Ghost never leaves us, it is the
sweetest inhabitant that ever lodging was given to; he does all the saving good
that is done to the soul, and is perpetually with his own work in joy and
comfort; though he seem sometimes to be in a corner of the heart, and is not
easily discerned, yet he always dwells in his sealed ones.

What is that stamp, that Quest.
the Spirit seals us withal?

The Spirit works in this Answ.
order for the most part; First of all, the Spirit does together with the Word
(which is the instrument, and the Chariot wherein it is carried) convince us of
the ill that is in us, and the misery attending on us for the same. It
convinces us of sin, and the fearful estate we are in by that, and abaseth
us thereupon, therefore it is called the Spirit of bondage, because it makes a
man tremble and quake, till he see his peace made up in Christ.

When he has done this, then he convinces righteousness, by a sweet light
discovering the excellencies of the Lord Jesus, and the remedy in him provided
for sinners. God opens the eye of the soul, to see the all sufficiency of his
Sons sanct^fication, and inclines the heart to cast it self by faith upon him.

When we are thoroughly ill that is in us, and of the good that is in Christ,
and are moved by the Holy Ghost, to go out of our selves and embrace
reconciliation in the Lord Jesus, then a superadded work is vouchsafed unto
us; for the Spirit daily perfecteth his own work; he adds therefore after
all, his Seal, to confirm us; which Seal is not faith: for the Apostle
says, After Ephesians. 1. 13.
you believed, you were sealed, where we see the work of faith and sealing
distinguished: first the soul is set in a good estate, and then follows
assurance and stablishment.

But what needs confirmation when we believe? Answ.
Is not faith confirmation enough? when a man may know by a private reflect act
of the soul, that he is in the state of grace?

This act of ours in believing Quest.
is often terribly shaken; and God is wondrous desirous that we should be secure
of his love; he knows he can have no glory, nor we any solid peace else:
therefore when we by faith have sealed to his truth, he sees that we need
further sealing that our faith be current and good; for all is little enough in
the time of temptation, the single witness of our soul is not strong enough in
great assaults. For sometimes the Spirit is so tossed and disquieted with
temptations, that we cannot reflect aright on our selves, nor discern what is
in our own breasts without much ado; therefore God first works faith to apply
the promise, Whosoever believes in Christ shall be saved. I believe in Christ,
therefore I shall be saved, and then seals this belief with an addition of
his holy Spirit; for this sealing is a work upon believing, an honoring of
faith with a superadded confirmation.

How shall we know Quest.
that there is such a spiritual sealing in us?

I answer, when we truly Answ.
believe, the Spirit of adoption, reveals unto us that we are the sons of
God, by a secret whispering, and intimation to the soul, (which the believing
heart feels better than I am able to express) saying, be of good comfort, thy
sins are forgiven; there is a sweet kiss, vouchsafed to the soul: the Lord
refreshes it with the light of his countenance, and assures it, that all
enmity is now slain: I am thy salvation, thou art for ever mine, and I am
thine; because thou beleevest, behold thou art honored to be my child.

Again the Spirit of adoption Abba Father. The soul when it truly believes,
has a bold and familiar speech to God.

There are two things in the prayer of a Christian that are incompetible with a
carnal man: there is first an inward confidence, and secondly, an carnestnesse
in the soul, whereby he goes to God as a Child to his loving Father, not
considering his own worthiness or means, but the constant love that is bore
to him.

This spiritual speech of God to the soul, and of the soul to God, is an
evident demonstration of our truth in grace, because we can do that which no
Hypocrite in the world can attain to.

Thirdly, this sealing of seals our spirits, by stamping the likeness of
Christ upon us; so as when a man finds in his soul, some lineaments of the
heavenly Image, he may know thereby, that he is translated from death to life;
when he finds his heart subdued to humility and obedience, to such a holy and
gracious frame as Christ's was; he may clearly discern that he has something
more than the Old man in him: when a man can say, naturally I am proud, but now
I can abase my self; naturally, I am full of malice, now I can love, and pray
heartily for my enemies; naturally I am lumpish and dead-hearted, now I can joy
in the Holy Ghost; naturally, I am apt to distrust the Lord, and be
discontented with my condition, now I can rest securely upon his Promise and
Providence: sin has been my delight, now it is my sorrow and heartbreaking, I
find somewhat contrary to corruption in me. I carry the Image of the second
Adam about me now: I say, whosoever has this blessed change, may rest assured
of his right to happiness. Know you not that Christ is in you, except you be
reprobates, says the Apostle. A Christian that upon a through search finds
something of Christ always in his soul, can never want a sweet evidence that
he is sealed to the day of redemption.

The fourth way is by joy of the Spirit, which is the beginning of Heaven as it
were, and a possessing of glory before our time; there are few of Gods
children, but in the course of their pilgrimage, first or last, have this divine
impression wrought in them, enlarging and ravishing their souls to joy in the
Almighty.

Yet this is especially seen after conflict, when the soul has combated with
some strong corruption or temptation, To him that overcomes wll I give of the
hidden Mannah, says Christ, and a white stone which none can read but he that
has it, that is, he shall have assurance that he is in the state of grace,
and the sweet savor of goodness it self shall be his portion; usually God
gives comfort after we have conflicted with some sinful disposition and have
got the victory, as we see in Job, after God had exercised that Champion a long
time, at the last he discovered himself in a glorious manner to him.

In the midst of afflictions, when a Christian is under great crosses, and God
sees he must be supported with spiritual strength, or else he sinks, then he
puts in with supply from above: when the creature cannot help us, the Creator
of all things will. Thus Paul in the midst of the Dungeon being sealed with the
Spirit, sang at midnight when he was in the Stocks: and so David in the midst
of persecution: Daniel in a Lions Den: the three Children in the fiery furnace,
etc. God does as Parents, smile on their little ones when they are sick and
dejected: he reserves his choicest comforts for the greatest exigents: when
God has a great work for his children to do, or some sharp suffering for
them to undergo, as an encouragement beforehand, he often enlarges their
spirits that they may be able to go through all. As our Savior Christ had
James and John with him upon the Mountain, to strengthen the^ against his
ensuing suffering.

Let us then examine our selves by that which has been delivered: has God
spoken to thy soul and said, I am thy salvation, thy sins are remitted, and
thy person received into my favor: does God stir up thy spirit to call upon
him, (especially in extremity) and to go with boldness and earrestnesse to his
Throne? Surely this is an evidence of the seal of the Spirit, for who ever
wants this, cannot look God in the face, when distress is upon him: Saul in
this case goes to the Witch, and Achitophel to desperate conclusions: Judas in
extremity, we see what becomes of him? So every one that has not this sealing
of the Spirit, (to whom God speaks not peace by shedding abroad the love of
Christ in his heart) must needs sinck as Lead in the bottom of the Sea, which
has no consistence, till it come to the Center, to Hell. Did you ever feel
the joy of the Spirit in holy duties, after inward striving against your lusts,
and getting ground of them; this is a certain sign that God has sealed you.

But you will say, How Quest.
can that be a seal? A seal Quest.
continues with the thing, but the joy of the Spirit comes after the work of
the Spirit, and abides not with us?

I answer, though we Answ.
have not always the joy of the Spirit, yet we have the Spirit of joy, which
though it be not known by joy, yet may be discerned by its operation and
working. A Christian may have a gracious work of the Spirit in him, and yet
want the delight and joy of the Spirit; therefore when that fails, look to thy
sanctification, and see what resemblance of Christ is formed in thee. See (...)
(...) heart be humble and broken, if thou have a heavenly disposition like to
thy Savior; when the joy of the Spirit cease, go to the work of the Spirit,
and from the work of the Spirit, to the voice of the Spirit; Can thou cry to
God with strong supplications? or if thou can not pray with distinct words,
can thou mourn and groan? The Spirit helps our infirmities, when we know
not what to ask. This sighing and groaning is the voice of Gods Spirit, which
he will regard wheresoever he finds it. This made Job in his distress, to
swim above water.

If one be in the midst of extremity, and can seriously seek to God, it is an
undoubted sign that such a one is sealed, especially when the corruption of
his soul joins with Satan's temptations the more to afflict him; for a sinner
in the midst of storms and clouds of darkness, then to cast anchor, and quiet
his soul in Christ, argues great faith: So when a temptation closes with our
corruption, and affliction yields ground to further the temptation, then to
pray and rely securely upon God, is a gracious sign; for Satan uses the
afflictions we are in, as temptations to shake our faith; as thus, Can thou
be a child of God, and be so exercised? so vilified, so persecuted? Did thou
belong to Christ, would ever these crosses, and losses, and miseries have
befallen thee? deceive not thy self: Thus affliction is a weapon to
temptation, for Satan to help his fiery darts with, he having such a dangerous
party in us (as our own corruption) does us the more harm continually.

How shall a man know Quest.
whether God has a part in him?

I answer. If he can run Answ.
against the stream; if he find his soul resisting Satan's temptations, and
raising him above afflictions, standing out, and combating with corruptions to
the uttermost; when he can check his carnal heart that draws him downwards,
saying: Why art thou cast Psalm. 42. 13
down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me: it is a good sign.

David found inward corruptions, and outward afflictions joining with Satan's
temptations, to depresse his spirit, hereupon he chides his own soul. Why is
it thus with thee, why art thou dejected in this manner? and then he lays a
charge upon it, Trust in God. Whatsoever hardship we meet with in the world,
yet there is hope in God still; though we can find little comfort below, yet
there are rivers of consolation above; it argues a gracious heart to quiet ones
self in God in the worst times.

I beseech you let us labor to have our souls Use.
sealed with the Spirit of God, to have further and clearer evidence of our
estate in grace; it is a blessed thing to have Christ live in us, the enemies
of our salvation are exceeding many, and how soon death or judgment may ceaze
us, we know not, God will set none at his right hand, but his Sheep, those
that have his own Image on them; his best Sheep have no outward mark, but an
inward; the world sees not their beauty, The Kings daughter is all glorious
within. Psalm. 45.


How comfortably will the soul commend it self to Christ, when it finds it
self stamped with the Spirit of Christ? when he can chearefully say, Lord
Jesus receive my soul; thou that have redeemed me by thy blood, and sealed me
by thy Spirit, acknowledge thine own likeness in me, though it be not as it
should be, yet there is somewhat of thine in me.

Beloved, we must not give false evidence of our selves, as we must not
against others; what a comfort has a sealed soul in the hour of death, and in
all extremities? what a difference is there between such a soul, and others
in the time of affliction, as in the time of pestilence, war, and persecution
for Christ? The soul that is sealed knows that he is marked out for
happiness in the world to come. Whatsoever befalls him in this life, he
knows that God in all confusion of times knows his own Seal* and that his
destroying Angel shall spare and pass over those that are marked, Ezech. 9.
And though our bodies escape not, yet our souls shall.

Josias we see was taken away from the evil to come, and Lot was delivered
from the judgment of the Sodomites. If we partake not of the sins of the
wicked, we shall never partake of their plagues; God has a special care of
his little ones in this life, and if he take them away, yet their death is
precious in his sight; he Psalm. 116.
will not part with them but upon special consideration: he sees if they live
it will be worse for them, their precious souls are in continual danger; he
sees it is best for them to be gathered to God, and the souls of perfect ones
in heaven, therefore he provides a shelter to free them from all storms on
earth.

And as he has an eye over them in regard of outward miseries; so in respect
of spiritual corruption and infection; as Revel. 7. Gods holy ones were
sealed, so many of such a Tribe, and so many of such a Tribe, to signify, that
God has always some that he will keep and preserve from the leaprous
contagion of sin, and Antichrist; even in evil times God has his little
flock still.

In the obscure ages of the Church, 900 years after Christ, when there was
little learning and goodness in the world, and Egyptian darkness had over-spred
the earth. God had always sealed ones, marked out for himself, whom he
preserved from the danger of dark times; why then should we be afraid of evil
tidings? Let any affliction or death it self come, Christ will know his own
stamp in us, he has a book of remembrance, for those that are his, and when
he gathers his jewels, they will be highly set by. God in common calamities
suffers his luggage, (wicked men) to go to wrack, but he will secure his
jewels, his darlings, what ever come of it; labor therefore to be a sealed
person.

But you will say, what Quest.
shall I account of my self, if there be but a little sign of grace in me?

Be not discouraged, you Answ.
know in wax, though the stamp be almost out, yet it is current in Law
notwithstanding. Put the case the stamp of the Prince be an old Coin, is it
not current though it be cracked? Suppose the mark of the Spirit, should be
dim and blurred, scarce discernable in us, (this ought to be our shame and
grief) yet some evidences of grace are still remaining; there are some sighs
and groans against corruption, which may continually support us: if we mourn
in our spirits, and do not join with our lusts, nor allow our selves in them,
this is a divine impression, though it be (as it were) almost worn out: the
more comfort we desire, the fresher she should keep this seal of comfort.

And labor to grow in faith and obedience, that we may read our evidence
clearly, that it be not over-growne with the dust of the world, so as we
cannot see it. Sometimes Gods children have the graces of the Spirit in them,
yet they yield so much to fears and doubtings, that they can read nothing but
their corruption. When we bid them puruse their evidences, they can see nothing
but worldliness, nothing but pride and envy, because they grieve the holy
Spirit by their negligence and distrust. Though there be a stamp in them, yet
God holds the soul from it, and gives men up to mistake their estates, for not
stirring up the graces of his Spirit in them.

Honor God by believing, and he will honor thee by stamping his Spirit more
clearly on thee, what a comfort is it to have the evidence of a gracious soul
at all times. When a man carries about him the mark of the Spirit, what in the
world can discourage such a soul? On the contrary, if a man have not something
above nature in him, when death and judgment comes, how miserable is his
condition? If a man be a King or an Emperor of the World, and have not an
interest in Christ's righteousness, ere long he shall be stripped of all, and
adjudged to eternal torments. Oh the excellency of man's soul, a Jewel more
to be prized then a Princes Diadem.

It is the solly of the times to set up curious Pictures, but what a poor
delight is this in comparison of the ambition of a true Christian, to see the
Image of Christ stamped in his soul, to find the joy of the Spirit, and God
speaking peace to his inner man.

The transforming of our selves into the image of Christ, is the best Picture
in the world; therefore we should labor for the new creature, that as we grow
downward one way, we may grow up toward Heaven another; that as the life of
nature decays, so the spiritual life may be more active and working. It
should be our daily study while we live in this world to attain that holiness,
without which no man shall ever see God.

There is besides the common broad Seal of God, his privy Seal. What is the
reason that many proud hearted persons are damned? the truth is, they are all
for external contentments, and despise the ordinances of GOD: for though they
stand upon their admission into the Church, upon the common seals and
prerogatives (which in themselves are excellent) yet relying on these things
overmuch betrays many souls to the Devil in the time of distress. It is an
other manner of seal than the outward seal in the Sacrament, that must settle
peace in the conscience. When once the beginnings of faith are wrought in us,
then we may with comfort think upon our receiving of the Communion, but the
special thing to be eyed, is the hidden seal. If the external means work no
inward sanctification in our hearts, we shall be the worse rather than the
better for them: yet we must not be so profane as to think slightly of Gods
Ordinances, they are of great consequence.

For when Satan shakes the confidence of a Christian, and says, Thou art an
Hypocrite, God does not love thee; these help us to hold out: why says the
soul, I can speak by experience that I have found the contrary; the Lord has
removed my fears, he has pardoned my sin and accepted my person, he has
given me many Precious Promises to support my spirit. Here is the excellency of
the Sacrament, it comes more home to me, it seals the general Promises of God
particularly to my self: for finding the inward work of the Spirit in my
heart, and God having strengthened my faith by the outward seal, I can defy
Satan with all his accusations, and look death in the face with comfort. We
should labor therefore to observe Gods sealing days, when he uses to manifest
himself to his people; which though it may be every day (if we be spiritually
exercised) yet it is in the Lords day more especially, for then his ordinance
and his Spirit go together.

Now there is a sealing of persons, and of truths, besides the sealing of our
estates, that we are the children of God; there is a sealing of every
particular truth to a Christian. For where there is grace to believe the truth,
God seals those truths firmly to that soul by the comforts of his Spirit.
For example, this is a truth, Whosoever believes in Christ, shall not perish
but have everlasting life. Now the same Spirit that stirs up the soul to
believe this, seals it fast upon the conscience even to death; there is no
promise, but upon our believing the same, it is sealed by God upon us: for
those truths only abide firm in the soul which the Holy Ghost sets on. What
is the reason that many forget their consolations, the reason is they hear
much but the Spirit settles nothing on their hearts.

What is the reason that Quest.
lettered men many times stand out in their profession to blood, whereas those
that are more able and learned, yield to any thing. The reason is, the Answ.
knowledge of the one is set fast upon the soul; the Spirit brings his seal
and this man's knowledge close together: whereas the learning and abilities of
the other, is only a discoursive thing swimming in the brain without any
sollid foundation; their knowledge of truths is not spiritual: they see not
heavenly things by heavenly, but by a natural light. Those that would not
apostatize, must have a knowledge suitable to the things they know; they must
see spiritual things by the Spirit of GOD. Therefore when we come to hear the
Word, we should not come with strong conceits of our own, to bring all to our
wits, but with reverent dispositions and dependence upon God, that he would
teach us together with his Ministers, and close with his Ordinances so as to
fasten truths upon our souls, else shall we never hold out: for that which
must stablish and quiet the soul, must be greater than the soul.

In time of tentations when the terrors of the Almighty encompasse us, when
God lays open our conscience, and writes bitter things against us, those
truths that most satisfy the soul at such a time, must be above the natural
capacity of the soul, therefore says the Apostle, It is God that establishes,
and God by his Spirit that seals us up unto the day of redemption, because
divine truths of themselves in the bare letter, cannot stir up the heart; it
is only the blessed Spirit, which is above our spirits, that must quiet the
conscience in all perplexities; the Lord can soon still the soul when he
settles spiritual truths upon it: therefore go to him in thy distress and
trouble of mind; send up ejaculations to God, that he would seal the comfort
revealed in his word to thy soul, that as it is true in it self, so it may be
true to thee likewise.

This is a necessary observation for us all. Oh we desire in the hour of death
to find some comforts, that be standing comforts, that may uphold us against
Hell and judgment. Know that nothing will do this but spiritual truths
spiritually known, but holy truths set on by the Holy Ghost upon the soul.
Often therefore enter into thine heart and examine upon what grounds and motives
thou beleevest; Consider well what it is thou beleevest, and upon what
evidences, and withwhat light, otherwise expect not to find sollid peace.

What course may a Christian generally take Quest.
when he wants comfort and inward refreshing.

There are in 1 John 5. Answ.
three witnesses in heaven, and three in earth, to secure In want of comfort
what is to be done.
us of our estate in grace: The three witnesses in heaven are, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost: And the three witnesses in earth are, the Spirit, the
Water, and Blood: and these three on earth, and those three in heaven agree in
one. Now by the Spirit here is meant the feelings and sweet motions thereof,
the water may well be the Laver of Sanctification, and by blood is understood
the sufferings of Christ for our justification.

When therefore we find that extraordinary seal I spoke of before (the joys
of the Spirit of God) that it is not in us. What shall we do? shall we
despair then? No, then go to the water; when the witness of the Spirit is
silent, go to the work of the Spirit, see what gracious dispositions are found
in thee.

I, but what shall we do Quest.
if the waters be troubled in the soul, as some times there is such a
confusion, that we cannot see the Image of God upon it in sanctification.

Then go to the blood, there is always comfort; Answ.
go to the fountain set open for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in, that is
never dry. If we find much sin upon our consciences, and no peace in our
hearts; apply the blood of sprinkling, that will give rest.

When thou find nothing but corruption and filthiness in thy soul, when
thou see neither joy nor sanctification of Spirit, go to the Lord Jesus, and
he will purge thee from all guilt, and wash thee with clean water. But to go
on.

Who has sealed us, and given us the earnest of his Spirit in our hearts.

This is the third word, borrowed from humane Contracts, to set forth Gods
gracious work in the soul: Anointing we had before and sealing; now here is
earnest. The variety of expression shows, there is a great remainder of
unbelief in the soul of man, which causes the blessed Spirit to use so many
words to manifest Gods mind, and assure the soul of salvation, stablishing,
anointing, sealing, and earnest.

And indeed so it is, howsoever we in the time of prosperity (when all things
go well with us) are apt to presume our estate is good, yet in the hour of
death when conscience is awaked, we are prone to nothing so much as to call all
in question, and believe the lies and doubts and fears of our own deceitful
hearts, more than the undoubted truth and promise of God. Therefore the Lord
takes all courses to establish us, he gives us rich and precious promises, he
gives us the holy Spirit to confirm us in those promises, he seals us with
that Spirit, and gives us a comfortable earnest thereof, and all to settle
these wretched and unbeleeving hearts of ours. So desirous is God that we
should be well conceited of him, that he loves us better than we love our
selves; He prizeth our love so much, that he labors by all means to secure
us of our eternal welfare; as knowing, that except we apprehend his love to
us, we can never love him again, nor delight in him as we ought to do.

Now the Spirit is an earnest of our inheritance in heaven, we are sons here
indeed; but we are not heirs invested into the blessed estate we have title
to; God does notkeep all our happiness till another world, but gives us
somewhat to comfort us in our absence from our husband; he gives us the Holy
Ghost in our hearts, as a pledge of that glorious condition, which we shall
one day have eternally with him; this is the meaning of the words.

But to show you more particularly, In what regard the Spirit is called an
earnest.

First of all, you know Why the Spirit is called an earnest.
of a Contract. So the holy Spirit does secure us of the blessed estate, we
shall have in heaven for ever.

Secondly, an earnest is

Thirdly, an earnest is in it self, yet it is great in security; A shilling
secures a bargain of a thousand pound we see; We value an earnest not for its
own worth, so much as (for that which it is a pledge of) for the excellent
bargain and rich possession which it does interest us unto: So the Spirit of
God with its blessed effects in the soul, the joy and peace of the Spirit,
chearing and reviving perplexed sinners; this earnest, I say, though it be
little in it self, yet it is great to us in respect of the assurance that we
have by it.

Again, it has the earnest, because an arnest is given rather for the
security of the party that receives it, than in regard of him that gives it; So
God gives us the earnest of his Spirit, grace and comfort in this life, not so
much for God, for he means to give us heaven and happiness, when we are
dissolved: As he has passed his promise, so he will undoubtedly perform the
same; He is Lord and Master of his word, He is Jehovah that gives a being to
his word, as well as to every other thing: But notwithstanding having to do
with mistrustfull, unbeleeving men, he is pleased to condescend to our
weakness, he stoops to the lowest capacity, and frames his speech to the
understanding of the simplest soul; for which purpose this term of earnest is
here borrowed.

In these respects the Spirit of God together with the graces of it, and the
comforts it brings (for they are not divided) is called an earnest. And thus
having cleared the point, we will observe this doctrine for our further
instruction.

That a Christian ought to be, and may be assured of his interest in God,
because (as I said before) an earnest is given not so much for Gods sake, as
for our sakes; this then must needs follow from hence, Either none have this
earnest, or else those that have it, may be assured of their comfortable
condition. Otherwise God is fickle, and plays fast and loose with his
children, which is blasphemy to affirm. Besides, if none have this earnest,
then the Apostle speaks false, when he says, God has stablished us, and given
us the earnest of his Spirit, which is horrible impiety once to conceive.

If this be so, then either Quest.
such as have this seal and earnest of the Spirit, may be assured of their
estate in grace or not; And if not, where is the fault? Will not God really and
truly vouchsafe unto his people this earnest of the Spirit in their hearts?
Undoubtedly Answ.
he will, he is God means truly in giving his earnest.
desirous that we should be persuaded of his love in all things, and therefore
we may and ought to be assured of his favor toward us: S. John's whole
Epistle contains little else, but sundry marks and evidences how we may know
that we are the children of God: wherefore was Christ himself sealed of the
Father to the Office of Mediator? wherefore did he die and rise again? and
wherefore does he still make intercession for us in Heaven? that we should
doubt of Gods love? (when as he has given us that which is greater than
salvation, yea greater than all the world, even his own Son.) no certainly;
can we desire a more ample testimony of his favor, than he has already
bestowed upon us? Is it not the errand of all Gods mercies to bring us nearer
to him self? that we should not doubt of his love, but rest securely upon him:
why then do we distrust the Almighty, who is truth it self, and never failed
any?

Yet we must know that Christians have not at all Assurance of our estates not
always alike.
their interest, for there is an infancy of grace, where in we are ignorant of
our own condition. And there is a time of desertion, of their estates. Some
again use not that care and diligence in the use of means which God requires,
whereupon they are justly deprived of that inward peace and comfort which
others enjoy. There is a difference likewise in growth and continuance in
Christianity, some are strong Christians, and some weak, answerable whereunto
is the difference of assurance of Gods love usually in the hearts of his
people. Nay, its possible that for a long time, the Lords Jewels (his redeemed
ones) may want this blessed comfort. A double act of faith to work assurance.


For we must conceive there is a double act of faith.

First, an act, whereby a

Secondly, there is a reflect knowing that we rely upon the truth and promise
of the Almighty, we have assurance of his favor. Now a man may perform the
one act, and not the other: many of the Saints sometimes can hardly say that
they have any assurance, but yet notwithstanding, they will daily cast
themselves upon the rich mercy and free grace of God in Jesus Christ. Things
hindering our assurance.


Besides, there are many things which may hinder this act of assurance, because
(together with believing) God may present such things to my mind as may so
damp and disquiet my soul, that I cannot have any definitive thoughts, about
that which God would especially have me to think upon.

As when God will humble a man, he takes not away the Spirit of faith wholly
from him, but sets before such a sinful creature, his anger and sore
displeasure, together with the hellish torments and pains of the damned, as
due to his soul; which makes him for the present to be in an estate little
differing from the Reprobate: so that he is far from saying, he has any
assurance at that time: yet notwithstanding he does not leave off nor renounce
his confidence, but casts himself upon Gods mercy still; Though the Lord kill
him, yet will he trust in him, although he sees nothing but terror and wrath
before him. This God does to tame our presumption, and prepare us for the
enjoyment of his future glory. If we feel not sense of assurance, it is good
to bless God for what we have. We cannot deny but God offers himself in
mercy to us, and that he intends our good thereby: for so we ought to construe
his merciful dealing toward us, and not have him in jealousy without ground.
Had we but willing hearts to praise God, for that which we cannot but
acknowledge comes from him, he will be ready in his time to show himself more
clearly to us. We taste of his goodness many ways, and it is accompanied
with much patience: and these in their natures should lead us, not only to
repentance, but to nearer dependence on him: we ought to follow that which God
leads us unto, though he has not yet acquainted us with his secrets.

These things we must observe, that we give not a false evidence against our
selves, though we have not such assurance as we have had, yet always there
is some ground in us whereupon we may be comforted, that we are Gods
children, could we but search into it. Let us not then be negligent in
laboring for the same, and in the Lords good time we shall certainly obtain
it: it is the profaneness of the world that they improve not those helps
which God has afforded for this purpose.

Nay they had rather stagger and take contentment in their own ways, saying;
If God will love me in a loose licentious course, so it is, but I will not
give diligence to make my calling and election sure: I will never bar my
self of such profits and delights, nor forsake all, chiefly to mind
spiritual things.

Whereas we ought constantly to endeavor for assurance of grace, that God may
have honor from us, and we the more comfort from him again; that we may live
in the world above the world, and pass cheerfully through the manifold
troubles and temptations which hefail us in our pilgrimage.

A man in his pure natu rals will swell against this doctrine, because he
feels no such thing, and thinks what is above his measure, is hypocrisy. He
makes himself the rule of other Christians to walk by, and therefore values
and esteems others by his uncertain condition: but the heart of a Christian
has a light in it, the Spirit of God in his soul makes him discern what
estate he is in.

In a natural man all is dark, he sees nothing because his heart is in a
Dungeon, his eye being dark, the whole man must needs be in blindness. All is
alike to him, he sees no difference between flesh and spirit, and therefore
holds on in a doubting hope; in a confused disposition and temper of soul to
his dying-day.

But a Christian that labors to walk in the comforts of the holy Ghost, cannot
rest in such an unsettled estate; he dares not venture his eternal welfare upon
such infirm grounds: What? to depart this life, and be tossed in uncertainty,
whether a man goes to Heaven or to Hell! What a miserable perplexity must such
a soul needs be in? Therefore he is still working out his salvation, and
storing up of grace against the evil day.

And well may this condition challenge all our diligence in laboring for it:
because it is neither attained nor maintained without the strength and Sense of
Gods love how preserved.
prime of our care, for the sense of Gods favor will not be kept, without
keeping him in our best affections, above all things else in the world besides;
without keeping of our hearts constantly close and near to him, which can
never be done without keeping a most narrow watch over our loose spirits,
which are ever ready to stray from him, and fall to the creature.

It cannot be kept without exact walking, and serious self-denial. But what
of that? Can we spend our labors to better purpose? One sweet beam of Gods
countenance will requite all abundantly. A Christian indeed undergoes more
trouble and pains (especially with his own heart) than others do, but what is
that to his gains? One day spent in communion with God, is sweeter than a
thousand without it. What comforts so great as those that are fetched from the
Fountain? Oh woe to him that savours not these heavenly, but lingers after
carnal comforts. It cannot but grieve the holy Spirit, when the consolations
of the Almighty are either forgotten, or seem nothing to us.

But why does the Spirit Quest.
thus establish and seal us, and conveigh grace to our souls? why does that
do all?

Because since the fall Answ.
we have no principles of

Again there is still remaining in us an utter averseness

But why the Spirit rather Quest.
than the Father or the Son? He comes from both, and therefore is fit to
witness the love of both; the Holy Ghost is in the breast of the Father and
the Son, he knows their secret affection toward us. A man's spirit is
acquainted with his in most thoughts: the blessed Spirit is privy to the
hidden love of God, and of Jesus Christ to us poor creatures, which we are
strangers unto, therefore none so fit to cheer and revive us.

Indeed the love originally is from the Father, but in regard of application of
what is wrought by the Son, all proceeds from the Holy Ghost; he receives
grace from Christ for us. It must needs be so, because no less than the Spirit
of God can quiet our perplexed spirits in time of tentation. For when the
conscience of a guilty person is affrighted, what man can allay its fears?
That which must settle a troubled spirit, must be a spirit above our own. It
being no easy thing to bring the soul and God together after peace is broken:
we have both wind and tide against us in this business, grace being but weak,
and corruption strong in the best of us.

We should labor therefore for heavenly spirits, and get something more than a
man in us. There can never be any true peace attained, till the Spirit from
above settle it in our souls. An unsanctified heart is an unpacified heart. If
there be a neglect of holiness, the soul can never be soundlyquiet; where
there is not a clear conscience, there cannot be a calm conscience, that is a
general rule. Sin like Jonas in the ship will raise continual storms both
within and without a man. Take away God once, and farewell all true
tranquillity. Spiritual comforts flow immediately from the Spirit of Comfort,
who has his office designed for that purpose.

But how shall we know Quest.
that we have the Spirit?

How may a man know Answ.
that he has a soul? by living and moving, by actions vital, etc. Even so
may a man know he has the Spirit of God by its blessed effects and
operations: it is not idle in us, but as the soul quickens the body, so does
the Spirit the soul. Every saving grace is a sign that the Spirit is in us.
Wheresoever the Spirit dwells, he transformes the soul, and changes the party
(like himself) to be holy, and gracious, this is an undoubted symptom of the
Spirits habitation.

Secondly, all spiritual graces are with conflict, the flesh still lusts
against the spirit, and Satan cannot endure to see any man walk co^fortably to
heaven. What, thinks he, such a base creature as this is to have the earnest
of salvation, to live here as if he were in heaven already, and to defy all
opposite powers; sure he shall have little peace this way, I will disquiet and
vex his spirit; if he will go to heaven, he shall go mourning thither.

This is the reasoning of the cursed spirit, whereupon he labors to shake our
assurance, and follow us with perplexities. The grace and comfort of a
Christian, is with much conflict and tentations, not only with Satan, but with
his own heart; which so long as guilt remains, will ever be misgiving and
casting of doubts; there must therefore be a higher power, than the soul of man
to quiet and allay its own troubles.

Thirdly, the Spirit enables us to the practice of to be humble in prosperity,
and contented with any estate. It draws our affection heavenward, and makes us
delight in God above all, as our best portion. He that has the Spirit, joys
in spiritual company and employment; he hates sin as being contrary to that
blessed earnest which he has received. He looks on things as God does, and
approves of the same, as he is made more or less spiritual thereby, and so
is brought nearer to that fountain of Goodness, God himself; by them he
esteems his best being to be in Christ, and therefore labors more and more to
be transformed into his likeness. He values nothing in the world further than
it conduces to his spiritual welfare. If all be well for that, he accounts
himself happy whatsoever else befalls him. Indeed where the Spirit has taken
up his firm abode, that soul will little set by any outward change. Nothing
can be very ill with a man that has all well within him.

But that I may not distract your thoughts, you Symptoms of the Spirits
inhabitation, out of Romans 8.
shall find diverse properties of the Spirit of God in Romans 8. which I will
briefly touch. First, it is said that the Spirit where it is, dwells in that
heart, as in an house, it rules where ever it comes. The Holy Ghost will not be
an underling to our lusts, it repaires and makes up all our inward breaches.
The Spirit prepares his own dwelling, he begets knowledge and acquaintance of
God within us; he is not in us as he is in the wicked, he only knocks at
their hearts, but has not his abode there.

Secondly, when the Spirit to mortify the deeds of the flesh, by the Spirit,
ver 13. Those that by help of the Spirit have got the victory of sin, can in
no wise be led as slaves by the flesh: as on the contrary, he that cherishes
corruption, and crucifies it not (by spiritual reasons, but out of civil
respects to be freed from aspersions, and to uphold his reputation or the like)
is a mere stranger to the Holy Ghosts working.

Thirdly, as many as are led by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God. As the
Angel went before the Israelites from Egypt into Canaan; so the Spirit of God
goes along with his in all their ways, remooving all lets, and strengthening
against all impediments in their Christian race. It conducts us sweetly, not
(violently) as the Devil does those that are possessed with the Spirit; we
are led strongly indeed, because it is against corruption within us, and
opposition from without us, but yet sweetly to preserve the liberty and
freedom of the soul still. We are all by nature like children or blind men,
we cannot lead our selves, the Spirit must be our conduct, or we shall wander
and go aside presently. Those therefore that enjoy the same, submit themselves
to its guidance, and direction in all things.

Again, the Spirit stirs up sighs and groans, that cannot be expressed.
When we are not able to pray, or lay open the griefs of our souls, if we can
but send out sighs and groans to heaven, they shall be accepted; for God
will hear the voice of his own Spirit, from whence these sobs and complaints
come. How should we be overwhelmed with despair, did not the Spirit support
us? Those therefore that in extremity have nothing to comfort them, yet are
able to send forth holy desires to the Lord, may certainly conclude that the
Spirit is in them.

Again, the Spirit makes us mourn, and wait for the adoption of sons, the
same Spirit that sanctifies a sinner, witnesses to his soul, that God is his.
Worldlings grieve not for their absence from Christ, neither at all long they
for his blessed appearing, because their heaven is here. They mourn not for
the hidden distempers, and secret impersections of their souls, whereas the
godly are much in condemning themselves, for that which no creature can tax
them of; Want of communion with their Maker, straitness of spirit, distraction
in duty, that they cannot obey as they would; these exceedingly deject them,
yet wait they will without despair, till God have finished their course; there
is such a divine power in faith, as a very little beam of it, having no other
help than a naked promise, will uphold the soul against the greatest
discouragements, and keep it from utter sinking.

Indeed, waiting is a difficult duty, both in regard of the long day, which God
usually takes before he performs his promise, as also by reason of the
untowardnesse of our natures, being ready to be put off by the least frown, did
not God by a Spirit of constancy preserve the soul immovable in all
conditions, whether present or to come, so as it fails not before him; and
why? because it knows full well, that God in whom it rests, is unchangably
good.

Alas, we are at the best but light and vain creatures, till the divine Spirit
fix and settle us: the firmer our Union is here, the surer will be our standing
in all danger; for what can daunt that soul, which in the greatest troubles
has made the great good to be his own? Such a person dares chearefully
encounter any opposition, as having a Spirit higher than the world about him;
and seeing all (but God) far beneath him; Though I might name more, what a
many sweet evidences are here to manifest a soul truly ^^ted* and led by the
Spirit of God?

How may a man obtain this blessed guest to Quest.
lodge in his soul and rule over him?

First attend upon the Answ.
teaching of the Gospel. Received ye the Spirit, by the hearing of the Law, or
of faith preached? says the Apostle; The Spirit it usually given, with a
clear unfolding of Christ.

Secondly, omit likewise as a man walking in a Garden (though he think not of
it) draws a sweet sent of the flowers. So the word of God being dictated by
the Spirit, leaves a heavenly favor in such as converse with it. The spirit of
a man is like water that runs through Mineralls. We see Baths have their
warmth from Mineralls that they run thorough. So it is with the soul in its
holy employments. When it has to deal with good books and good company, it
draws a spiritual tincture from these things, and is bettered by them.

Withal, take heed that grieve not the holy Ghost, for that will cause an
estrangement of his presence in thy soul.

How is that done? Quest.


By cherishing contrary Answ.
affections and lusts to his How the Spirit is grieved.
blessed motions, as when we hear the Word, but resolve never to obey it; When
God knocks at our hearts for entrance, oh how readily should we set open those
everlasting doors to receive him? If Christ be willing to give us his Spirit,
it must needs be our own fault if we remain carnal. There being nothing in a
manner required to be spiritual, but not to resist the Spirit; What greater
indignity can we offer to the blessed Comforter, than to prefer our base
lusts before his motions, leading to happiness? What greater unkindnesse can a
man do his friend, than to slight his loving direction, and embrace the
counsel of a professed ene mie? The Holy Ghost presses such forcible reasons
upon us of heavenly n indednesse, and de spising earthly things, that it is
more than evident, none are damned in the bosone of the Church, but those that
set a bar against the Spirit of God in their hearts; such are damned, because
they will be damned, that (say the Preacher what he will) think it better to
be as they are, than to entertain such a guest as will mar, and alter all
that was there before.

Take heed therefore of resisting the Spirit in the least kind, sad not his
blessed motions, but make much of the same by yielding subjection thereunto;
lay thy soul often before the spirit, suffer thy self to be molded and
fashioned by his gracious working; Oh consider how high the slighting of a
gracious motion reaches, even to the contemning of God himself; certainly as
we use these, so would we use the Spirit himself were he visible to us.

And converse not with carnal company, for what will thou gain there but
sorrow to thine heart, if thou belongest to God: and as holy Lot vex thy
righteous soul with the unclean conversation of these Sodomites, it is an
undoubted sign of a man destitute of grace, not to care at all what company he
frequents.

Fourthly, seeing the Holy Ghost is promised to them that ask it, beg
earnestly for it at Gods hands; this is the good th-ing that GOD gives. Christ
seems to insinuate as much, saying, What can I give you better than the Holy
Ghost? Yet this will I bestow on them that ask it: for indeed that is the seed
of all grace and comfort. A world of promises are included in the promise of
giving the Spirit.

Labor therefore above all gettings to obtain this high prerogative: the
comforts of the Spirit are above al earthly comfort, and the graces of the
Spirit enable to encounter the greatest tentations whatsoever. A man that has
this, stands impregnable. God may withdraw his favor for a time to humble us,
but to quench the work of the Spirit (once wrought in the soul) all the power
of all the Devils in Hell cannot stir it. This will carry us through all
oppositions and difficulties in our Christian race. Let a man never baulk or
decline a good cause for any thing that he shall suffer: for the seal and
earnest of the Spirit is never more strong than when we are deprived of all
other comforts save that alone.

What makes a man differ from himself and from other men, but this? Take a
Christian that has the earnest of the Spirit, you shall have him defy Death,
Satan, the World, and all: take another that is careless to increase his
earnest, how weak and feeble will you find him, ready to be overcome by every
tentation, and sinck under the least burden.

The Apostle Peter before the Holy Ghost came upon him, was astonished with the
voice of a weak Damsel, but after, how forward was he to suffer any thing.

Labor not then to be strengthened in things below, neither value thy self by
outward dependances. Alas all things here are perishing. If thou have grace,
thou have that which will stand by thee when these fail, the Comforter shall
never be taken away. What are all friends in the world to the Holy Ghost? This
will speak to God for us when no creature dares look him in the face. The
Spirit will make requests with sighs and groans in our behalf, and we may
be sure we shall be heard, when that intercedes for us. What Prison can shut
up the Spirit of God? Oh gain this what ever thou losest, prefer it to thy
chief treasure. The very earnest of the Spirit is far more precious, than the
creatures full quint essence. If the Promises laid hold on by faith, quicken
and cheer the soul, what shall the accomplishment of them do? If the giving
a taste of Heaven so lift our souls above all earthly discouragements, how
glorious shall we shine forth, when the Spirit shall be all in all in us? This
will make us more or less fruitful, more or less glorious in our profession,
and resolute in obedience through our whole course.

If we want this we can never be thankful for any thing, for it is the love of
God that sweetens every mercy to us, (and indeed is more to be valued than any
blessing we enjoy besides) which if we eye not or are ignorant of, what can we
expect but wrath and displeasure in all that befalls us? Oh it is sweet to see
favors and benefits issuing from grace and love: they do not always prove
mercies which men often times esteem to be so. We can have no sollid comfort in
any condition, further than God smiles upon us in it. What a fearful case
must that then be, wherein a man cannot be thankful for what he has.

Every condition and place we are in, should indeed be a witness of our
thankfulness to God; we must not think life was given only to live in. Our
life should not be the end of it self, but the praise of the giver thereof. It
is but fit that we should refer all that is good to his glory, who has joined
his glory to our best good, in being glorified in our salvation, which while we
question and doubt of, it is impossible ever to be cheerful toward him.

Besides, how can a man suffer willingly, that knows not that God has begun
any good work in him? How lumpish and dead is he under the cross without this
assurance? It is worth the considering, to see two men of equal parts under
the same afliction, how quietly and calmly the one that has interest in Christ
will bear his grievances, whereas the other rages as a fool, and is more
beaten. A man will endure any thing comfortably when he considers it proceeds
from his Fathers good pleasure. This breeds a holy resigning of our selves to
God in all estates; as Eli, the will of the Lord be done; his will is a wise
will, and ever conduces to his peoples good.

Fear thou danger, cry unto God, I am thine, Lord save me; I am the price of
thy Sons blood, let me not be lost, thou have given me the earnest of thy
Spirit, and set thy seal upon me for thine own, let me neither lose my
bargain nor thou thine.

Hence it is, that Gods child can so easily deny himself in tentations and
allurements which others sinck under. Oh says he, the Holy Ghost has sealed
me up to the day of redemption, shall I grieve and quench the same for this
base lust? It is a great disparagement to prefer husks before the provision
of our Fathers House: when we give content to Satan and a wretched heart, we
put the Holy Ghost out of his Office.

Again, without this we can never comfortably depart this life: he that has
the earnest of the Spirit in his heart, may laugh Satan in the face and
rejoice at deaths ap proaching, as knowing there will be an accomplishment then
of all the bargain; then the Marriage will be perfectly consummate, then
shall be the great year of Iubilee, the Sabbath of rest for ever: he that
lives much by faith will find it no hard matter to die in it. But let a man
stagger and doubt whether he belong to God or no, what a miserable case will
he be in at the time of dissolution? Death (with the eternity of torment after
it) who can look it in the face without the assurance of a happy change? This
makes men that see no greater pleasure than the following of their lusts,
resolve of swimming in worldly delights still. Alas say they, I had as good
take this pleasure as have none at all: what shall become of me hereafter, who
knows?

FINIS.
THE PRIVILEGES OF THE FAITHFVLL.
ROMANS 8. 28. Also we knew that all things work together for the best to them
that love God, even to them that are called of his purpose.
THere are three things especially that trouble the life of a Christian, or at
least should trouble the same.

The first whereof is sin, with the guilt and punishment thereof.

The second, is, the corruption of Nature, which still abidesin him, even after
his vocation and conversion to Christ.

The third, is, the miseries of this life, which do follow and ensue both upon
sin, and the evil thereof, as also by reason of that corruption of Nature
still remaining in him, after his recovered estate in grace.

For the first, The guilt of sin, which does bind men over to death and
damnation, that is forgiven to all believers in Christ Jesus the second Adam.

The second, which is the corruption of Nature, which cleaves so fast to us,
that is daily mortified and crucified in the Saints by the Word and Spirit of
God.

For the third, which is the grievous crosses and afflictions, which do
accompany and follow the guilt of sin and the corruption of nature still
remaining in Gods children, however they are not taken away, yet they are made
to have an excellent issue, For all things work together for the best unto them
that love God: So that these words of the Apostle do afford us.

1. A ground of Patience. 2. A ground of Comfort
In the former part of this Chapter, the Apostle had told us, That we know not
how to pray as we ought, but that the Spirit it self does teach us how to
pray, and makes requests for us with sighs that cannot be expressed. And
therefore how ever our corruptions and miseries in this life, are not quite
taken away, yet the evil of those evils is removed: God teaching and directing
us by his Spirit, to seek by prayer unto him, for grace to profit by them. And
this is the co-herence of these words with the former.

The parts here to be Parts of the Text.
handled may be these.

An excellent prerogative. All things work together for the best.

Secondly, the persons To them that love God, and whom he does call.

Thirdly, the main cause of this blessed Prerogative.

Those that love God have this privilege, belonging to them, because they are
effectually called by his Word, according to his purpose. We know (says the
Apostle) that all things work together for the best to these; He does not say,
We hope, or we conjecture, but we know it assuredly.

We have the Scriptures of God for it, David says, that it was good for him
that Psalm. 119.
he was afflicted, for thereby he had learned to reform his ways: he knew by
observation that all things would tend to his future happiness. For he had
seen in the example of Job, that notwithstanding his sore afflictions, yet he
had a blessed issue out of all; he knew this many ways, he knew it by faith,
as also by experience, that every thing should further the Saints wel-being.

We know, that is, we only know it, who are led and taught of God, and none but
we can be assured hereof, which excludes the wicked, who shall never know any
such thing; but what is it that Paul is confident of here? Namely, that all
things work together for the best, to them that love God.

And this may serve to be a prevention of a question, which weak Christians
might move in their troubles, and say, Never was any more afflicted than I am?
Why, says the Apostle, be it so? yet nevertheless all things whatsoever, all
thy crosses, vexations, and (...) shall work together, and join issue; though
they be averse one to the other, and opposite to the good of Gods children, as
Herod and Pilat were; yet all things thus contrary notwithstanding, shall work
for the best unto them; there is

1. A good of Quality. 2. A good of Estate.
Now therefore what kind of Good is this the Quest.
Apostle means?

He does not here mean Answ.
the natural or civil good estate of them that love God, but their spiritual
condition in grace, and their glorious estate for the life to come; for the
furthering whereof, whatsoever befalls them in this life, shall help forward
still.

And thus much for the words themselves.

The first point to be Doct.
spoken of, is, The excellent privilege of Gods children, That all things
shall work together for the best; both good and evil shall turn to their
happiness. The reason stands thus; All things shall work together for the best
to them that love God. Therefore all afflictions, crosses, and vexations,
whatsoever that betide such persons, shall work together for their good; and
for this cause all Gods servants must learn patiently to bear, and
cheerfully to undergo, poverty, or riches, honor, or dishonor, in this
world.

That all good things do All good things.
work for the best to Gods servants, is most apparent by daily proof and
experience. To begin with the first chief good of all; 1 God the Father.
which is God the Father, who is goodness it self, and unspeakably
comfortable to all his: Do not all Gods attributes conduce to our eternal
welfare? Is he not set forth in Scripture, under the sweet name of a Father;
of a Shield and Buckler, of a Tower of Defense, of an All-sufficient and
Almighty God, just, wise, provident, merciful, full of boundless compassion,
and all to support his poor creatures from failing before him?

As he is our Father, he is careful of us above the care of earthly parents to
their children; As he is a Shield, so he shelters us from all wrongs; As he is
God Almighty, and All-sufficient, so his power and bounty serve to sustain us
in this world, and reserve us for ever safe in the world to come; His wisdom
makes us wise to prevent the politic plots of the Devil or wicked men; His
justice and providence, they serve to defend us in our right; to provide for us
in all our wants, and prevent the evils of the ungodly intended against us;
His power is ours to keep us, his providence, to dispose all things for our
advantage; Every thing in God shall co-work to provide and foresee all good
for us, and mercifully to impart and bestow whatsoever is behoovefull upon us;
So that God being our Father, we have right and title to his lov, emercy,
power, justice, truth, faithfulness, providence, wisdom, and
all-sufficiencie. All which shall ever work together for the best, to them that
love his appearing.

So for Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God. All 2 God the Son.
his glorious titles and attributes, serve like wise for the everlasting
comfort of his poor Saints on earth: He is called the Husband of his Church,
to cherish and maintain the same. His love unto his Church is far above the
love of any husband to his wife; He is called the Savior of the World,
because he so loved the world, that he gave his life for it, and has
promised, that whosoever believes on him, shall not perish: He is called the
Fountain of life, the Well of life, the Water of life, the Bread of life, the
Way, the Truth, and the Life, because that in him is our life, and by him we
are fed and nourished to eternal life; here in him we obtain the life of
Grace, and in the World to come, shall for ever enjoy the life of Glory.

So likewise for the Holy 3 God the Holy Ghost.
Ghost; what heavenly attributes are ascribed to him in the Scriptures? He is
called the Comforter of Gods servants; The Sealer of the Redemption of Gods
children in their hearts; he teaches the Elect to call God Father; he bears
witness with their spirits, that they are the Sons and Daughters of God; he
teaches them to pray, as they ought, he fills them with peace that passes
all understanding; And refreshes their spirits with such unspeakable joy, as
eye has not seen, nor ear heard the like. He that is instructed by the
Spirit, knows the things of God, which a natural man is ignorant of; The
holy Ghost does call to rememberance the doctrine of God taught unto his
servants, and writes the same in their hearts; so that the operations of the
blessed Spirit, are all appropriated to them that love God, and they alone have
their right in them; The direction, comfort, teaching, and guiding of the
Spirit of God, do serve entirely and peculiarly, to order and work all things
together for the best to the Godly.

Yea, the Angels themselves are called Messengers 4 Angels.
and ministering Spirits, appointed by God to attend and wait upon his servants,
He gives his Angels charge over these, to serve them in all their Psalm. 34.
ways, and to pitch their tents round about them; whenever God pleases to
call any of his out of this world, the Angels are a safe conduct, to carry
their souls into Abraham's bosom; And at the last judgment, the Lord shall
send forth his Angels to gather his Elect, from one end of the world to the
other, that they may fully enjoy that which they have long waited for, even
eternal bliss and glory.

Under the Angels all other creatures are likewise 5 Magistrates.
made serviceable for his peoples good. Princes in authority, are called in
Scripture nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers unto the Church of Christ: the
end of all magistracy being, that we might live religiously and peaceably in
all the ways of God.

Ministers also are styled in the Word by the 6 Ministers.
names of Watchmen and Seeds-men, and spiritual Fathers, to beget men again
to the kingdom of Heaven; they are called Gods Husbandmen to manure and till
his ground. They are called Gods lights, and the Salt of the Earth, both to
enlighten the Church with the light of the glorious Gospel whereof they are
Ministers: and to season them with such savoury and sweet instructions, as may
make them wise to salvation; this being the very end of all Gods giving gifts
to men, that they might build up the Church of Christ here below.

So also the Word of 7 The Word.
God is called the savor of life, and the power of God unto salvation: It is
the seed of God, which being sown in the hearts of Gods children, springs up
in them to everlasting happiness: Gods Word is a light and a Lantern to
guide and direct us in all his ways: it is the Sword of the Spirit, to arm us
against sin, and to maintain us in grace.

The Sacraments likewise 8 Sacraments.
are the Seals of life, and pledges of our salvation in Christ: and Ex
communication though it be rough, and the extremest censure of the Church*
(and therefore ought to be undertaken upon weighty grounds) yet the end of it
is, to save the souls of Gods people, and to make them by repentance turn
unto him.

So all outward gifts, as 9 Outward gifts.
beauty, strength, riches and honors; these are given by God to serve for the
good of his children. As the beauty of Hester was an instrument of her
preferment, whereby she became a preservation to Gods children, and an
overthrow of her and their enemies: Joseph's outward honors and wealth were
made by Gods disposing hand, a means of the preservation and nourishment of
the Israelites in the time of their great extremity and famine: the like may be
said of learning and other natural acquirements, all which do often tend to
general and public advantages.

Yea, the outward gists of God which are bestowed 10 Outward gifts of
Reprobates.
upon reprobates, are still for the good of his: for they who had skill and
knowledge to build Noah's Ark, though they themselves were not saved therein,
yet were they the means of Noah's preservation: and so it many times falls
out, that men of excellent parts and great abilities without grace, though
themselves are not profited thereby, yet God so uses them as their gifts much
conduce, to further and build up the Church of Christ.

Even outward favor 11 Favor of Princes.
of Princes, often tend to Gods servants good. A just man (as the Heathens could
say) is a common benefit. And so a true Christian, whatsoever good he has it
is communicable to all the faithful: and therefore S. Paul says of him self,
that he was a debtor to all men, both Jews and Gentiles, and that he became
all things to all men, that he migh twin some.

But here the maine question will be, and the difficulty arises, how all ill
things can work together for the best to Gods children? I shall therefore
demonstrate,

1 The truth of this, how it can be so? 2 The reasons, why it is so. 3 Observe
a caution, that it be not abused. 4 Let us see the sweet and comfortable use of
this Doctrine.


That this may the better appear, we must know that all evil things are either
1 Spiritual evil things. 2 Outward evil things.


And for spiritual evil things, they are either First, Sin. Secondly, That
which has a reference to Sin, as being evils following after sin.

The first sin of all which has gone over whole 1 Sin.
mankind, and is spread abroad in every one of us, this by Gods mercy and our
repentance, prooves to al believers a transcendent good: for the fall and sin
of the first Adam, caused the birth and death of the second Adam, Christ Jesus;
who notwitstanding he was God, took upon him the nature of man, and has made
us by his coming, far more happy than if we had neverfallen: neither would
God have suffered Adam to have fallen, but for his own further glory, in the
manifestation of his justice and mercy, and for the greater felicity of his
servants in Christ their Mediator.

The next spiritual evil 2 Corruption of nature.
is, the corruption of nature remaining in all mankind, howsoever broken and
subdued in the Lords dear ones, this works for the best to them after this
manner. First it serves to make us see and know we are kept by God, how that
we are not the keepers of our own selves, but are kept by his power through
faith unto salvation. For were it not that God upholds and sustaines us, our
corruptions would soon overturn us: but the sight of corruption being
sanctified to the soul, causes us to ground our comfort out of our selves in
Christ, and no whit to rely on any thing that is in us.

Our corruptions are also good, to abase the pride of our natures, and let us
see the naughtiness of our spirits that we may be humbled before GOD. And it
is good we should have something within us to make us weary of the world; else,
when we have run out our race, we shall be unwilling to depart hence. Now our
bondage to this natural corruption serves exceedingly to make us mourn for
our sinful disposition, and hunger after our God to be joined with him, as we
see in S. Paul's exam ple, Romans 17. where finding the rebellion of his nature,
and the strise that was in him, the flesh lusting against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh, he cries out, saying, Oh wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death, and seeks to God in Christ for
mercy strait.

Sometimes God suffers corruption to break out of us, that we mayknow our
selves the better: and because corruption is weakened, not only by smothering,
but many times by having a vent, whereupon grace stirs up in the soul, a fresh
hatred and revenge against it, and lets us see a necessity of having whole
Christ; not only to pardon sin, but to purge and cleanse our defiled natures.
But yet that which is ill it self, must not be done for the good that comes by
it by accident; this must be a comfort after our surprizals, not an
encouragement before.

It is our great consolation, that our nature is perfect in Christ, who has
taken our nature upon him, and satisfied Divine justice, not only for the sin
of our lives, but for the sin of our natures, who will finish his own work in
us, and never give over, till by his Spirit he has made our natures holy and
pure as his own; till he has taken away, not only the reign, but the very
life and being of sin out of our hearts. To which end he leaves his Spirit
and truth in the Church to the end of the world, that the seed of the Spirit
may subdue the seed of the Serpent in us, and that the Spirit may be a never
failing spring of al holy thoughts, desires, and endeavors, in us, and dry up
the contrary issue and spring of corrupt nature.

Lastly, it is good that that through the strength of faith, though mixed with
much distrust: for a Christian in the state of sin and corruption to overcome
the great adversary of mankind, what a wonderment is it? It tends much to
the shame and dishonor of that fiery Dragon, that weak and sinful man should
be his conqueror. Oh how it confounds him to think, that a grain of
Mustardseed should be stronger than the Gates of Hell, that it should be able
to remove Mountains of oppositions and temptations, cast up by Satan and our
rebellious hearts between God and us. Abi meleck could not endure that it
should be said, a Woman had slain him: and it must needs be a torment to
Satan, that a weak Child, a decrepid old man, should by a spirit of faith put
him to flight.

A third kind of spiritual 3 Inward and outward gross sins
ill ^f sin, are the things that issue out of this cursed stock, and those are
either inward, or outward. For inward sins, they are eithers errors or doubt
ings, or pride, or wrath, or such like.

And first for doubtings 1. Doubtings.
of the truth: this makes Gods servants often more resolute to seek and search
out the same, and to stand afterward more firm and courageous for it. For if
we doubted not of things, we should not afterward be put out of doubt, nor
seek to be better grounded and instructed in them. The Corinthians doubted once
of the Resurrection, but were ever after better resolved in that Doctrine, the
benefit whereof has much redounded to the Churches good ever since. Thomas had
the like wavering disposition, but this doubting more manifested the truth.
Luther being a Monk at the first, and not fully grounded in the Doctrine of the
Gospel, did therefore suspect himself the more, and wished all men after him
to read his writings warily. The Doctrine of the Trinity has formerly been
much doubted of, and therefore has bin with the greater pains and study of
worthy men (then living in the Church) more evidently prooved. And when the
Pelagians grew into Heresies, they were by S. Augustine gainesayd, and very
strongly withstood. So the doctrine of the Church of Rome, being branched into
diverse erroneous opinions, and broached to the great hurt and prejudice of
Christians, has occasioned the truth of God against them to be the more
excellently cleared and made known. For when Religion is oppugned, it is time
then to hold fast, as the Apostle S. Jude says, with both hands, the Word, and
to fight for the faith: that so we may know both what to hold, and upon what
ground we oppose Heresy.

Now for inward sins. as anger, covetousness, 2 Anger, covetousness, etc.
distrust, and such like; these often prove advantageous to the Saints: their
corruptions are a means of their humiliation: Paul and Barnabas having a
breach between them, were so exasperated, that they forsook each others
company, by which means it came to pass, that the Church was more instructed
than before. And hence we may see what the best men are in themselves. If
Luther had had no infirmities, how would men have attributed to him above
measure? as we see, they were ready to sacrifice to Paul and Barnabas, which
shows us, that even the distempers and weaknesses of Gods servants, are
disposed by Divine Providence to their eternal welfare.

Yea, God often suffers 3 (...) sins.
his children, to fall into some outward gross sins, that by means thereof
they might be humbled and abased, and in the end be cured of that provoking
sin of being proud in spirit.

The falling of Gods children does much deject 4 Carnal sins.
them and bring them upon their knees with shame. It makes them gentle and meek
in the reprehension of their brethren; for having slipped out of the way
themselves, and being by repentance recovered, they learn to restore others
with the spirit Gal. 6. 6.
of meekness, as the Apostle speaks. A man humbledby experience of sin in
himself, will soon relent at the fall of others. Those often times prove the
most excellent instruments in the Church who have formerly been overtaken with
some gross sin, by means where of they have ever after been much abased in
their own eyes.

We see David, Paul, and Peter, fell grievously, but being afterward raised
again, and finding comfort themselves, they were a great means of
strengthening others: for he which teaches out of his own experience and
feeling, is the fittest and best teacher of all. So it was with Jonah, when by
casting him into the Sea, God had humbled him, he was fit to preach repentance
to Niniveh. This is a most certain truth, that never any of Gods elect fell
grievously, but he was the better all the days of his life for his fall. David
having been thoroughly humbled for sin, when Shimei his subject cursed him to
his face, how patiently did he bear the same? So Peter having denied his
Master, and afterward recovering himself again, we see how zealous he was for
his Lord Christ, and suffered death for him.

Furthermore, not only the sins of Gods children which they themselves 5 Sins
of others of Gods children.
commit, do work for their best, but also the sins of others of the Saints,
with whom they converse and live, do much tend to their good and welfare. Do
not the falls of David Peter, Manasses, and Paul, comfort the distressed and
despairing souls of such as languish, and are ready to faint under the burden
of their sins? And do not the registry of their sins in Scripture, give hope to
us that God will be merciful to our sins also: we may not think it is Gods
will, to set upon perpetual Record, the sins of his servants for their
shame, disgrace, and punishment, but for our comfort, who live and remain to
the end of the world. And the faults of the Saints have two excellent uses,
whereof the one is for comfort, the other for instruction.

The use in regard of comfort, is this: God has Use.
showed mercy to David, Paul, Peter, and others, sinning grievously against
him, and repenting of the same; Therefore if I also shall sin, and truly
repent as they did, surely God is where he was, as full of mercy and readiness
to forgive, now as ever.

The second use for instruction Use.
is this; If such excellent and eminent Saints by sin have fallen grievously?
how then much more are we poor weak souls subject to fall, if we neglect
watchfulness over our selves? If a weak Christian often assaulted with
tentations, should not see the falls and slips of Gods worthier servants, he
would be in a wonderful desperation, and cry out of himself, saying, Alas,
what shall I do, never was any so assaulted and tempted, so cast down, and
overcome in temptations as I am; and therefore my case is more fearesull, and
worse than ever was any; But when he considers the grievous falls of Gods
special servants, how they have stepped aside foulely, and yet obtained mercy;
by their examples he begins to be revived, and receive inward comfort;
whereby it is evident, that all sins whatsoever of Gods Elect, as vile and as
loathsome as they are, do by Gods providence, and our own serious repentance
turn to their good, and the good of those with whom they live.

The next spiritual Evil, is that which follows 4 Desertions.
after sin committed, viz. Gods desertion, or forsaking of us, when he seems
to hide his favor from men, after they have sinned against him; when God
manifests himself as an enemy to his people, this grieves them more than any
thing else in the world beside; we see David how he calls upon God, not to
rebuke him in his wrath, nor forsake Psalm. 6.
him in his displeasure, where he shows how grievously he was afflicted with
the anger of the Almighty.

But albeit that God does seem sometimes to forsake his servants, it is not
for their confusion, but for their consolation; for by this means they come to
be poor in spirit, and wonderfully emptied of themselves. And it is very
observable, that when such as are thoroughly wounded, and afflicted inwardly,
come to recover strength and peace again, they often prove the most
comfortable Christians of all others; walking with more care to avoid offense
all their lives after.

Christ Jesus himself, though he never sinned, but only stood (as a surety)
in our room to pay the ransom of our debts, seemed to be forsaken of God his
Father; and because he was thus thus humbled, therefore he was after most
highly exalted above all, both in heaven and in earth. So Job seemed to be
forsaken, and does grievously bemoane his miseries, but this was not because
he had sinned against God, more grievously than others had done, but for the
trial of his faith and patience, to give him experience of Gods love to him in
the cross, that he might cleave the closer to his Maker all his time after.

Another Evil arising 5 Wounded Spirit.
from the guiltiness of sin, is anguish of mind, and a wounded spirit, which
(says Solomon) who can bear? But for all this, grief for sin, is an happy
grief; yea, a grief never to be grieved for. This wound in spirit breeds
afterward a sound spirit; Repentance is good, and Faith in Christ is good; But
what does prepare us to these happy graces? Is it not a wounded spirit? Who
would ever repent of his sins, and lay hold on Christ for remission of the
same, if he were not pricked and pierced in the sense thereof; Christ
professes himself to be a Physician; but to whom? To the lost Sheep of
Israel. He promises ease and refreshment, but to whom? To them that are weary,
and laden with the burden of their sins; The Spirit of the Lord was upon
him, that he might preach the Gospel to the poor, and he was sent to heal
the broken hearted, that he might Luke 4. 1.
preach deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, and
set at liberty them that are bruised.

Again, diverse Christians do walk very heavily 6 Blasphemous thoughts.
and uncomfortably, by reason of inward tentations* and blasphemous
imaginations, which often are suggested, and enter into their minds; but these
sins which so vex the souls of poor Christians, are a means of their
humiliation, causing them to sue more earnestly to God for pardon. And these
sinful corruptions do further serve for a testimony to themselves, that they
are not under the power of Satan, but live in the Kingdom of grace; for if
they were captived to the Devil, and under his government, then would he never
molest and vex them, but suffer them quietly to live and die in their sins, but
because they are from under his rule and jurisdiction, therefore he perplexeth
and troubles them all he can: By which it is evident, that all sins by Gods
mercy and our repentance, do work together for the best unto us.

Yea, the circumstances of sin as continuance therein, 7 Continuance in sin.
which much agravates the sin; when such a one truly repents, and is restored
to Christ, it makes him more zealous, and watchful ever after; as we see in
Paul, and the Thief on the Cross, who finding favor, acknowledges his
worthiness of punishment, reprehendeth his fellow on the Cross, and
justifies Christ to have done all things well, and so giving glory unto God,
and crying for mercy, receives a comfortable promise of an heavenly Kingdom.
All things are possible to God. We can never be so ill, as he is powerful and
good, God can bring contrary out of contrary. He has promised to pour clean
water upon us, which faith sues out, and remembers, that Christ has taken upon
him to purge his Spouse, and make her fit for himself.

Further, the very relapses and backslidings of Gods servants into sin, do
not argue no repentance, but a weak repentance, and therefore when they are
again rebuked and turned from sin, their relapses do make them set upon the
service of God more strongly, and run more constantly in his ways. Where
true grace is, sin looses strength, by every new fall; for hence issues
deeper humility, stronger hatred of evil, fresh indignation against our
selves, more experience of the deceitfulness of our hearts, and renewed
resolutions till sin be brought under. Adam lost all by once sinning, but we
are under a better covenant (a covenant of mercy) and are encouraged to go to
God every day, for the sins of that day.

For it is not with God as it is with men, who being offended will scarce be
reconciled, but God offended still offers mercy. He is not only ready to
receive us when we return, but persuades, and intreates us to come unto him:
yea, after backsliding and false dealing with him, wherein he allows no mercy
to be showed by man, yet he will take liberty to show mercy himself, as in
Jeremiah, If a man have an adulterous Wife, and shall put her away, and she
become another man's, he will not receive her any more to him. But says the
Lord, thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers, yet turn again unto me,
for I am merciful, and my wrath shall not fall upon you: I will not always
keep mine anger, though your sins be as Crimson, they shall be white as
Snow, and though they were red like Skarlet, they shall be as white as Wool;
if ye will turn to me, and wash ye, and make ye clean, and cease to do
evil, and learn to do well. So Revel. 2. Christ speaking to the Church of
Ephesus, says, She has fallen from her first love, but says he, Remember
from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works, and I will
receive thee to favor; by which we see, that the relapses of Gods elect, as
they do not finally hinder mercy from their souls, so notwithstanding the
same, they are still encouraged to return to God, to renew their covenant by
faith and repentance, and cleave more strongly to him.

As for outward evils, 8 Outward evils.
they are, First, evils of estate, as want and poverty, which often falls out to
be the portion of Gods children, yet are they not any whit the worse hereby,
but rather the better in their inner man: for the less they have in this
world, the greater and larger happiness shall they partake of in another
world. What they lose one way, is supplied another. Whatsoever comfort we have
in goods or friends below, it is all conveyed from God above, who still
remains, though these be taken away. The Saints see, that if to preserve the
dearest thing in the world, they break with God, he can make it a dead
contentment, and a torment to them: whereas if we care to preserve communion
with God, we shall be sure to find in him, whatsoever we deny for him, honor,
riches, pleasures, friends, all; so much the sweeter, by how much we have them
more immediately from the Springhead. Our riches, and friends, and life it
self may soon depart. But God never loses his right in us, nor we our
interest in him. Every thing beneath, teaches us by the vanity and vexation we
find in them, that our happiness is not there; they send us to God, they may
make us worse, but better they cannot: our nature is above them, and ordained
for a greater good: they can but go along with us for a while, and their end
swallows up all the comfort of their beginning.

Besides, none have that experience of Gods goodness and faithfulness, as
those that are in want and misery: God in his wisdom foreseeing what is best
for his servants, knows, that the more worldly wealth they do abound in, the
less their estimation would be of heavenly things: he sees how apt the poor
creature is to be carried away with present comfort, and to have his love
drawn to the world from better contentments. The poorer they are in worldly
riches, the more they seek to be rich in grace, in knowledge, faith, and
repentance, which heavenly treasures incomparably surmount the most
transcendent excellency which the creature can yield.

As for the evil of losing 9 Slanders.
a good name, a thing often befalling the children of God, to be slandered and
evil spoken of. They upon every small disgrace take occasion to enter into
themselves and try, whether they be guilty of such hard imputations as are
flung upon them.

And if upon a serious consideration he find himself disgraced for good
things, he wears it as a Crown, and as a Garland upon his head, Rejoicing
that he is accounted worthy to suffer for the Lord Jesus, esteeming the rebukes
of Christ grea ter treasure than the riches of Egypt. A true believer resignes
his good name, and all that he has to God. He is assured that no man can take
away that from him, which God will give him, and keep for him. It is not in
man's power to make others conceive what they please of us.

For the evils of Body, 10 Evils of body.
such as sickness, and diseases of all sorts, which daily attend our houses of
Clay: God by means hereof acquaints his children with their frail condition,
and shows them what a little time they have to provide for eternity, thereby
driving them to search their evidences, and to make all straight betwixt him
and them: outward weaknesses are often a means to restrain men from inward
evils. God usually sanctifies the pains and griefs of his servants to make them
better. The time of sickness is a time of purging from that defilement we
gathered in our health. We should not be cast down so much for any bodily
distemper, as for sin, that procures and invenomes the same. That is a good
sickness which tends to the health of the soul: Naaman the Assyrian, if he
had not had a leprousie in his body had continued a Leper, both in body and
soul all his days: his outward grievances made him inwardly sound. The very
heathen could say, that we are then best in soul when we are weakest in body,
for then we are most in heavenly resolutions, and seeking after God. Yea then
it appears what good proficients we have been in time of health. Oh how happy
were our conditions, if we were as good when we are well and in health, as we
usually are when we are sick and ill. 11 Death.


Even death it self which is the end of all, though it be fearful and irksome
to nature, yet it is to Gods servants a bed of Down, easing them of all their
miseries and putting them in possession of an heavenly kingdom, therefore
says Solomon, the day of death is better than the day of birth. God will be
the God of his, not only unto death, but in death: Death is the death of it
self, and not of us; it is a disarmed and conquered enemy to all the
faithful: for which cause S. Paul desired to be dissolved and to be with
Christ, which is best of all. Death, albeit it seems terrible and dreadful,
yet the sting thereof being taken away (by the death of Christ) it brings
everlasting joy along with it; and is only as a Groom-Porter to let us in to a
stately Palace. Whether tend all the troubles we meet with in this world? but
only to fit us for a better condition hereafter, and to assure the soul that
when earth can hold it no longer, Heaven shall.

Yea, when friends forsake 12 Death of friends.
us, and are false unto us, God is a sure help in time of need, he is our
refuge from one generation to another; do we not see that in the decay of
worldly comforts, God then manifests himself most comfortably to his people:
does he not style himself the Comforter of the comfortless, and the help of
them that are in distresses; and do not with him the fatherless find mercy;
if men were more fatherless they would find more mercy at Gods hands. As
Christ makes us al to him, so should we make him all in all to our selves. If
all comforts in the world were dead, we have them still in the living Lord. How
many friends have we in him alone? who rather than we shall want friends, can
make our enemies our friends. Thus it appears that all miseries are a trial
of us to God, and to the world, what we are; they are a cure of sin past, and a
preparation to endure further crosses, they have many excellent uses and ends,
and all for the best to Gods servants.

It is good we should be Afflictions
exercised with present crosses, to put us in mind of the evils we have done
long ago, that so we may repent of them: Joseph's brethren being afflicted and
imprisoned, called to mind how hardly they had dealt with their brother long
before. It should be our wisdom while we remain here, to consider our
warfaring condition, how we are daily environed with enemies, and therefore
ought to stand continually upon our guard against Satan, and the Powers of
darkness, and as Pilgrims and Strangers go on in our journey to Heaven: not
starting at the barking of every Dog, nor intangling our selves in worldly
things whereby we should be stopped in our way.

It is for our best not to be condemned with the world. Afflictions serve for
this very end, to make us more prize God, and deny the creature with all its
excellencies: are our crosses great here? let us not be daunted, but bear them
patiently, our comfort shall be the greater afterward. It is not only good for
us, that we should have crosses, but that they should be continued upon us,
that we may the better know our selves; If all were well with a man wounded,
and the sore clean healed, the plaster would fall off it self; So, were we
thoroughly cured of our spiritual wants, and in a continual resistance of every
evil way: These afflictions which are the plasters of our souls, would soon
cease and leave us.

Furthermore, Satan himself and all his instruments, 14 Devil and Heretics.
when they most set themselves against Gods people, and seek their overthrow,
then are they working their chief good, The Devil when he thought to make an
end of Christ by putting him to death, even then, by that very thing, was
vanquished himself, and the Church of God fully ransomed from hell and
damnation; God suffers many heretics to be in the world, but why? not that
the truth should be held in darkness, but that it might thereby be more
manifested and known. It is Satan's continual trade, to seek his rest in our
disquiet. When he sees men will to heaven, and that they have good title to
it, then he follows them with all tentations and discomforts that he can. He
cannot endure that a creature of meaner rank than himself, should enjoy a
happiness beyond him; but our comfort is, that Christ was tempted, that he
might succor all poor souls in the like case. We are kept by his power
through faith unto salvation.

Now the causes why all things do work together Causes why all things work
together for the best.
for the best to them that love God, are these. viz.

1. It is Gods Decree. 2. It is Gods manner of working. 3. It is Gods blessed
Covenant. 4. It is the foundation of the covenant, Christ Jesus.
Gods decree and purpose 1 Gods Decree.
is, of bringing all his Elect unto eternal salvation, and therefore all
things in heaven and earth must conduce to bring his servants unto glory. The
reason is this, God is infinitely wise, and infinitely strong, provident, and
good, therefore by his infinite wisdom, power, providence, and mercy, he
turns all things to the best for his; whatsoever is in heaven, earth, or
hell, is ordered by God; neither is there any thing without him; therefore
nothing can hinder his Decree; Satan himself with all his instruments, yea
the worst of creatures, all must serve Gods purpose contrary to their natures,
for the good of his children; The Prophet says, God has commanded salvation,
and he has commanded deliverance to Jacob; When God has determined to save
any man, all things must needs serve him, that overrules all things. As it was
said of Christ when he stilled the Seas, Who is this that the very wind and
Seas obey him? God commanded the Whale to serve at his beck to save Jonah, and
it obeyed. All creatures in the earth are at his disposing, and serve to
accomplish his pleasure.

The second cause why all works together for the 2 Gods manner of working.
best to believers; Is the manner of God working in things, which is by
contraries; he brings light out of darkness, glory out of shame, and life
out of death; We fell by pride to hell and destruction, and must be restored
by humiliation to life and salvation; Christ humbled himself being God, to
become man for us; and by his death restored us to life; When our sins had
brought us to greatest extremities, even then were we nearest to eternal
happiness. Therefore says the Apostle, When we are weak, then are we strong
in the Lord. When we are abased, then are we readiest to be exalted; when we
are poor, then are we most rich; and when we are dead, then do we live: For
God works all by contraries, he lets men see his greatness and his
goodness, that so they may admire his works, and give more glory to him; he
works without means, and above means, and against means; out of misery he
brings happiness, and by hell brings men to heaven. Which as it
manifests Gods glory to his creatures, so it serves for the confusion of
man's pride, that he may discern he is nothing in himself, but is all that he
is in the Lord.

The third cause why all things work for the 3 Gods covenant.
best to them that fear God, Is Gods covenant with his Church; when once this
gracious covenant is made, that he will be their God, and they shall be his
people: that he will be their Father and Protector, must not all things then
needs serve for their good? When as God tells Abraham, I am thy God.
All-sufficient, only walk before me, and be thou perfect: Does not this engage
him to set his power and mercy, his wisdom, and providence, all on work for
the happy estate of Abraham? When once God by his promise is become our God,
there is a covenant betwixt us and the creatures, yea, and the stones in the
street, that nothing shall wrong us, but all conduce to our good. The Angels
are ours, their service is for our protection, safety, and welfare; Heaven and
earth is ours, and all things in them for our behoof; Christ himself, and,
together with him, all things else are become ours; in him we are heirs of
all. What a wondrous comfort is this, that God has put himself over to be
ours? whom to enjoy, is to possess all things, and to want, is misery
unexpressable. Had we all the world without God, it would prove a curse, and no
blessing to us: whereas if we have nothing, and enjoy God, we have happiness
it self for our portion. If we have no better portion here than these things,
we are like to have hell for our portion hereafter. Let God be in any
condition though never so ill, yet it is comfortable. He is goodness it self.
And indeed, nothing is so much a Christians, as God is his, because by his
being ours in covenant, all other things become ours, and therefore they cannot
but cooperate for our good.

When thou art in the fire, and water, I am with thee, says God: And Thou art
my Buckler, my Glory, and Shield, therefore I will not be afraid, though ten
thousand of people shall be set me round about, says David, for salvation
belongs unto the Lord. And if God be on our side, who can be against us? If
God justify us, who shall condemn us? Can any thing hurt us, when he is
become our loving Father? Neither death, nor life, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor principalities, nor powers, nor any thing whatsoever, can
separate us from his love toward us.

A fourth ground, why all things fall out for the best to the Saints, is: The 4
Foundation of the covenant.
foundation of this covenant of God with his Church, which is Christ Jesus, who
by his blood has purchased our peace, he being God became man, and is the
sole Author of all our comfort; Without Christ God is a consuming fire; but in
him a most loving Father, and ever well pleased. God promises in Christ his
Son to marry his people unto himself for ever, Yea (says he) I will marry
thee unto me in righteousness and in judgment, and in mercy, and everlasting
compassion. Now upon this blessed contract made in Christ to his Church; what
follows? In that day (says the Lord) I will hear the heavens, and they
shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the Corn, and the Wine, and
the Oil, and they shall hear Israel, and I will have mercy upon her, that was
not pitied; And I will say unto them which were not my people; thou art my
people, And they shall say, thou art my God.

Where we see, what is the reason of all their happiness, even this, that God
will marry them to himself. So that this marriage works all our bliss; our
conjunction with Christ, and reconciliation through his death, is the cause of
all our comfort, in him we have the adoption of Sons. Hence it is, that we
are at peace with God, and have freedom from all harms. Christ in his greatest
reproach, and deepest humiliation, had his greatest triumph and exaltation; In
his death on the Cross he vanquished Death, and entered into eternal life:
When Christ came into the world, and took upon him our nature, even then the
greatest Monarch in the world, Augustus Caesar, was at his command, whom he so
ordered, as that by his causing all the world to be taxed. Christ was
manifested to be borne at Bethlehem in Jury.

How comes it to pass, that death which is fearful in it self, cannot
hurt us? The reason is, Death is swallowed up in victory by his death. It is
Christ that sanctifies all crosses, afflictions, and disgraces to the Saints
advantage. The evil of them all is taken away by him, and turned to his
peoples good. How comes it to pass that the Law cannot hurt us, which
pronounces a curse against every one, that abides not in all things written
therein, to do them? The reason is, Christ was made a curse for us, he was made
Gal. 4.
under the Law, that he might redeem us who were under the Law: and thus is
Christ a meritorious and deserving cause of procuring all good to us, and
removing all ill from us.

He does not only overcome evil for us, but also overcommeth evil in us, and
gives us his Spirit, which unites us to himself; whereby we have ground to
expect good out of every ill, as knowing, that whatsoever Christ wrought for
the good of mankind, he did it for us in particular.

In Outward favors, grace makes us acknowledge all the blessings we have to
be the free gifts of God, and invites us to return the glory to him.

Gods servants take all occasions and opportunities of doing good by those
gifts and abilities wherewith they are endowed. When Hester was advanced to
great honor, Mordechay told her, that God had conferred that dignity upon her
for his peoples welfare, that she might be a means of their safety. Whereas on
the contrary, a proud heart destitute of the Spirit of Christ, ascribes all to
it self, waxes more haughty, and grows worse and worse, the more good he
enjoyes.

A gracious soul upon the sight of the evil of sin in it self, is more
deeply humbled before God, and with S. Paul, cries out of his wretchedness. A
heavenly minded man being smitten for his wickedness, labors for subjection
under the hand of the Almighty, and says, I will patiently abide and endure
thy correction, because thou Lord have done it. When the gracious man is held
under the cross, and suffers bitter things, he says, It is good for me that
I am afflicted, for thereby I am taught to know thee. In all troubles that
befall him, he professes that it is good for him to cleave unto God. And the
less outward wealth he has, the more he seeks for inward grace, making a holy
use of all things.

Upon these instructions hence delivered, let us take a view of ourselves, and
try whether we in our afflictions are such as cleave to God, and are drawn
nearer to him thereby; call to mind the crosses wherewith God has exercised
thee, and the blessings which at any time he has bestowed upon thee, and see
how in both thou have been bettered, see what profitable use thou have made
thereof for thy souls comfort.

Let us see how we have followed the providence of God in his dealing with us:
for if we have an interest in his goodness, then will we be careful, as God
turns all things for our good, so to follow the same (together with him) for
the good of our souls.

Now because things do not always conduce to the Object.
good of Gods children, as outward Peace and prosperity, oftentimes make them
worse; therefore some may object, how can this be true which here the Apostle
says, That all things do work together for the best to them that love God?

The answer hereunto is, that for the most part Answ.
the children of God do Job says, The things I feared are come upon me. By
Job 3. 25.
which we see, that Job in the midst of his prosperity did fear, and was
jealous over himself.

But a more plainer answer of the objection is, Peace, Plenty, and Prosperity,
do fall out at the first to their ill, yet nevertheless they shall prove in
the end a great gain unto them; for whereas by occasion of these, they
formerly fell (having too high an estimation of the creature, and overprizing
the same) they see now more into their nature, and learn to contemn them.

Again the outward good things of this life Hezekias that God left him, to try
what was in him, the outward treasure which 2 Chronicles. 31. 33.
he had was a means to make known to himself and others, the pride and
vanity of his mind; the plenty and prosperity of the Saints are greater triers
of them, than adversities and wants. For many that have comfortably gone
through a low condition, have yet foully failed in a full estate; their
corruptions breaking forth to the view of others: prosperity teaches men
themselves; it tries their spirits, and lays them open to the world. Therefore
it seems good to God, to strip his servants of these outward things. They can
acknowledge with patience his righteous dealing, knowing that man's happiness
consists not in abundance of these things, but that the blessing of God is
riches enough.

But some may object Object.
and say, I have been long afflicted, and have had many crosses upon me, and
little good do I find by them, I am never the better, but rather the worse
for all. This may be true thou say, but stay a little, Answ.
and consider the event; howsoever by reason of the bitterness and continuance
of the cross, hitherto thou find little good thereby: yet know that God is
all this while but in hammering and working of thy unruly heart, thy good will
follow afterward. We see Simile.
by experience that sick persons while they are in their physic, are made
sicker and sicker, but after that has done working, then the party is far
better than before. It is a folly to think that we should have physic and
health both at once: it is impossible that a man should sow and reap both
together. We must of necessity endure the working of Gods Physic. If trouble
be lengthned, lengthen thy patience: when the sick humor is carried away and
purged, then we shall enjoy desired health. God promises forgiveness of
sin, but thou find the burden of it daily on thee. Cheer up thy self,
when the morning is darkest then comes day: after a fight, victory will
appear. Gods time is best, therefore wait cheerfully.

Often times Gods servants under his cross are so sore wrought upon, that they
have hardly leisure of making a good use of the same, being distracted and
dejected for the present, so as they burst out rather into further evil than
before. But afterward when their afflictions are thoroughly digested, then they
begin to find the fruit of patience, humiliation, and obedience, and are
better for the same ever after: therefore wait contentedly Gods leisure, thou
shall surely find a sweet calm after the storm is over: though we find
little benefit by afflictions for the present, yet let us not conclude all is
naught with us; for tentations being bitter, will not suffer men in them to
lift up their hearts strait: after the extremity and vexation thereof is laid,
then ensues the quiet fruit of righteousness.

But if all things (yea sin Object.
it self) shall turn to the sin? The Apostle S. Paul,* was in his days
Answ.
troubled with the like question, therefore observe with what detestation he
answers, saying, God forbid, the damnation of such men is just. But to answer
more fully and plainly for the satisfaction of weak Christians.

True it is, that al things, we may not do evil Evils not to be done, that
good may come thereof.
that good may come thereof. That which is evil in it self must not be done;
no, though for the doing thereof we might gain the greatest good, or avoid
the greatest evil whatsoever: as if it were to win a World, we might not
tell a lie, because it is a breach of Gods Law; Christ says to the Devil, It
is written, thou Matthew. 4. 4
shall not tempt the Lord thy God. We may not therefore by sin tempt God, so
to see his goodness in working good out of our wickedness.

If therefore upon this ground of Doctrine (that all things shall turn to the
good of Gods children, yea even their sins themselves) any of us shall commit
wickedness and displease his Majesty, to try what mercy and wisdom is in him,
to draw good out of our evil; this is a provoking of Gods goodness, and those
who thus do, turn the truth of Gods Word into poison, and make even that
their destruction, which should build them up in grace and holiness.

If we sin through weakness Danger of wilful sinning.
and frailty of our flesh, and through strength of tentation, upon repentance
we may find grace, but if presuming that God will turn all things to our good,
we break his Law, what else do we but first of all make God the cause of our
evil; and secondly, vex and scandal the Saints on earth: thirdly, we sad the
blessed Angels in Heaven; and fourthly rejoice the Devils and damned spirits in
Hell; putting Darts and deadly weapons into their hands to work our ruin and
overthrow: nay fifthly, we grieve the good Spirit of God, who continually
puts us in mind of better things (if we would hearken to him) and by whom
we are sealed up unto the day of redemption: sixthly, we slacken grace in our
hearts, and whereas we should grow forward in virtue and holiness, we weaken
the power of godliness exceedingly in us: seventhly, all willing sins do abate
our affiance in God, and the seeling of his favor toward us: yea, often times
by so sinning, many of his dear children have walked heavily without
spiritual joy all the days of their lives; for howsoever in regard the Lord
has elected us, we shall never finally fall away and perish, yet we may want
the sweet sense of his favor, and remain afflicted in spirit all our life
long. And then we shall know that the grief and trouble Note.
which we here undergo to avoid sin and subdue it, will be nothing so much
as the mischief and sosrow; That sin once committed and yielded too, will
bring on the soul.

Yea, there is no child of God, but by experience shall one day feel, that
howsoever God by his wisdom and mercy, can turn every sin to our good, yet
it will prove bitter as Wormwood in the end, the pleasure will never answer the
smart and vexation that attends it. The contrition and breaking of thy heart
for thy sins committed (if thou be Gods) will more disquiet and trouble thee,
than possibly it can be a trouble to resist and forsake sin.

Nay, oftentimes God does punish the very want of reverence in his servants to
him, as also their slacknesse and unfitness in good duties, so, as they may
easily discern he is offended with them for the same. As we may see by the
example of the Corinthians, who coming unpreparedly to the Lords Supper, for
this very cause were so punished, that some of them were sick, and some weak,
and some were struck by Death.

David's numbering of the people, and Hezekias showing of his treasures to the
Princes of Babell; howsoever, by some they may be thought small sins, yet God
scourged them for the same very sharply; And it is good that Gods servants
should a little know what it is to offend their Maker, for if they will be so
negligent and careless in walking with him, it is fit they should reap the
fruit of their own devices. It causes much relapsing, and backsliding from
God, when men have never truly smarted for their sin. Having had knocks in
our own ways, it establishes us in Gods ways. For we love to wander from our
selves, and bite strangers at home, till God by one cross or other brings us
to himself, and then we think of returning to him. Nay, it is better for them
a thousand fold, that God should so school them, then that they should be let
alone, and so go on without controulement from sin to sin till they come to
desperation.

Howsoever therefore that God can, and will turn the sins of his servants to
their best advantage; yet better it were for them they had never sinned at all,
Do we not think that David wished he had never fallen into that sin of
Adultery? And would not Peter have bin glad, that he had never denied his
Master? The sin of David cost him many a cry for pardon, Mercy Lord, mercy,
against thee have I sinned, forgive me this heinous crime. And it cost Peter
many a bitter salt tear too; Howsoever both David and Peter after their
recovery by repentance, were the better for it, to their dying day.

As for all such as persist in sin, that God may turn all things to their
best, Let them know that all things shall work together for their bane and
utter destruction for ever, which I now come to show.

First of all God himself, and his blessed Angels, 1 God.
are at enmity with them: And therefore, 2 All the creatures both in heaven 2
Creatures.
and earth are against them. In Pharaohs ten Plagues, we see the creatures
were all ready to execute the pleasure of the Almighty against him. And the
Bears out of the Forest were armed by God to devour those scoffing children:
This is one part of the burden, under which the creatures of God do groan,
that they serve God against wicked men, and are his Armies to punish the
rebellious world.

3. Even the good gifts 3 Good gifts.
of God are turned to the bane of the wicked. Absoloms glory, his goodly long
locks, were his halter to hang him up by: Achitophels wit and policy, brought
him to that fearful end, of being his own hangman. Hamans honor, what good
did it to him, but only brought him to greater shame? his greatness made him
swell in pride, and his pride had a sudden fall: What became of Herod's high
mind in taking to himself the glory of God? which when foolish people ascribed
it to him, was he not presently smitten, so as the worms consumed him, and
he dyed a loathsome death? What became of Dives his riches? did not his abuse
thereof plunge him deeper into hell? Wicked men though they abound in this
world, yet not being in covenant with God, they have nothing with a blessing.
The wicked are but as traitors before God; And often it is seen, that great
Traitors who are by the Prince kept in prison, are nourished very liberally,
until their time of Execution come: So it is with all graceless persons, how
ever for the present they have great allowances, yet as Traitors (in the
conclusion) they shall have an hard account to make unto God for all those
things they have sinfully enjoyed. And not only 4 Truth of God.
so, but they abuse the very truth of God, as shall appear in diverse
particulars.

First, for the comfortable 1 Justification.
doctrine of justification by faith alone, they pervert the same to their own
destruction; saying, We are justified by faith only, what need we then care
for doing of good works? Alas, they profit us nothing to our salvation.
Therefore it is to no end to strive to do good.

Again, for the Doctrine 2 Ch^istian liberty.
of Christian liberty, God having given us lawful recreations, and plentiful
use of his creatures, they turn all into licentiousness; and in stead of
moderate refreshment, they make a daily occupation of sports and games; In
stead of a lawful use of the creatures, they run into all excess of riot,
in meat, drink, apparel, buildings, and delights.

And for the Doctrine of mortality, how do wicked men abuse it, saying, Let us
eat, drink, and be 3 Mor ality. 1 Cor.
merry, for to morrow we shall die: that which should put the^ in mind of
spending of their time well, increases their sin.

Whereas the long suffering of God should lead 4 Gods patience.
men to repentance; the wicked by means of Gods patience, run more securely
on in sin; treasuring up to themselves, wrath against the day of wrath, and
the declaration of Gods just judgment, which one day shall ceaze upon them.
Because he does not speedily execute his displeasure, therefore they grow
worse and worse. Never considering the lamentable condition that sin brings
men into, which did they thoroughly weigh, they would give the whole world if
they were possessours of it, to have their spirits at freedom from this
bondage and fear. God will take a course, that his grace shall not be turned
into wantonness. First or last, thou shall find (who ever thou art) at what
rare thou buyest the pleasure of sin. Those that have enjoyed long the sweet of
sin, may expect the bitterest sorrow, and heartbreaking sor it.

Nay, the greater good things they have, the greater evil they receive thereby
by abuse of the same; the more they are illuminated by the Word, 5 The Word
their hearts become more rebellious against it; and the greater authority,
wealth, and health they enjoy, the more mischief they do with them. Those
heavenly Doctrines, which should build up a good heart unto holiness, do they
abuse to bring their souls deeper into wickedness; showing themselves like to
their Father the Devil, whose children they indeed are: God has said, He
would give his Angels charge over thee, which is a most comfortable place to a
good heart: But how does Satan abuse this to Christ; That he should fling
himself headlong from the Pinnacle of the Temple; and as the Devil, so every
wicked man by all instructions of the Word, takes occasion to tempt God the
more; turning both grace it self, and the Doctrine of Grace, into wantonness.

Are there not many that hear the Word, and know Gods mind, who yet profit
nothing to amendment of life? were it not better for these never to enjoy such
means of heavenly wisdom, Than now having the light still to live in
darkness; their knowledge only makes their damnation the greater if they
continue in sin; what a lamentable condition is that man in, whose knowledge is
only sufficient to damn his own soul? But let us see further Evil things.
how all evil things work together for the worst to ungodly persons.

And to begin with spiritual ill things, as Heresies 1 Spiritual ill things.
and errors they serve but to ensnare the wicked; for instead of making them
cautelous, and diligent to search out the truth, they are carried away with
every wind of Doctrine.

So for the ill of good men their falls and sins, the wicked of the world reap
no benefit there by, but encourage and hearten themselves the more in a sinful
way, rejoicing thereat, and making it their daily talk: neither do their own
daily sinnings any whit better them, but are as so many punishments of their
former transgressions: God in his justice suffering them still to run on to
the fulfilling of the measure of their iniquities.

And for outward evils 2 Outward evils and crosses.
in this life, those that do turn to a good man's happiness, fall out
continually to their destruction. Pharaohs ten Plagues (which might have
humbled his soul) made him but worse and worse: therefore says God, Why should
I smite you any more? for even since I punished you ye revolted still. The
wicked are like to the Smiths-Anvill, which by often beating is made harder and
harder; so the more they are corrected, the stubborner and stiffer in sin
they grow. Their crosses are laid upon them from an angry God, and are
sorerunners of his eternal wrath, which shall seize upon their souls in hell,
where the more they are tormented, the more they shall blaspheme; and the more
they shall blaspheme, and the more they shall blaspheme, the more they shall be
tormented without cessation. Causes


The cause of all this evil Gods infinite justice, which will not be
unsatisfied.

Secondly, their own vile hearts, which like a sick man having an ill stomach,
digests nothing, but turns all to poison. Therefore says the Apostle, To the
unclean, all things are unclean. As poysonsome Plants put into a fertile
place, do invenome the ground whereinto they are removed. So the same crosses
that turn unto a good man's welfare, prove a bad man's ruin by reason of the
corruption within him.

Another cause is, the inward and outward to Gods dishonor, and their own
confusion, endeavoring to conform them to himself. None has greater
knowledge and understanding in the Word of God than the Devil. Yet he turns
all his knowledge unto the sin against the Holy Ghost: but yet the Devil
cannot sorce men to wickedness; it is their own sinful hearts which betray
them into his hands.

Whence we learn that Use.
all wicked men in the Balaam had good parts, but they not being sanctified
proved his bane.

We see further, that outward prosperity is no Use.
mark of the true Church. and parts than any man: howbeit, sight of sin
preserves us from falling into it: and such as shut their eyes against the
light, plunge themselves into deeper the misery.

Now to proceed to further instructions: do Obser. 1. Salvation certain.
all things work together for the best to Gods servants; then hence we may
learn the certainty of the salvation of Gods elect. I take my reason from the
Text it self, after this manner. That which nothing can hinder, that is
certain, but the salvation of Gods children cannot be hindered, therefore the
salvation of Gods children is most certain. If any thing do or can hinder the
Saints recovery or perseverance, it is sin: but to such as are united unto
Christ by faith, sin is so far from hindering their happiness, that by Gods
overruling providence it turns to their best good.

The second thing which we may ground here Obser. 2. Gods particular
providence to be observed.
for the information of our judgment, is this, That as we know, the providence
of God is the cause why all things work together for the best to his children:
so we should eye this very particular providence in all that we enjoy, turning
the same to our good: there is a working hand of God in every thing toward us,
as we may see in the examples of Job, Joseph, and David, with other of his
servants, whose present sorrow and humiliation, was but a means of their
future glory and exaltation. There is nothing so bad, but he can draw good out
of it when any evil is intended. God either puts bars and lets to the
execution of it against us: or else limiteth and boundeth the same, both in
regard of time and measure. The God of spirits has an influence into the
spirits of all men, and knows how to take them off from doing us harm. All
the strength of the creature, rests in the great Creator of all things, who if
he denies concourse, the arm of their power soon withers. It cannot but
bring strong consolation to the soul, to know that in all variety of changes,
and intercourse of good and bad things, our loving God has a disposing hand.
So as all blessings and crosses, all ordinances and graces, nay our very falls,
yea, Satan himself, with all his instruments, being over mastred and ruled by
God, have this injunction upon them, to further Gods good intendment to us, and
in no wise hurt us, which should move us to see his disposing hand in all that
befalls us. We owe God this respect, to observe his providence in the particular
passages of our lives; considering he is our Sovereign, and his will is the
rule, and we are to be accountable to him as our Judge. We should question our
hearts for questioning his care in the least kind. So long as God sits at the
Stern and rules all, we may be sure no evil shall betyde us that he can
hinder.

Thirdly, hence we may Obser. 3.
learn, that there is not two, but one Sovereign head over the whole World,
which is plainly proved by this Text of Scripture. For all things work together
for the best to them that love God: and things which in themselves are
contraries, agree together to procure their good; therefore all things
whatsoever, are over ruled by the sole power of the Almighty. The Devil
himself although he be called the God of this World, yet he is at Christ's
beck, and could not enter into a few Swine, without leave first obtained: he
raises up hideous storms and tempests against the Saints, but perishes
himself in the waves at last; persecutions and perils may follow us, but they
are all limited in the doing of hurt, which plainly demonstrates that there is
but one main worker and wise disposer of all things.

Further, hence observe, Observe. 4
that there is nothing in the world, that to Gods servants is absolutely evil;
because nothing is so ill, but some good may be raised out of it, not as it is
an evil, but as it is governed and mastred by a supreme cause. Sin is of all
evils the greatest, and yet sinful actions may produce gracious effects,
through Gods ordering and guiding the same.

Again observe, that a Observe. 5
child of God is truly happy in the midst of all misery. To prove this, I
reason thus; In what estate soever the child of God is, it shall turn to his
good: therefore no affliction can make him truly miserable. The proof of this
the Apostle sets down in his own example, he was 2 Cor. 6.
poor, yet made many rich; he sorrowed, yet always rejoyeed; he had nothing,
yet possessed all things; he was chastned, and yet not killed: Gods children,
although to the world they may seem to be miserable, yet having communion and
fellowship with him, they are always happy: the very worst day of Gods child,
^is better than the very best day of the wicked. The worst day of S. Paul was
better to him, than the best day of Nero was to him; for the wicked, in the
midst of their happiness are accursed; whereas the godly, in the midst of
their miseries are blessed.

This Doctrine is a A ground of understanding the promises.
ground of understanding diverse other places of Scripture: as Psalm 91. The
Lord promises that he will deliver his from the snare of the Hunter, and from
the noisome pestilence: and yet often times his dear servants are in the hands
of the wicked, and taken away by the stroke of his judgments: this truth
nevertheless remaining firm, that all works together for their best. So God
teaches us in his Word, that he does make a league between his servants and
the creatures; but all such expressions of his love we must bring to this Text,
and then they are true, else they may seem to be false; The plague shall not
come near thy dwelling place; but only so far forth as it is for thy benefit.
The good Prophet was torn in pieces by a Lion; and sundry holy men have
received hurt by wild Beasts, whose eternal welfare were furthered thereby.
Therefore this phrase of Scripture (that the creatures are in league) is to be
understood, not that they have put off their hostile nature. But that they have
the same issue, as those that are at peace with us.

Here likewise is a direction A direction to pray for temporal blessings.
for us, how to pray for earthly blessings, and the removal of temporal
judgments; often times worldly honors and riches are snares unto Gods
children, and temporal chastisements (which we so earnestly pray against)
work much good unto us. And therefore it falls out, that when we pray
against temporal calamities, we pray against our own good.

Being therefore afflicted, we should desire not absolutely that God would
remove our troubles, but that he would work his own good pleasure upon us
thereby. Our prayers for temporal blessings, and removal of temporal crosses,
must always be conditional; for what good will it be for us to come out of
the fire worse than we were, when we went into it? If therefore God in his
wisdom see it good for us to have affliction, we should not desire him
absolutely to remove the same, till it have done us good; And then Lord deal
with us as seems best in thine own eyes.

As for such as affect neither God, nor goodness, let them know, that if all
things work for the best to the Saints, then they may forbear their
successesse endeavors, which they daily enterprise against them; in going
about to hurt the godly, they do them most good; for God will benefit them by
their malice: Their wicked practices shall not only be made frustrate, but
dangerous to themselves; after the chastisement of his servants for their good,
God will cast the rod into the fire. Men may know whether they are vessels of
mercy or no, by the use they are put to. The basest of people, are fit enough
to be executioners. It is a miserable wisdom, when men are wise to work their
own ruin. Do not many spin a fine thread, and weave a fair web, when by their
turnings and devices they turn themselves into hell? What ever we get by
sin for the present, it will one day prove the heaviest business that ever
we undertook.

God is the only Monarch of the world, and makes all things and persons
whatsoever, service able to his own end, and his Churches good. He is higher
than the highest: Satan with all his instruments, are but slaves to the
Almighty, executioners of his will. Can we think that Gods children who are so
near and dear to him, shall always be trampled upon by the powers of
darkness. No certainly, he is interessed in all their quarells, and takes
their injuries as don to himself. When we can be more subtle than the
Devil, or more strong than God, we may think to thrive against them. He is a
wall of fire round about his Church, not only to defend and preserve it, but to
consume all the Adversaries thereof; God does great matters for his servants;
he rebukes Kings and Princes, and ruinates Empires for their fakes: For the
bringing home back again of the Jews, he translated the Babylonish Empire to
the Persians; and therefore the wicked must take heed of attempting any thing
against Gods Church; because the harm thereof will redound upon their own
heads. God delights to take the oppressed parties part, and serves himself of
all his enemies for his peoples good. They practice against the righteous, and
he laughes them to scorn. Wicked men cannot do Gods children a greater
pleasure, than to oppose them, for by this means they help exceedingly to
advance them.

Satan and all his instruments, what get they by their cruelty to the Saints?
they do but increase their own torment, and do them the more good? but this
is both against, their knowledge and wills. Therefore if they be loath to do
them any good, let them take he how they attempt any evil against them.

And here let all such be admonished how they Use 1.
provoke Gods children to cry in their prayers against them: For it is better
for the wicked, that they had all the creatures in heaven and earth against
them, than the poor Saints; for a few of these will more prejudice them, than
all the world besides.

Come we now to the grounds of practice hence to be observed.

Again, does God order Use 2.
all for the best, to them that love him?

Let us not then except against any evil that shall befall us, for this our
present cross shall turn to our future comfort. It is the Saints happiness,
That their best is in working still, till they be complete in heaven: But the
wicked and men of the world, their worst is always in contriving; their life
is bad, their death is worse, and after death it is worst of all with them. God
himself, and all under him, work continually for the good of his children,
their best is last, their light grows on clearer and clearer as the light,
until the noone day. But the worldly grow worser and worser every moment: To
them that fear God, sin and sorrow, their very worst, is by Gods mercies
best for them; whereas all the best of the wicked by abuse turns to their
worst.

Observe here the excellency Use 3.
of the Saints comfort, above all other comforts whatsoever: The nature of it
is this; It must be stronger than the grievance of which it is a cordial: And
the reason of spiritual comfort must be more forcible, than any carnal reason
can be to undermine it. Now what stronger consolation can a man have than to
be assured, that all things (without exception) shall work together for his
good; but this is not all. What a sweet refreshment is it, when the soul can
say, God will either stop me from falling into sin, outwardly by afflictions,
or else subdue my corruptions inwardly by his Spirit, that I shall not be
overthrown by them; he will never suffer me to rot in my sins; but when I
do fall, will raise me up again: It bears up a Christians heart, that rather
than we shall continue in an evil way, God will send some Nathan or other to
rouse us out of our security.

Therefore to all thy comforts add this; That God will not only save thee at
last, but turn all things to the best whilst thou art here. This is the
highest strain of consolation. It is far stronger to refresh and quicken us,
than any grievance can be to afflict us; It makes evil things (in comparison)
to seem good, As Moses counted the rebukes of Christ greater riches than the
treasures of Egypt; he made more choice of affliction, than he did of the
worlds glory. If God be with us, who can be against us: If he be our
Shepherd, we are sure to lack nothing. There is such a force of comfort in
salvation, that we will rather choose outward evils, than to enjoy outward
good things. Moses by faith seeing that outward affliction and shame were knit
to salvation, chose these, and refused dignity and ease.

How ought this to stay the soul under all its heavy pressures? Why should
not I be patient in sickness, in poverty, in dis graces, or why should I
despair at the hour of death? Am I not under the hand of my God, working my
good out of every evil? It is the subtilty of our arch-enemie to drive us to a
stand, that we may doubt of our conditions, and say with Gideon, If the Lord be
with me, and that I am his child, why is it thus with me? How is it that all
this sorrow and misery has befallen me, and lies so heavy upon my soul?
But our comfort here, is, that God who turns all things to our best, is
stronger than Satan.

Again, considering all things conduce unto our good, though in appearance
never so opposite; this comfort arises, That if God do so work this or that,
then I must believe against belief, I must stand firm against contraries; my
faith must answer his manner of working, and believe that God can bring me to
honor by shame, and to Heaven by Hell gates: for if it be his course of
dealing, first to cast down, and then to lift up, by disgrace to bring his
servants to glory; then in all my extremities I must rest upon God, who is
never nearer unto his to succor them, than when he seems to be furthest
off. When ^hee means to give victory, he suffer us to be foiled first; and
when he intends to justify a poor sinner, he will condemn him first. Let us
therefore hope against hope, and desire God in our distresses to open our eyes,
that we may see our consolations.

Hagar had a Well by her when she was ready to perish for thrist, and yet she
saw it not: and Elisha's man had Angels to defend him when the Aramites
compassed him about, but perceived not the same: so the Angel of the Lord
continually pitcheth Psalm. 34.
his tent about the godly though they are not aware of it; yea, God is then
nearest to us when we are in most straights. Cordials are kept for faintings.
When Christ went to cast the Devil out of a child, he then most raged and tare
him: So likewise Satan and wicked men, most rage when they are nearest to their
end and destruction. In thy greatest danger never rest on thy friends, but on
the Lord, who never stands nearer and firmer to us, than when we are most
perplexed and know not what to do. A distressed soul sees often no comfort in
outward things, and therefore retireth unto God, in whom it finds whatsoever
may make it happy. Our strength may Psalm. 24.
fail, and our heart may fail, but God is our portion for ever. When we are
weak, then we are strong; and when we are most cast down in our selves, we
are nearest to Gods helping hand. This carriage of the Almighty ought to
establish our faith.

In all cases of extremity Double eye.
we should have a double eye, one to look upon our grievances and troubles, and
another to look upon the issue and event of them. Why do men in time of
dangerous sickness take bitter Physic, which is almost death unto them? Why
do they then undergo such things as they loath at other times? Is it not
because they rest upon the skill of the Physician? And shall we then in our
distresses did rust God for our souls, when we will trust a weak and mortal
man with our bodies? If conceit be so strong in earthly things, as indeed it
is, then faith is much stronger, when it grounds it self upon the truth of the
Word. When God exercises us with poverty, or other afflictions, this should
teach us submission to his providence in any condition, saying, Lord do with me
what thou will, only let this poor soul be precious in thine eyes. Thou have
promised, that howsoever these afflictions lie heavy upon me, yet in the end
al shall turn to my good, therefore dispose of thy servant at thine own
pleasure, I resign all to thee.

Here is the rejoicing A Christians joy.
of a Christian, which makes him cheerfully pass through any affliction; he
knows that good is intended in all that befalls him: with what alacrity did
Joseph say unto his brethren, Ye sold me hither, but God has turned it to the
best, that I should preserve and nourish you all, and save much people alive,
who otherwise were like to have perished with famine: This made Job so
patiently to say, The Lord gives and the Lord takes, blessed be the name of
the Lord.

This is the ground of all true contentation, I have learned, (says S. Paul)
in And contentment.
all estates to be content, to be rich, and to be poor, to abound, and to be
in want, and why so? Whatsoever his estate and condition was, God turned it to
the best: shall any man dare to mislike of Gods allowlowance? Does not he know
better what is good for us, than we can possibly imagine what is good for our
selves?

This likewise should teach us not to take offense at the reproach and disgrace
which is cast upon Gods children; for mark the righteous, (says David) and
behold the upright, the end of that man is peace. The issue of their trouble is
ever quietness: take not one piece of a Christian man's life by it self, but
take it altogether; and then thou shall see the truth of this Doctrine. To see
Joseph in the Dungeon and in his irons, we happily may be offended, and call
Gods providence in question: but beholding him in his honor and advancement,
we cannot but conclude him a happy man. So if we look on Job sitting with sores
on the Dunghill, there is matter of offense, but to see him restored again,
and blessed with a greater estate than he had before, this is matter of
praising God. If we consider of Christ abased, and hanging upon a Cross, so
there will be scandal, but look on him exalted to glory far above all
Dignities and Powers, and then the scandal is soon taken away. Let us
theresore lay one thing to another, when we eye Gods people, and we shall see a
blessing under their greatest curse. Those things which are contrived by man's
wit, may argue great folly, if one part be not annexed to the other; therefore
look to the whole work toward his servants, and then thou shall never be
offended at their condition.

This also is a ground of Use. 5. Holy boldness.
Christian boldness in holy courses, when a man is fully resolved, that come
what will come, God will turn all to his good; it encourages him cheersully to
go through any difficulty: what is the reason of the fearesulnesse and
dastardness of most men, but only this, that if we do this or that duty, or
abstain not from this or that good action; then this cross and this
displeasure by such and such a person will be brought upon me. The Wise man
says, That the fear of man Prove. 29.
brings a snare, but he that trusts in the Lord shall be exalted. Let us
not (regarding the fear of man) neglect our duty to God, for he can turn the
hearts of the Kings on the Earth, to seek the welfare of his poorest creature,
and make thy very enemies to be thy friends. He that for sinister ends will
offend his Maker, may well be excluded to the gods whom they have served. Go to
the Great men, whose persons you have obeyed for advantage; to your riches, to
your pleasures, which you have loved more than God or goodness. You would not
lose a base custom, a superfluity for me, therefore I will not own you now.
Such men are more impudent than the Devil himself, that will claim
acquaintance with God at last, when they have carried themselves as his enemies
all their days. God wants not means to maintain his, without being beholding
to the Devil. He has all help hid in himself, and will then show it, when
it shall make most for his own glory. He deserves not to live under the
protection of a King, that will displease him for fear of a Subject. The three
Children in Daniel said, Know O King, that our God can deliver us out of thy
hands; but if he will not, yet nevertheless we will not fall down and worship
thine Image. The righteous are bold as a Lion (says the Wise man) the Lord is
his strong Tower. Prove. 28. 1
What need we fear any creature, when we have him on our side, who has both
Men and Devils at his beck?

And if God turn all Use 6.
things whatsoever to our good, should not we through the whole carriage of
our lives, chiefly aim at his honor? God writes our names in his Book, he
numbers our hairs, and bottles up our tears: he has a special care of us,
every good deed we do he writes down to eternity; yea, if we give but a cup
of cold water in his name, he takes notice of it: and shall not we then take
special occasion to magnify him in all things? We pray daily, Hallowed be thy
name, therefore ought accordingly to observe Gods dealing with us. How is it
possible that we should give him the glory of his mercies, if we never observe
them?

A wicked man considers, this makes for my advantage, and this for my profit,
this tends to my ease and wealth, etc. studying how to make friends, and please
persons in place above him; not respecting Gods honor and glory in the least
kind: whereas the sincere Chri stian looks on all things as they tend to his
best happiness, and therefore, forecast thus: If I do this or that good, then
I shall grow in grace, and wisdom. and knowledge, but if I neglect it, and be
careless of well doing, I shall hurt and wound my soul, and break the peace
of my conscience: by this company and good acquaintance I shall be furthered in
holiness, become wiser and better in heavenly understanding; if I fall, they
may raise me up, and help maintain a gracious frame within me. Where true
holiness is, the soul is sensible of all advantages and disadvantages of
good. An indifferency for any company or employment, shows a dead heart.

This is a main difference to distinguish a child of God from a profane
wretch that only lives to himself, his heart is taken up wholly with the world
and matters below; whereas the godly are all for thriving in grace and increase
of godliness. The wicked man considers of things as they serve to satisfy his
lust; and if we have better thoughts at any time, it is but for a start. But a
godly man's aims are always holy, and the strength of his soul is put forth
that way. He values himself as he stands in relation to God and a better
life; and esteems all other things more or less, as they further or hinder
his spiritual growth, and bring peace and sorrow at the last unto him.

But I hasten to the second part of the Text, 2 Persons to whom this prviledge
belongs.
The persons to whom this privilege belongs, that is, to them that love God.
And why to them that love God? because the Apostle speaks of afflictions; and
we know that the grace which is most conversant in the Saints sufferings, is
patience, which flows from love.

Also, for that of all other graces is the first and sweetest: it is the first,
for whom we love we are sorry to offend; and hate whatsoever is contrary to
that we affect: we rejoice in that we love, and grieve in the absence thereof.

It is the commanding Excellency of love.
affection of all others, and sets the whole man sweetly a work to attain
its defire. Love makes us forward and zealous Christians; all the inward
worship of God is in the affections. As thou shall rejoice in no God but me,
and fear no God but me. All the Commandments of God are brought by Christ to
this duty.

Again, love has a special part in this privilege, Love me, and do with me
what you will. Love is full of inventions, it studies complacencie, and sets
the soul a work to honor God in all things.

In that the Apostle says, To them that love Christianity, not a b^re title
only.
God, and not to the children or servants of God. We may observe, That
Christianity is not a bare title, but it requires some qualification.
Therefore the Scriptures when they describe a Saint on earth, do not usually
say the child of God, but they set him forth by some holy affections or actions
wrought in him; As such as love God, or fear God, and walks in his ways.
Hereby showing that Religion is not a matter of complement, but a real and
holy endeavor to please the Lord; and although the Scriptures do name but some
one particular affection, yet it is all one as if they had named all, for where
one is in truth, there all follows.

Again, in that the Apostle here ascribes privileges to those only that are
thus qualified, we must take heed in applying the promises of God, and these
sweet consolations, that we be such persons to whom of right they do belong;
for all things work for the best, not to every one, but to such as love God: We
must not therefore Comfort not to be preached to all.
preach comfort to all, but must first labor to make men capable of it: To
this end.

1. First, we will show the Nature of this love. 2. Secondly, the exercises of
it, and directions unto it. 3. Thirdly, some incitements to this holy
affection.
The ground of Love is a considering of God as Ground of love.
our own God, in the covenant of Grace, and an acknowledging of our selves, to
be his peculiar children in Christ Jesus: when we can say as the Spouse in
the Canticles, I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine, this is a loving of
God; not as the God of Nature only, but as ours peculiar by Grace. This union
of love, which knits us to Christ, impileth another union by faith first; which
is a cleaving to God as my God, and to Christ as my Christ, whence issues a
second conjunction, or cleaving to him in love, as my Savior, my Husband, and
my Head.

To come to the nature of this Grace, and then to the working of it. The Nature
of Love is seen in four things:

1. In admiring of some secret good in the thing beloved, which stirs up the
soul to make out for it. 2. In a studiousnesse of the contentation of the
person beloved. 3. In a desire of union and fellowship with the person we
affect 4. In a resting, and solacing of our selves, in the thing we love.
By these let us examine our selves whether we have the true love of God or no;
For it concerns Nature of the love of God.
us much to have this grace, it will distinguish us from all others, who fear
him not:

First, our love to Christ 1 Branch.
comes from the high esteem of the good things we see in him: But how shall
we know whether that we have this admiring of the good things we see in God,
and in his word and children? We shall know it by our choice, Trial whether we
have made a right choice.
and our choice follows our judgment: Would we know whether our judgment be
good? See what do we choose (especially) when things of the world and God come
together. And here we want not examples to guide us: The question was, whether
that Moses should still choose to live in Pharaohs Court, and he accounted his
son in law, or else depart, and suffer adversity with Gods children: Now
Moses by sound judgment, had an high esteem of the excellency and
privileges of the Saints, And therefore chose rather to endure afflictions,
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Let us then see whether we
can be contented to part with our preferment, or pleasure for God or no. And
whether we do esteem the rebukes of Christ greater riches than the treasures
of the world; whether we can lay down our lives and liberties at Christ's feet,
and gladly want all, so we may enjoy him; If it be so with us, our estate is
good.

Again, let us see whether 2 Trial.
we have a right prizing of the good things in God. Do we delight to speak
much and often of Christ, and the benefits we receive by him? How was Saint
Paul's heart enlarged, and his tongue full of heavenly eloquence, in setting
sorth the unspeakable mercies of God, which Rom 8.
we have by Christ Jesus our Lord? If God be on our side, who can be against
us, (says he) What shall separate us from the love of Christ: Shall
tribulation, shall anguish and affliction? I am persuaded that neither death,
nor life, nor any other thing can do it.

Another sign to know whether we have a secret 3 Trial.
admiration of the good things we see in God, is this, If we do undrvalue all
things else for Christ. Worldly men are ever admiring of the things below,
accounting such men happy and blessed that abound most therein: Therefore there
is nothing that does more truly try a man than this: The soul that sees a
vanity in the things beneath, and can rejoice in God only as his true riches,
is in a good condition: Where there is a true judgment of God and Religion,
the soul of that man will never stoop to the creature; the soul so rejoices
in God, as that it will not yield it self to any other. Adam and Eve in their
innocence, were both naked, and were not ashamed; one reason might be, because
their thoughts were taken up with higher matters: In heaven we shall not be
ashamed, of things we now are ashamed of. A Christian soul is so ravished
with the enjoying of God, that it minds almost nothing but him.

The second branch in 2 Branch. Desire to please the beloved.
love, is a desire to do all things, to the content of the party beloved; Our
love to God will frame us to the obedience of his will: Obedience is the proof
of love; If ye love me, says Christ, keep my commandments: If we love God,
we will pray for the enlarging of his Kingdom; Where love is kindled in any
heart, there is a care to be approved of him whom we so love. This makes our
obedience general, to all Gods commandments, in all places and all things
whatsoever. It makes us give our inwards to God, serving him with the soul and
spirit.

Those therefore that nourish unclean hearts within them, and think it enough
to abstain from the outward act of evil, love not the Lord sincerely. The
Devil himself will do outward things as readily as you, he will confess
Christ to be the Son of God; and say, Why art thou come to torment me before
my time? So that if thou do outwardly only confess God, what do thou more
than the Devil? In outward duties without sincerity there is no love; You will
pray, the Devil will do as much; The Devil has a bad end in good actions:
so there are many that come to Church, and make show of Religion to cloak their
evil courses. But such poor wretches, how ever they are pleased with
shadows, are little better than Satan himself.

Again, if we be desirous to content him who^ True love rejoyeeth in
suffering.
we love, then will, we suffer any thing for his sake; Therefore the Apostles
went away rejoicing, and accounted it their glory, that they were esteemed
worthy to suffer hardship for Christ: And David for dancing before the Ark,
being by Michal mocked, says: I will yet be more vile for my God. He cared not
for any reproach that could happen to him in a good way: Yea, this will make us
zealous in his truth; he that has no zeal, has no love; If our hearts rise
not when God is dishonored, what love have we to him? Is Gods glory and the
Churches welfare dear to us? it is a sign we love him: But can we see those
things go backward, and have no zeal, nor be any thing affected therewith,
surely then we have no love.

Again, if we have a true love to God, then 3 Branch.
have we a desire of union and communion with him; Love covets union
we will be much in meditating of him, in speaking to him, and conferring with
him. Those therefore that go on from day to day, without private speeches with
God, or solacing of their souls in him, what affection have they to him? Love
is communicative; and what desire of communion can that soul have, that lives
a stranger to his Maker? Can we say we love one with whom we never confer,
or speak to any purpose.

Again, if we love a man, we will advise with 2 It advises with the party
loved.
him, especially in matters of moment: so if we love God, we will take
counsel of him in his Word, for the guidance of our lives, and stablishing our
consciences: If we advise not with God, it is a sign that we either think he
does not regard us, or else that we count him not worthy to be counseled by.

Another sign is, To 3 And fits it self for his appearing.
examine what desire we have to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: Do we
love his appearing to judgment? and are we now fit for his coming? surely
then it is a plain sign, that our love is fixed and set upon him: So much as
we do fail of this desire, so much we fail in love to Christ: What was the
reason that the people under the Law, were so much afraid at the appearing of
an Angel unto them? was it not this, that they were not fitted and prepared
for God? A man may be a good Christian, and yet not at all times willing to
die: for as eyes that are sore, cannot always endure the light; so a soul
galled with sin desires not to hear of the day of jadgement, yet ought we
to thirst after it.

Another sign of this And hungers after God.
grace, is our eager and hungry desire after God, when with David we can say,
Oh God my heart pants Psalm. 4^.
after thee, as the Heart pants after the Brooks of waters. When a soul is
never at rest til he injoyes his Maker, but cries out still, Oh when shall I
appear in his presence, it is a good sign.

The last branch or property 4 Branch.
is a resting and quieting our selves in the love of God above all things
whatsoever, saying with David, Whom have I in Heaven or in earth besides Psalm.
77.
thee, or what do I esteem Psalm. 4.
in comparison of thee; let me enjoy but the light of thy countenance, and it
suffices me: demand therefore of thine own heart, what the things are that
trouble thee most? and what is the cause of thy sorrow and disquietments,
whether it be for losses or crosses outwardly, or for want of Gods love and the
sense and feeling of his favor inwardly. They which grieve chiefly for outward
evils, are most carried in their affections that ways: but if in the
confluence of all worldly blessings, we can grieve for our spiritual wants,
it is a comfortable evidence. When a man reckons not his happiness to stand in
the possession of the creature, but in the fruition of the Creator, and desires
his favor above any thing, it is a gracious sign.

David had an abundance, yea, he had a Kingdom, yet nothing would satisfy him
but the mercies Psalm. 51.
of God. And when hec was in want, what course did he take, but still comforted
himself in the Lord his God: That which a man sorroweth most for when he
wants it, that he rejoices most in when he has it: can we in our crosses
rejoice that God is ours? This is an excellent sign, and plainly discovers,
that we place our contentation more in him than in any thing else: can we
delight more in the solace of his favor, than in outward prosperity? it is a
heavenly testimony of a renewed condition. When David was in his greatest
distresses; what desires had he then most in him? why, he longed after the
House of God: when the people were ready to stone him, wherein did he trust,
but in the Lord his strong ^ower?

In the last place would we know whether we can rest in God or no. Let us
examine our selves then what endeavors we have every day to cleanse our souls
from sin; that so God may take pleasure in us, and we again may delight in
him? Let us see Peter's told him) Lord thou know that I love thee, I desire o
Lord to please thee above all things, I have set mine heart upon thee, and I
joy in thee and in thy love, more than in all things else in the world. If thus
I say we can in the integrity of our spirits appeal to God, who only knows
and searches our ways, and say, truly Lord thou know that I love thee; it
is a certain and infallible sign unto us that we are his, and all things
shall work for the best unto us.

But take we heed how we deceive our selves in these things; by love we are
Christians, therefore labor for sincerity of affection. A Reprobate or a
Castaway may go far in these four signs of love. He may admire and wonder at
the good things of God, but he does it not from any thing within him, but from
the outward beholding of them; he can admire and talk of them, but yet such men
are without any relish or sweet taste of the thing they speak of. So likewise
an Hypocrite may desire to please God in many things, but not in all things: as
we see in Herod, he heard John Baptist willingly, and obeyed in some things,
but not in all; he could not be crossed in his beloved sin which abode in
him, that must not be touched. Then farewell God, and farewell Christ and all.

So a Castaway may desire to be in Heaven, as being a place good for him: and
he may have some little taste of those joys above, as is mentioned in the
Hebrews: but he has no relish of them from the love of God, but only from
the love of himself. And his desire is not such as will draw him on to the use
of means for spiritual growth and progress thereunto: as we see in Balaam, he
had a desire to die the death of the righteous, but this could not make him
leave his covetous disposition, and find a contentment in God alone.

A Reprobate may be content with religion and with Gods ways, so long as
peace does accompany the same, (as now in this our Country, Christ comes
amongst us with plenty and prosperity, therefore Christ is a good Christ) but
if the Gospel and Religion should be professed with perfecution, and danger,
and disgrace, it would soon appear where men's contentments were. There is a
resting not in the truth, because it is truth, but in regard of the good things
which follow it. If we desire to approve our selves to God, let us examine our
selves about this affection and every branch of it. The deceit is both common
and deadly; and the profession of Religion in many Christians is not for
Religion it self, but for by ends and sinister respects. To which end consider
further these particulars.

Where there is true love, there will be a dedesire of union to the beloved
object; so where the love of God is, there will be a desire of the
accomplishment of the marriage between God and the soul. He that loves a
Harlot, says the wise man, is one with her: so he that affects the Lord,
desires to be one with him; therefore men have their names from what they love;
if they love the world, they are called worldlings; if they love Christ, they
are called Christians; how can thou say that thou love the Lord, and do
not desire his presence in his Ordinances? Can we say we love such a man when
we care not for his company? God observes not so much what we do, as from what
affection our duties proceed.

Again, if we love; there will be a desire to give content to the party
beloved; this appears even in carnal self-love: for take a man that loves
himself, he makes himself his utmost aim and end in all his actions: but
when once God has plucked this fleshly love out of our souls, then our
affections will be carried to Christ only: this made the Prophet David say, I
love the Psalm. 18.
Lord deerly, He is my rock, my fortress, my deliverer: Psalm. 71.
a Christian has his contentment in God alone; he finds an all sufficiency in
the Almighty, and therefore makes him his resting place. In all his trouble he
will make God his deliverer, and find more true comfort in him, than in all
the things of the world besides: therefore if God should take all other things
from us, yet if he leave us Himself, a Christian is well contented be cause
he knows his best being is in God.

But how shall I know Quest.
whether I do esteem rightly of God or no?

If we highly esteem Answ.
any thing, whether it be of this or a better life, we will be often speaking
of them; it is a sign men undervalue heavenly truths when they discourse
little about them; they much set light by God that have him not in all their
thoughts.

Again, what we esteem of, we will choose above other things: it appears we
have a precious esteem of God when we choose him, and him alone for our
portion; as David when he said, One thing have I desired of the Lord, Psalm. 26.
that I may dwell in his courts for ever: where God is truly loved, there will
be a fall of all earthly things in that man's estimation: so he may gain
Christ, he counts all else but dross and dung.

Lastly, if thou love God, thou will be afraid to offend him, and careful to
please him in all things: God delights not in a proud and haughty spirit, but
in an humble and meek soul; these then should be thy delight. God is
wonderful well pleased with faith, for it is that which binds him to perform
his promise, therefore seek it earnestly: whatsoever God approves; a Christian
should take pleasure in: every grace is an ornament to a Christian, and God
delights to see his own graces in us. Isaac before he took Rebecka to wife,
sent her Jewels to adorn her; so Christ sends rich Jewels to his children,
even the graces of his Holy Spirit, to make us love him, and fit us the more
for him. Those that live in sins against conscience, think we that these love
God? No certainly; if they did they would love that which he loves, and hate
that which he hates: what a pitiful thing is it to see men glorying in that
which is their shame, in swearing and profaneness, and yet for all this say
they love God. Is it possible that the love of God and the love of sin should
ever stand together?

Proceed we now to some reasons and directions, grace.

And first let us not rest in Directions unto love.
an inferior degree of this affection, but rise up therein, and labor that it
may have full assent. There are degrees of assent, as when we love God because
we love our selves: a natural man may do so, but this is not enough, for if
we love God for our selves, we make our selves our God. Where the heart is
truly set upon God, it delights in him only for himself, and takes comfort in
no condition further than he sees God in it. He never affected Christ in truth,
that is more taken with the benefits and privileges that come by him, than
with the excellency of his person. What friend will be content, that a man
should only love him because he does him good? We must love our selves and all
other things in and for God. Moses and Paul rejoiced to honor the Lord, though
themselves were accurfed and deprived of happiness; and if we could so love
Christ, as not to desire heaven it self if Christ were not there. This were
truly to affect him: for indeed if Christ were not there, heaven should not be
heaven unto us. We must love our happiness, no further than we can have with
it Gods good leave and liking.

Again, we shall know 2 Direction.
our love to God whether it be sincere or no, by our abstaining from sin; If
we avoid evil for fear of punishment, or hope of reward only, our love is
unsound, but when we so love God that we will not do any thing contrary to
his spirit: it is a special sign. Such a man if there were no hell to punish
him, nor place of bliss to receive him, yet would not break with God upon any
terms.

For the means to attain Means to attain the love of God.
this love, we must in the first place labor for an humble and empty soul;
Blessed are the poor in Spirit (says Christ) for such only apprehend their
misery without Christ, and their need of him; which occasions an holy rejoicing
in the Lord, and unfeigned love to him; What is the reason that some are so
ravished with the favors of the Almighty? Is it not for that they were so
formerly stung with the sight and feeling of their sins? the more loving
Christian ever the more humble Christian. Mark it when you will, and you shall
find this disposition manifest in every true convert, they are daily humbling
themselves for the least offense.

A second direction is to taste of the love of God in We love him (says the
Apostle) because he loved us first; Mary therefore loved much, because she had
experience of Gods love, in forgiving her many sins: When a broken humble
soul truly savoureth the goodness of the Lord, it cannot but be enflamed with
desire after him: A Christian after he has had a taste of the love of God,
has another manner of judgment of justification than before. Taste and see
(says David) how good and gracious the Lord is. Psalm. 34.
A man that rellishes the sweetness of a thing, can better judge of it than
he which never tasted it.

A third direction is, to see what motives and reasons exercise our
understanding this way. We know heat comes from light; and there is a
sympathy between the brain and the heart; the brain must make a report to
the heart, before that can be enflamed with affection; therefore seriously
search into the grounds of thy affection.

The first ground is 1 Grounds of our love to God.
goodness in God, God is goodness it self; in whom all good is involved: if
therefore we love other things for the goodness which we see in them, Why
do we not love God in whom is all goodness? All other things are but sparks
of that fire, and drops of that Sea; see thou any good in the creature,
remember there is much more in the Creator: leave therefore the streams, and
go to the wellhead of comfort.

Another reason of love, Father and friend; who is unto us in all degrees of
neerenesse, both our head and our husband; were not the Son ours, what
fellowship could we have with the Father: having such a Mediator with God, that
is bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh, why should we fear to go unto
him? He has taken upon him these comfortable relations of Shepherd and
Brother, to possess us of his acquaintance with our infirmities, and
readiness to releeve us. For shall others by his grace fulfill what he calls
them unto, and not he that (out of his love) has taken upon him these
relations, so thoroughly founded upon his Fathers assignment, and his own
voluntary undertaking? How does the tender Mother sympathize in the anguish of
her child, notwithstanding all its froward averseness; and shall we think
there is more bowels in our selves than in God? can there be more sweetness
in the stream, than in the spring? If the well of consolation be always open,
and the fountain of living water, be never shut up, let us teach our hearts
to suck and draw comfort from these rivers of refreshing: What a shame is it,
that men should hunger at such a feast?

Consider likewise the benefits which we have bestowed upon us, and the end
why God vouchsafes us so much favor.

Benefits win love even from bruit creatures; therefore we are worse than
beasts, if we love not God for his benefits; The Ox knows his owner, and the
Ass his Masters Crib; what are we indeed but an heap of Gods benefits? All
our faculties of soul and body are the blessings of God; Whatsoever we have
or hope to have, is from him. Our breath, life, and being, subsists in God, who
has promised, that heaven and earth, men and Devils, crosses and blessings,
sin and death, all shall be turned by his overruling power to our good.

Consider what now we are, and what a happy condition God has made us capable
of hereafter; Is it a small matter that we should be regarded above the Angels
that fell? And that he who knew no sin, should be made sin for us? nay,
become a curse to free us from the curse? It was strange that the three
Children being cast into the hot fiery Furnace, should not burn. So likewise
it is a wonder that Christians being in the midst of the flame of Gods love,
should be so cold and dead hearted: it is not only the guilt of sin that we are
freed from, but the unsupportable vengeance of the Almighty due for the same:
and is this a small matter?

If we regard the manner of all? and prevent us with his favors? Is not his
love full and overflowing? so as he never leaves us until he make an end:
where he sreeth a man from danger he set* leth him in a good estate, never
ceasing till he possess him of glory; as it is 2 Timothy 4. The Lord has freed
me out of the mouth of the Lion, and he will preserve me to his everla sting
kingdom. He delivers us srom spiritual evil, and gives us spiritual good.
The meditation of these things will warm our hearts.

The next means is to ^oyne fear with our love to God: whom we love
thoroughly, we will do nothing that shall displease. The fear of God whom we
love, will cause us to make conscience of the least sin against him; for
there is no sin be it never so little, but it will weaken our affection to
goodness. When we venture upon any thing against conscience, is there not a
decay of our love to God? and of our sense of his favor toward us: surely sin
is the only makebate in our souls, and weakner of all our comforts. Those
therefore are the lovingest souls toward God, that are most conscientious in
their ways. Careless Christians have not that feeling of Gods love, which
humble fruitful Christians have: neither do they live or die with that
comfort as these do.

We are the Spouse of Christ, and he is jealous of our love. Our betrothed
Husband cannot abide that we should set our affections upon strangers. Take
heed therefore of adulterous and false affections; the more we love earthly
things the less we shall esteem of heavenly; and as our affection toward the
creature increases, so our heat toward Christ abateth.

The next direction to stir up our love unto God is, to exercise the same
daily. For true love is not an abstractive affection, but an affection in
practice, and we know every thing does increase by exercise: exercise it
therefore in fighting against the love of the world, and all self love; for as
there are contrary commands, so there are contrary desires in a Christian: as
there is the old man and the new man, the flesh and the Spirit, so there are
contrary affections, one setting it self against another in him.

When we see a poor Christian, the love of God will say unto us, now show thy
love unto Christ in succouring one of his members. No says flesh and blood,
charity begins at home, thou may want thy self another day.

In doing good likewise we should say, here is now an occasion offered me of
honoring God, and I will embrace it. Oh but says self-love, there is time
enough hereafter; hereby you may run into poverty and disgrace, be not too
forward. Therefore there must be a perpetual denial of our selves against our
whole thwart nature. Those that are Christians know experimentally what belongs
to these things: but take a carnal man or woman, and they are led altogether
by their sensual lusts as bruit Beasts: whatsoever ease and self-love wills,
that swayes their hearts any ways. And indeed the most sincere Christian has
the motions of these carnal and worldly respects, but his love unto God
constrains him to deny all, and listen to what Christ whispereth in his heart.

Consider we a little Motives to stir up exercise in the love of God.
what may stir us up to exercise our selves herein. Love it is the light of
our life; love we must something, and he lives not that loves not: seeing then
we cannot but love, and that the misplacing of our affection is the cause of
all sin and misery; what can we do better than attend to directions, how to
love as we should?

To come therefore to the four things before mentioned being the branches of
love. First, We must admire God above all things. And can we admire any thing
with wisdom but God alone? It is commonly said, that we cannot be wise and
love together, for that this affection is blind, except it be in God. Again,
is there any thing more comfortable then that we give content to God? Is any
service comparable to the service of a Prince? We must serve the Lord only, and
others in and for him, or else all we do is naught. All other services are
bondage, this a perfect freedom. Again, is there any thing more worthy our
souls, than to be united to God? Can we have a greater happiness than to be
made one with Christ? By loving a thing we come to be like to it. Is there any
thing that may or ought to challenge our love but Christ? Is it not a base
thing to unite our souls (which are the best things under Heaven) to earthly
contentments, than which we shall one day find nothing to be worse? The love of
God planted in our hearts, makes Christ and us one. As a Pearl in a Ring
makes the Ring more precious and valuable; so the soul united unto Christ,
comes to be more gracious and heavenly. The more excellent the soul is, the
more loving it will be to God. The holiest Saints have ever burned with most
affection to Christ, as Moses and Paul. Can any thing satisfy us more than
God? Know we not that all things here shall perish? Therefore when we place
our love and joy in the world, do we not lose them too? We shall leave behind
us the things of this life, our sins only we carry away, which cleave fast unto
us, and stain our consciences world with out end: what might more content us
than the love of God, which will endure for ever, and accompany us to Heaven
when all other loves perish?

Consider that every thing thou do without love, is dead and empty; love is
the life of all actions; as we say of a gift, the love of the giver, is better
than the gift it self; not only our performance is nothing without love, but
we our selves are nothing without it; every acceptable service we do must
proceed from this heavenly flame; Though we speak with the tongues of men and
Angels, and have not love, we are like to a sounding brass and tinckling
Symball. Have we not much to do and suffer in this life? and what is it that
makes us constant in duty, and carries us through so many oppositions as we
meet withal, is it not love? does not love sweeten our hearts, and take away
every difficulty in our way to Heaven. Whilst we live here, we must of
necessity suffer ill things, and go on in well doing; neither of which can be
performed without love; this rules our whole lives. Beg therefore of God to
quicken thee in all cheerful and willing obedience: pray that the Sun of
righteousness would enlighten thy heart: we cannot serve God without God, nor
have any holy affection, except by his Spirit he work the same in us.

FINIS.

