TWO SERMONS UPON THE FIRST words of Christ's last Sermon JOHN XIIII. I.

Being also the last Sermons of RICHARDS SIBBS D. D. Preached to the honorable
society of Grayes Inn, June the 21. and 28. 1635.

Who the next Lords day following, died, and rested from all his labors.

2. Sam. 23. 1. These are the last words of the sweet singer of Israel. LONDON,
Printed by Thomas Harper, for Lawrence Chapman, and are to be sold at his shop
in Holborne, at Chancery lane end. 1636.

HONORATISSIMO DOMINO, DOMINO ROBERTO COMITI WARVVICENSI, HAS MELLITISSIMI
THEOLOGI RICHARDI SIBBS, S. THEOL. DOCTORIS (QUEM Percharum habuit, cuiusque
concionantis auditor erat assiduus, una cum nobilissima Familia) CYGNEAS
CONCIONES, IN ^ENTISSIMI AVTHORIS AFFECTVS, NEC NON IPSORVM SINGVLARIS OBSEQVII
(...)

D. D. D. THOMAS GOODWIN. PHILIPPUS NIGH.

Imprimatur,

Tho. Weeks, R. P. EP. Land. Capel. Domest.

The first SERMON.
lOHN 14. chap. 1 verse. Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe in God,
believe also in me.
HOly men as they be trees os righteousness, and desire to be fruitful at all
times, so most especially toward their end, having but a short time to live in
the world, they be willing to leave the world with a good savor; so it was
with Jacob; so with Moses, as appears in his excellent Song made before his
death; you may see it in King Solomon and David before their deaths, but
especially in our Savior. The nearer to heaven, the more heavenly minded, when
grace and glory are ready to join, the one to be swallowed up of the other,
then grace is most glorious. All the passages of Christ are comfortable, but
none more comfortable then those Sermons of his, that were delivered a little
before his death; of all words that come from loving men to those they love,
such are most remarkable as be spoken when they be ready to die, because then
men are most serious, they being about the most serious business: then they
be wisest, and best able to judge: for the consideration of their end makes
them wise. And therefore says God, Psalm. 90.
Oh that my people were wise to consider their latter end. And, Teach me to
number my days, that I may apply my heart to wisdom, says Moses. And indeed
there is no wisdom to that: for it teaches men to pass a right judgment
upon all things in the world: they be no longer drunk with the prosperity of
the world, they be no longer swayed with opinion, but they pass an estimation
of things as they are.

Besides, love at that time is especially set on work. Therefore our blessed
Savior being now to offer himself a sacrifice on the Cross, he sweetly
delivers these words before his departure, Let not your hearts be troubled:
Let us hear them therefore, as the dying words of our Savior, to his
Disciples, and in his Disciples to us all, as in the 17 of Saint John, I pray
not for them only, but for all such as shall believe in me, through their
word, for his comforts concern us all, as his prayers did.

This Chapter is sweetly mixed of comforts, counsels, and gracious promises, but
especially it affords matter of comfort: mark who it is that gives this
comfort, our blessed Savior; And at what time, when he was to sacrifice
himself.

What admirable love, and care, and pity is in this merciful high Priest of
ours, that should so think of comforting his disciples, as to forget hemselfe,
and his own approaching death; It is the nature of love so to do, and we
should imitate our blessed Savior in it: you see how he labors to
strengthen them; especially toward his end, he knew they would then need it
most, and therefore he endeavors by all means to strengthen them both by
counsel, as here by the Passover, and by a newly instituted Sacrament.

But what need we wonder at this in our blessed Savior who so regarded us, as
he left heaven, took our nature, became man; put himself under the Law, became
sin.

The words contain a disswasion from overmuch trouble; and then a direction
to believe in God, and Christ, comforts must be founded on strong reasons; For
we are reasonable and understanding creatures, and God works on us answerably
to our principles. He stays our spirits by reasons stronger then the
grievance. For what is comfort, but that which establishes and upholds the
soul against that evil which is feared or felt, from a greater strength of
reason which overmastreth the evil. If the grievance be but even with the
comfort, then the consolation works not; but Christ's comforts are of an higher
nature, then any trouble can be, for he not only disswades from trouble, but
also persuades to confidence, Be of good comfort, I have overcome the world.

The occasion of this comforting them, and of remooving their discouragements
was this: In the former Chapter, he had told them, that he should leave them,
and that they should leave him, the best of them all, even Peter should take
offense at him, and deny him, and that all the rest should leave him: From
whence they might gather, that the approaching trouble should be great, That
should cause Peter to deny him, and them all to forsake him: And thence must
needs arise great scandalls. Our Savior saw by the power of his Godhead, into
their hearts, and like enough, in their lookeshee saw a spirit of
discouragement seyzing on them, for his departure, and Peter's fall, their
forsaking of him, and the persecutions that would follow. And therefore Christ
discerning this dejection of their spirits, he rayseth them by this, Let not
your hearts be troubled. The heavenly Physician of our souls applies then the
remedy when it is the fittest season.

There was some good in their trouble, something naturally, and something
spiritually good. There was ground of natural trouble at the departure of such
a friend, at the hearing of such persecutions: For we are flesh, not steel,
and in that sense, Christ was troubled himself to show the truth of his
manhood: nay trouble is the seasoning of all heavenly comforts, so as there
were no comforts if there were no trouble: and therefore this natural trouble
was not disallowed by Christ. There was likewise something spiritually good, in
this trouble, they loved their Master, who they saw was going away; And they
knew it was a shameful thing for them to forsake him: there was love in them
toward him all this while, Christ could discern gold in ^oare, some good in a
great deal of ill; and therefore loved them again, and manifested it by
comforting them, Let not your bears be troubled: They were right in this
principle, that all comfort depends on the presence of Christ. And so the maine
ground of the sorrow was good. For as all heavenly light, and heat, and
influence comes from the Sun, it being all gathered into that body: so all
heavenly comfort is gathered into Christ, and therefore must come to us from
Christ's presence, bodily or spiritually. Their error was in tying all comfort
to a bodily, a corporal presence. As if it were necessary for the Sun to come
down and abide upon the earth, to bestow its heat and influence; and therefore
he tells them, that though he was to go away, yet he would send another
comforter, the holy Ghost.

And then they were overcome by an opinion, that it would go worse with them
when Christ was gone: therefore Christ tells them that it should be better
for them, and indeed it was better: Christ did not take away his blessed
presence for their disadvantage, but for their good, God never takes any thing
from his children, but he makes it up in a better kind. If Christ takes away
his bodily presence, he leaves his spiritual presence, and more abundantly.

So that though they were led with sensible things and what they saw not, they
could hardly believe, yet Christ looks to what is good in them, and accepts
it: he saw what was naught in them, with a purpose to purge it, what was
naturally weak in them to strengthen it, and therefore he counsels them, Let
not your hearts be troubled.

The thing that I will first observe out of the words, is, That the best
Christians are subject to be troubled, to be pensive, and dejected more then
should be.

Indeed our Savior Christ himself was troubled, but his trouble was like the
shaking of clear water in a crystal glass. There was no mudde in the
bottom; but our trouble is of another kind, and apt to be inordinate.

We may carry this truth through the whole Scripture, and show how Hannah was
in bitterness of spirit which exceeded so, that Eli a good man mistakes her,
supposing that she was overcome with drink.

Hezekiah a good King, was in such bitterness, that like a crane or swallow he
did chatter. And David complained that his spirit was overwhelmed within him;
And Jonah cries out, that he was in the belly of hell.

And God will have it so, partly for conformity to our head; and partly that we
may be known to our selves, that we may discern where our weakness lies; and
so be better instructed to seek to him in whom our strength lies.

He suffers us likewise to be troubled for the preventing of spiritual sins,
pride, and security, and the like.

And partly in regard of others, that we may be pitiful; Christ was man for
this end that he might be a merciful high Priest, and we have much more need to
know and feel the infirmities that are in our selves, that we may be merciful
to others; that we may not be harsh and censorious upon the troubles of others;
from want of which consideration proceeded Elies rashness in passing that
censure upon Hannah.

But how shall we know we know that our hearts are more troubled then they
should be? For I lay this for a ground: That we may sin in being overmuch
troubled, at things for which it is a sin not to be troubled; If they had not
been at all affected with the absence of Christ; it had been a sin, and no
less then stupidity; yet it was their sin to be over much troubled. In a
word therefore for answer; a trouble is sinful, when it hinders us in duty,
or from duty; when it hinders us in duties to God, or to others.

Or from duty, that is, when the soul is disturbed by it, and like an
Instrument out of tune, made fit for nothing, or like a limb out of joint,
that moves, not only uncomelily, but painfully, and becomes unfit for action:
when we find this in our trouble. we may know it is not as it should be.

There be some affections especially that are causes of over much trouble,
fear of evils to come, sorrow for evils that are present seize on us. Now when
these do hinder us from duty, or trouble us in duty, they be exorbitant and
irregular.

Naturally affections should be helps to duty, they being the wind that carry
the soul on, and the spiritual wings of the soul: so that a man without
affections is like the dead sea, that moves not at all. But then they must be
regulated, and ordered, they must be raised up, and laid down, at the command
of a spiritual understanding: when they be raised up of themselves, by shallow
and false conceits, and opinions, they be irregular, when they be raised up by
a right judgment of things, and laid down again when they ought to be, then
they are right and orderly.

Now besides the hurt that is in such affections themselves, Satan loves to
fish in these troubled waters. The affections are never stirred and raised up
irregularly, and exorbitantly, but Satan joins with them. And therefore we
have need keep our affections of grief and fear within their due bounds:
Satan is a curious observer of any excess in our passions, and in just
correction (to speak the mildest of it) God lets loose Satan to join with
that excess. And therefore the Apostle says wisely, Let not the Sun go
down upon your wrath, neither give place to the Devil, because as soon as
ever we give way to any excess of affection, Satan fishes in these waters,
and ioynes with that excess. He being a spirit of darkness, loves to dwell in
the soul when it is in darkness. And therefore when it is clouded by passion
(as all passions beyond their due measure are as clouds that darken the soul)
Satan that works in darkness, then seizes on the soul presently.

That was Saul's case, he was envious at David being of a proud and haughty
spirit, that could not endure competition: and Satan took his time to work on
him, And therefore it is said he was troubled with an evil spirit.

But trouble of Spirit is too large an Argument, I will not now stand upon it,
only I will show that we should not yield to excess of trouble any way. And
the reasons are:

First, we wrong our own selves when we give way to grief and sorrow that is
immoderate and inordinate: The soul is as it were put out of joint by it; we
make actions difficult unto us, the wheels of the soul are thereby taken off;
joy and comfort are as it were oil to the soul. And therefore Nehemiah says,
Chap. 8. 10.
The joy of the Lord is your strength; when therefore we give way to fear, and
grief, and such passions, it weakeneth the soul in action. And then again
they are as it were a cloud betwixt Gods love, and us, and so the soul is
hindered of much comfort and enlargement: joy enlarges the soul, but grief
strengthens it: comfort raises up the soul, grief and sorrow weigh down
the soul. A Christian should be of a straight, upright. and enlarged spirit.
When therefore the spirit is streightened. when it is pressed down and dejected,
a Christian is not in his right mind, in his due and proper frame.

Besides, if we regard God himself, we should take heed that the soul be not
thus distempered: for by over much sorrow and grief what a great deal of
dishonor do we to God, it proceeding from a mistake of his goodness and
providence? And with over much fear and sorrow, there is always joined
murmuring and discontent, and a spirit unsubdued to God, and his Spirit. There
is a wronging as of his care in providence, so of his gratiousnesse in his
promises. There is a grieving of his good Spirit, a questioning of his
government, as if he did not dispose of things as he should, when we will have
it one way, and God will have it another way. There is likewise a great deal
of pride in dejections and discontent. The most discontented spirit in the
world is the Devil, and none prouder. It argues a great deal of pride, and
sullenness to be affectedly sad, and dejected, as if such worthy and excellent
persons as we should not be so afflicted: Or there were greater cause for us to
be dejected then raised up. Whereas if we balance our grounds of comfort
(being Christians) as we should do, they would appear incomparably above the
grounds of our discouragements: so it is a wrong to God, and his truth, and his
gracious sweet government to yield to a dejected sullen disposition.

It is likewise a wrong to others: for it makes us unfit for any office of
love to them, when we plodde and pore so much upon our discontentments, and
drink up our spirits, and eat up our hearts, it disables the soul, taking
away not only the strength, but also the willingness of the soul.

Besides the scandal that it brings on Religion, and the best ways, as if
there were not enough in Religion to comfort the soul.

But you will say, Religion breeds a great deal of trouble, and pensiveness.
It is indeed the speech of the shallow people of the world, Religion makes men
sad.

And it is true that as our Savior Christ here had made his Disciples sad, by
telling them that they would leave him, and that a great scandal would be
taken at his Cross, and shameful suffering; but yet withal bids them not be
troubled, and gives you grounds of comfort; so Religion will make men sad;
For it discovers truths, and sad truths. I but the same Religion will cheer
them up again, yea it casts them down, that it may raise them up. The uSnne in
the morning raises clouds, but when it has strength it scatters them. God
intending solid. and substantial comfort. does first beget troubles, and
discovers true grounds of trouble: he lets us see that all is not well, but
still as Religion brings any trouble, so it brings with it greater remedies
against thse troubles: and that God that raises a soul to see just matter of
grief, will by his spirit show its due, and right portion in comfort. Thus to
be sorrowful and sad in some measure is from Religion, but that which will
prevent the excess and over measure of it, is from Religion likewise.

So that it is a scandal to Religion to be over much dejected.

Besides, though we should be troubled for sin, yet to be over much troubled
for sin is a dishonor to Christ, and to the love of God, in Christ: for it
is as if we had not in him a sufficient remedy for that great malady. As be it
grief for the troubles of the Church: as not to be troubled at the affliction
of Joseph is branded for a sin. So to be too much cast down, as if Christ
had cast off the government from his shoulders, or had not the name of the
Church on his breast in heaven (as the high Priest had the names of the 12
Tribes) in his breast plate, to be so cast down as to be taken off from
prayer, and from the use of all good means to help the Church, this is
sinful. So also when grief for sin makes us forget the mercies of God in
Christ, to forget the healing virtue of him our brazen Serpent, to neglect to
search our grounds of comforts, and to yield to Satan, to temptation. Even
over much sadness, though it be for sin, or for the Church, it is hurtful
and scandalous.

Iosuah was much cast down when he saw it went not well with Israel: but get
thee up Iosuah, says God, what do thou lying here? up and do thy duty;
consider what is amiss: There is an Achan in the Camp: and so when things go
not well, let not your thoughts be conversant about the matters of trouble, so
much as about your duty. So we see it is incident to Gods people to be over
much troubled, and we see also the reasons why it should not be so, because it
is injurious to God, to our selves, and others every way.

And after all this there is much reason in this that Christ has forbidden it,
let not your hearts be troubled.

But Christ could as well have cured it being God, Ob.
as easily as forbidden it.

It is true, but he cures it by forbidding it: Ans.
with the words, there went forth a spirit of comfort into their hearts, an
influence of grace, accompanied his commands, for the word, and Spirit God,
together, Christ deals with men by men. The spirit of comfort is a spirit of
truth, and therefore God comforts by truths. He gives us sanctified
understandings, and affections, and then works on them by sanctified truths.

And sometimes Christ cures it by real comforts, for comforts are either
rational, which are fetched from grounds, which faith ministers, or real from
the presence of any thing which comforts; as the sight of friends, or the
accommodating of us in any thing wherein we see the love of God conveyed: how
many real comforts does God bestow, when he fitteth us with conveniences in
our way to heaven, so that we may teade the love of God in them? God does not
only comfort us by his gracious promise, by his Word and Sacraments,
administering heavenly comforts by them, but also by the conveighing of
himself, and his love by outward comforts that we enjoy in the world:
howsoever carnal men abuse them, making all things to work for the worst: yet
that love that intends heaven, sweetens all things in the passage to heaven to
his children, because they see the love of God in the least comfort.

Again, observe from this here, let not your hearts be troubled, what is the
seat of comfort, the heart, the seat of comfort is the fear of griese: There
must be an application of comfort suitable to the grief, and the heart must be
comforted.

And therefore in Isa. 40. 1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, speak to
the heart. As the grief sinks and soakes to the root of the heart: so do
Christ's comforts, like true cordials indeed, that go as deep as the grievance.
If the grief goes to the heart, the comfort must go as deep. Now God the
Father of spirits, and the holy Ghost the Comforter, knows and searches our
spirits; they know all the corners of the heart, they can banish fear, and
sorrow, out of every cranny; and bring light, heat, and influence into every
part of the soul. And therefore Christ says, Let not your hearts be troubled.

Now for the ways whereby we must labor to comfort our hearts (amongst many
that I might speak of) I will name a few.

First of all, there must be a due search into the heart, of the grounds of our
trouble; for oftentimes Christians are troubled, they cannot tell wherefore: As
children that Will complain they know not why. I speak not of hypocrites that
will complain of that which is not a true grief to them; like some Birds that
make greatest noise, when they be furthest from their nests: But of some poor
Christians that are troubled, but distinctly know not the ground of it. But
search the heart ingenuously, and truly to the bottom of it, and see if there
be not some Achan in the Camp, some sin in the heart (for sin is like wind
when it gets into the veins, it will have vent, and a troublesome one: and so
will sin. if it get into the soul) it is that indeed which causes all
trouble. And therefore search your hearts thoroughly, what sin lies there
unrepented of, and for which you have not been humbled.

And when you have found out your sin, give it vent by confession of it to
God, and in some cases to others.

And when we have done so, consider what promises, and comforts, in the word of
God are fitted to that condition; for we can be in no condition, but there are
comforts for it, and promises fitted to yield comforts for every malady. And it
will be the wisdom of a Christian to accommodate the remedy to the sore of
his heart. And therefore we ought to be skillful and well seen, in the word of
God, that we may sore up comforts beforehand. Our Savior Christ tells them
beforehand of the scandal of the Cross, and of Peter's denial, that they
might lay up strength and spiritual armor against the day of trial. Those
comforts do not (for the most part) hold out in the day of adversity, Non
durant in adversis quae non in pace quaesita.
which were not procured in the day of prosperity. It is not wisdom to be to
learn Religion when we should use it: and therefore let us be spiritual good
husbands for our souls, by storing up comforts out of the Word of God, and
then we shall have no more to do, then to remember the comforts that we did
beforehand know.

And there be some promise of more general use, that are Catholica, fitted for
all sorts of grievances: and of these we must make use, when we cannot think
of particular ones. As the promises that concern forgiveness of sins.
Think of Gods mercy in pardoning sin with admiration; because sin will be
presented us in such terrible colors, that if God be not presented in as
gracious colors, we shall sink: and therefore set out Christ in his mercies,
and all sufficiency, when sin is aggravated to be in its heinousness, and
out of measure sinfulness: as the Prophet Michah does, Who is a God like our
God, that pardons iniquity, transgression, and sin, etc. Likewise how many
promises and comforts are there in that one promise, Luke 11. He will give his
spirit to them that ask him. And here our Savior promises to send the
Comforter: all graces and all comforts are included in the Spirit of grace, and
comfort; his Spirit is a Spirit of all grace: and therefore our Savior thought
that the promised enough when be said he would send them the Comforter: And so
what a world of comfort is in that promise. All things shall work together for
the best to them that love God: yea those things that are worst shall work
together; though they be hostile, and opposite one to another: yet they join
issue in this, they be all for the good of Gods people. As in a clock the
wheels go several ways, but all join to make the Clock strike: And so in
the carriage, and ordering of things, one passage crosses another, but in the
issue, we shall be able to say, all things work together for the best, I found
God turning all things for my good. And I could not have been without such a
cross, such an affliction. And so for present assistance in your callings or
straits, remember that promise made to Iosuab, which is repeated in the 13 of
the Hebrews, I will not fail thee, nor for sake thee: a promise which is five
times renewed in Scripture; and how much comfort is in that, that he will
vouchsafe by his spirit a gracious presence in all conditions whatsoever. And
likewise that of David, Psalm 23. Though I walk in the valley of the shadow
of death, yet will I fear no ill, for thou art with me. It was a terrible
supposition made, that though he should walk in the valley of the shadow of
death, yet he would fear no evil, These promises well digested, will arm the
soul with confidence, that it shall be able to put any case of trouble: As in
the 27. Psalm, David puts cases, The Lord is my strength, the Lord is the
light of my countenance, of whom shall I be afraid? Though thousands shall rise
against me, yet in this I will be confident. If our hearts be established by
the word of God settled in the truth of such promises, by the Spirit of God, we
may set God, and his truth, against all troubles that can arise from Satan,
and hell, and the instruments of Satan, or our own hearts. And therefore it
is a great wrong to God, and his truth, if we know not our portion of comfort,
and use it, as occasion serves. More particulars I omit, leaving them to your
own industry, the Scripture being full of them.

When we have these promises, let us

Labor likewise to have them fresh in memory: it is a great defect of
Christians, Hebrews: Heb. 12. 5.
though we know many things, yet we have the benefit of our comfort from no
more then we remember.

But above all, if we will keep our hearts purifying. It first purges the
soul being set aworke to search our sins, and confess them, which makes us
see our need of Christ, who dyed to satisfy divine justice. Then God sprinkles
our heart with this blood, which was shed for all penitent sinners: by which
when the heart is purged, the conscience will be soon satisfied also, by
Christ's blood. And when it is purged, and pacified, then keep it clean, for a
foul soul is always a troubled soul; and though it may be quiet, yet it is
sure to break out afterward.

in such a relation, but I have omitted it, it is a disquietment, and that upon
good grounds, and if you have been negligent, there must be an actual
renewing of the Covenant, and a setting upon the duty with fresh endeavors to
make amends for former negligences, or else the soul shall have no comfort.
nor will God suffer it to admit of comfort. And therefore work out your
salvation with fear, and trembling. The reason that men do still tremble, and
are troubled with this doubt, and that fear, is, because their salvation is
not wrought out, something is left undone, and their consciences tells them so.

But above all, that we may receive comfort, You believe in God, believe also
in me. Christ brings them to faith for comfort. And he sets down a a double
object of faith, God, that is, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: and Christ,
considered as Mediator; and Christ brings them to himself, ( Believe also in
me) because he would fense them against the future scandal of his suffering. As
if he should say, You will hereafter when you see me so handled, and upon the
Cross, doubt, and call in question, whether I am God, and the Messiah of the
world, or no. But if you believe in God, believe in me. For howsoever in love
to you, and mankind, I took man's nature on me, and am abased, yet in my
greatest abasement, remember this, that I am God. And surely there is nothing
can stay the soul more, especially when it is deeply humbled, then to consider
God in the second person incarnate, and abased, and crucified, and made a
curse, and sin for us, to see the great God of heaven, and earth, whose
excellencies we cannot comprehend, to take our nature, and in our nature to
suffer for us those things which he did endure. This will establish the soul
indeed. Can the the soul think that this was done for any small, or to little
purpose? Or can there be any grief, or sin, that should hinder comfort, or
persuasion of the possibility of pardon, when the great God became man, on
purpose to dye for sin? We may set this against all discouragements
whatsoever. And therefore, believe in God, believe also in me. Howsoever you
see me abased, yet you may have comfort in my abasement, for it is for you. And
therefore says Paul, Irejoyce to know nothing, but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. That which proud, and Atheistical Heathens took scandal at, that
he rejoices in, God forbid that I should glory in anything but in the Cross
of Christ, Peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, reconciliation, and
title to happiness is all founded upon Christ crucified.

And then again you see he joins both together ( Ye believe in God, believe
also in me) to show the distinction of persons in the Trinity, God the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost; all our faith is resolved at length into one God, but
yet withal into three persons in that Divine nature, because as there is God
the Father offended, so there must be a God to satisfy that God, and there
must be a God to reveal, and apply that satisfaction. The soul is so full of
doubtings, that nothing can set it down, but that which is above the soul,
and above the devil. And therefore for our salvation, and to give us comfort,
there is a necessity of three persons in the Godhead. The Father is offended,
God in the second person must satisfy offended justice; and God in the third
person must reveal, and apply the Son for comfort. And therefore he names
them distinctly (Ye believe in God, etc.) And because we cannot believe in God
the Father, but by believing in Christ, therefore he joins them together (ye
believe in God, ye believe also in me,) No man comes to the Father, but by the
Son. God the Father dwells in the light that no mortal eye can approach unto,
only he has manifested himself in his Son, who is the engraven Image of
his person; God shines in the face of Christ, and as he comes down, and makes
himself known to us in his Son, so we must go up to him in his Son, as he
says afterward: I am the way, the truth, and the life. There is no going to
the Father but by me: nothing is more terrible then to conceive of God, out of
Christ, for so he is a consuming fire: therefore think of God as ours in
Christ, carry Christ our elder Brother with us, and desire God to look upon us
in his Son.

Now now does faith in Christ ease the soul in trouble? Quest.


Many ways: Answ.
I will name a few. Faith in Christ banisheth troubles, and brings in comfort.

Because it is an emptying grace; it emptieth us of our selves, and so makes us
clean to another, and thereby becomes a grace of union. It is such a grace as
brings the soul, and Christ together. Now Christ being the fountain of
comfort, God having treasured all comfort in him; for the fullness of the
Godhead dwells in Christ, and faith causes Christ to dwell in us, brings the
soul and Christ together, and so must needs make way for comfort, for it makes
us one with the fountain of comfort. And by its repeated acts derives fresh
comfort.

Again, faith establishes the heart. Now to establish the soul, there must be
a solid Basis, as in building there must be a foundation, and a planting upon
that foundation. Now here is a foundation, God and Christ, and there must be a
grace to found, and bottom the soul thereupon, and that is faith, and so the
soul is established. The chain and connection of causes herein is this. God
the Father in Christ, and by the holy Ghost conveighs comforts, through the
word laid hold upon by faith. It is not the word alone, for that is but as the
veins and atteries, that conveigh the blood, and spirits. So the Spirit being
conveyed by the promises, helps the soul to lay it self upon Christ by
faith, which is a grace of union, by which union with him the foul is
established.

And then again faith stirs up such graces, as do comfort the soul, as
hope in all good things promised. And therefore in the next Verse he adds to
comfort them, In my Fathers house are many mansions; and faith is the grace
that apprehends the joys thereof, and hope expects that which faith believes,
and that hope becomes an anchor to the soul, that stays the soul in all the
waves and troubels of the world; and what is the ground of that hope but faith?
Faith stirs up hope, and hope pitcheth on the promise, especially of life
everlasting. And thus faith becomes a quieting and a stilling grace, because it
raises the soul by representing and making real to it, better things then
the world can give or take, as it does also at other times present upon the
power of God, and the mercy of God in Christ, and upon those rich promises:
What is in the world, or in the rank of good things, but faith out-bids it by
setting heaven against it: and what evil is there but faith overcomes the
fear of it by setting hell against it. I shall have such a good, if I yield to
such a lust: I, but what is that to heaven, says Faith? For faith being the
Hypostasis the substance of things to come, makes them substantial, and
evident to the soul, as if they were already subsistent, being looked upon in
the certainty of the word; and so it affects the soul deeply, and upholds it
strongly, even as if the things themselves were present and so it banisheth and
dispels all discomforts, the 11. Chapter to the Hebrews is a Comment upon this
truth in the example of Moses, and many others. What greater object of fear
might be presented to a man then the angry face and countenance of a terrible
Tyrant? Yet when by the eye of faith, he saw him that was invisible, and then
looked upon Pharaoh, what was Pharaoh, to God? When Micaiah had seen God
sitting on his Throne, what was Ahab to him? And when the soul has entered
into the veil, and sees the glorious things of heaven, and happiness, what
are all things below? Faith sets the Soul on a Rock, above the reach of
waves, upon the love of God in Christ. And therefore set the grace of Faith on
work, keep it on the wing, preserve it on exercise, and faith exercised will
be able to comfort the most dejected soul in the world, and to raise it above
all the troubels that can be imagined, or befall us.

The Second SERMON
JOHN Chapter 14. Ver. 1 Let not your hearts be tronbled: ye believe in God,
believe also in me.
THe words of dying men departing out of the world, as being most serious, and
weighty, are most to be regarded. The children of God the nearer they are to
heaven, the more suitable they are to their heavenly condition. So was our
Savior Christ, and therefore he labors to furnish his Disciples (and in them
us) with good counsel to establish their hearts against the troubles, and
scandals to come. If you consider the time when he spoke these words, it was
when he himself was to be troubled more then ever was any creature: yet ye
forgets himself, and his future troubles, and thinks how to raise up and
comfort them. He foresaw that Peter would deny him, that the rest would leave
him; he foresaw that they would be dejected, when he was gone: yet let not your
hearts be troubled.

Oh what a blessed, and sweet Savior have we, that thinks more of us, then of
himself; that he forgets his own troubles, and sufferings, and extremities,
and thinks of the supporting and upholding of his Disciples.

This came from the same love that drew him from heaven to earth, which moved
him to take our nature, and in that nature to dye for us: and what may we not
expect from that sweet and large love? out of the same bowels of pity, and
compassion, was it (that they should not be over much dejected) that he says,
Let not your hearts be troubled.

He knew his Disciples were in the state of grace already: yet he foresaw they
were such as would sin. Nay, that Peter would deny him. Yet the foresight of
Peter's and their unkindnesse, did not take away his love, and pity, and
compassion toward them: Yet notwithstanding he gives them sweet counsel; nay
after they had dealt unkindly with him, and denied and forsook him. Indeed, he
took no advantage of their weakness. He knew they had a secret love to him,
that they had in them a root of affection, and he was so far from taking
advantage for it, that presently after, he says, Tell my brethren that I
ascend to my God, and their God, yea and tell Peter so too, that has dealt
most unkindly of all with me. What a gracious and merciful Savior have we,
that foresees what ill we will do; and when we have done it, takes no advantage
against us, but is careful to keep us from too much dejection, though he knew
we would deal so unkindly by him: and indeed he did of purpose take our
nature, that he might be a merciful high Priest.

Christians must distinguish bewixt dejection and grief: It had been a sin
for them not to have grieved, as well as it was a sin for them to be over
much troubled. None are more sensible then a Christian: Sentit dum vincit, he
feels troubles whiles he overcomes them.

Christ speaks to the heart, because the heart is the seat of trouble: Let not
your hearts be troubled.

Christ could speak to the ears and heart at once, his words were operative,
and conveyed comfort with them. Together with his words, he let in his holy
Spirit, that comforted them. Gods commands in the ministry of his word,
suppose not that we have any ability to execute them, but together with his
word there comes forth a power. As when Christ said, Lazarus arise: there went
forth a power that caused Lazarus to arise. As in the Creation he said, Let
there be light; for the Word, and the Spirit go together.

Having taken them off from trouble, he shows a way how to raise them, which is
by faith, Ye believe in God, believe also in me.

The object in believing is God, and Christ Mediator: we must have both to
found our faith upon. We cannot believe in God, except we believe in Christ:
for God must be satisfied by God, and by him that is God must that satisfaction
be applied, the Spirit of God, by working faith in the heart, and for the
raising of it up when it is dejected, all is supernatural in faith. The things
we believe are above nature, the promises are above nature, the worker of it
the holy Ghost is above nature, and every thing in faith is above nature, there
must be a God in whom we believe, and a God through whom: if God had not
satisfied God, the conscience would never have been satisfied, there would
still have been misdoubtings. And yet if the holy Ghost sets not down the
heart, and convinces it thoroughly of the all-sufficiencie of that
satisfaction, it would never believe neither. And therefore as ye believe in
God, believe also in me, for I am God too.

We may know that Christ is God, not only by that which Christ has done: the
Miracles, which none could do but God, but also by what is done to him. And two
things are done to him, which show that he is God, that is, Faith, and Prayer,
we must believe only in God, and pray only to God. But Christ is the object
of both these, here he is set forth as the object of Faith, and of Prayer in
that of Saint Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. And therefore he is God,
for that is done unto him which is proper and peculiar only to God.

That which I shall now touch upon is this* we must remember what a strong
foundation, what bottom, and basis our faith has; there is God the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, and Christ the Mediator, that our faith may be
supported, we have him to believe on, who supports heaven and earth. As in 1.
Hebr. and Colos. 1. he created all things as well as the Father; he is honored
of all as well as the Father; he that supports the pillars of heaven, and
earth, is able to support the pillars of thy soul.

But how does faith in Christ ease the soul of trouble?

In a word, as it carries the soul out of it self unto God in Christ, and
unto Christ uniting, and making us one with him, and so sets the soul above
all trouble whatsoever: for being one with Christ, we are already with him in
heaven. And again, faith is a grace that presents things to come, as present,
and so establishes the soul. It is the hypostasis of things, it gives
subsistence to them in the promise, and it does never leave to do it till the
things subsist indeed. It is grace that accompanies the soul to heaven,
looking upon things in the word of him that is truth it self, and so giving a
kind of being to them throughout all the way to heaven, till they have a being
indeed. And then faith is out of office, yielding it up to sight, and the full
enjoyment of all.

But did not the Disciples believe already? Quest.


Yes they did, Answ.
but they had need to renew their faith, as occasions were renewed, and as
troubles were to increase. Believe in me: it is as he should have said, Now
there is occasion for you to use your faith, I must be taken out of your sight,
you must see me suffer, and you had need of an extraordinary measure of faith
to see me in such abasement, and yet to believe that I am God.

We must grow from faith to faith, we may live by it continually, and we must
increase with the increase of God, that as our difficulties do increase, our
strength to go through them may increase also: as they prayed, Lord increase
our faith.

I gave some directions how we might not be troubled.

And first, we must labor to have our part and portion in Christ, else there
is nothing belongs to us but trouble. There are two sorts of men in the Church,
some that usurp a peace and exemption from trouble, as if joy and comfort were
their portion. Satan is wise enough not to trouble them, and they take an
order with their consciences, that they shall not trouble them till needs must,
till the hour of death, or some dismal accident: the only way for such is to
be troubled, that their trouble may be a foundation of their comfort. For to
such as live in their sins against conscience apparently, so that every man
may see it, and yet are not troubled, they have no interest in comfort, nothing
but woe and misery belongs to them. Indeed Christ came to save sinners, but it
is brokenhearted sinners, penitent sinners, that are weary, and heavy laden
under the burden of sin. And therefore though these speak peace to
themselves, yet we dare not speak any comfort to them from Christ: As Iehu
said to Ioram, What have thou to do with peace, as long as the whoredoms of
thy mother lezebel are so many? Do thou talk of peace as long as thou art a
sweater, a profane liver, a malicious person, against all that are truly good,
what have thou to do with peace?

Now in the visible Church there is another sort that Satan labors to
trouble; since he cannot keep them in the state of nature but they break from
him, Christ pulling them out of Satan's kingdom by the power of his
ordinances, and holy Spirit, he labors to trouble them in their peace all he
can; because they be in the world, above the world, he enjoyes their condition,
that they should enjoy that paradise which he left, the comforts that he once
had, and therefore he labors to disturb them in their comforts.

The estate of such is mixed, here in this world: they have that in them, and
without them, which will always be a cause and occasion of trouble. They have
corruption in them not altogether subdued: and they have without them Satan
taking advantage against them: and the world opposing them. These although they
have something in them that must be subdued, yet something also that must be
cherished and strengthened* And therefore these are the persons to whom comfort
properly belongs.

In heaven we shall have no need of being comforted, for there our peace shall
be to have no enemies at all: our peace here is to have comfort in the midst of
discomfort, and an heart enlarged in troubles.

He speaks this to them here who were believers already: Ye believe in God, who
he knew should not be troubled, Let not your hearts be troubled So that to the
end we may be subjects capable of comfort, we must be such as by faith are one
with Christ, and so reconciled to God. All motion ends in rest, and all the
rest of the soul ends in God, the center of the soul. And therefore before the
soul can settle it self, it must be brought to God, through Christ, that must
be laid as a ground.

Now there is a threefold malady that troubles us, and there must be a
threefold peace, and ground of comfort against them.

First, it is a trouble to the soul (when once it is awakened) that God, and
it should be in ill terms when the soul looks upon God as angry, and is
displeased with it.

Again the soul is troubled, when it looks upon it self, and sees nothing
but turmoiles and seditions there.

Thirdly, when it looks upon the affairs of the world, and accidents here
below, it is full of confusion for the present; and it is full of fears for
time to come, that things will be worse and worse. Thus the soul whilst it is
in the world, is troubled about its peace with God, and with its self, and
about this evil world.

Now before the soul can yield to any quiet, all these quarrels must be taken
up.

1 A peace must be made betwixt God and us, by the great peacemaker, who is
also called our peace, and when we be justified and acquitted from our sins by
the blood of Christ sprinkled on our souls by faith, that blood of Christ
speaks peace to the soul in the pardon of sin: being justified by faith, we
have peace with God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Then secondly, there must be another peace settled in some degree, and that is
the peace of government in the soul; grace must be above corruption. They will
be together in the soul whilst we are here, but sin must not have the
dominion. This is such a peace, not, as will admit of no conflict, but a peace
wherein grace may get the better; and where grace gets the better, it will
keep corruption under, and God gives his Spirit to whom he gives his Son:
that as we be in good terms with God, so our natures may be like his: That we
may love, and delight in what he loves and delights in, and so may be as
friends, enjoying acquaintance and communion together.

I but thirdly, there is confusion in the world, and many accidents may fall
out, that may disquiet us for time to come. Now before the soul can be at
peace in that respect, it must know, that being once in Christ, reconciled to
God, and having the Spirit of God, it is under a gracious government and
providence, that disposes all things to good, and makes every thing
peaceable. Tranquillus Deus tranquillat omnia: When God is at peace, all is at
peace, yea so far at peace, that they have a blessing in them. The curse and
venom is taken out of them by Christ, who took the curse on himself, and
satisfied the wrath of God, and now they be not only harmless, but
medicinal, and helpful, so that they be all ours, and made in some sort
serviceable to further our spiritual good.

When our husband has all things committed unto him in heaven or earth, will he
suffer any thing to befall his dearly beloved Spouse, that shall be
disadvantagious, and prejudicial to the maine. No, no, he will not suffer any
thing to befall her, which he will not rule, and order, and overruled for the
good of the Church, and so there comes to be that third peace.

And for the time to come a Christian knows, that whom Christ loves, he loves
to the end, and the good work begun shall be perfected to the day of the Lord.
He knows he is in heaven already in his head: He that believes in Christ has
everlasting life, and is triumphing in glory in his head.

And therefore nothing can dismay a Christian that is truly in Christ; grant
the first, grant all, stand upon good terms with Christ, be reconciled to God,
and nothing can do thee hurt.

But when we at any time come to comfort such as have comfort for their
portion, it sticks here; if I were a child of God indeed, or if I did believe,
it were something. These be good comforts indeed, and certain, and true, for
they be the word of God: but what is this to me? I find universally, that
comfort sticks there, and therefore we must labor to remove that objection.

First of all therefore labor to have a good judgment of maine truths, that
these comforts are the comforts of the holy Ghost, and that the word is the
word of God, by a general knowledge of the truth of the promises; thou shall
be better able to apply them. If thou stick in the principles, so as not to
know them, nor to believe them; there is no talking of the application of faith
upon them; we must make that our own in particular, which we believe first in
general. And therefore Christians must first be well seen in the Scriptures,
and in the promises there; that they may know what belongs to them, and apply
them to themselves.

I but my faith is weak?

I answer: The office of faith is to know Christ, and the weakest faith will do
that, as well as the strongest: And when we are once one with Christ, then our
perfection is to be found in him. It is the office of Faith to bring us to
Christ, and then look to him for all perfections, and for thy title to him in
heaven, and not in thy faith. And true faith is faith even in the least degree
of it. As we say of the elements, every drop of water is water, and every
spark of fire is fire. And therefore the argument will not hold, if we have
not much faith, we have no faith; or if we have no feeling, we have no faith.
There are many common errors which we must remove, that they may not hinder us
in the application of Christ, by distinguishing between strong grace, and true
grace; and above all, labor to know and understand the covenant of grace. The
tenor of which requires no set measures of grace, but if we believe, we shall
not perish, but have everlasting life, under so gracious and merciful a
covenant are we.

2 But this is not sufficient to satisfy the soul. The very cleaving to
Christ is indeed a sufficient ground of comfort, but yet to obtain actual
comfort, there must be a knowledge that we do cleave to Christ, and believe.
There may be adherence without evidence: and there must be an act of reflection
to cause faith of evidence, it must appear to our selves that we do believe
before we can have comfort, though we may be true Christians, and go to heaven
without it. Therefore let us labor to make our calling and election sure: that
is, in our selves, and in our own apprehension: though it be never so sure in
it self, and in Gods breast, yet we must labor to make it sure in our own
breasts, that sin may be pardoned in our own consciences, that all may be
reconciled in our own hearts, that what is done in heaven, may be done in our
hearts also, being cleared to our own assurance. You see what advise the
Apostle gives, Give all diligence: it is not got without diligence, nor without
all diligence: to make our calling and election sure, 2. Pet. 1.
that is, to make our election sure, by our calling, and to that end to add
grace to grace. It is the growing Christian, that is the assured Christian.
Whilst we are yet adding to every heap, we shall get more abundant entrance,
and further into the kingdom of Jesus Christ, as the Apostle there speaks.

3 And when we have attained any evidence of true faith, labor to keep that
our evidence clear, let it not be spotted or defiled by any sinful acts: you
have many a good evidence that is so blurred with negligences, and daily
errors in speeches and conversation, that when they reflect upon themselves
they conclude, Can such a wretch as I, that have so loose a tongue, that have
no more watchfulness over my heart, have any faith at all. And thus God does
suspend their comforts so, that though they may be in a good estate for the
maine, yet they shall not know it, and all because they are not careful to
keep their evidence which we should preserve clear and bright, that it might
be seen and read upon all occasions. And we should so keep them bright, that
our consciences may witness with us, and that the Spirit and the Word may
join their witness with our consciences. The Word says, That he that loves
the brethren is translated to life, and he that hears the word, as the word,
is Christ's sheep. Now does thy conscience tell thee, that though in weak
measure, yet I do so? Then here is the word, and thy conscience for thee: and
does the spirit witness with thy conscience that it is so indeed? then it is
well, thou keep thy Evidence to purpose.

4 And when we have done this, let us make conscience not to yield to any base
doubts, and fears, and objections of Satan, and our own hearts. When we
find any work of grace, deny not the work of God, lest we grieve the Spirit
of God. As some melancholy Christians, that though every man may see the work
of God in them, yet yield so slavishly to the misguidings of their hearts, and
the temptations of Satan, that they conclude they have no faith, no love:
though other Christians that can read their evidence better, see that they
have these in them; what dishonor is this to God and his Spirit, when a dark
humor shall prevail more then the Word, the truth it self? this is a great
bondage which Satan brings the soul into: that when there is evidence of
faith in the fruits of it, yet men will believe a peevish humor, before the
word and testimony of conscience, enlightened by the spirit. Take heed of it as
a great pride in the heart, when we yield more to a sturdy, dark, unsubdued
humor, then to Evidence it self.

Therefore in such cases hearken not to what fear says, or humor says, or
Satan says, or what the world says, but hearken what truth it self says,
and what conscience says, when it is enlightened by the Spirit, as in good
times when we are at the best. True Christians, though more remiss, shall have
so much comfort as shall support them from falling into despair, yet not so
much as shall strengthen them, and carry them into a vigorous life, fit for
Christians.

5 When we have found any work of grace, and thereupon that our faith is true,
we ought to comfort our selves, and to maintain our comfort by all means.
Every grace is but faith exercised: when our Savior says, Ye believe in God,
believe also in me, he might have said also in particular, Be patient, be
contented, be comforted. But he names the root of all, Faith, wherein all
graces are radically, which is therefore discerned in the fruits of it, so that
if any grace be found, as love to the brethren, hope of life everlasting, or
the like, there is faith. For the root and branches be together, though the
root is not always discerned. And therefore when we discover any true faith in
the fruit of it, let us support and comfort our selves with it.

For when a man is in Christ, and by Christ an heir of heaven, and a child of
God, what in the world can befall him, that should deject over much, and cast
him down? What loss, what cross, what want of friends, has he not all in
God, and in Christ, and in the promise? Do not the promises weigh down all
discouragements whatsoever? Surely they do. And therefore we must strive
against dejection. For besides what I spoke the last day, it is a dishonor to
the profession of Religion, which is in it self so glorious, what a dishonor
to God, and to Christ, when we have such glorious prerogatives, and
privileges, which the Angles themselves admire; yet every petty cross and
loss that we meet withal in the world should cast us down, we should take
heed exceedingly of this, and should labor every day to have a more and more
clear sight of the promises that belong unto us, and to know the privileges
of Christianity, and renew our faith in them continually, that they may be
fresh to us in all temptations, and occasions whatsoever.

I beseech you do but consider any one grand promise, which if it be rooted in
the soul, how it is able to support the soul, against all troubles
whatsoever. As that, Fear not little flock, for it is your Fathers good
pleasure to give you the kingdom. Or that other: If God spared not his Son
for us; how will he not with him give us all things else?

Labor to have these things fresh in memory, together with the privileges
belonging to Christians. Think what is it to be a child of God, and an heir
of heaven.

We must not look only to the blind and dark side of our condition.
Christians have two sides, one to heaven ward, and Godward; and that is full
of glory, certain, and immovable. Another toward the world, and that is
oftentimes full of abasement, full of disgrace, and dejection. That is
moveable, sometimes better, sometimes worse, as God pleases to dispense his
government in the Church. Let us look to the grace, to the comforts that
belong to that grace, to the promises, the best side, and not to be carried
away with the darkness of the other.

It is a terrible sight to look upon sin, and misery, and hell, and
judgment to come; but what are these to a Christian that is in Christ, that
sees them all subdued, and overcome to him? The afflictions of the world, and
the crosses of the world, what are they to a soul, that is already in heaven
by faith, and sees them all overcome in his head Christ? Be of good comfort, I
have overcome the world. And therefore we must not be so malignant, as to look
all upon one part of a Christian, and that the worser part which is the object
of sense; for shame, live not by sense: but if we be Christians, let us live by
faith, look to the best part: look, upwards and forwards to that which is
eternal.

5 And withal labor to keep the grace of the Spirit in continual exercise
upon all occasions. For grace exercised brings certain comfort: it may be with
a Christian in his feelings as with the worst man living; but he may thank his
own negligence, his own dullness; his not stirring up of the graces of God in
him. For therefore it is that he hangs the wing, upon every petty cross, on
every occasion: Labor to have an heart ready to exercise grace suitable to
that occasion; for then grace will reflect sweetly, where there is sincerity
and grace in exercise. Sincerity alone will not comfort a man, unless it grow
up to fruitfulness: and fruitfulness which springs from the exercise of
grace, has a sweet reflection upon the soul. Remember Lord how I have walked
before thee, in truth, and with a perfect heart, says Hezekiah. He stood then
most in need of comfort, and this comforted him, this his reflection upon his
former sincerity. So when a man can appeal unto God as Peter did, Lord thou
know I love thee* so much sincerity, so much boldness with God. And
therefore let us keep grace in exercise, that we may be fruitful in our lives
and conversations, and then we shall be always comfortable.

And to add a little, there is no grace in a Christian, but if it be
exercised, there is a suitable comfort upon it even here in this world. There
is a Praemium ante praemium, A reward before a reward. Nay, the Heathen men,
Socrates, and the best of them, so far as they exercised the natural
goodness that was in them; their consciences reflected peace so far as they
were good, and did good, they had peace, much more peace then bad men had. God
gave even them some rewards, upon discharge of their duties: he will not be
beholden to any man, that exercises any degree of goodness that is in him.
Much more therefore shall a child of God enjoy it, when he exercises his
graces in any temptation, when he overcomes any unclean, earthly,
vainglorious vindictive, or any other base lust, he shall find peace of
conscience suitable: and the more he grows in strength, and resolution for the
time to come, the more he grows in inward peace. Righteousness and peace go
together, not only the righteousness of Christ, and our reconciliation before
God; but also the righteousness of an holy life, and peace in our own
consciences.

The righteousness of Christ entitles to heaven, and the righteousness of an
holy life shows my title unto comfort. As faith in Christ's righteousness
brings peace, so sanctification also: Heb. 7. 1.
Christ is first King of righteousness, and then King of peace. And therefore
where there is no righteousness, there is no peace. But on the contrary, as
heat follows the fire, and as the beams have an emanation from the Sun, so
does comfort arise from grace, especially from grace exercised.

Therefore they that would have inward peace, let them labor to be gracious,
and that not only in the inward frame of the heart, but in the exercise of
grace upon all occasions. For they that walk according to this rule, that is,
of the new creature, peace be to them, and the whole Israel of God. Gal. 15*
16* an exact and careful life will bring constant peace.

Therefore let us labor first for interest in Christ's righteousness, and then
for the righteousness of an holy life; for a conscience to justify us, that
we have no purpose to live in any sin, and a not accusing conscience will be
a justifying conscience. What a blessed condition shall we be in, to be in
Christ, and to know that we are so? Oh the heaven on earth of such a man, as is
in that condition! For which way soever he looks, he finds matter of comfort.
If he looks backward, to the government of the spirit that has ruled him in
the former part of his life, he may say with Saint Paul, I have fought a good
fight, 2. Tim. 4. 7.
I have run the race that God has set before me. And what a sweet reflection
is this? he is not afraid to look back to his life past as other men. If he
looks forward, he sees a place prepared for him in heaven, and there he sees
himself already in Christ: hence forth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the righteous judge shall give me at that day: and all
that love his appearing, says he, there. When there comes ill tidings of the
Church abroad, and at home, it does not much dismay him, his heart is fixed, he
believes in God, and in Christ, and that keeps him from being like a reed
shaken with every wind. For reproaches, and disgraces that he meets withal in
the world, he wears them as his crown, if they be for Religion and goodness
sake. For his witness is in heaven, and in his own conscience. And God in
heaven, and his conscience within, do acquit him, and if he suffer for his
deserts, yet in all afflictions God deals with him as a correcting father, he
knows he has deserved them; but he looks on them as coming from a father in
covenant with him: And what can come from a father but what is sweet? He sees
it moderated and sweetened, and in the issue tending to make him more holy. The
sting is taken out, and a blessing is upon it, to make him better. And
therefore what can make a Christian uncomfortable when he has the Spirit of
Christ, and faith the root of grace?

These comforts being warmed with meditation, will stick close to the heart:
comforts that are digested, are they that work. Let them therefore not only
enter into the brain and fleet there, but let them sink into the heart by
often consideration of Gods love in Christ, and the privileges of Christians
here, and in heaven, where our head is, and where we shall be ere long* Warm
the heart with these, and see if any petty thing can cast thee down.

FINIS.

