A SACRED SEPTENARIE, OR, A GODLY AND FRUITFUL EXPOSITION ON THE SEVEN PSALMS
OF REPENTANCE.

viz. the VI. XXV. XXXII. XXXVIII. LI. CXXX. CXLIII.
the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
of the penitentials.

Serving especially for the direction and comfort of all such, who are either
troubled in mind, diseased in body, or persecuted by the wicked.

The second impression.

By Mr. A. Symson, Pastor of the Church at Dalkeeth in Scotland,

LONDON, Printed by W. I. for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the two Greyhounds in Cornehill, near the Royall-Exchange. 1623

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, although many both of the ancient Fathers and modern Divines
have worthily, learnedly and feellingly written on these seven Penitentialls,
so that it may seem in a manner unnecessary and superfluous, that any thing
should be added: yea because this Ocean is not dried up* and he that comes
last, may as well fill his bucket as he that comes first, for the great
advantage to my Master, and the performance of my promise to mine own people,
and certain other godly Christians, (and not for any desire of commendation or
gain, as God is my record) I have strained my self to put forth this my
Talent to the view of the world, whereby I might (though not as those worthies
of David who have gone before, whose weapons I have in some places used) give
some blows to the enemy. Herein albeit there may be somewhat both redundant
and defective, (for there is no perfection in man, and Apelles always found
somewhat to be amended in those pictures which he had most curiously drawn)
yet let not that somewhat which is imperfect withdraw thee from the use of the
rest, but read, confer, consider, and if any thing be added to the trauiles
of others, give thanks to God, and reap thou the commodity. Farewell.

A. SIMSON.

A GODLY AND FRVITFVLL EXPOSITION ON THE TWENTY FIVE AND THIRTY TWO PSALMS,
THE SECOND AND THIRD OF THE PENITENTIALS.

Serving especially for the Direction and comfort of all persons, who are
either troubled in mind, diseased in body, or persecuted by the wicked.

By Mr. A. SYMSON, Pastor of the Church at DALKEITH in Scotland.

LONDON, Printed by W. I. for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the two Greyhounds in Cornehill, near the Royall-Exchange. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND POTENT LORD, WILLIAM EARL of Morton, Lord Dalkeith:
one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council of Scotland, etc.
And TO HIS NOBLE LADY, Dame ANNA KEITH, eternal felicity.
AS my first travels on the seven words which our Lord spoke upon the Cross,
sought to shelter themselves under the shadow of your Ladyships protection: So
these upon the first of the 7. Psalms of Repenta^^ craves the Patronage of
(...) both; and does specially app^taine to your Lo. Because y^^ Grandfather of
good memory (...) led by all men the good Earl of M^^ton, was the first who
moved (...) in my youth to preach the sam^ not only public in the Church but
privately in the Castle to (...) Lady your Grandmother, wh^^ memorial is so
sweet, that it is li^^ the smell of fragrant odors, a^ is honorable among all
men. H^ had the true fear of God, a si^^cere love to the truth, and all go^^
men, a mirror of chastity, me^cifull, instant in prayer, consta^^ in the
truth. In a word (Go^ knows I lie not, neither flatte^ the only Phoenix of
this age. And as your Lo. represents his person in body, so I pray God you may
draw as near to the gifts of his mind, whereby your name may be eternalized,
and especially in zeal to the glory of God, your duty to your Prince and
Country, the honor of your estate, and care to live honorably and dutifully to
al your equals and inferiors And finally, to crown all the actions of your
precedent years, with such a glorious testament as he did, whereof your Lo. was
eyewitness, that your noble house may be so much the more ennobled in your
noble person, and leave a memorable example to your posterity that shall
follow, I was thrice happy, that I was brought up under his hand, who that
same year he entered to his Earldom, choosed me to his Church of Dalkeith,
where I have served these thirty five years.

Wherefore my hearty desire is that this book may be a memorial of my love and
service to your Lordship, and to your Lady, which I trust in God will give you
faithful admonitions and directions, as I my self have done oft-times, both
how to live in your Religion, and conversation. So wishing many good and
prosperous days to you both, and your hopeful Posterity; I rest,

Your Lordships and Ladyships servant, A. SYMSON.

A GODLY AND FRVITFVLL EXPOSITION ON THE SIXTH PSALM, the first of the
PENITENTIALS.
THE accustomable method of doctrine which Moses and the Prophets, Leuit. 5.5.
Christ and his Apostles, Ezekiel. 18.20. Mat. 4.17. Acts. 2.38. Revel. 2.5. Mat.
3.2.
and John Baptist used in their Sermons, was Repent, for the kingdom of heaven
is at hand. For as it were folly to power in Wine and Oil in the wound, till
it be first ripped and searched: So to offer the Kingdom of God and the
promises of salvation to a sinner, who were stung by the fiery Serpents, Numb.
21.9. Mark 2.17.
and none sue and seek after the Physician, but the sick: So none cares for
Christ Jesus, but these that feel themselves stung by sin. That then is the
first and best preaching, and he the fittest Preacher to cure souls, who can
first wound, then heal; first cast down, and then raise up. I love (says the
Ancient) that Pastor who does not move the people by his doctrine to applaud
him, but moves me to mourn for my sin. For as the Law preceeds the
Gospel, so Repentance does the remission of sins: not that I would have you
to think that repentance were a cause of the Kingdom of heaven, albeit it be
a necessary preparation for the same;

This is the first and most necessary lesson to be learned by us all, Note.
and at whose school can we learn better, than at such an experimented Prince
and Prophet, (experience having great place in any who would teach and instruct
others, 1 Reg. 15.5. 2 Samuel 11.4.17. 2 Samuel 12.13.
that which he has first felt in himself) who (albeit a man after Gods own
heart) did commit murder and adultery, for which he repented sincerely, and
has honored God more by his repentance, than he offended him by his sin. For
as the sin of a Prince is very great, so also should their repentance be: not
as Saul, 1 Samuel 22.18.
who committed horrible murders, in killing fourscore Priests of the Lord,
and yet repented not. Blessed is that King who leaves behind him, as great
testimony of his conversion to God, as he has given proof of his defection
from him. And therefore let Kings learn of a King, and Pastors of a Prophet,
that when they sin, and become stumbling blocks to others, they may repent, and
blot out the note of ignominy (which through their sin they have received) by
a true conversion and open confession, as the King of Nineveh, Jonah 3.6.
Ester. 4.16.17. 2 Chro. 33.12. Simil.
Queen Hester, Mordecay, Manasses, and here David for their sins are more
offensive and grea^er than others, for they make many to fall with them, as the
fall of a Cedar is the ruin of many inferior trees.

If our sins be secret, we are not bound to any auricular Confession, Prou.
25.2.
for Gods honor is to conceal a sin; in doing otherwise, we do double wrong,
one by our sin to offend God, another by our revealing to dishonor our selves
and offend the Church. But if our sin be public (as was David's) to deny,
color, 2 Samuel 11.4.
or extenuate it, we sin grievously against God and our own souls,
defrauding God of his glory, and our souls of salvation.

But mark the truth of that sentence, all things work for the best to those
that love the Lord: Romans 8.28.
for David's sin turns to the glory of God, the comfort of the Church, and his
own salvation:

Herein also is the mercy of God greatly to be admired, that where sin did
abound, now grace does superabound, Romans 5.20.
for albeit David did fall through the corruption of his nature in those
heinous sins, yet God magnifieth his compassions in his conversion, and in
his unfeigned repentance.

But hereby let not licentious libertines be provoked by David's example to sin,
as commonly they abuse the falls of Gods children, to be warrants to
themselves, and arguments by which they corroborate and strengthen themselves
in their wickedness, as Drunkards cast up Noah; Genesis 9.21. Genesis 19.33.35. 2 Samuel
11.4.^7. Act. 9 1, 2. Mat. 26.74
Incestuous men, Lot; Adulterers and Murderers, David; Persecutors, Paul;
Apostates, Peter, etc. But oh wretched men that ye are, do ye make the falls of
the Saints allurements provoking you to sin, where by the contrary they should
be as so many Beacons, warning you that ye take heed, Comparison.
But alas these desperate men take the instrument which should lance their
wound, to kill themselves therewith.

David has left behind him seven Psalms of Repentance, according to the
number of the seven days of the week, that as each day we sin and fall, so
we may have one of these Psalms, as a sheepe-crooke to pull us out of the
ditch of sin. Simil. Numb. 35.13.
These are as seven Cities of refuge, whereinto a sinner may fly for safeguard,
when he finds himself pursued by the auenger of blood for his sins, David
(whereof some are instructions to a godly life, others deprecations against his
adversaries, many of them praises of Gods mercies, others prayers for the
Church) these Seven are left as witnesses of his unfeigned repentance, therefore
they bear the name of penitentials, Why called Penitentials.
a poenam tenendo, because they bear in them the pain and grief of his
heart, which he sustained for his sins.

We have all sinned with David, let us learn to repent with David, for the
blood of Christ will not be effectual to any, but to a penitent sinner. Now is
the time when repentance may help thee, for though (as Augustine says) after
this life it be perpetual, Augustine. Genesis 27.38.
it is in vain: even as Esau mourned bitterly, while there was no place left
for the blessing, so shall thou do, if thou neglect the opportunity of
repentance.

But that ye may learn to discern, Four marks of Repentance. 1 Mark. The
ground of repentance. Exodus 9.27. 2 Samuel 12.13.
whether ye have obtained the gift of true repentance, as David did, observe
these four marks.

First, what was the ground and first motive which made you to repent your
sin; if the plagues and scourges of God, as they made Pharo to say, I have
sinned: Or the sweet voice of Gods word which moved David to say, I have
sinned: If some pain, shame or sickness has made thee to repent, it being
removed, thou may change; but if the Word has won thee, thou art won indeed.
The Spouse in the Canti^les was raised from the bed of sin by the voice of
her Beloved: Cant. 5.5. Luk 22.61.62. Act. 2.41.
Christ looked on Peter, and he wept bitterly. The word of God by John
converted the Soldiers; by Peter three thousand Jews, and Paul by the voice
of Christ, why persecutest thou me. Act. 9 4. 2 Mark. Sincerity Simil.


Next, try the sincerity of thy Repentance, whether thy heart has greater
grief for sin than thy tongue vtters. The Comoedians who play the siege of
Troy, can represent the doleful habit, tears and sorrow of Priamus and
Hecube, King and Queen of Troy, but they are not in heart touched with their
grief, neither are they sensible of their sorrow. 2 Samuel 14.2.
The woman of Tecoah counterfeited her dole to David for Absolon, but felt
none. Such and no better is the repentance of Hypocrites, they may weep with
Saul counterfeitly, 1 Samuel 24.17.
their heart not being truly touched: which hypocrisy of theirs and fained
repentance, the Lord detests more, then any sin that a man can commit: for a
man sinning professes himself to be the Devils servant, but fainedly
repenting, he professes himself to be Gods servant, in the mean time
keeping his heart to the Devil, and with Ananias and Saphira, Act. ^.2.
stealing back sacrilegiously that which he offered to God, yea even the best
part, his heart.

Thirdly, 3 Mark. Universality. 1. Sam. 15.9.
try the universality of thy repentance, for it must not be of one, but of all
sins; ye must not spare Agag and the fat cattle with Saul, and your principal,
most profitable and pleasant sins, but if ye deny one, deny all; if ye refuse
one, refuse all; if ye reject one, reject all: for as one rope was able to
bind Sampson, Judge. 16.21.
when he was spoiled of the mark of Gods presence in his head; so one sin not
repented for, is able to carry any person headlong to destruction.

Finally, 4 Mark. Constancy Hosea 13.3
let thy repentance be constant, not as the dew of the morning, or the morning
cloud, but the longer thou live, thou must ever have the greater remorse for
thy sin. The ships are in greatest hazard when they ride in shallow waters,
Psalm. 130.1.
according to that of David, Out of the deep places I cried unto thee. And as
quick springs send forth continual waters both Winter and Summer,

The Argument of the PSALM.
Division general.
THe Sixth Psalm is first in order of the Seven, containing a Preface, and the
Psalm it self. The Preface contains the Author David, and the musical
Instruments, and persons to whom it is concredit to be sung.

David was a chief sinner, who not only sinned in his person, but by his
example made Gods name to be evil spoken of, now he becomes a chief mourner
for his offenses committed.

The Title.
Music lawful.
HE commits this Psalm to the Master of Basses and Tenors to be sung, by these
tunes which are called (...), the undermost and middle. Ye see by this that
Music has ever been lawful, and esteemed among the Saints, and of great
virtue to stir up the affections of men. 1 Samuel 16.23. 2 Reg. 3.15.
The Harp of David banished the evil spirit from Saul: Elisha craved a
Minstrill to remove his anger, yea it is alleged that by the sound of Music
the Delphine is moved: it is very commendable if it be rightly used, for it is
not only meet to stir up the affections to joy, but also to provoke them to
mourning, for so heavy is our nature, that it craves helps and suppliments
which may further us to the service of God, where by the contrary is force
enough in nature to provoke it to evil, for this cause he commits it to the
Base and Tenor.

Music praised.
To conclude this point, let no man contemn Music, seeing it is magnified in
heaven amongst the Angels, the air is replenished with infinite variety of
tunes and notes, the earth should imitate Angels, and not be inferior to
birds, but be stirred up to praise God, yea and in hell there shall be sung
that black Basse, the shouts of wicked men, who shall be forced to cry, Psalm.
145.17.
The Lord is just in all his judgments.

The Division.
Division particular.
THE Psalm has two parts, a Prayer, and a Triumph after Prayer. The prayer
has two parts, a deprecation of evil, in the first three verses, and a desire
of delivery, in the next four. The Triumph and persuasion of obtaining his
suit, in the three last.

The Use.
The use of this psalm
THIS Psalm serves for all persons who are either troubled in mind, or diseased
in their bodies, or are persecuted by the wicked. If they peruse this Psalm,
they shall find medicine to remedy and cure all.

VERSE 1.
David being heavily vexed, has his refuge to God, In our afflictions we must
look to God, and not to secondary causes.
whose hands he felt upon him: whereby he would learn us, not to set our eye
upon the instrument which afflicts us, or the mid causes which deal with us,
but let us look higher than those, to that Primum mobile, the eternal God,
the first mouer of them all, without whose special advice and determination,
the Devil himself is not able to cause the least hair of our head fall to
the ground For all are numbered. Mat. 10.30. 2 Samuel 16.11. and 12.23. Job 1.21.
, which David considered well (when Shemei railed at him) in saying, The Lord
has sent him: the like he thought at the death of his child. This Job
acknowledged, when in his great distress he looked to God and said, We have
received good things at his hand, why not evil also; the Lord has given, the
Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. Whereby we are taught,
wounded, To go to God for help in our distresses.
Prayer is our wings to fly to God in our affliction. Cant. 2.14.


Next, David being in distress, runs to Prayer, for Prayer is the wings
wherewith we must fly to the mountain of God in our tribulations, to hide our
selves in his Rock (as a Dove) from the violence of the Hawk which pursues
us, yea oftentimes God sends us afflictions, to the end we may be provoked to
prayer.

Rebuke me not] God has two means by which he reduces his children to
obedience: 2. means by which Gods brings us to obedience. 1. His word 2. His
Rod. Mark. 2.17. Psalm. 141.5. If we refuse to be ruled by gods word, then God
will not fail to correct us with his Rod. Mat. 26.46.
his word, by which he rebukes them, and his rod, by which he chastises them.
The word precedes, admonishing them by his servants whom he has sent in all
ages to call sinners to repentance: of the which David himself says, Let the
righteous rebuke me: and as a Father does first rebuke his disordered child, so
does God speak to them. But when men neglect the warnings of his word, then
God, as a good Father, takes up the rod and beats them. Our Savior wakened the
three disciples in the garden three times, but seeing they could not waken, he
told them that Judas and his band was coming to awaken them, whom his own
voice could not waken. Many contemn the Word and Sacraments, and such gracious
warnings, 1 Cor. 11.30.
For which cause (as says the Apostle) many are sick among you, many die
also. And indeed many warnings have we received, but all in vain, and
therefore the Lord has been forced to apply some harder remedies,

But yet happy is that man that can be touched with any of them (where by the
contrary it is a desperate evil where nothing can move) either with the Word,
Note. Yield to the means which God uses. 2 Samuel 12.13. Luke 15.18:
as David was when he said, I have sinned, or the rod, as the Prodigal, being
pinched with famine, resolved to return to his father, and confess his own
unworthiness. But alas, the Lord has too great cause to complain of this
age, as he did of the Israelites by his Prophet, while he says, I have smitten
them with Mildew, Amos 4.9.
Grasshoppers, etc. and yet they have not returned unto me: 1 Samuel 2.25. and
4.11.
and therefore it is to be feared that it befall to us, as to the Sons of Eli,
who would not hear the voice of their Father, Distiction betwixt Gods
chastising his children and punishing his enemies.
because the Lord would s^y them.

In thine anger.] David deprecates not Gods rebukes or corrections, but that
he would not rebuke him in his anger, neither chastise him in his wrath, by
which he makes a manifest distinction between Gods chastisements to his own,
and his punishments to his enemies, for God strikes them both, but not with a
like affection, as a father will correct his child and punish his enemy, being
in a contrary disposition to the one, Gods children increase their grief in
not discerning betwixt a curse and a cross. Some marks betwixt a curse and a
cross.
in which he was not to the other. It is true, there is a great similitude
between a curse and a cross, and oftentimes Gods children have been deceived
thereby, and through his hard handling of them, have judged him to have become
their enemy; but indeed there is great difference, as the one coming out of
his love, the other out of his hatred, as a beginning of their everlasting
pains.

And to the end ye may know whether they come from the hands of a loving God,
or no, 1. Mark. To look to our selves, as ca^sing it, and not to secondary
means.
consider these marks and tokens.

First, if they lead thee to a consideration of thy sin, which is the ground
and cause of them, so that thou look not to the isntrumental or second
cause, but to thy self, the cause of all, they come from the hand of a loving
God. 2. Mark. If by them we be driven from sin.


Secondly, if these corrections and chastisements make thee leave off to sin
and reject it, they come from a loving God.

And thirdly, 3. Mark. If they drive us to God. 2 Kin. 6 33.
if under thy cross thou run unto God, whom thou have pierced, that he may
deliver thee, and not say with that godless King Iehoram, Why should I attend
any more upon the Lord.

Moreover, 4. Mark. If they work in us humility and patience. Simil.
the cross works in the godly a wonderful humility and patience, so that
they submit themselves under the hand of the living God, that they under it may
be tamed, and from Lions be made Lambs. The wicked either howl (as do dogs
that are beaten) through sense of their present stroke, or if they be humbled
and seem patient, it is coacted and perforce, as a Lion which is caged, and
cannot stir. In a word, Note.
their affliction may well restrain their perverse nature, but it can never
change, alter, nor renew it, it must be the power of Gods restraining grace,
which will renew man and mortify his affections. The Lord sanctify our
corrections, that they may work in us a true conversion to our God, for which
God has laid them upon us. And let us desire his Majesty, that since he
visits us every morning, and deals (to the outward appearance) more strictly
with us, than with our enemies, that he may whip us with the rod of his
children, and take not away his holy Spirit from us, as he does from the wicked.

The thing that he deprecates here is the wrath of God, and therefore it
falls out naturally, that I should speak concerning the wrath of God.

Opinions of Gods anger.
The Philosophers said of old that there was neither wrath nor grace in God, and
therefore that he neither rewarded his worshippers, nor punished those that
contemned him. The Stoics affirmed that there was no wrath in God, because
they considered nothing in wrath, but that which is corruptible and sinful, as
to run after a beastly manner to revenge. But alas, these persons do not
consider the difference betwixt the qualities that are in our sinful nature,
and the essential properties which are in God: for he is angry and sins not.
His anger is as pure as his mercy, for his Justice is his anger, but our anger
is annexed with sin, and therefore evil.

The Scriptures themselves make mention of Gods wrath, that he was angry
against the Israelites, Number. 11.1. Genesis 19.24 Exodus 4. etc. 1 Kin. 11.9. Hosea
1.4.
against the Sodomites, against Pharaoh, against Solomon, against the Jews,
for the sin of Ioacham the son of Iehu. But it is to be understood, that the
names of Fury and Anger are not in God secundum affectum, How anger is in God.
that is, not according to the passion and affection (unto which God is not
subject) sedsecundum effectum, but according to the effect: as when God
chastises sin, it seems to the sinner that God is in choler, and so he
measures God according to humane sense.

The anger of God is threefold. 1. General, Gods anger threefold. 1. General.
Ephesians. 2.3. 2. Temporary. 3. Eternal.
which is laid upon all men, for which cause the Apostle says, we are all the
children of wrath. 2. Temporary, wherein God is angry both against the sins of
the elect and reprobate is this present life. 3. That eternal wrath, which the
Apostle calls the wrath to come: 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Matthew. 3.7.
of which also John the Baptist speaks, Who has forewarned you to escape the
wrath to come?

Three sin in man's anger. 1. To be angry against them they should not. 2. For
things they should not. 3. More than they should. Neither of which befall God.
Those who are subject to anger, whom the Grecians call (...), they are suddenly
passionate, and have three great infirmities in being angry: 1. (...), against
those whom they should not. 2. (...), for matters they should not. 3. (...),
more than they should be, which three fall not into God, for his wrath is only
against sinners who do transgress his Law, not against the righteous, as a
just Judge being angry at malefactors. Next, his anger is one y against sin,
for he hates not his own creature, but the corruption of sin that destroys
his creature. And thirdly, the whole Scriptures testify unto us, that he does
moderate and temperate his wrath, that in his greatest indignation he has
remembered mercy, and has not prosecuted with the extremity and rigor of his
justice.

But ye must remember, that as his grace is very great, Gods ange^ great.
Psalm. 90.11.
so his wrath is very heavy: And therefore says the Psalmist, Who knows the
weight of thy indignation. The wrath of a King is as the roaring of a Lion: Pro
19.12. Dan. 3.16, 19.
as the wrath of King Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel, was great and the fire very
fearful. But the three Children feared not so much that temporal fire, as
the fire of the angry countenance of God, himself being a consuming fire and
an everlasting burning: Deuteronomy. 4.24. and Heb. 12.29. Deu. 32.22
A fire is kindled in my wrath (says the Lord) and shall burn unto the
bottom of hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire
the foundations of the mountains, etc. Then since we will be loath to vnder-lie
the wrath of a King, ought we not to be careful and circumspect, that we come
not under the danger of the highest wrath? The anger of a mortal King reaches
and extends to the bodies, Differences betwixt the anger of a King, and of God.
goods, and posterity of the offenders; but the anger of God reaches further,
even to the soul. The anger of a Prince is finite, and will have an end, but
Gods anger is infinite and endless, as himself is, Esaias 30.33.
The breath of his nostrils as a river of brimstone will kindle Topheth
prepared for the King. But woe will be to those that for fear of any earthly
Prince or Monarch, come under the indignation and wrath of God.

What sins God hates.
All sins offend God and provoke him to anger, but there are some pointed out
by Scripture, whereat he is more offended, as Witchcraft, Idolatry,
Hypocrisy, etc: yea, those which seem lesser sins to us being multiplied,
and not repented for, will also kindle him to anger: yea more, what ever sin
we commit, God will be angry at it and offended therewith, not that he c^n
receive any evil by our evil doing, more than he gets good by our well doing;
Why God hates sin.
but he is angry that we should undo his Image in us, and be cause of our own
damnation. As a father is offended at his son, not for any wrong coming to
him, but to see his own image before his eyes, and a part of his own nature
destroying it self.

Neither chastise me in thy wrath] The duplication of the word anger, and heat
or fury, shows unto us that David apprehended deeply Gods indignation, for
there are many (alas) who do think little of it, but a heart afflicted and
mortified will redouble the grieuance, and think more and more of his
Majesty's anger.

But it may be asked, Esaias 27.4.
how God says there is no anger with me, and here David craves to be exempted
from his anger? I answer, He has no fleshly anger,

Gods anger differs from man's.
And as the anger of God differs from the anger of man, the one being grounded
upon partial affections of the corrupted heart which is offended at any thing
which crosses it, the other being only moved at finne: So they differ in
continuance; for Gods wrath lasts but a moment, Psalm. 53.8.
slow he is to conceive a wrath, and ready to pardon. But the anger of man on
the contrary, arises upon the smallest motives, and it cannot cease till it be
converted into malice, as at last the serpent becomes a fiery flying Dragon.
Be angry, and sin not. Ephesians. 4.26.
Let us be angry at nothing but sin in our selves and in others. And again,
Ephesians. 4.26.
Let not the Sun go down on our wrath, In the mean time, Let us remember
that there is nothing more terrible than the wrath of God: And therefore let us
walk in fear and trembling before him who is able to kill both body and
soul. Are they not then desperate, and miserable men, who at every word cry,
that the wrath of God be upon them, and the vengeance of God upon their
neighbors; alas, one day they shall feel the dint of that wrath, when they
shall be forced to cry, O mountains cover, Revel. 6.16.
and O hills hide us from the face of that terrible Judge.

VERSE 2.
Have mercy:] To fly and escape the anger of God, No means to eschew Gods
anger but to go to himself.
he sees no means in heaven or in earth, and therefore he retires himself to
God, even to him who wounded him, that he might heal him. He flies not with
Adam to the bush, Gen 3.8. 1 Samuel 28.8. Jonah 1.3.
nor with Saul to the Witch, or with Jonas to Tarshish, but he appeals from an
angry and just God to a merciful God, and from himself to himself. The woman
who was damned by King Philip, appealed from Philip being drunken to Philip
being sober. But David appeals from one Virtue, Justice, to another, Mercy.
There may be appellation from the Tribunal of man to the Justice seat of God,
In the sense of Gods wrath seek to him for mercy. Psalm. 73.25.
but when thou art indicted before Gods Justice, whither or to whom will thou
go, but to Himself, and his Mercy-seat, which is the highest and last place
of appellation? I have none in Heaven but thee, nor in earth by thee.

David craves, Mercy:] whereby we may perceive that he was brought to a
consideration of his own misery, A sense of misery i^ a spur to crave mercy.
or else he needed not to have asked for mercy. Then it is necessary, that to
the end we may the more effectually crave pardon, every one of us first have a
sense and f^eling of our own sin and misery. Labor for a true ^^nse of our
misery, to make us the^ more earnest for m^^y Ioh. ^.7, etc
The woman of Samaria sported herself with the offers of the waters of life,
which Christ Jesus offered her out of his own blessed mouth, until the time
be objected her sins to her, then she received them gladly, and communicated
them to the whole City; so did the Magdalen, Peter, Manasses, Luke 7.37. Luke
22.62. 2 Chro. 33.12. Act 9.4, etc.
Paul, and so have and must all penitent sinners do; so necessary a thing it
is to feel our own miseries, that the mercies of God may be more welcome and
sweet unto us. And therefore it is but an idle voice when men call for Gods
mercy, not having the least remorse for their sin. Luke 18.11. ark. 2.17.
Matthew. 5.4.
The Pharisee needed not Christ, as the whole need not the Physician. God give
us then the spirit of repentance, that we may mourn, to the end we may be
comforted.

As for the Mercy of God, Gods mercies innumerable. Ephesians. 3.18.
to me to speak thereof it is impossible, yea to express the height, breadth,
depth, and length thereof, as impossible as if I should reckon the number of
the sand of the Sea; yea all the creatures, Angels and men, if they would bend
their wits, they were not able to express the least part of the mercies of our
God, for they are finite creatures, and he an infinite God, whose mercies are
innumerable and infinite: yet according to my humane capacity, what I have
conceived and do believe of his mercy, that I will deliver to you. And as I
spoke before of his wrath and anger that endures but for a season, Psalm.
136.1, etc. Psalm 145.9
I will entreat of his mercies which endure for ever, and which are above all
his works, himself also being styled, The Father of mercies. 2 Cor. 1.3.


His mercies are either General or Special, Four sorts of mercies. 1.
General.
Temporal or Eternal. His General mercies are those benefits which he
bestows upon all mankind, as well elect as reprobate: whereupon our Savior
shows unto us, That he makes the Sun to shine upon the good and upon the
bad: and thereupon he infers, Mat. ^.4^.
Be merciful, as your Father in heaven is merciful. So that these same
External benefits are to the reprobate unseen and unfelt benefits and mercies.

The Special mercy is the remission of sins, 2. Special.
which he bestows upon his own children allanerly. Genesis 25.5, 6
So that as Abraham gave gifts to the children of the Concubines, and reserved
the heritage for Isaac his son; and as Helcanah gave to Peninnah a portion, 1 Samuel 1.4, 5
but unto Anna a worthy portion: So God gives riches to the wicked, but only
grace to his chosen children.

The Temporary mercy is the forgiveness whereby he pardons the sins of the
reprobate, 3. Temporary mercies.
and out of his clemency deferies their temporal punishments, to make them
the more inexcusable, I^^ah 3.10. 1 King. 21.29.
as he did to the Ninevites, and to Achab.

But that Sempiternall mercy is that whereof the Apostle speaks, 4 Eternal.
That God who is rich in mercy, for his great love, by which he loved us, when
we were dead in sins, Ephesians. 2.4, etc.
has quickened us in Jesus Christ, to make manifest in the ages to come the
riches of his grace.

This mercy flows from himself, Gods mercies unchangeable.
and he extends it to whom he pleases, and it is so sure and constant, that he
can deny himself as soon as he can alter his mercy toward any whom he has
received under his favor. And this constancy of his mercy is a sure hold, to
which all troubled consciences may retire.

To encourage Gods poor afflicted children ^say 61.1. Revel. 3.18 Simil.
where there is sure and perfect Physic to be found, innumerable riches to
the poor, eye-salue to the blind, etc. Think ye that your sins are of
greater weight than his mercies? or that the gold of his goodness in thee,
cannot ouersway the dross of thine own sinfulness? Has not the Lord sworn
that he delights not in the death of a sinner? Ezec. 18.23
will he falsify his word, belie his promise, Number. 23.19.
or is he like man that he can repent?

us against despair: Against presumption upon consideraon of Gods mercy.
so on the other part we should take heed that we presume not too far, by
abusing his mercies, and making them a cover for our wickedness; so that a
false persuasion of mercy, makes us live as we please: no no, there is no
mercy for an impenitent sinner. The mercy of God should lead thee to
repentance, and thou on the head of it should not entertain and nourish thy
sin.

Be merciful as God is. Math. 9.13.
so likewise give thou mercy to others, flowing from that mercy which thou have
received from God; I will have mercy, says the Lord, and not sacrifice.
Therefore since it shall be an undoubted token of thine election, that thou
have received mercy from Gods hands, try if thou find thy self unfeignedly
disposed to forgive others whatsoever, yea even the greatest faults committed
against you, for that is the ointment running down Aarons beard to the hemme
of his garment. Psalm. 133.2. Against merits, four Reasons.


Moreover, ye see that David does not present his merits, which might redeem
the filthiness of his sins, (as the Papists think) neither yet prayers,
broken reed, Esaias 36.6.
to the which he could not well lean in the day of his spiritual temptation
(as he confesses oftentimes in the Psalms) and has his only refuge to Gods
mercy. The merits of men (alas) what are they? The best works we do are so
full of imperfections, that there is more dross than gold in them:

James 1.17 August.
for all good gifts come from the Father of lights. Cum numero merita mea,
(says Augustine) enumero dona tua: When I number my merits, I reckon thy
gifts* What have we, that we have not received? 1 Cor. 4.7.
Why then glory we, as though we had not received them?



ought to do good works to serve, Via regni, non causa regnandi. August.
Object.
not to deserve; they are the way to the Kingdom, not the cause thereof.

But how is it that David sometimes protests of his innocence, and desires God
to judge him according to the innocence of it? Psalm. 7.8.


This is to be understood of his innocence before men, Saul, Psalm. 143.2.
Absolon. A hitophel, Doeg, etc. But not before God, in whose sight shall none
that lives be justified, if he enter into judgment with them, as David
confesses.

What mad doctrine is it then, Job 4.18. and 15.15.
since the heavens are not clean before him, yea and he has found folly in
his Angels?

David under the name of Mercy includes all things, Who gets me^cy, gets all
things, Genesis 33.11
according to that of Jacob to his brother Esau, I have gotten mercy, and
therefore I have gotten all things. Desire thou any thing at Gods hands? cry
for mercy, out of which fountain all good things will spring to thee. The
blind men seeking their light, cried, Have mercy upon us, thou son of David.
The Cananite, Mat. 20.30
who had her daughter possessed, cried, Have mercy upon me. If ye have
purchased the Kings pardon, Mat. 15.22. Simil.
then ye may enjoy the privileges of his Kingdom; if ye have mercy, ye have
all that God can give you; ye have title to Christ, to the heavens, to all the
creatures, yea and are freed and delivered from the prison of hell.

Arguments to o^taine mercy.
For I am weake] The arguments which he uses, that he may obtain mercy, are
taken from his own unworthiness and miserable estate, For (says he) I am
weak. This is the general word, under which be comprehends all his pains,
Two sorts of pains.
and this he explicates by the division of them, in his bodily pains in these
words, My bones are sore troubled, and his spiritual temptations in the
beginning of the third verse, My soul also is sore vexed.

The order of Gods curing is first to cure the spiritual diseases, next the
boddy pains.
But before I handle the argument, mark the coherence of this second part of
his suit with the former. In the first he craved mercy, in this he craves a
cure and remedy for his corporal pains. First he desires to be freed of
the bonds of his sins, then of his trouble. This is the order of Gods curing,
that first he cures the spiritual diseases, next, the bodily pains Hezekiah
first weeped for his sin, turning him to the wall, 2. King. 20.2. etc.
and God for gave it; and then commanded Isaias to take a lump of dry figs
and cure him. Mark 2.5. etc.
And Christ said to the sick man, Son thy sins are forgiven thee, A double
mercy, when God cures both spiritual and temporal discases: and a double
judgment to be loosed from the bonds of sickness, and bound with the bonds of
sin.
and then, arise and walk. It is a double mercy, when God has first loosed
the bonds of thy sin, and then the bonds of thy disease, and a double judgment
when he has loosed thee from the bonds of thy sickness, and left thy soul
bound with the chains of sin, for then thou are reserved for a further
judgment. That delivery is only profitable to thee, when God has freed thee
from thy sin, and from such plagues as follow it.

Ye see out of these words, that it is very lawful to crave corporal health,
it being a benefit of God. And at this time it is certain David was under some
heavy sickness in body, It is very lawful to seek corporal health. David
was here sick in body, contrary to Bellarmin.
contrary to the judgment of Bellarmine, writing upon the Title and Argument
of this Psalm, thinking it only to be the opinion of the Rabbines and their
followers. Albeit Loranus the Jesuit be contrary to him, writing upon the
third verse of this Psalm, and produces Lyranus, Innocentius tertius,
Theodorus, Antiochenus and Caietane, who in this, are all of one judgment and
opinion with us. And why may they not agree together, that a man being
distressed in body and troubled in conscience, may repent and mourn for them
both? The beginning of the two and thirtieth Psalm sets down his bodily
pains which he sustained in his flesh: Strong men weakened by the power of
sin. 1 Samuel 17.49. August. Quem non vicit ferrum vicit libido. Judge. 15.15.
and 16.21. Evils of Adultery.
Whereupon ye may perceive, that albeit David was a strong man, yet sin is
able to cast him on his back. He overcame Goliath, yet sin overcomes him:
Lust vanquished him whom the sword could not overcome. Sin debilitateth man,
and takes all strength from him: and so it befell to Sampson, who smote a
thousand Philistims, and yet one Whore del^uered him bound to them. Every sin
weakneth man, but especially the sin of Adultery, which does enfeeble man's
nature, and abate his strength, that it makes him effeminate and womanly
hearted. Alexander the Great being bewitched with the pleasures of Drunkenness
and Whoredom, suddenly made an end both of his life and conquest; yea how
many other heroical spirits have been wasted therewith! Therefore learn all to
abstain therefrom, otherwise it will bring you low, waste your body,
conscience, substance, name and posterity. Weakness^ in man, a means to
prevail with God.


But behold what Rethoricke he uses to move God to cure him: I am weak; an
argument taken from his weakness; which indeed were a weak argument to move
any man to show his favor, but is a strong argument to prevail with God.
Prou. 9.4.
All ye that are destitute of under standing come to me, and every one that
thirsts come to the waters, Esaias 55.1. etc.
and ye that have no silver come buy and eat; come I say, buy wine and milk
without silver, and without money. And our Savior himself cried, Mar. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden with sin, and I will ease
you. Martha said to Christ, Behold, he whom thou louedst is sick; John. 11.3.
that the mention of his* sickness might have moved him to revive her brother.

The tears of our misery are forcible arrows to pierce the heart of our
heavenly Father, Luke 10.33.
that he with the pitiful Samaritan at the sight of our wounds, may help us
in due time.

What thing he seeks, and wherefore.
O Lord heal me:] David in the first verse of the Psalm, desired that the
Lord would not punish him in his heavy displeasure and wrath: and in the former
part of this verse he asks of God that he would have mercy upon him, and
forgive him those sins that had provoked his wrath and indignation against
him: and now in the latter part he desires that the Lord would heal him. Every
one of these things were so necessary to David, that lacking any one of them,
he thought himself unfortunate, he felt the wrath of God, and therefore
desired the same to be removed: he had offended, and therefore desires mercy:
he was fallen into a most dangerous sickness, and therefore desires corporal
health.

Ye see here that the best of Gods children are subject to diseases, as well
as others, The best of Gods children subject to diseases. Grauissimu^ omnium
tentationum non tentari. The fruit of sin. Psalm 41.1. Use.
for seeing the root of sin is in them, and the fountain of that sinning
sin, what other bud can it produce, or what spring can flow therefrom, but
miserable destruction of our nature? Therefore when we see good men heavily
afflicted with diseases, let us remember that saying: Blessed are those that
judge wisely of the poor, and also be careful lest through our sins we
provoke the Lord to power the like upon us; which if he do (as we justly
deserve) then by prayer to run unto the Lord with David, and cry, Lord heal
me.

For my bones are sore vexed:] He shows how he is made weak in both his
parts, his body in these words, his soul in the next verse. Sin undoes the
whole man.
So sin undoes the whole man, and every part of him, so that as the soul
lusts, and the body executes and practices the foul desires of the soul, so
both are punished; he who sins in both, is punished in both.

Greatest pain in ^he bones.
Setting down his bodily diseases, he comprehends them under the trouble of
his bones: for as the greatest strength of man is in his bones, so his greatest
pain is the pain of the bones, which exceeds the pain of the flesh, as
experience in the toothache, or breaking any other bone teaches: for albeit
the bones of themselves are senseless, yet not so the membrans and tunicles
that compass them. Always the Scriptures of God do express both the
greatest strength and joy in Gods worship, and the greatest pains and
afflictions to the bones, Psalm. 35.10. Psalm. 51.8.
as all my bones shall say, O Lord who is like thee, and the bones which thou
have broken shall rejoice; that is, the whole strength of my body shall be
bent upon thy service. And again, Esaias 38.13 Lam. 3.4. Psalm. 38.3. Psalm.
34.20. Psalm. 42.10. Lam. 1 13. Job 20.21. Doct. Great mischief comes of the
evils of misgouerned health Job 20.11. Esaias 51.8. Simil.
He has bruised all my bones as a Lion, and all my bones are out of joint, and
there is no peace in my bones: And God keeps all their bones, and while my
bones are broken: and send a fire in my bones: and thy bones shall be filled
with the sins of thy youth.

Observe first out of this place, what a misgouerned health brings to man; it
destroys our nature, our pleasure becomes our displeasure. Our old bones
inherit the sins of our youth; which have wasted and consumed us, as the moth
does the garment. The poison and venom of the Aspe is received with great
sweetness, but it overcomes the body by destroying man. So is sin. Can
there be a rush grow without water, or sickness where there is no sin?
Job. 8.11.
Search down to the bottom of thine heart, and thou shall find the fountain
of the evil to be within thee, that thou may purge it by unfeigned repentance.

Next consider, The bestremedie againd diseases, is to go unto the Lord. 2
Kin. 20.2. Use. How God cures sin. Simil.
that as this his ficknesse comes from God, so he turns to him for remedy.
Diseases are Gods arrows shot by his own hand; why should we not then with
Ezekiah turn to the wall, and mourn to him that he may help us? For so
skilfully deals the Lord with us, that he cures our sins by our diseases
and visitations, albeit they spring out of sin; as Physicians do, curing the
sting of the Serpent, by the ashes of the dead Serpent: so by the bud and fruit
of sin he cures sin; and God is so infinitely wise, that he applies that
kind of disease to his patient which is fittest for such a sin. And indeed
as there be monstrous sins fallen forth in this ourage, Monstrous sins
produce unwonted sicknesses.
which the former ages knew not; so likewise has the Lord punished them with
unwonted sicknesses upon men's bodies, whose nature Galen, Hippocrates, or the
best Physicians have never yet discovered. And therefore the Lord remove from us
these sins, Cause of diseases. 1. The contempt of the Gospel. 2 Apostasy
from Gods truth.
that he may take from us these judgments, but namely the contempt of the
Gospel, Word and Sacraments (for which many are tied to the bed of sickness)
and this abominable Apostasy from Gods truth to Idolatry, which God is like
to punish fearfully by desertion.

The word means not only a troubling, but also a trembling.
Mark finally, that the word according to the Original, signifies not only a
troubling or obstupifying, but also a shaking or trembling, of which the Poet
says, -- Gelidusque per ima cu^urrit
Ossatremor. --


That is, The cold trembling ran through the deepest bones. This teaches us,
The force of sin will shake our strongest parts.
that sin can shake the strongest part we have, for if our bones were stones
and mountains, yet if sin sease on them it would shake them asunder.

VERSE 3.
Spiritual trouble greater than temporal. Reason.
far greater, yea and more importable than the other: for as the soul is a
more subtle and Spiritual substance, beginner of all life and motion in man,
it must feel the self more when it is troubled and wounded, I will therefore
by the help of God entreat here about the trouble of Conscience, and deduce it
in all particulars, that if it please God at any time to waken your conscience,
ye may have remedy in time to pacify it.

Yokefellowes in sin, yokefellowes in punishment.
My soul:] Yokefellowes in sin are yokefellowes in pain; the soul is
punished for informing, the body for performing, and as both the informer and
performer, the cause and the instrument, so shall the stirrer up of sin and
executer be punished.

That man has a soul.
But here appears first, that as a man has a body, so likewise has he a
soul, and as the one is pained, so likewise is the other. And yet (alas) there
are many who think they have not a soul. There were Sadduces who denied that
there were spirits, Two sorts of Sadduces. Psalm. 14.2.
these were Sadduces by prosession, but this Age has the like by action. The
wicked have said in their heart, there is not a God: and therefore seeing the
soul sins, Unlawful pleasures bring lawful pains.
of necessity; the unlawful pleasures thereof must be punished with lawful
pains: for it is better to suffer a short and momentanie tribulation in this
world to subdue sin in us, than to vnder-lie eternal punishment of the soul
in hels fire.

How to know when the soul is at true peace with Ged.
But before we can speak of the trouble of the soul, let us find out, when
the soul is in a good constitution and at peace. The peace of the soul, is
the tranquillity of the mind upon the assurance of Gods favor in Christ:
Being therefore justified by faith, Romans 5.1.
we have peace with God in Christ Jesus. Grace begins and brings peace, and
therefore these two are always conjoined, Romans 1.7.
Grace and peace from God the Father. Let no man think to get that peace that
passes understanding, Phil. 4.7.
but by Gods free mercy and forgiveness of sins. But there be many that cry
peace, peace, 2 King. 9.18, 19.
and say unto the Lord (as Ioram said to Iehu) Is there peace? To whom he shall
answer, What have thou to do with peace? and as there is a great and apparent
similitude between sleeping and swouning, Similitude of true and false peace
the senses being then both closed: yet is there great contrariety, the one
being the messenger of life, the other of death; So is there bewixt the peace
of the godly like a refreshing sleep, and the counterfeit security of the
wicked leading them to eternal pain with the rich Glutton: Luke 16.23.
so their peace is worse than any war that ever was. Jonah was sleeping when
the tempest was raging, Jonah 1.^.
and the waves were ouerwhelming the ship; so men are in security when God is
pursuing them in his judgments: It were good we were wakened in time. true
gold; Tokens to know peace from security. 1. Token.
so security a great appearance of true peace. But by these tokens ye may
discern the one from the other.

First, consider who made thy peace with God, 1. Token.
was it thy Peacemaker Jesus Christ? or is thy agreement made by any creature?
or trusts thou by thy merits to be at one with God? all things in heaven or in
earth are reconciled by his blood; To. 5.9, 10. Luke 3.22.
He is Gods well beloved Son in whom he is well pleased. He is the author
and finisher of our faith. Heb. 12.2.
He has broken the partition wall. He has brought peace to them that are
far and near. Ephesians. 2.17. 2 These. 3.16
He is the God and Lord of peace, Heb. 7.2.
the King of Salem, by whom the Saints sought peace. The Virgin called him God
and Savior. Luke 1.47. Rom 1.8.
And Paul says, I thank God through Jesus Christ. And Peter, To whom should
we go? thou have the words of eternal life. John 6.68.
And John, If any man sin we have an Advocate. I John 2.1.
Why then should we seek reconciliation by them who could not purchase it to
themselves but by him, and sends us to him in all their writs? Hypocrites,
Pharisees, would ye extol the servant with disgrace of his Master, seeking
not his honor, but your own gain? God help the poor Papist, who seeks
lying vanities, forsaking Gods mercies.

Next, thou must observe the form how thy peace was wrought, for if thou have
gotten peace to thy conscience, first, no doubt thou have found a warfare, and
a battle, the flesh rebelling against the spirit, nature against grace: Esau
and Jacob must strive together in the belly of Rebecca, Genesis 25.22, 23
and after a mighty combat the elder served the younger. The Israelites found
peace, but after many and sharp battles, with much shedding of their blood.
First you must see Hell, then Heaven. Repent, says John Baptist, and then he
adds, Math. 3.2.
for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand: we must first come to the Mount Sinai,
Exodus 19.14, etc.
where the sound of the thunder, earthquake, lightnings, smoke, and other
such like things are, and then to Mount Sion, the New Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. 4.48.
Revel. 3.12.
the Vision of Peace: for if ye see not God first in the throne of his
Justice, ye will never see him on the throne of his mercy. The devils rocking.
The devil Reprobates in a cradle, and lets them never see hell till they be
in it, 2 King 6.20, etc.
as the Prophet led the Aramites into the midst of Samaria, before their eyes
were opened, and they knew where they were.

Thirdly, 3. Token.
remember what was the instrument by which peace was wrought in thy conscience.

There is no instrument under heaven that can bring peace, but the word of God
conveyed by the mouth of his servants, of which is said, Esaias 52.7. and Nahum
1.15. and Romans 10.15.
O how beautiful are the feet of those who bring the glad tidings of peace: it
is the Gospel of peace, the instrument of reconciliation, he gives by their
hand, the wand of Peace, by which the King receives thee in his favor. Ye who
contemn the word and the Ministers thereof, think ye to get peace, but by
them? Christ commanded his Apostles to what-euer house they come, leave their
peace there; Matthew. 10.13, etc.
and if the Son of peace be in that house, their peace shall abide; if not,
depart. Gods servant ever brings peace with him, and reconciles men with God,
with men, with heaven, with earth: therefore welcome him to thy house, as thou
would welcome his Master. Matt. 10.40.
He that receives you receives me. O graceless generation of men, who dislike
Gods servants, and gladly would welcome this devil coming by Jesuits.

Finally, 4. Token.
try how thou have entertained that peace: if it be truly purchased, thou will
use all the means thou can to nourish it, and what-euer may break it, Sin
breaks peace with God.
that thou will eschew, which is namely sin, which for this cause thou will
fly, and avoid, both in thought, word and deed, wherein thou may offend Gods
divine Majesty, imitating therein the example of those who once have felt a
dint of the wrath of their Prince, and being reconciled to him, will be loath to
offend him again:

Now let us see how it may be disquieted, Disquioted soul not worst,
in the mean time considering with our selves, that sometime the soul when it
is disquieted, is not in worse case with God, but he makes it to be like the
poole of Bethesda, John 5.1.
which being troubled by the Angel was a present remedy unto such as were
cast thereinto: even so the poole of the conscience being troubled, God
oftentimes cures the man who is cast into that trouble; and therefore no man
ought to think the worse of any Christian who is thus handled.

The true trouble of Conscience is made by Gods goodness to his children,
Trouble of conscience a medicine to purge the soul from sin
a singular medicine to purge their soul which is disquieted: for even as in
the natural constitution of man's body, when the corrupt humors strive to
extinguish the natural power of his life, and do trouble his stomach
maruellously, the Physician to help nature for expelling of those humors,
gives the Patient medicine, which with great a do and molestation of the
person in the end brings health. So when sin and grace are combating in the
conscience, This trouble of conscience is not a mark of a reprobate.
Neither must men think trouble of Conscience to be a mark of a reprobate,
but rather of one, whose conscience is so tender and thin-skinned and strait,
that it can abide nothing which separateth God from it: like as a most loving
wife who is so far addicted to please her husband, that she can abide nothing,
no not in her very look to offend him, and that the change of his countenance
is very death unto her, his absence hell; so it is the greatest trouble that
ever a man can feel in this world, to be put upon the rack of Gods anger, yea
and most represents the pain of hell, which made Solomon say, Pro. 18.14.
But a troubled spirit who can bear?

There be many things which trouble the soul (which is not the trouble of
conscience; Trouble of soul is not always trouble of conscience.
for then properly the soul must be troubled with some spiritual cause) for
oftentimes because of its conjunction with the body, it is affected with the
miseries thereof, and namely with these four.

First, the soul is pined pitifully with the care of these worldly things, 4.
Things which trouble the soul, with their remedies.
which turmoyle her night and day, that she can get no rest; for which cause
our Savior calls them thornie cares (because they prick men through the
heart) and so often forewarneth men, 1. Worldly cares. Luke 21.34.
that they be not vexed therewith: if these men who had this excessive care
were troubled in conscience, I think the world would be full of them. Indeed I
think ouergreat care which is Avarice, as it is the root of all evil; so when
thy conscience shall be once stirred, it will become thy greatest torment, so
that thou shall loath those riches which before thou louedst. Remedy. Mark of
repentance Luke 10.42.
Therefore let all your care be drawn to seek that onething, how ye may serve
and seek God, and eschew sin, which is one of the marks of true repentance.

The second thing which troubles the Soul is Anger, 2. Trouble Anger.
which is like a fire burning it up, which if it continue will consume it. This
is a most dangerous evil, of which Job says, Anger kills the fool, and
Envy the idiot. Job 5.2.
For remedy against it, it is best to embrace David's and Paul's exhortation,
Remedy. Psalm. 4.5 and Ephesians. 4.25.
Be angry and sin not: and this ye may do, if all your anger be converted
against sin.

The third is Sorrow, 3. Trouble Sorrow.
which is a passion wearying the Soul, and pressing it down, contracted of
some worldy losses, of goods and children; and yet this is not the trouble of
which I speak. Remedy.
But to remedy this, it is good that all our sorrows may be for sin and the
offense done to God.

And lastly, 4. Trouble Fear.
fear shakes the soul as an earth quake, when it is afraid for any corporal
danger, Psalm. 53.5. Prou. 28.1.
of whom it is said, The wicked are smitten with fear, and flee when none are
pursuing them. The remedy.
But to amend this, it is requisite that our fears be reduced to this
principal fear, that we fear to offend God, and this fear will free us from
all our fears.

The trouble of conscience then comes only for sin, How the trouble of
conscience comes.
and for the absence of God from the soul (for when he is present, it can see
no sin) his presence is as the Sunbeams chasing away the clouds of our sins,
but when he obscures himself, then the soul sees her sins, and perceiues
and feels him absent: out of which two arises that which we call the trouble
of conscience, which is a felt desertion of God, What the trouble of conscience
is.
wherein the creature by a spiritual eclipse sees not the Creator in the
mirror of the Gospel, neither thinks that his promises appertain to them,
neither finds God hearing their prayers, neither feels comfort in the Word
and Sacraments, neither finds God blessing him in his actions, but as a man
left to himself, and a prey to the Devil, except God support him. He sees the
heaven as a fire above him, and hell as an open gulf beneath him, men and
Angels his enemies, and the deuds his burials. Behold in what a case this man
is in,

But because I have spoken at great length of the trouble of Conscience it
self, of her causes and ends, of her diseases and remedies in my book of
Meditations on the seven days, I refer the Reader thereto, not willing to
use any repetition.

But Lord how long:] Now ye have heard both the corporal diseases of David,
and spiritual, that as his body and soul mutually sinned, so both were
mutually pained, and both again cured, albeit not so soon as David desired,
and therefore longing for the Lords presence he subioynes; But Lord how long
will thou delay? A troubled heart has abrupt speeches to God.
Which is an abrupt interrogation, when through the vehemency of his
perturbation he curreth his speech; which the Orators by a figure call
Aposiopesis, when men cannot utter clearly and fully their mind, through the
greatness of their grief. The like whereof we have in the 13 Psalm, How long
will thou forget me, O Lord; for ever? and, Psalm. 79.5. and 89.46.
Lord how long will thou be angry, for ever? and, Lord how long will thou hide
thy self, for ever? Habak. 1.2.
O Lord, how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear? And the souls that
were under the Altar slain for the testimony of the truth, cry, Revel. 6.10
How long Lord, holy and true, etc. Out of this we have these three things to
observe.

An appointed time set by God for the end of our crosses.
First, that there is an appointed time, which God has measured for the crosses
of all his children, before which time they shall not be delivered, and for
which they must patiently attend, not thinking to prescribe times to God for
their delivery, or limit the holy One of Israel. Exo. 12.40.
The Israelites remained in Egypt till the complete number of 400 years were
accomplished. Ps. 115.18.
Joseph was three years and more in the prison, till the appointed time of his
delivery came. The Jews remained 70. years in Babylon. Dan. 9.2. Simil.
So that even as a Physician appoints certain times to the Patient, both
wherein he must fast, and be dieted, and wherein he must take recreation: So
God knows the convenient times both of our humiliation and exaltation.

The impatience ^f our nature under the cross.
Next, ye see the impatience of our nature, in our miseries, our flesh still
rebelling against the Spirit, which oftentimes forgets i^ self so far,
that it will enter in reasoning with God, and quarrelling with him, as we may
read of Job, Jonas, etc. and here also of David.

Thirdly, albeit the Lord delay his coming to releene his Saints, yet has he
great cause if we could ponder it: for when we were in the heat of our
sins, many times he cried by the mouth of his Prophets and Servants, Our just
recompense from God.
O fools! how long will you continue in your folly? and we would not hear;
and therefore, when we are in the heat of our pains, thinking long, yea every
day a year till we be delivered, let us consider with our selves the just
dealing of God with us, that as he cried and we would not hear; so now we cry,
and he will not hear.

VERSE 4. Return o Lord: deliver my soul: save me for thy mercies sake.
DAVID before has used some arguments to move the Lord to deliver him from his
present troubles: the first whereof was taken from his infirmity; the next,
from Gods mercies, having an object before them, his miseries. Now he goes
forward in a repetition of his request, desiring God to return to him.

Return o Lord.] These words presuppose that in his tentation God was
alienated from him, How God is said to return.
God is said to return to us, not by change of place, for he is in all places,
but by the dispensation of his gracious providence, and a declaration of his
new mercies and benefits toward us. Such a returning God promised to Abraham,
Genesis 18.10
I will certainly come again unto thee according to the time of life, and lo,
Sarah thy wife shall have a son. So he promised to return to the Israelites
to do them good, Ier. 32.40.
and he will turn again and have compassion upon us: and, Ier. 12.15.
return unto me, Zach. 1.3.
and I will return unto you. And James the brother of our Lord, Acts 15.16.
brings further a sentence out of the 9 of Amos, After these things I shall
return, and restore the Taberuacle of David. Therefore as David has lamented
the absence of God in the former verse, in this he desires a sign of his
presence to be given to him. Herein stands our happiness, if God look
favorably upon us, for then all things prosper well in our hand.

But because I have spoken largely of the presence and absence of God from the
soul, in my Book on the seven words which our Lord spoke on the Cross, and
namely upon the fifth word, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? whither I
refer the Reader who is desirous to understand any more of this subject.

Desperate dangers get comfortable remedies.
Deliver my soul.] This clearly declares that David has been in some
extreme dangers both of his spiritual and corporal enemies, from which he
could not be delivered, but by the mighty hand of God, who behooved to do
violence to his enemies, even as David himself delivered his fathers sheep
from the claws of the Lion, 1 Samuel 17.34.
and paws of the Bear, and smote them both. So it is miraculous to consider
in how desperate perils and dangers good men will be cast, wherein no doubt
they would perish, if they were not supported by the mighty hand of God.
Salvation only belongs to God.
Observe farther, that it lies not in the power of any man to deliver
himself, for salvation only belongs to the Lord, yea, whether he work our
delivery mediately or immediately, always he is to be praised.

The reason why Jehovah so often named.
I find that the name of Jehovah is five times mentioned in this prayer, which
is emphatically done, being a great testimony of the certainty of his
knowledge, that he knew assuredly upon whom he called, not upon an unknown
God, but upon him who manifested himself to Moses under the name of Jehovah,
Exodus 6.
whereby his faith was greatly strengthened, having assurance of delivery by
him who only is, and gives being to others, and makes his promises to be
extant; and the sweet name of Jehovah is so comfortable to a Christian, that in
the midst of dangers, yea at deaths door, Paul's defire and David's conce^ing
lice and death reconciled.
it will not only temper the bitterness of affl^ctions, but also quite take
them away.

Save me:] This ingemination of his prayer, to be delivered from death, would
presuppose that David was overmuch afraid of death, when as the faithful
should not love this life overmuch, neither fear death above measure, but
ought to say with the Apostle Paul, Phil. 1.23.
I desire to be dissolved and be with Christ. And again, My life is not dear
to me, that I may finish my race with gladness: as also when Agabus prophesied
of his bonds, the faithful of Caesarea requesting him not to go to Jerusalem,
answered; Acts 21.13
What do ye weeping and breaking my heart, for I am not only ready to be
bound, but also to dye at Jerusalem? I answer. David desired the continuation
of his life to settle the kingdom in Solomon's person, that the promises of God
might be confirmed, and that himself might have longer space to give better
proof of his repentance and service of God. Paul again by his death knew that
he should glorify God more, and edify his Church: so then it is lawful
either to seek life or death, providing we seek after Gods honor, and to
the end that Christ may be to us in life, and in death, advantage.

Mercy excludes merit.
For thy mercies sake:] In the duplication of his suite, that the Lord would
save him both in body and soul, he leanes upon his first ground, that is, the
mercies of God, he renounceth his own merits, and only takes him to Gods
mercy, which Bellarmine writing upon this place, (though slenderly, and not
beseeming such a Scholar) does confess, albeit against himself in his
controuerted places De iustificatione and de meriti^ operum, O magna veritatis
vis.
; O the great power of the truth. It behooves a liar to be mindful, for that
Jesuit has contradicted himself in many places, which is evidently known to
the whole world: as also, he lets us see the absurdity of the Papists, who in
the decree of the Council of Trent in the Roman Breuiary, printed at the
command of Pius Quintus, at Antuerpe, 1594. says, Maria matter gratiae, matter
misericordiae, tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe: that is, O
Mary the mother of grace, the mother of mercy, protect thou us from out
enemies, and receive us at the hour of death.

VERSE 5. For in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall
praise thee?
The third argument taken from t^^e^d of his d^s^e to live, to praise God
FOr in death:] The third argument by which he would move the Lord to deliver
him, is taken from the end of his suit, to wit, that he may praise God: this he
does illustrate by the contraries, If I dye, I shall not remember thee nor
praise thee, therefore let me live that I may do it. Bellarmine and Lorinus,
two Jesuits, do expound this, not of temporal death, which David feared, but
of eternal death, warranting themselves by men of their own sect, such as
Bonauenture, Lyranus, Hugo Cardinalis, Campensis, Leo Papa, Cassiodorus, and
the rest of that Order, who against Scripture, Conscience, Grammar, Logic,
Nature and Sense, have perverted and thrown the word of God, yea being blinded
themselves, they wilfully study to blind others. For there are sundry places of
Scripture, specially in the Psalms, which clear his mind in this matter, and
in which he expounds himself, and what he means by this death, and this
(...) Read the thirtieth Psalm and the ninth verse, What profit is there in
my blood, when I go down to the pit? shall the dust give thanks unto thee?
or shall it declare thy truth* Lyranus and Bellarmine upon this place cannot
deny, but that here is to be meant of a corporal death, for there is no dust in
hell So likewise Psalm. 88.10. Will thou show a miracle to the dead, or shall
the dead rise and praise thee? SELAH. shall thy loving kindness be declared in
the grave, or thy faithfulness in destruction? shall thy woudrous works be
known in the dark, and thy righteousness in the land of oblivion? Bellarmine
in expounding these questions, takes them to be meant of a temporal death,
which here he denies, albeit that graves be of dead bodies, but not of dead
souls.

But to confirm his opinion, he brings in the 38. of Isaias, verse. 18. For
the grave cannot confess thee, Death cannot praise thee: they that go down
to the pit cannot hope for thy truth. As also the 115. Psalm, verse. 17. The
dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down to the place of silence.
For the dead in body, when they lack the senses of their body, do not any
longer enjoy earthly benefits, yea, they live not according to the flesh, they
praise not God with a corporal mouth, neither yet give him thanks for earthly
things: and this interpretation he gives to these places, albeit after he
would interpret it of hell, to maintain his heresy, and deceive poor
ignorants: for we know that men's bodies go not down to hell before the
resurrection. In like manner expounding the seventeenth verse of the hundred
and eighteenth Psalm, I shall not dye, but live and show the works of God,
he inclines to our judgment, and only thinks it to be meant of temporal
death. So then ye may see upon what little ground by their own confession,
this Psalm is ordained by the Council of Trent, to be sung for the souls
that are in Purgatory.

But there arise here some doubts First,

It is to be answered,

Next, Luke, the 27. and 28. verses, where the rich glutton desired Abraham to
send some from the dead to his five brethren, to advertise them of the pains
of Hell?

Ye shall know that this is a plain Allegory, hear Moses and the Prophets,
but not that he should send one from the dead to teach them.

Finally, how this place agrees with that, Philip. 2.10. That at the name of
Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in heaven, and things in earth* and
things under the earth? It is to be understood that this is spoken
allegorically, and the meaning thereof is, that all creatures shall acknowledge
his power and authority, but not that these that are in heaven, or under the
earth, have knees wherewith to bow.

While we live praise God in our bodies.
Now let us make our use and profit of this matter, and learn by this argument,
that while we are in this world we keep in thankful remembrance the benefits
which God has given us: for if we be removed by death, we shall praise him no
more with our bodies, and therefore while we are in the world, let us pray to
God that we never live an hour longer, than that hour wherein we may be
praising our Lord, either in our thoughts and meditations, or in our speeches
and communications, or in our actions.

A necessity of death.
Concerning death: Consider first, that there is a necessity of death laid upon
al flesh, wise men and fools, Kings and Prophets, etc. neither the grandeur of
the King, nor holiness of the Prophet can exempt them from death.

Death interrupteth Gods service.
Next, that it interrupts the service and praise of God, as it destroys man's
nature, albeit it interrupteth it only for a time, and in a part; the soul in
the mean time praising God under the Altar, till that both soul and body meet
together, and praise him world without end.

Lawful to crave continuance of our life:
Thirdly, that it is lawful to crave the continuance of our life, to the end
that we may praise God. Would we desire the continuance of our life, that we
may continue in sin, God forbid. Likewise we may desire death, not for being
weary of temporal pain, or fear of shame; but with the Apostle, that we may
be dissolved and be with Christ, and be freed of the burden of sin by our
death. Yet in both our desires let us submit our selves to the good pleasure of
God, and say with our Savior, Thy will be done, not as I will, Luke 22.42
but as thou will.

Fourthly, we see in his sickness he seeks the continuation of his life at
Gods hands, who has the issues of death in his will, and would teach us, 2 Chronicles, 16.12. 2 King. 1.2
neither with Aza to put our trust in the Physicians, neither with Ahaziah to
go ask counsel at Beelzebub; but with good Hezekiah turn to the wall, 2
Kin. 20.2,
and beg the prorogation of our life with David from God.

Difference between the de^re of the godly and wicked
Finally, ve see what shall be the difference between the desire of the godly
and the wicked, in their contrary desires of the continuation of their life:
for the wicked being tied to the bed of sickness, crave longer life, to the
end they may enjoy their riches longer, and use, or rather abuse them: in the
mean time never conceiving or nourishing an hope of celestial good things.
But the godly, that they may record fruitfully the praises of God in the
congregation of the righteous, and preach out his praises: besides, that the
fear of death is in the reprobates, because they see by it an end put to all
their earthly felicities, whereas the Elect of God fear it, because by it they
are drawn from among men, with whom they might have magnified the name of God.
If ye desire to read any more of this subject, read the forenamed book of
Meditations, in the Meditation of death.

VERSE 6. I fainted in my mourning: I cause my bed every night to swim, and
water my couch with my tears.
THis argument is taken from the person of the Supplicant, which is set down
by hyperbolique Metaphors, The greatness.
expressing his great weariness, his tears, and mourning, his sobs and
sighing; The place.
the place wherein he mourned, his bed; the measure, swimming and watering of
the same; the time, all the night; The time. The adiu^ct.
the adiunct thereof, the dimnesse of his eyes, verse. 8. and the object of his
sorrow, his enemies, or rather Gods enemies.

I fainted.] It may seem a marvelous change in David, who was a man of such
magnitude of mind, to be so far dejected and cast down, whereas he
prevailed against Goliath, against the Lion and the Bear through fortitude and
magnanimity, and now he is sobbing, sighing and weeping as a child. It is
another thing to have to do with creatures, than with the Creator.
But ye must understand that he has to do with diverse persons: when men and
beasts are his opposites, then he is more then a conqueror, but when he has
to do with God against whom he sinned, then he is less then nothing.

Contrition the first step of repentance.
First, he says (as the word bears by all Interpreters) he sighed or sobbed,
which is the first degree of repentance, for inward contrition in the heart
must precede all the outward signs of repentance, and is most acceptable to
God, because it is secret, and only known to himself. And herein shall a
Christian try and discern himself, A perfect trial of a reformed heart.
if there never pass a secret cogitation of his mind, which is not
accompanied with a sob unto God. Hezekiah said he mourned like a Dove, Isay
38.14*
and chattered like a Swallow. Moses spoke nothing by his voice, Exo. 14.15
and the Lord said, 1 Samuel 1.13
Why cryest thou? Anna her lips moved, but her voice was not heard. God regards
not words but thoughts.

Sobs and sighs are best sacrifices.
Next, ye see that sobs and sighs are more acceptable to God, than any service
we can do to him: and in these David wearied himself for his sins, taking
such pains in chastising himself, and (as the Papists translate it) he
labored in his sobbing to humble both his soul and his body: whereby we
should learn, that this is the most profitable labor, when we can work upon
a rebellious heart, to subdue all our affections to the obedience of God, and
mortification of the same.

We should take pains with our hearts.
This should make us ashamed that we can take pains upon any thing, but not
upon our own heart: we will weary our selves upon any earthly vanity or
pleasure, but we are wearied of the service of our God, yea, even of the
smallest point of repentance and humiliation before God. We cannot spend our
selves better (since we must be spent upon something) than upon that principal
part of his service, which he likes best, that is, in chastising of our body,
and mortification of our affections: for it is said, Isai. 57.15.
Upon whom shall the Spirit of the Lord rest? Upon a contrite heart. Therefore
woe be to those that weary themselves in the works of sin, and add
drunkenness to thirst, Woe to such as weary themselves in the works of sin.
Isai. ^.11.
and can never be satisfied, nor go to their bed till they have accomplished
some wickedness.

In my mourning:] First, he sighed and sobbed for his sin, and now he
mourns for the same. Look whereunto our follies tend? The pleasures of sin
ever end in displeasure, for which either we must of necessity mourn in this
life, or eternally in the life to come. True it is, that the reprobate, as also
natural and unregenerate men shall pour forth many thousand tears, for the
plagues and judgments which God lays upon them, which are but the
forerunners and beginnings of their everlasting mourning in hell: but the
mourning of the Elect preuenteth many sorrows which would befall them; so,
Mourning for sin will keep us from many other mournings Exo. 12.30.
if we have grace to mourn for sin, it will keep us from many other
mournings. The Egyptians had an universal mourning through all their houses at
the slaughter of their first borne; but if they had mourned for the wrong done
to the Israelites, they needed not to have mourned for the plague that came
upon themselves.

The measure of the mourning.
I caused my bed swim:] The measure of his mourning is expressed by the
washing and swimming of his bed with tears, which indeed is an hyperbolique
speech, and does express unto us the vehemence and greatness of his grief,
and that he did not esteem light of his sin, David: neither was he in worse
case with God, but rather the multitude of his tears were as many seals of
Gods favor toward him, and of the remission of his sins: showers be better
then dewes, David, neither fountains flowing with the Magdalen, Luke 7.38.
Ie^. 9.1. Luk 22 62. Let us lament that we cannot mourn. Mat 9.21. John 20* 27
God regards not the quantity but quality of our repentance
The place of our sin should be the place of our repentance. Gen* 3.6. Luke
22.44. Psalm. 4.4. Amos 6.4.
nor wi^h Jeremy desire a fountain to be in our head, nor with Peter weep
bitrerly, it will be sufficient if we lament, that we cannot lament; and mourn
that we cannot mourn; yea, if we have the smallest sobs of sorrow and tears
of compunction, it they be true and not counterfeit, they will make us
acceptable to God: for as the woman with the bloody issue that touched the
hemme of Christ's garment, was no less welcome to Christ than Thomas who put
his fingers in the print of the nails. So God looks not at the quantity, but
the sincerity of thy repentance.

My bed:] The place of his sin is the place of his repentance, and so it
should be, yea, when we behold the place where we have offended, we should be
pricked in the heart, and there again crave him pardon. As Adam sinned in the
garden, and Christ sweat bloody tears in the garden; Examine your hearts upon
your beds, and convert unto the Lord; and whereas ye have stretched forth your
selves upon your bed to devise evil things, Repent there, and make them
Sanctuaries to God. Sanctify by tears every place which ye have polluted by
sin: Cant. 3.1.
In my bed by night I sought him whom my soul loved.

Every night: One hours sin may bring many nights of pain. Use.
] So one hours sin has brought many nights pain, it may be done in one
hour, which cannot be amended in all our life. Learn therefore in time to be
careful, and fall not into that ditch, out of which hardly can ye be freed.
How easy is it for a man to fall into a pit, but with what difficulty is he
delivered therefrom?

Beware therefore in time I pray you. Adam fell in such a pit by one sin, out
of which he could never release himself. What shall I say to such of you as
spend all the night in riot, and drunkenness, and whoredom, and cards, and
such abominable follies? It is Gods judgment if ye be brought to do penance
as many nights in the bed of sickness, that your feet may be put in the
stocks, and ye be tied to your bed by the cords of sickness, as ye went away
riotously with the wild As^e, Ier. 2.24.
till ye were taken in your Mo^e^h, and ye be brought to repent in your bed,
where ye would not at your board, and be forced ^o learn a lesson in Babel,
where ye would not in S^on.

As the night is secret, Note.
so should the work of thy repentance be; Repent ^hou secretly that the Lord
may reward thee openly.

Every night: Repen^a^^e should be constant.
Tea^es good purgations to expel sin.
] Mark here, that repentance should be constant, not one night* but every
night.

And water my couch with my tears.] Tears are good purgations wherewith the
Lord does expel the noisome humors of our corruptions (as the Physician
gives medicine to purge the humors of his patient) and albeit they seem
bitter and sower for the season, yet afterward they bring forth most sweet and
comfortable fruits of righteousness, when it please^h God to break up that
fountain in a man's heart, and break through the rock of induration, then that
exercise of repentance and mou^ning is so delightful to a Christian soul,
that there is no exercise of his religion which will content him and give
satisfaction to his poor soul, if it be not s^asoned with some sorrow and
mourning for his sins: which made Saint Angustine to affirm in many places,
that it was nor p^ssible, that repentance could be for grievous sins, which
was dry, and not watered with many tears. It is no^ seemly to a King to weep
for his own private calamities, le^t he might seem to be cast down from his
courage; but nothing more royal then to mourn for the offense of the King of
Kings.

what force tears have with God.
Finally, ye shall mark in this place, what force tears have with God, that
they can blot out the multitude of iniquities: For if Alexander being informed
of many odious crimes given up by Antipater against his mother, answered that
one mothers tear might blot many papers:

VERSE 7. Mine eye is dimmed for despite, and sunk in, because of all mine
enemies.
The fifth argument from the multitude of his enemies.
MIne eyes are dimmed:] The fifth argument, from the multitude of his enemies,
that are troubling him, when God is afflicting him; and his extraordinary
fear, noted by a sign, dimnesse of his eyes.

The eyes of man are made by God as two lights and windows, by which he might
behold his wondrous works, and glorify him in them, and by which he might see
to direct all his actions with men. Psalm. 8.3, 4.
When I behold (says Danid) the heavens, the work of thine hands, (he gathers
this out of his sight) the Moon and Stars which thou have ordained; What is
man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou visitest him?
The Lord for this end has planted the eyes, but the devil has corrupted our
souls, that he makes them instruments of wickedness, in lusting by them
evil things. 2 Samuel 2.2.
David saw Bathseba. The Israelites said of the golden Calfe, Behold the gods
which brought you out of Egypt: Exodus 32.4
a man sees the idol, he bows down to it, he lusts after it; he sees his
neighbors wife, and commits adultery: for as Christ says, Mat. 5.28.
He that sees a woman and lusts after her, has committed adultery in his heart
already. Of which is said, 2 Pet. 2.14.
their eyes are full of adultery. He sees his enemy with the eye of the
Ba^ilisque or Cocatrice to murder him, Prou. 6.17.
and this proud eye is one of the six things which the Lord abhors: he
sees his neighbors goods to lust after them, as Achab did Naboths vineyard. 1
King. 21.1, 2. Prou. 23.6
There is an evil eye, of which Solomon says, Eat not the bread of a man that
has an evil eye, he sees finally to circumuent his neighbor: of which also
Solomon, Pro. 10.10.
He that winkes with his eye, meditates deceit; and so, many make these eyes
which God has given them, as it were two lighted candles to let them see to
go to hell: and for this God has requited them, that seeing their mind was
blinded by the lust of the eyes, the lust of the flesh, 1 Ioh. 2.16*
and the pride of life; God has sent sickness to debilitate these eyes which
were so sharp sighted in the devils service, and their lust now shall cause
them want the necessary sight of their body. Sin blindes both soul and body.
Pro. 23.29.


Sin then blinds both body and soul. To whom comes woe, blindness of
eyes, etc. to him that sits long at wine. In the sickness thy sight is so
darkened that thou who saw thy neighbors wife, shall now scarce know thy
own wise, they shall be blind who look through the windows: when God
chastises man for his sin, The right use of our eyes.
then he grow^^h pale and woe. Out of this we have some instructions.

Job did) That we beheld not a woman in vain. Job 31.1.




Psalm 94* 16 Reu 1.14.
sees most cleer^ly himself, his eyes are like a flame of fire.

Mat 5.8. Doct. Christians can never lack enemies.
for Blessed are the pure in spirit, for they shall see God.

Because of all mine enemies:] First ye see, the Church and her true members
never can want enemies, either within or without, above, ben^ath, and about
her; yea, how many children the devil has, let a Christian persuade himself,
he has as many adversaries. And the Lord raises up enemies against him for
great and necessary causes. As f^rst, ^ph. 6.16. For what cause God raises
enemies against us.
the sword of the word, the h^^^me^ of salvation, the breast plate of
righteousness, which a Christian must put to proof. bo h ^n defending
himself, and offending his enemies. Thirdly, he ra^seth up enemies against
him, David did in all his conflicts, putting up new supplications to God for
his defense and delivery. Fourthly, to correct their sins, Pharaoh, Exodus 1*
2. Judge. 2.3.
in the wilderness Moab, in Palestina the Canannites, whom God reserved and
kept to be pricks in their sides. ^en 31.5. and ^7 2. and 39.17.
Jacob had his own Laban, and Joseph had Potiphars wife in Egypt, and at home
his brethren.

Neither let any Christian dream that immunity and security in any place of
all the world, Reu. 1^.4*
who does pursue the child which the woman has borne; but let him prepare
himself for some enemy, one or more, who shall pursue him: if thou be under
the standard of the devil, he will not pursue thee; but if thou be his
adversary, and fightest under the banner of Christ, then be assured he will
bend his whole forces against thee. Cain hate Abel? because he was righteous,
Genesis 4.5. The natural hatred between the seed of the woman and the Serpent.
Genesis 3.15.
the other iniust. There is a natural feude betwixt the seed of the woman, and
the seed of the Serpent, which God has put between them, and albeit they have
never done them injury, yet they hate them deadly, because their deuillish
inclination is disposed cruelly against them: What injury has the Lamb done
to the Lion? and yet it is set to kill it, and thinks the blood thereof
sweet. The sweet singing bird, what wrong does it to the Eagle, and yet she
seeks to devour it? So none are in danger but Gods children, his birds, his
lambs, and therefore they seem most unfortunate, for as much as all bloody
murderers are set against them.



Counsels to a persecuted Christian.
search what sin thou have done, and repent it.

Next, consider, whether thou have deserved their wrath, be not persecuted as
an evil doer, but have that within thee, that thou may say, what have I done.

If thou see thine enemy hungry, give him meat, Romans 12, 20
if he thirst, give him drink, for in so doing thou shall heap coals of
fire on his head. Commit vengeance to God; mine is vengeance, says the Lord,
Romans 12.19.
and I will repay it.

sin, then they afflict that man, as the Chaldeans did Job, Job 1.17. The
wicked add vinegar to our gall. Mat. 12.20.
they contrary to the practice of Christ, break a brussed reed.

Next, Christians are not destitute of their passions, but have their own
griefs, because they have great enemies: they fear, but are not swallowed up
with fear, for God comforts them. Gen 18.2. and 32.28.
Jacob was afraid of Esau his elder brother, who went about to kill him, but
God sent him to Padan-aram, and the Angel that wrestled with him, said unto
him, Because thou have had power with God, thou shall also prevail with men.

VERSE 8. Away from me all ye workers of iniquity, for the Lord has heard the
voice of my weeping.
David's ^iumph.
THe three last verses contain David's triumph against sin and sinful men, and
now after his dangerous battle he gets a glorious victory, and gives out a
plain defiance, and denounces war to the devil and all his children,
whereby it is clearly seen that the spiritual battles of Christians howsoever
they be sharp and sour in the beginning, and comfortable end: They sow in
tears, A Christians comfort is at the end of the o^flict. Psalm 126.5. Gen 32.26
Anhatred of sin, a mark of our victory against sin. 1 Cor. 6.14.
but reap in toy. The prayers of the Elect have good and comfortable answers.
Jacob wrestled with the Angel and night, but was blessed of him in the morning.

Next, observe that this is an undoubted token that we have gotten victory
over our own sins, when we have a detestation of sin in others, and we
separate our selves from the workers of iniquity: For what society has light
with darkness? We must say every one of us, Away from me, I will have no
society with thee, thou have no society with God: as all the members of the
body that are bound by hid sinews, are conjoined by an unspeakable love
amongst themselves, but they have no conjunction with any one that is cut away
from them: so do all the children of God, Away, a word to devils or dogees.
Doct. A Christian should fly the society of wicked me^, even as much as the
company of de deui^^
who are bound by the band and unity of one Spirit, love and cleave one to
another; but for the wicked, their soul has no delight in them.

Away from me:] This word, Away. is a word either to a devil, or to a dog,
depart from me: so that we should so fly the society of evil men, as we would
do the devil himself, or wild beasts. And let Princes and great men learn
of David, whom to choose to be their servants, Teaches Kings whose companies
to eschew. Ps. 101.6, 7.
and whom to banish out of their company. Let their eyes be upon the faithful
of the Land, that they may dwell with them, and let those that walk in a
perfect way serve them: let not deceitful person dwell within their house, nor
he that tells lies remain in their sight. But alas, it falls out quite
contrary: Number. 12.14
Miriam having the leprosy, was shut out of the Camp: pestilentious men
remove to another place; but senseless and brutish men seeing their house
infected with sin, will so much the more entertain, benefit, converse, and
esteem the doers thereof.

All ye workers of iniquity:] What sort of sinners we should shun.
He does not simply reject all sinners (for then he would have had none with
whom he might converse, yea he would have chased away his own self) but
only obstinate sinners, such in whom sin reigns, such as make a sport of
sin. These the King cannot abide, but puts them away from his company. Simil.
Leu. 13. and 12.
So we must make a difference of sinners; for as there was in the Law of Moses
a curable Leprosy and a fretting, the one discerned from the other; Fretting
Leprosy, if it had fallen upon a stone of the house, it should be pulled out
and cast away: so obstinate and impenitent sinners, and such as rejoice in
their sin, should be expelled from the society of all men, specially Princes
and Nobles, and cut off as a noisome gangrene, and the member possessed with
Saint Anthonies fire, lest they infect others.

All:] We ought not to partake with the sins of the greatest persons
whatsoever. Heb. 13.17. Dan. 3.16. Act. 4.19, 20
this universal particle excludes all persons without exception; so that
neither must we comport with the sins and iniquities of Princes and great
men, whom otherwise we are commanded to obey, but in the Lord, and in none of
their wicked decrees, as the three Children would not obey Nebuchadnezzar,
neither of Prophets, Priests, or Church governors (as Peter and John who
refused the decrees of the Pharisees, the Archpriest, and the rest of that
rabulous order) yea although they pretend visions, as the Roman Church and
their followers, who (having no warrant out of the holy Scriptures) think
their name to be a sufficient warrant for all their edicts, although they be
altogether contrary to the word of God, yea we must forsake our father, mother,
brother, and nearest friends, and be not compartners of their iniquity by
obeying them: For whether it be better to obey God or man, judge ye: Acts 4.19
Mat, 10.37.
And he that loves father or mother better than him, is not worthy of him.
Psalm. 45.10
Forget thine own people (says the Spirit) and thy fathers house, so shall
the King have pleasure in thy beauty. And so of necessity we must disclaim
all sort of sinners and sins, to the end we may embrace Christ.

Either quit all ^ns or quit none.
not bid them good speed. But ye must either quit all or keep all, and bid
good night to the whole garrisons of the devils army, or berake you to be a
soldier with them. Moreover, this universal particle, All, shows us, that
there is a great multitude that work iniquity; Mat. 7.13. Doct. The multitude
of consenters to evil, will not warrant our consciences. 1. King. 22.13.
for even as the way is broad which leads to perdition, so there are many who
walk therein; therefore ye must not follow the multitude in evil. Neither is
that a sufficient argument for warranting of your conscience which the
Gentleman said to Michaias, All the Prophets have said to the King, Go to
Ramoth gilead, let your words be as theirs. But be answered, What ever the Lord
puts in my mouth, that will I speak. And Joshua resolved well, Although ye
would all forsake the Lord, yet I and my fathers house will serve him. Ios.
24.15.
So the multitude of transgressors, either in Churches or commonwealths, will
not warrant the conscience, as I have said; but rather as I may say with Saint
Jerome, Multitudo peecantium est fortifi^atio errori^; A multitude of sinners,
is a strengthening of error.

Ye workers:] Sinners are workers indeed, Sins be the workmen of the devil
Ioh 8.34.
and sin is a work of the flesh, but they are workmen to the devil, working
in brick and cl^y to Pharaoh. H^ that c^mmitteth sin (says Christ) is a
servant to sin: as by the contrary, He that is borne of God sins not,
because the seed of God is in him.

The work of sin seems pleasant and againfull, but in the end ye shall
find it both unpleasant and painful, The reward of sin is death. Rom 6.23.
Ibid. 21.
And in another place, What have ye gain whereof now ye are ashamed, whose end
is death. The devil may give you the bait of present pleasures, but he lets
you not see the mischievous hook lying under the bait.

task unto Satan, and betake us to a better Master and better service, and work
in the Lords vineyard. John 6.27.
Labor after that meat which perishes not, whose fruits shall be eternal
life.

Of iniquity:] Some think these to be hypocrites, as in the 41. Psalm, verse
7. All they that hate me, whisper together against me, even against me do they
imagine mine hurt. But here it imports more, when he calls them workers of
iniquity. A manifest practice of their wicked devices in their actions against
David, What iniquity is.
for iniquity is that which is contrary to equity, and justice and equity is
defined by Cicero, Suum cuique tribuere, whereas iniquity is to defraud any man
of his due.

Whereby ye see that God abhors all injuries we can do to our neighbors,
God abhors all injuries done to our neighbors. 1 Ioh. 4.20. Mat. 9.13.
and esteems then his service to be true, when it begins at our neighbors:
For how can we love God whom we see not (says the Apostle) when we love not
man made to the Image of God whom we see? And our Savior says, I will have
mercy and not sacrifice. So that he refuses the principal part of his
service, which consists in sacrifices, if they be not conjoined with mercy
to our neighbors: and in Isaiah, Isai. 66.3.
he that kelleth a Bullock or a Lamb, offers a gift as though he had killed a
dog or a sow; and only because of their injuries.

Woe to this sinful generation, Note.
I wish rather they would profess Papistry or Paganism, that their confession
and profession might be answerable, and that they would either profess as they
live, or live as they profess, for it is shame that a good faith should be
backed with had works.

For the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping.] The nearer we draw to God,
the further we must flee from all his enemies.
The argument whereby he repelleth the wicked from his, is taken from his
familiarity with God: and sure it is, the nearer we draw to God, the further
will we flee from all his enemies: what makes us such associates with the
children of the Devil, but that we are strangers to God? and when once we
have drawn in friendship and service with him, then we hate the other party.

Next, Prayer joins us to God.
ye shall know that the principal mean by which we can frequent with God is
Prayer, for if God give us the Spirit of Prayer, then he gives us an access to
the throne of his grace. Many, yea the most part of the world know not what
prayer means: others pray perfunctoriously and hypocritically, and their
prayer turns into sin. The benefit of true prayer.
But happy are those whom Gods most holy Spirit teaches to pray, and those
only can pray aright.

The voice:] There is ascribed to prayer a voice, The voice of prayer more
mental then vocal.
which is not so much vocal as mental, always it has a piercing voice, which
pierces the heavens, and prevails mightily with God, and is so importunate,
that it will not come from heavens gates till and answer be given, as Ezechias,
Moses, etc.

Of my weeping:] As David's prayers were not dumb, His prayer was not dry.
but had a voice, so they are not dry, but full of tears: those sappy prayers
be acceptable to God, which proceed not from a barren and dry heart, but from
an heart well watered with the clouds of heaven, hears planted at the Rivers of
waters which we should all pray after.

He has this comfort that God heard his prayers, Our prayers in faith will
surely be heard.
not that he heard them wit ears, as he who planted the ears does hear, but
he heard his prayer, when he granted and yielded to his petition. And this is
a great provocation to us, to make us pray in faith, and then we may persuade
our selves God will hear them. Think ye not that a mother will discern the
voice, own child, and the Ewe discern the bleating of her own lamb amongst
a thousand; and will not God regard the prayer of his own child being in
affliction? Mat. 9.29. Mark 7.9.
Be it to thee according to thy faith. And again, I saw not greater faith in
Israel. It is then superfluous to pray except thou believe.

Infidelity is the cause why we lack many good things, Distrust is the cause
we receive nothing from God.
for we do God great injury in uttering forth words to him, when either we
doubt of his power, that he cannot, or of his love, that he will not bestow
good things necessary to us.

Verse 9. The Lord has heard my petition: the Lord will receive my prayer.
Why he repeateth three times that he was heard.
HE repeats the hearing of his prayer three times, for two causes. First, to let
us see how frequently he used the exercise of prayer; for he divide the day in
three, Morning noon, and at evening tide did I call upon thee: and the night in
three; for he began the night with prayer, I arose at midnight, and called
upon thee, and he prevented the break of day and the morning watch. God
hears not sinners, Ioh. 9.31.
but If any be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him hears he: then if
the Lord hear our suifs and grant them, Ester. 7.
When Hester obtained her suite at Ahashuerosh, it was an argument she was
acceptable to him: So is it with us in our petitions to God.

VERSE. 10. All mine enemies shall be confounded, and sore vexed: they shall be
turned back and put to shame suddenly.
THis is a Prophecy of the final extirpation of his enemies, The Churches
enemies will not prosper.
albeit it is to be understood, that David was not of a vindicatiue spirit,
that he had malice against Simei, Saul or Doeg, for the particular wrongs he
received from them, yet because they were enemies to Gods counsel in his
promotion, he triumphs over them, whereby by we may learn to abandon our
affections in our particular quarrels, We ought in our own quartels to be
merciful, but sharp in the quarrels of God. Numb. 12.3.
that we may affirm before God and the world, we can be content to pardon
whatsoever injury done to our selves, and labor to be as was Moses, the
meekest man in the world, in our own particular, but most sharp in reue^ging
wrongs done to God. It should teach Prince and Preachers to imitate this Prince
and Prophet, to sharpen the edge of their sword and tongue against Gods
enemies, and namely these devilish Jesuits and factions Papists, and to forget
their own particulars against any so far as they may.

But in this his Prophecy, it is most remarkable what shall be the end of all
the enemies of Gods Church; whatsoever they be, either Kings, Balaamites,
Baalites, Iulians, Turks, Papists, they shall be confounded and overthrown,
and shall be shameful spectacles of the judgment of God, as Pharo, Saul,
Achab, Iezabel, Herod, Julian: there is no man breathing that sets him against
that truth of God, that shall escape shame in this world, Let Persecutors
learn by the examples of their Prodecessors.
and eternal condemnation in the world to come, without repentance. But the
examples of our Predecessors will not learn this future age to be wise, and
therefore they shall inherit shame for a reward of their hostility against Gods
Church, except they repent. But shame cannot befall Gods Children, they shall
never be ashamed; for albeit they commit oftentimes things shameful, yet their
repentance blots them away.

Suddenly.] Sudden Judgments are the greatest are the greatest judgments.
Dan. 5.30. Mat. 24.38
This is an amplification of their judgment, that it comes suddenly unlooked
for, as befell Beltazar; for when God gives men time to repent it is happy,
but when he takes them in their sin, then they are most miserable, as those
in the first world, they were eating, and drinking, marying, and giving in
marriage, when the flood came. The Lord help us, and keep us from such
suddenties, which may take us in our sins, but that we may be prepared with
the five wise Virgins, Mat 25.10.
whenever our Bridegroom shall come to call us: To whom, with the Father,
and the holy Spirit, be all praise, honor, and glory, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.
A GODLY AND FRVITFVLL EXPOSItion on the twenty fifth Psalm, the second of the
PENITENTIALS.
DAVID being oppressed by his enemies, The substance of this Psalm.
in this Psalm desires, that God would deliver him from shame, and sin the
cause of all his evils; and that he would direct him to walk in his ways: as
also confirms himself by many arguments in the assurance of Gods goodness:
and finally prays for delivery to himself and to the Church.

This Ode of David's is set down in 22. Sections or Verses, after the number
and order of the Hebrew Alphabet, at least very near, as are the
34.111.112.119. as also the Lamentations of Jeremiah, and the 31. of the
Proverbs. Those who seek a reason of this, let them read S. Jerome, Epist.
155. and in Lament. Ieremiae, and Eusebius. de praepar. Euang.

For he alludeth to the fignification of every Letter of the Hebrew Alphabet,
which has a spiritual meaning. But in my judgment these Psalms are so framed
for our memory, that keeping in mind the Letters, we may the more easily
remember the matter. Man has need of many helps.
For we have need of many helps to confirm our memory in goodness.

These Verses are called Acrostichi, as were Sibyllaes verses of (...) which
signifies a Fish: (...). Sedullius in like manner made an Hymn, A Solis ortus
cardine, Beatus auctor seculi, Castae parentis viscera, etc. As also Nazianzen.
I would not wish men to be too curious in the searching of the causes hereof;
but rather be diligent in the confirmation of their memories by these 22.
Alphabeticall Letters.

The Division of the Psalm.
THis Psalm contains a Prayer to the eight Verse: a Confirmation to the
eighteenth: and a Conclusion petitory to the end.

In the first seven Verses he craves three things at God. First, that he may
not be a shamed. Secondly, that he may learn Gods ways, and be taught by
him. Thirdly, that he may be delivered from sin.

Then there is contained a deprecation against sin and shame, and the mean
by which he may escape them both, that is, by the word of God, which may direct
him in such a way wherein he may not fall under shame and sin.

Shame proceeds of sin.
There are two things which we may lawfully crave of God, to eschew sin and
shame: sin as the mother and cause, shame as the daughter and effect. And as
we desire to fly them, so especially we should crave of God that only mean
by which we may shun them, even that we submit our selves to be governed by
his word, The word of God freeth man both of sin and shame.
and frame all our actions thereto, by which we may persuade our selves that we
shall escape both.

All pray, Lord keep us from shame and sin, when as many contemn the mean
by which they should be preserved, even that blessed word of God.

VERSE 1. Unto thee O Lord lift I up my soul.
To whom God is Jehovah he is also Elohim.
THe names which he gives God are Jehovah and Eloim: the first taken from his
nature, the other from his power; and he applies them to himself, My strong
Gods, including the persons of the Trinity.

He leads us to God in our prayers, Psalm. 73.23. Heb. 11.6.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? He that comes to God must believe that God
is, and that he is able to save such as come to him. God appeared in sundry
names to others, Exodus 6.3.
but to Moses in his essential name Jehovah. Claim first to his nature, and
next to his power. Note.
First, he must be thy God Jehovah, and then thy strong God. First he must love
thee, and then he will defend thee. Ps. 144.15
Blessed is the people whose God is the Lord. Those are foolish who seeks his
protection, not first having assurance of his love. If he be to thee Jehovah,
then shall he also be to thee Eloim.

Three arguments to move God to bear him.
The arguments by which he would move God to hear him, are taken from three
persons. First, from his own person. Secondly, from the person of his
adversaries. Thirdly, from the person of the godly.

In his own person first his prayer is signified by this circumscription, I.
From his own person, because he believes in him.
I lift up my soul to thee: and his faith, I trust in thee. What is prayer but
a lifting up of the heart to God, for the heart must first be affected, and
then it will frame all the members of the body, and draw them up with it.

Whereby it appears that there is no prayer or spiritual service acceptable
to God, No spirin^ all service but that which proceeds from the heart. Pro.
23.26. Isay 29.13.
but that which comes and is derived from the heart: My son give me thy
heart. This people seek me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
Ye are praying, but your heart is as the eye of the fool, every where.
Sometime ye are thinking of the earth, sometime of your pleasure, sometime
sleeping, sometime ye know not what ye are thinking. At preaching, ye hear
the voice of a man speaking, but say not Amen. And sometime your voice is
repeating some idle and deaf sounds, your heart no whit being moved: but as a
Parrat or Pie, uttering incertaine sounds; or a Bell, your mouth praising God,
your heart being absented from him.

Faith only fixed on God. Lifting up of the heart presupposes a former
deiection.
Next, his faith is not carried about hither and thither, but only fixes it
self upon God.

Thirdly, the lifting up of the heart presupposes a former deiection of his
soul: The soul of man is pressed down with sin, and with the cares of this
world, which (as lead does the net) draws it so down, that it cannot mount
above, till God send spiritual prayers (as cork to the net) to exalt it, Heb.
12.1.
and which must be free of secular cares and all things pressing down: which
shows unto us that worldlings can no more pray,

Here the future tense used for the present.
In the Hebrew it is, I will lift up, by a common phrase using the future time
for the present; but he says not, I lift up my voice or my hands to thee,
which both he did, for these are in vain without the heart, (So Anna the
mother of Samuel says, 1 Samuel 1.15
I poured fo^^h my heart in the sight of the Lord,) as a body without the soul.

VERSE 2. My God I trust in thee: let me not be confounded: let not mine
enemies rejoice over me.
2. Argument taken from the person of his adversaries opposing his faith to
their fury. Mat 10.13. Psalm. 20.7. 2 King. 1.2 1 Samuel 28.8
THe second argument that he uses is taken from the person of his adversaries,
who albeit they were furiously bent against him, yet he only runs to God,
without whose permission they were not able to cause one hair of his head fall
to the ground. Some seek for the help of men, some trust in horses and
chario^s, some go to Beelzebub and devils by wirches, but let a true Christian
(with Da^id here) have his refuge to God,

Faith is the ground of prayer.
I trust in thee:] Here is faith the root and ground of prayer: When Christ
bestowed any benefit upon his patients, he asked them, Do ye believe? and then
answered, Mark 9.23. Mat. 8.13. Simil.
Be it to thee according to thy says.

It is a natural dependence that all creatures use this argument to their
superiors and masters, As my trust is in you, help me. And should not we use
this same to our Lord, and say, My trust is in thee O Lord, therefore h^lpe me.
He stands upon the points of his honor, will he then cast off his dependants?
Faith in God a strong argument whereby God is moved to defend us. Mark. 9.23 24.
No truly, there is no stronger argument to move God to defend thee, then if
thou allege thy faith in him; there is nothing impossible to him that
believes. Let us therefore crave the augmentation of our faith, and say, Lord
increase our faith; and then we need not to doubt but God will give us all
things.

His prayer is grounded upon faith: 1 Cor 4.13 Prayer grounded on faith.
Paul says, I believed, therefore have I spoken: therefore such prayers as
proceed of an incertaine faith, are abomination in the sight of the Lord, and
scorning of his Majesty. Do ye not think, Words without faith and feeling
unprofitable. Doct. Shame, the daughter of sin.
that if we conceive words in our own language (if we want a feeling of them)
that they will be acceptable to God? no indeed: but much less will they
please him, if in an uncouth language we repeat vain words, we know not what.

Let me not be confounded:] Shame is the daughter of sin, and a condign
punishment for sin, Romans 6.2^.
What fruit had ye then in those things wherewith now ye are ashamed? For the
end of those things is death. But no shame can befall to a Christian, Qui
credit non erubesces, He that believes shall not be a shamed, Repentance
blotteth out the memory of sin. Heb. 11.31. 2 Pet. 2.7.
for if he fall in sin, it will by Gods blessing turn to the best to him,
and his repentance will blot out the memory of his sin. Rachabs faith has
blotted away the remembrance of her whoredom; David's repentance and Manasses,
has blotted out their sins; Lots righteousness is remembered; their sin is
not shameful, for God honored them with such virtues as took away the
filthiness of their sin. Jacobs thigh made him to halt, Genesis 32.3.
yet the strength of his arms who wrastled with the Angel, his revelations
that he got, and his holiness, made not that to be thought a deformity in
him, Simil. Doct. The afflictions of Gods children are honorable.
what the worse is a Captain for a scarre in his face, whose valorous arms
have been so well tried.

Next, his afflictions and persecutions cannot be shameful, but honorable,
for the Apostles themselves thought it great honor to be beaten, Acts 3.41.
yea to be scourged for Christ's sake. They now are crowned with martyrdom,
who to the worlds opinion have suffered as evil doers.

Let not mine enemies rejoice over me: The devils rejoice at evil Luke 15.10
] The wicked do imitate the nature of the devil, for he is never glad but at
the destruction of sinners, as the Angels rejoice at their conversion: whereby
ye may try if ye be a true Christian, The trial of a Christian by
compassion. 2 Cor. 11.29. Doct. Gods children have many enemies. Reu. 12.17
if ye lament with those that lament, and have compassion on them, and say with
the Apostle Saint Paul, Quis affligitur, and ego non vror? Who is afflicted,
and I do not burn?

Gods children have many enemies, he is not one of Gods lambs if he have not
a Lion or a dog to pursue him: some are secret, some are open: but who are
they? none but the Devil and his children; the Dragon pursues the seed of the
woman.

Next, observe their malicious nature, they rejoice at the evil of Gods
children, The wicked always rejoice in evil.
Rejoice not over me, my enemy, I have fallen, I will rise again.

Thirdly, he would not feed their eyes with his losses: The joy of the wicked
is ever in evil, either in their own or other men's sins, they sleep not
till they sin, they eat not but in sin with gluttony they sleep in
whoredom, they go to murder, oppression, or strealing.

VERSE. 3. So all that hope in thee shall not be ashamed, but let them be
confounded that transgress without cause.
The benefits of Christi^ns are common.
SO all that hope in thee.] He so draws his delivery that the benefit thereof
may redound to the rest of the members of Christ, for their evils and their
goods are common; neither should we seek any thing to our selves, but so
far as it may redound to the good of the Church, and her comfort.

For as a ring on the finger adornes the whole body: Shame sent to the wicked
a^ to the right owner. 1. They transgress
so does the good of one member rejoice all, and the hurt of one offend all.

But let them be confounded that transgress without cause.] Now shame is sent
to the right owner, the wicked, who are described by two marks; first they
are perfidious, and forsworn, no bond can bind them, they are a false
generation, trust them not, when they are with Iuda^ kissing thee, Luke
22.47. 2 Samuel 3.27.
then are they betraying thee: Ioab said to Abner in peaceable manner, how do
you my Brother, in the mean time had a dagger privately wherewith to kill him.
2. Without cause.
The next mark is, without cause; they are not able to qualify any injury
that ever they have done: Psalm. 11.3.
What has the righteous done? says David. They live upon suspicions,
apprehensions, and judge others after their own false nature.

Ianocencie a great comfort in time of trouble.
Note a great comfort to establish thy conscience in thy sufferings, thine
innocence, which makes thy afflictions light, and thy burdens easy.

VERSE 4. Show me thy ways O Lord, and teach me thy paths.
We are naturally ignorant.
Show me.] This lets us see how that naturally we are ignorant of the
ways of God, and therefore David would be taught of God. He craved in the
first three verses to be freed of shame, and now he craves the means by
which he may be delivered, even Gods word, which is the only preservative
from shame. And herefore it often comes to pass, that when men are brought
to be open spectacles of shame, The contempt of Gods word the cause of shame.
Use. Against contemners of the word of God. Simil.
they do confess it was not the present accident wherein they are taken, but
the contempt of Gods word. And this should teach us to love that word and
follow it, to the end we may be kept from shame: which makes greatly against
the Atheists and Papists of our Land, who contemn the blessed word of God,
they are as Owls flying the light of the day, Qui male facit, ^ait lucem: he
that does evil hates the light.

In this verse are contained, 1. the person whom he implores, Jehovah, whom he
describes, leading him, teaching him, Ioh. 3.20. The Parts
receiving him in favor, and nourishing him,

David, a King and a Prophet craves to be directed by God, to the effect and
end he may direct the course of his life well, and of all his Subjects, which
was Solomon's choice: 1 Kin. 3.^.
Lord give me wisdom to go in and out wisely before thy people.

So should Pastors do. Who would be a good Master, All should desire to be
taught by God in his ways. Two contrary ways
let him be a good Apprentice, and this same should all private Christians
desire, that God would teach them that way which will please him best, even his
own ways.

Thy ways:] This presupposes that there is another way, which is the way of
sin, as there are two places and ends, heaven and hell; so are there two
persons sheep and Goats, two ways, the broad and narrow, two words, Ios.
24.15.
come and depart. I, with Joshua, set before you life or death, the right or
wrong way, choose or refuse. All men are going, but there is only one Gods way,
the Kings hie street, many by-ways. All think they are going to Heaven,
Jews, Turks, Papists, Atheists, but try if thou be going thereto by that way
which God has set down to thee, try which is the ancient way, the true and
living way. Brigands and false guids may deceive you, 2 Kin. 6.19. The wrong
way* as the Prophet led the Aramites. Ioh. 14.6. Ps. 119* 35.
and lead you to Samaria, but the way of God is set down by Christ, I am the
way, the truth, and the life, no man comes to the Father* but by me, even
through the vale of his flesh: thus he steps through Christ. David prays unto
the Lord, that he would direct him in the path of his commandments, for
therein was his delight: and Isaias says, God will teach us his ways, Isai.
2.3.
and we will walk in his paths.

Faith and Love, two feet whereupon we must walk.
There be two feet whereupon we must walk, even Faith and Love, which two
will carry us to heaven, without Faith thou art lame of thy right foot, without
Love thou art lame of thy left foot: let Faith work through Love. Believe in
Jesus Christ and live a Godly life, and assure thy self thou art in the way to
heaven. Note.
If thou believe and live evil, thy one foot is in the way to heaven, thy
other to hell: so if thou pretend a good life, and casts away the word, thy
left foot is to heaven, and thy right to hell. 1 These. 4.^.
Concerning Love, ye need not that I write unto you; for ye are taught of God
to love one another.

Moreover, this (way) in the Scripture is surely set down, and the word is so
called many times in the hundred and nineteenth Psalm. Ioh. 5.39.
Such great commendation has Christ given to the word, that he desires us
diligently to search it. Patres ex Scripturis didicerunt, nos ex iis discamus
viam: the Fathers learned of the Scriptures, A desire to be taught presupposes
an ignorance. Simil.
let us learn of them the way.

Teach me thy paths:] this presupposes that men are ignorant by nature; for
even as strangers put in a Wilderness, where there is no straight way, could
very hardly discern what way to take, but would be a prey to Beasts and
Brigands: so are men by nature ignorant of God. Act. 8.31.
The Eunuch said to Philip, How can I understand without an Interpreter? Nature
may teach thee vvayes to maintain this life; but the way to heaven, there is
no reason that can persuade or teach, it comes by divine inspiration. Mat.
16.17.
Blessed art thou Simon son of Iona, flesh and blood has not revealed it
unto thee, but my Father that is in heaven.

The Philosophers and Astrologians who were quick in judging things
natural, were but blind in grace. Mat. 11.25.
I thank thee (Father) thou have hid it from wise men, and revealed it to
babes. The Scripture is as the Star that leads us to Bethleem. Mat. 2.9.


This is a great humility in David, that being a King and a Prophet, yet he
would learn this Lesson, to serve God: let Preachers ever be learning.
S^crates said at his death, Hoc vnum scio, me nihil scire, I know this one
thing, that I know nothing: Note.
a conceit of knowledge is a m^rke of ignorance.

He repeats this word teach me, often; whereby he acknowledges, that the
chief lesson he vvish^th to learn to make him wise, is to know how to serve
God by his word: and of this wisdom in the 119. Psalm he affirms, that it
will make him wiser then his enemies, then his masters, then his ancients.

By the word teach, Preaching of the word of God is the ordinary mean of
Salvation. Luke 4.16.
he would teach us that the ordinary means of Satuation and knowledge is the
word preached, How can they believe without preaching? not by reading, mumbling
Masses, etc. but by lively preaching. Christ preached so in the Temple, when he
took the Book from the Reader. Brethren have ye any word of exhortation for
the people? Preach in season and out of season. Act. 13.15.
The repetition of the words, show me, teach me, lead me, teach me, declares
the instancie that he used to hear the word, more sweet then honey, Ps.
119.103. Ps. 88.1^.
yea better then his appointed food, so that he desired that he might be
but a doore-keeper in the house of the Lord. This his affection to the word he
declares by repeating it in the 119. Psalm 175. times. The great ignorance
which is among us springs from a want of desire to hear. Ignorance springs
from want of desire to be taught. Luke 24.31.
The two Disciples said, Did not our heart burn within us, all the time he
spoke to us?

VERSE. 5. Lead me forth in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of
my Salvation, in thee do I trust all the day.
It is not sufficient to be taught the way unless we be led into it.
He craves not only to be taught the truth and the way, but to be led and
directed in the way, that God may not only point it out to him, but conuoy him
thereunto, and keep him from going out of it: for albeit we be entered in the
way of grace, if God would not perfect that work, we would fall every moment;
therefore he works in us to will and perfect: and he who began, can crown
also the work, he is the staff to which we must lean, and of which we
must take hold: knowledge is not sufficient without practice. God must make us
to walk in the way we know. Our knowledge will be a dittay against us, if
we walk not in the way we know; Luk* 12.47
for he that knows the will of his master and does not the same, shall have
double stripes.

For thou art the God of my salvation:] The Argument by which he would move
God to teach him his ways, is taken from the person of God, whom he calls
the God of his salvation, and his own person who is saved in that he believes
in him, and the adiunct of faith, which is constancy and perseverance, all the
day.

The Argument is taken from the Office of a Savior, to guide them whom he
has delivered and saved: but thou have saved me, therefore guide me.

First, All in condemnation without Christ. Rom 11.32 Doct. No man or Angel can
save us but God. Psalm. 3.8. Psalm. 71.19 Psalm. 136.11.13, etc.
in that he calls him the God of his salvation, he would let us see that we
are all in condemnation without Christ, all are enclosed under sin, that God
might be merciful to them.

And where he calls him the God of his salvation, he imports, that it
was not in the power of Man or Angel to save him, but in Gods, who behooved to
take it upon himself, to deliver him from temporal and spiritual dangers.
Salvation only belongs to the Lord; What God is like our God, who delivers
us from our enemies, as he brought the Israelites out of Egypt, led them
through the red Sea, fought all their battles, rebuked Kings for their sakes.
What ever delivery comes to us, comes by God, whateuer instrument he uses in
the same; he saues us, and not we our selves, neither chariots nor horses.
Note.
The consideration of this should move us to be thankful to him. Moses,
Joshua, Sampson, etc. were typical Saviors, but God was the great Savior,
who saved his people.

Next, if God be the only and sole Savior of our bodies, in saving them from
diseases; and of our lives, in saving them from our enemies, should any seek
salvation to his soul but from him? for if a temporary delivery cannot come
but by him, what deuillish doctrine is it to teach, that salvation can come by
any other? Seeing then salvation only belongs to the Lord, let us run to him
and seek it at his hands, who is only able to perform, and bring it to us.
Seek it not at Saints, but at the King of Saints.

In thee do I trust:] There is described the powerful instrument,
apprehending Gods mercies, even faith adorned with his chief quality,
Constancy crowns all our vertu^^.
constancy: for (all the day) signifies as much as continually: for there is
no virtue in man which can be responsable to God, if it be not joined with
constancy. Ye must wait patiently, believe confidently, seek, knock, ask,
hold up your hands without fainting, strengthen your weak hands and feeble
knees. Genesis 32.2^
He abode with Jacob the heat of the day, and the cold of the morning, and
shrinked not, till the Lord came at last; and we must abide to the end of the
day of our life.

Many begin in the morning of their youth to seek God who forsake him in the
evening of their age.
The day has a morning, a noone, and an euening-tide; so has our age, a youth,
a middle age, and a declining time; blessed is he that perseuers to the end,
and till his later breath constantly depends on God, and leaves him not; for
certainly that man shall have the crown of eternal glory.

VERSE 6. Remember O Lord thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindness: for
they have been for ever.
IN the preceding words, David first prayed that God would deliver him from
shame and contempt: next, that he would teach him his ways: No assurance of
the remission of sin* till God put his law in our hearts*
and now he desires that God would have mercy upon him, and pardon him his
sins. Mark by this his order in prayer, how first he desires that God would
teach him his law, and then that he would put away his sin; for we can never
get assurance of the remission of our sins, till God put his law in our
heart. After these days, says the Lord by Jeremy, I will put my law in their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they
shall be my people. And they shall teath no more every man his neighbor, and
every man his brother, saying, Know ye the Lord; for they shall all know me,
from the least to the greatest of them, says the Lord. For I will forgive them
their iniquity and remember their sins no more. Which the Apostle to the
Hebrews recites word by word. Knowledge of sin comes before remission of
sin.
For God first by his word and Spirit works in the mind of a sinner a light
and sight of his sins, and in his heart a sorrow for it, and then he puts
it away and forgiues it. Therefore let us try what sight and sense of sin the
word of God has wrought in us, that we have a certificate to our conscience of
the remission thereof. Ps. 107.20.
He sends his word and heals them. He sent Nathan to David, and then
pardoned him.

In these two verses he thrice repeateth the word (remember,) not that there is
any memory or forgetfulness in God, as in man, for time makes man to forget,
but God changes no time; absence makes us forget, but all things are present
to him; memory has a seat in man's brain, which being perturbed it fayles, God
is all memory. But he is said to remember or forget, How God is said to
remember. Genesis 8.1. and 19.29. Genesis 30.22 1 Samuel 1.19
when by visible tokens of doing he shows his favor or displeasure to man.
As he remembered Noah when the flood diminished; Abraham, when he saved Lot and
brought him out from Sodom; Rachel, when he made her conceive; and Anna, when
he granted unto her her petition.

Thy tender mercies and loving kindness:] First he craves at God that he would
remembe his mercies, which is the first thing we should seek at God; for if
we get it (as said Jacob) we get all things. Genesis 33.11 Mercy against merit.
And hereby it is clearly seen, that he disclaimes all merits; for albeit he
fought the Lords battles, governed his people by the word and sword, in
executing justice, prayed and praised God continually, fasted, and bestowed
alms on the Saints; Psalm. 16.2. Use. Of confutation of the Papists merits.
yet he confesses they cannot extend to God: which refureth and damneth the
foolish Papists, who pretend merits, but commit murders and adulteries, and
yet with open mouth they cry, merits, merits.

He amplifieth Gods mercies by three names, mercies, benignities, goodness;
benignity twice repeated; see how highly he does esteem of Gods goodness,
when he cannot find terms sufficiently to express them.

A lively representation of the Trinity.
But these three lively represent unto us the Trinity: the Father the fountain
of goodness, yea goodness it self; the Son, mercy supplying our misery;
the holy Spirit, benignity and bountifulness, graciously working and bestowing
these things which the Father and Son give. The goodness of God is the
fountain begetting mercy, and mercy brings forth benignity. Let us learn by
this, that whateuer comes to us, must either come out of the fountain of
Gods mercy, or else it is a curse, not a benignity, but a malignity. Many say,
Who will show us any good thing? Psalm. 4.6.
but David says, Lord lift up the light of thy countenance on me.

We should imitate the three properties of the Trinity.
These three properries of the Trinity all Christians should imitate; the
goodness of the Father, the mercy of the Son, and the bountifulness of the
Spirit; that in so doing they may have society with the Father, Son, and
Spirit. I know thee to be a good man, because thou art not cruel but
merciful; I know thee to be merciful, in that thy hand is bountiful, thou
gives and distributes to the poor, Psalm. 112.9
thy righteousness endures for ever.

The word (...) Rachamim signifies bowels, which are the seats and places of
the fatherly and motherly love, and therefore the children are called parentum
viscera, the bowels of the parents; which phrase the Apostle writing to
Philemon both in the 12. and 20. verse, expounds spiritually: Thou therefore
receive him that is mine own bowels: and in the 20. verse, Comfort my bowels
in the Lord. Esaias 49.19
Can a mother forget her child, etc. yet the Lord cannot forget Israel. Ps.
103.13.
And as the Father pitties his children, so the Lord has pity on those that
fear him. So we see hereby how dear and near we are to Gods very heart, that
we have a place in his innermost affections.

Infinite miseries have need of infinite mercies. 2 Cor. 1.3. Gods mercies are
eternal.
But when he speaks of mercies and benignities, he speaks in the plural
number, because as our sins and miseries are infinite, so we have need of
infinite comforts and pardons, he is called the father of mercies.

For they have been for ever:] A fair commendation of Gods mercies, from the
eternity thereof. His mercies had no beginning, as himself had none, and shall
have no end; From everlasting to everlasting thou art our God. For as the Ocean
and maine Sea, Psalm. 100. Simil.
can never be exhausted, but it would furnish water to all the world, if every
one should bring vessels to draw water therefrom: So if we had faith and
prayer to seek grace from God, he is all-sufficient in himself to furnish us
all: which makes David to cry in one Psalm twenty and six times, Psalm. 126.
thy mercy endures for ever. Therefore we may build our faith on it as on a
strong Rock, Mat. 1.6.18
that the gates of hell cannot prevail against us, for every thing earthly on
which we repose is subject to mutation and change: All things change, God only
immutable.
But herein is our comfort, that he is an immutable God on whom we depend, and
in whom we trust: then as long as God stands, our salvation cannot fail. Woe
to them who put their trust in any other, following lying vanities, Jonah 2.8.
Psalm. 119.
and forsaking mercies. I have seen an end of all perfection, (says David)
but thy word is very large.

VERSE 7. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my rebellions: but according
to thy kindness remember thou me, even for thy goodness sake, O Lord.
When God ^^^embers ^ercies he ^^^gets sin.
HE conioynes these two, memory of mercies, and forgetfulness of sins, the
one destroys the other; when God remembers mercy, he forgets sin; when he
remembers sin, he forgets mercy: when God will plague the Whore of Babel, it
is said, He will remember her sins. and in Hosea, Hos 8.13.
Now will he remember their iniquity, and visit their sins, they shall
return to Egypt.

If sin had not been, Gods mercies had not been known. Romans 8.28.
He craved mercy before at God, now he let us us see the object of Gods mercy,
even sin; and here appears the great wisdom of God, who can turn all things
to the best to those that love him; so that he does make their sin which
they did commit, to manifest his glory, and work their own salvation. All the
properties of God (his justice and mercy excepted) might have been known to
the world by the creation; his wisdom in framing the world so artificially,
his power in maintaining it, his goodness in making man so excellent a
creature; but if sin had not been, neither Gods mercy would have been
manifested in pardoning it, neither his justice in punishing it: Romans 5.20.
For where sin abounded, there mercy super abounds.

Remember not the sins of my youth:] He makes mention of his sins, for
when he speaks to God who is most just and righteous, that he should remember
his own unrighteousness; as the brethren of Joseph when they sought favor of
him, they remembered the wrong they did to him: as if one seeking the help of
his friend, he would confess the faults he did against him; Luke 15.21
as the forlorn son did to his father. So, seeing sin is the principal wall
which diuides us from God, so that he does not hear our prayers, David here
takes away this impediment. We must confess our sin if we would be heard.
Therefore if we would have our prayers acceptable to God, let us begin at an
humble begging of pardon and remission (at which all our prayers should begin)
that having assurance of Gods favor, we may boldly suit what we please. But if
we begin not our prayers at craving pardon;

But how is it that David specially nominates the transgressions of his youth?

I answer, had heaped sin upon sin, and so by process of time was loadned
and ouercharged with it.

Next, if God should deal with him by extreme rigor, he should not only
call to mind the faults which he did yesterday, but whatsoever sins he did
from his youth. The word (...) includes all the faults either of commission or
omission which he did. Therefore so often as the Lord terrifies us with his
judgments, Note.
let us not only remember our last offense, but let our former transgressions
make us be ashamed, and bring new sobs and sighs in our heart. Let old men
call to minds their former offenses which they did commit in their youth. Saint
Augustine in his confessions reckons out all the follies which he committed
in his childhood, infancy, youth, and age, calling them to mind even from the
beginning: Psalm. 51.5.
for we are conceived in sin, and a child of one day is not clean before
God. As we grow in years ye grow in sin: as a Lions whelpe is borne with a
savage nature, and as it grows in age so the cruelty thereof increases, so
does man. Solomon in the Proverbs says, Pro. 30.19.
It is hard to know the way of a young man with a maid. So young men have need
of sure custody, that their parents, masters and Preachers, should take heed
diligently to them.

Saint Ambrose in a Sermon at the Funeral of the Emperor Valentinian the
younger, brings in that place of the Lamentations, Blessed is the man who
bears his yoke in his youth. Lam. 3.27.
God is merciful to that youth whom he corrects.

David he deplores the sins of his youth, which were secret from the world,
and perchance to himself, yet he craves pardon for them. Now the smallest
sins trouble him, which before were but sports to him; and so it will befall
to us: those offenses now which we account no offenses, after we will esteem
them great sins; Prou. 6.3.
now they are honey in the mouth, but after in the belly they will be bitter as
gall.

No time of man's life free of sin. Ier. 2. Exodus 22.29. Simil. Note. Ex. 23.10.
There is no time of man's age which is free from sin, but the youth is not
only first, but most subject thereunto; for a youth is like an untamed Calfe,
like a wild Ass which will be taken in her month. The first borne should be
sacrificed to God, the first fruits should be offered to him, yea the beast if
it had not been redeemed, the neck of it behooved to have been broken. Think
ye not that God has more respect of the first fruits of our life, then he
has of the first fruits of Bullocks. Thou shall consecrate thy beginnings to
God with Josias, 2 King. 22.1
who in the morning of his life, even early, began to seek the Lord. We should
in our life keep such dyets as did David in his prayers; Psalm. 55.17
Morning, noone-tide, and at even he sought the Lord. Remember thy Creator in
the days of thy youth, Eccles. 12.1
before the years come wherein ye shall say, I have no pleasure. Eccles. 11.9
Be assured O young man ye shall come to judgment: Job 20.11.
yea, thy old bones shall inherit the sins of thy youth.

To what sins youth is most inclined.
The sins of youth whereto they are most inclined, are first, pride, and a
contempt of their elders: the vile do contemn the honorable, and youth
despise age. Such was the pride of Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.9
whose punishment should terrify all youths.

Next, lust is natural to them, as the Prodigal child spent his time in riot
and luxury. Luke 15.14


Thirdly, hypocrisy; they can very well dissemble their doings: and when, with
the Whore in the Proverbs, they are intending sin, then they pretend they
were offering their peace offerings: and with Absalom, pretending their vows
in Hebron, 2 Samuel 15.7
but intending to stir up rebellion.

And finally, all youths are subject to inconstancy, they are compared to
dreggy wine not settled,

If thou have escaped from judgment in thy youth, and have passed the dangers
thereof, thou may greatly praise God. I read of a man,

If sins of his youth and ignorance be grievous, how much more those of
knowledge.
Then if the sins of youth now trouble him in his age, what do ye think of
the sins which ye do against knowledge and conscience in your old age? Should
ye not confess them and be ashamed of them? If a child blush it is thought
good, verecundia; but if an old man blush it is thought evil, because he is
bound to do nothing whereof he should be ashamed. But many are like to the
false Elders that lusted after Susanna, and to them appertains shame and
confusion, for their example in courageth youngmen to do wickedly. Yea they
are very rare who have escaped the perils of youth, either by one notable sin
or other.

Now David of these his own sins does make a special confession, and does not
infold himself under the mantle of generality: A simple confession needful.
albeit many are taught naturaly to dissemble their sins, to excuse them, to
extenuate them, or else to inuolue them under a common necessity of sinning:
but this will not please God, unless we freely say with David, I have sinned:

Moreover, he desires not only that God would forgive his sins, but more,
When God forgiues sin he forgets it.
that he would forget them: wherein God differs from men; men may forgive,
but they will remember, for malice and anger takes such impression in our
hearts, that it is hard to raze out the memory of our received injuries,
although we pardon them with our heart: But God as he remits, so he forgets,
Number. 23.2^.
he sees no iniquity in Jacob; and because the children of God are imperfect,
and in this can never be like to God, so long as they carry about with them
this sinning sin, as may be seen in David, 1 Kin. 2.8.
who in his Testament remembered the injury done to him by Simei, to be
punished by Solomon, although in his time he did dissimulate it: yet let this
be some comfort to us, that if the wicked motions of injuries done to us come
in our minds, let us resist and control them, which shall be sufficient
before God.

Nor my rebellions.] Sin and rebellion are conjoined 1 Samuel 15.23. Simil.
Sins and rebellions are joined together, the mother and her daughter, sin
if it grow and increase it turns into rebellion and disobedience; which is
like to the sin of witchcraft and Idolatry: and as a Serpent by eating a
Serpent becomes a Dragon, (...), so sin feeding upon sin, becomes at
last rebellion. There are degrees of sin, Nemo repent factus est
turpissimus. David prays to God to forgive him his secret sins, and he
desires that God would keep him from presumptuous sins; slay sin in the
cradle, if ye let it come to maturity it may turn into rebellion.

The word also imports ignorances, which agrees very well with this youth, to
declare that the sins of youth commonly springs forth from ignorance, Youth
is ignorant, albeit it th^^ ^^th it ^^^^e wise
for they are blind through lack of knowledge, for they have no natural
judgment, they lack instruction, they want experience, and such like: by
nature we are all borne fools, nature has taught the beasts to know things
profitable and hurtful to them. The Swallow knows her time, the Ox his
crib, Isa. 1.3.
but man knows not his owner, neither the time when he shall turn to the
Lord.

And this ignorance makes youth to be rebellious to their parents; whereof the
Lord complains by his Prophet, Isa. 1.2.
I have brought up children, says the Lord, and nourished them, and they have
rebelled against me.

A profitable Lesson for Parents to train up their children in virtue.
This should teach Parents to remedy the ignorance of their youth by instruction,
that their minds being enlightened by the knowledge of God and learning, they
may fear God in the morning of their youth, and have the eyes of their
understanding opened to know the true God and fear him, that it may be
fulfilled that is spoken by the Prophet: Joel 2.28.
And in the last days I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh, and your
sons and your daughters shall prophecy, and your young men shall see
visions. We may complain most justly with that holy Father S. Augustine, of
the neglect of education of our youth, where he says, Gods iuft recompense to
Parents.
O flores vere non frondium, sed veprarum: O truly they are flourishes not of
branches but of briers, and so the Lord does recompense the Parents in their
age, that as they were negligent in training them up in the knowledge of God so
they become crosses to their Parents in their age. Plutarch.
Among the Lacedaemonians there was a Law that children were not obliged to
maintain their Parents in their age, who were careless of their education in
virtue when they were young.

Moreover, Sins of ignorance will not excuse us.
let us assure our selue that the sins of Ignorance will not excuse us,
albeit they may extenuate our pains, and make us to be punished with fewer
stripes.

I will not insist in this point, because I have spoken sufficiently thereof in
that Sermon on Christ's first word spoken on the Cross, Father forgive them,
for they know not what they do.

But according to thy kindness remember thou me, even for the goodness sake,
O Lord.] The fountain he runs unto is the mercy of God, where he plainly
disclaimes his own merits. Lorinus the Jesuit against merits.
Lorinus a Jesuit here brings in sundry passages of Scripture to qualify
the mercy of God against merits: Psalm.
6.8.51.3.69.14.86.5.15.106.45.119.156.130.7. Dan. 9.18. Isa. 55.7.

VERSE. 8. Gracious and righteous is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners
in the way.
IN this second part of the Psalm after his Petition, Gods truth and mercy
props of a Christians faith. Psalm. 116.
he sets down the props to the which his faith does lean, to wit, the
mercy, truth, and righteousness of God, He believed, therefore he spoke: so
our Prayers except they be grounded on faith, and an assurance that God will
grant them, they are offensive to God, and not profitable for us: He who
prays without faith, says S. James, is like a wave of the Sea, Iam. 1.6.
tossed of the wind, and carried away. The proof of this is in the sixth Psalm,
wherein after his prayers, with a constant assurance he concludes, all mine
enemies shall be confounded. Psalm. 6.1^.
After he had prayed for mercy, he falls out in a meditation, consideration
and proclamation of Gods goodness, in the eighth, ninth, and tenth verses,

Gracious and righteous is the Lord.] First in his own nature, he is good and
righteous (...) rectus: next, he is good to us in teaching us his way. God is
not only good but goodness it self: but how does his goodness appear? not in
showing mercy on Abraham, Isaacke, Jacob, Moses, and the righteous, but on the
most miserable sinners, (as Manasses says in his Prayer) the Prodigal child,
harlots, and such other.

Therefore will he teach sinners in the way. Mat. 6.11.12.
] In this common benefit of remission of sins, he inuolueth himself with the
rest of the Saints, and so should all our suits be common, that we desire
nothing alone, but that whereof our brethren may participate. This is the
communion of Saints which we believe. Our daily prayers are for all, Give us
this day our daily bread, forgive us our sins, and lead us not into
temptation. Note.
Who seeks any thing for himself of God, and not for the rest of his
brethren, shall be repelled, and receive nothing.

The persons to whom mercy appertains are called sinners, Sin the only
object of Gods mercy. Romans 5.20.
as though he would make sin the only object of Gods mercy, as indeed it
is: for Gods mercy would not have been manifested, if sin had not been known,
that so where sin abounded, there grace might superabound: the whole have not
need of the Physician, Luke 5.31.
but the sick. Think not that the multitude of thy sins will exclude thee
from Gods grace.

Christ at the well was found of the Samaritan woman; Ioh: 4.
mercy and misery met together in the Pharisees house, Luke 7.36.
even Christ and the Magdalen: Mat. 20.31.
in the field he met with the blind, who cried, Luke 18.14
Son of David have mercy on us; in the Temple with the Publican; John 5.2.
at the Poole with the Paralitique; for, Luke 5.32.
He came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

But what teaches he? His ways: He teaches Godswaies not man's traditions.
Jonah 2.8.
not the tradition of men, of Popes, of Councels, who could and have erred, but
Gods own ways, his statutes, so often repeated in the 119. Psalm. Woe to the
Papist, who follows lying vanities, forsaking their own mercy.

The great Doctor and teacher is God himself, who having the key of the heart,
must open it himself. The conversion of a sinner is not a work of nature. 1
Cor. 3.6.
Therefore the conversion of a sinner is not a work of nature, but it is Gods
principal favor, who must give increase to Paul's planting, and Apolloes
watering. We should therefore fervently pray to God for the Preachers, that he
would so bless them, that by their labors many may be converted to himself.
The Israelites under the Law being terrified by Gods voice, said, Let not God
speak any more unto us, Exodus 20.1^
but Moses. But we under the Gospel being comforted by his voice, say, Note.
Let Moses and Paul be silent, but let God speak to us.

The work of conversion of sinners, David draws to the fountain, even Gods
grace and free favor: whateuer comes to us, does proceed out of his grace.

But this is wonderful, Mercy and justice meet in the salvation of man.
how grace and righteousness, which seem so opposite in the salvation and
conversion of a sinner meets together, and kisses one another. I answer, In the
work of our redemption they accorded, when Gods justice was fully satisfied by
the death of Christ, and his mercy was clear by full pardoning us, Simil. Leu.
16.8.
when we escaped with the Scapegoat to the wilderness, and he died; the
suerty paid the debt, and we were freed. In the conversion of a sinner he
uses both, he vvounds and humbles, cures and exalts again. Deducit ad
inferos, and reducit; He cast down Paul, Acts 9.4.8.
made him blind, rebuked him, and then converted and comforted him, and sent
him to teach the Gospel, and convert others.

VERSE 9. Them that be meek, will he guide in judgment, and teach the humble
his way.
HE sets down in this verse to whom the former benefit does appertain; and
what sort of sinners shall participate of mercy; to wit, the meek and humble;
whom God has so prepared by afflictions and crosses, Afflictions teach
humility. Who are humble. Simil.
that he has made them to give an open way and place to the Gospel to work in
them. For as the wax first is by labor and by fire, made soft and pliable
before it can take stamp and impression of the Kings image and superscription;
yea clay must be made soft and pliable before it be made a vessel: so must
God humble us, before he put his image in us: so the gold, Ps. 119.71.
It is good (says David) that thou have humbled me, for thereby I learned thy
Commandments: If he had not been first humbled, he had never learned Gods
Commandments. He desired children to come to him, for of such is the Kingdom
of heaven: yea except we become as these, Mar. 19.14.
we shall never enter thereinto. God resists the proud, Iam. 4.6.
and gives grace to the humble. On whom will the Spirit of the Lordrest? on
the contrite heart.

The Palace of Heaven is very ample, Mat. 11.29.
and we shall find rest to our souls.

The word meek, is in Latin mites, of which our Savior speaks, Who are
meek. Mat. 5.3.
Blessed are the meek, or mansueti, quasi ad manum venire sueti, accustomed to
come under the hand; so God so mitigateth the fury of our nature and tameth us,
that we become so obedient, that as a child comes under the hand of his
Parent, Psalm. 123.2
or as a handmaid is directed by the eye of her mistress, so do we attend
upon God.

Whom God directs he also protecteth.
Will he guide:] God who teaches the meek, he also guides and directs them,
and leads them through the way. For as children are ignorant, so are they
impotent; they are taught by their parents and led by them; whom God directs he
also protects, and guides to heaven, or else we should soon perish. He must
order the actions of our whole life rightly, which is the second grace that God
will bestow on his children when they submit themselves obediently to bear his
yoke. This docility will never be till our proud heart be subdued.

what Gods judgment and his way is.
His judgment and his way, is nothing else but his gonernment, whereby he
declares himself as a loving Father, careful to provide for the salvation of
his own children, that he may relieve them that are oppressed, raise up those
who are cast down, comfort those who are sorrowful and grieved, and succor
such as be in misery. And because in the former verse he spoke of sinners (he
will teach sinners his ways) he expounds of what sinners he meant; God
teaches sinners, but not all.
he will not teach every sinner, but those whom he has received into his
favor. First, he bears down our pride and contumacy, and humbles us, First
God will have our pride beaten down, then he will teach us.
but being cast down he will not forsake us; and being humbled by the cross,
he directs all the actions of our life in his holy obedience; of which
Apollinarius:

(...),
Viros iustitiae diriget mansuetos,
Humility the first, second, and last gift of a Christian. August. Epist. 56.
He will direct righteous men that are meek.

Wherefore ye may clearly see, that the gift of modesty and humility is so
necessary, as without which we can never be capable of the mysteries of Gods
kingdom: Which made Augustine to say (borrowing the allusion from Demosthenes
the Grecian, August. Epist. 75 ad Auxilium Episcopum.
who being demanded what was the chief thing required in an Orator, answered
thrice, pronunciation) thrice, that the chief virtue required in a Christian
was humility: and in another Epistle; En adsum senex a iuuene coepiscopo,
Episcopus tot annorum, a collega nondum anniculo, paratus sum discere; I am
here an old man ready to learn from a young man my coadiutor in the ministry,
and so old a Bishop from a young man who scarce has been one year in the
service.

VERSE 10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his
covenant and his testimonies.
ALl the paths, etc.] An (...) or exclamation, whereby he explaineth what he
would show, even the ways of the Lord; a most comfortable saying: such as Paul
has another, Romans 8.28.
To those that love the Lord all things work together for the best: Sickness,
poverty, infamy, yea death, which is the greatest mercy, when we are separate
perfectly from sin and the world, and conjoined to Christ. So that God is
ever accumulating mercies, and heaping them on our head, Lam. 3.22.
that whateuer befalls us, certainly comes from his mercy, and it is of
his mercy that we are not consumed and daily brought to confusion.

He comprehends the paths of the Lord in two words, All Gods ways are mercy
and truth Pro. 20.28
mercy and truth, or (as others expound) justice. These are the two pillars
which vpholdeth a King and his kingdom. Mercy and truth preserve the King, for
his throne shall be established with mercy. Whateuer we hear or read of the
ways of God, is either mercy or truth: mercy in pardoning sin, truth in
performing his promises. Mercy and truth belong not to the wicked.
Other quali^ies that are in God may tend to the reprobate, but with none of
these two have they any thing to do, for they have no repentance, therefore no
remission of sins; they have no faith, and therefore they depend not on his
truth. But the godly are not to be afraid of his justice, because mercy
interuenes: his power mainta^nes them, his wisdom foresees their relief.
Romans 8.33.
Who shall intend any thing against the elect of God? Christ justifies, who
can condemn? But with the wicked he will dealt very hardly, Psalm. 18.25.26.
with the godly he will show himself godly, with the upright man he will show
himself upright, with the pure he will show himself pure, and the froward
he will show himself froward.

To such as keep his covenant:] But to whom will he show this mercy? To those
who keep his covenant. Of this covenant which God made with his Church, read
Genesis 17.2. Exodus 24.7. Josh. 24.16. Ier. 3.31. and in many other places.

This is the third name which he gives to those who shall be partakers of his
mercy. Three names given to the chosen.
First, they are sinners; next, humble and penitent sinners; and thirdly, their
repentance is declared by their life, in that they keep Gods covenants.

What a covenant is. A covenant must be mutual.
A covenant is a mutual band between two persons, having mutual conditions.
God humbles himself, so far, that he covenants with man to be his God, and
promises to be their Father; we again oblige our selves to be his children
and people, if we forget to honor our Father, then he will not account us his
children. He craves that we should keep his Commandments and covenants, not
the traditions of men; Man's traditions cannot bind the conscience. Note.
which can never bind the conscience: yea oftentimes it falls out, that those
who are too curious in observing these idle and vain rites, are careless in
keeping these things which are absolutely commanded by God.

VERSE. 11. For thy names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto mine iniquity, for
it is great.
FOr thy names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto mine iniquity:] What before he
spoke generally of Gods mercy promised to all humble and penitent sinners,
Particular application of mercy needful. 1 Cor. 9.27
that in this verse he particularly applies unto himself; showing us hereby
how necessary the application of mercy is to a Preacher, lest preaching to
others he become a Reprobate himself.

He runs ever to mercy pretending no merits, and craves pardon to his
iniquity, which before he called sin, for he sinned against God, and did
iniquity to Vrias: Who sins against God hurts his neighbor. 1 Ioh. 4.20.
where observe that sin and the forgetfulness of God, causes us to do
iniquity and wrong to our neighbors: how can we love God, whom we see not,
and hate man made to his I mage whom we see.

For it is great: To aggrauate sin, a true mark of a penitent. Genesis 3.12.13.
A true mark of a petitent sinner, to aggrauate his sin. Some use to
extenuate their sins, by comparing them to others whom they think sin more
then they do: others excuse them, as Adam did when he said, The woman which
thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat: she
again excused herself, The Serpent beguiled me and I did eat: When man
remembers sin God forgets it.
But let the children of God search and find out the greatness of their
sins, and aggrauare them, that God may extenuate them, and so forget them.
Are ye loadned with sin, remember it, and God will forget it, and ease you;
if ye have it before your eyes, he shall cast it behind his back: but if you
think nothing of sin, God will bind it on your back, so that it shall
press you down as a millstone.

But he craves this for Gods names sake: his name is his honor, Gods chiefest
honor is his mercy. Pro. 25.2.
showing us that God purchases his chief honor by his mercy: It is the
honor of the King to try sins, but the honor of God to cover them.

VERSE. 12. What man is he that fears the Lord, him will he teach the way
that he shall choose.
IN this and the other two verses following is contained another quality which
God craves in his penitent, humble, and obedient sinner, to wit, that he have
the fear of God, who is rewarded with temporal and spiritual blessings in
his soul, body and posterity: So godliness is great gain, having the p^om^es
of this life the life to come. 1 Timothy 4.8.


What man is he.] By this form of interrogation he would note the raritie of
those that shall find mercy, and this indefinite speech answerable to an
universal, declares, that whatsoever they be, of whatsoever estate and
cond^tion, who fear God, shall be sure of these after following blessings.
God directs them whom he forgiues.


Next observe that God he directs all these in the course of their life whom
he has pardoned; therefore those who are not reconciled to God, need not look
for Gods direction, he was a Pillar of fire and Cloud to the Israelites, for
they were under the Covenant. Exo. 14.19.


The fear of the Lord is the chief virtue, Pro. ^5 33. What the fear of God
is.
even the beginning of wisdom. It is a secret reverence bred in the heart of
a Christian proceeding out of the sense and feeling of Gods love, whereby a
sinner is afraid that he neither think, speak, or do any thing which he
supposes may offend Gods Majesty. This secret fear if it be once planted in
the heart will direct thee in all good actions acceptable to God, and correct
thy evil doings. Note. The two properties of Gods fear. Simil.
The love of God has a constraining power, whereby it compels and forces
us to serve him: the fear of God has a restraining power, by which it
restrains and stays us, and keeps us back from offending him: this is
like a bit, the other like a spur. Abraham feared that the fear of God was not
Genesis 20.11.
in the place whereto he went. Joseph being enticed by his Mistress to commit
wickedness with her, answered, How can I do this great wickedness and so sin
against God? Genesis 39.9.
the Lord plant this fear in our hearts. This is a filial fear which he
craves, coming from love, and not a servile fear which comes from a fear
of punishment. The preserver of this fear is a continual nourishment in thy
mind of the presence of God, How the fear of God is preserved.
to who^ thou presentest all thy actions. When thou co^mittest any thing
unworthy of his presence, be ashamed of it, fly from it, crave mercy for it,
and make the quiet Cabinet of thy mind the Chamber of his presence, wherein thou
dare admit no lewd thought, no filthy thing. And because it is impossible to
fray thy heart and mind from the conceptions of that sinning sin in thee;
Note.
yet have this testimony, that it is no sooner conceived, but as soon repented.

Will he teach the way that he shall choose.] He promises four benefits to
the man that fears God, he heapeth upon him grace upon grace: before he
pardoned him, and now he directs the man whom he forgave: for no sooner
receives he any man in his favor when he immediately takes the protection and
direction of him.

But out of these words we see three things. First there are diverse, yea
contrary ways, as there are contrary ends, the broad and the narrow, the Kings
way and by-rodes, the way of life and of death. Many promise to themselves a
Kingdom not being in the way leading thereto.
This is against such as dream to themselves that whatsoever religion they
profess, or howsoever they live they shall go to heaven; but they are
deceived; for if thou be not in the way to the Kingdom, thou shall never
attain to the Kingdom: many, yea the most part are not going but riding, not
running but posting to hell; whom if ye demand whither they go? they will
answer, to heaven: yea and they will brag they shall be nearer God then the
Preacher himself, even as if one would dream of life at the point of death.

Next we see that a man cannot of himself choose the right way to heaven; Man
of himself is igno^ant of the rig^ he way. 1 Cor. 2.1 4
for the natural man cannot apprehend those things which pertain to Gods
Kingdom, neither yet can he see them, for they are spiritually discerned.
Whereupon follows the third, that is, how man shall choose the good and
refuse the evil way: Romans 9.1^.
Non est currentis, nec volentis, sed miserentis Dei: It is not in him that
runs, nor in him that wills, but in God that shows mercy. Heb. 11.25.
Moses choosed rather to suffer with the Church then to be called the son of
Pharohs daughter. Ios. 24.15.
Joshua and his house choosed to serve God, though all the people should serve
Baal. Psalm 4.6.
David the King choosed the light of Gods countenance to shine on him. 1 Kin.
3.9.
Solomon made his choice of wisdom. Luke 10.42
Mary choosed the better part. Paul thought all things to be dung in respect of
the excellent knowledge of Christ. Phil. 3.8.
The Church of Laodicea was counseled to buy gold. Apoc. 3.18.
But all these their choyces were of God, who put it in their hearts to choose
good things. Wisdom cried in the streets that all that were destitute of
understanding should come to her, Pro. 8.1.
but the fool heard the voice of the harlot, Go to our daliance, Pro. 7.22.
says she, and he went like a sheep to the slaughter. So by nature we
choose the way to destruction; Hos. 13.9.
Thy perdition is of thee O Israel, thy salvation of me.

VERSE. 13. His soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the
Land.
What the peace of conscience (...).
HIs soul shall dwell at ease.] The second promise and spiritual blessing,
the peace of conscience which is the tranquillity of the soul, flowing from the
assurance of Gods favor in Christ wrought by the holy Spirit. This is that
white stone in the Revelation, Revel. 2.17
wherein a name is written, which none can read but he that has it. Thy good
life may be a mark to others of thy salvation, but thy inward peace is a
token to thy self, that howsoever thy outward man be afflicted; yet thy
inward man has that peace which passes all natural understanding: of which
Christ says, My peace I give you, Ioh. 20.19.
not as the world; and he commanded the Apostles to give their peace.

The giver of this peace is called the Prince of peace; the wicked cry peace,
Ier. 8.11.
when as sudden destruction is approaching, as the travel of a woman: But
there is no peace to the wicked, Esa. 48.22.
says my God; they may sometimes lie in careless security, not wakened by the
sight of Gods judgments, but sleeping in the bottom of the Sea, having no
true rest: for the worldlings have three worms which eat them up, care, fear
and dolor; Care, fear, and grief, are three worms which eat the worldlings.
care to conquest the things of this world so excessiuely, that they are eaten
up by it, fear lest it be taken from them, and commonly God as he threateneth
by his word, the thing they fear shall come on them, and then follows an
excessive sorrow for the loss of them, they despair and oftentimes are the
cause of their own death: but the godly cast their care upon the Lord, they
have a reasonable care of their Family, but with measure, they fear nothing
but the offense of God, all other fears are swallowed up in the gulf of that
fear; for they assure themselves that God will maintain their Lot; and
finally, at the loss of any creature the godly have a natural sorrow, albeit
not out of measure, Job. 1.21.
but with Job, saying, The Lord has given and taken.

The third benefit.
And his seed shall inherit the Land.] The third blessing temporal, he
promises wealth to the posterity of the righteous, that their days shall be
long in the Land that God has given them. First in this promise ye see the
constancy of Gods favor toward them that fear him, their death does not
withdraw Gods love from their posterity, 2 Samuel 19.38.
as David after Barzillai went home, remembered his kindness in intertaining
Chimham, and on Mephibosheth he showed the mercy of God for Ionathans sake: 2 Samuel 9.3.
Gods love dies not with the Parents, but reuiues in their posterity. A note
for Parents.
so Gods love dies not with the Parents, but reuiueth in their posterity, as
the Lord promised to David, 2 Samuel 7.12. Here is a promise to the godly who
fear him, of a sure and perpetual maintenance to their posterity. The
consideration hereof should abate that excessive care that Parents have of
their children, whereas the best care they can have of them is, that they fear
God themselves, and labor to bring them up in that fear. Kings have not such
surety of the continuance of their crowns to their succession, neither
Noblemen of their Lands, as ^ godly man has of Gods provision: Psalm 37.25.
I was young, says David, and now am old; yet I never saw the just man nor his
seed to beg.

Moreover we see that Lands are at the disposition of God, All changes come of
sin.
who will give them to whom he pleases, and alters Dominions, as the
Monarchy of the Babylonians, Persians, Grecians, and Romans, the cause of
this alteration was their sin: and do we not see amongst our selves within
these thirty years, Example of our time
many and strange alterations of Lands and houses, translated from the right
owners thereof to others neither of their name, nor any way belonging to them.
Should not this teach us all to fear God, and make our houses as Sanctuaries
to him, left he be forced (as he extirped the Canaanites for their sins) to
root us out, and sweep us away as with a besom.

VERSE. 14. The secret of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him: and his
covenant to give them understanding.
4. Benefit and promise, revelation of his secret^
THe fourth benefit which the Lord will bestow upon the godly men, he will (if
they fear him) reveal to them his secrets.

First, Gods word is a secret. ^eu. 5.5.
ye see the word of God is called a secret, a mystery, and hid treasure, a
closed book which none is able to loose but the Lamb. For all the natural
wit of man is not able to attain to the understanding of the meanest Article
of faith. All things which we believe are above the compass of reason, or flat
against it.

The Gospel comes by revelation: The Gospel comes by revelation. Mat. 16.17.
Blessed art thou Simon, the Son of Jonah, flesh and blood has not revealed
this to thee, but my Father: where he manifestly testifies, that the
confession of Christ is a hid matter, which must be revealed to us by
himself. The wit of man can search the profundities of nature (albeit it is
not able to attain to the hundredth part thereof, as of Physic, Astronomy,
Geometry, etc.) but it cannot sca^se upon Divinity without inspiration, which
must come from above. It is no marvel therefore that so few believe the word,
for fa^^h is not of all men, it is the gift of God: as i^ is a secret, so are
they called his secret ones to whom he reuealeth it

But men may think,

Augustine, it is a flood on which a Lamb may swim, and an Elephant may
walk. Mat. 13.11.
To the children of God it is plain; to those it is given to understand, but
to others they are parables, Esaias 6.9.
That seeing they should not perceive.

But to whom does he reveal it? No true service without conscience.
To them that fear him, and to these he gives understanding, as in the 15.
and 119, Psalm he testifies. By which I see there is no true service without
conscience, and none can profit in the knowledge of the Scripture but such as
fear God; and the more they fear him, the more they grow in knowledge. True
piety and godliness is the nourisher of knowledge, for the fear of God is the
beginning, growth, and perfection of all wisdom. And therefore Athiests and
profane persons have not learned Christ aright, they are learning, but do
never attain to the power of godliness and his covenant to give them
understanding.

His covenant is specially mentioned, Gods covenant belong^^th to such ^s fear
him. John 6.33.
because the Jews brag of the covenant made to Abraham their Father. But here
he declares to them that they have no title ^o the covenant except they fear
God. The Jews bragged that they were descended of Abraham, but Christ sends
them to their father the devil, because they follow his manners, and are
murderers. Therefore there is no part in the covenant to those who have not
the true fear of God.

VERSE 15. Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord: for who will bring my feet out
of the net.
NOw he does apply the benefits of God (which generally were propounded to the
Church) to himself, and as he began the Psalm, so he ends it with a prayer
for his delivery from his enemies.

In this Verse he persuades himself by faith that God will set him free, for
(as says the Text) his eyes are ever toward the Lord; that is, he depended on
God, as the eye of the handmayd is toward her mistress. This he testifies
when he says, Psalm. 123. Psalm 121.
And I lift up mine eyes to the mountains, my help comes from thee O Lord,
for thou will deliver me who trusts in thee. Note.
Men may look for help at the hands of men, but in vain. But God will not
frustrate the expectation of his own; which should make us not to turn our
eyes from him, seeking help from Egypt. We cannot at one time look up to
heaven, and down to hell or the earth, no more put our confidence in God and
man.

Next, ye see that if we desire to get delivery, we must in all our actions set
him before our eyes, direct all our actions to glorify God, and edify his
Church. Psalm. 16.8.
I have set the Lord always before my face, for he is at my right hand,
therefore I shall not slide. Will God defend an unrighteous man, who asmeth not
at Gods glory, but his own designs? Note.
If thou have him before thine eyes, then will he stand at thy right hand to
maintain thee.

He will bring my feet out of the net: Comparison.
] He compares his estate to a bird ensnared in the fowlers net: for his
enemies were fowlers, their engines were nets, himself was the poor bird
circumuened. The Churches enemies using subtilties to entrap her. Genesis 3.1. Let
Christians have their conversation in heaven. God will break the snare. Acts
16.26.


The Church has many enemies, but none are so crafty as these fowlers: fraud
and craft is a mark of Gods enemies; they imitate their father the devil, who
is a wily Serpent, and more subtle then any beast of the field.

Thirdly, let Christians be birds, that as they have their chief abode in the
air, so we may have our conversation in heaven; as they fill the air with
their sounds, so let us praise God.

Fourthly, Gods children may be ensnared, but God will break their nets and
deliver them, as Paul, Silas, and Peter out of prison; for that which seems
impossible to men, is possible with God. Man is as the bird escaped out of the
snare of the fowler; Psalm. 124. Simil.
for as the bird compassed cannot deliver it self, no more can man escape
their attempts by his own strength, but only by Gods power.

VERSE. 16. Turn thy face unto me: and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate
and poor.
Adversity makes me^ fear Gods absence. Doct. Gods mercy the fountain of all
blessings. Doct. Misery the object of Gods mercy. Luke 10.33. Simil.
HE thinks in adversity that God turns away his face, whose presence to a
creature is as the turning of the Sun unto the earth.

He craves mercy oftentimes in this Psalm, acknowledging that to be the
fountain from which all blessings flow to him: this argument is taken from God
himself.

The next argument from his misery, For I am desolate and poor. This is the
object of Gods mercy, upon which it must work; as the vvounded Jew was an
object of the Samaritans mercy. How would Gods mercy be known, if man had no
misery? How would the Physicians skill be tried, if not by the patients
diseases? How would the liberality of Princes and their justice be notified,
but by the poverty of their subjects, and their distresses.

VERSE 17. The sorrows of mine heart are enlarged: draw me out of my troubles.
God multiplieses sorrows, because we multiply sins.
THe sorrows of mine heart are enlarged:] God has many means to humble the
sons of men, and namely he turns their joy of sin into sorrow; the right
sorrow, whereof the Lord send us. God multiplies sorrows because we multiply
sins. David found a cause of sorrow in every thing he gat from God: for his
brethren envied him, 1 Samuel 17.28. and 18.9. 2 Samuel 6.20. and 15.31. 1 Samuel
23.12. and 26.1. and 29.4.
his father in law Saul persecuted him, his wife mocked him, his familiars and
companions deceived him, his children pursued him, the Ziphims and the Lords of
Keilah betrayed him, the Philistims rejected him. The ioies which God propineth
us with, are as so many roses; but in the bottom of them are enclosed as many
thorns to prick us: Simil. 2 Cor. 12.7
As Paul was pricked with the messenger of Satan, le^t he should have been
exalted through the great revelations. So if we found not some discomfort in
every creature, we should be bewitched with the delight thereof, that we could
not settle our affection on God: And therefore God peppers every pleasure, and
gives us some sour sauce thereto, Exodus 12.8.
as he gave sour herbs to be eaten with the Paschal Lamb.

Draw me out of my troubles: If the pleasures of this world were not painful
we would too much delight in them. Psalm. 34 11 1 Samuel 17.34. Doct. The root of
all our trouble is our own sin. Simil. Pro. 20.17
] Many are the tribulations of the righteous, but the Lord will deliver him out
of them all. God uses to draw them, by which he would testify that it is a
work of Gods power to deliver the innocent; as David delivered his fathers
sheep from the Lion and the Bear, and the vessels out of the hands of a
strong man.

VERSE 18. Look upon mine afflictions, and my travel, and forgive all my
sins.
THere he acknowledges the root of al his troubles to be sin: for which he
craves mercy at God. Ye may see here that sin touches him so near the heart,
that he cannot find ease but in the remission thereof. Sin is sweet in the
mouth as honey, but it is in the womb as gravel. There is no venom in the
affliction but sin, so being quit of sin, he esteems nothing of the
affliction. Sin is the noisome humor; purge the humor, and save the patient.
The goodness and wisdom of God, which makes affliction a bitter water to eat
up the rust of sin. The affliction is not profitable which has not made some
diminution of sin. When Gods anger was quenched, Genesis 8.1.
then the floods were abated, so as thy sin decreases, thy affliction
diminishes daily.

VERSE 19. Behold mine enemies, for they are many, and they hate me with cruel
hatred.
THis ends as the sixth Psalm; The subduing of sin is the triumph over out
enemies. Acts 9.3. 1 Samuel 31.4
for triumphing above sin his spiritual enemies, he triumphs above all his
bodily foes, he preuailes with God, he prevails also with men.

He uses no imprecations against them, but that God would look on them either
mercifully to convert them with Saul, who was called Paul, or to confound them,
as the first Saul who killed himself. His enemies are described from their
multitude and number; next, from their malice and cruelty. Always Gods honor
is so much the more greater that he is one for all, and his love preuents their
cruelty. He complained of their craft, before they had spread nets for him, and
the devil who before was a Serpent and could not prevail, now becomes a
fiery flying Dragon, Genesis 3.1. Apoc. 12.3.
to devour the seed of the woman: so craft disappointed, becomes cruel: he
was first a Serpent, and yet he is more dangerous when he is a serpent,
cheaping, Craft disappointed, becomes cruelty. Ephesians. 6.14.
then when he is roaring as a Lion; when he roares he is heard far off and is
eschewed, but who can shun a Fox and a Serpent: therefore craft is always
cruel. Since then we have to do with malicious enemies and crafty deceitful
men, let us inarme us against them by the breast plate of righteousness, to
strike by their darts, and by patience to suffer their wrongs.

VERSE 20. Keep my soul and deliver me: let me not be confounded, for I trust
in thee.
HE ends as Christ ended his life, The soul is well kept when God keeps it.
Luke 23.46. Mat. 6.19.
In thy hand I commit my spirit. By the soul he means also the life, for it
is well kept when the Lord keeps it: no earthly place so sure, but the thief
may come in, or rust consume, but if thy soul be bound up in the bundle of
life, and treasured with God, no violence or co^sumption can attain thereunto.
And he uses that same argument in the end which he did in the beginning, For I
trust in thee.

VERSE 21. Let mine uprightness and equity preserve me: for mine hope is in
thee.
LEt no man claim the patrocinie of God, God will not patronize an unrighteous
cause 1 Sa^. 26.17.
unless he maintain a righteous cause and quarrel, for what fellowship has
the Lord with the throne of iniquity? This he speaks because of his enemies to
whom he never did injury, and the more ungrateful were they; yea these he
benefited: as Saul, with whom in the field he pleaded his innocence, when Saul
said, Psalm. 143.2.
My son David thou art more righteous then I. But when he came before God he
cried, Enter not in judgment with thy servant; but recountering with men he
braggeth of his innocence: Our eyes are sharp sighted and bright enough to
behold the earth, but when we look to the Sun they will be dim.

For I trust in thee:] Ye see albeit he claims to his innocence, yet he
retireth him to faith and hope in God. Our righteousness is not such as that
we can altogether stand by it: there are some slips and faults in the best of
our actions, Note.
therefore we are forced to retire to God, who can supply them all in his
al-sufficiency.

VERSE 22. Deliver Israel O God out of all his troubles.
THis last verse contains a prayer for the Church, Atrue note of a Christian
to be affected with the state of the Church. Psalm. 51.8. Doct. The Church
subject to infinite troubles.
so that he is not contented to enjoy any private benefit from God, himself,
unless the Church of God be partaker thereof; whose welfare he promises to
procure, and desires others to pray for the peace of Jerusalem: and this is a
mark of a feeling member of Christ, who remembers not his own sorrows
without regard of the tribulations of Gods Church.

Next, ye see that the Church is subject to infinite tribulations, she is a
Lilly among thorns, Exodus 3.2. Mat. 14.24. Genesis 8.1.
there must be a fire always in that bush. is no marvel to see the ship of the
Disciples tossed in the seas, and the Arc of Noah in the deluge, but indeed it
were a marvel to see the Church not persecuted. God will in the end deliver his
Church.


Finally he prays for delivery to her, letting us see two things: First, that
the Lord will compass his Church with joyful deliverances, and not let the
rod of the wicked lie always on the back of the righteous, but as they have
many crosses, The Churches deliverance is Gods prerogative.
so they get many comforts from God. Next, God commonly takes that honor to
himself to deliver his Church, when Princes persecute the same to their own
ruin and shame. Let us pray unto our God to deliver his Church in Europe this
day, which is fearfully assaulted by wicked men, and to give his Saints
patience and perseverance in the truth to the end. Amen.

FINIS.
A GODLY AND FRVITFVLL EXPOSITION ON THE THIRTY TWO PSALM, THE THIRD OF THE
PENETENTIALS.
THis is the third Psalm of Repentance, the Title thereof is David's
Instruction, 12. Psalms are Psalms of instruction.
showing both the substance and matter of the same (that is) Instruction, as
also the writer thereof, David. There are many other Psalms which bear this
title, especially the 42.44.45.52.53.54.55.74.78.89.142. For if ye would
divide the 150. Psalms unto classes, ye shall find some instruction as these
twelve, others for consolation, others of deprecations, The Scriptures are
profitable for all uses. 2 Timothy 3.16. Simil.
others of imprecations, for the Scriptures of God are profitable for all uses,
to rebuke, to comfort, to instruct, etc. Amongst all, this book of the Psalms
especially is as an Apothecaries shop, wherein ye shall find all sorts of
Drugs, Cordial to comfort our heart, or Corrasiue to eat up the cancer of our
nature, yea in what estate was ever man or can he be, but he shall find
comfort and good in this book of Psalms. For the Psalms are an Epitome of
the old Testament,

David by his doctrine teaches these to repent whom by his example he had
taught to sin. A general lesson for all persons.
This is a Didascalique Psalm wherein David teaches sinners to repent, by this
doctrine, Who teached them to sin by his example. This science is universal,
and pertains to all men, and which necessarily we must all learn; Princes,
Priests and people, men and women, children, tradsemen, and whatsoever they be,
m^st be put to this School. without which lesson all others are unprofitable.

A mark of a true penitent sin^er.
But to the point. This is a mark of a true pe^itent when he has been a
stumbling block to others, he may be as careful to raise them up by his
repentance, as he was hurtful to them by his sin, and I never think that
man truly penitent, who is ashamed to teach sinners repentance by his own
particular proof. The Samaritan woman when she was converted, Ioh: 4.29.
left her bucket at the Well, entered the City and said come forth, yonder is a
man who has told me all that I have done, Luk: 22.32.
and our Savior says to S. Peter, when thou art converted strengthen thy
brethren. 1 Timothy: 1.14.
S. Paul also after his conversion, is not ashamed to call himself chiefest of
all sinners, and to teach others to repent their sins, happy and thrice
happy is the man who can build as much as he has cast down.

Let Princes be ashamed to sin but not to repent.
Next he is a King, and yet not a shamed to be an example of repentance, by
which all kings and noblemen should learn to be ashamed of their sin, but
never be ashamed to repent. Theodosius the Emperor after the slaughter that
his Soldiers made at Thessalonica came to S. Ambrose, The example of
Theodosius the Emperor*
and humbly fell down on his face amongst the penitents, saying that part of
the Psalm, Agglutinata est terrae anima mea, Ps: 44.25.
my soul is glewed unto the earth.

David an experimented teacher.
Thirdly, David is an experimented doctor (as I have said in the former two
Psalms) who having felt himself, teaches others; The Pilot who has Sailed
the Sea can best teach others the art of Nau^gation,

Learn to get remission of sin.
The doctrine most necessary for a Christian to learn, is, the remission of
sins. For although ye had learned all other sciences, what could they avail
you without this: For as one of the worthiest fathers says, all sciences
without this are unprofitable. What if thou thou were never so prudent in the
laws, if thine own conscience accuse thee? and expert in Physic, if thine
own soul be sickly, and know the power of the stars, if thy sin throw thee
down to the lowest hels, yea albeit ye learned all the heads of Theology,
and taught them unto others, yet they are nothing worth to thy self, if thou
have not learned to repent thy sins, and to have persuasion of mercy for
them. Iam. 2.19. Mar. 5.12.
The Devils believe and they tremble, the legion of Devils which came from the
possessed, could pray to Christ that he might license them to enter into the
heard of Swine, they they could confess and profess that Christ was the Son
of God, 2 Cor: 7.14
the Devil can change himself into an Angel of light. Balaam can Prophecy,
and many shall say, Numb. 23.
we have done miracles in thy name. Judas can preach, and many can speak
eloquently thinking to add to Paul's bands, but one thing can they never do,
even assure themselves that their sins are forgiven them. This lesson none
can learn but those who are (...), taught by God. And this is the lesson that
David teaches al Christians who come to his School, which if they learn, it
is sufficient, this is that one thing which is needful. I wish to God from
mine heart, Note.
that Pastors of Gods word would lean ostentation words of humane eloquen^e,
and the show of learning, and labor more to work most upon the hearts of the
people, a remorse for sin, and an assurance of mercy, Et vt plactum populo,
non sibi plausum mo^eant, that they may move a weeping among the people, more
then an applause to themselves.

VERSE I. Blessed is he, whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sins is
covered.
BEfore I come to the particular parts of this excellent Psalm, I must observe
wherein David does place happiness and felicity. He more then twenty times
in the Psalms (d scribing who are happy) accounts thesee only happy who
are godly. Sometimes in the cause, Blessed is the people whose God is the Lord;
Psalm: 33.12. Psalm: 41.1. Psalm: 128.1. Psalm: 32.1. Blessedness sometimes
imputed to the causes, sometimes to the effect sometimes to the mean.
sometimes in the effect. Blessed is the man who judges wisely of the poor,
sometimes in the means, as blessed are those that fear God, whose sins are
forgiven, for as gold is always gold whither it be in the mine, where it grew,
or put forth to exchange, or in the kings treasury, so godliness must be
esteemed all one, whither ye judge it by the cause from which it had its
beginning, or from the effects thereof, or from the means; whereby it is
entertained, albeit every one of those have their own place, the one as the
fountain the other as the spring flowing therefro.

There is no man, although never so unhappy, who does not aspire and desire to
be happy, Wherein many put happiness. 2 Samuel 13.4.29.
but they perceive not wherein happiness consists, some put it in the
pleasure of their flesh with Ammon, but his sudden repentance in thrusting away
his sister, and his unfortunate end, show that there is no happiness in those
filthy pleasures: some place happiness in riches with Crassus, but finding
the incertaintie thereof they will be forced to cry, Plutarchus
O Solon, Solon: other place happiness on honors as Absalom and Haman who
were both exalted on trees. 2 Samuel 18.9 Ester. 7.10.
But David albeit having riches, honors, and pleasures in his kingdom)
accompteth himself only happy in this that his sins were pardoned. Those
earthly things are a weak foundation whereupon to build, Note.
should we expect happiness of an unhappy world.

The vanity of the Philosophers concerning happiness is to be put away,
Chrysostom: in 1. Cor: hom: 4.
of whom Chrysostom writes, they have wouen Spiders webes by which they might
ma^re the minds of foolish men. He who is a rebel to the king, can enjoy no
benefits of his kingdom, they be to us if we have not the favor of God, and
assurance of the remission of our sins.

Blessed is he: He gives out this beatitude in the singular number. The man,
as Habackuk also has, Hab: 2.4.
iustus ex fide sua viuet: the just man shall live by his faith. The Apostle
Saint Paul says, 2 Cor: 4.13
I have believed, therefore I spoke, that we may not infold our selves under
the lap of generality, and say with Athists and Papists, Every man must be
assured of his Salvation.
we will be saved as other men are, for we believe as the Church believes,
but every man must have a faith of his own, by which he must be saved, for
albeit there be but one common Medicine applied to all Christians who are
penitent, yet every one of them must have that applied to himself, even that
Salve to cure his soar. For medicaments must be personal, we must have our
particular warrant in our pocket for our debts, and not dream that we are
free of debt, when others are freed thereof. There are three gradations or
climaxes answerable to the three degrees of nature, A threefold Gradation 1
Nature. 2. grace. 3. glory.
grace, and glory. The natural estate of man is noted by sin, impiety and
iniquity; grace, by lightened of it, covered, not imputed; glory, blessed,
blessed. Nature begins the work, and it is full of vanity, and it has the
root of sin, which grows in all our hearts, that sinning sin and
concupiscence, that Original corruption, without which never man was borne,
except Christ Jesus. Of this man esteems little, albeit he have it in his
house, and the thief lying in his bosom. This root of sin springs up in
two branches, impiety against God, and iniquity against man, this monster
with these two twins are ever found together, they grow together, and live
together, a sinner vnrepenting is impious and irreligious toward God, and
profane, and inequitable toward men. When sin reigns as a tyrant, and has
taken any captive to do him service, is it any marvel, that he rage against
God by blasphemies, and against man by injuries. The man possessed with Devils
who was amongst the graves threw stones at the passengers, Math: 8.28.
as by the contrary, he who is holy and Sanctified is also godly and just, for
these three cohere, Piety, Justice, Sanctity.

Sin is never alone (as neither comes the judgment of God alone) one
draws another, Math: 22.13.
they are linked together as a chain of iron, by which man is bound and
carried to utter darkness, if the Angel who came to Peter in prison does not
lose them. Act: 12.7. Psalm: 1.1.
This Chapter is depainted in the first Psalm, at the first verse, for he
calls them sinners, wicked, The degrees of sin.
and scorners, Peccatum peccatum trahit; one sin draws on another, for
sin grows to wickedness, and wickedness to scorning of all religion,
which is the extremity and highest degree of all evil.

The deformity of beasts we allow in our selves.
This further is to be noted, that what deformity we see and dislike in all the
beasts they are found in one man. We detest the the falsehood of the Fox and
the subtlety of the Serpent, and yet man is falser then both, we cannot abide
to look upon a Dog when he licketh up his vomit, neither on a Sow while
she is wallowing in the puddle, and our only delight is to swallow up sin,
and feed on our own filthiness, and when we have been cleansed from it by
repentance, we return to it within a little time, we abhor the greediness
of the Wolf, (albeit sometimes he can be satisfied) and yet our covetous
heart is insatiable. The cruelty of the Lion is odious unto us, albeit it
spares the own kind, but man as Athaliah rages against his own blood, 2 Chronicles: 22.10.
every beast has one deformity which is no sin in it, but a spectacle
whereby man may hate that in himself which he abhors in a beast, but man
has all deformities, Note.
he is subtle then a Serpent, more crafty, One may have all beasts properties.
then a Fox, more cruel then a Lion, more filthy then a Sow, more greedy
then a Wolf, etc. Yea much differing from all these, for all may be tamed, I
am. 3.8.
but the tongue of man cannot be tamed, and if one member of man be worse then
all beasts, Note:
what think ye of the whole powers of man's nature. Look then what evil
comes of sin, it seems to be profitable and pleasant for the present, as
honey in the mouth, Pro: 20.17.
but in the belly it turns in gravel and wormwood. Judas thought his wages
sweet in receiving them, Math: 27.3.
but after cast that money back in great sorrow Ammon was sick for love of
his sister, but when he had fulfilled his lust, 2 Samuel 13.15.
he hated her more, then before he had loved her. Behold what Leprosies,
Phrensies, Fevers, Botches have ever fallen upon man's body, as many sins, as
fountains of them, are pressing down his soul, which we should lament, if
we were sensible of the smallest of them.

Whose wickedness is forgiven:] This threefold repetition of the remission of
Sins, argues the necessity of the persuasion of this doctrine: for it is an
article of our Creed which we must believe, and for the which we are commanded
to pray daily, he has promised it, who is faithful; he has sworn, and
given the earnest of his Spirit to seal it. We must not doubt with these
doubting Doctors, We may be assured of the remission of sin. Eccles: 9.1. Ob.
whether we shall obtain mercy or not, but we may assure our selves of the
remission of our sins. They allege that of Ecclesiastes, No man knows
either love or hatred of all that is before him. I Answer that place is to be
under understood thus,

This persuasion indeed wants not the own doubtings we doubt, but we
dispare not, Whence doubts arise in Gods children.
these doubtings spring from the sense of our unworthiness, not of Gods
goodness. But if a man be not assured of the remission of his sins, his
conscience must be left in a most miserable agony and torment. What shall
become of him at the latter day, for the fear of eternal death, and the
horror of Gods judgments will ever be before him. It is a very true sentence,
there can be no pleasure in the hoping for any good thing, Note.
if the fear of the contrary be joined to it, and if this be the greatest
infelicitie of the wicked to be tormented in conscience, because they see the
anger of an irreconciable God, then that must be the greatest felicity of Gods
children, when they find that God is at one with them, which felicity,
comes not without this assurance of his mercy.

But there is as great difference, between this (...), full persuasion, and a
presumption, as there is between two rebels, whereof one, having repented,
does find means of reconciliation with the king,

Gods grace amplified by three similitudes.
The grace of God is amplified by three notable similitudes, the first from a
burden, of the which the sinner is lightened and made free. Sin albeit before
it be committed it seem light as a fether, yet it is the heauiest burden that
ever man did bear, Sin is the heauiest burden. Hereditarie.
in these three respects. First, Because it is Hereditarie and man is borne
with it, whereof except he be cased by baptism, and the mercies of God in
Christ it shall press him down to hell, Heb: 12.1.
for it hangs on fast and it presses down. Universal.
the Israelits were burdened with the task laid upon their flesh, Exodus
1.14. Gen: 39.19.
and Joseph with irons, their soul being free thereof, albeit both burdened
with sin. Vnf^lt.
and the heavy burden the greatest sense, but a sinner is contrary, he has
no sense, yea the greater be his sin, the more senseless is he. Exodus:
2.23.24.3. Means to be free of sin. Math: 7.28.
The seeling of thy sin is the preparation to thy ease and relief. The
Israelites groaned under Pharaoh, and the Lord sent Moses, next rinne to him
who is only able to pacify God and thy conscience, even Jesus Christ, who
cries, Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden with sin, and I will
ease you. Thirdly, Endeavor to be quit of it, Christonly can take away the
burden of sin.
and be loath to take in on again.

There is nothing able to disburden thee of thy sin, but Christ. F^ie to the
fond and new found out remedies, of Merit, Pardons, Pilgrimages, and see what
they can avail thee,

Musculus in Psalm.
Musculus, upon the Psalms makes mention of a Servant in Germany who stole
some of his Masters goods, and after, being become wealthy, was greatly
tormented in conscience for the same. Wherefore desirous of some ease, at the
advice of a Popish Priest, he gave some part to the Church, some to the poor,
but yet his torment no whit eased, he restored (at the counsel of the true
Servant of God) to his master his own, and craved mercy at Christ, and so
received ease, wherefore there is nothing that can ease a troubled mind but
Christ Jesus, who has taken our burden upon himself.

There are two sorts of persons to whom this Doctrine does appertain: the one,
who are touched with no sense of sin, those feel not the burden, yea being
drowned in the Sea they feel no waters, and burnt up, Some sinners have no
sense, others too great sense. Jonah. 1.6.
sents no fire; O dead soul, that when Gods judgments are as so many ways,
pursuing thee with Jonas, thou art a sleep. The other, over much pressed down
and moved with their sins, almost disparing, who are the rarest sort to whom
this comfortable sentence does appertain. Pro: 25.2.
It is Gods honor to pass by sins and to cover them. The triplication of
this remission argues the certainty thereof.


And whose sin is covered.] He is not content once to speak of the
rem^ission of sin, but thrice, using three similitudes to express the same,
to declare that it is a matter of great moment, as also that it is perfect and
absolute. He says the wickedness is pardoned, the sin covered, the
iniquity not imputed, a pretty gradation, so that the weight of our sin
shuts not the way to Gods mercy.

He says not, that he is happy who covers his sins, for he who covers
his sin shall not prosper, but he who confesses his sin shall be saved.
Pro: 28.13.
For the hiding of our sins from God closes the door to repentance, He is
happy whose sin God covers.
and so as long we use subter-fuges and colors our sins, so long can we
never heartily repent them, and God will not pardon an impenitent sinner. He
is a fool who would cover his wounds from the Physician, Physician covers it
by healing it, it is best covered.

This covering has relation to some nakedness, and filthiness which should
be covered, even sin, which defiles us, and makes us naked, Sin makes
us naked. Exodus 32.25
why, says Moses to Aaron, have thou made the people naked. Sin makes us
black as a Moore, defiles and makes us like menstrous garments, and thus
being so disgraceful we have need to be covered, our own garments of our
merits are too short and cannot cover us, we have need therefore to borrow at
Christ Jesus his merits, and the mantle of his righteousness, that he may be
unto us as a garment, Adam, Gen: 3.7.21. The properties of a garment.
when they cast away those figge-tree-leafes which they sewed to themselves:
garments are ordained to cover our nakedness, defend us from the injury of
the weather, and to decore us. So the mediation of our Savior serves to cover
our nakedness, that the wrath of God sease not upon us, (he is that white
raiment, Revel. 3.18
wherewith we should be clothed, that our filthy nakedness do not appear)
to defend us against Satan, Isa: 63.1. Math. 22.7. Rom: 13.14
(he is mighty to save etc.) and to be an ornament to decore us, for he is
that wedding garment. Put ye on (therefore) the Lord Jesus Christ.

Rom: 4.17. Ans:
he calls those things that are not, as though they were, and things that
are, as though they were not, because he forgiueth them, as though they never
had been committed, and therefore he says, Isa. 44.22. Mic. 7.19.
I have put away thy transgressions as a cloud, and thy sins as a mist. He
will subdue our iniquities, and cast all our sins into the bottom of the
Sea; Psalm. 103.7.12.
as high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them
that fear him; as far as the East is from the West: so far has he removed
our sins from us. Isa. 1.18.
Though our sins were as crimson, they shall be made wh^te as snow, though
they were red as Scarlet, they shall be as wool. I, even I, am he that
putt^th away thine iniquities for mine own sake, and will not remember thy
sins if the wicked will turn etc. Ibid. 44.25.
All his transgressions that he has committed they shall not be mentioned unto
him but in his righteousness that he has done, Ezech. 18.21.22.
he shall live. So it is a like to be covered of God* as not to have sinned at
all.

When God forgiueth sin he covers it.
The allusion of the words Nassui and Cassui is proper, for the sins that are
pardoned are also covered. So most miserable is the state of those who are nor
reconciled unto God, for his majesty has his revenging eye looking on them,
and their actions to destroy them. The Lord sets their iniquities before
him, Psalm. 90.8
and their secret sins in the light of his countenance, whereas he casts
the sins of his elect, behind his back.

What shall become of those, who think their sins to be hid, if they come
not to the open sight of the world, as though the sight of man were more to be
feared then the sight of God? Note.
why should we not be more afraid of Gods sight, who may avenge himself on
us, then of men's, who though they behold us, may either pity us, or offend at
us.

There are many, who to cover their sins, Nazianzenus.
run to human a satisfactions. They purge clay with clay, they add
superstition to superstition, and in so doing in my judgment they carry
timber on their backs, that the more timber they have, they may kindle the the
greater fire, Man's satisfaction cancouer sin
for what are our merits but a new fuel to kindle Gods judgment, and the
more trees ye bring, ye kindle up the greater flame. Then we are greatly
bound to the Lord, who when he might have written our faults upon our brows,
he has covered and hid them, therefore let us not renew and raise them up
again, since the Lord has buried them in the bottom of the Sea of his
oblivion.

VERSE 2. Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in
whose spirit there is no guile.
Sin is a debt.
THis third similitud is taken from debt, that albeit we are obliged and bound
to God, either to satisfaction or obedience, yet the Lord takes payment from
our surty and so freeth us. For God will not take twice payment for one debt,
so that we may say truly, if we believe in Christ, we are not obliged nor
bound to God for payment for he has our obligation, and nailed it to the
Cross. This the Apostle testifies writing to the Corinthians, 2 Cor: 5.18 19.
and all things are of God, which has reconciled us unto himself, by Jesus
Christ, and has given unto us the ministry of reconciliation, for God was in
Christ, and reconciled the world to himself, not imputing their sins to
them. See how the Prophet by reiteration of this remission of sin, extennuats
and annihilats himself, and brings him so low, that by impiety, sin, and
iniquity, whereof he grants he found himself culpable, and by lightening
him of that burden, covering of his sin, not imputation of his debt, he
assured himself to be relieved.

But it may be asked, Ob:
how far we should be mindful of our sins, and whether they are so covered
by God that we should bury them by perpetual silence. To dissolve this
question, Note.
when we concondemne our selves, our sins are then covered best, when they
are most discovered to God. And therefore we ought to call our sins to
mind, Why we should remember our sins.
not that we should distrust of the remission thereof, but that the remembrance
thereof may make us more thankful to God, and more prudent that we sin not
again, yea it makes us ready to have compassion on others who offended

But another question arises, Ob:
whether we should desire that our sins should be hid from men's eyes, or
opened? I answer, Why should thou dishonor God so far, Pro: 25.2.
as to reveal that which God has concealed, Josh. 7.20.
But if it be public, why should it not be publickely confessed, as was
Achans.

Moreover it may be demanded, how can it stand with the most righteous God,
Ob.
who is the judge of the world, that he should suffer an unrighteous man to go
free without punishment, for if he diminish any part of his righteousness, he
must deny himself and his own nature.

True felicity stands in justification and Sanctfication.
[And in whose spirit there is no guile.] Ye heard the first part of the
felicity of man, which stands in his justification, that is the remission of
his sins, the second part stands in his Sanctification, and purification of
his heart, by the Spirit of God from Hypocrisy, which are the fruits
answerable to the former. Note:
For the Lord never bestowed his Sons blood to wash away any sin, but he
bestowed his Sons spirit to Sanctify that man, the chief virtue that he
craves in a Christian is sincerity, the chief vice he hates, Hypocrisy.
God esteems not of outward p^rts, but being a Spi^i^ he looks to Spirits My
Son (says he) give me thine heart* and a^ ^ee is a spirit, Pro: 23.26.
so he will be worshipp^d ^n spi^^^.

Basilius as he commends that sentence of Plato, Basil ad popul. hom: 24.
that is gre^test extremity of iniquity, when an unrighteous man would s^eme
to be righteous, so he condemns the opinion of Euripides, I had ^ather some
to be good, then be so. So that of all the things in the world the Spirit of
God does most abhor and detest, dissimlation most odious to God. Hypocrisy
an enemy to faith.
a dissimulation in his service, neither is there any vice so opposite to true
faith as Hypocrisy for faith lodges in the heart, Hypocrisy, in the
countenance: faith studies to please God, Hypocrisy seeks to please men,
says is lively and constant, Hypocrisy as a fa^ling leaf fades
incontinently: So that there is no society betwixt faith and Hypocrisy, a
fained thing cannot be firm and solid. Nazian. De funere patris. Math: 23.27.
Our Savior Christ accounts them to be as painted tombs who have a goodly
show before men, but within are full of dead men's bones, they have a show of
life although they be dead.

The sin of Witchcraft and Idolatry, are two great sins, but Hypocrisy is
more dangerous then both, we have heard of many thousand Papists and Idolaters
who have been reclaimed and turned to God, confess it what great errors they
had been, also many Witches at their death have renounced their Master the
Devil. But seldom have I read that Hypocrites have repented, when our Savior
(who never brake a bruised reed) thundered woes, Math: 23.13.14.15.
He cried woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, and when he
denounced judgment, he said, whose portion is with Hypocrites.

To be short let no man think that remission of sins can be separate from
holiness and sanctification, Remission of sins joined with holiness.
for they are borne together as two twins, and live together, yea the one
cannot live without the other, how can thou think from thine heart, that
thine sins are pardoned, unless heartily thou hate sin for which thou have
repented, then we may say that those get pardon for their sin, who feel
their sins, and feeling, do hate and fly from them, and flying from them
with all the force of their heart, are carried to a contrary virtue, being made
free from sin, we are the servants of righteousness. Rom: 6.18. Ibid. 8.1.
There is no condemnation says the Apostle to them that are in Christ Jesus,
who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. God loves sincerily in a
Christian. Ioh: 1.47.
But we have deeply to consider that in all our religion, the Lord loves
nothing so much as sincerity, Behold a true Israelit in whom there is no
guile. He does not look to the measure of thy repentance, faith, or love, but
to the uprightness thereof. Love thou me, love thou me, Ioh: 21.15. Psalm:
51.6.
love thou me, says our Savior to Peter.

He craves the truth in the inward parts.

The Papists take from this text some occasion of stumbling, for they would
make a part of righteousness to be Christ's, another to be ours, that which
comes from Christ is ours by imputation, ours again to be inherent, because
he says in whose heart there is no guile? But they confound justification with
the effects thereof, Answer to the Papists.
opposing the spring to the fountain, not driving them from it. So is the
righteousness of Christ the fountain of all our happiness, Et causa regni,
and the cause of the kingdom, and if there be any dropps of righteousness in
us, they spring from that fountain, Et sunt viaregnandi, and they are the way
by which we must attain to that kingdom, and say with the Apostle, That
Christ is made our righteousness. Albeit we be of our selves unrighteous, 1
Cor. 1.30
yet by him we are made righteous, albeit we are not able to pay the debt our
selves, yet seeing Christ has paid it for us we are freed. For as by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, Rom: 5.19.
so by the obedience of one, many shall be made righteous. By which we are
evidently taught that by Christ's righteousness, we are righteous before God. I
will not glory because I am righteous, but because I am redeemed: Ambros. de
Iar^et vita beata lib 1. cap. 6.
not by reason I am void of sin, but because my sins are pardoned, not
because I have done good, or received good from others, but because Christ my
advocate is with the father interceding for me, for his blood was powered forth
for me. Indeed the Saints of God, yea the best of us all cannot purge our
selves of Hypocrisy, neither do we sincerely serve our God as we ought to
do, but one thing we know, that we have a displeasure within our selves for
it, and does it not willingly, which spiritual sight God pardons in his Saints.

The marks by which ye shall know whether ye be sincere in Gods service or
no, 3 Marks to try our sincerity.
are these.

Saul knowing himself in disgrace with God, 1 These: 2.4. 1 Samuel: 15.30.
desired Samuel to honor him before the people.

S. Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15.
The greatest of all sinners.

religion for the love of the same, and for no other respect, and loves good
men, for no other cause but for their godliness, where as Hyprocrites may do
both outwardly, for some worldly respect either of a benefit or credit, which
they may purchase by these means.

I pray God therefore that all of us may remove from our hearts this vale of
Hypocrisy and dissimulation in Gods service, that we may study to approve our
selves to God in the sight of Christ, in all integrity and singleness of
mind, to the end that all our service may be acceptable to him.

VERSE 3. When I held my tongue, my bones consumed, or when I roared all the
day.
The second part of the Psalm.
Ye have heard the Proposition of the Psalm, concerning the true happiness of
man consisting in the remission of his sins, now follows the confirmation
thereof by his own example, which is the second part of the Psalm, wherein he
sets down himself in two estates: one before confession, most miserable,
and as it were upon the rack of Gods justice, inwardly and outwardly
tormented, the other after conversion and confession, that the Lord took away
not only his sin, but also the punishment thereof, this is the division and
some of these three verses following: first David propoundes himself to be an
example to us, that we may learn to put difference betwixt an obstinate
sinner, and a peintent sinner, for our hardness of heart breeds unto us
infinite discontentments and miseries, which unfeigned repentance does remove,
and whereof by it we are eased. He puts himself to be an example, For when
I concealed my sins (says he) I was tormented with innumerable dolours: but
when I revealed it, then I got ease.

Particular benefits. should redound to the good of the whole Church.
Nazianzen) to those who are affected with the same disease, as the Poet says
Handignara mali, miseris suaurrere disce.

But first we must consider who he is that fesseth himself to do cure to our
disease, it is David a King and Prophet, and yet he becomes a Physician to
apply fomentations to our sickness And that which is more to be admired, that
he may make us more ready to receive remedy, he presents the cicatrices and
marks of his wounds.

Satan who teaches men to sin furnishes him with cloakes to cover it.
[And when I held my tongue.] The silence of David letreth us see the craft of
Satan, who does not sooner allure us to sin, as he presents to us excuses
by which we may cover our sin, as figgetree-leafe to hide our nakedness;
sometime he bids us deny, sometime extenuate, sometime defend our sin, and
thus the cover is worse then the sin. He taught David three engines to cover
his adultery, Three ways where by David thought to cover his sin. 2 Samuel: 7
8.13.15.
first he sent for Vriah, thinking that he would have lien with his wife: then
he caused him for the same end to be make drunken, and thirdly to be put in
the front of the battle to be slain, but the more he studied to obscure and
hid that sin, the more the Lord did to reveal it. See what a thing it is for a
man to obscure himself to God, as though he saw him not, but the more he
studieth to obscure it, the more the Lord will manifest it.

[My bones consumed:] God sporteth not at the sins of his elect, God winketh
not at the sins of his children.
but outwardly does deal with them more hardly and chastise them more
rigorously, then he does the reprobate. His pains were partly external,
partly internal, his external pains, I call those that were caslen on his
body, this internal upon his conscience. And in the body there are torments
and vexations, seasing sometimes on the flesh, which is less painful,
sometimes on the bones, which are more grievous, yea almost intolerable as
experience, teaches and this is Gods just recompense, when we bestow our
strength on sin, God abateth it, and so weakeneth us, Judge. 16.
Samson spent his strength on Daliah, and ye see to what weakness he was
brought. Let us therefore learn that God has given us bones, and the strength
thereof for another use, that is to serve him, and to waste and be prodigal of
them in the Devils service.

[Or when I roared:] By this he would signify, that this prayers so long as
they were not mixed with faith and repentance, were no better then roaring,
that is then the crying of any brutish and vnteasonable creature, for this is a
Metaphor, taken from Lions caught in a snare, as appears in the third of
Amos, where there is a seen difference between the faithfulls prayers, A
difference of prayers proceeding from faith, and no faith
and the faithless, the sacrifice of the one is kindled from heaven, and when
he powers forth his spirit he eases his heart. But with the Hypocrite in
the day of visitation it fares, as with a beast that is sticked or haled with
ropes, which with roarings and struggling strains it self, and with brutish
raging doubleth the pain. There is no doubt, but when affliction lights upon
men who are tainted with hypocrisy, the air is beaten with many such
roarings, and men flutter like birds in the net when God has caught them.
Apoc. 8.3.
yea the Angel does ascend up in the smooke of this Sacrifice, whereas men who
cannot confess their sin: Note.
rage and roar desperately. Yet let us not think, but that the children of God
are oftentimes brought so low, Math. 26.
that they are not able to utter perfect prayers with their lips, but
abruptly utter half words to God, as Christ himself did in the Garden, and
upon the Cross. Isa. 38.14.
And Hezekiah chattered like a Swallow, and mourned like a Dove, for it is well
said, Graves curoe tacent, leaves loquutur. Weight^^ cares are silent, and
little speak. Gods children do find a combat in all their prayers, Job. 7.19.
albeit in the mean time they have a sweere sense of Gods grace, and God
puts his own arm between them and the grave, that they should not bruise
themselves with any fall.

Sin makes men both in their actions and passions like beasts, Sin makes
men like beasts.
and therefore if we desire not to roar with them, let us not follow beastly
pleasures.

Sin touch^th him at the heart.
Moreoure he lets us see how nearly, yea at the very heart he was touched
for sin, many seem to be dolor^us and lament for their sin, but oftentimes
it comes to pass that their tongue only lament and their tears (as we have
in a Proverb) soon dries up.

[All the day.] He shows that his sorrow was continual, not as the dew of
the morning, all the day; So his speech ascends, the last word giving power
to the former, A Gradation to be noted.
for it is no light sorrow which pierces to the marrow and to the bones, next
it must be grievous which draws out such roaring and vnaccustomable cries and
horrible, like the roaring of a Lion, but most of all the sorrow which cannot
be relaxed through intermission of time.

Difference betwixt the godly and wickeds grief.
There is great difference between the dolor of the godly and of the wicked,
for the passions of the godly proceed from a good ground, that is from the
sense of Gods anger; the other only from the sense of their pain. Then the
godly albeit with Job and David they will sometime ouershoote themselves, yet
they will take up themselves again, lest they ouerpasse their bounds.

VERSE 4. (For thine hand is heavy upon me, day and night, and my moisture is
turned into the drought of summer. Selah.
continued so long. Now he declares the cause of all, even the heavy hand of
God upon him,

[For thine hand is heavy upon me.] The hand of God is either a comfortable
hand in feeding his Church. Thou openest thy hands and they are filled with
good things, or defending her, Psalm: 104. Psa: 136.28
or chastising her. As the hand of a father both feeds and chastises his
child, the one in him being as necessary as the other,

Observe first that all afflictions are Gods hand, All afflictions are Gods
hand. Amos 3.6. 1 These: 3.3.
Shall there be evil in the city and the Lord has not done it; his hand
ordaines them: Hence Saint Paul says. That no man should be moved with these
afflictions, for ye your selves know that we are appointed thereunto.
Secondly, His hand who executes them caused Job to say, The Lord has given,
the Lord has taken, Job. 1.21.
and this made David to say, 1 Samuel 16.11.
Suffer Shimei to curse for the Lord has bidden him. Thirdly, His hand orders
and disposes upon them, and turns them to such ends as are fittest.

Next, We should look to God when we are smi^ten.
See how David lifts up his eyes to God in the midds of his troubles, and
acknowledges the hand of God smiting him, wherein many men fail, who albeit
they acknowledge all things that befall them to come by Gods providence: yet
when they are touched with some trouble, they look not to God who chastises
them, but to the Secondarie means and instruments that God uses for that
effect. Isai. 1.5.
Why should ye be smitten any more; for ye fall away more and more, thou have
smitten them (says ^er^mie) and they have not lamented. Ier: 5 3.
And Isai. The people have not turned to him who smot them. Isa. 9.13.
Even as a man, being wounded, sometime would accuse his own ignorance and
sloth, who would not eschew the stroke, sometime would bite the instrument,
Let us return unto the Lord who has wounded us and must heal us again. Hos.
6.1. Nazianz.
Nazianzenus says, a te percussus ad te respicio, and so does the Prophet,
saying. I am smiten by thee, to thee I look, who have pierced me. Exodus 8.18.
Let us not be like the Egyptians that acknowledge the finger of God, but they
repented not therefore. See that we despise not the judgments of God by a
beastly stupiditie and senselessness, or the sharpness of trouble extort words
of impatiencie. It is enough that it is the hand of God who smites, to whom we
look, and from whom we beg mercy.

A sure ground of patience.
Here is a notable ground of patience in affliction, that it is Gods hand under
which we should humble our selves, that is, with meekness bow under it, Ioh.
18.11.
for it is the hand of our father. Shall I not drink of the cup that my father
has given me to ^rinke, Note.
If it be a little bitter at the top, the bottom will have a pleasant farewell.

Moreover the hand that smites the Church, The troubles of the Godly turn to
their good. Isa. 59.1. Cant. 2.6. Psalm. 39 9. Isa: 38.15. 1 Samuel 3.18 2 Samuel 15.
is no further stretched then to her benefit, the Lords hand is not shortened,
that it cannot save. The same hand is under her head. This made the Saints
patient. I was dumb and have not opened my mouth, because thou did it. It
made Hezekias to say, what should I say, for he has said it to me and has
done it. And Eli, it is the Lord, let him do as seems to him good. And
David, if he say I have no delight in thee, Lo here am I, let him do to me as
seems good in his eyes.

Then if afflictions be the hand of God, 2 Chronicles. 16.12.
as they are indeed; what need we run to Physicians with Asa, or with
Achaziah, Pharaoh, Nebuchadnez^^, Saul, etc. to Beelzebub, Astrologians,
Witches, Devils etc. to seek our delivery, since we have the hand which made
us, all-sufficient to cure us. Note.
Let us go gripe and kiss that hand, which formed us, reformed us fed us,
defended us, drew us from Idolatry and hell it self.

[Day and night.] The Circumstances of the time and the continuance of the
same, should remember us that we ceased not night and day to offend him, and
why should not we be patient both day, and in the night, to sustain the marks
of his displeasure, and ^ust retributions of our sins; therefore we should
not, at least have no cause to be impatient when our trouble lasts longer, in
regard we have spent longer time in sin, without thinking long: much time
spent in sin, requires a great time of troubles.
Yea justly he might have requited us with everlasting plagues in hell, whom he
suffers not but a little with momentaneal chastisements to be afflicted. So
David gives us a singular example of fortitude and patience, who could endure
those of long time, when we will scarce abide eight days trial with out
grudging. Job suffered his pains night and day, for he says, Job 7.13.
Christians endure ^ong trouble.
When I say my bed shall comfort me, then thou affraiest me with visions, etc.
This threatening was given forth When it is evening we will say, would to God
it were morning, and in the morning would God it were evening, Deuteronomy. 28. Luk:
8.43
A daughter of Israel was bowed by the Devil 18. years. The woman with the
bloody issue 12. Years. Aeneas was sick of the Palsy 8. years, Act: 9.23.
Ioh: 55.
The time of the Churches delivery known to God. Exodus 12.40 Leu. 26.19.
the man cured at the Poole of Bethesda. 38. years. So we must not impose
hours and dyets to God, for he knows the appointed time of our delivery,
and he will save us when he pleases. The Israelites were in Egypt 400.
years, and in Babylon 70. years. The ten general persecutions last. 300.
years. even till Constantines days. For if we walk stubbornely against him,
he will bring seven times more Plagues upon us, according to our sins. And
again God by the continuance of his hand will hold us in continual exercise
of grace, Continuance of troubles exercises our grace.
as of humility, faith, patience, prayer, and repentance; for as one having a
precious Jewel in his hand, so long as he watches he is careful to keep
it, but being a sleep it may ready fall out of his hand. So God holds us
waking by continual exercise,

[My moisture is turned into the drought of Summer.] Body and soul jointly
punished, being yokefellowes in sin.
The dolor of David was not only internal but also external by sickness,
for as the body was an instrument of sin, it worthily and duly is punished,
and as they were yoke fellows in sinning, it is just with God, that they
should be companions in sorrow. It is no small matter when the body is
diseased, although the mind were well established, but when both are unquieted
it is harder. Pro: 18.14.
The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity of the body, but who can
bear a troubled Spirit. So that the Philosophers supposed that man to be
happy, who had mentem sanam in corpore sano, a sound mind in an whole body.

Then if we be whole, let us give thakes to God and dedicate our lives to his
service; if we be sick, crave him pardon and mercy, seeking relief at his
hand, repent our sinful life. Therefore I think that many in their best
health are sick, because they abuse their health, Many being whole are most
diseased.
and many sick are whole, who turn to God, and from their greatest sickness
seek medicine against their sin.

Selah.] It is here added, Bueherus
first to show what a torment it is rightly to feel the burden of sin, so
that he leaves this pause or groan, as we will do at things wherewith we
are greatly affected.

Next it declares what weight this doctrine has, and of what consideration to
rebuke us, who think so little of sin, as we have in all our days never
mourned for it.

VERSE 5. Then I acknowledged my sin unto thee neither hid I mine iniquity:
for I thought I will confess against my self, my wickedness unto the Lord,
and thou forgauest the punishment of my sin, Selah.
DAvid has hi herto propounded the the doctrine of the remission of sins, and
brought in his own example for confirmation of the same. We have spoken
already of his sorrow for his sin, now follows the confession of the same
before God, which is a necessary part of repentance.

Confession necessary part of repentance.
Then I acknowledged my sin unto thee.] Ye have heard the estate of David
before his confession, when the heavy hand of God was upon him. The Second
part of his experience is set down in this verse, comprehending the feeling of
Gods mercy, the occasion whereof was the confession of his sins, and the end
the remission of the same.

The division of this verse.
The former has these parts, first, the time, then secondly, the ground, I
thought or said will confess: thirdly the matter, my sin, iniquity, and
wickedness, fourthly the manner, first in respect of God, to thee: secondly in
respect of himself: against my self.

The latter part, And thou forgauest the punishment of my sin. Selah.

David over came hypocrisy.
This diligence in describing his confession so often. First, That he
acknowledged his sin. Secondly, That he would not hide his iniquity, but
confess his Apostasy to the Lord, declares he has gotten victory over all
Hypocrisy, and obtained the hold of sincerity and simplicity.

God chooses the most fit times to workegrace in us. Simil.
[Then.] This circumstance argues, that first he behooved to feel his sin,
and the bitter panges inflicted upon him, because of it. For when men are cast
down then is a most sit occasion for God to work grace upon them, as when men
are greatly extenuate by sickness, it is a convenient time for a Physician to
give medicine. And surely afflictions are necessary preparations to grace. For
our nature is like fallow ground, which if it be not broken up by tentation,
The use of the conscience in man.
God placed the conscience in man's Soul to show unto him his wrongs, and to
follow him, and apprehend him, yea and set up a gibbet in his soul, to which
it adiudgeth him, to the end it may bring him to himself to seek pardon and
mercy. Gen: 1.3.
so he brings the joy of his elect out of sorrow. Hos: 6.2.


We see also here an infallible example of the frowardness of our own nature,
Force must reclaim the frowardnes of our nature.
which cannot be restrained without extreme dealing, for David is laid upon the
rack and almost stretched asunder, and disioynted be fore he can be brought
to a sincere confession, which should teach us, that we should enter to an
hearty mislike of our selves, and to be displeased with our intractablenesse,
which has moved God to heave us up and cast us down again. For if we would
judge our selves, we would not provoke him to such extreme dealing, for he
would not condemn us, but be a comforter in our agonies. Yea David in this
teaches us to judge wisely of the poor, and those who are troubled in their
Conscience (for when men are so afflicted they are called mad, Melancholic
desperate) assuring our selves that Gods dearest children are often rent in
pieces, all their tackles may be burst asunder, their bruised bark left to the
mercy of the wind and waves, and yet come to a comfortable harbor, and
safely arrive at shore.

Moreover these wicked sort of people are to be damned, who with a Sardinian
laughter rejoice in their sin, and sport themselves therewith, yea boast of
their mad humors, when God in the mean time is bending his bow at them.

[I acknowledged my sin, neither hid I mine iniquity.] He uses three
phrases to show his confession, I made it known, I hid it not, and I confessed
it, he in like manner to express his filthiness uses three terms,
wickedness, sin, and iniquity, as he did in the beginning of this Psalm.
And as far as he expresses his corruption by aggravating it by such
degrees, so far he does show forth his grief for it, and his sincerity in
repentance, not hiding, but acknowledging and confessing it, that as the venom
of sin, infected him, so he labors to expel it, and make no conditions of
peace with it, to discover it, to quit himself of it as his deadly enemy,
with whom he will make no paction, but make his complaint to God, that he is
wearied of it.

But this seems strange that he says he made his sin known to the Lord,
How man makes sin known to God.
to whom nothing is unknown, for he who foreknew we should sin, before we
were, can he be ignorant of our sin when we do it. This is spoken after
the manner of men. So we are bidden show our necessities to God, not that he
is ignorant thereof, but that he may provide for them. Psalm. 37. Gen: 7.18.
Gen: 22. Deuteronomy. 13. Psalm: 26.
And God is said to come down and see the affairs of man. So God sees men's
doings, with a most acurat and sharp eye. But he is said to know these sins
which are explicat by us, when we confess them unto him, that thereby we may
be the more moved. So God wills not this for his sake, but for our cause, for
this commemoration of our sins sharpeneth our prayers, and makes us more
ready to prayer, by our confession, we show no new thing to God, but we
testify we know, that whereof we were ignorant before.

Whence knowledge of sin proceeds.
A man learneth a great lesson, if he learn to know his own sins. I know
mine iniquity (says David) This knowledge comes by the law, therefore we
had need to have the law ever before our eyes, as a mirror in which if we
look, it will perfectly let us see all that we have done. The great misery
which lies upon this world, is, that they know not their sin, and therefore
they cannot acknowledge it, wherefore let us beg from our gracious God that we
may see our sin and talk with it, that we may also find grace after our
acknowledgment.

(...) cognitum feci, I made known. He adds another degree of his true
repentance, it was without hypocrisy, for he hid it not, nor used any
subterfuges, colors, excuses, extenuations, denyals, or other shifts, which
the Devil teaches men to use, to preiudge them of mercy, he quiteth
himself of all these; and this is the second preparation to grace, when men
not only come to a sight and acknowledgement of their sins, but with all
grows to a resolution that they will be content to deal with God so
sincerely, that they will not hide their sin any more, but they will be the
greatest censurers of themselves.

Concerning the hidding and covering of our sins, Note.
I spoke in the beginning of the Psalm, all ways let us assure our selves of
this, that while we obscure our selves, we will never deal truly with God.

For I thought, or said, purposed and resolved to confess heartily my sin. A
Christian resolution necessary to repentance. Luk: 15. Exodus: 9.27. 1 Samuel: 15.
Gen: 4.13.
The same phrase the forlorn Son used, I said I will go home to my father,
which Christian resolution is necessary to repentance, for otherwise men at
starts and brads will now and then repent, and have feeling of their sin and
confess, as Pharaoh, Saul, Caine, but it indureth not, because they wanted a
resolution. Therefore let us have our meditations of our sins, and
resolutions to amend our lives, for all the rest as lightenings will fly away
as soon as they come, a wise man does his business advisedly, but a fool
bableth forth what he knows not. Therefore Solomon said and resolved, Pro:
15.8.
The Sacrifice of Fools is abomination to the Lord. Then (I pray you), be wise
and resolve to do well.

[I will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord.] See now how
he is not ashamed to confess his sin, and break out in an open Proclamation
of the same. For his, knowledge of sin banished his Hypocrisy that he would
not hide it, and the last point of his resolution is to confess it to God and
the Prophet Nathan. By this ye may clearly perceive the degrees by which God
works grace in a christian, The degrees by which God works grace, and the
Devil indurance in finnes.
as by the contrary the Devil works induration in sin. For first, the
Devil blinds man that he should not see his sin, next he teaches him to
cover his sin, and finally never to confess his sin. But God by the
contrary, brings a man to the sight of sin, to a discovering of sin, and
last to a free confession of the same.

This confession of sin is an unfeigned profession to leave it off. True
repentance is voluntary.
It is not extorted as the confession of Caine who being punished with the
fury of conscience, said, his burden was greater then he was able to bear,
Gen: 4.13.
neither of Judas, who also confessed he had slain the innocent blood; Mat:
27.4.
neither through extremity of pain with Adonibezek professing he was justly
recompensed with that measure, Judge: 1.7.
wherewith he had met others, seventy kings were under my table, their thumbs
and toes cut off, as I have done, the Lord has done to me. Jonah 3.8.
Neither with the Ninivites, for fear of the present judgment at the word of
Jonas, neither with Achab for the same cause. 1 King 21.27.
But David's confession comes from an unfeigned remorse and grief for his
sins and confidence in Gods mercies, as being truly moved, and having a sense
and feeling of his own misery. A man who hides his sin (as ye heard
before) will not prosper, Pro: 13.28.13.
wherefore let our confession be simple, and as we were not ashamed to sin,
let us not be ashamed to confess out sin. When we have sinned let us not
hide them, as our first Parents hid themselves under bushes after they had
sinned, Gen: 3.7.8.
neither let us make clothes of figge-tree-leafes to cover them as they did,
neither excuse our selves as they did, but simply confess our sin that we
may be absolved, if ye come before an earthly Tribunal and confess, ye
file your selves, but before the heavenly tribunal your confession will
absolve you.

[ Unto the Lord.] Against thee I have sinned, For what causes we should make
confession to God.
therefore to thee only I confess, and indeed great reason have we so to do.
For God only knows all our sins. Secondly, He is only able to pardon
them. Lastly, He is a secret confessor, he will not preiudge our confessions,
and send word of them to the Pope, or reveal them to our disgrace, to the
world.

It is great reason we should confess our sin before God, and before men
also, if we have publicly offended. Chrysostom: in Psalm. 50.
I say not confess to thy fellow servant who may reproach thee, but to God who
may heal thee. This auricular Confession was not known in David's time.

But did he not confess himself to Nathan? Ob:


It is to be understood, Nathan extraordinarily* and be told David thereof
first, Thou art the man: So that David finding his sin was revealed, why
should he have striven against God by concealing it. But when God obscureth our
sins from the world, why should we round them in the care of any false
Priest, who not only has no warrant of God for his calling, being the servant
of the Devil, but makes his advantage of our Confession, and by it does
provoke us to more sins, and to commit filthiness with himself, as
experience has taught us; Against auricular confession.
as also does reveal them to his General, and he to the Pope, against their
own oath of secrecy. See if we be wise, when we have our God to confess us,
we justly make our selves a prey to Satan, and detects our nakedness to such
who cannot only cover us, but discover our follies and secrets to such who may
make us more shameful, and that is the just judgment of God to such as do
it, and by so doing they entangle themselves, and advance the kingdom of
Antichrist. Rohere he says, he will confess his sin unto God, he has great
reason so to do, as also we have to do the like, because God is the party
offended, and none can forgive us our sins but he only. Who is like our God,
that passes by the sins of his people? What reason have we to confess a
debt to him, to whom we are addebted in nothing? The Jews who were blind in
many things, yet they said; 1 Ioh. 1.9.
God only could forgive sins. If we coufesse our sins, he is faithful, who
will forgive us. And seeing confession is a part of divine worship, Confession
a part of Gods worship. Esa. 41.8.
which the Lord will not communicate to any creature: we were traitors to God,
to confess our selves to any but to him, because in so doing, we derogate so
much from his glory, and substract from his honor so much as we give to any
other. Confess your sins therefore to the Lord your God, and use daily
Confession, as ye sin daily Let no sin pass the secretest cogitation of
your hearts, without a secret confession of your heart, and (as I have said) if
ye become offensive to the Gospel publicly, and God has revealed that
sin, repent it publicly, and honor God as much by your public
repentance, as ye have dishonored him by your public sin. Upon such a
public repentance, was the incestuous man received in again, 1 Cor. 5.
it is sufficient that the same man was rebuked of many: And in the Acts, it is
recorded of the believers of Ephesus; Act. 19.18.
They came and confessed their works before the multitisde.

Private confession when it should be made.
As for private Confession, I think it also may be, (but not as the Popish
auricular) for in injuries man does to man (as often they fall out) we ought to
confess our fault to the party offended, yea, crave of him pardon, so to be
reconciled to him. As we are commanded, If thy brother trespass against thee
seven times in a day, Luke 17.4.
and seven times in a day turn again unto thee, saying; it repents me,
thou shall forgive him. And God sends Abimelech to Abraham, Genesis 20.7.
to be reconciled, for detaining of his wife, that he might obtain his
prayers. And Jobs friends to Job, Job. 41.8.
to confess their fault. As also, privately we may go to the Minister, Ioh.
5.16.
and declare our grief. Confess one to another. We urge no confession,
neither yet of all things, neither at set times, as at Easter, but at all
occasions; let them power forth their heart in any Christians bosom, for their
own ease.

Care not for shame if it be Gods honor.
Against my self.] This declares unto us, that whosoever will truly confess
his sin, must be his own greatell enemy. So David shamed himself to all
posterity, that Gods grace might be known; for it is the nature of true
confession, to aggravate our sins, and cast down our selves. The Prophet
calls himself a Beast before God. 1 Timothy 1.13
S. Paul accused himself of blasphemy; I abhor my self, and repent in dust
and ashes, Job. 42.6. Dan. 9.8.
says Job. Unto us appertains open shame, etc. S. Paul, taking a view of his
sins, 1 Timothy 1.14
calls himself the greatest of all sinners. I am not worthy to look up to
the heavens, says the Publican. Luke 18.
This trying of our selves, is called a judging; for, 1 Cor. 7.31
if we would judge our selves, we should not be condemned with the world.

In the course of judgment, there is araignment, 1. Araignement
, when we summon our selves before the batre of Gods judgment. Examination by
the Attorney, 2. Examination.
sifting narrowly the points of our dittie; So our conscience accuses us of
all our sins, Psalm. 50.3. 3. Conviction.
and lays them in order before us. Conviction, when we are forced to say with
the penitent thief, we are justly here. Lastly, 4. Execution. Luke 23.41. 2
Cor. 7.11
execution, and holy revenge, whereby a Christian chastises his body, and
abandoneth his affections, mortifying and subduing the corruptions of his own
nature.

Plutarch says, Plutarch.
p. 422. when he writes of Antalcides, and Lysander, when they were initiate,
they were commanded to confess their faults; and if any had been found
culpable, they were to go about the Altar, and sing their own disprayse.

Man himself is the cau^^ of all the evil that come to him.
If every man would accuse himself of any danger that comes to him, we should
not blame God, albeit, he be the author and director of all, or the Devil, who
only is the instrument, or the stars, who have no power; nor chance, not
fortune, which are not, (all being guided by a Providence) nor the infirmity
of our flesh, and constitution of our body, or counsel, or example of other
men. These shifts we have learned from Adam and Eve; only let us blame our
selves the cause of all.

My wickedness.] He made mention in the beginning of this Psalm, of his
sins, wickedness, and iniquity; as also he does in many other Psalms,
teaching us hereby, to aggravate, not extenuate our sin: for, grace works
alike against all sin. Note.
He who has grace to confess one sin aright, by the same grace confesses
all. Repent for all sin.
So that it cannot be true repentance, when we can repent of one, and leave
the rest unrepented, as did the Israelites in their conversion; 1 Samuel 12.19.
Pray for thy servants (said they to Samuel) that we die not, for we have
sinned in asking us a King; beside all other sins. But a sincere heart seeks
no starting holes, or subterfuges, but deals truly betwixt God and it self,
yea, grace is at war with all sin, especially, with that which is nearest
and dearest to man, and will not spare to disgrace it by all means; so that
discovering the loath somnes thereof, it makes man willing to confess it.
Ezra. 9.6.
Ezra says; I am confounded, and ashamed to lift up mine eyes. Thou shall
remember thy ways, Eze. 16.61. Act. 2.37.
and be ashamed, etc. They were pricked in their hearts when they heard it. God
will have his children like himself, that as he esteems of sin, and as it
is most oditious to him, so we may account it odious and abominable, and we can
never hate and abhor it overmuch. Yea, further, when he makes us to
aggravate our sin, he makes us so much the more, to have an earnest desire
of mercy, that when we have seen sin in an ugly visage, we may see Gods
grace more gladly laughing upon us, with a merry countenance, whereby we may
the more glorify him, and accept of his mercy; yea, the more we confess our
debts to God, and in humility crave forgiveness thereof, the more he pitieth
us; and the more we confess our baseness, the more we magnify the goodness
of God, pardoning the same.

The Lord will have us to confess our sins, that these being hewed from us, we
may be more fit stones for his building.

Against merits and superogation Gods superogation. Mat. 18.27. Against
Atheists.
This humble and penitent Confession of sins, not only damneth that divellish
doctrine of merits, and superogation, or supererrogance, when as the Master is
said to forgive all the debt. But also convinces such Atheists of our age, who
can well in gross, and general terms, say, God forgive us, we are all
sinners, and others who make a sport of sin, and others, who will defend and
patronize their sin, excusing the same, and saying; I am not alone, I love
not to be singular, it is the fashion of the world to whore and swear, and be
drunk, I hope God is not so strait laced as you are. Yea, many have answered
to my self, You will not answer for our sins: although I should have been
partaker of them, if I had not reprooved them. They say to the Ministers, as
the Sodomites said to Lot; Genesis 19.9.
Shall thou judge and rule? or as Corah, and his confederates said to Moses and
Aaron; Number. 16.3.
Ye take too much upon you; or as those in the second Psalm; Psalm. 2.3.
Let us break their bonds asunder.

And thou forgauest the punishment of my sin. Repentance and remission meet
together.
] In the former part, Repentance and remission meet together.
in few words David's true Repentance is lively expressed: Now in this part is
set down the remission of his sins, and both are closed in one verse, to let
us see, that the one is not so soon done, as the other meets. David says; 2 Samuel 12.13.
I have sinned, and Nathan subioynes presently, and thy sins are forgiven
thee.

So this may encourage penitent sinners, that God will not suspend, or drift
time with them, but will presently, what time soever a sinner repent him of his
sin, put away his sins out of his remembrance. Forgiveness meets
repentance in the face, as the father of the forlorn Son met him, and kissed
him. Luke 15.22


But how can Confession be sound, Ob:
before sin be pardoned? it seems rather that Confession should follow the
remission of sin.

It is answered,

The Lord forgave not only his sin, but the iniquity of his sin, Dan.
12.2.
as we say, terra pulveris, or caenum luti, the dust of the earth, or dirt of
clay. Note.
By this he would teach us, that albeit, we be altogether sinful, yet God is
altogether merciful, great is our sin (I grant) but his mercy is far
greater, Ps 10.11.
as far as the heaven is above the earth.

Next, ye see, that God only pardons penitent sinners. It is an idle
doctrine, to cause men to believe, that Christ's blood is sufficient for all
sorts of sinners, whatsoever they do, for if it were so, what needs
repentance, faith, the love and fear of God, etc. We cannot have these
without their conditions; for as the ancient says, fides iustificat
correlative, How faith justifies. August:
We must merit God by faith and repentance; for (as Augustine says) he that
made thee without them, does not save thee without them. But Christ died for
all, all therefore must be saved for whom Christ died? It is answered, Christ's
death had been able (as Leo says) to save infinite worlds, but we speak of
the effectual shedding of his blood, which was shed for many (not for all) for
the remission of sins.

VERSE 6. Therefore shall every one that is godly, make his prayer unto thee in
a time, when thou may be found: surely in the flood of great waters they
shall not come near him.
The godly shall reap the benefit of remission of sin.
THis is the second part of the Psalm, for having taught that the happiness of
man, consists in the remission of his sins: now he shows, who shall reap
the benefit of the same. So this gift of God is not restricted only to David,
but to all the godly, as a clear light shining abroad for the utility of the
whole Church.

We receive gifts from God to impart them to others 1 Timothy 1.16
Hereby we may learn for what end God does bestow his gifts upon us, to wit,
that we may reach forth the fruit thereof to others. So the Apostle says, he
found mercy, that he might be an example to others.

As also we should look to the examples going before us. Ask the former ages,
says Job, Job. 8.9. 1 Cor. 10.7
for our days upon earth are as a shadow: and be not Idolaters, as some of
them were.

Therefore:] David being kindled, does kindle others. coal can give light, but
once kindled, it will give both light and heat; He that does not edify his
own heart, will be the more unable to edify others. Paul says, I believed,
Psalm. 40.10. 2 Cor. 1.14.
therefore I spoke. David becomes an example to others, of Gods mercy,
neither yet do we lack examples, both of his mercy and justice. But here we
fail, we cannot use these examples, neither make profit by them.

There arises here a question, Ob:
since David was an holy experimented Doctor, taking upon him to teach others,
must they be all like David, that is, holy, and truly religious, who are able
to teach others?

I answer: Do ye not think, Balaams prophecies wrought good to the Church?
Judas taught and wrought miracles: and was not Saul among the Prophets? 1 Samuel
10.7.
The Apostle Paul, seeing many Preach (...), not purely, but of envy, and
pride, says, Phil. 1.15.18.
I rejoice Christ is Preached any manner of way. Gaudet in re non in modo,
says one of the Fathers. And why was Paul so careful, Lest while he preached
salvation to others, 1 Cor. 9.27
he should be a Reprobate himself; if a man might not miscarrie himself
Preaching Salvation to others. The work, that the Hypocritical Preacher does,
shall not prosper to himself, but I know no reason, why it may not prosper to
others, as I have shown you by the pretending similituds. 1 King. 16.6. Note.
Elias refused not his meat, although a Raven brought it, for if thou find it
to be Gods word, take it out of what so ever mouth. This 6 verse has two
parts. First, the means which godly men will use to bring them in Gods favor.
They will pray unto him in a time when he may be found. Secondly, The effect of
their Prayer: Surely in the floude of great waters they shall not come near
him.

In the former, after the inference (therefore) is noted the person praying,
every godly man; next, to whom he prays, to thee, thirdly, the time, when
thou may be found. Remission of sin belongs to all Gods children. Deuteronomy:
29.29.
In this inference (Therefore) David gives us to understand that this work of
Gods mercy in the remission of his sins shall not die in himself, but shall
surviue for ever, and refresh the godly of all ages. Things showed to us belong
to us and our children. Every one that is godly. Here is the person who must
pray, the godly, and every one of them.

The word (Chasid) in the own language signifies two things; the first, a
gracious man who has received favor from God. Isa. 7.6. He that has grace
can pray for grace. Pro: 15.8.
Secondly, It signifies, one who shows mercy, or a meek man, a merciful
man. Wherein we observe that only he that has grace can pray for grace, The
sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord. Genesis 4.4.
The Lord has respect to the offering of Abel, but not to Caines offering. He
says of the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that though they
cry unto him, Ier. 11.11.
he will not hear them, etc. Only those can pray rightly, who have the Spirit
to cry Abba, Father, which no reprobate has, Rom: 8.15.
but only the godly. God hears not sinners: Ioh: 9.31.
but if any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him hears he. He
has no promise to be heard, therefore his prayer turns unto sin, Pro: 28.9.
and God will cast back the dung of his Sacrifice upon his face: neither has
he faith to believe, Rom: 14.23
and what so ever is without faith is sin, then the wicked are in a miserable
estate, who in all their life cannot pray, they call not on the Lord. Psalm:
14.4.


The Second signification, is a meek, or merciful man, to declare that that
prayer is in vain, which does not proceed from a meek and humble heart in
thy self, and merciful to men, and therefore in the prayer which is
prescribed to us by our Lord, we protest that we are free from all hatred, and
do heartily forgive such as offend us. Who would have pardon of God let them
forgive others.
Which I wish to God we remembered, so off as we pray; for we have daily
contentions, and strife; which no doubt, interrupteth our prayers. With what
mouth can ye protest to God, ye have pardoned others, when the hatred which
ye have locked up in your heart, accuses you, of a manifest lie before God.
Thou would have thy sins to be pardoned, which thou committest against the
eternal and omnipotent God, and thou will not pardon the sins which are done
against thee, by a worm, dust, and ashes. Then this is the way to right
prayer, that thou be bountiful, mecke, and merciful. Mat: 10.16.
The Scriptures calls Gods children Doves, then they must be far from the
cruelty of the Hawk.

Shall pray.] this is the office and part of godly and meek men to pray, for
prayer has great fruit, and is profitable both to purchase things present,
and to come, if any man be pressed by adversity, in any Per^ill, or danger,
sickness, hunger, Prayer profitable for all things.
or be urged by any calamity, what shall he do? pray. If the memory of his
former sins sting his conscience, if he be terrified with the fear of hell
and eternal death, Iam. 5.23.
Let him pray; for this is the only hope and refuge of a Christian. Chrysostom. de
oratione. lib. 1.
Yea (as Chrysostom says) it is the life of the soul, and the soul would
die without it. What can affright us, if we take our self to the hold of
prayer? Exodus 14 21 Josh 6 20. Exodus 17.11 1 Kings. 17.1 2 Chronicles 20 3. 2 Chronicles.
14 11. and 32.20. Prayer need full to all.
This divided the red Sea, cast down Jericho, overthrew Amalek, closed and
opened the heavens. By this Ichosaphat overcame Moab, and Ammon, Asa the
Ethiopians, Ezechias the Assyrians etc. Let us therefore run to these weapons
in all our troubles.

Prayer is necessary, that it is required of what so ever age, young, or old, of
what ever fexe, men, or women, of what so ever cailing, Princes, Pastors, and
people, so that who ever lack this, are not godly; and by this a manifest
difference is made betwixt the godly, and ungodly. Let each man try himself of
what Spirit he is, and crave the spirit of prayer.

[Vnto thee:] Now he sets down the person to whom he should pray, to God:
and is it not very convenient that the Godly in their trouble should run to
God? from who^, as they have their name, Conditions necessary to be in him to
whom we pray.
so they have all good things; if we would seek help at any, we must see,
that he does know our danger, that he will hear us, that he favors us,
that he will help us, that he will deliver us, that he will continue
constant to help us, and if any of these lack, our suit is in vain, and to
no purpose. There is no creature in heaven or earth, to whom all these can be
attributed, but only to God. For Images, and Idols, have no more sense, then
Baal had, when his Priests called; O Baal hear us: of whom (to deride them)
Eliah, 1 Kings. 18 26. God sees our misery with pitiful eyes. Luke 10.33.
said he is in a journey or sleeping. But our God sees all our tribulations, and
foresees them, and sees them with regrate, as a parent would behold the misery
of his child, not with common eyes, as an on looker of a commedit, but with
mournful eyes, as the Samaritan beheld the wounded Jew; for he that made the
eye, can he not see? and qui totus est visus, he who is altogether sight, can
he not perceive? This is a great comfort to the patient, that he has God
looking on him with the eye of his compassion.

And as he sees, so he hears our groaning with both his cares. Isa. 63.26.
God hears our groanings. Psalm: 27.10.
Though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not, yet thou O Lord art
our father and our redeemer. Though my father and my mother would forget me*
yet the Lord will gather me up. And if Abraham did not see the miseries of the
Israelites, who sprang out of his loins. shall we suppose that the Saints
departed see our particular Crosses, or sorrows, The Saints departed hear not
or tentations, who when they were alive, could not see them, but so far, as
they would expressed them. How much less now can they see our crosses; except as
the Papists folishly say, in the Glass of the Trinity, which were as much as
to make the Trinity a myrrour to their souls, The Saints occupied in praising
God.
to occupy them in the earthly sorrows of his Saints, who are so well occupied
in the celestial praises of his Maiestic. and albeit they be lying under the
altar, desiring the accomplishment of the body of Christ, yet they are put to
no business, to that which the Trinity fully can do themselves, to whom
belongs the work of our salvation.

Many, both see, hear, and pitle our miseries, albeit they are not able to
succor, God able to help us.
or supply us. Here then is our comfort, that we have an omnipotent God, to
whom we come who, quiequid voluit, fecit has, and is able to do what so ever
he will: and if we have his heart to love us, we need nor to doubt of his
hand to help us, as a subject, on whom a Potent king casts his affection,
and whom he loves entirely, needs not to doubt of his liberality and
protection.

And finally, albeit that any mortal man both saw and knew, Gods fauouris
constant.
and favored us, and had power to accomplish our suites, yet what surety have
we of the continuance of of his favor, or yet of his life. Therefore says
David. Trust not in wordly Princes, whose breath is in their nostriles. Psalm.
146.3.
But our God is constant, eternal, immutable, and as he abides for ever, so
does his love continue without any shadow of change.

Here I might very pertinently convince that Doctrine of the Papists, Against
the Popish intercession of Saints.
who seek to God by other intercessors then Christ. But seeing that worthy
English man Mr. Tailor, has handled that subject very well, and I use not to
fall forth in my Sermons in any Etenchticke place against the enemies, except
shortly to point at them as the text affoordeth occasion, or yet Didactick
common places, seeing only I purpose to interpret the text of the Psalm, as
it lies; therefore I refer you who desire to hear this controversy, to the
said reverend fathers commentary on this Psalm, who has reasoned the matter
very well, and to all your contentments will satisfy you, as also my brother
Master Patricke Simsons treatise of the Invocatio^ of Saints, written in his
Centuries.

In a time when thou may be found.] This is the fourth, The time o prayer.
and last point of the godly man's phrase, the time, when he shall pray. This
phrase, implies three things. First, That prayer is a seeking of God.
Secondly, That there is a time, wherein God will not be found, and Lastly that
there is a time wherein the godly shall find him.

Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near: That
prayer is a seeking of God. Psalm. 34.4. 2 Chronicles 20 3. Math 7.7. Luke 2.27. Can
6.1. Where God is to be found in his Temple.
Isa 55.6. I sought the Lord says David, and Iehosaphat sought the Lord by
Prayer. So it is necessary we should seek God by Prayer, that we may find
him, Seek and ye shall find. That ye may find him. First seek him in his
own house, there Simeon found him. The Church found him amongst the tents of
the shepherds, in his Garden amongst the beds of the Spices, that is, in the
assembly of the Saints, where graces grow up as sweet Spices. Next, Seek him
in his word, and by Prayer; His word Ephesians. 6 18. By prayer Ier. 29 13.
for there he is to be found.

Thirdly, in sincerity of Spirit, praying in the Spirit. Ye shall seek me
and find me, because ye sought me withal your heart. Seek him also in
season, timously; Early in the morning says David will I seek thee; Psalm.
63.2.
that is every morning, the beginning of my work shall be to praise thee.

Fourthly, seek him for himself, not as the Jews, God is to be sought for
himself
who sought him for their belly. Then we seek him for himself, when we
seek his glory in every thing, although to our own shame and discommoditie.

Then seeing the Lord may be found, it were good for us to seek him, as I said
before: and specially in his Temple, where he may be found, and not in time of
his service to frequent Alehouses, or any pastimes upon the Sabbath day, or
Merchandise, pretending they can serve God on horseback, as well as in the
Church.

I will not be ashamed to borrow some fearful examples from that learned and
godly Pastor Master Tailor. Mark the example of abusing the Sabbath.
A certain man, for hunting on the Sabbath day, had a child borne with the
head of a Dog, that seeing he preferred his Dogs before the service of
God, he might have one of his own geting to make much of. Histor. Theat. A
Flaxwoman at Kinstat in France, Jeremy. verse 27. At Parise at the
Beare-bating. Ano. 1585, eight persons were slain,

Dumbar about the year of God 1577. whereof I was an eye witness, my father
master Andrew Symson of good memory being Minister thereof, who going to
Church law a thousand Boats setting their nets on the Sabbath, he weeped and
feared that God would not suffer such contempt, it being a most calm day as
ever was seen at that season; at midnight when they went forth to draw their
nets the wind arose so fearefullie, that it drowned eightscore and ten Boats,
so that there were reckoned in the coast side, fourteen score of widows.
Thus God has ways to find out profaine persons.

But Alas this is pit^ifull, that not only we do not seek God, Pro. 8.1.
but when wisdom sends forth her maids in the streets to seek us, and
call upon us, we hear their cries with deafned ears, so that I fear, that
the reproach of Isaias justly appertain to us; Isa. 63.
All the day I stretched forth my hand to a rebellious people.

Finally, as there is a time of all things, which would be observed, Time
flees away, take it before it be gone. Simil: Pro. 6.6.
for (post occasio calua) as fortune is bauld behind, so is time, a Spring
time, an Harvest time, a Summer time, a Wintertime. The Pismire knows her
time: the Sea, and Moon, have their times, and so has Grace a time, while it
is offered, and God a time, wherein he may be found. Therefore seek the Lord
while he may be found. Isa. 55.
If we slip the tide and influence of grace, the tide will fail us, which
we shall never recover.

But to the end, God must seek us first A time when God will not be be found.
^^k. 13.24.
we may find God, we are to be found of God, for we can never seek him till
he first seek us, as the lost sheep cannot seek it self.

Next, there is a time, when God cannot be found. Many shall seek to enter,
but shall not be able: for the wicked seek not, till the time of finding be
past; so did the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.12. Genesis 27.35
it was too late when the gate was closed. It was too late for Esau to seek
his Fathers blessing, when he had contemned it. Exodus 14.24
It was too late for Pharaoh to fly, when he was in the midst of the Sea. When
God is found.


God is found when he offers gracious occasions of his finding, and we
embrace them. Which Hosea expresieth in his tenth Chapter, verse. 12. Till he
come and rain down righteousuesse on us.

But there are two things which breeds doubts in us: Ob:
first, the wicked are heard; as, Achab, the Ninivites, the Israelites in
seeking a King, 1 Samuel 8.22 1 King. 21.29. Ion. 3.10. Luke 8.32. Ans:
the Devils seeking to enter in swine, etc.

I answer, albeit, God grants their worldly desires, yet it is to their
double destruction. The Israelites obtained a King in his wrath, Achab
prolonging temporal judgment, procuted eternal condemnation, and in this
world (albeit suspended for a time, to show Gods lenity, sparing reprobates
for a season) in the end utter exterminion.

Next, the godly find not always God? Ob. Ans.


Answer: They find him not at the present, he delayeth time with them, to
exercise the^r faith, and patience; but in the end he comes: Mat. 14.25.
he comes at the fourth watch. Abraham, Zachary, and Anna prayed for ch^ldren
in their youth, but gat their prayers granted in their age: yea, often they are
refused in some things, and better given them. Paul prayed to remove the
messenger of Satan, 2 Cor. 1^.9
but God would not yield thereto, albeit, he heard him in a better, supplying
him with sufficient grace. Christ prayed the cup might be taken from him, but
in that he was not heard, Luke 22.42.
yet he was heard in a better, that he brought him well through it.

The fruit of Prayers.
Surely in the flood of great waters they shall not come near thee.] Here is
the second part of this Verse; wherein is expressed the fruits of our prayers,
and the excellent effect thereof, that the faithful are delivered from all
troubles after their prayer.

God gives a singular privilege to prayer, God delights in Prayer. Rev. 8.3.
that he prefers it to any other thing, for he delights in that sacrifice
more then in any burnt offering, and therefore the Angels are said, to offer up
the prayers of the Saints, as though God had preferred them more in assigning
them to that office, then in any other. And none can pray but the child of
God. Let us therefore strive night and day to perform that duty, which shall
do us more good in our miseries, then any other remedy.

The great danger of Gods Saints.
Flood of great waters.] He magnifieth the mercy of God, by setting forth the
great danger, whereto a Christian is subject, by a similitude taken from great
Floods, which is very frequent in the Scriptures. And to express our danger,
it is said; We go through fire and water: they are both extreme and
merciless elemenes, albeit, water be worse, and more dangerous, for fire may
be extinguished by water, but what is able to resist the rage of waters, and
specially, an inundation, which comes so vehemently, so suddenly, so
forcibly, that no man is able to resist it, but straight way it carries him
away.

The floods are sometime said to come upon us from God; Psalm 42.7.
All thy floods and waves are gone over me. Sometime by Satan; The serpent
cast out waters as a Flood. Rev. 12.5.
Sometime by wicked men; Isa. 59.19.
The enemy shall come as a Flood. God is the first raiser of the Floods* but
the Devil and wicked men do concur, and advances that work to destroy the
Church. Ye see then, the enemies of the Church are compared to waters. Psalm.
124. Isa. 8. Isa. 17. Ier. 47. There is nothing to eschew the rage of waters,
but only to fl^e from them.

Moreover, as many waters, yea, stryps and roots arises together, A concurse
of the wicked against God Psalm. 10. Psalm. 2.
so do wicked men in the persecution of the Church concur together, even to
destroy Gods Church. All p^t too their shoulder, their force, their malice,
their words, and deeds, and what they can to subvert her.

The fu^y of the enemies wasting the Church.
And again; The sloods arising wash away Lands, Corn, Cattle, Houses, and
what ever lies in their way; So do the wicked rage against the Saints, that
they wast them, and if they could, would extirp^t them from the earth.

See we not in all Europe this day, the raging waves of tyrannous persecutions,
overrunning the Church of Christ, which has had such Halcyon days, under
happy and Christian Princes. What should we do, but with Nazianzen, say;
(...).

They shall not come near him.] The church at ast shall be delivered. Psalm
34.11. Genesis 8.1. Mat 14.24 Isa. 42.3.
Here is a promised delivery to every member of the Church. Many are the
troubles of the righteous, but the Lord will deliver them out of them all. Noab
was saved in the Arc; and the Disciples in the Boat. And in the midst of the
waters will I be with thee, says Isaias.

Be constant in the time of the Church her persecu^ions.
Most miserable are those men, who to save themselves, have made defection from
the Church; for they have seen such assaults made against her, that they
feared ^o ^e drowned by these Floods. As if Noah in the midst of the deluge had
cast himself ^ut of the Arc into the midst of the waters. See we not the
reformed Church to be ever under danger; yet I will say with the Ancient,
Ecclesiam oppugnary posse, non expugnari, iactari fluctibus, non demergi; May
be assaulied, not overcome: tossed with waves, nos drowned. Was Noah, think
ye, so secure in the waters, The church cannot be ov^rwhelmed.
that he was never shaken, and tossed to and fro? No truly: but it is true,
^luctuat. at nunquam mergitur illa rates: That boat may float, but shall never
be drowned. So all good men be, if they keep them within the Arc, That is,
within the Church, and contain themselves in the pure worship of God; for
albeit, we be terrified by the outward sight of earthly troubles and
persecutions, yet our surety shall be in the Arc; for who would not have
thought in the deluge, but that the mountains would have been freest, but the
highest top of Olympus was covered, and only the Arc floated above: yea, the
higher that the waters grew,

Ye see the bush on fire, in Germany and in France, especially now burning, but
the Lord is in the midst thereof, that it consumes not. That Lily is compassed
with thorns, Dan. 3.25. And 6.22.
that it could not hurt the three children, although they were cast therein to;
and as the mouths of the Lions were stopped, when Daniel was among them, so
that he would so keep us, that albeit, troubles comes so near us, that they
seize upon our bodies, yet that they come not near us, to do us any harm, but
rather by the marveilous proof we have of the power of our God, in our
delivery, we may be men encouraged to serve him, who can bring us from the
gates of hell, and although we are at the mouth of the grave, Psalm. 23.4.
yet his rod and Shepherds crook can comfort us.

VERSE 7. Thou art my secret place: thou preservest me from trouble: thou
compassest me about with joyful deliverance. Selah.
THis is an amplification of that which he said, That the Floods should not
come near him; because he draws to Gods protection, and makes him his
refuge, both for the present time, and to come. So that the remission of our
sins, does bring to us protection, and safeguard against all evil: for,
Remission of sin brings safeguard and protection.
if we be freed of our spiritual and greatest enemies, by pardon obtained for
them, how soon may we persuade our selves, of surety from these fleshly
adversaries, wicked men, who rise up against us?

The allegory of the refuge is taken from one, Christians pursued are sure of
an hold. Rev. 12.14.
who being hotly pursued, cannot resist the violence of the enemy, but is glad
to retire himself to some hold: as the Woman in the Revelations, being
followed by the fiery Dragon, took wings, and fled to the Wilderness, there
to hide her self, with her child, which she brought forth: So is the Church
persecuted by bloody Tyrants, she must not think any earthly hold can keep
her sure, but she must retire to the shadow of the almighty, and dwell in the
secret of the most high; Psalm. 91.
and say to the Lord; Thou art my rock, my refuge, and strong tower. Where
she shall dwell more safely, Genesis 7.
then in the Arc of Noah in the Deluge: or Mariners, when they are in the
Port, for while they are in the Port, they may yet drown, No refuge sure but
God Cant. 2.14.
or wild Ass in the woods and mountains, or the dove in the hole of the
Rock, or those that are besieged in Castles, and strong walled Cities, or the
chickes under the mothers wings. Mat. 23.27.
And this is the Privilege of Gods children, who have obtained mercy, that
they are secure, and safe, either from perils, or in perils; for, if a man be
once in Gods favor, he is ever safe, Exodus 14.21
he becomes a cloud to him in the day: this is the cloud of his protection,
not but that in this world they may be in dangers, and be in trouble, yea, Ioh
16.33. Act. 28.5. Dan. 6.22.
and slain, torn in pieces and devoured: Paul was not hurt by the Viper,
neither Daniel was overtaken by the Lions, other times they were in great
dangers, but their losses external were recompensed by spiritual peace.

In me ye shall have peace, Says our Savior. Ioh. 16.33.
Then ye see God is the hiding of his own children, and in what surety are
these, who are under his coverture. They may hunt beasts out of their dens,
and subterranean places, but who can hunt a Christian out of heaven? He has
builded his nest there, and is not afraid. Psalm. 27.5.
The Lord is a strong tower, and the righteous flee to it. God is our refuge,
Psalm. 46.
and present help, we will not be afraid, if the earth should be moved: he
hid me in his Tabernacle. Psalm. 27.
Those who make flesh to be their confidence, they shall see, that their refuge
will fail them, when they have most to do with it, and such like are they who
go to Idols, who can keep them no better then they keep themselves. Dagon
could not help himself. 1 Samuel 5.3
Oftentimes our faith is ecclipsed, We depend no longer on God, then withal we
see means by which he may help us.
that we see not his invisible protection, and we cannot depend upon him longer
then we can see some means, whereby he will help us, and so we leave the
waters of Shiloah, and run to Rezin, and seek other means, and lurk under
some fleshly hold, which is to be imputed to the distrust and imbecilitie of
our faith; for, we see not the company of the invisible Angels, with the
servant of Elisha. 2 King. 5.17
Seeing therefore that the Lord is a sure hold, and all-sufficient, (all other
helps being vain) let us say with David, Christians though subject to
troubles, yet not overcome by them. 2 Cor. 4.8.
Thou art my refuge. Yet we must not think, that we are free from all dangers,
for we lack not our own perils, but I may well say with the holy Apostle; We
are afflicted on every side, yet are we not in distress: in poverty, but not
overcome of poverty: we are persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down, but we
perish not: as unknown, and yet known: as dying, and behold we live* as
chastened, and yet not killed: as sorrowing, and yet always rejoicing: 2 Cor.
6.9 10.
as poor, and yet making many rich: as having nothing, and yet possessing all
things. For if Christians be Warriors, have they taken Weapons to sit idle,
Salmacida spolia sine sanguine and s^dore, The spoil of Sarmatum without blood
or sweat. If we would have victory, Nisi praecedat pugna non sequetur victoria,
Except there precede a battle, there will not ensue a victory.

For the wisdom of God, his power, justice, and goodness, shines most
clearly, when his Church is in trouble. Beside, then the dross and corruption
of our nature, is burnt up by the fire of tentations: The use of ^^oub^es to
the godly.
our faith exercised, and our patience crowned, yea, the bitterness which we
felt in our trouble, makes our delivery more sweet and comfortable: as the
sharper pain the woman has felt in bringing forth her child, her joy will be
the greater when she is delivered: as Prorsper, the Disciple of Augustine
said; Dulcior fit salus, cum dolor excruciat, and sanitatis amissae dulcedinem
languoris amaritudo commendat: That is, Our health becomes sweeter, when
dolor has tormented us, and the bitterness of our disease, commends the
sweetness of our health* which was lost. We needed not safety, ^f the
necessity of peril did not urge: and what needs a Savior, where there are
none that have need to be saved?

Thou preseruest me from trouble.] David's faith is not confined within the
bounds of the present time of his delivery, but looks ^o the future time, and
continuance of Gods ^reservation. The experience of his former mercies, makes
him bold, The experience of former deliveries, a mea^^ to cause us wait for
more. 1 Samuel 17.36. Psalm: 23.6.
and confident of ^he constant continuance thereof in time to ^ome, which often
he used, in his conflict ^ith Goliath; Thy servant slew a Lion, and a ^eare, and
so shall it be with this Philistim And ^n the 23. Psalm, seeing before he
called him ^is Shepherd, he concludes, and I shall dwell (...) long season in
the house of the Lord. And the Apostle Paul says, and he has delivered me out
of the mouth of the Lion, 2 Timothy 4.17.18.
and he will deliver me from every evil way. So we should keep a Book of
memorial and register, written in our hearts, of Gods ancient dealings to us,
that they may refresh us in our present trouble.

Gods children rejoice in the mids of troubles.
God preserves his own children, not only in delivering them from their
troubles as he does many a time, but also in the midst of their grievous
pangues, so comfort and assisteth them by his presence, that they rejoice in
the midst of death. Although some be wounded and slain, as the Martyrs, and
many other thousand good Christians, as in the Marian days in England, as ye
may read in the book of Martyrs: And in France, where on Saint Bartholmews
day August 24. 1572. an 100000. Christians were killed, The church remains
ever victorious.
yet the Church remains ever victorious, for the Lord makes the blood of his
servants the seat of his Church, plagueth her enemies, and advances his truth,
yea, he turns their corporal destruction to the best. They would not be
delivered because they looked for a better resurrection. In the midst of the
winter of their afflictions they shall see the Summer sunne-blinks of Gods
gracious countenance comforting them, which is their greatest preservation from
defection, and tentation.

Thou compassest me about mith joyful deliverance, or Songs of deliverance,]
First, In this verse, he said, God was his secret place, next, Would deliver
him in trouble, and now by Gradations he assures himself, he will give him
matter of rejoicing, and Sing praises to him, for his preservation.

Here the nature of faith is seen, it sings the triumph before the victory;
for, it is sure, Faith sings the triumph before the victory. 1 Ioh. 1.9. Psalm.
4.8. Psalm. 3.6.
God who has promised is faithful to perform, whereby he hops against
hope. This made him lie down and sleep; when his enemies keep watch about
him, he was not afraid of ten thousand because God was his protection.

He assures himself of Gods preservation, and also that God shall give him
Songs of deliverance, and by his delivery shall minister occasion of his own
praises; and this deliverance he ascribes to God, and that he would deliver
him from ingratitude; for I think, all our temporal deliueries from troubles
so many chains to faste^ our selves, unless we praise God for them* And
doubtless, this second grace of God to be thankful, is greater then the
other, for as much as the first is often a temporal benefit, To be thankful an
especial gift of God. Luk 17.17. 2 King. 5.18.
but gratitude to God is a Spiritual benefit, belonging only to Gods
children. Many with the nine Lepers return not back to give thanks. Few with
Naaman promise to serve no God, but the God of Israel. So to be short, that ye
know whether your delivery be in mercy, or judgment, see how ye are
affected toward God in thankfulness after the same, David says, Psalm. 51.15.
thou shall compass me with songs of deliverance, So he acknowledges he has
both of God, and in the 51. Psalm, he says Open my lips, and I will show
thy praises.

David assures himself, God would give him a thankful heart, which is the
worthiest part of Gods service; for, when we pray, we have some great respect
to our self, When we pray, we chiefly respect our s^lues, when we praise, God.
and our necessities, but when we praise, we have our chief respect to God,
and his honor, and the Lord he does both; for, he works delivery of us, and
thankfulness in us, Ab eo incipient, ab eo desinent, operatur velle et
perficere. They begin of him, they shall end of him, he works to will and
to perfect. Jacob was delivered by God, Genesis 35.
and he said to him, Go up to the God of Bethel. Often christians are grieved
at themselves, that they know not how to perform a duty to God for his
blessings, for which cause David says; What shall I render to the Lord, etc.
Psalm. 116.12
I will take the cup of Salvation, etc.

Compassest me about.] This word imports, As we are beseiged with troubles,
so are we compassed with deliueries.
that as we are beseiged on every side with troubles, so we are compassed
with as many comforts, and deliueries, as our crosses grow daily, so our
consolations are augmented, day by day; We are on every side offended, and on
every side defended, therefore we ought on every side sound Gods praises, as
David says, Psalm. 103.1.
My soul praise the Lord and all that is within me.

With Songs of deliverance.] This notes the the greatness of his praises, and
what delight he had in them, that he would not only speak them but sing
them. This was very familiar to the Jews, namely to David to sing songs on
Harps, Viols, Tabrets, and all instruments of Music. All my springs shall be
in thee. Awake Viol* etc.

The tears of Gods children end in joy.
But first, let us observe, that the tears of Gods children, end in joy, they
sow a precious seed with sorrow, but they bring home sheaues of corn dancing.

In that he will not be content only with thanks, but also will have them
conjoined with songs, he lets us see how high all the strings of his heart
are bended that he cannot contain himself, for the mercies of God to his
Church, and for his manifold deliverances for the same. Many sing praises to
God with an half open mouth, Many have an half open mouth in singing praises
to God, who are too ready to sing filthy Ballads to the dishonor of God.
and albeit they can sing alowde, any filthy ballad in their house, they make
the mean, I warrant you in the Church, that scarce they can hear the sound of
their own voice. I think they be ashamed to proclaim and show forth Gods
praises, or they fear to deafen God by their loud singing But David bended
all his forces, within and without to praise his God.

Neither do we approve those foolish songs of the Papists, Against Popish
singing.
who do not only weary the hearers, but the Idols themselves, with their
rowting and crying, and that in an unknown Language. Saint Basil says, eos
demum cantus recipiendos, qui nos possunt efficere meliores, Those Songs are to
be received, which may make us better, and in old they sung as though they had
been speaking, that men might rather understand their meaning, then delight
their ear by the instrument.

VERSE 8. I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way, that thou shall go,
and I will guide thee with mine eye. VERSE 9. Be not like an Horse, or like a
Mule which understands not: whose mouths thou do bind with bit, and
bridle lest they come near thee. VERSE 10. Many sorrows shall come to the
wicked: but he that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass him.
NOw David after he has gotten assurance of there mission of his sins, and
described the virtues which flow from the same, in these three verses, The
substance of these three verses.
gives forth a worthy and Doctorall admonition to all sinners, to take heed
unto themselves, in the eight verse propounding himself to to be their Doctor:
in the ninth, sharply admonishing them, that they become not brutish beasts,
in not giving voluntar obedience till they be coacted; and lastly, in the 10.
verse, he threateneth those that will not obey, many sorrows shall come to
them.

Concerning, the first part, I spoke in the Inscription of the Psalm, yet
somewhat I will add. Seeing it pleases Gods Spirit to repeat, I am not
grieved once or twice for your edification to repeat the same matter; albeit,
not after the same manner; for this is true Philosophy to teach repentance. A
King becomes a Philosopher in the teaching of repentance, and these are the
frui^s of true repentance, He who has overcome sin in himself, will strive
to overcome it in others.
when we will communicate our feelings to others, for he who has overcome
sin in himself, will studdie to banish it from others: for repentance cannot
be without charity. Some translate this (...), I will make it known, So I
will make it evident to you if ye be ignorant. Since I have shown you the
way, ye your selves are blame worthy, if ye will not follow it. This is the
zeal of the Lords glory which is in the hearts of Gods children, that it
bursts forth as a vessel of new Wine, as Elihu said, Simil. Job. 41. Luke 13.21.
as fire, as oil, that gives smell to all who are in the house, as Leaven,
which leaueneth the whole batch, as a light which inlighteneth the whole house,
Pro. 27.17.
as iron sharpeneth iron, so does a Christian, a Christian. Andrew found Simon,
and brought him to Christ, Philip found Nathaneel, they brought others to
Christ. Ioh. 4.
The Samaritan woman being called did also call the Samaritans to Christ, Paul
converted, studied to convert others, Act. 9. Luke 22.32.
and Peter converted by our Savior was commanded to strengthen his brethren.

And if we would consider how busied wicked men are to intise others to their
sin. Pro. 1.14.
Go, we shall have a common purse, cast in thy lot among us, and again how
wicked Prose^its go by Sea and Land, Note.
to make others of their profession. We both Pastors and others would be
ashamed, that we take no pains upon ^ur selves to strengthen weak Christians
and ^raw those who are without, and confirm those who are within in the truth
of God, whereof our own consciences are sufficiently persuaded. Our coldness
in this point has need to be kindled and let us endeavor to amend it, and
be more relaxe in our own affairs, and more bent in the cause of God.

The Lord waken us also, for Vt ingulent homines surgunt de nocte Latrones,
Thieves rise in the night to kill men, tu vt te ipsum serves non expergisceris,
thou that thou may save thy self do not awake. Math. 26.40.47.
Judas arose in the night to betray Christ, while the Apostles were in a heavy
sleep, and would not watch for him and themselves. Such is the security of
our nature that we are not provident for good things, and the pronesse of the
wicked to all evil actions.

Therefore David is, as the righteous man in the Proverbs, Pro. 10.21. Pro.
31.26. Isa: 2.3 Psalm. 122.1.2.
whose lips feed many, Yea as that gracious woman who opens her lips
with wisdom: Many shall go up to the mountain of God and say, he will
teach us his ways. I rejoiced (says David) when they said, Let us go up to
the house of the Lord.

Moreover, Learn that we must not cast all teaching over on Pastors (who
should I confess be greatest teachers, to whom that office of public and
private admonition does appertain) but that every Christian ought by his
speech, Every one ought to instructothers
instruction and example, admonish his family and familiars, as he has
occasion to speak with them. Did not Saint Steven teach, Act. 7.2.
as well as Saint Paul or Peter, for albeit they teach not as Preachers, yet as
Christians, the master his servants, the father his children, etc. So that it
is requisite (as one says well) that every man should be a Bishop in his own
house. The Papists think it arrogancy that any man (except those of the
clergy) should dippe in matters of religion and doctrine.

I will.] Surely only the faithful are wise, and others, howsoever they
pretend wisdom, Only the faithful are wise.
are fools. And true wisdom is only to be sought out of the Scriptures; and
the cause of the errors of the Roman Church is this, The cause of Popish
errors.
That they will not be Disciples to the Scriptures, but Masters to throw it
whether they list, as a nose of wax, and with their vain glosses, to
adulterate the simplicity and purity of the same.

Against ignorance.
And further, these miscreants affirm in their open doctrine, that ignorance is
the mother of devotion, and that it is sufficient for the people, to believe as
the Church believes. But David says plainly, that he will instruct them. For
where the Papist alleges the obscurity of the Scripture, David calls it, a
light to our eyes, and a lantern to our feet. Ps: 119.105
So that the word is not hid, but to those that perish. And as we should be
diligent in opening up and unloosing the seal of that book, so should ye be
ready and attentive to understand it,

Moreover, it is to be considered that al men are naturally ignorant, til they
be instructed, for no man understands the things of God except by the
preaching of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 2 14 Act. 8.31. 1 Samuel 3.7.
for who can believe except he hear. Therefore we should desire, that the Lord
may thrust out faithful laborers into his harvest, Math. 6.38.
who may bring both light and life unto his people.

And teach thee the way.] He becomes not only a general Doctor, but a
special and particular. I will teach thee, for the thing that is spoken to
all, is spoken to none. For if Nathan had spoken against adultery in general,
David would not have repented it, and said; I have sinned, neither yet if Elias
had generally reproved oppression in his Sermon to King Achab, he would not
have taken it to himself. But when he said, 1 King. 21.19.
Occidisti, possedisti, thou have killed, and also taken possession, then he
took it to be spoken of him. This liberty John Baptist used to Herod; Math.
14.4. Luke 13.32.
It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife. And our Savior called
Herod a Fox.

Why then should not particular remedies be applied to particular diseases.
Particular remedies should be applied to particular diseases.
What avails it though a Physician would discourse of medicine, and of
ulcers, Apostoms, and what ever evil could befall to the body of a man, if in
the mean time he applied not cure to the person diseased. His Theoricks are
nothing worth, unless his practice follow after. So I conclude this lesson,
where David says, erudiam te, I will instruct thee, that it is necessary for a
Pastor particularly to apply his doctrine, either to comfort, reprove,
admonish, or instruct, as the Apostle says. 2 Timothy 3.16. For the Ministry is
by application of the general doctrine to the diseased, for the word vndrawne
has no edge, but being drawn is sharper then a two edged sword, dividing
between the marrow and bones, Heb 4.12
piercing between the Soul and Spirit.

Against such as will not take with particular reproves. Let people say, as
they please, and ministers do as they should.
This condemns such as cannot abide particularly to be rebuked, but say, what
ne^de these bra^nsicke men to make pulpit matters of every thing, I cannot
endure to be chid for every idle word, he bears me envy. But let them say
what they please, let Ministers do as they should. The patient will be angry
when his wounds are pierced; what of that, it is sufficient that the Physician
is d^ing a good cure. Let him rage as he pleases, when he comes to
himself, he will find what profit he has gotten by him.

In the way, that thou shall go.] Here is the matter wherein he shall be
instructed, in the way he should go. It is called a way, because it is the
necessary mean, by which man must attain to the end of his journey, for none
can attain to the end, but by the way which carries thereto.

This way never man knew, but by revelation from God, in his holy Scriptures
which begins, continues, and ends in him. Godliness is a going in Gods
way. Psalm. 119.32 Deuteronomy. 4.6.
Then godliness is a going in Gods way and following his directions, and
guides, appointed by him. I have considered thy ways and kept thy
commandments. Keep his ordinances for that is your wisdom. I will do
wisely in the perfect way; Psalm: 101.2.
(says David) where he tyeth wisdom to the perfect way. The ways of God
are safest, being the Kings high way, wherein, if a man walk, he will find
himself surest; Psalm: 91.11
For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.
Gods ways are the clearest ways, his ways are vncorrupt. His ways are the
rightest ways, 2 Samuel 22.31.
This way shall be called holy. These are the ancient ways. The ways of the
Lord are righteous, and the just shall walk in them. Isa. 35.8.
For the which the Apostle reproves Simon Magus, will thou not cease to
pervert the straight ways of the Lord. Hos. 14.9.
All other ways are crooked, Act. 13.10.
they have made them crooked paths: who so ever goes therein, shall not know
peace. Isa: 55.8.


I will guide th^e with mine eye.] This threefold repetition, I will instruct
thee, I will teach thee, I will guide thee, Three pr^perties requisite in a
Preacher.
teach us three properties of a good teacher. First, that they make the people
understand the way to salvation. Secondly, to go before them. Thirdly, to
watch over them, and their ways.

First, First, that they infor^^ the people in Gods way. Neh. 8.9.
the pastors and ministers of Gods word should inform the people of God in his
truth, as Ezra did, who read the book of the Law distinctlie, and gave the
sense thereof, causing them to understand it, teaching pure and wholesome
doctrine faithfully, without mixture of man's inventions; which the Apostle
recommendeth to Timothy. 2 Timothy 2.2.
What things thou have heard of me by many witnesses* the same deliver to
faithful men, which shall be able to teach others also. Avoiding curious
questions and unknown words. Then if a minister should be apt to teach, there
should none be put in the places of the Church, who before have not given
proof to the Church of their qualification. As in the Roman Church such are
appointed to Benefices, who are altogether ignorant of Scriptures, and who
attend on the Court, and matters civil, and go in Pomp, attending on the
Pope, their Chaplans and Suffragans, such belliegods in the mean time abusing,
the people by their service, and so as blind, guiding the blind to the Ditch.
Luke 6.39.


Next, it is necessary, that the Preacher should teach the people by his life;
Secondly, teach them by his life and conversation.
for, he who teaches well and lives evil, condemns himself with his own
mouth, for he takes upon him to gu^de others to heaven, who cannot gu^de
himself. Thou who teach others, Romans 2. Exodus 28.34.36.
teach not thyselfe. Minist^rs should have, Holiness to the Lord written on
their foreheads, and not only the word to be opened, and sounding as the Bells
on Aarons garments, but odoriferously smelling as sweet Pomgranats. And this
condemns such vicious men, Against the evil life of such as pre ch one thing
and practis^ another Math* 7 ^8. Math 25.41. Thirdly, to watch over the people.
who blot their calling by their vicious life, making the good word of God to
be evil spoken of, of whom is said, Woe be to them who give offense, and
albeit, they would prophecy and cast forth deu^is in Christ's name, he will
say to them; Depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

Thirdly, (as David says, I will direct you with mine eye) Preachers should be
watchmen, and Superintendents, and Bishops, from which comes the name (...),
Episcopi, as the mother ever having her child before her eye, that he fall not
into dangers. But when the Preacher attends not on the people, no marvel that
they perish. The sheep must ever be guided by the eye of the shepherd. The
Prophet Zachary speaks against such shepherds as leave their flock, Zach.
11.17
and denounces judgment against them, as also other Prophets do.
Nebuchadnezor commanded Nebuzaradan to have an eye on Jeremy for his good.
Ier. 39.11.
And God says concerning his people in Captivity; I will set mine eyes upon
them for their good. Ier. 24.6.


Those who take upon them spiritual charges, should attend diligently on their
people, Preachers should (as shepherds) wait on their flock.
whereof they must give an account at the great day. And the blood of such as
are lost by their negligence, shall undoubtedly be craved at their hands. As ye
may read in Ezech. 3.18.

Against non-residence.
The sin of non-residence, is a great sin, a Minister is tied to live among
his people, he may go from them sometimes upon necessity, but not dwell from
them. He may go to the Court, law, or Session, but not abide there, but ever
attend on his flock.

Against such as will not suffer themselves to be rebuked by the Minister.
Again, the frowardness of many is to be blamed, who will not suffer their
faults to be observed by the Minister, but say; What has he to do with me or
my house, let him guide himself well, and his own house. No, but he is set by
God to attend on thy ways.

Against ^^ch as entreat the Minister unkindly. S^^^l.
Finally, upon this Preface I observe, that where the Ministers should guide you
to heaven, should ye not entertain them kindly. What a barbarous man is he,
who will not both love and cherish his guide, who leads him through a perilous
way? And yet this is the lot, has been, and shall be unto the worlds end,
that the best guides are commonly misguided, and evil entreated, and for their
paine^ receives nothing but calumnies, hatred, and spiteful dealing.

They are like those in Isaias days, Isa. 30.10. Ier. 11.21.
who said to the Seer, see not, and in Ieremies days the men of Onathoth, who
discharged him to Preach in the name of the Lord: but let the people hear
Saint Basil, saying; Obiurgatio ost animasanatio, a rebuke is the healing of
the soul.

Be not like an Horse, or like a Mule.] The preface of the exhortation was
contained in the 8. verse, which I have expounded: Now follows the
exhortation, or rather dehortation it self, wherein he exhorts them to
repentance, and dehorteth them from that beastly stupiditie, and obstinacy,
and pervicacie, which beseems rather Mules and Horses, then men, who should
be reasonable, and obedient to God their Master; for this habit which we have
received through the custom of sin, does shut up the door to repentance.
The Mules are lasie, stupid, The n^^^o of the horse and mule, whereby the
nature of man is r^presente^.
and dull beasts, who are to be urged continually, either by whippe, or spur.
The horse more ferocious and furious, has need of the bit and bridle.

Thus those two beasts represents our natures, and Gods dealing with us, that
either we are too slow in any good action, and have need of a sputre
continually on our side, or more bent and marching furiously with Iehu to all
evil actions, 2 Kin* 9.2^
therefore God is forced to put a bridle in our teeth, to restrain from evil,
as he had a spur to constrain us to do good.

These two creatures are intractable, says the Prophet, they understand not,
their mouths must be bound.

M^^ are compared to those beasts whose manners they follow.
God in all the Scriptures compares men to beasts, whose manners they resemble,
as I showed before, therefore I will not repea^e it. But these two are observed
in the Horse and Mule, they have no knowledge, no willingness.

Moreover, it is known, that Horses are libidinous, neying after Mares, How
the wicked resemble the Horse.
so that hardly they can be stayed from them; so do men after women, without
measure, till God stay them by adversity and some hard handling. Phidias
painted the picture of Venus treading on a Snaile, which only amongst all
creatures wants an heart: so witless persons, frying in their shell, Deuteronomy.
32.15
etc. therefore he forsook God that made him, etc.

The Mule is a creature not created by God, generate between an Horse and an
Ass, yea contrary to his institution, who forbad there should be any mixture
of diverse kinds, Genesis 36.24. How the wicked resemble the Mule.
either beasts or seeds. And so a wicked man is a degenerate creature, not of
Gods creation, but bred between Satan and sin, who are the only parents of
that Beast.

work, but die in their own sin.

And as they are so stupid, that the greater burden be laid on them they go
the more quickly;

Ier. 8, 4. and 6.
and Gods plagues, run madly to their own destruction.

And finally, as the Horse and Mule remember for the present, but shortly after
forget;

Who understand not.] Mark the ignorance of man's nature, who understands not
those things pertaining to God. Animalis homo (says the Apostle) non novit
quae sunt Dei. 1 Cor. 2.1^.
The natural man knows not the things belonging to God. Yea cannot, being
more ignorant then brutish Beasts, who know the crib of their Master. Isa. 1.3.
Nebuchadnezar would not hear and learn till God changed him to a brute
Beast, not in shape of body, but in conversing with them seven years, Dan. 3.
till his understanding came again. 2 Pet. 2.16.
Balaam was rebuked by his Ass. The Pastors are become brute beasts having no
understanding. Ier. 10.21.


But because Beasts have not been created reasonable, as man is, it is not
imputed to them, that they are ignorant. But man, being borne a reasonable
creature, he is justly to be blamed, that he is metamorphosed and changed unto
the nature of a Beast, as Circe changed her ghuests into Beasts. Therefore let
us pray to God to illuminate our minds with the knowledge of his will, and send
us his Spirit, who may lead us in all truth.

Whose mouth thou bindest with bit and bridle.] The similitude of the bit and
bridle is common in the Scriptures. The Lord says to Senacherib; I will put
mine hook in thy nostrels, and my bridle in thy lips, 2 King. 19.28. Pro.
26.3. 2 Samuel 8.1. Isa. 30.28.
and will bring thee back again the same way thou came. And Solomon says,
A rod is for the back of the fool. It is called the bridle of bondage. A
bridle to cause them to err in the jaws of the people. And the Lord to
Pharaoh, Ezekiel. 29.4.
I will put hooks in thy jaws. And to the Prince of Meshech and Tubal the
same. Ezekiel. 38.4.


(...)(says Xenophon de re equestri) (...). Respira re non prohibet, mordere
autem non sinit. He forbids not to breath, but he suffers not to byte.

See how God is forced to use extremities to tame a wild nature, which by no
lessons, warnings, or admonitions can be tamed. Man has need of many bridles.
Herodian in his 7. Book, and Lucius in his 35. Book, praise the Numidians
for their skill in riding without bridles, whom Virgil in the 4. of Aeuead and
Ausonius in great. action. pro consul. gratian. call infrenos, gentem uesciam
freni And seeing among the Num^ds their ryders can ride without a bridle; Note.
Fie upon Christians, who have so many birs, and cannot make use of them, to
ride forward, and run into Gods obedience.

God has taken great pains to chastise us, albeit, we have not amended, but
gone from evil to worse, and therefore seeing neither his good provocations,
neither his chastisements will work upon us he has one bit and bridle to
keep us in from doing more evil, even at the hour of our death, God has a
bridle for man.
where we shall be curbed in, that we do no more. Were it not better for us,
to make better use of the frequent admonitions of Gods servants, and of the
chastisements which God has laid upon us, that we may humble us under the
mighty hand of God, and learn to be wise by our own experience, lest he be
forced to draw his sword against us.

Lest they come near thee] See the untowardness of these jades, the poor
Minister if he be upon their backs, can scarce keep the saddle, and if he
would lead him forward, one ^ade or other would take him by the collar, which
would not be, unless there were Hor^e and Mules.

Many sorrows shall come to the wicked.] Now is set down two reasons, which
may raise and rouse the natural man from his senseless brutishinesse.

First, from the judgments of God upon the wicked.

Secondly, from his mercies to his elect and obedient children.

Desperate is he who will neither be moved with admonitions no^ corrections.
So that either Gods mercy may allure him, or his justice terrify him. Then he
must needs be a desperate person, who can be moved with neither of them. Before
he called them in^ocil, and vatractable, and obstinate, now he called them
wicked, not a simple sinner, as we be all, but who adds drunkenness to
thirst, and rebellion and presumption to his ignorance, worse then a Mule or
Horse.

He comprises all the miseries of the wicked, The life of the wicked is sorrow
Luke 16. 1 Samuel 25.37.
under the name of sorrow, who although they live delitiously with the rich
Glutton, and Nabal, yet all their mirth is converted into sorrow, and
perplexity; for as the miseries of Gods children are ever turned into joy;
Psalm 30.5.
Weeping is at evening, but joy comes in the mor^ing; so the joys of the
wicked are ever turned into sorrows, for albeit they seem the happiest men
under the Sun, yet the sudden revolution and change of their estate, shall
demonstrate to the world, what fools they were, and how the Devil bewitched
them, Dan. 5.30.
and (as upon Beltashar) brought unexpected sorrows upon them in the midst of
their joys. And is it not just with God, to render tribulation to them who
troubled his Church; and them releasement, who have had many grieved hearts for
the same. And I doubt not but the Lord in his mercy, shall so bring about all
matters, that as the wicked trivmph and rejoice at the sorrows of the Saints,
God shall make them weep time about, and bring joy to his elect. Mat. 5.4.
Luke 6.25.
Blessed are they that weep, for they shall be comforted; woe to you who
laugh, for ye shall weep.

Many sins bring many sor^owes.
Many sorrows:] Many sins bring many plagues, many in life, many in death,
many in this life, many in the life to come, many within him, many without him.
So unhappy is the state of the wicked, whose sorrows shall be multiplied. Isa
65.13.14.
Behold my servants shall eat, and ye shall be hungry, etc. and in the Revel.
Revel. 9.12 Revel. 8.13.
One woe is past, and two are to come: and the Angel flying through heaven,
cried; Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabitants of the earth.

The godly and wickeds sorrow differ.
The Godly have sorrow also, but nothing comparable to theirs; For God
remembers mercy in the mids of judgment, which he does never to the wicked;
the Lord delivers the godly, as the Israelites through the Sea, and drownes
the wicked.

The examples of Gods judgments are seen in Lucifer. Isa. 14.12. Genesis 3.10.
Genesis 4.11. Gen 7. Genesis 18.19.
Our first parents. Caine. the first world. The five Cities. Pharaoh.
Nebuchadnezar. Antiochus. Herod, etc. Read over the 28. of Dout. There is a
Catalogue of the sorrows of the wicked, which should affraie any Christian
heart. And also in the 20. of Job. where is said; Job. 20.22.
all sorrow shall fall on him. But mercy shall compass him, who trusts in
the Lord. He has threatened in his doctrine the wicked with a consideration of
Gods judgments. Now he is alluring them, with an offer of Gods mercies, the
godly are ever well, and all turn to the best to them. Salvation and welfare
attends them in all places, at all times, in all causes, in all their
business, in things certain, and uncertain, in prosperity and adversity,
in body and soul, in things present and to come.

Mercy:] What ever come to him is mercy, and flowing from the fountain of
the remission of his sins. The Lord crowns them with mercies, yea, his
sins turn to mercies to him. But of this before.

Shall compass him.] The godly as they are compassed with trouble so are they
with mercies. 2 King. 6.15.17. Psalm. 125.2. Zach. 2.5.
Mercy belongs to the faithful.
As he was compassed with innumerable troubles, So God shall compass him with
as many comforts. Dothan was compassed with Aramits, so was it also with
Angels, as the mountain compasses Jerusalem* so is the Lord about his people,
and has promised to be a wall of fire about her.

That trusts in the Lord.] These are the people to whom mercy appertains,
even the believers, for faith only maks us acceptable to God. But of this
likewise before.

I beseech God make us all penitent for our sins, and sensible of his
^uercies, but above all things, root us in the Faith of Christ, that we may
depend upon his promises; that are both faithful and true.

VERSE. 11. Be glad ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful all
ye that are upright in heart.
The substance of this verse.
THis verse contains the conclusion of the Psalm, wherein is set down, an
exhortation ^o such as are happy and blessed by remission of their sins, to
a spiritual joy and praising of God. And this exhortation depends very well
on the antecedents; for having spoken of the remission of sins, and the
fruits of repentance, and the fatherly mercy of God toward the faithful, to
whom properly this exhortation belongs.

For after the remission of sins, After remission of sin arises joy. Gal.
5. Romans 5.1.
there arises an unspeakable joy in the believers heart, for joy is that
fruit of faith. And after the Apostle. Romans 4. had spoken of justification, he
infers, Romans 5. Then being iustifieed by faith, we have peace toward God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Which doubtlesly co^prehendeth all sorts of joy,
and the Angels when they Preached to the shepherds of Christ, Luke 2.10.
they professed they told joyful tidings.

This exhortation contains three parts. First, what he does exhort, to
rejoice. Secondly, whom; the righteous and upright men. Thirdly, the limitation
thereof, in the Lord.

Be glad:] He exhorts them three times, be glad, rejoice, and be joyful, and
as ^ee made mention of a threefold blessing, so does he of a threefold joy.
Wherein, we have two things necessary to be observed: First, the duinesse of
our nature, who as slow horses need many spurs, Man's senslesnesse in
spiritual things.
and prou^c^tions to spiritual things, for we are naturally overmuch ^ent to
carnal things, that we need no incitations to the same. But by the contrary
in spiritual things, we are cast in a deep sleep, who cannot be wakened at
the first cry, as those men after drink have need to be roused often, that
they may behold the light, so men drunken with the pleasures of sin, as
Nazianzen says, Must be wakened by diverse exhortations, as this same Prophet
in the subsequet Psalm, redoubleth his exhortatio^s for the same effect. And
the Apostle to the Philippians says, Phil. 4.4.
rejoice in the Lord continually, and I say again, Tho proper signification of
the words, be glad.
rejoice.

Next, I perceive that this exhortation grows, for the word Be glad, properly
in the own language signifies an inward and hearty joy, Psalm. 35.26. Rejoice.
by the presence or hope at least of a thing desirable or good. The second word
Rejoice, in the own language signifies, to express our joy by some outward
gesture, sometimes used for dancing, as the Hills skip for gladness. Psalm.
65.12. Be joyful. Isa. 35.6.
The third word Be joyful, signifies to cry forth for gladness, as the dumb
man's tongue shall sing.

This Gradation teaches us, Spiritual joy always increases.
that this is the nature of Spiritual joy. That it is always augmented to us
by certain degrees, until the time is come to the perfection of all joy,
which is signified by the last word, importing as it were a triumph, and
showting after victory. So that they are truly penitent, when they have
overcome sin, and Satan in their spiritual combat, triumphs over them as
vanquished enemies.

In the world ye shall have trouble, Ioh. 16.33.
but in me ye shall have joy; rejoice, I have overcome the world. The Martyrs
who suffer the loss of their lives, and riches, with great joy answers in the
midst of the fiery flames where they sing, and praise God, as though they felt
no pain; their inward joy swallowing up their outward trouble. Christians in
their very death answers to that, when they cry. O death where is thy sting, O
hell where is thy victory. So, 1 Cor. 15. Inward joy swalloweth up outward
crosses.
how so ever they be subject to the greatest miseries outwardly, yet the joy
arising from the assurance of Gods favor does swallow them up.

Observe, Only those truly rejoice whose sin is pardoned Pro. 29.6. Pro.
14.10. Psalm. 40.16. Isa. 65.13. Rev. 2.17.
moreover that none can truly rejoice, but these who have gotten remission of
their sins. The righteous does sing and rejoice. The stranger shall not meddle
with his joy. Let them that seek rejoice and be glad in thee. My servants
shall rejoice says the Lord. For they get the white stone given them, And a
name written therein, which no man knows, saving he that receives it. And
this is, Thy sins are forgiven thee. Indeed the wicked have their own
earthly and fleshly joys, but if ye would examine them strictly, they are
rather torments then joys, which Chrysostom observes well, Chrysostom. him. 18. ad
pop. Atiochenum
affirming that joy is only proper to the godly, and never to be attributed to
the wicked. For the covetous man whose pleasure is in riches, the more they
grow, the more his thirst increases, which desire tormenteth them, as also the
fear of the loss of them, excrutiats his mind night and day, when riches
grow, fear grows. And the Prophet Isaias says, Isa. 57.20.
The wicked are like the raging Sea, Es. 57.21.
that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt, there is no peace,
says, my God to the wicked.

The godly and wickeds joy differ.
But there is a great difference beweene the joy of the godly and the joy of the
wicked, if ye will compare them, for the one rejoices only in God, the other
in earthly things. The scule of the godly is endued with true and solid joy:
the flesh of the wicked only enioyes perishing pleasures, the godly they
rejoice in the midst of their troubles, the wicked are grieved in the midst of
their joys. The joys of the godly are eternal, the joys of the godly are
evermore augmented till at last they attain to eternal felicity, but the hope
of the wicked turns in despair, their life in death eternal. Finally the
joys of the godly spring out of tears, They sow a precious seed in tears,
and reap in joy, for the spiritual harvest is far different from the
temporal harvest, The Spiritual and earthly harvest differ.
for the husbandmen holds by their experience, that the harvest will be
answerable to the seed time, but in the Christian harvest, we fow with watrie
tears and reapes on dry weather, by the contrary the wicked have a dry and
seasonable seede-time, but they reap with waterie tears with confusion.

Reasons of the peoples joy.
The reasons wherefore, First because none else have warrant to rejoice. For the
wicked man, nothing troubles him, not sin, 1 The godly have a warrant to
rejoice.
for it is his pleasure: not tentations, these he swalloweth up: not his
conscience, it is a sleep: not the Devil, he is already made his vassal and
Servant: not the world, it is his treasure: no outward afflictions, he will
not endure them: Iam. 5 1. Luk 6.25.
Yea S. James bids them not rejoice but houle. Houle ye rich men. And S. Luke
says to them, woe be to you that rejoice now for ye shall mourn.

2. They are commanded to rejoice.
Secondly as the godly only are commanded to rejoice, so they have only cruse
to rejoice, because they only enjoy the presence of God by reason of the
covenant, they have entresse to all things in heaven and in earth, as a woman
has to the goods of her husband: which is a great cause of joy. Next, they
know that their names are written in the book of life, as our Savior says.
Luke 10.20.
Rejoice not in this, that ye may cast out devils, but that your names are
written in the book of life.

3. They have the spirit of God, the author of joy.
Thirdly, only they have the spirit of God, the author of true joy, which is
therefore called the joy of the holy Ghost. Only they are anointed with the
oil of gladness.

Fourthly, only they have escaped from condemnation, 1 These 1.6. Psalm. 45.7.
as the Israelites escaped the hand of Pharaoh, and rejoiced.

4. They escape condemnation. Exodus 15.1.
Fifthly, only these suck and draw their joy out of the Wells of sound
consolation, that is, out of the Scriptures, which are written, that their joy
may be full.

5. They draw joy out of the Scriptures. Isa. 12.3. 1 Ioh. 1.4.
Sixthly, only these enjoy a good conscience, which is a continual feast; and
the cause of the Apostles joy, in the midst of their persecutions.

Finally, only they have the hope of eternal glory; We rejoice under the hope
of the glory of God, 6. They have a good conscience. Pro. 15.15.
says the Apostle.

Ye righteous and upright in heart.] They are called righteous in two respects.
1. Because they have received the blood of Jesus Christ, which has made them
righteous before God, 7. Hope of eternal glory. Why called righteous.
by his p^ssiue obedience, in that he has suffered for their sins; as
likewise by his active obedience, whereby he has fulfilled the law, which are
both imputed to them, as though they had suffered, and done both themselves. As
also they are righteous, having received the Spirit of sanctification, which
teaches them to render to every one that which is his own. To Caesar, Mat.
22.21.
that which is Caesar's. To the Superiors that which is his. To his equal that
which appertains to him; to his Inferior, that which he ought to do.

The rule of righteousness.
The rule of righteousness is set down in the 15. Psalm, that neither in
name, body, nor goods, we should iniure any man.

The righteous man must be sincere and upright.
The righteous man must also be upright in heart, that is, sincere, for faith
and hypocrisy can never stand together, for of all virtues, God likes best of
sincerity, and singleness of heart, that in our Religion we mean sincerely,
and we may say to the Lord, Thou tryest my reins in the night season, and
foundest nothing in my mouth, which was not in my heart.

And with our neighbors, we should deal so uprightly, that we may not have
Butter and Oil in our mouth, and a sword in our heart, but as we profess
kindness to them, who speak kindly, so our heart may mean the same, Psalm.
12. Righteousness cannot be without sincerity.
and have not an heart and an heart.

To conclude this point, righteousness and sincerity are so joined together,
that the one can never be without the other, and they are reciprocal, that a
righteous man must be sincere, and a sincere man must be righteous.

The godly rejoice in the Lord.
The limitation of this joy is set down in the last part, In Jehovah, which
distinguishes the Christian joy, from all joys earthly. Some rejoice in one
thing; some in another, but the Christian rejoices in the Lord. Let not the
rich man rejoice in his riches, nor the strong man in his strength, nor the
wise man in his wisdom, but rejoice in the Lord.

Only one question remains to be dissolved; Ob:
Whether may not men lawfully rejoice in the blessings that God has given
them, as a man in the Wife of his youth, Parents in their children, and in
their temporal blessings?

I answer, yea, verily, providing always, that God be the ground and end of
their rejoicing: 1 Samuel 4.17 18.
as did the love of Eli to his children, who in the end smarted for it.

The Lord moderate our joys, that they may be all in him, and sanctify our
persons, that they may be righteous, and upright, that the loyes we receive
here, may be entrances to the everlasting joys we shall receive in the
kingdom of Heaven, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
A GODLY AND FRUITFUL EXPOSITION ON THE xxxviij PSALM.
THis Psalm has three parts to be considered. First, The division of the
Psalm.
the title and superscription, A Psalm for remembrance. Secondly, David's
humble confession of his sins, which brought forth such miseries on his body
and mind, which he regrateth throughout all the Psalm, until the two last
verses. Thirdly, a prayer to God for support and relief out of those troubles,
contained in the two last verses.

The title, A Psalm for remembrance.
THe meaning of this title is, that he would keep it to be a memorial and a
memento of his miseries, which because of his sin he did sustain at the
making hereof. For man by nature is forgetful of his miseries, Man remembers
his trouble no longer then whilst he is under it.
so that they pass as waters that are gone; yea albeit they urge him very
vehemently while they are lying on him, yet he presently forgets them when
he gets the smallest relief; as men do the stormy blasts of Winter, so
soon as some few fair Summer days do appear. Forgetfulness springs of
ingratitude. Psalm. 103.2. Doctrine. God who delivers us, must put us in mind
of our delivery. Genesis 28.20
and therefore David prays unto the Lord, that his benefits slip never out of
his mind. So that God who delivers us out of our troubles, must also furnish
us with memory, both to remember the delivery, as also the troubles out of
which he has delivered us.

Jacob made a vow at Bethel, that if God went with him, and would keep him in
the journey which he went, and would give him bread to eat and clothes to put
on etc. then he should be his God. But when he returned, God put him in mind of
his vow, saying, Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there, and make there an
altar unto God that appeared unto thee when thou fleddest from Esau thy
brother. Genesis 35.1.


And as it is natural in us to forget Gods benefits, so is it as natural in
us to remember evil. Man rem^bers evil too well.
If any has offended us in the smallest word, that we keep fresh in memory:
Nam ira tardissime senescit, wrath slowly grows old. As the sieue retains
and bears above the clats and bran,

This superscription is not to be found in all the Psalms, except in this and
in the seventy. Always let us pray unto the Lord to furnish us with a
faithful remembrance both of our sins provoking him to wrath against us, and
of his manifold mercies pardoning our manifold sins; as also that we may
forget the particular injuries and wrongs done unto us.

The substance and use of this Psalm. In this 38 Psalm David deploreth unto
God the violence of his sickness, the malice of his adversaries, who seeming
to pity him, mocked him by their crafty visitation, exulcerating his wounds
by their deceitful dealing, while he in the mean time in patience possessed
his soul, not making answer to their injuries, in the first twenty verses; in
the two last imploring Gods help for his deliverance from them.

The use of this Psalm.

This Psalm will be very pertinent for every one, who is outwardly or inwardly
grieved: for they have this godly Prince and Prophet set down before them in
that same case: as Christ also, whose type he was, was acquainted with the like
miseries, and an high Priest, who having tafted of all our dolours, may more
heartily compassionate us in our afflictions.

The Papists think that this Psalm should be sung for those that are in
Purgatory, Against the Papists songs for those in Purgatory.
(which they themselves grant was not before Christ's days:) but if they marked
it rightly, they would be ashamed of that assertion; for it destroys all the
grounds of their purgatoriall fire, which some of themselves confess; from
whom albeit Lorinu^ the Jesuit and Bellarmine do not disassent, yet they think
it not meet to condemn the opinion of others who affirm the same, lest
thereby they should give us (whom they call Heretics) cause of rejoicing.
Whereby we may plainly perceive how those two arch-heretikes detain the truth
of God in unrighteousness, (...) 1.18.
commending and approving the false wresting of the Scriptures, yet not daring
to condemn that as heretical doctrine, which they cannot prove to be
canonical and agreeable to the truth.

VERSE 1. O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy wrath.
THere are 22 verses of this Psalm, answering to the order of the Hebrew
Alphabet. This first verse is agreeable to the first verse of the sixth Psalm
(of which I have written at length) except only in the two Hebrew words
Beappecha and Bekitspecha, which are Synonyma, and of one signification: which
two Psalms Saint Basil conferring together, finds them to agree in many
things, as the diligent Reader by comparing them together may perceive. He also
compares a sinner to a sick man, Basil. lib. 1. de sta^u animae.
qui leuia ac mitia pharmaca desideret, ferrim and incisiones and ignem
deprecetur, who desires light and easy plasters, and again, would be free of
cuttings, fire, and extreme remedies. To the foresaid place of the sixth Psalm
(lest I should seem tedious in repetition) I refer the Reader.

VERSE 2. For thine arrows have light upon me, and thine hand lies upon me.
SAint Ierom translateth the Hebrew word Nichathu, piercing me. The arrows of
God, are the calamities and vexations whereby he was unquieted in mind and
body; compared to arrows frequently in the Scriptures, as Deuteronomy. 32.23. I will
bestow mine ^rrowes upon them. And in the 42 verse, I wi^ make mine arrows
drunk with blood. And Job 6.4. The arrows of the Almighty are in me. For God
is compared to an archer, whose hand is strong, what Gods arrows are.
and wauereth not; who has a sharp eye, foreseeing on what part his arrows
will light. His arrows are his afflictions; his mark, is the souls and
bodies either of the elect or reprbate.

In this, that God is the archer who shoots at us we have singular comfort,
that it is his hand who made us, God who Wounds (...), must also steal us
^g^ine. (...).
that also wounds us; neither can any evil come from his hand: for albeit he
wound us, yet he will cure v^ again. Come, let us return to the Lord, (says
the Prophet) for he has wounded us, and he will heal us again* His sword
cutteth with the one side, and heals with the other; as the Poet speaks of
Achilles: Ovid. lib. 1. de Trislib.
-- and qui mihi vulnera fecit,
Solus Achilleo tollere more potest.
Gods arrows are like Ionathans, which he shot to David in the fields, 1. Sa.
20.36
in token of his love. God, says Saint Augustine, Aug. conf. 9. cap. 2.
amat quos sagittat, loves those at whom he shoots. And Chrysostom calls
them, Chrys^hom. 3. in Ioh. lib. 10. cap. 6.
Sagittae salutis Domini, the arrows of the Lords salvation.

Those arrows commonly are either wicked men or devils, The diverse so^ts o^
Gods arrows.
whom God sends forth to afflict his own children, sharp as arrows, light
and swift as arrows, and ready to do harm to Gods Saints; or else sickness,
poverty, infamy, and such other afflictions, whereby our most gracious Father
thinks most fit to subdue our vile corruption: all which albeit in their own
nature they are evil, Nota.
yet God can convert and turn them to the utility and profit of his own
children.

The mark and But at which the Lord shoots here, is David.

And uses the Lord to make his pastime to shoot at his own Saints?

I answer, Solut. How God is said to shoot at the godly, and how at the wicked.
he shoots both at the godly and wicked, but upon diverse intentions: at the
godly, to waken them out of their sleep, and he will cure the wound which he
makes: at the wicked for their utter destruction; he shoots at their heart,
to kill them.

Are fixed in me. By this he declares, that it is impossible to any creature,
visible or invisible, to pull forth that arrow which God shoots. The hand
which shoots it, must also pull it forth. Albeit the devil, the Caldeans and
Sabeans plagued Job, and were arrows shot by God, as he confesses Chap. 13.
verse 14. and Chap. 19. verse 21. yet the Lords hand only relieved him.

And thine hand ly^th on me. This second comparison, taken from the hand of a
man, signifies, that whatsoever trouble came to him, he took it from Gods
hand. The sorts of Gods ^ands in ^^e Scrip^^^^s.
His hand sometime is called the hand of creation; as Psalm. 8.3. When I behold
th^ne heaue^^, eue^ the works of thy fingers. Sometime of delivery; as when
he delivered his people ou^ of Egypt by a strong hand. Sometime of revenge, as
Heb. 10.31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the l^uing God. It
has also many other significations in the Scripture. And so David in his
sickness sets before his eyes the hand of God enarmed for the punishment of
his sin. And whosoever he be, that subsisteth and stays in the sense of his
calamities, he differs nothing from a beast: but this is wisdom and
prudencie in a Christian to look up unto him who smites him; whereof Isay
complains: for the people turn not to him who s^it^ them.

Lorinus the Jesuit makes a ridiculous accommodation of this chastising hand
of God, in these words: Isa. ^3. A ridicules application made by Lorinus.
Per ac^ommodation^m pratere^ posset illud admitti, vt confirmatio manus sit
veluti impressio illa collophi, quae sit ab Episcopo ei, qui sacramcutum
Confirmationis confert, memoriae causa: nam and titulus Psalmi est in
rememorationem: that is, Moreover this might be admitted by application, that
the confirmation of the hand may be like to that impression of the blow, which
is made by the Bishops hand, to whom he gives the sacrament of Confirmation
for memories cause; for the title of the Psalm is in remembrance. Indeed such
a ridiculous exposition of the Scriptures and abuse thereof, deserves to be
laughed at by children. For if David had not felt heavier blows from the hand
of God, then the children do from the Bishops, I think he had no cause to
complain.

VERSE 3. There is nothing sound in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither
is there rest in my bones, because of my sin.
HE proceeds in this third verse to exaggerate and amplify the greatness of
his grief from the universality thereof, that his sickness was not laid on
any one part of his body, but upon his whole flesh, and upon all his bones.
His flesh is his exterior part, his bones his interior. Albeit the ulcers and
wounds of his flesh were very sensible to him, and more horrible in the eyes of
men who beheld them (as those of Job and Lazarus,) which he might have
apprehended deeply, when as by them he was made contemptible in the eyes of
men's yet his inward pain, which was more felt then seen, makes him thus so
pitifully to cry. Wherein we have these things to consider.

First, that as all his memb^rs agreed very well to the performance of his
filthy lust, All his members sinned, all are punished.
so every one of them receives a condign punishment. And it is good for man
that he should be thus chastised in this world for a little time, rather then
he should be reserved for everlasting darkness, where every member shall
receive eternal pain for their sin. For as sin pleases nature, so it
destroys and consumes nature.

Gods wrath cannot ab^de sin,
Secondly, he marketh the cause of those punishments, even Gods wrath, because
of his sin. For when those two meet together* they are as fire and flax; Gods
wrath as fire,

Thirdly, observe that David makes not Gods wrath the only cause of his
miseries and heavy sickness, for that were to charge God of vn^ighteousnesse:
but he justifies God, Si^ne ((...) God) ^he ^^le of (...)
when he acknowledges that his own sin was the cause of all his evils. And
surely we can never give sufficient honor to God, except we free him of all
(...) of unjust dealing, and acknowledge o^^ selves to be the ca^^es of ou^
own ^^^^^ies.

Finally, I observe out of this verse, that the word in the original language
mippene, from the face, is two times repeated, both in speaking of Gods wrath
and his own own sins, that is, for the sight of them both. Wherein I
perceive a lesson worthy of consideration, God will not look favorably upon
us, unless first we look both upon our own sins and his anger at the^.
that is, that we must have a twofold sight, before we get the sight of Gods
favorable face: First, we must have our own sins before our eyes; next, we
must see the countenance of an angry God looking down upon us with austere
and heavy looks because of them: and then in the third room, we must beg
Gods favorable face to shine upon us. The Lord grant us the right sight of all
those three: that as Joseph's brethren first saw his angry countenance, Genesis 42.
and then his favorable acceptance with the greater gladness; so we may see
what we have deserved at Gods hand, and so after may hear the voice of joy and
gladness, Psalm. 51.8.
that the bones which he has broken may rejoice again. First we must hear the
terrible thundering of mount Sinai; then the joyful shouting of mount Sion.

VERSE 4. For mine iniquities are gone over mine head: and as a heavy burden
they are too heavy for me.
Having spoken before of the cause of his misery, which was his sins; now he
aggrauateth them in respect of their multitude, comparing them to waters which
had ouergone his head; and in respect of the magnitude and weight, A mark of a
truly penitent, to aggrauat^ his sin. Psa. 138.18
comparing them to a burden: which surely is a mark of a penitent sinner, when
he (as was David) can be content to confess his sins, to be in number more
then the sand of the sea, or the hairs of his head.

Why sins are compared to waters.
He compares his sins to waters, which albeit in the first entry are shallow,
that scarce they will touch the ankles; yet the further ye go into them, they
will be deeper, and will soon pass from your knee to your shoulders, and
ouergo your head, Ezekiel. 47.1.2.3.4.5.
and drown you, except God provide a remedy; as if a planke or board be casten
in, whereupon taking hold, you may easily escape the danger: even so we go from
sin to sin, and from less to greater, until that many sin^ meeting and
concerning together ouergo us; and we filling the cup of our iniquity, be
poisoned with the dregs thereof. Therefore let us take heed, and turn back in
time, lest going forward, contemning such warnings, we become selfe-murderers
of our own souls. We have better waters, thorough which we may go in safety,
the waters of Siloah, Esa. 8.6.
which run softly, by which we may refresh our own souls; the blessed blood
of Jesus Christ; and the waters of Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 47.12.
which flow in the Sanctuary, that we may grow from grace to grace, till we
come to glory.

Against auricular confession.
Out of this place is clearly condemned that auricular confession, by which men
are bound under p^in^ of condemnation to confess every particular sin to the
Priest, which is imposs^^^^ for them to do: when as David says, they are gone
over mine head; and again, Psalm 19.12.
Who can understand his faults?

It is no marvel that he says, his sins have gone over his head: for in
this one, he committed many sins, The persons against whom David sinned.
and offended many persons. He sinned against himself in defiling his own
body, against Bathsheba, against Vriah, against those slain with Vriah,
against his concubines; against the body of the people, by giving them an evil
example^ and (which was worst of all) against God, by making his Name to be
blasphemed.

And as a weighty burden they are too heavy for me. The second comparison is
taken from a burden, weightier then lead, Wherein sin is heavier then any b^rden.
heavier then sand. And indeed sin is more weighty then any burden whatsoever:
for, first, it presses down both soul and body. When Peter was chained in
prison, Act. ^2.
in the night he had liberty with joy to raise up his soul to praise God.
Paul was in prison, Act* 16.25.
but Gods word was not bound.

Next, burdens are upon some parts of the body, not upon all; as manicles are
on the hands, fetters on the feet, etc. other members being free; but sin and
the bonds thereof are upon every member, binding and pressing it down so, that
it cannot do any service to Christ. The ears are dull in he^ring, the eyes
full of adultery, Job 24.1^. Psalm 13.9.
the mouth an open sepulcher, the foot ready to shed blood, etc.

Thirdly, this is the greatest misery, that when all other burdens are felt,
we take thi^ on with pleasure, we undergo it with delight, without wearying,
and are as Issachar, asses couching between two burdens. Genesis 4 ^.1^.
And surely I think we are worse then asses. For when our burden grows
greatest, we do not only not groan under them, but are glad to under go them,
the two burdens, both of our conscience and of our bodies. The Israelites
groaned in Egypt under temporal burdens, Ezod. 2.13
and were heard; the Jews in Babylon, Psalm. 147.
and were relieved: would God we could groan, that so we might be helped.

I will not deny but David may also mean in this text of the burden of
afflictions; seeing the original word gnon, signifies pain; and Cain used
that selfsame word in the fourth of Genesis. For three burdens are mentioned
in the Scriptures: Three fort^ of burd^^ns. Mat. 11.28
of sin, as, Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden with sin, and I
will ease you. Of pain, as, Cast thy burden upon the Lord. Psalm. 37.15.
And of Gods benefits, as, Praised be God, who daily loadneth us with his
benefits. Psalm. 10.3.
God he loadneth us with his blessings both spiritual and temporal; and we
again laden him with our sins, with which we are loadned our selves; Ah
sinful nation, Isa. 1.4^
a people laden with iniquity. And therefore God justly must again laden us
with his corrections.

But it may be asked, how this selfsame speech is spoken both by Cain a
reprobate, ^biec ^.
and David an elect child of God.

I answer, David had a sight of Gods mercy in the midst of his sins, which
Cain did never see, and therefore did not run unto God for relief, as here
David does.

Verse 5. My wounds are putrisied, and corrupt, because of my foolishnesses*
HE goes further in the enumeration of ^is miseries, which he sets down by
the putrefaction and rotting of his wounds, and confesses the cause of them to
be his own foolishness. Where first ye see, Sin causes putrifactio^ and
rottenness. Genesis 3.19.
that sin brings putrefaction and rottenness to men's flesh. For as the sin
of Adam received that sentence, Dust thou art, and to dust shall thou return
again; so that curse ouertooke all his posterity, that they are subject to
putrefaction and rottenness: which not only befalls to them after their
death, but when they are yet alive, it seizes on their nature. For the sweet
savor, there shall be stink. Isa. 3.24.
Yea commonly those that have bin fed most delicately, stink most filthily
after their death. Nota.
Mollius, delicatiusque nutrita corpora grauius elent mortua. And it is seen
by common experience, that the fairest body has the foulest corpse. Which
Saint Ambrose confirming, brings in an example of one who lasciuiously and
libidinously having lain in whoredom and feasting daily, after his death did so
stink, that incense of diverse colors could not remove the same. A necessary
lesson for belly pamperers.
A fearful example, to strike terror in the hearts of all such pamperers of
their belly, and who make so much of their flesh, that they are careless of
all other things. Let them remember that they are (as Saint Augustine says in
his Confessions) esca vermium, and saccus stercorum, a prey of worms, and a
sack of dung. But their chief rottenness is worse then the rottenness of
Lazarus, Ioh. 11.39.
who stanke upon the fourth day: a type and figure of a sinner, who being dead
in sin, his mouth becomes an open sepulcher, and casts forth such a
stinking, unsavory and pestilentious smell, that it does infect the very air.

Because of my foolishness. The original version bears, from the face of my
foolishnes, as ye heard twice before. He calls it not foolishness to
extenuate his sin (as many hypocrites do, who say, they failed through
ignorance,) but to declare that he was bereft of his wits, and carried with a
beastly appetite after his own lusts. Sin is properly called folly, but it is
spiritually folly. A natural fool lacks the use of reason; A comparison
between a natural and a spiritual fool. Pro. 12.15. 1. Cor. 1.18 1 Cor.
2.14 1. Cor. 1.26
a spiritual fool is not guided by grace. A natural fool thinks himself
wiser then any other; so a spiritual fool thinks himself wise in his own
conceit, there is more hope of a fool then of him. The wisdom of God is
foolishness to men. The natural man perceives not the things that are of
God. Not many wise, etc. Thirdly, the effects try, how a fool marreth all his
matters; so does a sinner bring all miseries on his body, soul, estate,
posterity: and look how they laugh at our folly, (for they think religion
folly, and a holy life and devotion to be dotage,) so God does laugh them to
scorn, and their wisdom is turned to folly. He confounds the counsel of
Achitophel. 2. Sa. 17.29.
And at the last day they shall say, Behold, these who^ we thought fools, are
like the Angels of God.

Verse 6. I am bowed and crooked very sores, I go mourning all the day.
HE proceeds in the enlarging of his extreme troubles, wherewith he was
oppressed: so that it is a wonder to think, how his faith could bear up such
a heap of evils. And where he says, he was bowed and crooked, he shows how
far he was humbled under the mighty hand of God. 1. Pet. 5.6.
And he seems to oppose his great deiection and down-casting to the proud
pertinacie of many, who strive so against God, that none of his rods can humble
them; who albeit they be fearfully shaken and cast down, so that they are
forced to bow their body, yet their mind remains so obstinate, as though
they had sinews of iron in their necks, that they lift up their hearts against
God. Therefore this circumstance of his crooking and bowing, is an argument to
move God to pity his case, because he is not an obstinate sinner, and one who
is rebellious, but one cast down at the correction which he gat. There is no
fitter remedy for us to be delivered, then by hu^bling our selves under the
hand of God.
Whereby we are taught, that there is no better remedy for us then to cast off
our pride, and bow our selves under Gods hand; yea the heavier that Gods hand
be, the more dejected should we be. And therefore David adds, he is crooked
very sore. The word in the original, meod, signifying very greatly and
vehemently, shows unto us, that his griefs and sorrows were not common but
extraordinary; and God uses to make his children examples of his
chastisements, Nota.
who made themselves examples of sin to the world.

I go mourning all the day. The Hebrew word koder, signifies blackness, as
one that walks in mourning clothes. For the black color is a token of
gravity and sadness. But I am rather of the opinion, that his meaning is, of
the blackness of his skin. For we know, that men whose heart is oppressed with
dolor, do lose their natural color; as David says, Psalm. 119. I am like a
bottle in the smoke. Sin changes man's beauty into deformity.
For we see that sin deformeth and disgraceth men so, that it turns their
fatness into leanness, and beauty into deformity; as the same Prophet says
in another place, When God afflicts man for sin, Psalm. 39.12.
th n he waxes woe and wan: and in the 22 Psalm. verse 15. My strength is dried
up like a potsheard. A fearful example is set down by Jeremy in his
Lamentations, Chap. 4. ver. 7, 8. Her Nazarites were purer then the snow, and
whiter then the milk; they were more ruddie in body then the red precious
stones; they were like polished Saphir: now their visage is blacker then a
coal, they cannot know them in the streets; their skin cleaves to their
bones, it is withered like a stock.

All the day. The continuance of his pain amplifieth the same. For if a man
had some relaxation or breathing, he might gather new strength for a new
assault. Job complains of the like dealing; for when he had bin vexed all the
day, he said, My couch will give me rest; but thou affrayest me with visions.
Herein have we to learn, Job 7.14.
patiently to bear Gods corrections, Bear patiently afflictions, since God
has dealt more hardly with better then we are.
when now and then it pleases him to lay them upon us, as sickness, poverty,
infamy, etc. whereby others better then we, have bin more rigorously handled
then we are.

Verse 7. For my reins are full of burning, and there is nothing sound in my
flesh.
TO move God to pity him, he lays open all his sores; eue^ as a beggar will
lay open to the view of all ye people his wounds and sores, to move them to
have compassion on him. The patient unfolds his wounds to the Physician, Luke
10.33
may close and cure them.

In this verse he points out his inward diseases in the former words, My
reins are full of burning; and his outward in the latter words, And there is
no soundness in my flesh. He was universally tormented, both within and
without. Should not this assuage our grief, when God visits us in any one
part of our body, seeing David was visited in them all. The word Csihelim, is
diversely expounded; but I agree best with those that call it the reins, under
the loins, and by a Metonymie, the generatiue faculty. For the strength of
man is in the loiues: and it is mentioned of the children who came out of the
loins of Jacob: and in the 35. of Genesis, verse. 11. Kings shall come out of
thy loins. And in Proverb. 31.17. she girdeth her loins with strength. So
that, as David gave his strength to sin, and that filthy act of adultery; so
God punishes those same parts which did offend his Majesty. Observe Gods
justice against whorehunters.
And commonly God in his righteous judgment recompenceth whore-hunters and
harlots with filthy consumptions in those places whereby they took pleasure to
offend God. Therefore give not your strength to sin, Romans 6.13.
nor your members to be weapons of iniquity, remembering that sentence of the
learned Father, Per quod quis peccat, per idipsum punitur, Man is punished by
that self same thing, by which he sinned.

Of the latter part of this verse is spoken before, in the beginning of the
third verse.

Verse 8. I am weakened and sore broken: I roar for the very grief of my heart.
Again by diverse forms of speaking he expresses the intolerable vehemency
of his pain, that it rent and brayed him, and forced him, not to cry, but to
roar as a Lion. See ye not such a weight of misery which sin brings on
man's body and soul, forcing God to disgrace his own image, that pleasant
pourtraiture of man's body and soul, which he builded up for his glory, and
to break it down and turn it into ashes, and to deface that picture which he
painted so gloriously and artificially, that he takes as much pleasure to pull
it down as did to rear it up, to cut down his carved work, on him whom he
eased;

Sin enfeebleth man's nature.
But where he says, he is weakened, it is evident, that sin enfeebleth man's
nature. As we may clearly perceive in Samson and David. For when Goliath and all
David's enemies were not able to overcome him, 1. Sam. 17.
his own sin weakneth him. And when Samson killed a thousand Philistines,
Judge. 15.15 and 16.9.21.
and no bands were able to keep him fast, his own sin made him a slave to
the Philistims.

And in like manner he complains of his roaring, as he did in the 22. Psalm.
verse 1. So that, as sin changes us into beasts, and through it we live as
beasts; so in the end it will make us to cry as beasts. Then let us live as
men, subduing by reason our beastly passions and affections; and like Christian
men let us overcome the same by the Spirit of grace which is in Christ Jesus,
that we may speak to God as children, crying Abba, Father. Romans 8, 15.


Verse 9. Lord, I power my whole desire before thee, and my sighing is not hid
from thee.
THis desire is a desire of mercy and forgiveness, and of his favor, and to
walk innocently and holily before him. For God looks to the purpose of man's
heart in repentance, more then to the words of his outward confession. For
albeit Ezekiah chattered like a swallow, and mourned like a done, Esa. 38.14.
turning him to the wall; yet the Lord said, I heard thy prayers, and saw thy
tears. This is the desire of mercy, of which the Apostle Paul speaks, 2.
Cor. 7.12
calling it epipthesis.

My whole desire. By this he would show, that he parted not his thoughts
between God and the devil, or his flesh and the world, but keeps a sound
and a whole heart to God. He would not divide the child, 1. Ki^. 3.26
but keep it altogether for God: whereas the worldlings do far otherwise,
Against by poeri^^.
giving their countenance and outward show of holiness and repentance to the
Lord, and keeping that which is best to sin. Which sort of dealing the Lord
ever did abhor. Esa. 29.13.
This people come to me with their lips, but their heart is far away from me.

Thirdly, he takes God to be witness, who is only cardiognostes, the
searcher of the heart. And such should be our disposition in Gods service, that
albeit our heart be not so well disposed as it should be, yet we may protest of
the soundness thereof, that it is not false or double.

And my sighing. Yet again he protests of his sincerity and uprightness,
that in his heart there is no guile; that not only his purposes are upright
before God, but also his sobs and sighs. For sighs may be counterfeit, as the
Hiena does a man's voice, and Crocodile does tears. In every action of
religion, In Gods service use always since^itie and vprightne^
but especially in repentance, we are to present our uprightness and sincerity
before God, that we do it from a single mind, without counterfeit hypocrisy;
wherein albeit we may delude mon, yet can we not mock God, who esteems our
service by our intention, and not by our action. For men only can judge by our
actions, but God by our upright intentions.

Verse 10. Mine heart pants, my strength fails me: and the light of mine
eyes, even they are not mine own.
WHen he has protested of the sincerity of his repentance, he falls forth
to his former passions, that his heart is troubled, confused, circumagitate,
and carried about, as it were giddie, troubled with diverse cogitations, and
rolling about, scarce knowing what he was doing. The Hebrew word signifies
such an agitation, which makes him to wag, and thereby breeds such anxietie,
that he as destitute of all counsel, knows not what he does. For when men
are disquieted, they turn them on all sides, not knowing what to do first.
When the sorrow and dolor rages, the heart uses to pant and leap
insolently; and therefore he says, that his heart pants, and goes about, as
it were altogether inuerted; but faith setleth our heart, and fixes it on God.
This wagging error did shake David so far, that he remembered not himself;
albeit he leaned to the promises of God, yet through humane fragilitie he
wauered a little. Genesis 7.18.
Albeit the Arc of Noah was assured by Gods covenant, not to be drowned, yet it
was tossed vehemently; and Peter, Mat. 14 30.
albeit by faith he walked on the sea, yet he sanke at the sight of the waves.
So let us always remember, that there is no perfection in our faith, Our faith
has its own defects, and our prayers their wauerings.
but that it has the own defects and infirmities; yea in our prayers we have
our own wauerings, till God call us home to himself. And if we have such
agitations in our prayers in the time of our rest, what marvel though we be
disquieted in the time of our tentations: as a ship in a tempest catied to and
fro, as Job and David that we keep not a constant course in trouble, when we
cannot do it in prosperity.

My strength fails me. Behold what benefit man gets by sin, even
debilitie and weakness; we become through it a prey to our enemies.

And the light of mine eyes, even they are not mine own. The effect of the
former is evident in the sight of his eyes, which he said in the sixth Psalm
were dimmed. For his eyes were instruments of sin, full of adultery, when he
made not a covenant with them. Use therefore thine eyes rightly O man, lest
those who look through the windows, Eccle. 12.3
grow dim before the time. To whom comes bleerdnesse of eyes, Pro 23.29 30.
etc. says Solomon? and he answers, To those that look to the red wine, and
tarry long at wine, to them that go and seek mixed wine, that is, by art to
make wine stronger and more pleasant.

Not^.
I like well of the judgment of the Fathers, who think that his tears had
dazeled his sight. And would to God that when our sight fails, it were by
tears of true repentance; that our consciences may bear us witness, that
where sin abounded by wantonness, grace superabounded by sorrow. Albeit it
destroys nature, it repaireth grace in us. And is not that a good change in
us, that when the eyes of our body do decay, the eyes of our mind are
renewed; Christ saying unto us, Luke 18.
Ephatha, be opened.

I thinks also, that when men spend their eyes upon continual reading of the
Scriptures and holy writers, Now to spend our eyes rightly
and thereby contract dimnesse, and some also blindness, they spend them in a
good cause; which too few do; but rather spend nights and days in reading idle
writings of profane and fuperstitious men, which provoke them to wantonness,
or infect their minds with heresies.

Bernard writing upon the Assumption of the blessed Virgin, Ser. 5. brings in
three things which impeach the light of the eye; contracted humors, blindness,
or any outward impediment, as dust, smoke, What things take away the sight of
the eyes.
etc. For, says he, the blindness is the ignorance of God; the dust is the
cares of the world; the filthy humors are the abundance of sin, which flows
in such measure, that all the three stays our sight of Christ. Age also and
sickness dimmeth our eyes, but sin does dim them more then any other thing
whatsoever.

That we may conclude this verse, observe the glory of God in giving light to
our eyes, Gods great power manifested in making the eye.
in placing so great a light in so little an organ as the apple or pupil of
the eye, which is the least part of the eye, yet all the light is closed within
that, that it may look up to the stars, as a little star it self, and from
thence is retroflected or brought back again, when as the beams of the Sun
never pass the mid region of the air. Whereby we are taught to admire his
Majesty's work in this little creature; as also to use this light rightly, not
abusing it in wantonness, as those who have their eyes full of adultery; nor
in malice, having eyes of revenge; nor in covetousness, Pro. 23.6.
as those who have an evil eye, as I have spoken before. And finally let us
know, that if his Majesty has closed within so little room so great a light
now, If our eyes see so clearly now being imperfect, how clearly shall they see
being made perfect in heaven.
unspeakable shall the brightness of that light be, when we shall be glorified,
and our eyes perfected. For when we cannot now behold the Sun, then our eyes
shall be brighter then the Sun, and see that everlasting Trinity, and the
Angels in eternal glory.

Verse 11. My lovers and my friends stand aside from my plague, and my kinsmen
stand a far off.
NOw he adds some new circumstances to augment the heaviness of his evil,
by which he might provoke God to mercy; namely, that he was left alone by
such, whom either nature should have bound to him, as his brethren and kinsmen;
or of acquaintance, as his familiars, of whom Solomon said, that a friend is
nearer then a brother. Pro. 18.24
This might have come either through disdainfulnesse, that they were ashamed of
his crosses, as is the custom almost of all men. For in prosperity, when they
see a man in a good case, then they forge acquaintance on him; A man in
prosperity has many friends, in adversity few or none.
they allege they are of his kindred and blood, and come of his house, though
they be not in any degree of his kindred: but when he is distressed and in
adversity, though they were of his kindred, they will be as Jobs friends, and
look not se^en days only, Job 2.13^
but seven years a for on him, and misknow him, or for fear to purchase
hatred for his cause. Thus through feebleness they refuse him help, and stand
aside from his plague, whereby they did greatly exaggerate his grief, in that
when he flourished they followed him, when he was troubled they did forsake
him; whereof he complains at another time, Psalm. 142.4 Job 6.15. Luke 23.49
2. Tim. 4.16.
I look to the right hand, and none knows me. And Job, My brethron passed by
me. And when Christ was naked on the cross, his friends stood a far off. And
Saint Paul says, In my first defense none was with me, but all left me. By
which examples we should be enarmed with patience, Though all forsake us, God
cleaves to us.
though all forsake us, if God be with us. For our God will not leave us, or be
ashamed of us, or be afraid to assist us. Therefore also says David, Psalm.
31.1^ and 5^.^3.
I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind: I am like a broken vessel. And in
another place: But it was thou, O my companion, my guide and my familiar, which
delighted to consult together, and went unto the house of God as companions.
And, I am become a stranger to my brethren, even an alien to my mothers sons.
Psalm. 69.8. and 88.8.18.
And. Thou have put away my acquaintance far from me, and me to be abhorred of
them: I am shut up, and cannot get forth; and my lovers and friends have thou
put far from me, and mine acquaintance hid themselves. And Isaias the Prophet
says, I looked and there was none to help, Isa. 63.5. Zech. 13.6.
and I wondered that there was none to uphold. And Zechariah, Thus was I wounded
in the house, of my friends. And Job: Job 6.13. and 19.13.14 15.16.17.18.19.
and 30.1.
Is it not so, that in me there is no help? and that strength is taken from me.
And, He has removed my brethren far from me. And also, My acquaintance were
strangers unto me, etc. And, But now those that are younger then I am, mock me;
yea those whose fathers I have refused to set with the dogs of my flocks.

Julius Caesar said to Brutus stabbing him, (...), and thou also my son? And
Apollinarius,

(...):
(...).
Coram amici timuerunt: pedes vero firma verunt socij. (...) Qui vero me prope
euntes, de long recesserunt.

Many of the Fathers expound this of false teachers, Against false teachers,
who, in time of trouble forsake the flock. Bern ser. 77 in Cantie.
who then look a far off to the sheep and their people, when they should be
most comfortable to them in the day of their trouble. Those are but hirelings,
who seeing the wolf coming do leave the flock. Woe be unto those men who abound
in the world, to whom shame and condemnation does appertain. David had
experience of this in Absolon his son. Amasa his nephew, Achitaphel his
Counceller.

By this expenence of David let us learn, No conjunction can stand* unless it
be in God.
that there is no conjunction so strict, if it be not in God which can be able
to bind any flesh to us. For the bonds of nature are very weak, because the
ground of them is but fleshly, that is brittle and inconstant. Therefore let us
not trust in flesh and blood. Woe be unto him who puts his strength in man.
Ier. 17.5.


Next, Trouble tries our friends. Trouble tries who are friends. Job 6.15.^
They will be unto thee as a brook, and as a broken tooth in the day of thy
adversity. I know the proof of them; and if thou will not trust me, then thou
shall learn by thine own experience, when thou shall stand in need of their
comfort. They will be as a broken reed, 2. Ki. 18.21
which, howsoever it may seem to be a precious staff, if thou lean unto, not
only will fail thee, but iniure thee, and pierce thy hand. There are many
rarities in the world, which men seek after, but there is not it well ra^er
then to find in all thy life a faithful, A rare thing to find a trusty and
faithful friend.
constant and secret friend, whom if thou can find, to keep him is better then
gold. It is written of Alexander, that coming to the sepulcher of Achilles, he
wept, saying, Plut in vita Alexandri.
O foelicem inuenem, qui Homerum laudum suarum depredicatoram, and vnicum
fidelem amicum Patroclum inuenerit: O happy youth, who found such a preacher of
his praises as Homer was, and such a faithful friend as Patroclus. Valerius
Maximus makes mention of two, who kept constant kindness. Pythias and Damon,
of whom the one being adjudged to death on a certain day, the other entered
himself in his fellow companions place, til he went home to put his affairs
in order, who abode until the very last day, and then came: which thing the
Tyrant seeing and admiring, pardoned the other, desiring that they would admit
him the third of their society. Should not we be ashamed that are called
Christians, that neither love nor truth can be found amongst us. We love for
gain, and we discord for gain: The heathens may condemn Christians, amongst
whom love and truth is rare to be found. Luk 18.18. Mat. 10.36
and therefore those Heathenish people shall condemn us at the latter day. Now
is found to be true that sentence which our Savior foretold, that in the
latter days faith nor love should not be found in the earth; and love should
wax cold, the father against the son, etc. a man's enemies should be those of
his own house.

Verse 12. They also that seek after my life, lay snares: and they that go
about to do me evil talk wicked things, and imagine deceit continually.
BEllarmine expounds this and all the rest typically of Christ, which may
stand, but he omitteth the literal interpretation of the person of David, and
the common estate of Christ's members. The substance of it, is: Seeing my
friends furnish me no comfort, but look upon me a far off, careless of me, yet
mine enemies are not idle against me, but set themselves by all their engine
and labor to destroy me. When friends are slow in helping, foes are most busy.
For it comes often to pass, that when our friends are slow in helping us,
our foes are earnest against us. Our friends should blush, that the wicked
should be more instant against us, then they are to maintain us. But it is no
wonder, since by nature men are more bent and prone to evil, then to do good
things. By constraint they do good, but willingly they commit evil.

He describes his enemies, 1. from their malice: 2. from their means to
perform it: 3. from their continuance. Their malice in two, they sought his
life, and devised evil things against him. The means, meditating and musing
evil, and taking counsel. Next, speaking evil; last, doing evil, laying
snares by craft (like fowlers) to take my life. Their profit and pastime was to
undo me. The order is here inuerted; for meditating properly precedeth
speaking, and speaking doing: but in the words of the text it is otherwise;
their malice extends to the highest degree, they will not be contented to
banish him, prison him and revile him, nothing can satisfy their thirst but
his blood. This is the envy of the Serpent against the seed of the woman. The
Devil is a murderer, and so are his children. The wild beasts do prey upon the
poor sheep, and its blood is sweet to their taste: so are the cruel and
bloody Papists of the Iesuitical sect, so much gape for the blood of
Christians, that albeit we profess one God, one Christ, Against the cruel
malice of Jesuits.
one Bible and Scripture, no bonds can bind them to us. They will be content
rather to agree with Jews (who deny Christ, to whom Synagogues in Rome are
not denied by the Pope) or with Turks (with who^ they have often taken
assurance, to the prejudice of Christians) yea with the Devil himself, by
witchcraft and Necromancie; but there is no agreement between them and the
sincere professors of the Gospel: they paint them as horned devils; they raise
up Princes to shed their blood unkindly, and unnaturally to triumph on their
own funerals. Thus the Jesuits, enemies of all Commonweals, powder-blowers
of all kingdoms, to be exploded from all Christians, casten in in the end of
the world as vials to power forth Gods anger upon the inhabitants of the earth.
They are only to have their name translated from Jesus to Judas, and so to be
named Iudasites.

They devised evil against him. And what can be evil, if blood and cruelty
be not evil against the Creator and creature. If they did it ignorantly, it
were tolerable; but ye know they do against their conscience. They think when
they slay us, they do God good service, as our Savior faith; but they are
murderers. And therefore the Lord open their eyes, that they may see what they
do, and their ears may hear Christ saying unto them, Acts 9.4.
Saul, Saul why persecutest thou me?

The second point, is the means which they used against him; their puposes,
their words, and their actions. The last word of the verse, they meditated, is
the ground of the rest of their mischiefs. They meditated, they consulted: for
wr^ngs done rashly, are less dangerous, and more excusable, out of a spleen
and choler; but ad^^^ed evils are more fearful, and more hardly to be eschued,
laying the grounds and pillars of their proceedings upon some s^re ^uld. But we
have one aduanta^^e, A comfort to Gods children, that God can disappoint the
wickeds counsel. ^ Kin. 5.9. Job 15.35. Psalm. 56.2. Psalm. 94.20.
that God is present in all their counsels, and can not only reveal them, but
also d ^^ppoint them: as the counsels of the king of Aram. They have traveled
with vanity, and brought forth lies and wind for their tr^uels. And from the
abundance of their heart, their mouth spoke. What? Vanities, iniquities. Mine
enemies would daily swallow me up; for many sight against me. Unrighteousness:
Has the throne of iniquity fellowship with thee? which forgeth wrong for a
law. And many other significations, as, labor, sharpness, etc. See how this
one word comprehends many mischifes, which flow from a cruel heart against
Gods children. The heart of man is deep, and excogitateth a world of evils, and
they busy themselves so about that business, that they forget themselves. Yet
this is a comfort to us, that all their speeches, calling us Devils, Hugonites,
seditious, and what not, are all but vanities, Nota.
as they are vain men who style us so.

Finally, those their meditations and communications, which proceeded from
cruel hearts, burst forth in actions which were mixed with craft, and so much
the more perilous, for they are said to lay snares for him; taking the
metaphor from hunters, fowlers or fishers, whose trade is only to catch birds,
beasts and fishes by their engines and policy, seeing hardly they can be taken
otherwise. So these bloody Nimrods, mighty hunters before the Lord, Genesis
8.9. Psalm. 124.
those fowlers who lay grins, who lay nets to snare Gods Saints God shall
disappoint them. In them, both craft and cruelty are conjoined; Satan more to
be feared because of his craft, the^ cruelty
and Satan is not so much to be feared being a Lion, as being a Serpent.
Pharaoh said, Let us work wisely with them, Exodus 1.10.
that is, craftily. Lord keep thy Church from the policy and craft of
hypocrites, more then from their sword and open violence.

Verse 13. But I as a deaf man heard not, and am as a dumb man which opens
not his mouth.
NOw David declares his singular mansuetude and meekness, against the
perfidie and violence of his enemies, that he became as a deaf and a dumb
man, who used no confutations against the sycophanties and calumnies of his
enemies, but suffered patiently.

He answers them by silence and taciturnitie, as Christ himself did before
Pilat, Herod and Caiaphas. Mat. 27.12 14. Luke 23.9.
For there is a time to speak to a fool, and a time to be silent. When thy
particular is touched, be silent; but when Gods errand is a doing, When fit to
speak, when to be silent.
then speak. Nihil fortius, nihil egregius, quam audire noxia, and non
respondere contraria, says the Father Cassiod, Nothing more couragicus,
nothing more excellent, then to hear injuries, and to make no answer again.
Silentium responsi loco, etc. let silence be an answer. This is a great victory
of a Christian to have the commandment of his affections, A great victory in a
Christian to subdue his passions
and not to reply to wicked men, nor to revile those who have reviled him; but
blessing those who curse him, not answering to them. For by meeting injurious
speeches with like reproaches, we show our impatiencie, deprive God of his
glory (to whom belongs vengeance,) enarme our enemies, giving them further
advantage, and expose our weakness to the ludibrie of the world. Viuendo
melius argunitur obtrectatores, quam loquendo, Slanderers are better checked by
our life then our speeches.

Finally, it were better to many that they were dumb and deaf, Against such
as speak in choler.
then to speak untimely in choler, when they should be silent. For they give
such advantage to the enemy through their hot and rash speeches, and they stay
the Lord to speak for them. So it were better their innocence should plead
cause, then they should mix their affections with the equity of their cause.

He says not, he was dumb and deaf; in the problem of Aphrodiseus, (...).
as in the father of John Baptist, Luke 1.20.
who neither heard, but by signs, nor spoke, the nerves being bound up by God,
which served both the senses of seeing and speaking. Saint Mark says, (...),
surdus vix loquens, deaf searce speaking. Saint Jerome in Math. 8. thinks
(...) rather to be called deaf then dumb.

Verse 14. Thus I am as a man that hears not, and in whose mouth are no
reproves.
A Rep^tition of this deafness; not that he heard not, but that he seemed not
to hear. By the which he would twice teach us, how we may dissimulate without
sin the opprobries spoken against us in our own persons, but we should hear
with both our ears the injurious calumnies spoken against God. We can hear
too well our own reproaches, but not the Lords; Nota.
we close our ears at the d^shonorable speeches spoken against Gods honor.

And in whose mouth are no reproaches. He compares himself to a dumb and
deaf man for two causes. For first he would signify, that he was so wearied
with vain calumnies, that he could not have time to speak one word in his
own defense; for why should he make apologies for his equity, to the
pertinacious slanderers of his just cause. Next, he produces his patience
before God, to move him the more to pity him. For if we be wronged by men, and
bear it patiently, it makes men to pity our case the more: much more pity
will it be with God, who truly can consider our wrongs. If we are silent in our
own cause, then God will pity us; Cast thy cause over upon the Lord.
but if we take our own cause in hand, then God will leave us. So, if we would
have God to be our patron and speechman, let us bridle our affections, and not
give loose reins to our sudden passions. If it be possible, as much as in us
is, Romans 12.18
let us have peace with all men.

Certain it is, that David, if he might have had place to be heard, was able
to maintain his innocence; but when he saw he was exempted from all
patrocinie, he suffered it patiently, expecting the celestial Judge For so
long as there is a place left before magistrates to a just defense, then it
were a token of an evil conscience or little courage, if a man durst not give
a reason of his just proceeding; but when all equity is buried, and no place
left to reason, it is better to be silent then to speak, and so to possess
our souls in patience.

Verse 15. For on thee, O Lord, do I wait: thou will hear me, my Lord, my God.
IN this verse is contained the reason which moved David, albeit he was
tormented with so heavy a disease in his body, and the unkindness of his
friends, yet he answered not to their calumnies, but suffered them all, Why
David did not answer to his rebukers.
as a dumb and a deaf man, to wit, because he depended altogether upon God.
And truly this is the fountain of true patience, when we trusting in Gods
favor, thereby overcome all the tentations of the world; to which until we
attain, we can never be settled to endure any assault, neither to bridle our
furious motions and perturbations. The want of this repose, makes men rage at
their trouble by impatiencie, uttering the weakness of their nature, requiting
railing with railing, bitterness with bitterness, flesh meeting flesh, and
corruption corruption, as one fire meeting with another great flame, being far
off from Christian modesty, which should be in us all; when as the Apostle
commands that a patient mind should be known to Phil. 4.
all the world. From hence come those recriminations, brawlings, contentions,
declaring that yet we are fleshly and not well settled on God.

Thou will hear me. He nourishes his hope by prayer grounded on true faith in
his Lord and Master, his God and Father. He assures himself that God will not
reject his prayers, but answer them out of his fatherly care. And this is the
only way of perseverance, when we being instructed in Gods promises, pray
earnestly unto his Majesty for performance of the same.

Prayer strengthens our faith in Gods promises, and hasteneth him to deliver
us. Faith takes hold of things to come.
Mark I pray you, that the best means by which ye both strengthen your own
faith in Gods promises and provoke God to hasten your delivery, is prayer, by
which we should give the Lord no rest till he deliver his own Israel.

Furthermore, in this that he says, Thou will hear me; there is the voice of
faith certifying it self of a comfortable answer, as though it were done
already.

My Lord, my God. My is not in the Hebrew or Greek text; but it is his common
word of application, as it was Christ's, My God, my God. The one is a word of
power, the other of love; not (as Lorinus says) of science; for then you might
infer under it all Gods properties. Learn, that we have to do with one that
has both, love as God, and power as Lord. God has both power and will to
help us.
Many have power to help us, who bear us but little good will; many have love,
who want power; but God has them both, if we depend still upon him: for
whatsoever he has, is ours; and is ready to do us good when we need. Our God
is rich in mercy to all those that call upon him.

Verse 16. For I said, hear me, lest they rejoice over me: for when my foot
slippeth, they extol themselves against me.
HE uses an argument to move the Lord to hear him, taken from his enemies
insultation over him. For the nature of the wicked, Iud. 16.23. The wicked
insult over Gods children. Lam. 1.2. Sa. 1.20.
is to insult over Gods children, as the Philistims did over Samson. Jeremy
lamenteth, that the enemies opened their mouth against the city and nation;
and David feared that Saul's death should be published in Gath or Askelon; and
Micah, Rejoice not over iue mine enemy. This insultation displeases God so
much, that he turns back that evil upon the insulter. So did the children
of Edom cry, Psalm. 137.7.
Raze it, raze it, to the foundation thereof.

And when my foot slippeth. The wicked rejoice at the fall of others. 2. King.
18.
This is a mark of an evil and devilish man, who can be glad at the fall of
others, even his enemies, speaking great things, as did Rabsheketh. Against
which sort of railers Saint Jerome inueyeth mightily: Caninam (says he)
exercent facundiam, eloquenter maledicentes, Nerones for as, intus Catones: They
exerce doggish eloquence, without Neroes, within Catoes. Which sort of people
God will overthrow. It seems to be the comfort of wicked men (as the same
Father says) to carp at good men, because of the multitude of offenders they
suppose the blame of their faults to be lessened, or because by the dispraise
of others we would seem to be praiseworthy. Finally, that there be few which
abandon this vice, and seldom are they found who show their life so
unreprovable when they reprove another, and therefore this evil is rife; and
therefore in many this vice is hot, because it is willingly entertained of all.

Paulinus in the life of Saint Ambrose, shows, that when one through sliding
had fallen on the earth, Theodolus, then a Notary, and after Bishop of Mutines,
laughed at it; to whom Ambrose turned and laid* Et tu qui stas, vide ne cadas,
And thou who stand, take heed lest thou fall. And shortly after, he that
iested at another man's fall, lamented for his own.

Verse 17. Surely I am ready to halt, and my sorrow is ever before me.
SOme of the interpreters think that this verse shows his halting of a bile;
but it is not very likely, neither is there greater reason then to say the like
of Jeremy, who says, that his enemies intended and awaited for his halting.
But the sentence is, that like a cripple man without help he is like to fall
down. 1. Kin. 18.21.
We halt in sin, and often between two opinions, as the Israelites, whereupon
we are forced to halt in our bodies.

And my sorrow is ever before me. The meaning is, that he is so strictly urged,
that he can get no relaxation of his evil, being so incurable, except he get a
remedy from God. These would seem to be the words of an impatient mind; but
we must not think that a Christian can keep a continual course, but as Job
fell forth in bitter speeches, so the best man in the world may do as much and
more. Therefore when men are thus passionate, let us not cast them off, judging
them to be reprobates.

When he faith, they are ever before him, note the extremity of his tentation,
that he has no stay of his trouble, but continually pressed therewith. Should
not we thank God that deals more mercifully with us, that notwithstanding of
our sins does not suffer us to be overwhelmed with troubles: for he is
faithful, 1. Cor. 10.13.
who will not suffer us to be tempted above that which we are able to bear.

Lorinus here brings in Purgatory, as though David had not had purgatory of
afflictions in this l^fe, but had need of another purgatory in another life.

Verse 18. When I declare my pain, and am sorry for my sin: Verse 19. Then
mine enemies are alive, and are mighty; and they that hate me wrongfully are
many.
HEre the malice of his enemies is described from the circumstance of time when
they utter their malice in the highest degree; when he is lowest, in declaring
both his sin and the punishments thereof: and being afflicted of God, they
afflict him, and impeach his spiritual meditations. Thus Satan takes us at
the shot, and at the pinch; that when we have to do with God specially and most
particularly, he then* manifests his malice most against us, to interrupt our
divine service; yea he goes mad in fury when he sees us serving God: Satan
abhors our repentance and confession of sin.
for there is no exercise which he does more abhor then repentance and
confession of our sins; for in so doing, we bid adieu to the devil, and
acquit our selves from his camp.

Lorinus following Origin, expounds this of auricular confession to the
Priest, yet he grants that this place does not convince the use of confession
sacramental which was not under the law, neither the other which was made
sometime to men, yet he thinks it favors them both, lest contadicting the
Fathers* he may seem to favor the heretics who abhor the sacramental
confession.

Mine enemies are alive. The miseries of Gods children inanimates their
enemies, and gives them new courage; as though they got a new life, and were
revived when they hear the destruction of Gods children; and yet they are in
effect dead, who delight in the dead works of sin, Non est viuere, sed valere
vita.

Si viuis animae, si quid antiqua tibi
Remanet vigoris: pelle foemineos metus,
E^^ inhospitalem caucasum mente indue.
(...), ardere, but rather as Plato in Cratylo, (...), viuere, vnde Jupiter
(...).

The lust of the wicked is sin.
Also I mark here, what is the life of wicked men, sin and doing of wrong. The
devil he delights to tempt men to sin, and the wicked cannot sleep till they
have done some sin, and neither can eat nor drink with delight till they have
performed some mischief.

And they that hate me wrongfully are many. An argument to persuade God to
deliver him, is, his innocence, that the wrongs he suffers are causlesse.
For surely the Lord will not maintain us against our enemies, if we have
justly provoked their anger. Psalm. 5.4.
For he is a God that loves no iniquity, and no wickedness dwells with
him. It is not his pleasure that we should be envious, neither will our
Christian profession admit it, which is so far from doing wrong, A mark of one
truly religious, he does wrong to none.
that by the contrary it will be content patiently to endure injuries. Then if
this be a note of true religion, to do violence to none, what religion think
ye the Romanists have, who teach, that it is s^ruice done to God (...) murder
Princes, shed Christian and innocent blood? it is a bloody religion, and the
Devil is the father of i^ and Rome the mother which hatched it. Fly from ^ha^
Babel, that ye be not partakers of her judgments.

Verse 20. They also that rewarded evil for good, are mine ad^^rsaries,
because I ^o^^ow goodness.
THis is a higher d^gree of iniquity, that not only they har^d him without
any cause or wrong done by him to any of them, but also he had provoked them by
his benefi^s to love him, and yet they were so diuellishly disposed, that as
Judas did recompense Christ* so did they David, repaying him evil for the good
things he had bestowed on them.

Three sorts of spirits 1. natural.
There be three sorts of spirit; a natural, when a man can do good for good,
and evil for evil; which thieves, Pagans, Barbarians, and the very beasts will
do. 2. celestia^^.
The second, celestial, who can do good for evil, to show their conformity
and obedience to Christ their Master. The third sort are infernal, 3 diabolical
possessed by the devil, who render evil for good* who in our days abound
too much, whom God reserueth to eternal darkness.

Were mine adversaries; or did calumniate From this comes the name of the
Devil Satan, an accuser of the brethren. The wicked calumne always Gods
children.
Gods children have ever the devils children set against them to accuse; who if
at any time they praise, let us suspect our selves, lest we have done any evil,
for which they do it. As Antisthenes, when he heard the people praise him,
said, Quid (inquit) mali feci? Plutarch.
What evil have I committed.

Because I followed goodness. This is the highest degree of their persecution,
to trouble him for religion, and because he feared God. So they hated God in
him, and persecuted God in him.

21. Forsake me not, O Lord: be not thou far from me, my God. Verse 22. Haste
thee to help me, O my Lord, my salvation.
THese two verses contain a prayer, wherein he imploreth the help of God by a
threefold repetition^ ever he fears desertion; for sin ingendreth this
fear. For if we were cast into the deepest dangers, this will ever comfort us,
if we be assured of the Lords presence; heaven is hell to us if he be not with
us; Nota.
hell is heaven to us if he be there.

Haste thee to help me, O my Lord, my salvation. Here is the weakness of our
nature described, that through our infirmity we cannot wait the time of Gods
delivery, which makes us to cry hasten. God will come if we patiently attend
his coming.
But let us learn patiently to attend his good leisure, assuring our selves
that he will come. Come Lord Jesus and deliver thy Church from all her miseries
by thy glorious appearance.

O my Lord, my salvation. He attributes those names to God: Jehovah the name
of his essence and love; Elohim the name signifying his persons and power;
Adonai the name of his sovereignty and greatness; to teach us, that when we
come before him, we may acknowledge what he is in nature and in persons, What
is deficient in us, is sufficient, in God.
and what our qualities, that our doubtful faith may be vpholden under so many
tempestuous assaults, knowing whatsoever is deficient in us, is sufficient, in
him. Those are as many props, upon which our faith is builded, that the gates
of hell cannot prevail against us.

A GODLY AND FRUITFUL EXPOSITION ON THE LI. PSALM, the fifth of the
Penitentials.
THis Psalm is most memorable amongst the seven Penitentials: so that
Athanasius that learned and divine Doctor instructs Christian virgins, Tract,
de Virg.
when they awake in the midst of the night to repeat the same; and the ancient
Church made great use of it. And justly may it be called the sinners guide. For
as David by his sin led them to error; so by this his repentance he leads
them to grace.

This Psalm consists of a Title and Supplication. The division of the Psalm.
The Title contains the argument, substance and occasion of the Psalm. The
Supplication contains sixteen arguments, which he uses to move God to have
compassion on him; and a prayer for the Church in the end.

The Title.
To him that excels on Neginoth. A Psalm of David, when the Prophet Nathan
came unto him, after he had gone in to Bathshebah.

The Title bears four things. 1. the Author and penman of this Psalm,
David; Gods Spirit no doubt being the inditer. 2. To whom it was committed to
be sung, To the chief Musician on Neginoth. 3. At what time, when Nathan had
reproved him. 4. The occasion of the reproof, his going in to Bathshebah.

David is not content verbally to utter his repentance, or to leave it in the
perishing books of the records of his kingdom, His repentance is committed to
the eternal monument of Gods book.
but he commits it to the everlasting momuments of Gods book, whereof one
jot cannot perish, but shall endure for ever, in despite both of the Devil
and Antichrist the Pope his first borne.

A Psalm of David.
He puts to his name, prefixing and subscribing it himself, neither will
suffer any to publish it but himself: as he was not ashamed to sin, he is not
ashamed to repent; as he was not ashamed to sin openly, Let not those be
ashamed to repent for sin, who have not bin ashamed to sin, Theodosius his
repentance.
he is not ashamed publikly to declare his repentance.

Theodosius the Emperor is renowned in all the world for his humble repentance
before Saint Ambrose, after the slaughter at Thessalonica, where in the place
of the penitents he fell down on his face, and said, Agglutinata est terra
anima mea, My soul is glued to the earth. None are ashamed to sin, but all
are ashamed to repent; and so God powers shame upon many, because they will
not honor him whom they have dishonored.

To the chief Musician, or, to him that excels on Neginoth.
This same is the title of the 4. Psalm. La^menatzeah oftentimes in the
Scriptures is taken for the Presidents who are chief in any thing* as 2.
Chron. 18. and 34.18. The sweet^ singer of Israel gives it to a sweet singer.
I think it to be best translated, To him that excels. Neginoth was an
instrument of music, upon which they played. So they did not only read the
Psalms, but also sing them; yea so distinctly, that the people easily might
understand them: not so much addicted to the note or tune, as to the matter;
Mat. 26.3^
as our Savior did sing after the Communion; and Paul commands it, Col. 3.16.

Music is an Art very pleasant, delectable and profitable, to stir up the
affections of man to Gods service, The commodities of music. 2. Kin. 3.15
or to restrain the anger and perturbations of our nature, as was in Elizeus,
who sought for a minstrell to appease him.

But first we have to see, that this excellent Psalm is committed to an
excellent person, who has great cunning to put it forth to the use of the
Church; teaching us hereby, that spiritual exercises are not to be put into
the hands of ignorant dolts, who have no wisdom or skill to set forth the
glory of their God. For the subject being most glorious, why should it be
concredited to such as have neither learning not wisdom? And if that singing
should have so worthy instruments, what do ye think of the preaching of the
Gospel? of which the Apostle says, Who can be sufficient for those things?
Happy then is that Church when learned men are promoted to good places,
whereby the word may be further advanced. And in a miserable case are those who
are committed to the charge of ignorants, Against ignorant and idle preachers.
idle bellies, and such like, who are unfit to take the care of Gods people,
for whom they shall be countable to God at the great day, and Gods vengeance
shall be upon them in this world.

David he aduanceth music very much, as Solomon also after him; 1. Chron.
15.16.
and the Musicians were distributed into certain classes and orders. Col.
3.16. 1* Cor. 14.15.
The antiquity and ancientie hereof makes much for its commendation, for God
did invent it. This is a principal science, and yet in has few aduancers.
Men's deafned ears betoken their beastly ignorance, who will not suffer
themselves to be wakened and roused up from their security and sleep.

There are some good Christians challenged, Nota.
The Church being spoiled of her rents, is not able to entertain this science
as it should be; which God supply when he thinks time. And this I say not,
that I do like either the profanitie of beastly men, that in stead of heavenly
songs sing bawdie ballads; or of such superstitious Papists; who sing and tune
Latin words in their Masses, thereby mocking God, and making religion a sport.
But the abuse of that science I disallow; the use I allow and approve, as most
necessary to Gods glory. And seeing it will be perpetual in the heavens, why
should it not begin on earth? There shall be a natural, not artificial song;
of which we shall sing for ever the song of Moses the servant of God. Apoc. 15.3
Let us therefore begin on earth, Nota.
learn of our Gamma, and enter into our Alphabet here, that we may be perfect
Musicians, when we become perfect our selves in glory. Here let us sing with
grace in our hearts to the Lord, Col. 3 16.
rejecting vain, idolatrous and profane ballads, and sing spiritually unto the
Lord.

When Nathan the Prophet came to him.

David (as is thought) lay a year almost in this sin asleep, till God
wakened him by Nathan, Jonah 1.6.
as he did Jonas by the Pilot. It is certain we would sleep unto death before
we awake from sin, if God did not put upon us, Man is lying asleep till God
waken him
and stir us up. We are so benumbed by the spirit of slumber, and possessed
by a lethargy, that all our senses are stupefied till Nathan come and awake us.

Next, God sends him that which he prayed for, even a faithful admonisher.
Psalm. 119.
One Prophet comes to another: yea a greater then himself; 1. King. 13.18.
not as the old Prophet came to the young at Bethel to deceive him, but as a
father to admonish his child.

There should be an holy freedom and liberty among Preachers, Pastors should
freely rebuke the vices one of another
each one should freely rebuke another when they see them doing wrong. One
should not wink at an other, as most part do; and others being reproved, rage
mightily, saying with Zidkiah, When went the Spirit of the Lord out of me to
thee? 1. King. 22.24. Esa. 30.10.
They rebuke the rebuker, They say to the Prophet, Prophecy not.

Observe moreover, that Nathan comes first to David, not David to Nathan: the
Physician to the patient, not the patient to the Physician. Christ himself
came to the sinners and Publicans, and called them to repentance.

This is against the pride of some, Mat. 9.13. Against the pride and laziness
of Preachers.
and laziness of others, who will not come or take the pains to visit weak
Christians, yea will scarce admit them to their presence when they come, as
though they were Princes. Woe to their pride who come not to the sick, and
heal not the broken, (as says the Prophet) but feed themselves with the fat
of the sheep.

Let none of higher gifts despise those of lower. Acts 9.17.
God uses Nathan a Prophet, inferior to David both in Prophecy, wisdom and
other gifts, to be an instrument to warn David. Let none then of greater gifts
despise those of lesser. Ananias taught Paul, and here Nathan David.

After he had gone in to Bathsheba. Albeit David thought he had hid himself
well enough, yet God found him out by Nathan. Adam hid himself among the
bushes, but God called to him, Genesis 3.8.
Where art thou? Let us not then dream, that God does not see us, and
whatsoever starting holes we seek to hide our selves in. The woman lights
the candle, Luke 15.4.
and finds the lost penny; and our Shepherd will seek his lost sheep, and
bring it home again. No wither can we go from the all-seeing eye of God.

Gone in to Bathsheba. As David was an example of the frailty of man's nature,
and Nathan of a faithful Preacher, so David sets down what evils do come of
the beauty of women, which is conjoined with impudency and leuitie. For if
she had not washed her self naked before the palace, and consented so readily
to the King, Against the impudency of women*
that he should come in to her (a filthy action spoken in clean terms, as
Christians should do the like) there had not bin such abominable crimes
committed. She represents many women in our days, shamelesly haunting such
places where they may give occasion to me^ to suit after the^, Genesis 38.1^
as Tamar sitting by the high way when Judah came by. This does not disgrace
honest women, but rather gives them matter to glorify God, who has not
suffered them to be deborde in their filthy affections. As the wise mariner
seeing others by throwing themselves in danger suffer shipwreck, Simil,
thanketh God who kept him from the like; so honest women may praise God that
he has preserved their honesty, which was not in their own hand.

Beauty is not to be evil thought of, being a benefit and blessing of God:
Beauty a blessing of God, if not abused,
but the abuse of beauty* by the tentation of the devil and deceitfulness of
our own nature, when Satan allureth us to dishonor God, and destroy that
goodly piece of workmanship which God has made up in us, by that which should
have bin an instrument to provoke us to Gods service. Pro. 31.30*
Beauty is de^^^tfull. Absoloms beauty deceived him, c. Sa. 14.15
and many with him have beauty, but have no grace to use it well.

Finally, I see both the persons are noted by their names, and not obscured:
wherein the Spirit of God in his word, as in a true mirror and glass,
represents every ones natural face, either in their beauty or in their
blemishes. So John Baptist spoke particularly to Herod, Math. 14.4.
and the Prophets to their Princes. They closed not up their reproves under
generalities, that they might interpret them any way which pleased them best;
but called black, black, sour, sour, and sweet, whosoever sin openly,
ought openly to be rebuked.
sweet. For particular applications to eminent persons is most requisite; and
those that sin openly, should be openly rebuked, that others may stand in awe.

Verse 1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness:
according to the multitude of thy compassions put away mine iniquities.
Have mercy upon me, O God. The thing he craves most of God is mercy: for
God has many qualities which are essential to him, but none of them could do
us any good without his mercy; his power would destroy us, his wisdom
confound us, his justice condemn us, his majesty affright us, but all these
by it turn to our good.

To beg for mercy is the first word of a supplicant. The first word of the
for^orne son to his father, was, Father, Luke 15.21.
I have sinned against heaven and against thee. This Christ in his prayer has
taught us to pray, Math. 6.12
Forgive us our sins. So in every prayer we should begin at have mercy upon
me O God. We sin daily, and unless we offer up at the door of the Sanctuary
a sin-offering, we cannot offer an offering of thanksgiving and the sweet
incense of praises. Thus prayed the woman of Canaan, saying, Mat. 19.22.
Have mercy upon me, comprehending under that the cure of her daughter: and
the two blind men cried, O Son of David have mercy; Mat. 9.27.
as also did many others.

The greatest comfort that Christians have in their trouble, is, that they have
to do with a merciful God, and not rigorous, nor one who will chide with us
continually, Psalm. 103.9.
but one who is flow to anger, ready to forgive, whose name is mercy, whose
nature is merciful, who has promised to be merciful, who is the Father of
mercies. 2. Cor. 1.3.
The earth is full of his mercies, they are above the heavens and the clouds;
his mercy is above all his works, extending to a thousand generations, Exo.
20.6. Psalm. 100.5 Hos. 6.6.
whose mercy endures for ever. With the Lord is mercy and great redemption.
I will have mercy, and not sacrifire. His mercies are often repeated in the
Scriptures, as Psalm. 5.6.12.16.17.20.22.23.24. thrice, 25.30. thrice. 32.
twice. 35. thrice. 39. twice. 41. thrice. 47.50.50.58. thrice. 60.61.62.63.68.
twice. etc. Joel 2.13. Mica 7.18. M^th. 12.7. rich in mercy, ^. Tim. 1.2.
Ephesians. 2.4. etc. The Apostles salutation is Grace, mercy and peace. Since so it
is, As a garden is replenished with flowers, so is the Scriptures with mercy.
that this herb of mercy grows in every corner of the garden of holy
Scriptures, and all the Prophets and Evangelists by plucking thereof have
nourished themselves; let us also in our greatest distresses run unto it,
persuading our selves that God will as soon deny himself unto us, as he will
deny his mercy, if we come with penitent hearts, and beg it with such
humility as becomes supplicants, such faith as believers, such hope and
patience as becomes the elect; we need not doubt, he is faithful who has
promised.

The Papists, Bellarmine and Larinus in their translations, Lorinus and
Bellarmine add to the Scriptures.
following the Septuagints, and not Saint Jerome, as they confess, do add
magnam, great, giving greater credit to their own translation, then to S.
Jerome, who was known to have bin a godly and learned translator, or to the
Hebrew verity. They confess the Scriptures in the original language to be
the best, and yet do not spare to add or pare therefrom as pleases them; and
therefore that curse must fall upon them in the 22 of the Revelation, that God
will add all the curses of the law upon those who add to the Scripture and
the words of this book, and put their name out of the book of life who
diminish any point of them. What need have they to put in magnam, great, as
though the multitude which follows, did not include the greatness.

O God. The person to whom he prays, is God. Against i^uocation of Saint^.
But in regard of his baseness and unworthiness, why does he not make suite
to Abraham, Moses, Samuel, Job, or some other holy men, only contenting
himself with God. For I think the sinners of old time had as much need of the
suppliment of the old Patriarchs and Fathers of the Church, as we have now of
the help of our Apostles and Saints. If they had not mind of such Mediators,
^^^si^.
but fled only to God, I think we should follow their footsteps. When God is
deficient, then let us go to them: and when the Sun of righteousness does not
shine, it is time to light our half ^pennie candles. Paul says, O foolish
Galatians, Gal. 4.3.1.
who has bewitched you? and I say, O foolish Papists, when will you leave off
your folly? If Christ's intercession, being God, who knows all our
necessities, and pitieth them, were not perfect, then we might claim some
subsidies; but it is vain to seek other^, when he, has all; for that does
greatly derogate to his glory, as I have spoken in another place.

He uses the word Elohim, representing the holy Trinity; He inuocateth the
whole Trinity.
of which some of the ancients have this conjecture: because he failed against
the Fathers omnipotency, when he abused his regal power in slaying Vriah;
against the Son, being the wisdom of the Father, using deceitfulness and
fraud in this murder; against the Spirit, when he by his filthiness abused his
holiness who is the Spirit of sanctification. Therefore (say they) he now
prays to Elohim. Judge of this nomination as ye please. Elohim represents
the Trinity, as Jehovah the unity; of both which Saint Augustine in his
Confessions admonishes us: We should (says he) never remember the unity of
the essence, but we should as soon remember and dissolve our mind upon the
trinity of the persons; and not so soon think upon the trinity of the
persons, but to gather in our minds the unity of the nature, which albeit they
be unspeakable and incomprehensible to us, it is enough that we speak with the
Scriptures, believe with the Scriptures, and pray at the direction of the
Scriptures, whose direction if we follow we cannot err; in whose paths (as
being the undoubted writs of God) if we walk, we cannot fall.

According to thy loving kindness. The thing which he reposeth and rests
upon, Against merits.
is not his own deserts, but Gods good will. Judge ye if this overthrows
merit or no. For if any man might have pretended good works, it was he. Psalm.
16.
I give (says he) my goodness to the Saints. I am companion to all them that
fear thee. I wash my hands in innocence, and compass thine altar. Look the
101. Psalm concerning the government of his family and his own person. Of his
upright life he says, Judge me according to my righteousness. While he has to
do with men, there was no man more pure in life and religion: but when he has
to do with God, he renounceth all, and takes him to Gods kindness and favor.
While we look down to the earth, our sight is sharp enough, and we may see
far and clearly; David, Shame belongs to us, but glory to thee. Out best
actions are contaminate with such imperfections and spots, that we have cause
to ^top our mouths, and blush, and be ashamed of them, we are conscious of the
manifold faults and defects which are in them.

According to the multitude of thy compassions put away mine iniquities. He
exaggerateth the weight of his sin, in that it has need of many mercies;
whereby he testifies, that his sins were many, passing the number of the
heirs of his head, and like waters that had gone over his head So, Gods
mercies are more then man's miseries.
many sins require many mercies. Men are greatly terrified at the multitude
of their sins; but here is a comfort, our God has multitude of mercies. If
our sins be in number as the heirs of our head, Gods mercies are as the
stars of heaven: and a^ he is an infinite God, so his mercies are infinite;
yea so far are his mercies above our sins, as he himself is above us poor
sinners.

By this that he seeks for multitude of mercies, The godly account one sin t^
be many.
he would show how deeply he was wounded with his manifold sins, that one
seemed a hundred: where by the contrary, so long as we are under Satan's
guiding, a thousand seem but one; but if we betake our selves to Gods service,
one will seem a thousand.

Again, we may admire the wonderful largeness of the mercies of God, the
breadth whereof extends over all the world, the height to place us in heaven,
the depth to draw us from the lower hell, the length betwixt hell and heaven. O
the breadth, length, deepnesse and height of the mercies of ou^ God, Admire the
mercies of God.
the multitude of whose compassions neither man nor Angel is able to
comprehend. Why then do thou despair thereof O man? though thy sins were
never so many, his mercies exceed them; and although thou sinnest* seventy
seven times a day, Mat. 7.
he can pardon and forgive thee.

Thy compassions: the word in the original signifies an ardent and earnest
affection of the heart, compassionating that which it pitieth, as it were the
commotion of the bowels (as I noted before,) that his very bowels are moved
toward his children, Philem. 12 Luke 15.20 2. Sa. 18.33 Psalm. 103.
as Paul writes to Philemon. This compassion was demonstrate in the father of
the prodigal son, and in David to Absalom, much more in God toward his dear
children. Look what pity parents have to their children, greater has God
toward us. Are not parents touched at the very heart, when they behold the
miseries of their children? yea, would they not hazard their lives and estates,
as many times they do to deliver them? and will not God be moved toward us,
if we considering his compassion and meekness, would but pity our selves by
confessing our iniquities unto him?

Put away. He borrows a similitude from Merchants, who have their debts
written in their account-booke, and at the payment thereof they score out that
which before they have written. Therefore since our sins are written with a
pen of iron and a point of a diamond, we must pray to God to blot them out, and
that the hand-writ may be nailed to the cross. It is God that puts away
iniquities, he can remove them as a cloud. Dan. 9.24.
Daniel prophesying of the Messiah, says, Seventy weeks are determinate upon
thy people and upon thy holy City, to finish the wickednesses, and to seal up
the sins, and to reconcile the iniquity. All our sins shall be washed away
by the streams of his blood, so that they shall never be read, or brought to
an account, either in this world or the world to come.

Mine iniquities. He committed iniquity against Vriah, whom he killed, for
which he is so charged in his conscience, being summoned before the bar of Gods
justice, that he can get no rest, until he get pardon; and none could give him
pardon and rest in his mind, but God whom he principally offended, in killing
and destroying one formed to Gods own image. So, when we do wrong to men, In
wronging our neighbor we do most injury to God.
let us not think it enough if we be reconciled to the party wronged, but by
repentance and an humble confession of our sins, let us seek to be at one
with God, who is the party whom we do most wrong to.

Verse 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and c^eanse me from my sin.
HE expresses by similitudes taken from washing and cleansing, the mercy
which he craved in the former verse, that is, Similitudes are much used in the
Scriptures.
remission of his sins. Similitudes are very common in the Scriptures, and in
the ancient Fathers. The Prophets spoke by similitudes; Christ spoke by
parables; the Epistles of the holy Apostles, and Sermons of the Fathers, are
full of them. So earthly objects should serve us to this end, that in them we
may see heavenly things: and there is no creature, There is no earthly thing
which may not be applied to some spiritual use.
which does not represent to thee the Creator: and if we had spiritual eyes,
we would apply every earthly thing to some spiritual use. The dust teaches us
whereof we came, and what we are, even dust. The grass admonishes us to seek
a dwelling elsewhere; for here we are as grass, which soon fades. The worms
will us not to be proud, for we are me^te prepared for them. The Sun when it
begins to sh^ne, puts us in mind to beg for the Sun of righteousness to
shine in our souls. Every bird after his kind praises God, so should we.
When we behold bread, we should remember that of our Savior, Labor not for
the meat that perishes. Ioh. 6.27.
So God has set all his creatures to be as so many masters to teach us our
duty. The Lord sanctify our sight, that we may look attentively, and
consider God in his creatures, and that they may be as steps of a ladder to
draw us up to him.

Sin makes man to appear filthy before God
Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquities. There is nothing can make men appear
filthy before God, but only sin: as natural Philosophers through the light
of nature have bin forced to confess. And therefore, says Seneca, Seneca.
Si scirem homines ignoraturos* and deos ignoscituros, non peccarem tamen
propter peccati vtilitatem: If I knew (says he) that the gods would pardon me,
and men would not see me, yet would I not sin, because of the filthiness of
sin. It blacketh the body with shameful ignominy, The en^^ of sin.
burdeneth the soul with an evil conscience, disgraceth the gifts of the
mind and defaceth them, blotteth them out, makes them stink, and seem
nothing. Virtue in a profane man, is as a gold ring on a swines snout. The
vomit of a dog seems filthy to us, and a sow wallowing in the puddle is
loathsome, albeit not so in the sight of God; A man polluted with sin, of all
creatures the most beastly.
but more loathsome is a man defiled with blood, whoredom and drunkenness,
and such like, of all beasts he is the most beastly. Man was in honor, but
became a beast; and when he is drunken, he is then inferior to a beast, which
will drink no more then is necessary, and having drank can discern the right
way home. Alas, men now make no end of drunkenness, they add drunkenness to
thirst, The evils of drunkenness.
whereby they weaken their nature, exhaust their money, impouerish their
posterity, become infamous to the world, make shipwreck of their conscience,
and so destroy body, soul, conscience, riches, name, and all. A woman though
she were a Princess, and never so gallant a Lady, if she be known to be like
Herodias, Psalm. 15.
she is to be contemned in all godly men's eyes, and to be esteemed of as
Mordecai esteemed Haman.

Let us be ashamed of sin in any, and Blush at our own filthiness, because
of it. But alas, we are fallen in such a time, when sinners are become
shame^esse, and women not of the meaner sort, Nota.
delight as much to be harlots, and defile their bodies with whoredom, then as
honest women to be obedient to their husbands, and keep their bodies holy and
clean vessels.

Sin is filthy to think of it, filthy to sp^ake of, filthy to hear of,
filthy to do; Sin altogether filthy*
in a word, there is nothing in it but vileness. What can we see in a botch
but filth? in a wound but filth? and look to sin, nothing in it but sin,
which is more filthy, then if the filth of all worldly diseases were cont^acted
in one heap. And therefore David seeing his own filthiness, craves as God
to be washed therefrom.

He desires to be washed. No element so fit to wash away filth as water; which
serves for many uses, but especially for that. And as God has appointed that
element to take away our outward uncleanness, The blood of Christ a fit
elemen^ to wash away sin.
so he has appointed his Sons blood to be the only Jordan to wash and take
away the leprosy of our sins. This is the fountain of David for remission of
sins. Unless a man be borne again by the Spirit and water, Ioh. 3.5.
he can not come to the kingdom of heaven, which is our regeneration. This was
prefigured in the Leuiticall law, when there was frequent washing. The high
Priest Aaron himself and the rest of the inferior Priests presumed not to
offer sacrifices till they were washed. The vessels were in the Tabernacle, and
the great Sea, for continual purgations and washings, not only to prefigurate
the fountain of justification, by which all those who are consecrated to God
must be once washed, but also the Spirit of sanctification, by which they must
be sanctified. And he that is once washed, Daily sins have need of daily
purgations
has not need to be washed again. Yet our feet and affections must be daily
washed. We sin daily, and therefore have need of daily purgation. We contract
daily guiltiness, for which we are commanded to pray daily, Mat. 6.12.
Forgive us our sins. This is signified by the holy Sacrament of Baptism,
wherewith God has commanded us to be washed, assuring us thereby of his
favor, if we believe the remission of sins, which the Apostle calls lauacrum
regenerationis, Tit. 3.5.
the lauer of regeneration. Those who seek to be washed by any other mean
then this, do as those qui luto lutum purgant, as Erasmus has in his Adagies,
wash one filth by another.

Against he Papists merits. Simil.
Those foolish Papists who think by their foul merits to cleanse their filthy
sins, do as those who having their clothes berayed by dirt, take dirtie clothes
to wipe the former dirt away, whereby they make them filthier then before. Yea,
their hypocrisy and superstition, whereby they think to appease Gods wrath,
shall double their guiltiness before God and man.

The word in the original includes a multiplication of washing: whereby he
acknowledges a multiplication in sinning; and his earnestness, that every sin
may have some particular assurance of grace. For this is the hungring and
thirsting after spiritual graces, that the heart cannot be satisfied till it
be filled with them; neither will be content of a bare crust and outward show
of pardon, unless the assurance thereof be doubled.

And cleanse me from my sin. The second similitude is taken from cleansing;
which is respective to the Leprosy under the Law, Leuit. 13.
for which God appointed purgations and cleansings.

Why sin so compared (...) leprosy.
Sin is compared to a leprosy. Frst, because it is hereditarie, being in the
blood; so we are conceived in sin; and the more dangerous, because by no
natural means it can be helped, but by God alone. Sin is from the descent of
our parents, we are conceived therein. Who can bring that which is clean, out
of a thing unclean?

Secondly, as leprosy is ignominious and disgraceth man above all other
diseases, that men who are infected by the plague, are not so much shunned as
those that are leprous: so sin disgraceth man. The leprosy of Miriam made her
to be separated from the camp; Number. 12.14
and the leprosy of Vzza made him to be shut out of the Temple: so sin
depriueth us of the society of man and Angels.

Thirdly, Leprosy makes men's flesh senseless; so sin makes men insensible of
the judgments of God.

Fourthly, Leprosy is incurable with men, as are the frenzy, heresy, and
jealousy, God keeps those cures to himself: so sin can be purged by none
but by gods own cunning. As Abanah and Pharpar rivers of Damascus, 2, Kin. 5.12
were not of force to cure the leprosy of Naaman, and leprous might have died,
if according to the Prophets direction he had not washed himself in Jordan: so
are the merits of men, or holiness of Angels, Apostles, yea of the blessed
virgin Marie, so much set by by men, unprofitable to purge us from our sins,
only that blessed blood of Jesus will do the turn, wherein if we be washed,
our flesh shall be as the flesh of a child, even as though we had never sinned.

But to the end thou ma^st be assured whether thou art cleansed from this
leprosy or no, I will give you some in allible tokens and marks, whereof some
are secret and only known to thy self, others are seen by others.

The secret marks be these: First* if thou art ashamed of those things which
thou have done. Private tokens whereby thou may know if thou be washed. Romans
6.21. Job 42.6.
What profit have ye of those things (says the Apostle) whereof now ye are
ashamed, and cannot remember them without blushing? ^f thou abhorrest thy self
when thou call them to mind, and repentest with Job in dust and ashes.
Secondly, if thou have says in Christ's blood, do desire to be purged by
these clean and clear waters, not running to others, or digging unto thy
self cisternes of rotten waters. External notes whereby others may know if
thou be washed.


The external mark, is sanctification of thy person; being washed, thou go
not to defile thee in the puddle. And thy thankfulness to God, 2 Kin. 5.15
as Naaman returned to Elisha, and not only offered, a great reward unto him,
but promised to be a worshipper of God all his days. Be not like unto the nine
lepers, who outwardly cured, abode in the leprosy of sin, of the two the worst
and most dangerous: Luke 17.17
but with the tenth return to Christ with thankfulness. For if thou be
unthankful to God, and art not diligent and earnest to celebrate praises unto
him for his mercies, it is an evident token thou art not yet cured.

Finally, thou must go to the Priest, and offer according to the law; receive
the absolution from Gods mouth* out of the mouth of his servants, and show thy
thankfulness in obedience to God all thy life.

Verse 3. For I know mine iniquity, and my sin is ever before me.
THe first argument which he used to move God to pardon his sins, was taken
from God himself, and that great mercy whereto he is inclined. The next, from
his great filthiness and uncleanness, whose misery was an object of Gods
mercy, desiring God to purge and cleanse him from the same. Now follows the
third argument, taken from ^is acknowledgement of his sin, and true confession
thereof. As though he would say: Lord, I know I have sinned, I confess my sin
to thee, therefore pardon me. What force, think ye, this argument would have
in a guilty man's mouth, if he came before an earthly Judge, and would say: I
have committed murder and adultery, I confess it? Surely the Judge would
answer, Ex ore tuo te iudico, I judge thee according to thine own confession;
as David commanded him to be killed, 2. Sa. 1.16. An humble acknowledgement of
sin, a good argument to obtain pardon from God.
who reported that he had killed Saul. But before the heavenly Tribunal, such
an argument has only force. There is no mean to acquit us from Gods justice,
unless we come to him, humbly confessing our sin, and accusing our selves, for
then he will pardon and excuse us. Our condemning of our selves, makes him to
absolve us: our remembrance of our sins, makes him to forget them; and our
repentance brings his pardon.

But how comes it to pass, that thus he lamenteth, Nathan had assured him
that his sins were forgotten and pardoned? I answer, the godly, be persuaded of
mercy, yet for the love they bear to God, they cannot but be displeased with
themselves, so often as they remember how unhappily they have offended so
gracious a majesty: The wicked forget the evils which they do, and remember
the good which they have done, if they have done any; whereas the godly
remember always their sins. 1. Cor. 15.9 1. Tim 1.13
but the wicked forget their sins most ^asi^y, and if they have done any show
of good, they remember it continually. The godly by the contrary forget their
good, and remember their sins, and the evil which they have done, as the
Apostle Paul says, I am the least of all the Apostles, and not meet to be
called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church. And again, When before I
was a blasphemer, a persecuter and oppressor, but I was received to mercy. And
again, Christ died for sinners, among whom I am the chief. They account
themselves the least among the godly, the greatest among sinners. So it is good
to us to nourish a continual remembrance of our own sins, that it may humble
us before God, and make God so much the more pity us, that he sees us
unfeignedly displeased with our selves that we have offen^ed him by our many
many sin^.

For I know my sin. The knowledge of his sin (doubtless) came by Gods word
out of the mouth of Nathan For albeit by a general notice he knew he had
done wrong, and the particular punctions of his conscience forced him to think
so, yet the true knowledge came never unto him, until God said by his Prophet,
Thou art the man, So the word of God serves us to this use, that it opens
our blind eyes to see what is evil in us. And therefore woe to that people who
have not the word, and faithful Preachers, who may let them see their sins.
For when they know not sin to be sin, they die in their sins. By the law* says
the Apostle, is the knowledge of sin: Romans 7.7.
for if the law had not said, Thou shall not lust, I would not think
concupiscence to be sin. Ye may see how great an evil is ignorance, when men's
eyes are blinded, whom the god of this world has blinded in so great a light.

The most part of the world couers their sin, by translating the cause over
unto others, as Adam upon Euah, Euah upon the Serpent. But the Scripture says,
Genesis 3. Pro. 28.13.
He that hides his sin shall not prosper. Non medio^re est (says Ambrose) vt
agnoscat peccatum suum vnusquisque: It is not a small thing to every one to
know and acknowledge his sin. So says David, Delicta quis intelligit, Who
understands his sin? He who knows them, may the sooner avoid them. If any
knew a danger, he could easily fly from it, and go by it. Our Savior wept,
because they knew not the day of their visitation.

That a man may know his sin, it is necessary he be admonished and rebuked; and
he who desires to attain this knowledge, must be content to receive rebukes
kindly. How to attain to an acknowledgement of sin.
He must resolve before God to shun the occasions of sin, and such evil
company as allureth him to folly; that he do call to mind what a gracious God
he has offended, what good things he has lost, how many he has offended by
his example; and to address himself henceforth to lead a holy and religious
life according to Gods word.

The Philosophers thought it most necessary for every man to know himself; and
in their precepts had this ever, He who knows not himself, can never know God
Nosce teipsum, Know thy self. Then much more it becomes a Christian to know
himself; for otherwise he can never know God in any of his properties. For if
we know not our sin, how shall we either know Gods justice pursuing us, or his
mercy pardoning us. Oh that we knew our selves.

But Satan does with us, as the Raven does with the Lamb, the eyes, then
deuoureth it: first he blinds us, then we follow him. Therefore we should
labor upon our souls, that the darkened eye thereof may be clear, the
dimnesse removed, Acts 9.
the scales which lie upon them (as upon Saint Paul) may fall to the ground;
that seeing our selves and our nakedness, we may crave to be covered; seeing
our wounds, we may desire to be cured. As also it is the principal part and
duty of Pastors to deal in their Sermons with people, that they may see their
sins. Son of man (says the Lord to Ezekiel) make known to Jerusalem their
abominations. Pastors ought to exhort the people to a sight of their sin.
We flatter the people in their sin, and use conniuence to their wickedness.
We are afraid, and belike dare not light the candle of the word and bring it to
them being lying in darkness, lest they put forth the candle or smite us, who
by the light thereof let them see their misbehauiour.

And my sin is ever before me. When Satan does present his baited hook of
sin to us, Satan's policy in presenting the greatness of our sins, after we have
sinned, to us
he never lets us see the hook of Gods judgments but ever the bait of
ple^sure: but when we have swallowed the bait, he never lets us see any
comfort of Gods mercies, but proposes to us a troubled conscience, the flames
of Gods wrath, and the terrors of his judgments; as the Prophet says, Our
iniquities are multiplied before us.

And yet we must take heed of the devils craft, who obscureth from many their
sin, so that they can never repent, for that which they never see or feel. And
yet on the other hand, he lets some see the mountains of their sins, and
hugeness of them, that they see nothing else in God but his justice, thereby
to lead them to despair, as he did with Judas. But we must not look with
such fixed eyes upon our sins, that we lift not up our eyes to Gods mercy,
which is ready to pardon, and to apply to-our heart all the sweet promises
which we read in the Scriptures; so that as fear bears us down, faith may
uphold us that we fall not. They must ever be before us in this world, and be
purged by unfeigned repentance, not that our repentance can expiate them, or
pacify Gods wrath, or (as the foolish Papists think) that we can do penance
for them. For what satisfaction can thy humiliation do, which is imperfect, to
satisfy the wrath of an infinite God? Unless his Son had intervened by his
satisfaction, Gods wrath could not have bin appeased. The more we repent for
sin, the more we are eased.
The more we remember our sin, and lament for the same, the more ease get we to
our afflicted minds and consciences, and the more sensibly shall we feel the
mercy of God pardoning our offenses. Therefore we cannot be better exercised
then in an humble confession of our sin, and by bitter tears with Peter weep
for our offenses; which I pray God the Lord may work in our hearts, that we
may find that blessing upon us, which Christ pronounced, Math. 5.
Blessed are they who now mourn, for they shall be comforted.

Verse 4. Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy
sight: that thou may be just when thou speak, and pure when thou iudgest.
THe ancients have so far differed in expounding this verse, some running forth
on Allegories, others on far sought interpretations, that Lorinus the Jesuit
numbreth twelve diverse interpretations hereof; of which, The diverse
interpretations of this verse.
two are most agreeable to the words and meaning of the text. The first
expounds it this way: Howsoever (say they) David did wrong to Vriah, yet it was
hid from all men, and only known to God; and these sins are only done
against God, whereof none is witness but he only. And surely albeit we would
cover our sins from the sight of the world, there is one witness, whose sight
we cannot flee.

Plato affirms, that we should do nothing in secret* whereof we would be
ashamed in publik. And Cicero, Ne siquidem deos omnes celare possumus, albeit
we could keep it secret from all the gods.

The other, whereto I rather incline, is thus: Albeit (say they) David had
offended man, yet it touched him more nigh at the heart the sin he did against
God, in breaking of his law. For so Nathan said unto him, Why did thou
contemn the word of the Lord, that thou should do evil in his sight? 2. Sa.
12.14
As though David would say: Though all the world would absolve me, this is more
then enough to me, that I feel thee my judge, and my conscience cites me
before thy tribunal. Let us have our eyes and our senses fixed on God, and not
be deceived with the vain allurements of men, who either extenuate or conniue
and wink at our sins. For God, N^t^.
as he is witness to our sins, so is he sole and only Judge, Admire the love
of God.
who can punish both soul and body in hell fire; of whose wrath we should be
more afraid, then of all the kings or tyrants of the world. As also we should
be sorry that we have offended so gracious a God, who when he might have damned
us, yet has pleased to pardon us, and takes no other satisfaction at our
hand, but repentance for our sin, and faith in his Son Jesus Christ. Who will
not give us to our enemies hand to be destroyed, but will set us free from
prison, out of his free love. Therefore O sinner in time be reconciled with thy
Judge, and take no rest till thou have surety of his favor. Say with David,
Peccaui, I have sinned; 2. Sa. 12.13
and God shall say with Nathan, Peccatatua remissa sunt, thy sins are forgiven.

Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight.
The ingemination of the word (against thee) signifies the deepnesse of his
feeling and grief, who is the more wounded, the more he finds the greatness
of that majesty and goodness whom he has offended. So it were happy for us,
that we could be deeply moved with a conscience of our sin, that out of the
deep places of a contrite heart we might redouble our sighs, which would pierce
that fatherly heart if we could shoot up such arrows to heaven: but we laugh
over the matter, not remembering that our laughter shall be turned to mourning.

This also serves to convince such miscreant Atheists, who can generally say,
God forgive us, we are all sinners, as it were excusing their sins, when as
they are never touched at the heart with a sorrow for them. They feed their
foolish humors with a cloak of the multitude that sins, quasi patrocinium
erroris sit multitudo peccantium, as though the multitude of sinners should be
a patrocinie and defense of errors, says Augustine. Hell is spacious and large
enough, having all the dimensions, which will contain all the devils and their
children, if they were more in number then they are.

That thou may be just when thou speak, and pure when thou iudgest. By
this it is clear, that the justice of God shines most in men's souls, and his
truth in their lies. As though he would say: Because I have sinned so
grievously, and have committed such wickedness, that thou can not be blamed
of unrighteousness, though thou should punish me most rigorously, for I have
deserved worse then I have suffered.

But because the Apostle Paul, Romans 3.4. would seem to turn this text to
another sense, we shall reconcile them easily. A reconc^liation betwixt this
place and that of Romans 3 4.
For the Apostle seeing the Jews to bring the testament and covenant of God in
stander, as though he had bin the cause of their ruin, by casting that upon
themselves, he freeth God of their fall. But David here vindicateth Gods
justice, laying all the cause on himself. Whereof we gather, that if any evil
come to man, the cause of it is to be found in himself; we need not cast it on
God.

But out of this, that David confesses God to be just when he judges, we
learn first* that God (as Abraham said) is the just Judge of the world: Genesis
18.25
and albeit he has reserved a general judgment after this life, God has a
particular judgment in this world.
as Augustine says, yet he has a particular judgment upon men in this world,
both elect and reprobate; iudicie non s^^^er manifesto, semper tamen iusto, not
always by a manifest, yet always by a just judgment. He erecteth a tribunal
in men's conscience, he summoneth the party, accuses and co^uicteth him. This
judgment is by his word and Spirit. For every man's work shall be manifest as by
the fire. For the fire both lets them see their faults, and burns up their
dross. As also he punishes them in the sight of the world, and in their
posterity, as he did as well to David as to Saul; 2. Sa. 12.10
for he said, that blood should not depart from his house, and so it was.
Therefore let not men, although the best Christians, think to escape the
censure of his justice; yea, what ever he does, Psalm. 143.17
we must say, God is just in all his works.

Next, he is pure when he judges or tries. We may be assured, God will put
men to trial.
God will put us to trial, by affl^ction, persecution, sickness and poverty.
Then men will be made manifest, the hypocrisy of many will be detected. For as
the wind is appointed to try the corn, Genesis 22.12
Abraham was tried in the slaughter or offering of his son, and his faith was
approved; Jonah 2.
so was Jonas tried, and Jobs patience, and Peter's weakness. In all these
trials God was pure and free of any injury done to any of them; for they were
known to be but men, although Prophets and Apostles. And it is no marvel
though at this time in the trial of the Church, Nota.
many be found to be but men, God is not to be blamed, he is pure when he
tries.

And seeing trial is prophesied to be not only the Church of Philadelphia,
Reu. 3.10. 1. Pet. 1.7.
but also in all the earth, which is called the hour of tentation, or a time
of fiery trial, either by heresies, schisms, or defection from the truth of
God, or by bloody persecutions of Gods Saints and his Church, (as all Europe
has experience this day;) what shall we do but keep Gods word, Nota.
possess our souls in patience, suffering the reproaches, calumnies, cruel
dealings, yea all that the devil and his children can do to us. If we be tried
by fire, let us be found gold; if by water, let us abide in the Arc and in the
Apostles boat; let us be found sure builders upon the foundation which the
Apostles laid, even Christ: 1. Pet. 2.
if by the air and winds, let us be as wheat and not chafe. If finally by
the earth and earthly allurements, let us be found to have our conversation
above, the time of trial is come already.

We learn also out of this, that in all our trials, whether inward in our
conscience, or external in our bodies, yea though our bodies were given to the
beasts and fowls of heaven, In all our trials, external or internal, God is
pure
yet God is pure and without fault. In the best of us all there is cause why we
should be tried.

Verse 5. Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived
me.
THis is the fourth reason, by which he would move God to forgive him. That our
nature from the very original is corrupted, from the seminary and fountain of
our conception. For from our mothers womb, we bring nothing but sin. And
surely we cannot thoroughly acknowledge our sins, unless we condemn our whole
natural powers and faculties of uncleanness. So the knowledge of this one
sin, brings him to the examination of his whole life, Actua^ll sins are as
streams which proceed from original sin which is the fountain.
till he find nothing in himself but sin. For if the fountain be poisoned,
what will the streams be that flow from it. If we would look back to our
original sin, we might have cause the more to lament our actual sins, as
poisonable streams flowing from such a fountain.

So soon therefore as our conscience accuses us of any one sin, we should
call to remembrance the whole course of our life, Let the remembrance of one
sin put us in mind of all the sins we have committed. Simil.
that it has bin nothing else but a continual sinning against God; that thus
the last putting us in mind of the first, we may not be content to repent and
ask pardon for one, but for all. A sick man having obtained health, does
remember how long he was sick, whereby for the present he both considers his
own frailty, and Gods mercy in delivering him, as also encourages and
inanimateth him in time to come, by remembrance of former mercies obtained.
Happy were we if we would begin to remember our miseries and Gods mercies.

Lorinus the Jesuit to ecce adds enim, which he confesses is not in the
Hebrew verity, and that Saint Jerome has forgot it, yet maintains that it
is rightly put in, to give force to the words of his sin. See the Sophist, who
grants the Scriptures, and yet would empaire their credit: as though Gods
Spirit were not wise enough, and the sense could not hold without enim. The
like do they in these words, Hoc est corpus meum, they add enim, and say, Hoc
est enim, which is not in the Scriptures, and were altogether vngrammaticall.
In a word, they alter and change the Scriptures as they please, bringing in
their enim as a particle of reason, which carries with it no reason.

Ye see then what the miserable corruption of our nature is, so soon as we
take life, Man no sooner begins to live, but he begins to sin. Genesis 6.5.
we begin to sin. An infant of one day, is not clean before God. The mass
whereof we be formed, is filthy and sinful; and so much the more filthy,
seeing it is possessed with a soul unclean and polluted. The cogitation of
wans heart is only evil continually. God knows our mold. Psa. 103.14
We err from the womb. And albeit marriage be a bed undefiled, Heb. 13.4.
by reason of the institution, yet the concupiscence and lust polluteth the
ordinance which is most holy.

Children have original sin.
Then children are not free of original sin: for then why should they be
baptized; and why should they die, as many do daily?

But it may seem wonderful and strange, that children who can neither do,
Solut. Simil.
what is the reason that a young fox new whelped, does not slay a lamb? is it
not because it lacks strength, and is not come to that maturitie to execute
their inclination, which is naturally cruel. So are infants naturally inclined
to sin; and therefore so soon as they can think any thing, speak or do any
thing, it is evil, as daily experience teaches us. Parents should take care
to amend by good education that which is deficient in their children by nature.
Simil. Original sin is sin.
And therefore it becomes Christian parents to take pains to amend that which
is deficient and imperfect by nature in their children, by art, instruction and
correction. That as wild beasts are tamed by the industry of men, and barren
grounds have become fruitful by laboring and manuring; so evil natures may be
corrected by good education.

Ye see also out of this, that original sin is sin, and offen sieve to the law
of God, and the root of all others: that the most secret thought of our heart
is sufficient to condemn us, if God would deal extremely. Which impugneth
that devilish and erroneous doctrine of some, who think that the first
intentions and thoughts are venial, if consent come not with them. Our Lord
says, that whosoever sees a woman, and lusts after her, commits
adultery, Mat. 5.28.
and is as culpable before God as if he had sinned with her. But that
concludes not, that the motion is not sinful, to which such a wicked consent
is added; the greater sin cannot excuse the lesser. Therefore we must go with
Elizeus to the fountain, and cast in salt in those rotten and stinking waters,
2. Kin. 2.20
that they being purified, all the streams flowing there from, may be also
cured.

This parentall sin, hereditarie, radical, the leven of the primitive
corruption, the law of the members, Nota.
natural and general to all mankind, cannot be taken away, but by the
conception and nativity of Christ.

But here arises a question, how parents, both being Christians and received
in the covenant, Solut. Simil.
the seed, ye see, when it is sown, is made as clean as the art and industry
of man can do, and yet arises with a root, stalk, blade and beard; the cause
is not in man, the force lies in the seed: so in that the parents are
purified, they have it of God; what the child has, he has by nature, which
either must be repaired by grace, or he must perish. Adam, Noah, Samuel, Eli,
David, etc. although they were godly and religious men, yet had naughty and
wicked children; which shows unto us, that religion and godliness comes not
by nature, but by the free grace of God.

I omit those vain and idle questions de originali peccato, Godliness comes
not by nature but by grace.
which the Papists too curiously propound, and may be very easily answered,
lest it should breed errors in your mind, which ye never dreamed of.

And in sin has my mother conceived me. The word iechematin, signifieih
properly calefacit, warmed me in her womb, fed or nourished me, referring it
to the action of heating and feeding the child in the womb nine month.
Wherein the greatness of Gods work is to be seen, who so miraculously can
preserve the infant in such an obscure place, so compassed with the interior
parts. Always even there in that poor creature there is sin, albeit he be
ignorant of it. So he has a burden when he feels it not, and lies wrapped
with all miseries, and thinks himself then to be in a best case; for when he
comes out of the womb, with great pain to his mother, and difficulty to
himself, he weepeth poor soul because he is come to sorrow.

Ezekiel makes mention of a child newborn, whose nauill was not yet cut,
Ezech. 16.3.4.5.6.
neither salt put in it, nor washed, lying miserably in the pollution of
nature; which represents to us our natural filth in sin, that neither are we
cutted away by the knife of the Spirit from our original corruption, neither
washed by the blood of Christ from our natural uncleanness, neither salted by
the salt of the word; and if it were not by Gods grace, and care of our
spiritual parents that we were helped, we would never live, but die and perish
in the filth wherein we have bin conceived and borne. Man were utterly undone,
if he were not supported by the grace of God.
There is no beast which nature has not taught some means to help it self, as
some have naturally skins, or hair and wool to defend them from injuries, we
have none. In a word, man were undone if he were not supported by the grace of
God. We may weep, we have no more; and would God we could spiritually cry and
mourn, that the Lord hearing our weeping might pity and help us.

But because so many worthy writers, both ancient and modern, Papists and
Protestants, have written largely of this place, and I must say, Sum minimus
omnium, I cease to write any more hereof, lest I should repeat that which they
have already observed.

Verse 6. Behold, thou love truth in the inward affections: therefore have
thou taught me wisdom in the secret of mine heart.
THis is the fifth argument which he uses persuading God to forgive him, taken
from the sincerity of his repentance, that it was not counterfeit or
dissembled, which is very acceptable to God. Yea in all the actions of religion
and parts thereof, there is nothing more pleasing to God then sincerity and
uprightness. He cannot abide hypocrisy and dissimulation, and to put over
with fair words and an outward show. It is a mocking of God to look up with
our eyes to the heavens, Hypocrisy in religion is a mocking of God
to bow with our knees, to field our hands, to knock on our breasts, if we
want uprightness and soundnes of heart. We must serve God in faith, love,
repentance, humility, unfeignedly from our heart, as true Nathaniels, Ioh. 1.47.
in whom there is no guile.

The parts of this verse are these: 1. who loves, Thou. 2. where and what he
loves, truth in the inward affections. 3. the consequent following upon this
love, therefore have thou taught me wisdom* in the secret of mine heart.

Behold. Before he enter to any of these, he uses the particle of admiration
Behold; which he never uses but in some remarkable matter, thereby the more to
raise us up to the contemplation of such great matters to be told, as, Behold
how good and how comely a thing it is; Psalm. 133.1
brethren to dwell even together. And, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the world. Ioh. 1.29.
And this he does, that he might move God, that as he beheld his misery, being
conceived and borne in sin, so he might behold his sincere and unfeigned
repentance. And this is the happiness of man, when God beholds him mourning,
as he beheld him sinning. This second sight is as delight some to the Lord, as
the first was tedious. So, God sees all our sins, as he sees our repentance.
Nota.
Sin not because he sees thee, but repent unfeignedly, that he may take
pleasure in b^holding thee.

Thou love. The person who loves, is God. The Creator becomes a lover of
the creature; even God becomes a lover of his image in him. Does he then love?
Above all things let us seek to depend upon this his lone. In our religion we
should travel to know what he loves most, Godaboue all things loves
sincerity.
what he respects most, what best pleases him; for otherwise we lose our
time in his service: he loves sincerity best, and that we should present to
him. We enquire what every man loves best, and we frame our selves to seek
after it: then I beseech you, among the rest, search out what God loves best,
seek after it, and present it to him; and if there were no other argument to
move us to sincerity, this may be sufficient, because God loves it. Love that
which God loves, hate that which he hates; love sincerity, that he loves;
hate hypocrisy, that he cannot abide.

Truth. By truth is meant sincerity and uprightness in his Majesty's service;
that we do not gloss him by fair words and shows: he loves not shadows but
substances, no colors or couerts, but the body it self. For he pierces with
his eye to the lowest part of man's heart, and stays not upon the outward
picture of man-actions, howsoever plausible to man, God looks not as man
looks.

In every action of religion, let us remember to keep sincerity. Who would
desire to be called rich, if he want riches; esteemed valiant, if he have not
strength? and shall we think it sufficient to be called religious, Better to
be religious, then to be thought religious.
and not to be so? Better to be rich, then to be called rich; better to be
religious, then to be thought or called religious.

God loves truth as he hates all falsehood; for he is truth. Ego sum veritas,
via and vita. Ioh. 14.6.
He loves truth in our profession, truth in our civil life: truth in our
profession, is that which he has commanded in his word; truth in our civil
life, is that which agrees with duty of civil conversation, without fraud,
deceit or guile, which is different from Gods nature, and resembles the devil
who is a deceiuer.

In the inward affections. It is not a superficial or scroofe-worship which
God regards. For Cains sacrifice outwardly was as pleasant as Abels; Genesis 4.4*
but God looked to their hearts, accepted the one, and rejected the other. God
above all things craves the heart: Pro. 2^.26
My son give me thine heart. God will be worshipped in spirit and verity.

Therefore have thou taught me wisdom in the secret of mine heart. He
amplifieth his sin by this circumstance, that he did it not as an ignorant, but
as one who was enlightened with knowledge; and besides he had private
informations and intelligence from God in his heart, and tasted of the heavenly
doctrine, yea it was rooted and fixed in his heart, yet like a brute beast he
was carried to that filthy lust, and so was inexcusable, and suffocated the
light of the Spirit which he had received. He had informations given by God,
but he had not grace to follow them, which so much the more made him
inexcusable, that he was taught, Christians perish not for want of informatio^,
but for contemning the warnings they get. God must teach (...)
and would not obey. So Christians shall not perish for lack of information, but
because they do not obey the warnings which they get. This age has heard many
lessons, and God has manifested his whole will unto them; but because they
obey them not their knowledge shall augment their pains. God he must be our
great Doctor and Teacher, we must be Theodidactoi, taught of God. Neither
nature, learning, experience, practice or age can teach us wisdom, only Gods
word must teach us.

Nature prevailed among the Philosophers, but that never led them to God. For
all the principles of our faith are contrary to nature, sense and reason. What
is more against natural reason, then these points of our religion: God was
made man; a virgin has borne a child; a crucified man saved the world; a dead
man arose, etc. in these and such we must be taught from above by God.

God teaches by the ministry of his word
God he teaches by the ministry of his word, which whosoever contemns,
refuses the means of his salvation; but that ministry will not be sufficient
without divine inspiration. 1. Cor. 3.6.
Paul may plant, Apollo may water, but God gives the increase.

Bellarmine translateth the Hebrew word (which he grants signifies
abscondita) incerta, and so does Lorinus; those doubting Doctors would have the
mysteries of the Scriptures uncertain and doubtful. Nota.


There is great diversity of judgments among men what is true wisdom; These
are of the Lord is true wisdom. Eccles. 1.2.
but if ye would enquire at the wisest man that ever lived, he will tell you
that having examined all things under heaven, he found all things to be but
vanity and vexation of spirit; and that true wisdom consisted only in the
fear of God, and keeping his commandments. The fear of the Lord is the
instruction of wisdom; Pro. 15.33
all other wisdom is foolishness.

Verse 7. Purge me with hyssope, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be
whiter then snow.
HE is not contented simply to crave pardon once or twice, but many times; yes
he multiplieth his suites by metaphors; allegories, and such borrowed speeches,
signifying how deeply he was wounded with his sin, that he would have himself
assured and confirmed in the remission thereof: and now he borrows a
similitude from the washings and purgations used in the Leuiticall law,
desiring that God would look on his miseries, who was a leprous man by sin,
and a filthy polluted sinner, that he might be washed in the blood of Christ,
prefigured by the Mosaicall washings.

Purge me with hyssope. There is made mention of hyssope, where it was used,
Three times made mention of hysop. Exo. 12.^^.
in three places: first, in the 12. of Exodus, at the institution of the
Passover, where the blood of the Lamb was appointed to be sprinkled upon the
door cheeks with a bunch of hyssope bound with a scarlet lace. The blood
signified Christ's blood, the bunch of hyssope the saving, and the scarlet lace
his blood died, which bound the bunch* all having their spiritual
significations. For the blood no doubt signified the blood of that undefiled
Lamb, shed from the beginning of the world. The hyssope, the inst^ument
applying his blood by faith. The scarlet lace, the communion of the Saints, who
are bound by love the bond of perfection, and sprinkled with that same blood to
the remission of sins. And so the blood which washes faith which applies, and
the lace that coupleth, are all one; Christ by faith and love received to the
purgation of all Christians.

The second place, Leuit. 17. is the purgation of the Leper, wherein the blood
of the sparrow, the bunch of hyssope and the scarlet lace are likewise
mentioned, and differs nothing but in this, in the first was the Lamb, here
the Sparrow, which is all one: for even as the Lamb is among beast^, so is the
Sparrow bate and simple amongst fowls; to which David compar^th himself, I am
as a sparrow on the house top sitting alone: Psalm. 102.7.
so we must be sprinkled with his blood, which being contemptible to men, was
acceptable to God.

The third was, Numb. 19. about the red Cow, which must have hyssope dipped in
the b^ood thereof. And Christ is compared to the Cow or fat calfe, which being
in so great a price with the Father, was given to death for the salvation of
our souls.

The hyssope has many things wherein it represents Christ very nigh: Wherein
hysop represents Christ. 1. Kin. 43*
for first it is obseure, humble and abiec^^; so that Salo^o^ is said to have
written of all trees, from the Cedar the highest tree, opposed to the hyssope
springing out of the wall, that is to be basest and most common growing amongst
stones, not standing of man's industr^e to plant them, as other trees do. So
Christ in whom we believe was contemptible, a worm, not a man, despised, Psalm.
2^*
in him was no beaurie, riches or earthly honors, which makes men to come in
credit and account.

Next* the hyssope is bitter and sour, not pleasant to the drinkers: so the
cross of Christ, by which our affections are mortified, is very odious to the
flesh, and agrees not with its taste. His cross is therefore a stumbling
block to the Jews, and folly to the Gentiles.

Thirdly, albeit it be sour, yet it is most wholesome: so albeit the doctrine
of repentance be irksome and unsavory to the flesh yet it is wholesome to the
soul. Natural men esteem this doctrine to be an enemy to them, omnis
victima sale saliatur.

An observation of Cyvillus concerning hysop.
Cyrillus observes in the hyssope an hot operation, whereby it sha^pneth the
gross humors, and purges the concretion of the priuitie; so grace makes us
fervent in the spirit.

Moreover, hysop purges the lungs, ph^iriasis, rests, The property of hysop.
Plin. lib. 20. cap. 4.
nour^sh^th the native color of the body, kills filth and vermin growing
on man, cures the bites of serpents, provoke appetite, sharpneth the sight,
is enemy to seuers; of which it is written, Parua calens, pectus purgans,
petrosa streatrix
Ius sapidat pleurae congrua, spargit aquam.


So grace is hot by charity, purging by contrition, spitting forth by
confession, seasoning the body by temperance, saving the soul and inward parts
by application of Christ's blood, which being drunken purges our plurisie and
bloody eyes.

The hysop of Christ's blood a medicine for all our corruptio^^*
Then seeing all these diseases are in the soul of man, are we not much
beholden to God, who has made one salve to cure all our sores; the blindness
of our mind is removed by the water of his blood; the foul c^r up^ions of our
heart are euacuate and dissolu^d* that we spit them fo^th; our coldness is
warmed, our fie^y fevers and inflammations quenched our spiritual vigor and
color is restored, which we lost by sin.

Wash me, and I shall be whiter then the snow. What meant by washing.
He acknowledges that none in heaven or earth is able to purge him, but God
only: He has that fountain in his own garden; he will communicate the
glory of our redemption to none but to himself. For by this washing is meant
the washing of justification and remission of sins; that as creation belongs
only to God, so does redemption by Christ's blood. Woe to them who leaving the
waters of life, go to any other, to seek water out of these rotten cisterns.

Then seeing it is the proper work of God to wash us, let us go to the lauer of
baptism, that there we may be once washed; and after daily pray, that he may
wash our feet by sanctification.

And I shall be whi^er then the snow He persuades himself of a full purgation
by Christ's blood. Though I were as black as the Moore, yet shall I be white as
snow. Nothing can blot out our sins but this blood. If we would wash our
selves with snow waters, our righteousness shall be as a menstruous garment.
Esa. 64.6.
What is all the righteousness of man, but an abomination before God. Yea
Christ himself if he had b^n only man, could not have bin able to satisfy
the justice of an insinite God; he must be God himself, and therefore it is
called the blood of God.

But how shall we be whiter then snow? Act. 20. ^ouct. Solut.
I answer, our estate is more perfect and ^u^er by Christ, then it was by
nature in Adam; forasmuch as we have our perfection by Christ, which cannot
fail or alter; and it is the perfection of God which belongs to us: so that
we stand not before God as men, but as gods before God, being co^ered with his
perfect obedience who is our Redeemer, blessed for over. So there is no cause
why we should fear or despair, seeing we are cleansed perfectly, if we
believe and be sanctified. Let us put on Christ, whose garment is white as
snow. Mar. 17.2.
And his Church is made white in him. Who is this that comes up white? (...),
Cant. 8.5. Apoc. 7.14
And the Bride has white garments, made white in the Lambs blood.

The proper office of the holy Spirit is to wash us, and purify our conscience
by Christ's blood, lest our filthiness keep us back from access to God. And
this ye were, says the Apostle, but ye are washed, 1. Cor. 6.11
ye are sanctified, ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. And again, speaking of the Church, that he may sanctify
her, purging her by the washing of water, by the word, Ephesians. 5.17.
that he may make the Church glorious to himself, not having spot or wrinkle,
or any such thing, but that she may be holy and blameless. So, it is the only
work of God to sanctify his children and make them clean.

Finally observe, that justification and sanctification are undivided
companions; Justification and sanctification go together.
whomsoever the Lord washes by the hysop of his Sons blood, he also
sanctifies by his Spirit. Study therefore to get holiness, without which
none shall see God. ^et holiness to the Lord be written on your breasts. Exo.
28.36 Leuit. 20.7.
Holiness becomes the house of God. Be holy, Many study to attain to
knowledge, but not to sanctification.
as I am holy. For what fellowship can the most holy God have with unclean and
profane people? This miserable age studieth to attain to knowledge, but not to
sanctification. Let Atheists call you what they please, study you to purity
of li^e. A true Christian will make more conscience of an idle word or filthy
thought which will arise in their hearts, Nota.
and will correct it more sharply, then those lewd miscreants will do for
adultery and the worst actions they commit.

Verse 8. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.
Having craved before remission of sins, now he beggeth the fruit which
follows upon the same, that is, joy and gladness, which is one of the fruits of
the kingdom of God, and marks of Gods children.

Joy proceeds of sorrow.
This joy which he suiteth, must of necessi^ie presuppose a sorrow which he had
for his sin. For as repentance can never want sorrow, no more can remission
want joy. So that joy springs out of the bitter goote of sorrow. And the
greater sorrow we have, the greater shall our joy be. The deeper thy grief be,
the higher shall thy comfort be.

He doubleth joy and gladness both of soul and body; he will not be
contented with some one or two consolations, but will have them to be
multiplied; that as his tribulations did increase, so his comforts in Christ
Jesus might be enlargod.

As a Christian is the most sorrowful man in the world, Of all men a Christian
has most cause to rejoice.
so there is none more glad then he. For the cause of his joy is greatest: in
respect his misery was greatest, his delivery greatest, therefore his joy
greatest: from hell and death is he freed, to life in heaven is he brought.
What can make men more glad then this, if he will believe. No offers can
satisfy the mind of a prisoner appointed to death, unless his remission be
proclaimed and given him: Psalm. 4.8.
This joy David compares with the joy of worldlings who rejoiced in their
corn and wine, and says, that he had more joy then they had, and more peace
of conscience.

This joy eats up all false joys that men have in sin, True joy eats up
false joys. Exodus 7.12
as the rod of Aaron did the rods of the Egyptians. For it is not possible that
men can have both joy in God and godliness and in sin; for the one will ever
quench the other, as water does fire.

All other joys will alter, whatsoever they be; Nothing can alter this true joy.
but nothing can take this joy from us. Not tribulation; we rejoice in the
midst of tribulation. Not death; no pain, no hatred of men, no persecution,
all these rather in crease it. Acts 5.41.
We rejoice with the Apostles, that we are thought worthy to suffer for the
word of God.

Why do worldlings call us melancholious persons, and too precise, that we
cannot do away with an idle word, Ioh. 4.32.
let be an idle action; let them say what they please, we say as Christ said to
his disciples, he had meat they knew not; so we have joy that they know not
of. That which is thy joy, O hypocrite, that is my sorrow. I laugh with
Democritus at that, Democritus always laughed, and Heraelitus always weeped
Iam. 5.1.
for which thou weepest; I weep with Heraclitus at that, whereat thou
laughest. Woe to them that laugh for they shall weep. Howl ye rich men, says
the Apostle.

Make me to hear. The person from whom he seeks this joy, is God: make me to
hear, says he; whereby he would teach us, Spiritual joy proceeds from God.
that this joy comes only from God; it is he who is the fountain of joy and
all pleasure, for all good things come from above. Natural joys proceed from
a natural and fleshly fountain, spiritual joys spring only from God: so he
who seeks these joys beneath, seeks hot water under cold ice. Can any good
thing come out of Nazareth? Ioh. 1 46.
can any grace come from a graceless ground?

The instrument by which he seeks joy to be conveyed to him, is the hearing
of that word, Thy sins are forgiven thee. There is none other ordinary means
by which God will work or ever has wrought joy to the troubled heart, then by
his word preached by the mouth of his servants, The word of God is the cause of
this joy. Act. 16.14
and believed by Christians. Faith comes by hearing. God opened the heart of
Lydian. He that has ears to hear, let him hear. I have given eyes, and they
do not perceive, ears to hear, and do not understand, their ears are heavy,
etc. Preaching of the word is a necessary instrument by which spiritual
gracesis co^veied into our hearts. God craves this often in the old and new
Testanent, that we should hear his voice. And David confesses, that God had
prepared his ear. Psalm. 40.
God from heaven said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased,
Mat. 3.17.
hear him. If then ye give an obedient ear to Gods word, ye may be assured of
this joy wrought in your hearts, after ye have believed the comfortable
promises of salvation in Christ's blood.

Against Atheists and Papists lothing the word.
What think ye then of Atheists, who will not hear the word but for fashions
sake, calling those too holy who will hear two Sermons on one Sabbath; or of
Papists, who will no ways hear the word, which may be the means of their
conversion. Woe to the one and to the other. And because they have refused to
hear him, of whom they may receive comfort and instruction; therefore the Lord
shall refuse to speak to them any longer, unless betimes they repent.

That the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. The effect which he hops
to receive of those glad tidings, is a restitution of his first estate; wherein
he found himself wonderfully broken by his sin and affliction, and hops to be
restored by remission and pardon thereof. Where he speaks of the bones, he
would let us to understand, that there is no strength of nature able to resist
the stroke of Gods justice. No strength in man able to resist the stroke of
Godsiustice
For if he begin to fight with us, we are unable to resist. The bones are very
hard, and the strength of man stands in them; but if God bring the hammer of
his wrath, it shall be as iron and steel to crush them in pieces, being but as
potters vessels.

God cures none but those whom he has woun ded. Man wounds, but has no
care to cure; God wounds and seeks to cure.
Which thou have broken. The form of Gods curing: he first wounds, and then
heals. He cures none but those whom his hand has pierced; and he who
wounds, can best cure the wound. And in this God differs from man: for man
wounds, but has no care to cure; but when God inflicteth a wound on his
children, he has a present remedy appointed to cure the same. let us therefore
be content to be under his hand, who for sufficient causes crossing us, is ever
ready to comfort us in Jesus Christ.

May rejoice. By this he lets us see, what would be the effect of his
delivery, even to burst forth in the praises of his God, by his words, by his
actions, Let thy desire to be delivered from trouble be to glorify God.
by his writings. Which should teach us, that in trouble, either spiritual or
temporal, we ever have this the principal end for which we desire to be
delivered, that we may praise and glorify God.

Verse 9. Hide thy face from my sins, and put away all mine iniquities.
NOw he renews his former suite of the remission of his sins, showing now
earnestly he desired the same. He is not content once and again to cry for
pardon but many times. For he thought otherwise of his sin, then we do of ours,
it touched him at the very heart. In this verse he uses two similitudes; one,
that God would turn away his face from his sins; next, that he would blot
out all his iniquities.

Hide. The first similitude is taken from men, God cannot see sin in his
children.
who will hide their face from that which they desire not to see. And it is
certain, God is in every place, and sees every thing, but he cannot see the
sins of his elect children; for that intervenient righteousness of Christ will
not suffer him to see any filthiness in his children. He seethno iniquity in
Jacob, Ns^ 23.21. Simil.
says Balaam. For as a red or blue glass being set before out eyes, what ever
we see thorough it, seems to be of the color of the glass: so God looking
thorough Christ to us, all his righteousness seems to be ours, and we are of
his color.

In the mean time,

And put away all mine iniquities. The blotting away, presupposes an hand-writ
of the law against him, wherein his name was put in the count-booke, which must
be scraped out, and taken away, which cannot be done away but by the blood of
Jesus Christ.

All. Ye see that one sin calls to mind many thousands: and he is not
contented to be acquitted from one, unless he be acquitted from all. Call to
mind all the sins of thy life; be not at quiet till thou gettest a general
pardon for them all, which is to be purchased by Jesus Christ. Be afraid to
add new sins to thy old. Pro. 28.19. Ezech. 8.8.
Blessed is he that fears continually. Do as Ezekiel did to the wall of the
Temple, dig once, twice, thrice, and try thine heart; the more thou diggest,
the more abominations shall thou see in that place which should have bin a
Temple to God.

Verse 10. Create in me a clean heart, O God: and renew a right spirit within
me.
David has prayed already for the remission of his sins, and has doubled
over that petition eight times; now he craves new benefits, of sanctification,
of the holy Spirit, of joy, etc.

In all his peritions he prays for spiritual things; he seeks first the
kingdom of God. He prays not for the health of his body, Those are
senseless of troble, who seek to be freed of the pain, though not reconciled to
God. God as he is a great God, bestows great gifts.
but for the health of his soul; he craves not to be rich temporally, but
spiritually in God. Those are sensual, who being fallen in trouble, crave no
other thing then to be delivered from their present pain, never seeking to be
recoueiled to God.

Next, he seeks great things; for he is a great God, who according to his
greatness can bestow ample gifts, as the Ocean plenty of water. It stood not
with Alexanders honor to propine Diogenes with a small gift. We bring small
vessels to God, a weak faith, although we have great need; we think that he
is not able to give great things. Our Savior Christ could work no miracles
amongh them, Mat. 13.53 2. Kin. 7.17.
because of their infidelity. The Gentleman on whom the King leaned, died and
was trodden under foot, because he believed not the Prophet.

Thirdly, he suiteth importunately; and beggars ever speed best at Gods hand.
The Prophet Elizeus reproved King Ioas that he shot only three arrows forth
of the window; for if he had shot six or 7 times, 2. Kin. 13.19.
he might have v^terly subdued the Aramites. Let us then pray instantly and
importunately unto the Lord, and we may be assured he will hear us.

He prayed before for remission of sius, Sanctification follows remission.
and now he prays for the Spirit of sanctification, an inseparable companion
with the other. For you can never be assured that you have received pardon for
your sin past, unless Gods Spirit has given you a care to live holily in
time to come. Shall you be washen even now, and after pu^^le your self in the
mire? Not possible that ever Christ will bestow his blood to wash any, whom he
denies to sanctify by his holy Spirit.

Create in me a clean heart, O God. The worker, God; the workmanship, in me;
the work it self, create; the subject, a heart; the quality, a clean heart.

O God. As in the first creation a man is a mere patient, and has no part of
it, but God by the parents works it: God must work our second creation.
so God works the second creation by his Ministers. There is no freewill or
preparation to grace, or foreknowing godliness, as these heretical Jesuits do
affirm. Work the work thy self, and take the praise to thy self, O Lord.

Create. A man must be twice borne, before he can enter into heaven. As he is
made to the similitude of the first Adam, Man must be twice borne: and his
second creation is more excellent then the first.
so must he be made to the similitude of the second Adam; and the re-creation
or regeneration is more excellent then the former. For in the first, man was
wrought out of clay; but in the other, God works grace out of sin. What
harder to work upon then the dust? Next, he breathed in the dead body a
soul; but here he breaths in the holy Spirit in man's heart. Thirdly, in the
creation he made man perfect in all his members so in the regeneration, all the
members of the body and powers of the soul must be renewed; and if thou be
deficient in the one, thou disgracest all the workmanship. Now.
If thou have in thy new birth the eyes of knowledge, and lackest the bowels of
mercy, and art maimed of the hands of bountifulness; or if thou be dumble and
cannot praife God, or deaf and cannot hear his word, thou art not a perfect
man. A greater work in the second birth then in the first. Nota.
A greater work to raise up a dead man in sin, then to raise Lazarus out of
his grave. Blessed are they who are partakers of the first resurrection, for
the second death shall have no power of them. Reformation should begin at the
heart. Satan is an unclean spirit. As a fly is bred in filthiness, and
leaves ever filth behind it; so does the devil defile every place whereinto
he comes.

Our hearts are as open Tauernes ready to receive all passengers. Now having
tried sin and Satan to be so noisome to us, we should remove them, shut the
door of our hearts, harbor them no longer; yea if any unclean thought arise,
let us not entertain it, nor consent thereto, lest it bring worse with it.

The subject upon which he must work, is the heart, the most noble part, the
most secret part, which none can know but God; the seat of all the affections,
by which man is ruled and led.

Reformation must begin at the heart.
A reformation which begins at the members and external actions, is neither
true nor constant. As if a man intending to dress his garden, and purge it
from thistles and such like weeds, would cut off the upper part, and leave the
root, which would spring up again: so if thou would chastise thy body, and
let thine heart remain luxurious, it is nothing. The heart is the fountain,
wherefrom springs all evil, the root wherefrom all sin grows.

He speaks not of the substance but of the affections and qualities of the
heart. No honest man will lodge in a filthy house, Pro. 4.23.
and God cannot abide in a foul swinish heart. Keep thine heart diligently,
says the Spirit. Genesis 15.7.
Since God then will be thine hearts guest, thou must guard it diligently, that
others enter not in, neither lewd cogitations: but as Abraham chased away the
fowls from the sacrifice, so we must chase away corrupt and evil cogitations
from our soul, as vagabonds should be expelled from the Kings palace.

The heart in Latin is called cor, Nota.
noted by three letters, to signify (as some think) that it is the seat of
the Trinity; and therefore the pourtraiture of the natural heart is of three
corners, answerable to the same. As a vessel of gold or silver being through
long use wasted and broken,

Many are careless of the best things.
Renew a right spirit within me. He doubleth his suite concerning his soul, as
his principal desire. There are many who desire earnestly at God for earthly
things, but few are serious in seeking that best thing, a new soul. Many are
careful of the outward man, and careless of the hid man of the heart, that
inner man.

The spirit is right, when it is set upon the right object, which is God, but
when it declineth to the world or to sin, then it is wrong and goes astray.

David craving first that he might be purged from his filthiness, craves now
strength of God to his spirit, that he may not wander again, but abide
constant in the right way of Gods commandments. For we must not only pray for
a renewing grace, As we pray for renewing grace, so pray for accompanying and
following graces.
but for an accompanying grace, and a following grace to keep us in the way of
Gods obedience. The crooked and broken backed were not admitted to the
Priesthood; no more are crooked or perverse souls meet for Gods kingdom.
Try of what spirit ye are, whether of a right or a crooked; try whether it be
of God, or not. Every man's ways are right in his own eyes, but the Lord
pondereth the hearts. God must cast down the old building, and build up in
thee a new building for himself, that thou may be one of the stones of that
new Jerusalem, which shall be inhabited by God.

Verse 11. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit
from me.
IN this verse he craves two evils to be auerted from him; one, that he be not
cast out from Gods presence: the other, that the holy Spirit be not taken from
him. God cast off Saul his predecessor, 1. Sa. 16.15
and took his holy Spirit from him, and gave him over to be led by an evil
spirit; David here craves at God to be free of those two judgments. The
chief thing which he seeks after, is Gods favor; from which nothing
debarreth us more then sin. If any Courtier for his oversight were put out of
his place (as Pharaohs butler) and out of the Kings sight, Exodus 40.3
would they not think hard thereof till they recover his favor? We have
sinned against God, should we take any rest till we be restored to his favor?
Seek Gods favor.
Should we not be afraid to be exiled and cast forth from his favorable
countenance, in whose presence is fullness of joy? Psalm. 16.12.


The face and presence of God is as the Sun, which in Summer looking
favorably on the earth, quickneth all creatures, man, beasts, the earth,
whatsoever grows, the fishes of the sea, and the birds of the air; and by
his absence all are discouraged, comfortless, and lose their vigor: so while
we have Gods favor, we are in good case^ we have light, heat, comfort,
pleasure, and all things; if he hide his face, all things goes wrong; and
therefore our Poet says well,

Tu si me placido lumine videris,
Cedent continuo caetera prospere. Buch. Psalm.

But do you think that God can cast away his elect child? No verily, God cannot
absent him self forever
totally and finally he will not do it, he cannot do it; though we our selves
and others beholding our crosses, may esteem so. The Sun may seem not to
shine, With an everlasting love have I loved thee. He loved his own who were
in the world, to the end he loved them. Ioh. 16.27.
The gifts of God are without repentance. Romans 11.29 Mat. 24.24
False Christ's would deceive the very elect, if it were possible. Again,
Christ says, No man shall take them out of my hands. Romans 8.30
And Paul, Whom God predestinateth, he calls, justifies and glorifieth;
therefore they cannot fall away finally. Which is against that damnable
doctrine of the Papists, Against the Papists, who think the elect may be
reprobates, which is repugnant to the whole Trinity. Against God. Against
Christ.
who think the elect may be reprobates. This doctrine is injurious to the
whole Trinity: for the Father is greatly wronged, in that he is thought to be
impotent or inconstant; who has ordaned us before the world to glory, and
that his work could be hindered or altered by any intervenient fault or sin in
us, as though he would or could not remove and pardon it. And our Savior
gets no less injury by them, that one of his members can perish, and so he
should have a defective body. For if any who once has bin a member of his
mystical body fall away or be cut off, of necessity his body by want of
that one member would be disgraced. And the holy Spirit who is the pledge of
our adoption, Against the holy Spirit.
sealing up Gods grace in our hearts, and giving us that full persuasion of
Gods promises, causing us to cry Abba, Father, Romans 8.15
is greatly wronged, when his work is accounted nothing of, as frivolous, light
and uncertain. So to speak the truth, the Papists do what in them lies, to
disgrace the holy Trinity, and advance Angels and men, in plain contempt of
that glorious Godhead, which we ought so much to advance in our doctrine and
writings. This is a great comfort to us, The graces of the Spirit can not be
taken away.
that the graces of the Spirit which we have once gotten, cannot be taken away
again. For howsoever we do not feel them alike at all times, yet we have
them: sin may take away the feeling of grace, but not the possession thereof.
Albeit God be angry by correcting his best children, yet whom he chastises he
loves. Heb. 12.6.


But David says, Psa. 69 ^0
Blot them out of the book of life. David supposed they were written in the
book of life, but because they seemed to fear God, and were in the visible
Church, but not of her, he prays that God would make it known, they were
never written in it. And in praying that the holy Spirit may not be taken from
him, he doubts, yea he stands in fear of the loss thereof. Blessed is he
that fears continually. He doubts, but does not despair. The Spirit may be
grieved by us, and so cease to work in us good things, or to let us feel good
motions, but he cannot go away; for when he has brought us to our selves, and
letten us feel our sins, then he purges his dwelling place, and makes it
more meet, to work in such divine operations as it pleases him to inspire in
us.

Verse 12. Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy
free Spirit.
IN this 12 verse David craves another necessary gift and effect flowing from
the remission of his sins, to wit, the joy of his conscience. For the
kingdom of God stands not in external things, ^om. 14.17
as meat and drink, but in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost,
says the Apostle. For being made righteous by Christ, and peace made with God,
there arises a wonderful tranquillity in out consciences, from which finally
arises a joy unspeakable. For all the joys of the earth could not make us
joyful, unless God were at one with him: neither can all the troubles that
can fall upon our outward man discourage us, if we find the joy of God in our
hearts.

Nothing spoileth us of this joy and pleasure that we have in God, but only
sin. Pleasure in sin takes away our joy in God.
For once delighting in sin, we can have no pleasure in Gods service; for these
two can never stand together. Therefore we must loath sin, that we may
rejoice in God.

Christians have joy and sorrow intermingled. 2. Cor. 12.7
Next, ye see the estate of a Christian is not always one; joy and sorrow is
intermingled: he has a Summer of joys, and a Winter of griefs. Saint Paul
had the messenger of Satan to buffet him, that he should not be exalted above
measure with his great revelations. After a Christian has mourned, he will
rejoice. He who never sorrowed for sin, will never rejoice for grace. He that
never mourned for the affliction, never rejoices for the consolation of
Joseph. Mourn with them that mourn, and rejoice with them that rejoice, says
the Spirit.

The substance and ground of this joy, is the salvation of God; so God is the
matter of it: and this salvation is purchased by God only. Psalm. 3.8.
Salvation is the Lords. Whereby he lets us see, that the first grace will
not do the turn to us (of initiation,) but we have need of the second grace of
confirmation, which is the accompanying and perseuering grace.

Stablish me. This stablishing is to make us sure: whereby he would advertise
us of our instabilitie and vnsurenesse, if we were not yet supported. Samson
was strong in grace; but being left to himself he fell. Peter bragged
presumptuously in his own strength, Though all the world would forsake thee,
Mat. 26.33
yet I will not; yet being left to himself he fell, according as Christ had
prophesied, Before the cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice.

Let us now take heed unto our selves, the time is come to try all Christians
what is in them, and I fear our weakness will appear to the world to our
shame and the dishonor of our profession. And I never saw any who presumed
above others of their own strength, Nota.
but they have proved the weakest soldiers, who by Thrasonicall confidence in
their wisdom, holiness, constancy, and other of their virtues, bragged
above their neighbors, yea contemned them, but in the end they prove cowards,
presuming in pride, and falling with shame.

This is one of the most certain marks of Gods Spirit, that as he is free in
himself, so he gives liberty and freedom to all his children whom he
possesses. For where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. Where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.
They are not bound with the chains of sin, they are not bound with men's
traditions, but they freely serve God, as the children of the house are free.
The Romans were free men; as citizens brag of their freemen, and there is great
difference between them and other free men, that they may use their trades of
merchandise without controlement; so is a Christian, of all men, the most free.
Our Savior said to Peter, Who should pay tribute, children or strangers?

But I pray you, is a Christian who braggeth of the Spirit, Mat. 17.2^ Object.
Solut.
free to do what he pleases? God forbid; he is only free to do Gods
commandments, and to stand in the liberty which God has given him. He is
bound to keep the commandments of God, to be free from the traditions and
vanities of men. So a man needs not to brag of the Spirit, that he may say
and do what he pleases, and always pretend the Spirit and the liberty
purchased by Christ's blood to every one of his follies; no, but that liberty
has her own bounds and circumscriptions; for the Spirit gives us no more
liberty, but that which is bound by his word.

No true joy but in the salvation of Christ.
The word jasha imports either Savior or salvation, as Ier. 3.18. To declare
that there is no true joy but in the salvation by Christ. This joy Marie had in
God her Savior, Luke 1.47. and John in his mothers womb leaped for joy, Luke
1.44. Zach. 5.9. Isa. 60.5. Rejoice daughter Sion. This joy makes us rejoice
in tribulation, by the comforter who eats up all our sorrows and
perplexities, as fire eats up the rust of iron. Other joys be but toys.
Quicquid non est in Domino, non tam intus recreat, quam for as: What joy is not
in the Lord, refreshes not so much within as without. This is the wine which
Solomon commands to be given to the grieved in heart. Pro. ^1.6.
And surely this joy is a foretaste of that future joy which we shall have in
heaven, where there shall be no interchange of joy with sorrow, but a perpetual
joy, wherein the creature shall rejoice in the Creator, and daily find ^ew
causes of pleasure. Psalm. 16.12.
At thy right hand is ^leasure for evermore.

But where he desires a restoration of this joy, it is certain that he once
felt and tasted of the sweetness of Gods favor and the life to come; Those
who abuse the favor of God, shall feel the want thereof
and this sense failing him for a while, he desires that it may be repaired
and restored to him. And God justly deals this way with men. For when they
abuse the time of his gracious visitation, he lets them feel themselves
what they are without him. Therefore he is glad to seek now with the prodigal
son, a restitution of the thing losed.

Stablish me. He craves now the gift of confirmation; as though he would say:
Albeit thou would bestow all the former benefits, of remission of my sin, of
sanctification, and joy proceeding therefrom, yet I am likely to lose them,
unless it would please thee to confirm and strengthen me to the end.
Therefore he craves to be stablished by the Spirit; and he adds an epithete
to that Spirit, calling it his free Spirit.

Our Lord was reproched for his frequencie with sinners; they called him a
drunkard, because he drank with them; Luke 2.16.
and a glutton, because he eated with them. Who would reprove a Physician which
frequenteth with patients; and who would reprove a Preacher who haunteth and
conuerseth with penitents,

Thy free Spirit. He lets us see, that this stabilitie comes by no other
means but by the Spirit of God; as oftentimes he does make mention in this
Psalm. The title which he gives to the Spirit, is a free Spirit. The Spirit
is free in himself, neither can he be limited: so those who have him cannot be
bounded by any humane device or presumption. The Spirit is free in himself.
The wind blows whither it pleases; and shall not the Spirit have liberty
to blow whither he pleases. No man sees the wind, yet it blows and
overthrows great houses and trees: and yet they will bind the word of God.
This I speak not, that I would wish any to pretend the Spirit, and allege for
whatsoever thing they say a warrant of the Spirit: thus keeping that liberty
to be a pretense and sauegard of their imaginations; as the Anabaptists say;
but there is no warrant for such riot; for the Spirit seeks nothing but by
the word.

Christian liberty is to serve God.
Neither can this Christian liberty be a pretense for Atheists, who under
covert of Christian liberty do what they please, spend their time in all
manner of riot. Our liberty is to serve God, not sin, from the bondage
whereof we are made free.

Verse 13. Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee.
NOw follows his promise; 1. that he will be a Preacher: 2. to whom, to the
wicked: 3. what shall be the effect of his labors, sinners shall be converted
to God.

Then shall I teach the wicked. He minds not to hide his talent, but to put
it forth to his masters advantage. So this is a sure mark of one who has Gods
mercy, that he will not keep it private, but publish it, and make it known to
others. Which is a duty necessarily craved in us, Every Christian should
co^municat* their gift for the profit of the Church.
that we should be diligent to communicate our gift to the utility of the
Church. Worldly men put out their money for their own advantage; and should not
spiritual men put forth the Lords gifts for his advantage?

David a K^ing, is not ashamed to be a teacher of repentance and mercy, which
he felt himself. So, none in all the world should be ashamed of the holy
ministry. None should be ashamed of the holy ministry. 1. Cor. 9.16. Nota.
Saint Paul says, Vae mihi si non praedicauero, Woe be to me if I preach not
the Gospel. Those who are ashamed to preach and publish their sins, let them
be ashamed to sin.

Thy ways. But what is his text he teaches, thy ways, not men's traditions,
which can in no wise either assure or pacify the conscience. David was not so
bold, to put in his ways with Gods ways. Gods ways are the w^yes prescribed
in his word.
Gods ways are the ways prescribed in his word, which are perfect, just and
holy ways. But when men will bring in the altar of Damascus, opposing it to
the true altar, they remember not that God brought leprosy on the Kings sace,
2. Kin 16.13.
till he was expelled out of the Temple. This is a rule to Princes, that they
teach the people, and make them to be taught only the ways of God; and bring
not in men's traditions, and make a mixture of them with the holy Scriptures,
which here David shunneth.

But whom teaches he? The wicked, sinners, those who are in the very bonds and
hands of the Devil, these be the proper matter upon which Gods word works.
Hypocrites set not by such lessons, but poor miserable creatures, who see by
the word that they are worthy of hell, then they are touched with a remorse,
and would be very glad to go to heaven. So the physic is lost, which is not
bestowed on such as are sensible of their own sores.

And sinners shall be converted unto thee. He persuades himself that his
doctrine shall be effectual, forasmuch as it shall work the conversion of
sinners. The word can do more then any thing. Esa. 53.1. Romans 1.16.
O the wonderful power of Gods word, that it can do that which all the world
could not do. It is the arm of the Lord: To whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? says Isaias. It is the power of God to salvation, says Paul. No
doctrine can work faith in man, but the work whereto it persuades him, not
forces him.

Conuersio presupposes auersio^
Conversion presupposes auersion. The use of the word is to convert them that
are auerted or perverted; as the shepherd brings home the wandering sheep.
Which clearly argues the necessity of the word and teachers thereof; so
profitable, as without which, sinners cannot be converted to God: for no other
instrument can convert them; and they cannot convert themselves.

This teaches Ministers to be diligent in their calling; if they would shine
as stars in heaven, Dan. 12.3.
they must labor to convert sinners.

Verse 14. Deliver me from blood, O God, which art the God of my salvation: and
my tongue shall sing joyfully of thy righteousness.
Having before so often begged pardon for all his sins in general; he now
particularly confesses which of all his sins grieved him most, The shedding of
innocent blud David's greatest sin
which he sets down to be innocent blood, and therefore he craves to be
delivered from the burden of it, from the terrors of an accusing conscience,
the cries which it sends up to God.

This verse has a petition and a promise. In the petition two things: 1. of
whom he beggeth this petition: 2. what he seeks to be delivered, from blood.

O God, the God of my salvation. His doubling and repeating the name of God,
shows unto us, that he takes hold on God with both his hands; and it
declares his vehemency and earnestness in his suite at God, that he might be
delivered from that blood. And all his suites he directs only to God.
Foolish Papists, God help you.

When he calls him the God of his salvation, he clearly shows to us, that
he has no salvation either of his body or soul, but only of God, who will
not give his glory either to man or Angel.

When he says, My salvation, he applies salvation to himself, and does not
imply and infold his salvation in generality, thinking it presumption to
certify himself of his salvation, (as the Papists say.) For what comfort can
we have in life or death, We can have no comfort unless we be persuaded of Gods
mercy. David's petition.
if we be not persuaded of Gods mercy and favor: not that we presume of our
merit, but persuading us of his majesty's constancy and truth.

Deliver me from blood. His petition is to be delivered from blood^, both from
the guiltiness which he had contracted by his murder, as from the terrors of
his conscience, as also from the punishment threatened by Nathan, that blood
should never depart from his house; 2. Sa. 12.10
and finally from future blood, yt he never fell into it again: as God
delivered him from the blood of Nabal by Abigail. And this is a great delivery,
1. Sa. 25.33
that we do not evil; as we ate commanded to pray, Deliver us from evil, Mat.
6.11.
that we commit no sin; and when we have done evil, it is a great deliverance
when God freeth us of the guilt of it, the condign punishment. But our
greatest comfort is, when we are kept from doing of it, as Joseph and Susanna;
and it is Gods greatest honor when we are delivered from the punishment which
we have deserved for committing such evils.

From blood. He both committed adultery and murder; but he is more touched for
the one then for the other. Adultery is evil because it defiles and defaceth
Gods image in man; Murder worse then adultery.
but murder destroys his image. And there is no sin more odious in the
sight of God then blood: for which cause he banished Cain from his presence;
Genesis 4.14. Genesis 6.5.
he destroyed the first world, which was full of cruelty; he removed Saul from
his kingdom, 2. Sa. 21.1.
who slew the Priests and the Gibeonites; he removed the Crown from the house
of Ahab and dogs licked his blood. 1. Is^. 22.38


Kings should pray with David, to keep them from the blood of innocents; for
blood shall be in their house. Nota.
And often those who live in blood, die in blood, and make a bloody testament;
according to that of the Poet:

Ad generum Cereris fine caedet and sanguine,
Discedunt reges and sicea morte tyranni.
The word in the original is bloods, in the plural number. Why called bloods
in the plural number.
For such is the atrocitie of that sin, that one is weightier then a thousand
weights of Lead. So soon as it is shed, so soon does it defile the shedder, as
the purple dies the cloth. It seems well colored when it is shed, but
within a little time it becomes so thick and black, that a man would abhor
to behold it; therefore it is called bloods. Leu. 7.27.
The Lord in the Leuiticall law forbad his people to ear any flesh with the
blood; Nota.
that the detestation of beasts blood might make them so much the more to
abhor the blood of man, wherein his life stands. Blood has a cry: Genesis
4.10. Genesis 4 10.
The voice of thy brothers blood cries. Who so shedeth man's blood, his blood
shall be shed, which is either by the justice, or by revenge and repaiment. The
auengers of blood are admitted by the law.

Now men's hands are full and foul with blood. The earth is drunken with blood.
In her wings there is found blood. Polluted with blood. Lam. 4.14. Bull of
blood, Ezekiel. 9.9.22.2.23.27. Blood has touched blood. Hos. 4.2. Joel
complains of them, Joel 3.19. Mica 7.2. Nah. 3.1. Hab. 2.12. Mat. 23.35
that they shed innocent blood. Micah, Nahum, and Habakuk, pronounce a woe to
them that shed innocent blood. And Christ brings together all the blood shed
from Abel to Zechariah. Mat. 27.8.
The Jews bought Aceldema, a field of blood. Reu. 8.8.
Their feet are swift to shed blood The third part of the sea shall be blood.
God will revenge the blood of the Saints. Innocent blood is, has bin, and shall
be shed
So I see from the beginning of the world to the end thereof, innocent blood
has ever bin, is, and shall be shed, but namely the blood of Gods dearest
children.

Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia sanguine creuit.
leftblank; -- sanguine finis crit.
Let us then think it no uncouth thing, when we see innocent blood shed so
abundantly, that the streets of Jerusalem are filled, and like to be more
filled with the blood of Gods Saints.

And my tongue shall sing joyfully of thy righteousness. He promises to be
thankful unto God: for it becomes righteous men to be thankful. Psalm. 33.1.
Sin took away the use of his tongue, now grace restores it.

The tongue is a noble instrument, and as it were a bell hanging in a high
place. It is a shame it should not be occup^ed in sounding; and much more shame
that it should be ill occupied in sounding evil things. It is best used when
it sounds Gods praises, who formed it. Nota. The tongue is best used when it
praises God. Simil.
As the golden bell of Aarons garment sounded, so should our tongues sound Gods
praises, if we be his Priests.

This condemns two sorts of persons; one, Those are to be condemned who do
not speak for God.
who never speak any thing to Gods honor, thinking they are well discharged
when they do not openly blaspheme, or speak vilde speeches out of the filthy
groves of a polluted heart, although they hear others, and cannot open their
mouths to rebuke them, being ashamed to speak for the Lord, and glorify him
by maintenance of his truth.

Those are to be condemned who speak against God. Mat. 12.36
The other sort is more to be condemned, who open their mouth daily to lies,
blasphemies slanders. But be assured, that if for every idle word we are to be
countable, much more for every wicked speech we shall be answerable to God at
the last day.

Shall sing joyfully. He is not content to say, shall speak. For the more
vehement intention of the mind kindled up with joy, makes the tongue to burst
out in Psalms, hymns and spiritual songs, to stir up thy self, and provoke
others with greater delight and pleasure to praise God.

This sweet singer of Israel answers to his name, when he sings sweet
songs and ballads to the praise of our sweet God. Against those that sing
profane balads
So much in this are those to be condemned, who sing profane baudie songs, to
the dishonor of God, and offense of his Church.

Of thy righteousness, that is, not of his justice in punishing him, but of
his righteousness in covering his iniquity. For which Christ is called, God our
righteousness. So he would be unrighteous and deny himself, if he should
deny us mercy: so sure is our salvation, which is our great comfort. We must
praise God for all his benefits, whereof we are less then the least; and if
for the smallest, much more for the greatest, even that work of our redemption
by Christ, that he is made our righteousness to save us, when we had nothing
of our selves, and knew not our danger, he prepared a salve for us before we
were wounded, and the remedy before our danger. If we were sick, and had
received health; poor, and were relieved, would we not thank God, and think
our selves obliged to him, as we are: Nota. The greatest benefits deserve the
greatest praises.
but seeing he has delivered us from our sins, and from hell, have we not ^he
greater cause to be thankful; for the greatest benesits deserve the greatest
praises.

Verse 15. Open thou my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
HE promised in the former verse to sing joyfully of Gods righteousness; now
he bethinketh himself that this is not in his own power, but it must come
from God. That as his faith and repentance was of him, so his thankfulness
must also proceed from him. There is no temporal or spiritual gift which does
not come from God. Phil. 2.13.
So there is no temporal or spiritual gift, which does not come from God. He
works in us velle and perficere, to will and to do.

The tongue was consecrated before to God; now he presents his lips, another
instrument; and at last the mouth it self, which contains both. Seeing God
has given to every member the own faculty and power, Every member should
sound Gods praises.
it is good reason it should be vied to his glory. God has given thee a
tongue, mouth and lips, for no other end but to proclaim his praises. And
cursed is that man (if he repent not) who sounds any thing with his tongue,
but Gods honor.

We see further, that we are all close and bound up by nature, except the God
of nature enlarge our hearts with his love, and fit our mouths with his
praises; God has the key of his lips; he can make infants and sucklings
proclaim his praises; Psalm. 8.2. Nu^. 22.28. In Soliloq.
yea he can open the mouth of Balaams ass to utter his praise. Augustine
thinks non posse laudare Deum sine ipso, qui non ipsum habeat, qui se
adiuuet, that God cannot be praised without himself, he who has not him to
help them.

Moreover observe, Sorrow for sin will break open the dumb mouth to speak
for Gods mercy. Simil.
how sorrow for sin will break forth the dumb mouth to speak for Gods
mercy. I read of Croesus his son, who seeing a traitor going about to
murder his father, though before he was always dumb, began to speak and cry
pitifully: why should not we when we see that God is wounded with our sins,
once at last begin to cry.

Robert Rollock a holy man writing on this Psalm, Deum in se esse
perfectissimum, that God is most perfect ^n himself, without the work of any
crea^ure. The Father glorifying the Son, and ^he Son the Father, the Father
and Son the holy Spirit, the holy Spirit the Father and the Son. But yet will
be glorified by the creature. Because he is just, his righteousness craves,
that the creature should acknowledge the Creator, whose felicity stands in
this, that he should reverence his Maker with all dutiful service; he craves
it more for our weal, then for himself. Think ye that God can be either
worse or better for our praises; but we our selves are then best, when we have
grace to praise him.

Philip finding Nicanor detracting him, Plut.
relieved him from his necessity, and then he began to praise him; wherefore
he said, Videtis esse in nostra potestate and been and male audire: Ye see it
is in our power both to be well and evil thought of. But God is not so, he
cares not for our praises, and our obloquies do not touch him; he is so far
from the one and the other. We can neither augment nor impair his dignity,
speak what we will or please, we may do our selves evil, him we cannot
offend.

Sin takes away the benefit of our tongue, Sin makes a man du^b that he can
not praise God.
that we become dumb, and cannot praise God, till he forgive us our sins, and
then we shall speak; and although we would speak, God thinks nothing of our
speeches, until we be reconciled to him. What have thou to do to declare mine
ordinances, Psalm. 50.16
and to take my name in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed? But woe to
the tongue, mouth and lips, which are not employed in the service of God that
made them, to proclaim his praises: and double woe to them who employ them to
his dishonor; for they shall say, would God they had bin rather dumb, Nota.
and could have spoken nothing, then to have spoken to the dishonor of that
Majesty which made them.

Verse 16. For thou defirest no sacrifice, though I would give it: thou
delightst not in burnt offering.
NOw toward the end of the Psalm he is bursting forth in thankfulness,
setting down the sacrifice which the Lord would not have, to wit, external
sacrifices; and declaring that which he would have, a contrite heart.
Sacrifices of old comprehended all Gods worship. For the burnt offerings and
sin offerings represented Christ's blood. The thanksgiving offerings, The use
of the legal sacrifices.
peace offerings, the incense, the thankfulness of the Saints for his benefits;
and what of all these, he was wearied with them, when they were not mixed with
faith and repentence. Nazianzen says, Vna Dei est purum gratissima victima
pectus.

Then if God delight not in sacrifices which were commanded by himself, Nota.
what cares he for trifles invented by men, of which he can have no pleasure.
His delight is not in outward sacrifices at any time, if they be alone. I will
have mercy (says he) not sacrifice; Hos. 6.6.
much less does he respect the sacrifice of the Mass, having no warrant in
his word; neither yet of our prayers and praises, when we do but pretend
religion, not serve God unfeignedly. Away with all our offerings, if we offer
not to him that which he craves chiefly, to wit, a penitent heart.

Lorinus observes well, Sacrificia non operari per se peccatorum remissionem
posse, sed tantum represent are and praefiugare sacrificium illud vnicum
redemptoris: that is, that the sacrifices of old could not work by themselves
remission of sins, but only did represent and prefigure the only sacrifice
of our Redeemer. Then, as he says truly, their sacrifices ex opere operato, by
the external working of them, cannot give remission of sins. What reason then
has he to affirm that the Sacrament of the new Testament conferreth grace by
the very external giving thereof; Lorinus against him. self.
seeing that same thing was prefigurated by their sacrifices which is
represented by our Sacraments, that is, Christ's blood both in Baptism and in
the Lords Supper.

Verse 17. The sacrifices of the Lord are a contrite spirit: a contrite and
broken heart, O God, thou will not despise.
WHen he has removed that which God misliked and refused; now he places that
which God likes and receives, that is, the sacrifice of a contrite spirit. In
the plural number called sacrifices, that is this one for all.

A broken heart, is such a heart which is humbled through a sight and sense of
sin. What a broken heart is.
For it is needful, that as we have worn our heart by sin, so our heart
should be worn again by repentance and sorrow for sin, and that we should
take pains to subdue our hearts and all the thoughts thereof, and bring them
captive to Gods obedience.

That is that poor spirit of which Matthew speaks, Mat. 5.3. Esa. 66.2.
and Isaias speaks of the spirit that trembles at Gods word. Why sacrifices
in the plural number.
This caused David to put the word sacrifices in the plural number, that he
might express the better, that one contrite heart which is the sacrifice of
repentance alone suffiseth for all legal sacrifices. If he had said that a
contrite heart, is a sweet smelling sacrifice, they might have excepted ye so
are many others, as the papists do mix their works with the grace of God. But
David excludes purpossie all sacrifices, and shows, that what ever
sacrifices God respects are comprehended under a penitent heart, believing in
Christ's blood, and seeking mercy for the same.

This sort of people are called mourners in Sion, who mourn to God for their
own sins, and the sins of the people, who power out their heart with their
tears to God, who do lament for the affliction of Joseph. Oh, what cause have
we to lament this day for our sins, and to break our hearts for the
persecution of the Church in every place. Let our feasting be turned into
fasting, our laughter in tears. Mourn with Jeremiah for the desolation of
Sion. Nota.


A contrite and broken heart thou will not despise. Here he encourages the
penitent sinner; who may be affraied to appear before the Tribunal of God, in
regard of the conscience of his sin, and be feared that God will not accept
him, howsoever he be humbled. Him here he encourages, God will not despise a
troubled heart, yea rather he will like it and manifest his skill in healing
and comforting it. God likes a troubled heart.
To which agree all those places in Isaias which comfort the Church, those
sweet inuitations of Christ to the laden and weary, to come unto him, and to
those that were athirst, and he that calls upon us, will not reject and cast
us away.

The Lord is nigh to them that be of a contrite spirit. Psalm. 144.8. Who speak
to him in the bitterness of their soul. Job. 10.1. Crying like the Dragon or
Ostrich. Mich. 1.8. Who cry wonderful being ouercomed by the Elephants. As
Saint Jerome says, who slay their affections, and offer them as a sacrifice
to God, as the Magdalen, Peter, other Saints, who forsake their former lusts,
and say with a certain young man, who being temped by an harlot, and seeming
to be ignorant who she was, she said ego sum, it is I, he answered, ego non
sum, it is not I, for he was converted by repentance.

If thou would prevail with God, Pro. 23.26.
give him thine whole heart, if thou do any thing for God do it with thine
heart, 2. Chro. 31 21
seek him with thine whole heart, love him, fear him, pray to him, turn to
him, Deuteronomy. 4.29
obey him with thine whole heart. Deuteronomy. 10.12. Romans 6.17. Ier. 32.40. Joel.
2.12. Psalm. 119.145. Their heart is divided says the Lord of host, now shall
they perish. Hos. 10.2.
God is one and undivided, and craves an heart, one, and whole in affection,
and rent only by deiection, nothing can break God but a b^oken heart. The
string can bow the bow, the fire can temper and molifie the steel, the goats
blood the adamant, and the heart contrite can move God says Mantuan in these
verses.

Virga recens Zephyris, neruo curuabitur arcu^
Igne chalybs: adamas sangnine, cord Deus.
Finally, observe that albeit repentance does make a contrite heart, and as I
said before we should take such pain on our contrition, that we should not let
any thought of our heart escape unrepented and mourned for, yet, the only
hammer which must burst our souls is the word of God, The word of God bruseth
the heart. Simil.
which bruseth the rocks of a stony heart, and makes an heart of flesh. And
as out of rags being bruised is brought forth fine paper, so is a troubled heart
bruised with sorrow for sin turned into a gracious subject, whereinto God may
work and write his law. And as the poole of Bethsaida being troubled, Ioh. 5.4.
brought health to men's bodies: so does the conscience afflicted by God, bring
certain health and salvation to soul and body. Saint Ambrose says that
repentance is so difficult and hard a matter, that he has oftener found mo who
lived innocently, then who did truly repent. It is written of Augustine, that
he caused the psalms of repentance to be put on the wall over against him,
before he died, and reaped abundantly reading them ten days; at which time
none came to him but either the physicians or his refreshment. Seeing therefore
God likes this sacrifice of a contrite heart, without which none other thing
will please him, let us take the bests of our affections, separate them from
their old pleasures to God, bind them by the coards of the word, lay them
down at his feet, and slay them, and that sacrifice shall please him, offer
thy self a living sacrifice and be assured God will accept of thee; and never
reject thee not thine offering, other sacrifices die being offered, Nota.
but we by offering our selves to God yet live.

Verse. 18. Be favorable unto Zion for thy good pleasure: build the walls of
Jerusalem.
HE has prayed for mercy to himself, now he prays for the Church, which he
has offended by his sin, and upon which he had brought such evils, that it
would please God to be merciful to her, build up her walls, and repair her
ruins.

No man can truly pray for himself unless he pray for the church.
No man can truly pray for himself, unless he pray for the Church also; as
David does in many Psalms. If a man be a sensible member of the body, it is
not possible but the evils which befall to any one member (let be all) touch
not him to the heart, as it were done to himself.

In this verse are three things contained, first, for whom he prays, for Sion
and Jerusalem, secondly, what he suiteth, Gods favor, thirdly, out of what
ground, for thy good pleasure. But before we enter to any of these particulars,
we have some generals necessarely to be marked.

The chief care of princes should be for the Church.
First, that the chief care of Princes should be the weal of the Church.

The Church is as the heart in the body* which being troubled, of necessity
the body must be in danger: if ye love your head keep your hear. The Church is
as the heart.
The Church nurisheth the heart blood of Christ in her bosom, the res^ of the
members have also their own of fices, but she has the chiefest office, being
the most noble part; and who should maintain her more, then the head, wh^ has
all the senses infixed therein, an^ from which all the members, sinews an^
veins take their life. And what greater honor can they have, then to be
nursin^ fathers of the Church. If a king concredi^^ his child and his first
borne to be nourishe^ by any of his subjects, may not that subie^^ think he
has gotten great honor, and when a king has received Gods first borne (for
Israel is his first borne) in his custody, may he not think he has gotten
great glory; and if he neglect his first borne, shall he not receive great
infamy. Those who are greatest officers in a kingdom, as Chancelour,
Chamberlane, President, Secretary, and men of estate, are in greatest
estimation and credit; and shall not great men think they are greatly
obliged to God, who has made them administrators of his kingdom, whose
standing is the weal of the Church, the principal estate of their
Commonweal; if it stand, then they stand; if it fall, they fall, for their
subjects obey them more for conscience, then for any terror or fear of their
laws.

Then it is best for them to be religious, and to propagate holy religion, for
their own standing.

The Romans wrought more by religion then the sword.
The ancient Romans, Lacedaemonians and Athenians were most careful of
religion, because they affirmed that they wrought more by devotion, then they
were able to do by the sword. This was their good po^icie, as Plutarch amply
recites in his History.

Then when Princes innade religion, and draw the people to atheism, see if
they be not gratest enemies to themselves, to their estate and posterity. The
Turk and other polititions may give Christian princes sufficient proofs of
this my assertion, as also if examples of David, Solomon, Josias, Ezechia,
Constantine, Let princes follow David's example.
Theodosius, may move them, whose posterity has brought eternal renown unto
them, and if not, let Julian affray them, and wicked princes like unto him.

The care of religion a princes chiefest safeguard.
The care of religion, and to be a religious prince, is the greatest safeguard
to a prince. For religion has Gods maintainnance; and God has shown his
mighty hand for Ezechia against Senacherib, and for David against all his
enemies; for Queen Elizabeth who died in peace notwithstanding all the
maginations of her enemies; and for our dread Sovereign Lord King James,
against all the horrible and monstrous designs of his enemies. Princes
religious bring wealth to their subjects. 1. King. 10.21.


Princes maintaining religion, bring great wealth to themselves and to their
subjects, as Solomon did, when gold was as dust, and silver as the stones.

Next, the Church being under continual danger should be helped by princes. The
Church being troubled should be helped by princes.
Since the Church is the princes depositum, which God gave to their custody,
they ought to have a chief regard of her. The fatherless widow and orphans
are concredited to them, much more they should defend the Church, because the
devil and his instruments and her fight against her, and who should maintain
her but princes, who are set in authority only for her cause, to debate and
take her part against all the world. Her enemies are more then notorious, she
was never at rest, her enemies are assaulting her continually; hell has broken
loose against her in these latter days; princes have put their diadems on the
horns of the beast; people are rageing. And seeing that eternal spouse of God
is so hated of the world, should not princes with David procure her welfare
even to their uttermost.

Princes must by prayer and power support the Church. Princes who would fight
well must pray well. Exo. 17.11 Genesis 31.28.
Prayer has more power then armor. Therefore princes who would fight well,
must pray well. Moses did more with his hands lifted up to God, then Joshua did
with his sword. Israel wrestled with God, and gat his name by prayer: for
otherways he could not have prevailed with such a majesty. Therefore princes
who be athiests, can neuet be good to the Church: and no marvel, because they
know not what prayer is. Wicked princes cannot abase themselves so low as to
pray to a superior; but David who will be renowned for ever, not only
prays, but bids the people pray for the peace of Jerusalem. In a word, the
chief armor of the Church, and all Church wardens, and Church defenders are
spiritual. Arma militia non sunt carnalia: The weapons of our warrefare are
not carnal, but spiritual.

Be favorable unto Zion. He prays for Sion and Jerusalem, this is a novelty,
should the king pray for the Church, I think the Church should pray for the
king. Yea, but this king thinks that all his prosperity stands in the
weal of the Church, and therefore he, as the most principal member thereof,
prays for her.

The Church is represented by the names of Sion and Jerusalem. What Sion and
Jerusalem were, and what they signifie^.
Sion was the mountain upon which the fort and Temple were builded; Jerusalem
was the city. But these two have spiritual interpretations, being shadows
of things to come, as all the Fathers confess. Sion was a mountain in the holy
land, which the Lord loved more then all mountains. He might have chosen
Olimpus for height, Basan for fatness. And what was Sion, it is to be seen
yet, there are many bigger, stronger, and fairer mountains in Scotland, then
was Sion. (I will compare it to Authur -seat, at Edinburrough) how comes it
to pass that the Lord chooses it before all mountains? What, but because he
loved it, and made it a place of his habitation; there he built a Church, out
of it he will let the law, yea the Gospel came to all nations, mount Sion is a
place so firmly fixed by Gods providence, that it shall never be moved. So is
the Church a number indeed obscure and base in comparison of other people; but
so sure by his power, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against her,
for Sion is a watch tower, specula, and the watchman of Israel stands on the
top thereof, and who can take it or do it wrong, she seems weak in
comparison of mighty mountains who leaped and scorned her, yet she stands
and they are all fallen: for they exalted themselves by their pride and power,
but she abides strong, by the strength of God, and the arm of the Almighty.

We have now left mount Sinai which is in Arabia where was earth quake and
thunder, and are come to mount Sion, the Church in the Gospel, where is peace
and grace. So our estate is better then theirs was, firmer then theirs, for God
has chosen it to be everlasting. What do ye then think of those persecutions
and nouations in the world; nothing for the Church but extremity; her enemies
are seeking to root her out: but let these murders of Caines seed, beware of
themselves, let God root out their seed. Our mountain is fixed by God, which
cannot be moved, and that little stone which came out of the mountain without
hands, shall bruise that golden image in pieces. Therefore let us build our
selves upon mount Sion, and not on the sand of man's inventions, that we stand
in the evil day, and be approved of God, rejoice therefore daughter Sion, for
thy foundation is in heaven; they shall invade heaven, and pull Christ from the
right hand of his Father, before they overthrow thee. Let them build up their
tower Babel, but God will confound their languages, when the gates of hell
cannot overcome her, the sword of princes, shall destroy her.

Jerusalem. The name Jerusalem imports a vision of peace, a vision or a
sight, Jerusalem a vision of peace.
for there is neither sight nor light in all the world but blindness and
ignoran^^* as there was no light in Aegipt for three days, but a palpable
darkness, except among the Israelits in the land of Goshen: Exo. 10.23
so there is no knowledge of God, or Christ the light of the world to be found
in all the earth, but in the true Church of Christ. Then as there is a great
difference betwixt a blind man who sees nothing and a seeing man, as great
difference is there betwixt one who knows Christ, and an ignorant.

These ignorants, blind leaders of the blind, do not see this peace of
Jerusalem; This peace is only in the true Church, it grows where grace
grows, which two are inseparable, Gal. 1.3.
grace and peace was the salutation of Saint Paul, which he wished to all the
Churches, this peace is first with God, by the peacemaker Jesus Christ: next,
in a tranquillity of the conscience after reconciliation: and last, with all
men. There is no peace to the wicked, says my God. Esa. 48.22.
Therefore dwell in Jerusalem, and ye shall see peace.

Be favorable. 2. What he craves to the Church; even that God would be
favorable to her, and that he would build up her walls, as he says in the 132.
Psalm, Peace be within her walls, and prosperity within her palaces. The
Church can neither prosper in peace or war without God bless her.
The Church have palaces, for peace, and walls for war, he prays the Lord
to bless her in both, for neither can the Church of God flourish in peace,
neither be victorious in war, unless God bless her in both estates.

To be favorable to Sion, is to give her tokens of his good will and of his
comfortable assistance. A special token of Gods favor when the Church has
good governors.
both in Church and policy. And again, a sign of his wrath when he gives
her such as Saul and Achab, wicked and evil governors.

When the Gospel has a free passage.
the worship of God is enlarged, heretics are put away, true teachers are
diligent and vigilent.

When
then God is among them; but when God has casten them off, unity is in the
church.
all are rent and spoiled, religion decays, heritiques increase, Satan has
gotten the upper hand, Gods Church is miserablely spoiled by wolves and foxes,
troublers of the Lords vine.

Build the walls. The second part of his prayer is for the walls, that they
may be builded, for Jerusalem is not only a city for peace, but to be
prepared for war; she has not only palaces, but castles, towers,
fortresses, and walls; and therefore David craves that these might be built
up again.

First see, what are these walls. Secondly, whereof they are builded: Lastly,
who is the builder.

What are the walls. The Church of God is a fortefied town, which must have
defenses to resist the enemy, for the devil and all evil men, princes,
wisemen, gentiles, Jews are conspired against the city of God: therefore God
fortifieth his city with all necessary defenses which may hold out the enemy.
The Church has walls invisible and visible.


The walls are too fold: invisible, the protection of God, which the world
sees not, for the Lord is a wall of brass about his Church to repel her
enemies, and a wall of fire to burn them, also he has his Angels who pitch
their tents about his holy and chosen ones, 2. Kin. 6.7.
there was horses of fire compassing Elizeus.

The outward and visible walls are made of a number of lively stones,
compacted together by the mortar of love, strongly resisting all the enemies of
the Church, for that unity of the Saints strengthen them by the power of their
God. Boni enim ciues mania cinitatis, good citizens are the walls of the
city. And upon these walls compassing them on all sides be bulwarks,
whereupon are set the canons of the word of God, mighty in operation,
destroying the enemies; and the censures of the Church, namely excomunication,
which being lawfully led, is of greater power to subdue the enemy and resist
him, then all the power of civil authority.

The sins of princes and people make great gaps in the walls, at which the
devil and enemies of the Church and wolfes enter and destroy the Lords vines.
They with Tobias and Sanballat stay the building of these walls, Neh. 4.2.
and are striving to build the walls of Jericho, which were forbidden by
Iosuah to be redefied under a great curse, 1. Ki. 16.34
which lighted on Hiel the Bethelite in the days of Achab; pity is it to see
the princes of this world so much enfeebling Jerusalem to strengthen Jericho.

David cries to God that he would build them, whose power is greater then all
the worlds, who as he has invisible walls of his protection, so he has
outward defenses to maintain his Church, he is master of it, yea master
builder, and sends forth servants whom he strengthens for the building of
his work. I see many pulling down the walls, yea with Edom in the destroying
of Jerusalem, crying sack, sack, Psalm. 137.^*
raze, raze up the foundation. Few with Nehemiah mourning for the ruins of
Gods house in all parts, and helping to restore them. Let us therefore go to
the God of David; who albeit he was king of the town, and began to build the
city and walls, and laid materials to the Temple, yet he knew that the
laborers wrought in vain, unless the Lord of heaven builded the city, Lord
repair the decaies of thy Church, for thy Christ's take.

For thy good pleasure. He finds the ground of all that perfection to be in
God himself and his good favor, and not in men or their merits: for as the
whole building of the Church is the only work of God; so is the reparation of
her ruins only belonging to himself. Men might have builded with stone and
brick the exterior walls, It belongs to God to build the Church.
but it is proper to God to build his spiritual Church. And this is a token
that God has pleasure in his Church, when he is building it, sending good
builders; materials of spiritual graces, fortifiers, as Cyrus and Darius good
Princes, Nehemiah, good governors, Esdra and good Priests. And our obedient
and careful people; who do take the sword in one hand, and the instrument of
building in the other, that the Lords Jerusalem may be edified. But when his
favor is departed, then in his wrath, he gives Princes, Governors, Nobles,
Preachers, and people who strive either to hinder the building, or to pull
down the building, to build up Jericho, and cast down Jerusalem. David he
craves that God may be favorable according to his good pleasure, for the
building of the Church depends upon Gods good will and pleasure; who when he
likes his Church, can advance her, and when he is displeased with her cast her
down. It appears evidently now that God is angry with his Church in all
parts of Christendom, when he is pulling down, and not raising up his Church,
we have provoked his wrath against us; and his soul abhors our
hipocriticall profession, and our wicked conversation.

Verse. 19. Then shall thou accept the sacrifices of righteousness, even the
burnt offering and oblation: then shall they offer calves upon thine altar.
THis is the promise of thankfulness to God, wherein is set down a
correspondence or restipulation betwixt the people who shall offer sacrifices,
and God who will accept them. And Gods service then goes well, when we offer
willingly, and God accepts gladly.

If our sins be forgiven us, God will hear our p^^er^ Genesis 4.5.
Then. Mark the time, when God has been favorable to his Church in forgiving
her sins, then he will accept the offerings. For pray what ye please, and
distribute to the poor, if God do not like of it, all is in vain. Caine
offered sacrifices, but the Lord accepted them not, because he hated his cruel
heart. Abel offered in faith and was accepted.

But how shall ye know if your offerings be acceptable to God, seeing there is
no fire to fall down from heaven, as that which burnt up Elias sacrifice? 1.
Ki 18.34
Ye shall know that albeit an elementarie or material fire falls not down,
Nota.
yet the fire of the Spirit falls on our hearts, the fire burning up the
dross of our corruptions by unfeigned repentance, warmeing our hearts with the
love of God, kindling our hearts with a zeal of Gods glory. This is the fire
which will fall down from heaven upon our souls; which sensibly we feel, if
the Lord hear our prayers.

The sacrifices of righteousnesse^ Some expound these offerings to be such as
agree to his will. I reverence their judgment; but I see not how that
exposition can agree with the text. But it may be expounded of that
righteousness which we ought to do to our neighbors, as we offer a sacrifice
of a contrite heart, the calves of our lips by praises, and these are the
sacrifices of righteousness by our hands, so that heart, tongue, hand, should
be all offered to God, for God likes well of righteous dealing^ that our hand
be not defiled with thirst, covetousness, oppression, which if we sacrifice to
Satan by sin, let us not lift to God by prayer, but lift up pure hands, wash
our hands in innocence and then compass Gods altar.

It would seem to be some differenc, where God said,

Which be the sacrifices of righteousness. The alter Jesus Christ^ by whom we
must offer our prayers to the Father.
The sacrifices of righteousness are those which be lawful and are commanded
by God.

They shall offer calves upon thine altar. The calves are the calves of the
lips; the alter Jesus Christ, who was both represented by the brazen altar,
and by the golden alter. For no sacrifice or prayer could ever be acceptable to
God, unless it were offered upon Jesus Christ, for he is sacrificium;
sacerdes, et altar; Augustine says, he is the Priest, the Altar, and the
Sacrifice; the offer^r, the thing offered, and the altar upon which it is
offered.

All the mosaicall altars are abrogated, because the sacrifice is made. The
heathnish altars have no place; The popish altars are abominable, after the
apish imitation of the Jewish altars, they would offer that incrementum
sacrificium ^issa; without any warrant of Gods word. It is enough for us to
offer, not Christ to the Father, but our prayers by Christ to the Father, who
will smell asweet savor of rest, of all our peticions and thanks which are
presented upon Christ, and for thirst of him. Lord keep us from the altar of
Damas^us, and let us offer all our offenses upon Jesus Christ, with whom we
shall be very heartily welcome to God Amen.

A GODLY AND FRUITFUL EXPOSITION ON THE CXXX. PSALM, the sixth of the
Penitentials.
The Title. A Psalm of degrees.
OF the Psalms there are fifteen called Psalms of degrees, or cantica,
maaloth of assension, whereof four are assigned to David, and one to Solomon.
Why they are thus entitled, it is controuersed upon, some think them to be
thus called, Why called a psalm of degrees.
because there were so many steps in the Temple of Solomon whereby men
ascended; as Angustine in his hundred and fifty Psalm, whose opinion
Bellarmine cites. But apparently they have not taken their name from this,
because in David's days not so much as the Church was builded. Others be of
opinion that it was after the people came from Babylon, which is as light; when
that captivity was so many hundred years after their death. I think the
Hebrew word would rather be referred to the tune and notes, which should asend
in sing^ng, and be swift in high notes, being so excellent, and so easy to be
sung. (...) allegory.
The allegory is not to be neglected, that we should by singing them, ascend
from this earth to that heavenly Jerusalem in our affections.

Bellarmines e^rour concerning the singing of this P^alme for those that (...)
purgatory.
Bellarmine thinks this Psalm should be sung for the souls of those that
are in profundo, in a deep place; who desire to arise and get Gods mercy. But
who does not see (except he be blind) the heretics error. What: does he know
whither such have repented, whether they have confessed their sin or no? For
thousands dies without confessing them. If their sin be mortal they go to
hell (say they) wherefrom there is no redemption.

The form of prayer then, seeing it has no warrant in the word, it should be
rejected as serving to no use, and no credit should be given thereto. This
Psalm was made many hundred years before purgatory was invented, for
purgatory was after Christ; before Christ's days there was none, as they
themselves confess. And in this Psalm there is not one word that can give the
smallest warrant to that devilish and foolish invention. Let them sing their De
profound^s as they please, they do themselves no more good then they do to
others, and that is none at all: Nota.
only they spend some idle hours, and gain somewhat to themselves.

The substance of this Psalm.
In this Psalm is contained an earnost and ardent prayer of a troubled heart:
first for mercy to his sins; and next, for deliuerence therefrom: and last,
an exhortation to all men to hope in God, because he will be a continual
redeemer of his people, and can find means to deliver them from all their
sins and iniquites.

The parts of the Psalm.
In the first four verses is contained his tentation, by commemoration of his
prayer, which he conceived when he was in greatest perrill. Next, by form of
transitation he affirms that yet he will depend upon God and his word, in the
fifth and six verses. And last, he recommendeth this same hope to the Church in
the last two verses, with a bold assurance of the favor of God toward his
chosen.

Verse. 1. Out of the deep places have I called unto thee O Lord.
OVt of the deep places. In this verse he sets down. First, the place from
which he spoke, de profundis, out of the deep places. Secondly, the form of
his prayer, I called. Thirdly, the person to whom he prays, To thee, O Lord.

By the deep places is meant afflictions into which the godly are often plunged.
By the deep places. (as all the ancients consent) is meant the deep places of
afflictions, and the deep places of the heart troubled for sin. Afflictions
are compared to deep waters. Psalm. 18.17. He drew me out of many waters,
save me O God, for the waters have entered to my soul. Psalm. 96. And surely
Gods children are often cast into very desperate cases, and plunged into deep
miseries. To the end they may send out of a contrite and feeling heart, such
prayers as may mount aloft, and pierce the heavens. When we are in prosperity,
our prayers comes from our lips; Nota.
and therefore the Lord is forced to cast us down, to the end our prayers may
come from our heart, and that our senses may be wakened from the security in
which they are lying. Albeit the throne of God be most high, Nota.
yet he delights to hear the petition of hearts that are most low; that are
most casten down by the sight of sin. And there is no affliction, neither
any place so low (yea if as low as the belly of the whale wherein Jonas lay)
which can separate us from the love of our Lord, Jonah. 2.6.
or stay our prayers from coming before him. Those that are furthest casten
down, are not furthest from God, but nearest unto him. God is near to a
contrite heart, God nighest unto them that are most low. Simil.
and it is the proper seat where his Spirit dwells, Isa. 62. And this way
God dweleth with us, as men do with such houses as they are minded to build
sumptuously and on high, for then they dig deep grounds for the foundation.
Thus God purposing to make a fair show of Daniel, and the three children in
Babel; of Joseph in Aegipt; of David in Israel, he first threw them into the
deep waters of affliction. Daniel is casten into the den of Lions. Dan. 6.16.
Dan. 3.23. Ge. 39.20.
The three children are thrown into the fiery oven. Joseph is imprisoned.
David exiled. 1. Sa. 27.2.
yet all these he exalted and made them glorious Temples to himself.

Mark hereby the dullness of our nature, that is such, The dulnes of our
nature has need by sharp means to be wakened. Jonah. 1.6.17.
that God is forced to use sharp remedies to awaken us. Jonas lay sleeping in
the ship, when the tempest of Gods wrath was pers^eing him God therefore
threw him into the belly of the whale, and bottom of the deep, that from
these deep places he might cry to his God.

When therefore we are troubled either by heavy sickness, Nota.


By the deep places may be understood also an heart deeply wounded with the
consideration of sin and Gods justice, for God will not accept such
superficial and scrufe prayers, which come only from the lips, and not from
a contrite and broken heart. 1. Sa. 1.16.
Anna the mother of Samuel, out of the bitterness of her heart powered out her
soul before the Lord. Exo. 14.15.
Moses albeit he spoke not at all, yet the Lord said unto him, Why criest thou:
for out of the deep places of his heart he called on God. Will not God cast
back the dung of those foolish prayers in their faces, who think to be heard
by their much babbling, and idle repetition of an uncouth language which they
understand not, or numbering their beedes: as though God could be pleased with
such foolish and childish toies, which come not from faith (because they lack
knowledge;) nor yet from repentance, or a sorrow for sin. Let not men think
to find mines of gold or silver, in the streets,

I called upon the Lord. The person upon whom he calls was the Lord Jehovah,
one who only both might, as omnipotent, and would as most loujug hear him.
Psalm. 73.25
Whom have I in heaven but thee, and in earth none beside thee. God is all
sufficient therefore pray to him
If Christ were not only sufficient, to whom and by whom we should pray, we
might seek for others; but seeing he is sufficient, and none other, what
folly is it to pray to any but to him. God differs from kings, kings are not
able to do all the duties of their office to their subjects; Exo. 18.18
as Moses although endued with extraordinary graces, for his ease had seventy
joined to him to be judges of the people; and therefore we must address our
selves to the kings officers to end our business. But our God is infinite, and
wills all men to come to him, Mat. 11.28.
Come to me all ye that are weary and laden. To add to a thing perfect, is to
diminish it; as to light a candle to the Sun, To add to a thing perfect is
to make it imperfect.
a perfect Christ, is nothing else but to dishonor him. Search all the
Scriptures, if they yield one example or commanding of either Patriarchs,
Prophet, or Apostle, doing or commanding any to be prayed unto but God only.
Their apocrypha and unwritten verities, and their Legenda aurea must be all
their warrant.

Let us therefore with David in all our prayers call upon God; 1. Kin. 18 29.37.
and with Elias (when Baal could not hear his priests) pray to our God; and
with our Savior Christ, say, Our Father which art in heaven. Mat. 6.9.


I called. He sets down the form of his prayer under the name of calling;
which shows his fervent intention, not only in calling upon God, but crying.
And this manner of fervent prayer is most necessary (albeit God does as well
hear us when with Ezechias we mourn as a dove, Pray unto the Lord fervently.
Esa. 38.14.
and chatter as a swallow) both to stir up our selves and others to call on
God. For we are more moved when we call and cry, then when we speak with a
lower voice.

Verse. 2. Lord hear my voice, and let thine cares be bowed to the voice of my
prayer.
IN this verse he craves attention, that God would lay his care to his suite
before he propou^d it. David here out of the abundance of his heart, uses
this repetition, hear me; not that he doubted, but God heard: for himself
faith. Psalm. 94.9.
He that planted the ear, d^^h not he hear? But by hearing, he desires the
grant of his suite. As the king is then said to have heard a supplication, when
he has granted it.

Let us with David cry from a penitent heart and in faith,

Those are to be blamed who think that the Lord does not hear them, if
immediately he does not grant their desire, Solomon's dedi ation of the Temple,
there he prays that God would bow down his ear, so often as they called for
grace.

Verse. 3. If thou, O Lord, straightly markest iniquity, O Lord, who shall
stand. Verse. 4. But mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared.
These two verses are the sum of all the Scriptures.
THese two verses contain the sum of all the Scriptures. In the third is the
form of repentance; and in the fourth the mercies of the Lord. These are the
two mountains Gorazin and Ebal, mentioned in Deuteronomy. 27.12.13. These are the two
pillars in Salomons Temple. 1. King. 7.21, called Iachin and Boaz, we must with
Paul persuade our selves that we are come from mount Sinai to mount Sion, where
mercy is, although some sour grapes must be eaten by the way. Ier. 24.1.2.
Jeremy tasted in his vision first a bitter fig out of one basket, then a
sweet fig out of the other. In the days of Moses, Exo 15.25
the waters were first bitter, then sweetened by the sweet wood. And Elizeus
cast in salt in the pottage of the sons of the Prophets, 2. Kin. 4.41
then they became wholesome.

If thou O Lord. Mark here that in this third verse he two times names God,
by the Lord, as in all the other 8 verses, he is at least once named; showing
to us hereby his earnest desire to take hold of God with both his hands. He
names him not only Adonai, but also Iah (which two signify his nature and
power) all the qualities of God must be conjoined and concur together for us,
All Gods qualities must concur together for our good.
although he be Adonai, yet if he be not also Iah we are undone.

If thou straightly markest iniquity: Having craved attention in the
preceding verses, he sets forth his petition, that God would not use the
extremity of his judgment, but deal mercifully with him, not craving an
account of his debt, but freely pardoning him. This petition he does not
propound in simple terms, but inuolueth it in a reason, by which God should be
moved if thou (says he) would mark al men's iniquities, thou would
condemn all, but it seems not thine infinite goodness to destroy all flesh,
therefore I should not seem to be over bold to seek to be free of these
gulfes of miseries whereinto my sin has thrown me headlongs.

In the first part of this verse, I observe these three things. First, that God
is the marker. Secondly, that he marketh iniquities. Thirdly, that he marketh
iniquities straightly.

If thou markest, O Lord: Here we see the fantasies of those controlled, who
sin, and say (as the Psalmist says of them) tush God sees not, Psalm. 64.5.
or regards not. O fool, he that made the eye, Psalm 94.9.
cannot he see? he that made the heart, can he not discern of the thoughts
thereof and mark them? where will thou go from the presence of the Lord? God
is said to observe and mark men's sins when he takes heed to punish them:
How God is said to mark men's sins.
and he passes by the sins of his elect, when he minds not to punish. Non
aduertit, (says one of the Fathers) quia non animaduertit, he sees them not,
because he punished the^ not. Cum aduerethit, euertit, when he looks to the
sinners wickedness, he overthrows them. A Judge looks with an other eye on
the faults of his child, and the crime of rebels; Baalam (though a false
Prophet) says most truly, Nu. 23.21.
The Lord sees no sin in lacob, nor iniquitly in Israel.

If thou markest iniquity. The thing that God marketh is iniquity. The word
iniquity, is sometimes taken generally for any fault or offense against God, our
selves, The significan of the word inquire.
or our neighbors; sometimes especially for those sins which are directly
against ye first table, and concerns God immedialy, or for the violation of
the second table concerning our neighbor, which touches God mediatlie, as
also for the sin directly against our selves, all of them, both in respect of
the number, quantity, and quality, are pointed out by David under this word.
Let us therefore whatsoever our iniquities be, mark the same our selves, and
bewail it, and then God shall mark it, as letters written on the sand. Let us
be a Cato and Momus against our selves. And howsoever the proud pharisees of the
world vaunt and brag of their integrity; let us with the publican cast down
our selves, Luke 18.13
knock on our breasts, and say, God be merciful to us miserable sinners.

If thou straightly markest iniquity. The manner how he is said to mark, is
not lightly, as many judges do, but straightly every circumstance, God marketh
stricklie.
every word, every action, yea every thought. Christ says, of every idle word
we must give an account, Mat. 12.36
he is a strict exacter with whom we have to do. Therefore our duty is to
mark narrowly our own actions, yea even our thoughts and our idle looks,
(which the papists account not a sin) these we must mark straightly, that
is, daily and hourly, and drive them away, Genesis 15.17
as Abraham did the fowls from his sacrifice.

Who shall stand? All of us are sinking in the pit and filth of sin, with
Ierimie, Ier. 38.17.
while Ebedmelech come and let down coards to draw us out. None can stand
before this God, who finds folly in the Angels, Job. 4.18.
yea the Angels are not clean before him, and the Seraphimes cover their face
and feet with wings. Abraham says, What am I, Genesis 18.27
dust and ashes. Job says, I will lay my hand upon my mouth: If I should
justify my self, Job. 9.20.
my clothes would condemn me. A man may see far under the Sun, Abuse not
the patience of God.
but slaves: for children will be very loath to offend their loving fathers,
but and will fear to incur their wrath. Let us remember that sentence of the
wiseman (albeit an Ethnike) Furor fit laesa sapius pati^ntia: patience often
offended, in the end turns in fury and rage.

By this his example David gives a caveat to all the Church, Let none come
before God unless they acknowledge their own unworthiness.
that none should offer themselves in the sight of God, without an humble
confession of their unworthiness, for God marketh straightly whosoever
flattereth himself with an opinion of his own holiness, deceives himself,
and is unworthy to receive the smallest relaxation at Gods hands.

Albeit he prays here as one man, yet he prays here in the name of all the
Church, as though he would say: from the first Adam to the last, all are lost
and damned, if God would exact a straight account of them. Therefore the
holiest on the earth must acknowledge with David his own unworthiness, and
flee to Gods mercy as to a city of refuge.

Although David speaks generally of all mankind, he does not think thereby
to extenuate his sin, but rather to amplify and aggrauate it, confessing
himself to be in the common satalitie and naufragie of mankind. Many will
say, God forgive us, we are all sinners, as though the multitude of sinners
could be a patron and excuse to their wickedness. No, by the contrary when he
has acknowledged himself to be culpable, he confesses himself to be so much
the more guilty of judgment, that of all mankind there is not one who can
escape eternal judgment. The more general misery is, it is the greater.
Then if every one would examine himself he would succumbe, for the more
general that misery is, it is the greater.

This place then lets us see, that no man can stand by his own works. For
if God would call the holiest to an account, he could find them, even by their
own conscience, guilty of judgment. Thus Christ reasoned with the Jews,
taking an argument from their conscience. Let him, Ioh. 8.7.
says he, who is without sin among you, cast the first stone at the woman
taking in adultery.

The papists confess that the imperfection of our works are supplied by Gods
mercy, but they divide righteousness, giving Christ one part, and taking to
themselves another, who does not see how far they err from the Prophet
David's confession? Why establish they works of supererogation, which is a
superlatiue folly, if they cannot deserve more then may save themselves?

It is a vain thing to dream either of satisfaction or satispassion, Against
merits.
that either a man can do enough, or suffer enough to satisfy God for his
sin. Christ has satisfied for us all, both the law by obedience, and the
justice of God by his suffering; who has closed all under sin, that he may
have mercy on all. Romans 11.32.

Bellarmine says well on this place. Vide Bellermin. Psalm. 130.
Offensio in Deum est infinita magnitudinis. The offense done against God, is
of an infinite hudgenesse; that we can neither condignely and worthily satisfy
for them, yea not acknowledge the gravity and weight of them. 2. How can a
finite man make account for an infinite sum to such a God, who knows the
number of them, and craves so exact a reckoning.

But mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared. He being plunged in the
deepthes of sins and sorrows, is not able to reskew himself, What he
f^ndeth not in himself or others he sindeth In God. Simil.
till God relieved him. The thing which he cannot find in himself or in any
other, he seeks it in God.

The earth is barren by nature, an hard, deud, and cold element, till it get
life heat and moisture from heaven: the same warmeth and quickens it, and so
it becomes fruitful: even so by nature there is neither light, life nor
grace in us, until God send them down from heaven.

Wherefore then do sinners seek any relief from beneath. Iam. 2.17.
Every good gift comes from the father of lights. Let us seek it where it is
to be found. Luke 24 5
Why seek ye him that is living (says the Angel) among the dead. Why seek
we life in the dead world?

Mercy excludes merit. Romans 3.28.
Mercy excludes all merits. For grace and merits (as Paul reasons) do
fight ex diametro If we be saved by grace, then merit is no merit, if by
merit, then grace is no grace. To join those two, grace and merit, with
these old heretics the Pelagians, or with the Semipelagians arch-here-tique
papists, is great folly, for they can no more agree together, then fire and
water; of which of force the one will destroy the other. 1. Iam. 5.2.
Dagon and the Ark of God or the foot of Nebuchadnzars image composed of iron
and clay. Dan. 2.43.


How mercy is said to be in God and with God.
Is with thee. It is of him and from him, as the author and God of all mercies,
it is in him as a fountain to be found; It is with him lying in his treasury;
yea in a word it is himself, beginning, mids, and end, is ener mercy and
compassion. Are you in misery, stand you in need of mercy? ye know where to
find it, even in God, and with God. All the ways of the Lord are mercy and
truth, Psalm. 25.10
to them that walk uprightly. If thou be sick, thou know where to have
medicine without money; if poor, where true riches are to be gotten, if hungry,
where food is. The mercies of God supply all the miseries of man.
There is no misery in man's nature, which may not be helped by Gods mercy and
remission of thy sins. This mercy, as Augustine says, is to be found in the
redemption of Christ blood.

That thou may be feared. The consequent of this mercy is showen in the
latter part of this verse, yt God may be feared. But it seems very strange
that mercy should beget fear, Charitas expellit timorem, 1. Ioh. 4.18
love expels fear, he means of a beastly and slavish fear, True love
and true fear are always together. Simil.
but true love and true fear may stand both together, a child may fear to
offend his loving father, whom he loves.

The end for which God offers himself so peaceably to man, and so ready to
grant him mercy, is, that he may be feared. If men were not assured to get
mercy when they repent, there could be no worshipping of God, or godliness,
and if we had no esperance of grace, why should we pray or use divine service
in vain?

The papists understand not this ground: for albeit they speak largely of the
fear of God, The papists are miserable comforters.
yet they keep miserable souls in perplexity, denying that God will show
mercy unto them; calling it an high presumption, that any should assure
himself of Gods mercy. what do they I pray you, but build without a
foundation? for God can never be rightly worshipped, unless we have an assurance
of his mercy. I wish that those Doctors who obscure the grace of God, and
teach men's righteousness, could weigh this rightly. Is it not a vain thing in
them to affirm, that they would have Gods service and worship advanced,
themselves in the mean while obscuring Gods graces and mercies, which should
move men most to worship him?

But the doctrine of grace (say they) makes men secure and negligent of good
works? Gods grace in wantonness; but it is reasonable that for their
peruersitie the glory of God should be obscured, and the elect and faithful
should be defrauded of their comfort.

Verse. 5. I have waited on the Lord; my soul has waited, and I have trusted
in his word. Verse. 6. My soul waits on the Lord more then the morning
watch, watching for the morning.
IN these two verses, David declares that out of the faith which he had of the
remission of his sins, sprang forth the hope which he had of the
accomplishment both of his spiritual and temporal deliueries, for faith must
preceede, Wherein faith and hope differ
and hope must follow and attend upon that which was believed, faith and hope
are both one in substance; they differ in this, that faith presently
apprehends the promises of God, and hope attends the receiving of them. If
a king would give his word, Ex verbo Principis, upon the word of a king, he
would give such a token to his subjects, whereby he might be sure of that which
he promised, Psalm. 146.3.
Trust not in worldly princes whose breath is in their nostrells, they may
alter, and may become unable to do that which they promised. But our God if he
promise, and we believe it, he can do, he will do. Heaven and earth shall
change, Mat. 5.18.
but one title of his word shall not fail. Psa. 119.96
I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy word is exceeding large. Hope
is an ancer, to which thou being tied, thou art in safety, albeit thou see no
natural cause of thine hope, yet hope above hope, Romans 4.18.
as Abraham did when he sacrificed his son.

In these two verses he does four times make mention of his hope, and
attendance upon God and his word, to let us see how sure an hold we should
take on God, Hope a sure refuge in time of tentation.
and many temptations our faith is assaulted with, when we can see no reason of
it. There is nothing will bear us up but hope. Spero meliora. What encourages
husbandmen men and mariners, Our hope in God cannot fail us. 1. Cor. 10.13.
Nota.
only God is faithful who has promised. Therefore let us fix our faith on
God, our hope on God, for he will stand by his promise. No man has hoped in
him in vain, neither was ever any disappointed of their hope. David was
thirty years of age, before he attained to the kingdom, 2. Sam. 5.4.
which was promised to him being a child. The Israelits were in Aegipt four
hundred years, Exo. 12.40
and in the wilderness forty years, Amo. 5.23
yet at last came home to Canaan. God brake not his promise to Abraham. The
Jews were seventy years in Babylon, yet at last God brought them back
according to his promise Ier. 38.
by Jeremiah. So our hope shall never be disappointed.

My soul has waited. By this doubling and ingemination of his esperance and
hope, he would signify, that unfeignedly without simulation he attended the
promises of Gods merciful deliverances. Out of which we may gather, that he
was not only patient and constant before men, but he nourished his patience
secretly before God; which is the only and best trial of faith, for albeit
there be many that are ashamed through their ambition to murmr against God in
their troubles, and to utter to men their distrust, and diffidence, yet there
is not one among twenty who will keep himself from secret murmuring and
grudging before God, and who can awaite patiently the day of Gods delivery, as
that king said, Why should I attend on the Lord any longer? 2. Ki. 6.33.
But we should not precipate and hasten, He that hops is not too hasty.
he that hops will not be too hasty, but waiting patiently on Gods time,
attend his leisure willingly, for his time is our best time.

And I have trusted in his word. He sets down the ground of his trust, even
the word of God, and Gods promise otherways, we deceive our selves by vain
hopes and dreams, if we think God will give that to us, Faith and hope depend
on Gods word.
which he never promised, neither we believed: faith and hope do not lean on
imaginations, but upon the sure truth of Gods word. Therefore says he,
Remember thy word to thy servant in which thou gave me hope. Psa. 119.49


Bellermine cites this same place of Scripture, which makes much against
himself, Those who leave to any thing but Gods word, rest on sandy
foundations.
who bids men believe those unwritten verities, and decrees of counsels, as
if they were the written word of God, and whereto does all papisticall service
rely, but upon the traditions of men? And who relieth on those, their hopes
are in vain, and themselves like unto those that lean to dreams and visions,
or to oracles of diuils, shall be illuded, because they rest upon false
grounds. So if you would be assured of eternal life, take a sure hold of the
holy Scriptures, a sure rock to lean unto in thy trouble and adversity.
Whatsoever (says Paul) is written, is written for our instruction, Romans 15.4.
that by patience and comfort of the Scriptures we might have hope. The Apostle
stablisheth the word the only ground of his faith and hope, and affirms that
our faith is in vain, unless it form us to true patience and attendance upon
his promise and good will to us.

Herein of all heretics the papists are most to be blamed, Against the
papists with holding of the Scriptures from lay people. Ioh. 3.30.
who deny the use of the Scriptures to Christians, thinking that thereby their
knauerie in abusing the people would be discovered and made manifest to the
eyes of the world. He that does evil, hates the light. How can the people see
when the candle is put under a bashell. But now seeing the light, not of a
candle, but of the Sun shines, I would wish you all, Search the Scriptures,
for in them ye will find eternal life. Ioh. 5.39.


My soul waits on the Lord. This is the fourth time that he shows that his
soul, that is his inward affections waited on the Lord, and this is the sixth
time, that he makes mention of the Lord, one God, and one faith, one hope,
that God was the only ground of his hope, that he could not go by him, and to
declare the feruencie of his attendance he compares it to the expectation and
looking of the morning watch for the break of day, yea more then they,

Bellarmins opiuion concening this verse refuted.
This verse is falsely perverted and translated by Bellermine, who says, that
the Latin vulgar translation, Videtur partim mutila, partim redundans, cum non
habeat bis a custodia matutina vt habet hebraica veritas, at habeat vsque ad
noctem, quod non haebet veritas hebraica. And therefore willing to reconcile
them, he says, that both night and day they should awaite upon God. But seeing
he grants there is no word of the night in the Hebrew verity, why would he
go by that light of the Scriptures to his corrupt translation, citing Saint
Jerome, who makes twice mention of the morning, not once of the night. But he
peruerteth Scriptures as his manner is, and in confessing that our translation
is according to the Hebrew verity, he grants that his translation is after
a Latin lie, which indeed is both mutilat, and redundant, leaving out that
which should be in the morning twice, and putting in night, which should not be
there. But no marvel, so is all their doctrine, bringing in darkness of
ignorance, and putting away the light of the morning the Lord Jesus Christ.
Read Chrysos. translation. The night divided in to four warches.


More then the morning watch, watching for the morning. The night was divided
in four watches, every watch had three hours, the last watch because nearest
the day, and light of the Sun, is most comfortable, and therefore most
desired.

Out of this verse I observe these four things. First, that this world is a
night. Secondly, that Christians are watchmen. Thirdly, that their comfort and
light must come from above, from Christ that Son of righteousness. Fourthly,
that the light comes not till the fourth watch.

1. This world is a night.

The world is a night, and its darkness represents Hell, as the light represents
Heaven.
The morning presupposes the night, and this world most properly is compared to
a long winters night which is very comfortable. The light is comfortable both
to those that are in health and sickness, when men lie in darkness they are
discouraged, and their grief is augmented and ^ncreased, but when they see the
day breaking, they take heart. The darkness represents hell, wherein there
is utter darkness and no light, neither material not spiritual; there
shall be a fire burning, but neither giving heat or light, and the light
represents heaven, where there shall be no darkness, Reu. 21.23
For the Lamb shall be the light of the house.

As the night is cold, so is this world comfortles
The night also is cold, wanting the Sun which warmeth the earth, man and
beast: so is the world a shadow of death, a dark dungeon, a portrature of
hell, no comfort to be had in it, but displeasure and matter of mourning.
Ignorance a most obseure night To. 13.12.
The greatest night in this world is the ignorance of God, of which the Apostle
speaks: The night is passed and the day is come. This darkness ouerspread
the whole face of the earth, Genesis 1.3.
till it pleased God who brought light out of darkness the first day, to
illuminate our darkened minds by the knowledge of his truth; of which also the
Apostle speaks, yea are no more darkness, but light in the Lord.

Spiritual darkness which carries to eternal darkness, Ephesians. 5.8.
Spiritual darkness as most evil is most to be feared.
is more fearful then corporal darkness. Forasmuch as prisoners lying in
darkness, would most gladly see the light. But these who are lying in
ignorance of God, desire never to see the light of heaven; they think
ignorance the mother of devotion, they take pleasure in it, they hate
knowledge, they will not be informed. I pray God open all your eyes, that we
may see the light of God in Jesus Christ, that we do no more take delight in
ignorance, despising the light offered unto us for the salvation of our souls.
Let us not suffer our selves to be deceived by sesuiticall sophistications. For
when our souls shall present that terrible tribuniall at the hour of our
death, then we would wish we had been of the number of the wise virgins, Mat.
25.4.
and had prepared oil for our lamps, and might have had the light of the
knowledge of God shining in our souls; which (alack) some of us both
contemn, and seek to have it quenched in others.

2. Christians are watchmen.

The duty of a watchman.
David compares himself to a watchman, the office of a watchman is to take
heed, least the enemy come at unawares, and to give warning to the cirizens.
Every particular Christian ought to be a watchman; Every Christian should watch.
for he has euemies both spiritual and corporal, continually assaulting him,
to destroy both his soul and his body, for which cause our Savior often
exhorted his hearers to watch and pray, Mat. 26.41.
and by nature we fall asleep, Ibid. 40.
as the Apostles did in the garden, and Jonas in the ship. Jonah. 1.5.
Therefore it is good we should be careful to watch over our ways. The watch
looks to the enemy without, but we have more need to watch upon our
domestique and inward enemies, Nota.
least they supprise us, even our Iustes and concupiscences, our pride, our
avarice, our malice, all which are like to overthrow our soul. Let us
therefore watch, least we be supprised.

Preachers are Gods w^tchmen, Ezech 3.17 (...)
And as every Christian should watch, so much more should pastors, who are
called watchmen, whom God has made watchmen of Israel, that when they see
traitors and wolves entering into the fold of God, they may give warning, and
blow the trumper, and adoertise the citizens of their danger. So those who take
upon them the title of watchmen upon the walls of Jerusalem, and watch
diligently for their own benefit, Faise watchmen shall be destroyed.
only looking to themselves and not to the Church, they are false watchmen,
and shall be destroyed with the first.

Woe and woe again to such as call themselves watchmen, who smite the Bride,
and pull her veil from her, going and following after the bridegroom, when
they should watch for the welfare of Sion, if the watchman be false he may
betray the camp, As false and negligent watch men are most dangerous to a
common wealth, so are false and secure Preachers to the Church.
or the house wherein he is; and if he be negligent and sleep, all is in
peril: so if the watchmen and preachers be salfe and secure when the enemy is
coming, the Church is in great danger. Lord make thy ministry true to the
Church, that they seeing the enemies entered into the Lords Jerusalem, they may
in time give warning, least both they and the city perish.

3. Comfort and light must come from above.

The watchman waits for the day, and he is very glad when he sees it break,
for then he knows the Sun is a rising upon the earth, which will inlighten
all the world. No comfort is to be found on earth for a Christian soul in this
dark night, we must look to the day dawning, when Christ in that day of his
glorious appearing shall come to deliver his Church from all miseries: Our
light comes from above. Reu. 22.25.
which all Christians should earnestly attend, and fervently pray with the
spouse, Come Lord Jesus. The watchman looks about to see the Sun spread out
his beams, he knows that light does not come from below. We should turn our
eyes from the world, because here is no comfort, Nots.
and look unto Christ Jesus sitting at the right hand of the Father (with
Saint Steven) from whom only we may expect a comfortable delivery out of all
our miseries. Act. 7.56.


4. The light comes in the morning.

Before break of day is greatest darkness, and then the Sun arises, and
by his beams expels the same. the light comes not till the evening. The
Apostles rowed all night, Mat. 14.24.
till they were become weary, and out of all hope, and then Christ came in the
fourth watch and relieved them, being then in a most desperate case. God will
come.
So the Lord although he tarieth to let us feel our own weakness, yet no
doubt he will come he dealt this way with Jacob, he wrestled all night with him
till the break of day, Ge. 32.28.
and then blessed him, David after he was long pursued and persecuted by Saul,
2. Sam. 1.
yet at last gat rest and ease. Judge 2.16.
The Jews were nearly destroyed by their enemies, but God raised up Saviors
to defend them. Dispare not then and disquiet not your selves, be not
discouraged, howsoever ye see the Church which is as the Disciples boat
tossed to and fro by the waves of persecuting tyrants, Mat. 14.23.
look to heaven, for the day of her delivery is at hand; yea that everlasting
delivery, when the Sun of righteousness shall arise and shine on her for
ever, she may have a night for a time, but her morning will be most gracious;
she may be in pains, as a woman in travel for a time, but her delivery will
be most comfortable, God albeit he seems to come sero, late, yet he comes
serio, in earnest: as he did in preserving the Church in Queen Esters days.
Ester. 8.
By the contrary, the wicked may have a short morning in this world, but they
cannot escape an everlasting night in that bottomless pit of darkness, Nota.
out of which is no delivery.

Verse. 7. Let Israel wait on the Lord, for with the Lord is mercy, and with
him is great redemptions
After the Prophet has spoken of himself that he awaited upon the Lord, he
now exhorts all the Church to do the same. He ever desires the Church to be
a partner with him in any benefit which he obtained from the Lord, as in the
51 psalm, after he has prayed for mercy to himself, he in the 18 verse
prays unto the Lord for the Church, that he would be favorable to Sion. The
like did Moses, Daniel, Jeremy, they all prayed for her weal. All should pray
for the peace of the Church.
D^uid exhorts others to pray; Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Such sort of
preachers are to be highly respected who night and day power out their prayers
for the peace and welfare of Sion, who depend on God, and stir up others to
put their trust and hope in God. This did Joshua and Caleb after they had viewed
the land, Numb. 13.31.33.34.
give heart and courage to the people of Israel to go forward to Canaan;
whereas the other ten spies discouraged them, saying their walls reached to
heaven, and the people were as the sons of Anak.

When David desires the whole Church to put her hope in God, he recalleth her
from al^ other vain hopes, or putting her trust in any other. This should make
those (who profess themselves to be Christians) to blush and be ashamed to put
their trust in any other but God. I looked (says David) unto the mountains,
from whence mine help shall come: Psalm. 12^.^.2.
mine help comes from the Lord, who made the heaven and the earth. When
Israel looked to have help, fortification, and refuge of man, then she was
disapointed and left comfortless in her greatest extremeties. Ier. 17.5.
Cursed be he who makes the armo of flesh and blood his confidence.

For with the Lord is mercy. That which he so patiently attended upon was
mercy; and that which he desires the Church to wait for, is mercy. He
repeeteth to the Church the goodness of that which he had tasted himself,
that which was needful to him, was needful to the whole body of the Church^
and therefore as he wished mercy to himself, he wished mercy to the whole
Church militant, Every Christian should love the Church more then himself.
which teaches every Christian, to love the Church as well as himself, yea
more; and as he would have health and welfare to himself, so to procure the
same for the Church.

And with him is great redemption. He points out this mercy. First. By the
wonderful effect thereof, redemption. Secondly. By the quality thereof, great
redemption.

Redemption is the freeing of that which is in thraldom, by giving of a price,
What redemption is
as the redemption of land presupposes that it was engaged for sums of money
given to the owner, and thus fold upon reuersion: or warriors that are taken
in battle and ransoned at a price. Oh that we would consider the thraldom we
are in, and how we stand in Gods debt; the freedom which we get, and the
means whereby we obtain the same. God gave us his golden law, and we have
nothing whereby to pay him, but the dross of our merits, wherewith we will
never be able to pay him that sum wherein we are oblished, and thus we lie in
thraldom.

Man may be redeemed.
But herein is our comfort, that we are not sold out at the ground, but God
has always reserved to us a reuersion, that we may be redeemed.

But what is the means whereby we are redeemed? either it must be by strong
hand, as Abraham freed Lot; or by the gracious favor of those, Ge. 14.16.
whose captives we are; as a Master through love which he bears to his
servant may set him free, or by paying of a ransom. The parties were God and
the Devil, Gods justice must be satisfied, Satan must be vanquished, or no
redemption for us. This Christ Jesus the son of God seeing that blessed seed
of the woman, and p^tying us, became a redeemer for us; by his valor and
strength he vanquished that old serpent the Diuil, and made us free from him:
and by his death, he satisfied the wrath of God, and paid a ransom for us,
even his precious blood.

Man's redemption is by the blood of Christ.
This redemption then is neither by gold nor silver, but by Christ's blood. All
the world was not able to have redeemed; his blood only was a perfect
satisfaction to the Father. Lands impignorated, become free at the Jubilee; and
when we are made free from our sin, we may account that the most joyful
Jubilee that we ever saw.

Great redemption. It is called great, in regard of the great majesty that
redeemed us, God eternal. Secondly, Wherein the redemption of man is great.
the greatness of the price, his blood. Thirdly, the number of those who are
redeemed, all the believers. Fourthly, the strong man out of whose prison we
are freed. Fifthly, the graces which he powers on his Church.

Verse. 8. And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
A comfortable promise, with which he concludes this Psalm, assuring the
Church, that God will redeem her. Since the greatest danger from which the
Church is deliuere^.
And wherefrom, even from her sins, all her sins, which is the greatest
danger ever the Church fell into, and the mother of all other evils. For what
could the devil, hell, or wicked men do to us, without sin? nothing.

Israel. Every one is not delivered, but only the Israel of God, Only Gods
Israel shall be delivered. Ioh. 1.47. Romans 2.29.
those who are true Israelits, as was said of Nathanael, in whom is no guile;
and the Apostles Israelits not in the letter but Spirit.

From all his iniquities. Whatsoever they be, whether against God, our
neighbor, or our selves, they shall be forgiven and pardoned. The joyful
jubilee is now come, which to the Israelites was the 50. year, and now to the
true Israelites it is proclaimed every hour. In that Jubilee the lands which
were engaged became free, Nota.
and returned to the owners; but we our selves who were captives to the diuill,
are made free, and return to God by redemption of Christ's blood: yea all our
debts and iniquities are pardoned, though our sins were as crimson, Isa. 1.18.
they shall be made white as snow: though they were red as scarlet, they shall
be as woole, though they were as many as the sand of the sea, and as heavy as
lead, we are freed of all by that blood, and if of all, what need we seek
any other remedy, but that allouerlie. We need not with the Turks to run
to Mahomet, or with the Papists to Saints and images. God through Jesus Christ
has taken them all away. He who made all, cures all. It is his honor, he
will not give his glory to another. Our Sun illumilinateth all the world,
our Christ the Sun of righteousness shines to all the world, but none are
partakers of his light, but true Israelites, which dwell in the land of Goshen.
The Lord grant that we may be such, that being illuminated by the light of
Christ here, we may be conveyed thereby through the dangerous wilderness of
this world, to the kingdom of heaven, where we shall be with him world without
end*

Amen.
A GODLY AND FRUITFUL EXPOSITION ON THE CXLIII. PSALM, the seventh of the
Penitentials.
AT the making of this Psalm (as plainly appears) David has bin cast into
some desperate danger; 1. Sa. 24.4.
whether by Saul when he was forced to flee into the cave, as in the former
Psalm; or by Absolon his son, or by any other, it is uncertain. Always in
this he complains grieuoushe to God of the malice of his enemies, The
substance of this Psalm.
and desires God to hear his prayers, he acknowledges that he suffers
those things by Gods just judgment, most humbly craving mercy for his sins:
desiring not only to be restored, but also to be governed by Gods spirit that
he may dedicate and consecrate the rest of his life to Gods service.

This worthy Psalm then contains these three things. The parts of the
Psalm.
First, a confession of sins. Secondly a lamentation for his injury.
Thirdly, a supplication for temporal delivery and spiritual graces, to the
end of the Psalm.

Verse. 1. Hear my prayer, O Lord, and hearken unto my supplication; answer
me in thy truth, and in thy righteousness.
Those pray in vain who are not assured that God will bear them. Heb. 6.11.
Hear my prayer O Lord: He craves attention in the first place, and prepares
Gods ear, for it is in vain to pray, unless we be sure God will hear us and
answer us, for he that comes to God, must first believe that God is, and
that he will reward those who serve him, for otherwsie we pray without faith,
and our prayer is sin. Thus he does in diverse Psalms, as in the 102.
Psalm. 2. and in 5. Psalm. and 54. Psalms.

By this we learn, that the Saints should begin their prayers with a request
to be heard, so long does the Lord seem to men not to hear them, and to hold
back his ears and eyes, that he hears not their suits, and sees not their
tribulations, as he delayeth to grant their desires; and therefore they crave
audience and attention.

He does here three times repeat his earnest desire to be heard, as in the
fifth Psalm four times, he doubleth and ingeminateth this same suite to be
heard. There he desires God to hear his words, understand his meditation,
hearken unto the voice of his cry, and hear his voice in the morning; the like
he does here, thereby declaring the vehemency of his affection, if any be
desirous to have their suites granted, they go not slowly about their
business, they do not use cold rife words, Luke 18. Ged denies our request
because we do not confidently and earnestly desirs them.
As the importunity of the widow moved the false judge. How much more will our
heavenly Father, by loath to refuse us, yea there is no cause why he disdaineth
our suites, but by reason we neither confidently nor earnestly desire them,
nothing would be refased to thee, if thou would beg as thou should do.
The Spirit would request for thee with sights that cannot be expressed: and he
that searches the heart, knows what is the meaning of the spirit. Romans
8.26.27.


Is it possible that a mother can hear the mourning suites of her child
without moving and yielding; yea though the mother could forget the child,
Esa. 49.15.
yet God cannot forget us. Then speak, and he will hear; be thou not dumb,
and he will not be deaf; try, knock, ask, seek, be instant in thy
petitions, for the Lord is ready to hear all those, who seek him truly,
instantly, and constantly, God rejects none who desire to be heard.
never man sought to be heard, whom God has rejected and refused.

In this verse he desires Ichouah his God, to hear, hearken, and answer.
Secondly, the subject of his speech, and the thing which he desires to be
heard, is his prayer and oration. Thirdly, the manner how he desires his prayer
to be heard, in thy truth and righteousness.

When he doubleth his request of hearing, he would have God hearing him with
both his ears, that is, most attentively and readily; so instant is a
troubled mind, he desires the prayer, he puts up might be remembered, as
was said by the Angel to the Centurion: Thy prayers and almesdeeds are come up
before God. Act. 10.4.


This frequent desire to be heard comes not from diffidence and a distrust,
The more we hope to be heard, the more we desire to be heard
but from confidence, for the more we trust to be heard, the more we desire to
be heard. And this neglect of prayer, that we suite seldom or never,
proceeds from the ground of infidelity, because we believe God will not
grant, if we suite. Therefore knock often, beg earnestly, wrestle by prayer
with the Lord, hold him at a continual business until he grant thy just and
lawful petitions, and out of doubt things lawful in themselves (that is what
he has commanded) suited earnestly with dependence upon Gods pleasure, shall be
granted unto thee.

He that cannot pray can have no company with God.
My prayer and supplication. Prayer is the life of religion, and he that cannot
pray, can have no company with God. David who was a man after Gods own heart,
was evermore given to prayer, morning, evening, and noone; David spent all his
life in prayer.
yea in the midst of the night he arose and prayed unto God; he prevented the
morning watches, and the break of day, so that he spent all his life in
prayer. God be merciful to us who can not suffer to spend any time in prayer.
We spend many months, vainly, ^dlely, and sinfully, without wearing, and the
time is short which we bestow upon prayer, and yet we think it too long,
Against the too much neglect of prayer in these our timest.
we sleep in the night, and awake: but alas, what time thereof do we spend on
Gods service? when arises any of us, to seek God in the night? when think we
upon him in the night season? many cogitations come in our mind, but we never
think upon God, and in the day, we begin in the morning to seek the world
or our fleshly lusts, but who seeks the Lord early? The rest of the day we
put over and consume in pastime, as though the Sun were ordained for none
other use, but to let us see to go to hell. Pray then unto the Lord, that he
may give unto you the spirit of prayer, for as Saint James says very well,
Iam. 4.2.
Ye lack, because you ask not.

Answer me in thy truth and in thy righteousness. He builds his prayer upon
two grounds, Go^s truth in his promises, and his righteousness, that he being
a just judge of the world, will never forsake the righteous, 1. Cor. 1.30
in his son Jesus Christ, who is made our righteousness.

Then God stands much by his word, and as he is verity, so his word is yea
and amen, neither can he; neither will he chang or alter his word, has he
spoken, it must be performed. All men are liers; Ps. 116.17
they falsify their promises, there is no truth in this generation. All sorts
of men are changable, but God who is truth it self cannot alter.
It is a great oath to a prince to swear, per verbum principis, but it is
possible (as is often seen) that they alter and change, Noblemen and
Preachers, yea all sorts of men are found to say and to gain say, but who ever
heard that God promised (being as I have said verity it self) and violated
one word of his promise, since the foundaof the world, neither ever shall. Then
we have a good God both just and true; and I wish that we would imitate those
virtues of our God. For truth is exiled, and righteosnesse is departed from the
earth.

Verse. 2. And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight,
shall none that lives be iustefied.
THis verse contains a deprecation of Gods judgment, that he would not enter
in a straight marking of his sin. He might have pleaded his innocence before
men, but when he comes to that terrible tribunal of Gods justice, he
submits himself, craving pardon for his trespass, and this general rule
should be observed, if we desire God to be favorable to us, that we beg the
remission of our sins. For if David could not plead his innocence, Beg for
remission of sin. Job. 15.16.
what can any of us do, who drink in iniquity as water, who are altogether
unclean and filthy. Let us therefore confess our wickedness, and make
supplication to our judge, and lay our hands on our mouths, being unable to
plead our cause against the Lord.

That ye may the better understand this verse, observe. First, that there is a
judgment into which men must enter, or else be absolved from the indicatorie.
Secondly, by what name he styles himself, thy servant. Thirdly, the argument,
Because no lauing shall be justified in thy sight. Of those in order.

1. There is a judge and a judgment.

Men run forward in sin lasciuiously and without care, but they remember
not there is a judgment wherein they shall be called to an account. Rejoice
(says Solomon) O young man in the days of thy youth, but be sure thou shall
be brought to judgment. Eccl. 12.9.
If the servant remembered his accomptes, would he mispend his Masters
substance. But the Devil has blinded men's eyes, and made them so forgetful,
that they think not on their reckoning. But the judgment is more then the
reckoning. Albeit men for debt may lawfully be put in prison, and his goods
confiscat, Gods judgment more severe then man's.
yet no law will take a man's life for debt: but the spiritual tribunal is more
terrible: for if God enter once in judgment with any man, he will kill both
body and soul.

God has three judgment seats.
There be three judgment seats which God has made up for man: one which he
has set up in his conscience, accusing him, condemning him, and punishing him:
the second is at the hour of his death, then God puts him to trial. The
third and last tribunal is after death wherein all shall appear to render an
account of their actions: the books of their own conscience shall be opened and
none shall escape that indicatorie, neither kings, or preachers, or people, all
must appear and render an account of their thoughts, of their words, of
their actions.

That judgment is peremptory, no excuse, no subperseges or dilators, Luke
23.30
Let princes then and noblemen persuade them selves, that (albeit they think
no law can strike against them if they do whatsoever pleases themselves) God
has a throne and a justice court, before which they must needs appear, and
receive the definitive sentence, whereof oftentimes in this world they have a
feeling. Nebuchadnezer may be a proof for this, Dan. 4 29.
whom God for seven years made a beast. Herod, Antiochus, and infinite others.

2. With thy servant.

He was a Lord, and a King of a little world, and yet he calls himself Gods
servant, not as the Pope who styles himself, seruus seruorum Dei, servant of
the servants of God, when he is a Lord over Lords, both Ecclesiastical and
civil. But he indeed in the humility of his heart confesses God to be his
only liege Lord, Princes as much bound to serve God, as their subjects to obey
them
upon whom he depended, of whom he holds his crown. So princes may think
that their subjects are no more bound to them, then they are to God, and that
they are as inferior, and more to God, then their subjects are to them; ob
culpam or placitum, none ought to inquire. So God the supreme Majesty has an
absolute and unlimited liberty over all; as well rich as poor: he can
displace kings, and give their kingdoms and crowns to others, if they
displease him. He can rent the kingdom from Suul and give it to David; 1. Sa.
15.28. 1. Ki. 12.24.
from Rehoboam and give it to Iereboam, if they break his commandemenents.
Psalm. 2.10.
Be wise therefore O kings, serve the Lord in fear.

For no living shall be justified in thy sight. The like he has in the 130
Psalm, Who can stand before thee? so that not only he refuses any clame of
mercy by himself, but includes all living under sin, so that none is
exempted, for all are sinners, All are sinners that all may at God beg the
remission of sin.
and are destitute of grace, that God may show mercy to all; and all his
creatures may beg from himself alone that which is not in any of them. Away
away with merits, away with our worthiness; seek it where it is to be found,
even in Christ.

Where he says, they cannot be justified, there he cleerelie avouches the
Doctrine of Saint Paul, that justification comes by faith and not by works:
Rom 3.24.
directly against the Papisticall heresy, Against justification by works.
which teaches men to seek a part of it at least in others, and themselves;
whereas here all men are excluded from righteousness, but that which they must
find in God.

Verse. 3. For the enemy has persecuted my soul: he has smitten my life
down to the earth; he has laid me in the darkness, as they that have bin
dead long ago.
THis is the complaint of his enemies extreme malice against him, by a
threefold exaggeration thereof, their persecuting of his soul, their throwing
down of his life to the earth, and their laying him into darkness as a dead
man. Their malice was so vehement against him, that nothing could content them,
till they utterly ruin him both in body and soul, and name.

This represents clearly unto us the malice of the enemies of the Church,
Note the malice of the Church her enemies especially of the Iudasits orders.
Pro. 17.10.
which is so extreme, that nothing can satisfy them, unless they bath
themselves in the blood of the poor members. A Lion is more merciful to his
prey, then a tyrant is to a Christian; there is not the smallest favor to be
looked for at his hands. The mercies of the wicked are cruel, a clear
example hereof we have in the Papists, but specially in those blood thirsty
wolves the Jesuits, who will brag of a singularity in purity, and yet will
stir up princes and all other favorers of their sect to root out Christians
who profess the name of Jesus according to his word, those they go about daily
to massacre without respect of any, as witnesses the bloody massacrie of
Paris, Anno 1572. August. 24. at which time they murdered a great many
thousands in France, for professing Christ. As also that devilish and hellish
pouderplot: what a bloody execution was intended against our gracious
Sovereign, and hopeful children.

These bloody Jesuits and mastiue dogs are not fierce against the Turks and
Panims, but against the Israel of God. Yea, as Lions, Wolves, and Foxes, take
most pleasure in the blood of the lambs, then in any other beast, which they
will spare and pass by, except they be in great hunger; so these must desire
Christian blood, and think they do God good service in killing v^. And this
should be a matter of great comfort to the Church of God, seeing persecution is
a mark of the true Church, and Christ accounts men blessed when they are
persecuted and evil spoken of for his sake; Mat. 5.10.12.
For so (says he) did their Fathers to the Prophets that were before you.

Let us therefore be patient and suffer calamities, through hope of eternal
glory, which we shall inherit when these short tribulations shall expire.

The more the Church be trodden under foot, the greater is Gods honor in her
delivery.
Moreover ye may see how far the Lord permits the wicked to prevail above
his children, that he will suffer them to tread upon their bellies, as though
they were dead, and no hope of life left to them, that his honor may be the
more magnified, who out of their dead ashes could make a resurrection; as he
did to David, who was as a dead man, and forgotten, yet God raised him up, and
erected his throne above his enemies. O Lord deliver thy Church from her
troubles and persecution.

Verse. 4. And my spirit is in perplexity in me and mine heart within me was
amassed.
HE spoke before of his external calamities; now he confesses the infirmetie
of his mind, that he was wonderfully cast down in heart, and troubled in his
soul; so that his strength was almost gone, (not like the strength of a whale
fish, or of a rock) but being ready to drown with sorrow, he was sustained by
faith and Gods Spirit, he swimmed under these evils. Our Savior himself
confessed of himself, my soul is troubled to the death: Mat 26.38.
God knows our moulde, we are not stocks without passions or perturbations,
Gods children have their own passions.
we are not like lepers, whose flesh is senseless; but we are sensible of
evils, that we may run to God for help and comfort. Job. 42.7.
Had not Job his own perturbations and griefs, which made him utter hard
speeches, for which God rebuked him, and he afterward repented; and before the
wind? it is enough that it directs the course ever toward the port, albeit
it be forced to, cast board twenty times. So God cares not albeit we be
troubled in our course to heaven. Let us ever aim at the port of eternal
glory, howsoever we be disquieted with contrary winds and tempests, God will
pass by all these our frailties, and imperfections, and will at last deliver
us from them all; if in the midst of these our extremeties our heart set it
self toward heaven.

This Prophet in the 77. Psalm, finds himself so far cast down, that his
soul refused comfort; and in this verse he thinks himself so astonished, that
his senses were become scupified and benumed through ye great pains which he
sustained.

Verse. 5. Yet do I remember the time past; I meditate on all thy works, yea,
I do meditate in the works of thine hands. Verse. 6. I stretch forth mine
hands unto thee: my soul desires after thee as the thirsty land, Selah.
IN the two former verses were expressed his double tentations, bodily and
spiritual: in these two are double comforts, so, As the Churches troubles
increase so do her comforts. 1. Cor. 10.13.
as the crosses of Gods children do increase, so do their consolations, day by
day, for God is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above that we
have ability to bear, but with the tentation will give us a comfort to his
glory. One of the greatest comforts which Christians can have in their
extreme miseries, Experience of former mercies a great comfort in time of
extremity. 1. Sa. 17.34
is the ancient mercies of God bestowed either on themselves in particular, or
on the Church in general. This moved David to enterprise the nomachie against
Goliath. The Lord (says he) who delivered me from the pawe of the Lion, and
from the pawe of the Bear, will deliver me also from this uncircumcised
Philistim.

Remember mercies past if thou would be delivered in time to come.
We should recount the ancient mercies of God, that they may encourage us to
seek him in time to come, a Christian man's memory should be a faithful
chronicle of antiquity; we should remember what our fathers have told us, and
show that to our children, but especially the works we have found done by God
to our selves. God would hide nothing from Abraham, Genesis 18.17.
because he would show it to his children. The fool and idiot do not ponder
the works of God, but the righteous do lay them up in their hearts, and show
them to those who come after them. So let us make a register and book of
remembrance of the auntientie of Gods goodness to his Church; which will
comfort our souls in the present day of sorrow. Our memories may easily show
to our children the ancient mercies of God, in the first beginning of our
Church threescore years ago, and how he delivered her in her infancy from
the fury of the Frenchmen, and again in the 1588. year, from the great
armado of Spain; and diverse others bloody interprises of wicked men. Let us
therefore have a fresh memory of Gods benefits, which may furnish us with
comfort in our present necessities; let our own particular benefits encourage
us against our own particular evils; and general blessings and deliueries
which the Church has had, strengthen us against those evils which befall to
her in our time. Let us recollect our Spirits and take vigor in this our
present distress, yt we faint not.

If Gods mercies be rooted in our hearts our tongues will utter the same.
From his remembrance there flows a meditation twice remembered in this verse,
for a sanctified memory of Gods goodness stirs up an holy meditation and
revolution in our mind of the same, from whence flows our gratitude and
thankefulnes to God, and if we look lightly to the mercies of God, we speak
as lightly; but when they are rooted in our hearts, then we begin to speak
magnificallie and worthily.

The works of thine hands. Here he letreth us see that these works could have
bin done by no humane power, but by the immediate power of God. Exodus 8. ^^
As the Aegiptian sorcer^rs spoke of the lice, so may we say concerning the
deliverances of the Church, God reserueth to himself the deliueries of his
Church.
surely this is the finger of God. He will otherways honor his own children,
but he keeps the honor in delivering the Church to himself. He will have it
said in the ages to come, the Lord has done this. As he by the works of his
hand made the Church, so by these same saving hands he has redeemed it from
hell and damnation; and it is the work of his own hands that shall deliver
her from temporal dangers. Therefore let God arise and deliver his Church, for
she is now in great hazard; Psalm. 6^.^.
but the Lords arm is strong enough, and in his appointed time can deliver her.

I stretch forth mine hands unto thee. His ^econd comfort (...) prayer, which
springs from his earnest meditation. Here the fruit of holy meditation, it
stirs up our hearts t^o an earnest prayer. Such meditations of Gods goodness
and power are the best helpers and confirmations of our faith, Earnest prayer
from a serious meditation and consideration of Gods works.
to lighten us of our sorrows and griefs. Hence it follows, where there is
no meditation and earnest consideration of Gods works, there will be no
earnest prayer, but perfunctorious dealing with God, which we will not regard
but repudiat and forsake.

The instruments of his prayer is the stretching forth of his hands, The
stretching forth of the hands, notes the lifting up of the heart. Exo. 17.11.
which notes the lifting up of the heart. As Moses hands were lifted up when
Israel fighted against Amalek; and when they fell, Israel had the worse, and
therefore Aaron and Hur held them up, and so Israel preualed. Thus we should
compose the gestures of our body in spiritual exercises, as they may be most
helpefull unto us to our inward and secret worshipping of God.

My soul desires after thee as the thirsty land. He declares his vehement
affection to God by a very pretty similitude, taken from the ground which is
thirsty by the long drought of summer, wherein the earth rent in pieces as it
were and with open mouth, through long thirst seeks drink from heaven. By
which he shows that he came to God as distitute of natural substance; and
therefore seeks from above that which he lacked- So in all his extremities he
looks ever upward, from above he seeks help and comfort. Art thou athirst,
there is water in heaven to refresh thee
Albeit we be in extremity and as it were rent in sunder, yet here is comfort,
there is water in heaven which will refresh us, if we gape after them. Here is
a blessing, those that thirst shall be satisfied. If we thirst for mercy, for
delivery, and spiritual and temporal comfort, thou shall be satiffied
therewith for if God heard the prayer of Hagar and Ismael being athirst in the
wilderness, Ge. 21.17.
and opened unto them a fountain, will he forsake Isack the child of promise?
If he heard Samson in the bitterness of his heart, when he said, Judge. 15.19
I die for thirst, and opened a spring out of the lawbone of an Ass; will he
forsake us in time of our distress, if we thirst aright?

Verse. 7. Hear me speedily, O Lord, for my spirit fails: hide not thy face
from me, else I shall be like unto them that go down into the pit.
HE is now brought as it were to the latter sweat, he cries for speedy help,
or else he sees nothing but death before his eyes. Our impatiencie makes us
so bold and familiar with God, yt we would prescribe time to him, as though he
knew not which were the most convenient time for his coming.

My spirit fails: He is now as it were in a swouning, he craves quickly to
be helped, Gods children are often brought low, that the love and power of God
may be manifested in their deli^e^^.
or he is gone. See to what extremity God will bring his Saints; even near
the grave, and yet bring them back again; that his love and power may be known
so much the more, seeing to him belongs the issues of death. God brings upon
his own children such fainting, as it were deliquium animi, a lossing of our
life; that then feeling the weakness of our natural powers, and after being
restored by his grace, we may learn how greatly we are beholden to him, as by
whom and in whom we have our life and being, and can be restored by none, but
by him alone, and may bestow all the rest of our life upon himself and his own
service, and depend not on natural strength, but on him.

Hide not thy face from me. He declares plainly that he has no spark of
life, but from the favorable face and countenance of God, that he is then dead,
when he sees not God reconciled to him in Christ. He who has once seen the
countenance of God cannot live without it.
He who once has seen a blanke of his countenance, can no more breathe or
live without it, then a fish or bird out of their own elements.

Else I shall be like unto them that go down into the pit. As though he would
say, I shall be like a dead man without sense and life. The soul is the life
of the body, and God is the life of the soul, should we not then be busy to
seek him, and when he has hid himself, to find him again, There is no life
in the soul without the sensible presence of God. Psalm. 22.1. Mat. 27.46
for I will assure you, there is neither, life, comfort, peace, or joy in a
man's soul, unless he have the sensible presence of God. David not feeling it,
cries, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And Christ himself uttered
the same voice on the cross, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? Of
which I have spoken in another place on the same words.

Verse. 8. Let me hear thy loving kindness in the morning; for in thee is my
trust: show me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto thee.
AS he was cast down in the former verses, so he now arises by prayer, which
was the chiefest bulwark whereto he did run in time of his troubles.

In this verse he craves two things. First, that he might hear Gods
kindness; and the reason, because he trusts in him. Secondly, that he would
show him the way wherein he should walk; the reason, because he lifted up his
soul to him.

Let me hear thy loving kindness. Here he craves Gods favor and kindness,
as he does in many other Psalms. Because in his favor, is life, grace,
wealth, all good things, and pleasure for evermore, How we may be assured of
the favor of God.
so that if he look kindly to us, we need be afraid of nothing. But how shall
he be assured of his favor? even by hearing it, as he says in the 51. Psalm,
Let me hear the voice of joy and gladness. The voice which is heard is the
word of God, which being apprehended by faith, is only able to comfort our
souls in whatsoever tentation. And no meruell that such athiests and papists
who altogether refuse the word of God, Why papists and Athists live and die
comfortles.
live comfortles and die without comfort, because they refuse that instrument
which should carry joy to them. Good reason they die athirst, since they reject
that vessel the word o^ God, by which they might be refreshed. Therefore since
faith comes by hearing of Gods word, and all our comfort comes by it; let
us pray God, to bore our ears and our hearts, that we may receive the glad
tidings of reconcilation from God.

In the morning. Psalm. 90.14.
The time when he seeks to hear Gods kindness, is in the morning, as in
another Psalm, Fill us with thy sweet mercies in the morning. Psalm. 55.17
David used to pray morning, noone, and eueningtide. In the morning in the
beginning of the day he addressed himself to God, offering his morning
sacrifice, he desires that God may betime meet him, that he may begin the day
with some comfort, for then we know that God has accepted our prayer, when he
has sent down the comfort of his spirit in our hearts; when he with the fire
of his love, and joy of his countenance, burns up our sacrifice. This
gladdeth our heart and encourages us to seek him the rest of the day.

Seek God early.
Then let us seek God early, even in the morning of our youth, and every
morning, not perfunctoriously or for a fashion, but from our hearts, that he
may let us hear that comfortable voice saying. Thy prayers are come up before
me, Act. 10.4.
and I have heard them. For thy sins are forgiven thee.

For in thee is my trust. Confidence and faith in God is a great argument to
move God to speak good things unto us; for otherways our prayers are in
vain, Prayers not in faith are a scorning of God and shall not prevail with
him.
if they proceed not from faith, if you come unto him without confidence in
him, you scorn him; and so do double injury to your selves, adding to your
former sins a scorning of God.

These also who put their trust in any thing beside him, need not to look for
any good thing from him. If ye would use a thousand Angels as intercessours
to move God to hear you, it is nothing, only faith will prevail with God. The
Pharisees alms deeds, Luke 18.11.12.13.14.
his tithes-giuing, his prayers, of which he much bragged, wrought nothing with
God; but the Publicanes faith and contrition were forcible arguments preualing
with him.

Show me the way that I should walk in, The second petition arises very well
from the first. Being assured of Gods favor, we should seek to conform our
wills to obey his commaundiments.
For when we have obtained an assurance of Gods favor reconciled to us in
Jesus Christ; it follows next, that we should desire to conform our lives to
the obedience of his commandments. For no man will frame himself to walk in
Gods ways, till he be assured of Gods favor. Therefore faith in Gods promises
is the most effectual cause to bring forth good works; and an assurance of
justification to produce sanctification. But because by nature we are ignorant
which way we should go, let us pray God, that he may direct us what way we
should go to heaven through this miserable world. For men having no better
warrant of their ways, then their own determinations, may as blind men run
headlong to destruction.

Christ is the way in which we should walk, I am the way, says he, Ioh. 14.6.
none other way in heaven or earth. We go in this way, when we follow his
commandments and walk in them, leaving the traditions of men. Pray God that
not only he would show us the true way, but also give us grace to walk
therein.

For I lift up my soul unto thee, He used all wise and lawful means, yet
ever he hangs and depends on Gods providence. Because unless our care and
industry be governed by Gods spirit, it serves for nothing. Which teaches
us, in what ever case we be, In every case depend on God.
never to lean to our own wisdom, but with heart to depend upon the Lord,
that he may guide us by his holy spirit.

Behold what a wonderful effect God works by afflictions, they depresse and
cast down our outward man, The good of afflictions.
and our inner man by them is elevated and raised aloft: yea the more we are
afflicted, the more we are stirred up. The oftener the messenger of Satan is
sent to buffet us, 2. Cor. 12.8
the more earnestly (with Paul) we cry unto the Lord to be delivered. So if we
be cast down to hell, what the worse are we, if by that we be raised up to
heaven.

As by the contrary, the wicked for their prosperous successes seem as it
were lifted up to heaven, but their exaltation becomes a precipitation to
them to the deepest and lowest hells, in respect they fall through pride in the
condemnation of the devil; Let us therefore be patient in our troubles, and
lift up our eyes to our God who will help us.

Verse. 9. Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies: for I hide me with thee.
IN the former verse he desires Gods mercy and loving kindness, and that he
might be showed the way wherein he should walk; now he desires to be free of
temporal danger. This is a good method in prayer, first to seek the kingdom
of God, Seek first spiritual graces then temporal deliueries. Lu. 12.31.
and spiritual graces, and all other things shall be casten to us. We seek in
vain at God temporal deliueries, if we neglect to seek spiritual graces,
which are most necessary for us.

The church has many enemies, but God is one against them all.
As for enemies the Church and her members, never has or shall want
innumerable, against whom what can we oppose, but Gods protection. In number,
in power, in policy and subtlety they are ever above us. There is no help in
us against them all, but our gracious God. Ge. 32.36.
Esau came with four hundred against Jacob, a naked man, with his wife,
children, and droues of cattle. But Mahanaim was with him, he was guarded by
Gods Angels. And therefore since the Church of God in France, Germany, and
elsewhere, is in danger of the Liuiathan, and these sons of Anak; Let us
run to the Lord, and cry unto him, O God Jehovah, who is one against all,
deliver us from our enemies, who likewise are thy enemies.

For I hide my self with thee. As though he would say, I have no receipt or
lurking place, but thee. Hide me therefore under the shadow of thy wings.
Psalm. 91. The Lord hid the Prophets that Achab could not find them out. 1.
Kin. 18.13.
If we will creep under his wings, he will surely keep us.

Verse. 10. Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God: let thy good Spirit
lead me into the land of righteousness.
HEre he craves to be directed in the whole course of his life by God, and
therefore he prays that God would teach him to do his blessed will, and to
direct him by his holy Spirit toward heaven. The same he craves in another
Psalm, Guide me O Lord by thy counsel, and after bring me to thy glory.

Teach me to do thy will: This is a necessary lesson to be learned, It is God
who must teach us to do his will, which we of ourselves would never do.
which our nature will never teach us. God he must teach us not only to submit
ourselves to his will, but also do his will, and attempt no unlawful means
of our delivery against his delivery.

This is not the voice of the flesh in tribulation, teach me O Lord to do thy
will; but, I pray thee do my will. There is nothing more dificult, then to
learn to submit our selves to Gods will. But following the example of our
Savior in his greatest agony, let us say, Not my will be done but thine.

He says not, teach me to know thy will, but to do thy will. Luke 22.42 God
teaches us three ways. We must not only be hearers but doers. Luke 12.47.
God teaches us three ways. First, by his word. Secondly, he illumineth our
minds by his Spirit. Thirdly, he imprinteth that in our hearts and makes us
obedient to the same, for the servant who knows the will of his Master, and
does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. The hearing of Gods will
revealed in his word, would be unprofitable to us of it self, and be a
witness against us, unless a willing obedience of the heart followed the
hearing. We pray daily that Gods will may be done, not only known. Mat. 6.10.
But while we know what is Gods will, we are no ways obedient thereto, but
do follow our own rebellious wills and ways.

For thou art my God. An argument to move God to teach him, because he is his
God, and does trust in none but in him. As if David would say: thou promised.
est me help of thy free favor, help me then in this my danger. Whereby he
would teach us two principal lessons. First, by this that he desires God to
teach him to do his will, Is it not in man's power of himself to do the will of
God.
If God be our God let his will be ours. Mal. 1.6.
but his special grace, who preuenteth us by his favor, and becomes our
God, and after frames us to do his will, and obey him. Secondly, that if he
be our God, and we call upon him in our troubles, it were requisite we should
frame our selves to obey him. If he be our God, where is his love and
obedience? If he be our Father, where is his honor? So he must of necessity
be an athiest who says in his heart, there is no God; who professes God in
his mouth, and in his works denies him; following his own pleasure, in place
of Gods will.

Let thy good Spirit, lead me into the Land of righteousness. The second
petition is his future government and direction by that good Spirit, whom he
desires to lead him into the land of righteousness.

Let thy good Spirit. He craves the Spirit to be his Captain and conuoyer,
yea to lead him by the hand to that eternal life. In the 51. Psalm he craves
the holy Spirit not to be taken from him. Albeit the holy Ghost be God equal
with the Father and the Son, Ioh. 16.7.
the third person of that blessed Trinity, yet in order he is the third, sent
by the Father and the Son, as Christ says, I will send to you the comforter,
the Spirit of truth, who may lead you in all truth, and promised he should
abide with the Church to the end of the world.

The benefits which we get by the holy spirit.
He it is that sanctifies us, that regenerateth us, that comfort us in our
troubles; enlightneth us by his blessed word, God everlasting, for whom the
Father has elected and foreknowne, the Spirit has sealed, and the Son has
redeemed and sprinkled by his blood, who is the earnest of our inheritance, who
caused us to cry, Abba, father; who knows the will and secret mind of the
father, Romans 8.15
and carries our prayers unto God with sighs that cannot be expressed; whose
temples we are; Romans 8.26
which temples without sacrilege we should not pollute; whom we should not
grieve, lest he forsake us; for he can endure no pollution or uncleanness, for
him, with David, let us pray to the Father, for he is the disposer of all his
mysteries, and comforter in all our troubles and miseries.

Good. The Spirit of God has many epithets in the Scriptures, holy, constant,
right, and here good; There is a good and an evil spirit.
which seems to be opposite to an evil spirit of the Lords, which he sent
upon Saul, and was sent to deceive Achab, A lying spirit (says Satan) will I
be in the mouth of his false Prophets, and God said, 1. Sa. 16.14. 1. Ki. 22.22.
go for thou shall prevail. Sure it is, men are either possessed with Gods
Spirit, or with the spirit of the devil, who is called an impure spirit; Mat.
5.8.9.
who has possessed many corporally, as the Legion; or spiritually by since,
leaving them cap^iue as slaves to his will, which is the worst sort of
possession, and till he be d spossessed by the word of God, Luke 11.22
and thrown forth of man, Gods Spirit cannot enter, the strong man must be
bound by one stronger, and then Gods Spirit enters. As a man's stomach being
full of humors, cannot give place to good nutrie till those be avoided: so our
souls cannot receive the good Spirit of God, neither will he enter into them,
unless we be free of the spirit of Satan.

Lead me. Man by nature is as a criple, and blind, he can not go upright
unless he be led by a superior spirit: yea he must be carried as a Eagle
carries her little ones, Simil. Miserable are these who are not conveyed by
Gods holy spirit.
or as a mother her tender child. Think not that we can step one right step
to heaven, but by the conduct and conuoy of Gods holy Spirit. Miserable are
those who go without his conduction.

To the land of righteousness. Or the right land, I leave the interpretations
of many writing on this place, What is meant by the land of righteousness.
and follow that which is most plain and agreeable to the text, that is the
kingdom of heaven, where true righteousness is to be found, and none can
enter rherein but righteous men. This world is a land of unrighteousness; few or
none living either righteous to God or men no righteousness exercised, but
oppression, deceit, and falsehood. Nota.
This should be our comfort when we are heavily oppressed, that we shall come
to a land, and there be for ever, where no unrighteousness shall be used; but
the righteous Lord shall recompense them, who have done us wrong, and render
double on their head.

Verse. 11. Quicken me, O Lord, for thy names sake, and for thy righteousness
bring my soul out of troub^e, Verse. 12. And for thy mercy stay mine enemies,
and destroy all them that oppress my soul; for I am thy servant.
IN these two last verses he craves that God would quicken him, and bring his
foul out of trouble, and in his mercy scatter his enemies; using a reason,
because (says he) I am thy servant.

First he prefixeth his name Jehovah, affirming and confirming that he seeks
no salvation at any other but out of the fountain of Gods free mercy, and
that he depends only on his liberality, for if he offered any thing which
was not of himself, then the whole cause would not rest in God; and therefore
he desires that for his own names sake he would do it, and help him. He
would show that when he found nothing in himself, he depends only upon Gods
favor and grace. We may here observe that the injuries done to Gods children,
When the godly are injured, most wrong is done to God. Psalm. 42.10
do not so much evil to them, as they bring dishonor to God, for in their
sufferings God has most interest. Then the wicked say, where is their God?
Which should move us to urge God more upon his own credit, then for any worngs
which we sustain. For what do we suffer which we have not deserved; and to men
belongs confusion. What are we but worms? what, but sinful creatures;
though we should die, so many worms die. But when Gods name is disgrased, and
we are made a laughter to the uncircumcised, that should break our hearts.

So we may be assured that albeit God puts not to his hand instantly, A
great comfort for the godly. Use.
yet he will in his own time let his foes feel that they have done him wrong.

Should not this move us to have great regard of Gods name in all our actions
and sufferings, as we pray that his name may be hallowed, Mat. 6.10.
so let us respect nothing so much as it, we should not tear him in pieces
with blasphemies, as many do, neither dishonor it any manner of way, but
sanctify the great name of the Lord our God in our hearts and in our works.

Quicken me, O Lord for thy names sake; David thinks himself dead, both in
body, as a man not living but dead, and in his soul comfortless, unless God
give him life and vigor. Psalm. 103.5
As the Eagle by breaking her bill, renews her age, and the Serpent by
easting her skin renews her life: so we must throw away the old fathers of
our sins, that we may become young again.

Observe that we are ever dead in this world, God who gave us our natural life
must revive us who are fleeping in sin. Mar. 12.27
till God put life in us and quicken us, for all the world is dead without Gods
life. Then we are obliged to God, that we live naturally, who must also
quicken us spirituallie. For he is not the God of the dead but the God of the
living. Surely the natural death is not so much to be feared, as the
spiritual; of which Christ says, Let the dead bury the dead. Luke 9.60.
Both which are now (alike) lying upon most of this age. So we are to sue at
God to quicken and reui^^e us, that we may serve him. For surely we are dead
till the Lord our God quicken us; and this is to us a new resurrection.

And for thy righteousness bring my soul out of trouble. Man may crave with a
good conscience to be brought out of trouble. We brought our selves in trouble
through our sins; Man brings himself in trouble but God must pluck him out
of it.
but there is none who can free us from them, but God; and therefore we may
lawfully cry to him for help.

The first argument is taken from the righteousness of God; for it is
righteous with God to render judgment to your enemies, and to us relaxation;
for God pays them with their own coin. Therefore as God has mercy to his
own, so likewise he has justice by which he will plague his own adversaries.

And for thy mercy slay mine enemies, and destroy all them that oppress my
soul: He claimed to justice for his delivery as in the former verse;
together, as in another Psalm: Of mercy and justice (says he) my song shall be.
Psalm. 101.1.


But he desires God to slay his enemies in his mercy, the Church. As God
showed great mercy and kindness to his Church by the death of Pharaoh,
Senacherib, Herod, and other troublers thereof.

pray for them that persecute us? Mat 5.44.
Luke 23.34
Father forgive them for they know not what they do.

But why would he have them slain, seeing he says in another Psalm, Slay
them not, lest the posterity forget? I answer, they are said to be slain who
rage in malice, when God will make them examples of his judgments, some whom
he will reserve to another time, till their cup be full* and that they (as
Cain) may be tormenters of themselves, and examples to the posterity to come.
Genesis 4.15 Mat. 27.5.
Cain was reserved, and Judas executed, and God just in both. Cains
prolongation was as a sentence given by the judge suspended for a time, giving
time to repent, yet in a most fearful and disperat case that it had bin
better for him to have died, then to live in such a desperate punishment, and
torture of conscience.

For I am thy servant. The last argument which he uses to move God to help
him, is by professing himself to be Gods servant. A prince will think it a
great indignity offered to himself, if his servant be injured. Now Lord, I am
thy servant whom they torment, go Lord, confound them, and deliver me.

This teaches us, that if ever we desire to have any favor from God, He who
would be in favor with God must serve him.
either in maintaining us, or confounding our foes, that we must serve our
Lord, and employ all our endeavors to glorify him. Let us not serve sin and
our lusts, but serve him who is most faithful, and whose promises are yea and
Amen. God grant us that we may serve him in fear and trembling, and end our
days in the magnifiing of his holy name, through Jesus Christ, our Savior.
Amen.

FINIS.

