A SVRREPLICATION TO THE REIOYNDER OF A POPISH ADVERSARY.

Wherein, THE SPIRITVALL SVPREMACY of Christ Jesus in his Church; and the
Civil or Temporal Supremacy of Emperors, Kings, and Princes within their
own Dominions, over Persons Ecclesiastical, and in causes also
Ecclesiastical (as well as Civil and Temporal) be yet further declared
defended and maintained against him.

By CHRISTOPHER SIBTHORP, Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of his Court of
Chiefe-place in IRELAND.

Give therefore unto Caesar the things that be Cesars, and unto God the things
that be Gods. Matthew. 22.21. He that is not with me (says Christ) is against
me: And he that gathers not with me scatters. Luke. 11.23; Imprinted at
DVBLIN by the Society of Stationers. Anno Domini M.DC.XXVII.

To the Reader.
I Did expect (Courteous Reader) that before I had written any word in these
matters, both my first Book, and my second also (which is my Reply) should
first have been answered, and that in such sort as in the Postscript annexed
at the end of the same my Reply is declared: but therein I perceive mine
expectation is deceaved, and that my Adversary without any regard had to that
which I desired, has taken his own course, and put forth a Rejoinder to that
my Reply. In which his Rejoinder I am sorry to see how much he, debating the
point of Supremacy wrongeth not only Me, and his Reader, and the ancient
Christian Emperors and ancient Fathers, but even CHRIST JESUS also himself,
and all Kings and Princes generally in respect of their several rights to them
belonging. Wherefore, I thought it not meet or seemly, for me in this case to
be silent, or to desist, but, (being thus provoked) to proceed, and to make
and publish a Surreplication to that Rejoinder. And this I do the rather, that
so a third book being added to my two former, they all three together might
serve so much the more strongly to persuade him, and the rest of the pretended
Catholics to the truth in this cause for vis unita fortior, and a threefold
cord is not easily broken. If by all or any of my labors, I shall be a mean
or help to work their conformity or reformation I shall be glad of it, for
it is the maine thing I seek after: but if they hate to be reformed and will
in contempt and scorn of all admonitions live and die in their errors (which
were a case most fearful, desperate, and lamentable,) whom can they blame
therein but themselves, and their Popish teachers, by whom they are so much
misled and abused. My Adversary when he took upon him to answer the two
Chapters in my first Book did not prefixe those two Chapters of mine to his
answer: neither when he answered my Reply did he prefixe my Reply to his
Rejoinder: And therefore also, neither did I prefixe his answer to my Reply,
nor his Rejoinder to this my Surreplication. Whereat, neither he, nor any other
for him has cause to be offended, or to take exception, in as much as I do
therein but follow his own president and example, which himself first used,
and wherein he began unto me. The substance, nevertheless, marrow, pith, and
strength of all his Books, and of his reasons and arguments therein contained,
I omit not but mention, and that usually, or rather evermore in his own words,
and do also make answer thereunto. But I am loath any longer to detain you:
and therefore, I here leave you to the reading of that which follows: and
that which follows to your own judicious just, and equal censure:
Beseeching God to guide us all unto his truth, and to keep and establish us
therein continually, after that we once see and know it. Amen.

A SVRREPLICATION TO THE REIOYNDER OF A POPISH ADVERSARY.
To my Adversary.
SIR: As you throughout your Rejoinder addressed your speech to me, in
particular: so do I in like sort here direct my speech unto you in this work
of mine. For although I neither purposed nor promised it, nor others, (I
suppose) expected it, yet that which you have of late published against my
Reply has provoked me once more to set pen to paper in defense of that cause
which you so much strive against in vain In the beginning of that your
Rejoinder, you say, that although we be different in religion, yet you desire
much, that we be united in affection. This speech of yours I dislike not
because it savoureth (as I conceive it) of that humanity and charity which is
to be entertained, and continued amongst us, notwithstanding these differences
in points of religion: as also of some good affection, and inclination in you
unto Gods truth: wherein chiefly it is, that we are to be united. For, as
touching any other kinds of unity, namely that which is in error and
falsehood, I hope you desire it not because it is as S. Augustine rightly
calls it, Error is conspiratio, a conspiracy of error against the truth. The
unity, which is joined with divine verity, is it which S. Paul calls, The
unity of the spirit, and which he would have all Christians to be evermore
very careful to observe, saying, Ephesians. 4.3
Endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: and he says
again thus: Ephesians. 4.15.
Let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow up into him which is
the head, that is, Chirist; This truth if we did all earnestly seek after and
follow, and that in love, and in a charitable manner (as here we are required
to do) all our controversies would the better, and the sooner be ended and
determined which have now so long disquieted many men's minds, and do so much
hinder that which is indeed most requisite, namely, the good and due practice
of true religion in the world. For how can any practice religion aright, before
they know which is the right religion, which they are to practice, and to walk
in? Or how can they know which is the right religion they are to walk in, so
long as they be doubtful of it, by reason of questions, and controversies,
that do perplexe and distract them? The first thing then, which men desirous
to live good and godly lives are to seek after, is, in the midst of all
these controversies to get and obtain within themselves a resolution of a right
religion: which resolution they can never certainly have or attain unto, but
by means of the sacred and Canonical Scriptures, which be the only
infallible rule of all divine truth, as I have showed in my first Book: So
that the purpose and intention of that my first Book, as likewise of the
second, which is my Reply, and of this also, was not, nor is, to have men to
dwell continually and everlastingly in controversies, but clean contrariwise
to have them all ended and determined, and that as speedily as might be, in
every man's conscience by diligent searching of those holy Scriptures, and
finding out thereby what is the undoubted truth in them: that men being once
thus satisfied and resolved of the truth and true religion, might afterward the
better, and the more freely apply themselves to the good and due practice of it
in their affections, words, works, lives and conversations, refusing all other
religions of humane invention whatsoever, and the ways thereof. But now though
the truth be never so manifest and apparent, yet some there be of that froward
and perverse disposition, that they will not yield unto it, but as Iannes and
Iambres withstood Moses, 2. Tim. 3.8.
so do these also resist the truth, being men of corrupt minds and reprobate
concerning the faith, as S. Paul speaks of which sort of men (if I could
help it) I would not have you to be, though you be mine Adversary, yea though
you were mine utter enemy. And therefore, as to the answer which you made to
the two Chapters contained in the first part of my first Book, I replied: so
to your Rejoinder, I have here also thought it good to make a Surreplication;
wherein I must not omit to tell you, that as touching the second Chapter of my
Reply, you have in your Rejoinder made no answer at all unto it, but it
remains wholly and entirely unanswered, and consequently in his full force
and strength against you. And as touching the first Chapter of my Reply,
concerning the Supremacy (upon which point it seems that all your thoughts
were wholly fixed, and employed) although you make some kind of answer in
your Rejoinder unto it, and such as perchance, you and your partakers may
think to be somewhat strong, yet it is indeed of that great debilitie, as
that upon the matter, it is as good as no answer, as will appear by the
sequel: and yet have you moreover left a great part, even of that first
Chapter also unanswered. Beside that you have again in your Reioynder, sundry
things which were before answered in my Reply, and much other idle, futile, and
frivolous stuff, which I suppose you would never have inserted into your book
but fro want of better matter in your cause.

For, first, what an idle exception is this, that you take to my Reply in that
I dedicated it to the Right Honorable the Lord Deputy? Why might I not do
so? Was it not lawful? Or was there any inconvenience, or indecorum in it? You
say that his Lordship has taken the Oath of Supremacy, which makes him a
direct Party, and being a Party, he may not also be a Judge in the same
cause. What? have you so soon forgotten what your self did? For when you made
your answer to the two Chapters of my first Book, you may remember that you
dedicated it, To your dearest countrymen, the Lawyers of Ireland. You then
thought it lawful and seemly enough for you so to dedicate it,
notwithstanding that by their refusal and utter dislike to take the Oath of
Supremacy, they manifestly showed themselves to be Parties. And was this
lawful for you to do, and was not the other as lawful at least, or rather
much more lawful, and seemly (all things considered) for me to do? Howbeit,
you know also, that Books be not always dedicated to men to make them Judges,
but sometimes, and usually to the end, they should be the Patrons thereof,
albeit therein also, they be not disallowed but well allowed to pass their
judgment and censure upon the same. But indeed no reason had you to dislike
of the dedication of that my Book unto his Lordship, in whom your self do
acknowledge that there is sufficiency to understand, wisdom to discern, and
power to command. A like second exception you take for that I call the Papists
of this kingdom Pretended Catholics, which title (say you) they do not
acknowledge. But whether they acknowledge it or no, it must be granted, that
whilst they call themselves Catholics, when re vera they be not so, (as I
have showed and prooved in my first Book) they can be no other but Pretended
Catholics: As likewise he that calls himself an honest man, when revera
he is not so, is at the most, but a pretended honest man. Yet another exception
you take in this, that you say, I call you Canis festinans and Luscus inter
caecos: But you mistake, in both. For, (in that my epistle dedicatorie, of my
Reply) I did not say, that you were Cani^ festinans, but that whilst in your
Answer, you strived to make more have, then good speed, you showed your self
to be, like Canis festinans, caecos edens catibos: which is a proverbiall
speech, tolerable enough in the judgment of such, as be not over captious, and
often and ordinarily used in that sort and sense, and to that purpose that I
used it. Neither did I say definitely, and expressly of you, that you were
Luscus inter caecos, but my words be these: Regnat inter caecos Luscus, which
may be as well spoken of any other, as of you, unless you will needs be the
man, and so take and apply it, (as you do,) to your self, particularly.

2. After these exceptions, you come next to the the three requests, I made to
him, that would take upon him to answer my first book: in the first whereof I
desired, that he would answer it, not by parts, or peasemeals, but wholly and
entirely, from the beginning of it unto the end: The second was, that he would
do it, not superficialie, and sophistically, but substantially, soundly, and
satisfactorily, if he could: Thirdly, I desired him to do it, as in love, and
charity, so also with an affection, only to follow Gods truth, and with all, to
set his name unto it, as I had done to that book of mine. But hereunto, you
take diverse exceptions, though now somewhat lately in your Reioynder. First you
say, that these being conditions, they should have been agreed upon by the
mutual consent of parties: and that if any advantage be given, it should be in
favor of the defendant, as in matter of challenge: for the defendant appoints
the weapon, time, and place; But in this challenge of mine, contrary unto law
and custom, I have (say you) assumed unto my self, being the challenger, the
proposing of such conditions as do disadvantage the defendant. It is true,
that in contracts, and bargains between man and man, the conditions must be
agreed upon by mutual consent of parties, before it be, or can be a perfect
contract, or a perfect bargain, howbeit conditions for all that, not only may
be, but also must be, first propounded before they can be assented unto, or
agreed upon. Again there is as well a subsequent agreement, as a precedent: As
if a man propound, or offer unto you a Lease for years of lands, upon certain
conditions: you may choose, whether you will accept of it, or no, upon those
conditions; but if, though not at the first, yet afterward, you having the
election, do declare your consent, and acceptance of it, by entering upon the
lands, manuring them, taking the profits, is it not reason you should perform
the conditions thereunto annexed? You know how to make the application. And yet
neither was I, when I made that my Book, contracting, or bargaining with you,
or with any other man in particular: For, I then neither did, nor could
possibly know before hand, who was to be the Answerer of it, with whom I might
so contract, nor did I take upon me the person of a Challenger, as you affirm:
For I knew of no duel, that was in the case. And as for my defending of
Protestancie against Popery, it no more proves me to be a challenger, then
your defending of Popery against Protestancie, proves you to be the
challenger. Yea in the conclusion of that my first book Page 417. it
appears, that I was so far from taking upon me the person, or using the
words of a challenger, that clean contrariwise, I used only the peaceable,
and friendly words, of Desiring, and Requesting. For there I desire of him,
whosoever he were, that would take upon him to answer that book of mine,
that he would, in that his answer, be pleased to observe, and perform those
three requests, or three conditions before mentioned, which I there propounded.
All which were reasonable conditions, and such as (if you well consider them)
were not (as you say) disadvantageable, but much advantageable rather to the
cause of the answerer, if he had performed them. But here, by the way, you
tell me, of a very compendious course, how that my whole first book is
answered and confuted: For you say, that he which fails in one point of
faith, fails in all, and that a refutation or disproofe of any one particular
in my book, is a refutation and disproofe of all. And for proof hereof, you
cite S. James cap. 2. Iam. 2.10.
This you also cited, and alleged in your first book. This is a very speedy
course, and brief manner of answering and confuting whole books, and volumes,
if it might be allowed. Howbeit, touching that text of S. James, which you
so much abuse, and touching that your Paradoxe and strange opinion, you have
been before sufficiently answered in my Reply Chap. 2. page 110. 111. 112.
Whereunto you in your Reioynder have said nothing. But, admit your Mayor
proposition were true (which is indeed utterly untrue) yet how do you prove
your Minor? that is to say, how do you prove any one point or position of
mine, contained in that book to be false? Show, or name that one, which you
have disproved, or confuted, if you can: but you are not able to do it. From
henceforth therefore be not so prodigal of your words. But yet further to
derogate from the credit of that my first book, you say, that it is only a
collection out of Protestant authors: and that you can discover the Books,
Chapters, and Pages, of Master Fulke, Master Whitakers, Master Downam, and of
others, whence I have borrowed, verbatim, whatsoever is expressed in it. This
is too overlavish a speech, and more then you will be ever able to prove.
Indeed, as touching the substance of the matter, and doctrine, contained in
that my first book, and in my second, and in this also, I think it no shame,
but contrariwise I think it honor, and reputation, freely to confess, that I
have learned it of those, and of such other learned, and reverend Protestant
Divines: Yea I hold it a part of duty in me, not only ingenuously, but
thankefully also to acknowledge those my teachers: especially considering, that
what they have taught me herein, appears to be certainly, and irrefutably
true. This therefore does rather add credit to the matter and doctrine,
contained in those my books, then derogate, or take any from them. But was
there ever any reader of other men's works, that was not allowed to take
collections out of the^, and to make use of the^ as occasion requires: yea, if
that were an exception sufficient, I might also say, that as touching the
matter, all that you have spoken either in your first answer, or in your
Reioy^der, is likewise but a collection out of Popish authors and that the
Books, Chapters, and Pages of Bellarmine, Stapleton, Suarez, and of others,
might be showed, whence you have borrowed, and taken them all. But to what end,
were this? For the question is not, what I have learned, or collected out of
the one, or you out of the other: but whether of those doctrines, and
religions, which we have severally learned of those our several teachers, be
the truer, and which of them is approved of God, and by his word: namely,
whether Protestancie, or Popery. Here then, as touching the substance of the
matter delivered in all my books, you might have spared your labor: for you
have therein told no news, nor any more, then my self had before, affirmed,
confessed, and acknowledged. But you proceed, and say, that although you for
your part, have answeted but only to two Chapters of that my first book (the
force of which your answer, I have also overthrown in my Reply) that the whole
book is nevertheless answered, and completely finished, and extant any time
these two years and a half past, and yet not divulged, for want of means,
and opportunity for the impression: And, for that cause, do you desire of
me, that I would be a mean to procure it to be Printed, by the Protestant
Press here in Dublin. A very bold, unbeseeming, and strange request, to be
demanded, especially at my hands. But if it be (as you say it is) fully
answered, and completely finished, so long since, why is not printed all this
while? For whereas you pretend want of means, and opportunity for the
impression: It is well known, that the Papists (as sundry other their works
printed, sufficiently declare) do if they list, want neither means nor
opportunity for the impression: And I have told you heretofore, that if your
works, and books be so excellent, and so worthy the printing, as you make
show for, you might got them to be Printed, either at Doway, or at Rhemes, or
at some other place beyond the Seas. And therefore it was altogether idle for
you, to give me this election, either to receive it in a Manuscript, or to
procure the printing of it: for it is needless to receive it in a Manuscript,
when it may be Printed: And for the printing of it, not I, but your self must
procure it, if you will have it done. So that as touching that choice or offer,
you make me, I hold my self free, and not necessarily tied or bound, to do
either the one, or the other. Yea the very name of a Protestant Press (if
there were no more) might have been sufficient to tell you, that it were
utterly unmeete, for Popish works to come into it, especially those that be
purposely, and directly made, and contrived, against such clear, high, and
important points, as be also by law established. Now then to come to my second
request: I trust, you likewise find nothing in it, unreasonable: for I therein
desired no more of the answerer, but to answer, not superficially, or
sophistically, but substantially, soundly, and satisfactorily, if he could: so
that if he could not make such an answer, he might have said so, and so have
been excused. But you are loath to disable your self, and therefore as
touching the answer you made to the two Chapters of that my first book, you
say, that I am not to judge, whether it be substantial, sound, and
satisfactory, but that the equal, and indifferent Reader, is to judge of it:
which I am well contented, he should do, by conferring my Reply, with that
your ananswer. And therefore I proceed to my third request: which consists
of two parts: (for I make not four requests, or four conditions, as you
surmise:) The first part of that my third request, was this, that I would have
him, whosoever was to be the answerer, to answer in love, and charity, and
with an affection only to follow Gods truth. Thus far I am sure, you cannot
deny it to be a reasonable request. And as touching the other part of it,
whereby I desired him that would answer, to put his name to his answer, as I
had done to that book of mine: although this be it, you chiefly except
against: yet even this part of it also, was not unreasonable: and therefore did
I justly reprove you, for that in stead of your right name, you gave your self
the wrong, false, and counterfeite name of John at Style. But yet, in your
Reioy^der, you, herein, seek to excuse and defend your self, by the example
of Abram, who coming into Pharaoh^ Court in Egypt, Genesis 12.11.12.13. etc.
called Sarai his wife, by the name of his Sister: and you add further, and
say, that Matthew Sutcliffe, a Protestant writer, did put for his name unto his
work. O.E.

First concerning Abram, though he were an holy man, yet he had his faults
and imperfections, amongst which this is reckoned for one, which you here
allege: And can then that which was a fault in him, make yours to be no
fault? But yet in all that, he neither changed his name, nor his wifes name,
into a false, and counterfeite name, as you did. For he still called himself
Abram, and his wife Sarai, without any alteration, or change of those their
proper names. And as touching Doctor Sutcliffe, the reason why he put for his
name those two letters O. E. was, because the man, whom he answered, had
likewise for his name, subscribed certain letters: but, the case between you
and me is not like. For I subscribed my name truly, and as it was, and
therefore so should you also have done. Howbeit, at the first, you excused your
self herein, by reason of the Statute of 2. Eliz. which does (say you, in your
first answer) bind men's tongues, and pens within this kingdom, with the
cord of a Praemunire, from oppugning the Supremacy, either by word or writing.
Upon which answer of yours, it is true, I did, and who could otherwise suppose,
but that you then thought (whatsoever you say now) that the penalty for that
your first offense against that Statute, in oppugning the Kings Supremacy, was
a Praemunire: For to what end else do you so specially mention, that to be the
penalty, if you had not thought so? I did not therefore wrong you (as you now
allege in your Reioynder) when I taxed you being a Lawyer, See the Statute it
self, of 2. Eliz. cap. 1 made in Ireland.
with ignorance in your own profession, concerning that Statute. For that
Statute does not (as you then supposed) for any man's first offense, inflict the
penalty of a Praemunire, but (as I then likewise told you) the loss of goods
and chattels: after once conviction and attainder, it is indeed for the second
offense a Praemunire: and after twice conviction, and attainder, it is for the
third offense, high treason. Did you then account it, a wrong done unto you,
that I supposed this to be your first offense, against that statute? Or would
you have had me to think (which was more then I knew at that time and more then
yet I know) that you had bin once before convicted and attainted of that
offense, and that this was your second offense in that kind? For, unless this
were thus your second offense, you needed not to have feared, or mentioned a
Praemunire, to have been your penalty in the case: you might as well, and as
wisely have named, and mentioned the penalty, to have been high treason, in
as much as for the third offense, that Statute also makes it to be high
treason, as well as it makes it, for the second offense, to be a Praemunire.
But I conceived (as I think any man else, not knowing any thing to the
contrary, would have conceived) that it was not any your second offense, nor
third offense, that you then, and there meant, or had any reason, or purpose to
speak of, but your first offense, the penalty of which first offense, is, by
that Statute, neither Praemunire nor high treason (as I said before) and
consequently (if you would deal ingenuously) you must confess, that you then
mistook, and were deceived in opinion, whilst you thought the penalty for
that your first offense to be a Praemunire, by that Statute. But then you say,
that you will not be so saucy, as to tax me with ignorance in my
profession, concerning the same Statute, and yet you see not (say you) how the
subscribing of your name unto the answer, could have been any legal plea, to
have saved you from penalty, if you had been indicted upon that Statute:
Neither do I see, how it could, although you would feign wrest my words from
their true sense, unto that construction. For, whereas you have said, that my
requiring of the Answerer, to put his name unto the Answer, was, in effect,
as much, as to debar any man from answering unto it? I thereunto replied, that
he that in answering, is required to put his name to his answer, is so far
from being debarred from answering, that clean contrariwise, he is thereby
(that is, by such requiring of him to answer in that sort) permitted to answer
(if he please) so as he put his name thereunto. I did not say (as you seem
purposely to misconstrue and mistake) that by answering in that sort, viz. with
his name subscribed to his answer, he was to be freed from all manner of
penalty contained in that Statute of 2. Eliz. I was never so absurd, or
senseless to say or think it. Yea you might have observed, that I there
showed and expressly affirmed the clean contrary, namely, that the penalty
even for the first offense against that Statute (whether with his name
subscribed, or not subscribed, or howsoever,) was loss of goods, and chattels.
And therefore whether this were ignorance of that point of the Statute in me,
or gross, perverse, and malicious cavilling, and quarrelling in you, let the
equal Reader judge. But yet in your Reioynder, you further say: that you
cannot imagine why I should so much covet the answerers right name, unless it
be by advantage of the Statute in persecuting him, to confine him into the
Castle, there to argue with him, as the Jailer does with his prisoner. I know
no reason you have thus to charge me, with so much coveting of the Authors, or
Answerers name. For though it be lawful for me so to do, yet have I not
been much inquisitive after it: much less reason have you to charge me, in
your imaginations, with persecuting him, or seeking to confine him as a
prisoner within the Castle, which I never did: though I confess he deserves
it, and a far greater punishment then that: because, contrary to the laws,
and statutes of the Kingdom, which himself professes, being (as he says he
is) a Lawyer; and contrary to that duty, which as a Subject he owes to our
most noble, most gracious, religious, and most worthy Sovereign Lord King
CHARLES, and contrary to that fealty also, or fidelity, which (professing
himself to be a Christian) he likewise owes unto CHRIST JESUS, the only
spiritual King Monarch, and head of the whole Church Militant, as well as of
the triumphant, he does, and dares thus audaciously to offend. Neither is
prosecuting, or punishing of such bold, and notorious offenders to be called
(as you after the Romanisticall manner untruly call it) Persecuting. For though
Prosecution does well befit delinquents, and offenders, yet Persecution is a
word properly, and usually applied to the Martyrs of Christ, and is not
attributed to any professors of Antichrist, or Antichristian doctrine, unless
it be Catacrestically, and abusively. Howbeit I deal not with you by
authority, or as a Judge, or Iusticer, but do only debate, dispute, and
reason the matter with you, seeking, and endeavoring first by this means, (if
I can,) to reduce, and reclayme you, and the like unto you, from those your
grand errors, unto a most certain, and evident truth. But if yet still you
urge the Statute of 2. Eliz. made in this kingdom, which makes the penalty,
even for the first offense, to be, although not a Praemunire, yet loss of goods
and chattels, and that therefore in respect of this loss and damage it was not
a thing reasonable for me, to demand an answer with the Answerers name,
thereunto subscribed: Thereunto I then further say: First, that I know no
reason why you, or any man else, should make any answer, or any Books, or
writings at all, against the Kings Supremacy, which you ought in all good
duty to uphold, and defend. Secondly, I demanded not any answer at all to be
made either by you, or any other; but, if any did, or would answer, then I
desired, that he would answer in that sort, viz. with his name subscribed: so
that he might have chosen, whether he would have answered, yea, or no: and by
not answering, he might have kept, and freed himself from penalty of the
Statute: but if he would needs answer, then he was to do it, at his own
peril, if any peril did ensue. And yet I might also further tell you, that
such a one possibly might have been the Answerer, as needed not to fear that
peril, or penalty. For be there not diverse Scholars, in Colleges, and
Universities, and elsewhere, that live only upon other men's exhibition, and
beneficence, and have no manner of goods, or chattels, lands or tenements, of
their own? Might not such an one have answered, and put his name to his
Answer, without any fear of that penalty. Again, might not some
forrein-borne Papist, living out of the Kings Dominions, and that were no
Subject to the King, having well, and perfectly learned the English tongue,
have been the Answerer, and put his name likewise to his Answer, without any
fear of that danger. Or, (which was most likely,) might not some English m^n,
or some Irish man, living and abiding perpetually at Rhemes, Rome, Doway, or
some other place beyond the Seas, have been the Answerer? And would you then
have thought it a thing unreasonable for such a one to have been demanded to
put, and subscribe his name to his Answer? For these men living continually
beyond Sea out of the Kings Dominions, fear not, (as we see by experience,)
nor think, so long, as they be so far distant, that they need to fear the
penalty, or danger of any Law, or Statute amongst us, to be executed upon
them. Yea, what if it were your self, that were the Answerer of it, (as you
took upon you to be the Answerer of two Chapters in it) had it been
unreasonable to have demanded of you, to put your name to the Answer, in
respect of any fear of penalty, or danger, upon that Statute, or of any other
Statute, whatsoever? For what penalty or danger upon any Statute, should you
fear, who in your first Answer, in the Epistle to your Contrymen, write so
confidently in this your supposed Catholic cause, as if you feared no manner
of danger at all, but would willingly undergo all disasters in the world for
attestation and defense of it? But I am now glad to see, that you have some
fear in you: For, indeed, fear in every man, and not forwardness or
boldness in any, best becomes yours so bad a cause. But yet further, what
reason have you now, in your Reioynder, to except against any of these three
conditions, or three requests, or against any part of any of them, as
unreasonable, which in your first Answer, you took no exception against? Yea
which you then seemed well to approve and allow well of, saying, concerning the
same my whole first Book, that, It should shortly be answered in my own
strain of Divinity with the three conditions required by me. Yea, lastly if
you would needs be, (as you were) the Answerer to a part of that my first
Book, (namely, to two Chapters therein,) and thought it not fit to put your
right and true name unto it: yet, should you not, in stead thereof, have given
your self, a wrong, false, and counterfeyte name, (which is the thing, I
reproved in you:) For, as I said formerly in my Reply, so I say again, that it
had been much better for you, to have put no name at all to that your Answer,
then a false, wrong, and counterfeyte name, as you did.

3. From thence, you go on, and renew a former taxation of yours, namely, for
that being a Lawyer by profession. I nevertheless meddle with these matters of
Divinity, and concerning religion: But, concerning this, I told you before,
that I had made a sufficient Apology for these my doings, in that my first
Book, whereto, as yet I see no Answer made: and I added further in my second
Book, namely, my Reply that even you your self did justify me therein, in
as much, as you, being likewise a Lawyer, (as you then affirmed, and yet still
affirm your self to be,) did nevertheless meddle with these matters of
Divinity, and concerning religion, as well, as I. Neither is it any excuse, or
defense for you to say, (as you do,) that I began to commit this fault, and
that you do but follow me therein: For, if you saw it to be a fault in me,
you should rather have eschewed it, then committed it, upon any man's example
whatsoever. He that knows an Act to be a sin, and reproves, and condemns
another man for it, and yet will himself commit it, is not his sin and
fault, Romans 2.1.
so much the greater? Therefore art thou inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou
art, (says S. Paul,) that condemnest another: for in that thou condemnest
another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that condemnest, do the same
things. Yea, you say further, that in your Answer formerly made, you signified
this to be a fault, as well in your self, as in me. But if you then thought
so, in very deed, why did you commit it? Or why do you still commit, and
continue it? For so your Reioynder declares: does not this then more and more
aggravate your offense? And does it not declare you to be a man of little
conscience, that dare thus wittingly and willingly, to sin against your own
conscience, and to persist also in it? For, if our heart condemn us, 1. Ioh.
3.20.
(says S. John,) God is greater then our heart, and knows all things. It is
high time therefore for you, to give over writing in these matters of Religion,
if it be against your conscience, and that you verily think it to be unlawful
for you, so to do. But, as for me, I am not of that mind, neither have you
showed, nor can you show, any sufficient or good reason, to dissuade me. For,
whereas you suppose it to be unlawful, or unmeete for Lawyers, or other
laymen, to meddle with the Scriptures; and matters concerning Religion, as
being a thing out of their element, calling, and profession: First, to forbid
or deny lay people, the meddling with the Scriptures and with Religion, is
known to be an old Popish policy, and a most wicked, and damnable device: by
means whereof, men's eyes, being in times past thus blinded, and as it were put
out, it came to pass, that both Pope, and popery, in those days so mightily
prevayled, as they did, in the world, and yet still prevayle, amongst too too
many. For what is it else but ignorance of Gods word, and will in the people
that keeps them so fast fettered and chayned both to Pope and popery.
Secondly the untruth of this irreligious, and Antichristian opinion, is
formerly, and at large discovered, and manifested in my first Book, which I
see not yet answered: And yet thirdly, you must further know, (if already you
know it not) that a Lawyer, or any other layman, has a double calling, or a
double profession: one worldly, which concerns the things of this life: the
other is his Christian calling, which concerns, and respects things
belonging to a far better life, namely to a life everlasting. This Christian
calling, Ephesians. 4.1.
S. Paul proves, desiring men, to walk worthy of that calling, whereunto they
are called. Again, he prays for some, that God would make them worthy of
this calling S. Peter likewise speaks thus: 2. These. 1.11
Ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a people set
at liberty, that ye should show forth the virtues of him, 1. Pet. 2.9.
that has called you, out of darkness, into his mervailous light. And
sundry other Texts of holy Scripture there be to prove, that there is as well a
Divine, and Christian calling and profession, as there is a worldly, and
terrestrial. For what? Have not men souls to look to, as well as bodies? Or,
are men to be no more but natural, and mere men? 1. Pet. 1.23.
Are they not also to become Christian men, and to be regenerated, as well as
generated? And does not S. Peter tell us, that men are regenerated, or borne a
new, not by corruptible, but by incorruptible seed, even by the word of God,
who lives, and endures for ever. 1. Pet. 2.2.
And does he not further advise some, as newborn babes, to desire the sincere
milk of the word, that they may grow thereby. 1 Cor 3 1 2.
For, men, after that they be once begotten and borne a new, by Gods word,
Hebr. 5.12.13.14.
and the power of his spirit working therewithal, are first Babes in Christ,
and afterward by degrees, they grow to be strong men, and able to digest
strong meats, until they come, at last, to be a perfect man, as S. Paul
speaks. Yea, Ioh. 6.27.
does not Christ himself bid men to Labor not for the meat which perishes,
but for that meat which endures unto life everlasting? Luke 10.39 40.41.42.
And did he not also further tell Martha, that she was troubled about many
things, but this was the unum necessarium, the one thing that was necessary,
which Mary had chosen, namely the hearing of his word? Seeing then that Gods
word, (which is now long sithence committed to writing, and is in the sacred,
and Canonical Scriptures to be found, and where all truth, concerning points
of Divinity, and Religion is to be had,) is so necessary, as that it is the
food, meat, and nourishment of Christians, to life everlasting: How can it be
rightly, and truly said, that when they be thus within their aliment, they be
out of their element? For is not the life of the soul, to be preserved, and
maintained as well, or rather much more heedefully, then the life of the body?
Or will any say, that the fish is out of his element, when he swimmeth in the
water, where he lives, and most delights? Yea as the fish removed out of his
proper element, dies within a while after: and as the body that is destitute
of corporal food to sustain it, must needs decay, and die. So the soul
that has not this spiritual food of Gods word, to cherish, and maintain it
in a spiritual life, must likewise needs consume, decay, and pine away,
until it come in the end, to utter ruin. You see then, that a true Christian,
John. 17.16
(Who though he be in the world, yet is not of the world, but has his
affection set upon things that are above, and not on things which are on
earth,) Col. 3.1.2. Phil. 3.20
is so far from being out of his element, as that, contrariwise, he is
within his right, and true element, in respect of his soul, and the things
belonging to a better world, and keeps himself within the compass, and
bounds of that his divine, and Christian calling, so long, as he humbly and
reverently, hears, reads, searches the word of God, delights in it,
museth and meditateth upon it, talks of it, and thereout learneth truths and
true religion, and propounds them also unto others, for their benefit and
instruction, as well as of himself. Yea, all duties of a Christian, a Lawyer,
or other layman, may and ought to do, and perform, as he is able, and as
occasion requires: so that he do them discreetely, and with due respect to
all manner of persons, and so long as withal, he intrudeth not into those
duties, that be proper, and peculiar to the office, and function of the
Ecclesiastical Ministers. As for that your other reason, whereby you would
dissuade me, because these are points of great difficulty, and surpass a
Lawyers ability, (as you speak:) although I arrogate nothing to my self, yet
why should you say, that it surpasses a Lawyers ability, to deal in these
things, when as you your self, being a Lawyer, do nevertheless intermedle in
them? Or why should it surpass or exceed a Lawyers talent, or a Lawyers
ability, in me, more then in you? Indeed, if a man be nothing else, but a
mere Lawyer, in respect of that his mere worldly calling, he is not fit to
deal in matters concerning God, and his religion; But if he be a Christian
Lawyer, exercised in the Book of God, and well grounded in the points of his
faith and religion, (as all Lawyers, and other laymen ought to be,) then in
respect of that his divine and Christian calling, he may meddle with points of
Divinity and Christianity, Eatenus, Quatenus, so far forth as is before
showed, and as is in my first Book more at large declared. And yet there is
also a more special reason, why I should be permitted to intermeddle herein,
because being not only a Lawyer, but a Judge also in the Commonweal, it well
becomes me, and is my duty, (as I conceive it,) for that reason, (so much
as in me lies,) to seek to have the Laws, and Statutes of the Realm,
especially in these most high, and most important points, as well as in other,
that be inferior points unto them, to be observed of all his Majesty's
Subjectes within this kingdom. Neither are there any such great doubts, or
difficulties, in these points, as you would persuade: yea, they be very
clear, plain, open, and evident points, and such as any man, though but of
mean understanding, may easily, and readily conceive, and apprehend. For,
first, the very name of a Subject, (if there were no more) may serve to teach
any man, that the King, whose Subject he is, has of due right a Regal, and
Temporal Supremacy, not only over him, but over all the rest of his Subjects
within his own Dominions: and secondly the very name of a Christian, may
serve to teach a man, to believe, and to profess, no other religion, but that
which Christ himself taught, either by himself, or by his Apostles, as also,
to acknowledge no other to be the spiritual King, head, and Monarch, of the
whole Christian Church, but the same CHRIST JESUS only.

4. Now then, you are come, at last, to the matter it self. Where first of all
you affirm, and confess two Supremacies: the one spiritual, the other
temporal. The spiritual Supremacy, or spiritual Monarchy, (which indeed,
rightly, Job. 18.36.57. 1 Cor. 15.25 Ephesians. 1.20.21.22.23.
and properly belongs unto CHRIST JESUS,) you attribute unto the Pope of
Rome. But, by what right? Namely, as being his Deputy; Vicar, or Attorney, (as
you call him.) But can you show any letter of Attorney, or any Letters Patents,
Commission, or Warrant from him, or from his word, to prove the same? You have
sought long, but could never yet find or show, any such warrant, although you
have pretended diverse, which prove no such matter. If then it be high treason,
in a subject, to take upon him, to be a Viceroy, or Lord-Deputie in a
terrestrial kingdom, without a warrant, or Commission from his King: Is, it
not likewise, as grand and as high a treason, in the Bishop of Rome to take
upon him, to be Viceroy, or Deputy unto Christ, in his spiritual kingdom,
without any warrant, or commission from him? But as in the point of the
spiritual supremacy, he thus intolerably wrongeth Christ Jesus himself, his
Crown, and dignity: so does he also intolerable wrong to Emperors, Kings,
and Princes, and to their Crowns, and dignities, in respect of their Civil,
and Temporal supremacy, and authority, rightly, and aunciently belonging to
them, over Persons Ecclesiastical, and in causes also Ecclesiastical, within
their several Dominions. And this to men that be not extremely wilful,
perverse, and froward, I have very sufficiently, and abundantly proved, in my
first, and second Books; whereunto, you neither in your first Answer, nor yet
in your second, (which is your Rejoinder,) have alleged any thing that is of
force, or weight sufficient to refell or confute any one Argument I brought, in
that behalf. And herein I refuse not the judgment, of any equal, and
judicious person whosoever. Howbeit, in that your Reioynder, to prove the Popes
supremacy, you cite one Text of Scripture, namely, Deuteronomy. 17. The words
whereof, because you do not fully set them down, I will here recite, that the
Reader may the better perceive, how well, or ill, they fit your purpose:
Deuteronomy. 17.8.9 10 11.12.13.
the words be these. If there arise a matter to hard for thee, in judgment,
between blood, and blood between plea, and plea, and between stroke, and
stroke, being matter of controversy within thy Gates, then shall thou arise
and get unto the place, which the Lord thy God shall choose. And thou shall
come unto the Priests, Levites, and unto the Judge, that shall be in those
days, and enquire, and they shall show thee the sentence of judgment, and
thou shall do according to the sentence, which they of that place, (which the
Lord shall choose) shall show thee: according to the sentence of the Law, which
they shall teach thee, thou shall do: Thou shall not decline from the sentence
which they shall show thee, to the right hand, nor to the left. And the man
that will do presumptuously, and will not bearken unto the Priest, that
stands to minister there, before the Lord thy God, or unto the Judge, even
that man shall die: and thou shall put away the evil from Israel, and the
people shall hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously. Here, for the
honor of the Priest, you say, that he is in this case to be obeyed, upon
penalty of death: and why do you not say as much for the honor of the Judge,
that is, of the civil Magistrate? For the words of the Text do show, that
disobedience as well to the one, as to the other, was punishable with death. But
you will say peradventure as the Jesuits did, that the Latin translation,
called S. Ieromes, was, in times past, Ex decreto Iudicis morietur home ille,
By the decree of the Judge, shall that man die, that obeys not the Priest. In
his Book against the Jesuits, part. 3. page 33. 34 35.
To whom that reverend, and learned Bishop Doctor Bilson, answers, that it
was a corrupt translation, and that the very same translation, not long
sithence, was not, Ex decreto Iudicis, but, and decreto Iudicis: he that
obeys not the commandment of the Priest, and the decree of the Judge, that
man shall die. This was, (says he,) the text of the Bible, which you call S.
Ieromes, Nich. de Ly^ in Deuteronomy. 17.
not much more then two hundred years since, when Nicholaus de Lyra, and your
ordinary Gloss, did comment upon it: and so they read to this day, as also
many written coppies, which I have seen, (says he.) And therefore it is no
small blemish to the Papists, that, in former times, they had also thus
corrupted, even that which they call S. Ieromes translation. He further
shows, that the original Hebrew, and the Greek translation of the
Septuagints, be also directly against that their then corrupted translation,
in this point. And so did S. Cyprian also repeat this Text. Lib. 1. epist.
3.8.1^. libr. 3. epist. 4 epist. 9
Et homo quicunque fecerit in superbia, ut non exaudiat sacerdotem, aut
Iudicem, quicunque fuerit in diebus illis, morietur homo ille: Et omnis
populus, tum audierit timebit. And the man whosoever shall in pride, not hear
the Priest, or the Judge, which shall be in those days, that man shall die,
and the people, when they shall hear of it, shall fear. First then,
obedience, is by the words of this text, commanded, as well toward the Judge,
that is to say, the civil Magistrate, as toward the Priest. For you see, the
Priest, and the Judge, therein, to be not all one, but directly distinguished,
yea, by Judges, as by the chief rulers, was Israel sometimes governed, and
that for sundry years, until kings were appointed, as the Book of Judges,
it self declares. And when Kings were appointed, both Priests, and Judges
were subject to the Kings, as the Books of Samuel, of the Kings, and of the
Chronicles, do show: And for an evident proof hereof, you may take the
example, of that godly, and religious King, Iehoshaphat, amongst the rest. For
he not only set Judges in the land, throughout all the fenced Cities of
Judah, City by City, but he said likewise to those Judges. Take heed what
ye do, 2. Chron. 19. v. 5, 6.7.8 9.10.11.
for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment:
wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed, and do it:
For there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor
taking of gifts. Moreover, in Jerusalem, did Iehoshaphat set of the Levites,
and of the Priests, and of the chief of the Fathers of Israel, for the
judgment of the Lord, and for controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem:
and he charged them, sayng: Thus shall you do in the fear of the Lord,
faithfully, and with a perfect heart. And what cause soever shall come unto
you, of your brethren, that dwell in the Cities, between blood and blood,
between Law and Commandment, Statutes and Judgments, ye shall warn them,
that they trespass not against the Lord, and so wrath come upon you, and upon
your brethren: this do, and ye shall not trespass. And, behold, Amariah, the
Priest, shall be the chief over you, in all matters of the Lord: and Zebadiah,
the son of Ishmael, a ruler of the house of Judah, for all the Kings matters:
and the Levites shall be Officers before you. Deal courageously, and the Lord
shall be with the good. Where you see, that in the time of the Kings, the
Judges, and the Priests also, were subject to the King, and at his ordering,
and appointment: For all these, both Judges, Priests, and Levites, did King
Iehosaphat thus constitute, and appoint. But now, secondly, observe, that both
the Priest, and the Judge, Deuteronomy. 17.11
mentioned in this Text of Deuteronomy. 17. were to Judge, and give sentence, not as
they listed themselves, but according to the Law; which God himself had given
in those cases. So that the sentence, Mal 2.7.8.9 Isa. 6.10.11 12, Ier. 23
11.12.13. Esai. 56.10.11. Ier. 6.13.14 Ezec. 22.25.26. Micah. 3.5. 6 7. Exodus
32.1. and 23.4.5.6.7.8. etc. Iere. 26.7.8. Act. 23.1.2 3. Act. 4.18. Act. 5.40.
not only of the inferior Priests, but even of the chief or High Priest
himself, was not always certainly true, and evermore infallible, (as you say
it, was,) unless it were directed, and done, according to that law. For
otherwise they might, and did err in their judgments. Yea many complaints
were in the old Testament, against them, for their errors, and going astray
from Gods law: insomuch, that although they said, (as the Papists likewise do
of their Priest of Rome,) Non peribit lex a Sacerdote, That the law shall not
perish from the Priest, (Ierem. 18.18.) yet God himself said otherwise,
namely, that, Lex peribit a Sacerdote, The law shall perish from the priest,
Ezech. 7.26. And for further proof hereof, remember that Aaron was the high
Priest, and yet that he with the rest of the Priests, and people, erred when
they made the golden Calfe. Again, were they not the Priests, and Prophets,
that gave sentence of death against Jeremy, Gods true Prophet? was that
therefore a just sentence, which was so given against him? Was it not also in a
Council, that Ananias the high Priest, commanded men that stood by, to smite
S. Paul on the mouth? was it therefore well done, and justifiable? Was not,
(moreover,) the high Priest present in that Council, which commanded the
Apostles to teach no more in the name of JESUS? was that therefore a good
commandment? or a good and allowable decree, that was thus made against them?
Yea, was not the high Priest present in that Council, wherein CHRIST himself
was condemned? Math. 26.59 62.63.65.66.
And did not he, in that Council, say expressly of Christ, that he had
spoken blasphemy? It is then very apparent, that not only the inferior
Priests, but even the high Priest also, though joined, and assembled with
others in a Council, might nevertheless possibly err, and did err
sometimes, in his sentence, and giving of judgment. And therefore, so also may
the Pope of Rome err, not only as he is singly considered by himself, but
even though he be joined with others in a Council, admitting, that he were
the high Priest, Heb. 9.11. Hebr. 5.5. Heb. 4.14. Heb. 7.26. 1. Pet. 5.1.2 3.4.
Hebr. 13.20.
in the Christian Church, which he is not, as I have showed in my Reply, page
10.11. whereto you have made no Answer in your Reioynder. For the sacred
Scriptures, acknowledge no other high Priest, in the Christian Church, but
CHRIST JESUS only, nor any other to be the chief Shepherd, or Supreme
Pastor, over all the several Pastors, of all the several flocks in the
world, but only CHRIST JESUS. But yet here, thirdly, observe, that this Text
of Deuteronomy. 17. (which you cite,) concerns only the Jewish policy, or
Commonwealth of the Jews, as being a part of the Judicial law, proper to
that nation, and which is now abrogated, and abolished. For to determine those
harder, and difficulter questions, and litigious cases, concerning blood, and
the other things there mentioned, the party grieved is required to resort to
the Leviticall Priests, Deu 17.8.9
(of which sort there be none at this day amongst Christians:) and again, To
the place, which the Lord their God should choose, which was in aftertimes,
Jerusalem, where the Temple was builded, and where Iehosaphat also, (according
to this law,) erected, and constituted a Synedrion, or Council, consisting of
Levites, Priests, and of the chief of the Fathers of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 19.8.9.
But none is bound at this day, to go to Jerusalem, to have his litigious and
doubtful cases, to be decided and determined, by any Leviticall Priest, or
other Judges there: Neither is Rome, that Jerusalem: nor is the Pope of Rome,
or his Priests, any of those Priests, descended of the Tribe of Levi. And
therefore also, will not this text of Deuteronomy. 17. any way serve your turn, nor
help to maintain your Popes so long vainly fancied Supremacy.

5. But I proceed, prosecuting matters, not confusedly, as you do, but for
the most part, in that sort, and order, as they be laid down in my Reply,
that so the Reader also may the better and the more easily perceive, both what
you have Answered in this your Reioynder, and what, and how much you have left
unanswered, Chrysostom. hom 4. de verb. Esa vid. Dom.
as also how good, or bad your Answers be. In my Reply therefore, page 1. I
said, that S. Chrysostom, (distinguishing those two offices, (viz.) the
Regal, and Sacerdotall,) did say thus: Ille cogit, hic exhortatur: ille habet
arma sensibilia, hic arma spiritualia: The King compels, the Priest
exhorts: the King has sensible weapons, the Priest has spiritual weapons.
Hereunto you Answer, that S. Chrysostom meant only, that the King with his
sensible weapons, (of imprisonment, banishment, pecuniarie mulcts, temporal
death, and other penalties,) should force, (when other means failed,) the
rebellious children of the Church, to perform their duty unto their Prince,
and Prelate and not, that the Prince has any power over the Pastor, unto whom,
(say you,) by the ordinance of God, he is subjected; and thus you make the
King, to have power only over such, as you here call the children of the
Church, but not over Bishops, Pastors, and other Ecclesiastical Ministers: and
of this opinion you would draw S. Chrysostom to be, against his own good
will, and liking. But although by his words precedent, and subsequent, (which
you so much speak of.) it appears that Kings and Princes are to be subject,
to Bishops and Pastors, in respect of the due administration of those their
sacred offices, functions, and ministeries, committed to them from God: yet in
respect of themselves, and of their own Persons, he held them very clearly,
to be not superior, but subject, to Kings, and Princes. Romans 13.1. Chrysostom. ho.
23. in epistol. ad Romans
For whereas S. Paul speaks thus: Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers: The same S. Chrysostom says, (which I mervaile you have so soon
forgotten,) that, omnibus ista praecipiuntur, Sacerdotibus quo que ac Monachis,
and non solum secularibus. These things be commanded to all, even to Priests
also, and to Monckes, and not to lay, or secular men only. Yea he says
further, in the same place, that though you be an Apostle, though an
Evangelist, though a Prophet, or whatsoever you be, you must be subject to
these higher powers. Remember again, Chrysostom. ad Populu^. Antioch homil. 2.
that speaking of the Emperor, he says, that Non habet parem ullum super
terram, He has no Peer, nor equal upon earth. Yea, he says of him, that
he was, Caput and summit as omnium super terras hominum, The head, and one
that had the supremacy over all men upon earth. Yea, S. Chrysostom himself,
did yet further, really, and actually declare this subjection, to these higher
powers, even in his own person: For did not the Emperor exile and banish him?
Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 15. graec, and cap. 14. Latin. Theodor. lib. 2 cap.
2.4.13 Theodor. lib. 2 cap. 2.4 13.
And did not he, though Archbishop of Constantinople, humbly submit himself
thereunto, and yield obedience? Was not likewise Liberius, though a Bishop of
Rome, exiled, and banished by the Emperor, and did not he also quietly submit
himself unto it, as being done by the Emperors commandment, and authority?
And was not also Atbanasius, banished by the Emperors authority, and did not
he likewise patiently, and obediently undergo it? You see then, that not only
lay people, and such as you call the children of the Church, but even those
also that were Fathers in the same, as namely Bishops, and Pastors,
Archbishops, and even Bishops of Rome themselves, were, in those former, and
ancient times, Pelag. Epist. 16. Council. edit. Bin. tom. 2. page 633.
subject to these higher powers, (viz.) to Emperors, Kings, and Princes:
Quibus nos etiam subditos esse sanctae Scripturae praecipiunt: To whom, (says
also Pelagius another Bishop of Rome) the holy Scriptures command, even us
that be Bishops and the Bishops of Rome to be subject. So that those Bishops,
in those days, performed this subjection and obedience, unto them, as being
moved thereunto, out of duty, and good conscience, and because God, in his
holy Scriptures, had so commanded. But these two points, namely, that,
Emperors, Kings, and Princes be subject to that authority, message, and
ministry, which God has committed to Bishops, and Pastors: And, that Bishops
again, and Pastors, and all Ministers Ecclesiastical, be, nevertheless,
subject to Emperors, Kings, and Princes, in respect of their own persons, is
largely declared, both in my first Book, and in my Reply also as well as here.
As for those precedent, and subsequent words in S. Chrysostom, (which you so
often speak of,) even you as well as I, might very well have omitted them, as
being needless to be mentioned, because the matter, and substance of them, was
before granted, and confessed by me, in my former Books, as it is likewise
here again in this, and yet you never the nearer of your purpose. And
therefore you had no cause to complain of the omission of the^ by me, when the
recital of them by you, will do you no more good, nor prove, or infer any
more matter in your behalf, then that which was formerly by me confessed, and
granted unto you: But least reason of all, had you to insinuate, as though by
omission of those precedent, and subsequent words, I had a meaning to delude
my Reader, by concealing the truth: For you see, that I had no such purpose, or
meaning, to conceal that truth, which my self had formerly delivered, and
granted, and which I still confess with S. Chrysostom, touching the
subjection of Princes to Gods authority, committed to his Ministers: But it is
your self in very deed, which abuse, and delude your Reader, in this case,
by concealing truth. For although you tell some truth, you tell not the whole
truth, as you ought, but conceal a part of it, or, (which is worse,) you deny
a part of it, inasmuch as you affirm, the subjection of Emperors, Kings, and
Princes to that authority, which God has committed to his Bishops, and
Pastors. But the other part of truth, concerning the subjection, which Bishops,
Pastors, and all Ecclesiastical Ministers, (as well as lay people,) owe and are
to perform to Emperors, Kings, and Princes, in respect of their own persons,
this you conceal, and do not affirm: Yea, you do directly deny it,
although S. Chrysostom, (as here is manifest) does directly affirm it.
Henceforth therefore wrong not S Chrysostom in this point as you do, nor
delude your Reader any longer with these your false Comments and untrue
surmises.

6. But in my Reply page 2. I further cited the text of 1. Tim. 2.1.2. where S.
Paul exhorts Christians, to pray chiefly, and especial for Kings, and all
that are in authority, that, under them, We may lead a quiet, and peaceable
life, (...), (which you say, I English thus,) in all godliness, and honesty.
But you are deceived: for, although I put these words so together in the
English, yet I make them not all, to be the English of those Greek words.
Every mean Grecian knows, that the English of those Greek words, (...),
is no more, but in all godliness: but I added the other words, (and
honesty,) not as being signified by those former Greek words, but as being
other words, annexed in the English Text, the Greek whereof, I did not then
mention, which is, (...). Now all being put together, both according to the
Greek, and English, the Text is, (as I rightly recited it,) in all godliness,
and honesty. And therefore in all this you do but Nodum in sirpo quaerere,
which becomes you not. But why do you further say, that I cite this Text to
no purpose: I showed you in my Reply, to what end and purpose, I cited it:
namely, to declare, that Kings and Princes, are to respect as well piety,
godliness, and religion, as civil honesty, and correspondencie of humane
society. For, beside, that the words of the Text, do plainly import so much,
can any reasonable man suppose, that either S. Paul would exhort Christians, or
that Christians themselves would pray for Kings, and Princes, for this respect,
and to this end only that they should maintain external worldly peace,
civil honesty, and humane society, without any respect or regard had at all,
unto piety, godliness, and to that Christian religion, they held and
professed, and which they more esteemed then their lives, and more then all
earthly treasures and worldly happiness whatsoever? Yea, to this end, and
purpose it was, that I there also mentioned some speeches of Justinian,
Valentinian, and Theodosius, Emperors, testifying, and declaring their
chiefest care within their Empyres and Dominions, to be, for, and concerning
Gods religion: whereunto you have not answered. But yet for further proof
hereof, I alleged in the same my Reply page 3. Aug. contr^ Crescon. lib ^ cap
51.
that clear testimony also of S. Augustine, where he shows, that It is
enjoined Kings from God that in their kingdoms, they should command good
things, and forbid evil things, not only such things, as belong to humane
society, but such things also, as belong to Gods religion. You say, the words
of S. Augustine, be these In this, Kings, as they be commanded from heaven,
do serve God as they be Kings, if in their kingdoms, they command good,
prohibit ill, not only what pertaynes to humane society, but also what
pertaynes to divine religion. Let the words be as you relate them, all
comes to one effect, as touching that purpose for which I alleged him. For
what? Is it not all one in sense, to say, that Kings are enjoined from God, and
Kings are commanded from heaven? For when you say, that Kings are commanded
from heaven; I make no doubt, but you mean thereby, the same thing that I do.
when I say, it is enjoined Kings from God: and when you say again, that Kings
do, (as they are commanded from heaven,) serve God as Kings, if in their
Kingdoms, they command good, and prohibit ill, not only what pertaynes to
humane society, but what also pertaynes to divine Religion: Do not these
words of yours, as clearly, and as strongly prove, the Kings authority, in
matters Ecclesiastical, and concerning Religion, as my words do, when I say,
that it is enjoined Kings from God, that in their kingdoms, they should
command good things, and forbid evil things, not only such things, as belong
to humane society, but such things also, as belong to Gods religion? Yea, even
your self, forced by the unresistable evidence of this testimony of S.
Augustine, do at last yield, and grant, that Kings may command in things
belonging to religion: But then what those things be, which the King may
command, belonging to religion, you seem to say, that they be Theft Rape, and
such like. And yet you cite the same S. Augustine, affirming, that utilissium,
and saluberrimum est, etc. It is most profitable, and expedient, that the King
make laws to restrain the free will of man, from transgressing in such
things, as the law of God does intimate unto us. Hereby, you may perceive, that
you needed no better confuter then your self. For be only, Theft, Rape, and
such like civil offenses, prohibited by the law of God? And be not Idolatry,
false worship, blasphemy, and other offenses against God and his religion, by
the same law of God also prohibited? Yea, S. Augustine himself, (as you see,)
here distinguishes between things belonging to humane or civil society, and
things belonging to divine religion: and therefore you must not confound those
things, which he has so directly distinguished. Now, Theft, Rape, and such
like offenses, concern civil, or humane society, and be offenses against
the second Table of Gods Law: but there be also offenses, that be done
immediately against God, which be comprised in the first Table of his Law. And
did you never read nor hear, that the King is, Custos utriusque Tabulae, The
keeper of both the Tables? Deuteronomy. 17.18.19.
Why was the Book of Gods law, at the first institution of Kings in the
Commonweal of Israel, required to be delivered to the King? And why was he
charged to read therein, all the days of his life, and to keep all the
words, and ordinances contained in it, if he were not as well to see the
duties of the first Table of the Law, as of the second, to be observed within
his kingdom? For, the Book of Gods law, comprehends more then the duties of
the second Table. And you must observe that this was enjoined to him, not in
respect of his private conversation only, as he was a man, but in respect of
his Regal and Princely office and function specially: For, when he was set
upon the throne of his Kingdom, then it was, that, he was enjoined these
things, as the very words of the Text it self, do expressly testify.
Wherefore, well spoke S. Augustine, That a King serves God one way, as he is a
man, Aug epist. 50
and another way, as he is a King: as he is a man, he serves God by living
faithfully: As he is a King, he serves God in setting forth laws to
command, that which is good, and to remove the contrary. So that Kings, as
Kings, serve God, in doing that for his service, which none but Kings can do.
Yea, that Kings may punish Idolatry, blasphemy, sacrilege, schism, heresy,
and all the offenses against the first Table, as well as Thefts, Rapes,
Murders, Adulteries, and other offenses against the second Table of his law,
Aug. cont. 2. Gaudentis epist li. 2. c. 11
S. Augustine yet further directly shows against the Donatists, saying. Cry
thus, if, you dare, let murders be punished, let adulteries be punished, let
other degrees of lust, and sin, be punished: only sacriledges, (that is,
wronging of Gods truth, and his Church,) we will not have to be punished by
Princes laws. Again, Aug. contr. epist. Parmen. lib. cap. 7. Galat.
5.19.20.21.
he speaks thus. Will the Donatists, though they were convinced of a
sacrilegous schism, say, that it belongs not to the Princes power to
correct, or punish these things? Is it, because such powers, do not extend to
corrupt and false religion? The works of the flesh, S. Paul reckons to be
these: Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness idolatry, witchbraft,
hatred, debate, emulation, wrath, contentious, seditious, Cont. Epistol.
^armen. libr. cap. 7.
heresies, envy, murders, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like What think
these men, says S. Augustine? May the crime of idolatry be justly revenged
by the Magistrate? or may witches be rightly punished by the rigor of Princes
laws? and yet will they not acknowledge, that heretics and s^bismatickes, may
be repressed by the same, when S. Paul rehearses them al ogether with the
other fruits of iniquity? W^ll they reply that earthly powers are not to
meddle with such matters? ^o what end then, does he bear the sword, Luke 14.23
which is called Gods minister, serving to punish malefactors? Christ says in
the Gospel: Go out into the high ways, and hedges and compel them to come
in, Aug. cont. 2. Gaud. Epist. lib 2 cap. 17. Epistol, So. and ^ont. 2. Gaud.
epist. lib. 2. cap 17. and epistol. 48.
that mine house may be filled. We take ways, (says S Augustine,) for
heresies: and hedges, for schisms: because, ways, in this place, signify the
diversenesse; and, hedges, the perverseness of opinions. If then those that be
found in the high ways, and hedges, that is in heresies, and schisms, must be
compelled to come in, let them not mislike, that they be forced: For this
commanding by Princely power, occasioneth many to be saved, who though they be
violently brought to the feast of the great householder, and compelled to come
in, yet being there, they find cause to rejoice, that they did enter, though
at first against their wills. But here you tell me, (though somewhat
unseasonably,) that you cited in your Answer, a Decree or Canon, made in the
first Council of Nyce, declaring evidently, that the Bishop of Rome, (whom you
unjustly, and untruely call, the supreme Pastor of the whole Militant Church,)
had the Supreamacie in that time, and that unto this pregnant proof produced
by you, I only reply, as Maskers do with Mumme. Why? what needed any reply at
all unto it? For I had answered it before, in my first Book, cap. 1. page 12.
Where I affirmed, and showed it to be a forged, and counterfeyte Canon, by
diverse Councels, as namely by the sixth Council of Carthago, cap. 3. by the
Affrican Council, cap. 92. and 101. and 105. and by the Milevitane Council,
cap. 22. Yea the very fifth, and sixth Canons, (which be confessed to be
undoubtedly true Canons,) of the Council of Nyce, do themselves sufficiently
declare, that other Canon, (which you, and other Papists also allege,) to be
false, and forged. And not only those Councels, but the Decrees of other
Councels also, decreeing against the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, (as is
showed in the same my first book, c. 1. p. 16. 17. 18.) do thereby likewise
consequently declare, that Canon of the Council of Nice, which you speak of,
to be a new forged thing. But if you desire yet further proof thereof, against
the objections, and allegations that Papists make in this case, then read that
Book of jurisdiction, Regal, Episcopal, Papal, made by that worthy,
learned, and reverend Bishop Doctor Carleton, cap. 5. page 69. 70. 71. 72. 73.
74. 75. 76. 77. And read also for the same purpose, The Catholic Appeal for
the Protestants made by that reverend, worthy, and learned Bishop Doctor
Morton, lib. 4. cap. 8. page 467 468 469. 470. 471. 472. 473. 474. 475. 476.
and there shall you see this Canon, so fully maintained to be forged against
the adversaries, as that it is now a shame for you, or any other Papist, to
cite or produce it, for a witness of the Popes supremacy. But upon such
false, and forged testimonies, it is, that the Popes supremacy, is chiefly
founded. Howbeit I hope by this time, you perceive, that howsoever, the Pope,
and Popery, have been heretofore long maskers in the world, and gone
disguised, yet at last they have been discovered, and made known to be such,
as they be indeed: and, that it had been much better for you, to have been
mute, or mum, then by this your provocation, to have occasioned, the shame, and
ignominy of the Pope, and Popish Church, in the point, of forgerie to be thus
displayed, and laid open, as also you may here see, that I have no way wronged
S. Augustine, or wrested him to a wrong construction, (as you calumniate,) when
I alleged him, to prove the Kings authority as well in matters
Ecclesiastical, and concerning Religion, as in matters Civil, and Temporal.
Which that you, and every man else, may yet the better, and the more fully
perceive, I have here thought it good to set down, his own very words in
Latin, Aug. contra Crescon. lib. 3. cap 51.
and they be these: In hoc enim Reges sicut eis divinitus praecipitur, Deo
serviunt, in quantum Reges sunt, si, in suo regno, bona iubeant, mala,
prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verumetiam, quae ad
divinam religionem. For in this, (says he,) do Kings, as is commanded them
from God, serve as they be Kings, if in their kingdoms, they command good
things, and forbid evil things, not only those things, which belong to humane
society, but those things also, which belong to Gods Religion. Can any thing
be more plainly, or more directly spoken for proof of this point?

7. Here then you may withal perceive, the truth of that distinction, which I
used in my Reply (cap. 1. page 4.) For whereas you, in your Answer, amplifying
the Sacerdotall, or spiritual power, had said that how much the foul in
perfection exceeds the body: the eternal bliss, the temporal felicity: the
divine laws, the humane laws: By so much did the spiritual authority
exceed the temporal: Thereunto I replied, and said, that whilst you thus
spoke, you should have remembered, and observed, wherein, and in what respects
it was, that this excellency of the one above the other, did consist. For as
it is true, that in respect of converting souls, and fitting them for Gods
kingdom, by preaching of Gods word, administering of the Sacraments, and
exercise of the Ecclesiastical discipline, the spiritual function, and
authority is to be preferred before the Regal, or Temporal: So no less
true is it, that in respect of the temporal power of the sword, externally to
command, compel, and to punish offenders, in causes both Ecclesiastical, and
Civil, the Regal, and temporal office, and authority, is to be preferred
before the Episcopal, or Sacerdotall. This distinction, because it kills,
and strikes dead your cause, you cannot endure, and therefore do you, in your
Reioynder exclayme against it, and call it a distinction never heard of before,
and that it was lately hatched in the University of Mollinmighan, (as you
scoffingly speak,) in the College there, of your own divising and
nomination, and whereof you are the father, and the founder. But (to let this
pass, as an idle fiction of a fantastical brain,) why will you not
acknowledge the truth of this distinction, which is so clear, plain, and
evident in it self? The first part of it, you neither do, nor can deny,
namely, that in respect of converting souls, Chrysostom. in Mat hom. 83. Ad popul
antioch. homil. 60.
and fitting them for Gods kingdom, by preaching of Gods word, administering of
the Sacraments, and exercise of the Ecclesiastical discipline, the spiritual
office and authority is to be preferred before the Regal, or Temporal. For
this is, very apparent, even by S. Chrysostom himself, who speaks to
Ecclesiastical Ministers on this wise. No small vengeance, (says he,)
hangs over your heads, if you do suffer any heinous offender, to be partaker
of the Lords Table: his blood shall be required at your hands, whether he be a
Captain, Lieutenant, or a crowned King, forbid him: in these cases, thy power
is greater then his. Again he says. Si vis videre discrimen, quantum absit
Rex a Sacerdote, expende modum potestatis, vtrique traditae. Chrysostom. de verb.
Esa. vidi Dom. hom. 5.
If you will see the difference how great it is, between the King, and the
Priest, weigh the measure of the power, or authority, granted unto them both.
And there showing the power, and authority, which God has committed to the
Priest, he says: Eoque Deus, ipsum regale caput sacerdotis manibus subiecit:
and in that respect, (says he,) has God subjected the head of the King, to
the hand of the Priest. So that it is only in respect of their Ministry,
power, and authority, granted them from God, and not in all respects, nor to
all intents, and purposes, that this their excellency and preheminencie
consists. Yea, he further shows, that their power and offices, be
distinct, and limited, and that the one may not intrude into the office, and
bounds of the other. For, when King Vzziah, otherwise called Ozias, 2. Chron.
26.16.17 18.
entered into the Temple to burn incense, which pertayned to the Priests
office, and not to the King: S. Chrysostom, reproving and condemning this,
says thus unto the King: Chrysostom. de verbis Esaiae vidi Dom. homil. 4.
Mane intra tuos terminos; alij sunt termini Regni, alij termini sacerdotis:
Keep you within your own bounds: For, the limits or bounds of the Regal
calling, be one: and the limits or bounds of the Sacerdotall calling be
another, And again he says, that, Res est mala, non manner intra fines,
nobis a Deo praescriptos. It is an ill thing, not to abide within the limits or
bounds prescribed unto us of God. He again thus distinguishes their offices:
Regi, corpora commissa sunt: sacerdoti, animae: Rex maculas corporum remittit,
Sacerdos autem maculas peccatorum: Ille cogit, hic exhortatur: Ille
necessitate, hic consilio: Ille habet arma sensibilia, hic arma spiritualia.
Ille bellum gerit cum barbaris, mihi belium est adversus Daemones. To the King,
(says he, Homil. 5. Idem ibidem. hom. 4.
) are bodies committed; to the Priest, souls: the King remitteth the spots of
the bodies, the Priest the spots of sins. The King compels, the Priest
exhorts, the one with necessity, or constraint, the other with advice, or
counsel: The King has sensible weapons, the Priest has spiritual weapons:
The King makes war with the Barbarians, and the Priest has wars against
the Devils Again he says: Regi, ea quae hic sunt, commissa sunt: mihi
caelestia: mihi quum dico, sacerdotem intelligo. To the King are those things
committed, that be here: To me, are things heavenly committed: And when I say
to me, I mean (says he) the Priest. So that, although he there affirms
the Sacerdotall power, or office, to be more excellent or greater, then the
Regal yet withal he shows you wherein, and in what respects it is, namely,
(as I said before,) in respect of those things, which properly belong to the
office, ministry, and function of a Priest, or Bishop: of which sort, is
preaching of Gods word, administering of the Sacraments, and binding and loosing
of sinners, by Excommunication, or Absolution, as the case requires: But he
may not by virtue of that his Ecclesiastical and Priestly office, use any
external, civil, coactive power or compulsion, which you see, even by the
evident testimony of the same S. Chrysostom himself, rightly and properly
belongs to the King, and not to the Priest. Now then here you may perceive
withal the other part of my distinction to be likewise undoubtedly true,
namely, That in respect of the Temporal power of the sword, thereby externally
to command, compel and to punish offenders, in causes both Ecclesiastical,
and Civil, the Regal, and temporal office, and authority, is to be
preferred before the Episcopal, or Sacerdotall. For it is clear that God has
committed this Civil and Temporal sword, only to Kings and Princes, and such
like terrestrial Potentates, and not to Bishops or Priests: For so also does
S. Paul himself directly show. And who is there but he knows that it
properly appertains to the power, and office of this civil and temporal
sword, to command, compel, and to punish offenders, civilly and in a
temporal manner? For the same Apostle says of every of these higher powers,
that bear this temporal Sword, that he bears it not in vain. Yea he
says, that he is the Minister of God, a revenger unto wrath to him that does
evil. Here is no exception of any person, or of any cause, but he that
offends, or does evil, be he a layman, or a cleargie-man, or be he an
offender in a cause Civil, or cause Ecclesiastical, he appears to be
subject to this sword, and authority of these higher powers. For, seeing the
express words of the Text, be, Bernard. ad Senonen. Arobiepisc epist. 42.
Chrysostom. in Romans hom. 23
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: Who, (says S. Bernard,)
has excepted you, (speaking to an Archbishop,) from this generality. He that
brings in an exception, (says he,) uses but a delusion. And you may
remember, that even S. Chrysostom also himself, as he subjecteth Kings to
Bishops, Priests, and Pastors, in respect of their power and commission
granted them from God: So on the other side, in respect of the Regal sword,
power, and authority, given and granted likewise from God, to Kings and
Princes, he declares very fully that Bishops, Priests, Pastors, and all
Ecclesiastical Ministers whatsoever, as well, as lay people, are to be subject
to them. But this point concerning the subjection of all Bishops, Priests, and
Pastors, and even of the Bishop of Rome himself, as well, as of others, unto
Emperors, Kings, and Princes, as also in causes even Ecclesiastical, as well,
as Civil, and temporal, is so clearly, plainly, and plentifully proved,
both in my first, and second Books, and in this also, (all your answers,
evasions, quirkes, and quiddities, being therein, utterly frustrated, confuted,
and confounded,) as that it is to me a matter of wounder, that you should not
see, and so acknowledge the truth of it. But it seems you cannot see the wood
for trees, which I am sorry for.

8. Howbeit to make this point, yet the more evident, (viz,) the subjection of
Priests, and Ecclesiastical Ministers, unto the King: and therewithal, the
Kings supremacy, or supreme command, over them, even in causes
Ecclesiastical, I alleged in my Reply, cap. 1. page 5. the example of Moses,
who commanded not only the Levites, Deuteronomy. 31.25.26.
and that in a matter Ecclesiastical, and concerning their very office, but
he commanded also even Aaron, the high Priest, in a matter likewise
Ecclesiastical, and concerning his very office, Numb. 16.46.47.
saying thus unto him: Take the censer, and put fire therein of the Altar, and
put therein incense, and go quickly unto the congregation, and make an
atonement for them, for there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is
begun, then Aaron took, as Moses had commanded him, etc. Here you say, I
abuse my Reader, by falsely citing this text: for the right words, (say you,)
are these: Moses said to Aaron, take the Censer, and drawing fire from the
Altar, put incense upon it, going quickly to the people, to pray for them. To
pray, (say you,) and to make atonement, do differ, and be not all one:
howbeit, indeed, not I, but, you are the man that abuse your Reader, by
falsely citing the words of this Text: For you, therein follow the words, of
your vulgar Latin translation, which is untrue, and unsound, and I follow our
English translation, which is according to the Original, in Hebrew, and
therefore true: which you also, if you were a good Hebrician, would know, and
perceive, even in this very particular. But whether we take your translation,
of Praying for the people, or our translation, of Attonement-making, it comes
all to one pass, as touching that purpose for which I cited it, namely, to
prove, that Moses commanded Aaron the high Priest, in a matter
Ecclesiastical, and concerning his very office. For your self do say, that,
this praying for the people, was a religious act, to be wrought by Aaron, as
being intermediate between the people, and God, to reconcile, or gain unto
them the favors of heaven. And, on the other side we say, that to burn
incense, to make atonement for the people, 2. Chron. 26.18.
is likewise expressly, a thing properly pertaining to the Priests office. So
that as touching that purpose for which I cited that text, it makes (as I said
before) no difference. But then you go further, and seem to speak, as if
Moses, had not there commanded Aaron. But when Moses spoke to Aaron in this
sort: Accipe thuribulu^, Take the censer. Be not these words of commanding,
especially in this case, and at this time, being also spoken by a Superior,
namely by him, that was as the Scripture calls him, a king in the
commonweal of Israel: Deuteronomy. 33.5. Deuteronomy. 31.25 26.27.
Yea be they not words, of as full, and clear command, as when he spoke in
like sort, to the Levites, saying: Take the book of this law, and put ye it
in the side of the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord our God, etc. The Text it
self shows that these were words of commanding, in Moses: And so
witnesses also your own translation, that herein, Moses praecepit Levitis,
Moses commanded the Levites. Yea, that Moses, as well as his successor Ioshuah,
commanded not only the Levites, but the Priests also, and all the
congregation, and people of Israel, appears by that answer, and acclamation,
they gave to the same Ioshuah, saying thus unto him: Josh. 1.16.17.18.
All that thou have commanded us, we will do, and whethersoever thou sendest
us, we will go. As we have obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee:
only the Lord thy God be with thee as be was with Moses: whosoever shall
rebel against thy commandment, and will not obey thy words, in all that
thou commaundest him, let him be put to death. But then, when you cannot
gainesay, but that Moses commanded Aaron, and that in matters Ecclesiastical
and concerning his very office: you come to your last refuge, and do say, that
Moses was the high Priest, and so, as an high Priest commanded Aaron. But
first how do you prove this, that Moses was an high Priest? And yet if you
could prove it, what would you, or could you gain from thence? for your self
do say, that Moses was as well a king, as a Priest: and therefore why might
he not command him, as he was a king, rather then otherwise? for did he, in
his time, command the Priests. Levites, and the whole People of Israel,
otherwise, or in any other sort or sense, then Ioshuah, his successor did, who
was no Priest? how be it, if Moses had been both a Priest and a King, would not
the holy Scripture somewhere, have testified, and expressed, so much, as well as
it does, in the like case, of Melchisedech. Genesis 14.18. Hebr. 7.1? For as
touching those Texts of Scripture, which you bring to prove Moses to be a
Priest, it shall by and by appear, that they prove it not. Again if Moses
were the high Priest, what will you make Aaron to be? for it is evident and
confessed of all sides, that Aaron was the high Priest: and if Moses, were also
another high Priest, at the same time: Deuteronomy. 33.5.
then, beside that, there should be two high Priests together at one time, how
could the one command the other, they being both of equal authority? Or can
he be rightly, and truly called, Summus Sacerdos, that has a Superior Priest
over him, to command him? It is clear, that the Scripture does expressly
testify of Moses, that he was a King, and therefore of that there can be no
doubt: but that he was also a Priest, or an high Priest, (as you suppose) it
does not affirm, no not in that Place, where the purpose of the holy Ghost was
to show, what Offices he bare, during all his life time, and what manner of man
he was amongst the Israelites, so long, as he had been amongst them, until
that time, that he was to die, and to take his last farewell of them: Deuteronomy.
33.5. and Deuteronomy. 34.10.
for there it only appears, that he was a King and a Prophet, but not a
Priest. Had he been also a Priest, no doubt, it would not have been there
omitted, but specified likewise, as well as his other two Offices. Yea read
throughout the whole Bible, the history concerning Moses, and you will still
find, that he was a supreme civil Magistrate, a supreme Commander, Exodus
18.13 14.15.16.17.18.19.20.21.22.23.24.25.26.
and supreme Judge in Israel. For it is, said, that, When Moses sat to
judge the people, the People stood about Moses, from morning unto even: And
when Iethro Moses Father in Law, saw all that he did to the People, he said,
what is this, thou do to the People? Why sit thou thy self alone, and
all the People stand about thee from morning unto even? And because this was
too toylsome and troublesome a business for him alone to do, he advised him
to appoint some others to help him, and to bear the Burden with him, in
hearing and judging of causes. Whereupon Moses chose able men, out of all
Israel, and made them heads over the People, Rulers over thousands, Rulers over
hundreths, Rulers over fifties, and Rulers over tens. And these judged the
people, at all seasons: the hard Causes, they brought to Moses, but every small
matter, they judged themselves. When, again, Moses heard the murmuring, and
saw the weeping of the People of Israel, throughout their families, he was much
grieved, and speak thus to the Lord: Numb. 11.10.11.12.13.14.15. etc.
Wherefore have thou afflicted thy servant, and why have not I found favor in
thy sight, seeing thou have put the charge of all this People upon me? etc. By
all which, you see that Moses was, as a King, Prince, or supreme commander
over all Israel, and consequently, as a King, commanded Aaron and the rest of
the Priests, as well, as he commanded the Levites, or any of the rest of the
People. Moreover, if Moses had been the high Priest, Exodus 24.5.
he might have offered Sacrifice himself, and needed not to have sent others,
(as he did) to sacrifice: neither needed he to have commanded, Numb. 16.46.47.
or required Aaron, to burn incense, (as he did) to make an Atonement, for
the People, for himself might have done it. But whatsoever Bellarmine, or
other Papists, hold in this case, you, for your part, do not hold them, to
be both high Priests together, at one and the self same time, but in
succession one after another: accounting Moses, to be the high Priest, first,
and then Aaron, Heb^. 5 4.
afterward. Howbeit, the Scripture says, that No man takes this honor to
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. If then Moses were called
of God, to this honor of high Priesthood, let the like warrant be showed from
God, for the Authorizing of him thereunto, that is to be showed for Aaron. But
this you cannot show. Besides, if Moses were the high Priest first, and Aaron
afterward: why does that Epistle to the Hebrews, mention, for the Pattern, or
President in that Case, not Moses, but Aaron? For if Moses had been the first
high Priest, no doubt he would have said, That no man takes this honor unto
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Moses: But he says not so, but
he speaks in this sort. (viz) No man takes this honor to himself, but he
that is called of God, as was Aaron: As if Revera, not Moses at all, but Aaron
only were the first high Priest. And so, indeed, S. Chrysostom directly
affirms, Chrysostom. de verbis Isaiae vidi Dominu^ homil. 5.
for speaking of Aaron he says expressly, that Is primus fuit Pontifex, He
was the first high Priest. Again if Moses were the high Priest, so constituted
of God, how came he afterward, to loose that honor, or to be deprived of it,
and another, namely Aaron, to be put in his Place, in his life time, he
committing no fault nor any fault declared to be in him, for which he should be
deprived of that his Priesthood? But, lastly, what cause, or need is there, to
suppose Moses to be, (as you fancy him) an high Priest, extraordinarily
elected, and appointed, when there was to be seen at the same time, an High
Priest after the ordinary manner, in Esse, and allowed of God, namely the same
Aaron? For in my Reply, page 22. 23. I have proved, that the Priesthood before
the law given, did ordinarily belong to the first borne: and of these two
Brothers, Moses and Aaron, I have also there proved, that not Moses, but Aaron,
was the Elder, and consequently, that by right of Primogeniture, Aaron was the
Priest, and not Moses. Yea I have there further proved, that the Priesthood
thus being in Aaron, was so far from being removed, or taken from him that
contrariwise, it was continued in him, and afterward confirmed unto him, by God
himself, and to his seed, after him. But yet you would prove Moses to be a
Priest, Exodus 40.12 13.14.12.
because he did consecrate, and annoynte Aaron, and his sons, to the
Priesthood. But to this I have answered before in my Reply page 25. 26.
showing, that this proves not Moses to be a Priest, properly so called: for he
did this by Gods own special commandment, which he might not disobey or
refuse but stood bound to obey and perform, although he were a Civil
Magistrate, King, Prince, Prophet, or what office and calling soever he had.
You cite also Deuteronomy, 18.18. where God says thus to Moses: I will raise them up
a Prophet, amongst their brethren, like unto thee, etc. This prooveth, that
Moses was a Prophet, and that Christ, (of whom, these words are a Prophecy,)
was likewise a Prophet, Act. 3.21.
Act. 7.37. but they prove not Moses therefore to be a Priest, because he was a
Prophet. But the chief text you rely upon, is that in Psalm. 99. verse. 6. where
it is said: Moses and Aaron amongst the Priests, and Samuel amongst them that
call upon his name: these called upon the Lord, and he heard them. Howbeit, to
this also I have answered before in my Reply, page 23.24. First, that the being
of Moses, and Aaron, with, or among the Priests, is no proof, that therefore
they were Priests: It is true, that Aaron was a Priest, but that is proved by
other clear places of Scripture, and not necessarily deduced out of this:
because a man may be among Priests, and yet be no Priest. Secondly, I showed,
that the Hebrew word there used, is, Cohanim, which is a word of an ambiguous
signification, signifying, as well Princes, as Priests: 2. Sam. 8.18
As for example, The sons of King David, are said to be, Cohanim, that is,
Princes, or great Rulers: and so it is explayned, 2. Sam, 20.26.
and declared in 1, Chron. 18.17. And so it is likewise said, of Ira the
Iairite, that he was Cohen le David, that is, a Prince, or chief Ruler about
David. For, to conster these, to be Priests, in the proper and usual
signification of the word, they not being of the Tribe of Levi, were very
absurd. And to these thus formerly alleged in my Reply, you have answered
nothing in your Rejoinder. Yea, S. Jerome himself, in his own observation,
shows, that the Hebrew word, though he translate it Sacerdotes, in the one
case and Sacerdos in the other case, yet signifies, as I before affirmed. For,
says he, Ira Iairites erat sacerdos David, Hier. tradit Hebr. in libros Regum
to. 3
id est Magister, sicut alibi scriptum est: Filij autem David, erant
sacerdotes, idest Magistri fratrum suorum. But because you also object S.
Augustine, as the Jesuits likewise did object both S. Jerome, and S.
Augustine, in this case, (writing upon this Psalm. 99.) to prove Moses to be a
Priest: I had rather you should take your Answer thereunto, from the words of
that reverend and learned Bishop Doctor Bilson, then from me: who, answers
the Jesuits, and consequently you, in this sort. In his Book called, the
difference between Christian subjection, and unchristian rebellion part. 3.
page 102.103. Hier. in Psalm. 98. Aug. in Psalm. 98.
All that S. Jerome says, is this, that Moses had the rule of the Law, and
Aaron of the Priesthood: and that either of them did foreshew the coming of
Christ with a Priestly kind of Proclamation: Moses, with the sound of the Law:
and Aaron, with the Bells of his garments. Where, S. Hierome calls the
Prophetical function of Moses, to teach the people, the laws of God, a
Priestly kind of Proclamation and foreshewing, that the Son of God, should
come in the flesh, to teach us the will of his Father. S. Augustine uses the
word, in the like sense, for that sacred service, which Moses yielded to God,
in reporting his laws and precepts to the people. And therefore in the same
place, he says of Samuel also, that he was made high Priest, which is
expressly against the Scriptures, if you take the Priest for him that was
anointed to offer sacrifice unto God. For Samuel was but a Levite, and no
Priest, much less an high Priest. The sons of Samuel, 1. Chron. 6.
are reckoned in the Scripture it self, among the Levites, apart from the
Priests office, and lineage: And, the high Priesthood, was, long before, given
to Phinees, and his house, Number. 25.13 1. Sam. 14. 1. Chron. 6.
by covenant from Gods own mouth, and in the days of Samuel, was held by
Abiah, the son of Ahitub, who was directly of the descent of Phinees. S.
Augustine elsewhere debating this question of Moses and Aaron, resolves in
doubtful manner: Moses and Aaron, were both high Priests, or rather Moses the
chief, and Aaron under him: or else Aaron chief for the Pontifical attire,
and Moses for a more excellent Ministry. And in that sense, Moses may be
called a Priest, if you mean as S. Augustine does, an interpreter of Gods will
to Aaron, and others, which is the right vocation of all Prophets, that were no
Priests, and common to them all, save that by a more excellent prerogative then
any other Prophet of the Old Testament, Numb. 12. Exodus 33.
had God spoke to Moses mouth to mouth, and face to face. as a man speaks to
his friend. But this does not hinder his civil power which was to be chief
Judge, and sovereign executor of Justice amongst them, and by virtue thereof
to put them to death, that were offenders against the Law of God. And in his
stead, succeeded, not Eleazar, nor Phinees the sons of Aaron, but Ioshuah,
and Judah, the Captains, and leaders of Israel. So far he. Thus then you
see, in what sense it is, that both S. Jerome, and S. Augustine did, or might
call Moses a Priest, and yet not be such a Priest strictly, and properly
taken, as you fancy him: Yea, you see, that S. Augustine likewise affirms
Samuel to be a Priest, who nevertheless revera, Bellarmin. de verb. Dei lib.
3. cap. 4.
and properly, was not a Priest, as before is showed: And Bellarmine also
himself confesses so much of Samuel, saying expressly. Samulem non fuisse
sacerdotem, sed Iudicem tantum: Non enim descendit ex familia Aaron, sed Core
consobrini ejus 1. Paralip. 6. That Samuel was not a Priest, but only a Judge:
for he descended not of the family of Aaron, but of Core. And he says further,
that S. Hierome likewise, ( libr. 1. in Iovinianum,) ostendit Samuelem non
fuisse Sacerdotem, showed that Samuel was not a Priest.

As for those two Chapters of Exodus, 28. and 29. cited by Bellarmine, whereby
he will prove Moses, to be truly, and properly, a Priest. If you read those
Chapters, you shall find no such matter, but rather the contrary, namely, that
not Moses, but Aaron and his sons, Exodus 28 1.2, 3.4.
were the Priests. For God says there, to Moses: Take Aaron thy Brother and
his Sons with him, from amongst the children of Israel, that he may minister
unto me in the Priests Office, even Aaron, Nadab, and Abibu, Eleazar, and
Ithamar, Aarons sons. It is true, that, there, you may read that Moses made
holy Garments, Exodus 29.1.2.3.4. etc.
and offered certain Sacrifices. But observe withal, that all this was done
by Gods own express and special commandment, and to no other end, but
this, viz, for the conseruating of Aaron and his Sons, to the Priesthood. So
that by those two Chapters, it further appears, that not Moses but Aaron
only and his Sons, were the Priests: But as the Jesuits, In his book
before named part. 3. page 103. 104.
in time past, would have proved Samuel, to be a Priest, because it is said,
that he Sacrificed: so you say the same of King Saul, that he also sacrificed,
and thereby would likewise prove him to be a priest. Howbeit the former
revere^d, and learned Bishop, D. Bilson, does again show both them and you,
how much you deceave your selves, by such phrazes, and manner of speeches: and
that when they are rightly understood, they infer no such conclusion, as you,
and they would deduce out of them. My collection, (says he,) is grounded upon
the law of God. Samuel was none of the Sons of Aaron, Ergo, 1. Sam. 7.
Samuel was no Priest. It is true, that the Scripture says, He took a sucking
lamb and offered it for a burnt offering unto the Lord. So Iephta said: Judge.
11.
That thing which first comes out of the Doors of my house to me, I will offer
it for a burnt offering: And yet Iephtah was neither Priest nor Levite. So the
Angel said to Manoah: Judge. 13.
If thou will make a burnt offering, offer it unto the Lord, And yet Manoah was
of the tribe of Dan. Of David, that was no Priest, the Scripture says, Then
David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the Lord. And again,
David built there an Altar unto the Lord, and offered burnt offerings, 1. Sam.
10.
and peace offerings and the Lord was appeased toward the Land. And likewise
of Solomon: The King went to Gibeon to sacrifice there: 1. King. 3.
a thousand burnt offerings did Solomon offer upon the Altar. Thrice a year
did Solomon offer burnt offerings, and peace offerings, upon the Altar, 1.
King. 9.
which he built to the Lord: and he burnt incense upon the Altar, that was
before the Lord. Nothing is oftener in the Scriptures, then these kind of
speeches: By the which, no more is meant, but that either, they brought these
things, to be offered, or else they caused the Priests, to offer them: For in
their own Persons, they could not sacrifice them, because they were no
Priests. In that sense, the Scripture says of Saul, That he offered burnt
offerings at Gilgal before Samuel came: not that Saul offered it with his own
hands, 1. Sam. 13.
as you before did fondly imagine and said, He was deposed for aspiring to the
spiritual function: 1. Sam. 14. v. 3.18.
But he commanded the Priest to do it, who was then present in the host, with
the Ark of God, as the next chapter does witness, in two special Places. And
as for the reproof that Samuel gave to King Saul, it was (says he,) for
distrusting and disobeying God. For when God first advanced Saul to the
Kingdom, he charged him by the Mouth of Samuel, to go to Gilgal, and there to
stay seven Days, 1. Sam. 10.
(before he ventured to do any Sacrifice,) till the Prophet were sent to show
him what he should do: 1 Samuel 13.
But seeing his enemies gathered to fight against him, on the one side, and his
people ^h^inking from him on the other side, because Samuel came not he began
to suspect that Samuel had beguiled him, and therefore upon his own head,
against the commandment of God, willed the Priest, to go foreward with his
Sacrifices, and to consult God, what he should do. This secret distruct, and
presumption, against the charge which God had given him, was the thing, that
God took in so evil part: And since he would not submit himself to be
ruled by God, and expect his leisure, God rejected him, as unfitte to govern
the People. Neither did Samuel challenge him, for invading the Priests Office,
but for not staying the time, that God prefixed him, before the Prophet should
come. So far he, whom I thus recite the more at large, for your better
satisfaction, in this Point. But yet moreover, that worthy, In his Book of
jurisdiction Regal, Episcopal, Papal, page 31. 32. 33. etc.
learned, and reverend Bishop also, D. Carleton, amongst other arguments which
he brings to prove Moses to be a Civil Magistrate, and a Prince, but not a
Priest, alleges that Text of Exodus, 4.16. where Moses is said to be, as a
God to Aaron, and Aaron, as a Mouth to Moses. The word there used, is Elohim,
and the same, that is also used in Psalm. 82. and is never applied throughout
the whole Scriptures, when it is given to men, but to such as were Kings,
Princes, Judges, and other Civil Magistrate: and at no time to Priests, unless
they were themselves, the chief Magistrates, or received Authority from the
Chief Magistrate. Give you an instance in the holy Scripture, to the Contrary,
if you can, or else confess the truth of it. And here you may also observe one
reason among the rest, which Christ himself gives, why they be called Gods,
in that Psalm. 82. Psalm. 82.6.
For in that Psalm, it is, that these words are written, I have said, ye are
Gods: which be the words, that Christ cites, in the Gospel of S. John, Ioh.
10.34.35.
and says thereupon thus: If he called them Gods, unto whom the word of God
was given, etc. So that this appears to be one reason, why Kings, Princes,
and Civil Magistrates, Deuteronomy. 17.18 19 Josh. 1.8. 2 King. 11.12.
be called Gods, namely, because they have the word of God, given, or committed
to them, although not to preach it, (as Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors do,) yet
by way of special commission to keep it, to establish it by Authority, to
command obedience to it, to punish the Violaters of it, and to encourage
countenance, protect, and defend the Professors, and Practisers of it. For it
is certain, that all that Psalm, whence Christ took those words, is wholly,
and entirely understood, of Kings, Princes, and such like Civil Magistrates,
and not of Priests, Bishops, or other Ecclesiastical Ministers, as any man may
perceave, that will read that Psalm. Seeing then, this word, Elohim, is given
to Moses, and that comparatively, and in respect of Aaron the Priest, it must
be granted, that Moses was a Civil Magistrate, and as a King, or Prince, in
respect of him, and others, But neither Priest, nor high Priest, as you
surmise. And as for that Text before mentioned of Psalm. 99. verse. 6. how much
soever you and others, stand upon it, yet give me leave here once more to tell
you, that being well considered, you may, in your own judgment, easily
perceave, that you can enforce nothing thereout, to prove Moses to be a Priest,
properly so called, although Aaron was: for, the purpose, and intention, of
those words, is no more but this, to show, that not only Moses a Civil
Magistrate, but Aaron also a Chief Priest, amongst the other Priests, and
Samuel likewise a Prophet amongst others, that called upon the name of the
Lord, were all heard of him, when they prayed. Now, because all those when they
prayed and called upon the name of the Lord, were heard, and obtained their
requests: is that any argument, that therefore they were all Priests properly
so called? No man, I think, will be so absurd, as to make such an inference.

9. I therefore now come to Ioshuah the Successor of Moses: he, (as well, as
Moses,) did as a Prince, or King, command the Priests, Levites and all
Israel, and dealt in matters also Ecclesiastical as well as Temporal, as I
have showed in my Reply, page 6. hereunto you in your Reioynder, answer
nothing, that is of any weight, or moment. Your best answer is, That what
Iosuah did in matters Ecclesiastical, he did it by the direction and advise of
Eleasar the Priest: which if it be granted, makes nothing to the Question.
For the Question is not, by whose direction, or advise, but by whose Authority,
those things were done. It is not denied, but that Priests might, (as was fit
they should,) give their best direction and advise unto their Kings and
Princes: But this derogateth nothing from that Authority, which Kings and
Princes have and bear, within their own dominions. Yea, how impertinent,
weak, and feeble this your answer is, you might have perceived before, by my
Reply page 9. 10. if you had so pleased. Touching King Iosuah, I said in my
Reply, page 6. 7. That he commanded the high Priest, as well as the other
Priests, and dealt also in matters Ecclesiastical, and concerning Gods
service, and religion: And amongst other Text of Scripture, for proof thereof,
I alleged that Text of 2, King 23.4. where it is accorded, that the King
commanded Hilkiah, the high Priest, and the Priests of the second order, etc.
Hereunto you answer, that there is no such matter in the Place by me cited:
and that the force of this Argument, consists in these coined words of mine:
The King commanded Hilkiah, (whom you call Helcias:) which words not being in
Scripture (say you,) I am a wily Witness for strengthening my cause, to
produce so shameful an untruth, and though I be a Judge, yet you see no
commission I have to use falsehood. These words be able to provoke a man's
patience. But you must know, that bad words and a bold face, will do you no
good. Let others therefore judge, whether you, or I, be the honester man in
this Point. You say, there is no such matter in the Place by me cited.
Wherefore I desire the Reader, but to turn to that place I cited, which is
according to our English Bibles, 2. Kings 23.4 and according to your Latin
Bibles, 4. Reg. 23.4. and there shall he see, whether there be any such matter,
or no and, whether these words: The King commanded Hilkiah, (whom you call
Helcias,) be words coined by me, (as you shame not to speak,) or whether they
be in the Scripture it self, extant, and apparent. For, first, those words, be
in the Hebrew: Secondly, they be in our English Translations: and thirdly, they
be also even in your own vulgar Latin Translation. For even in that your own
Translation, the words be these: Et praecepit Rex Helciae Pontifici, and
Sacerdotibus secundi ordinis, etc. And the King commanded Helcias the high
Priest, and the Priests of the second order, etc, Now then, is it not Impudency
intolerable in you, to deny this. You shall therefore do well, yet at last,
to confess, that this good, and godly King, Josias, commanded Hilkiah,
(otherwise called Helcias,) the high Priest, and the Priests of the second
Order: and that he also dealt in matters Ecclesiastical, and concerning
religion, as I there said, and have further declared, in the same place of my
Reply, page 6.7. To that which I alleged concerning King Asa, and King
Hezekiah, in my Reply, page 7. 8. who likewise had Authority, (as is there
showed,) over Persons Ecclesiastical, and in causes also Ecclesiastical, you
answer nothing in your Reioinder that deserves to be replied unto. And
concerning King Iehosaphat also, your answer is likewise very idle, and
frivolous, and scarce worthy the mentioning. For whereas I alleged, amongst
other things, 2. Chron. 19 8.9.10.11
That this King Iehosaphat, did constitute, or set in Jerusalem of the
Levites, and of the Priests, and of the Chief of the families of Israel, for
the judgment and cause of the Lord, etc. (which words were sufficient, to prove
my purpose there, namely, the Kings Authority over Priests, and Levites, and in
causes also Ecclesiastical,) you to show your great learning, and judgment, in
this point, do tax me for omitting, or not rehearsing of some subsequent
words, in the which verse of that Chapter, which when they be uttered, and
rehearsed, do indeed make more against you, then for you: for, the words be
these. And behold, (says the King,) Amoriah the high Priest, shall be the
Chief over you, in all matters of the Lord: and Zebadiah, the son of
Ishmaell, a Ruler of the house of Judah shall be for all the Kings affairs. By
which words, it appears, That King Iehosaphat, did as well constitute, and
appointe Amariah the Priest, to be the Chief over that Assembly, Council, or
Synedrion, which he set at Jerusalem, for all matters of the Lord, as he did
constitute, and appoint Zebadiah, to be the Chief amongst them for all the
Kings affairs. For the words of the Text, put no difference, but that he
might, and did constitute, the one to be the Chief in the one case, as well, as
he did constitute the other, to be the Chief in the other case. As for that
reason you bring, for a difference, it is nothing worth: for, it is granted,
that the King did not, nor could by his Regal Authority, (without a special
commandment, or warrant from God,) consecrate, or make a Priest, neither is
it there said, That King Iehosaphat, did consecrate, or make Amariah, to be a
Priest: But he being a Priest before, the King did there constitute and appoint
him, (as lawfully he might,) to be the President, or Chief in that Synedrion,
or Assembly, in all matters of the Lord: as well as he did, or might constitute
Zebadiah, to be, therein, the Chief, or President, for all the Kings affairs.

10. Now then to come to King Solomon, I proved him also in my Reply, page 7.
to have had authority over the Priests, and Levites, and to have dealt
likewise, in matters Ecclesiastical, and concerning Religion: But to that Text
of 2. Chron. 8.14.15. by me alleged, for proof thereof, you answer not.
Only to that Text of 1. King. 2.27.35. where Solomon deposed Abiathar, the
high Priest, and put Sadocke in his place, you answer and grant it to be true,
that he did so: But this, say you, he did, as being a Prophet, and not as a
King. This answer of yours, I before confuted, and took a way in my Reply.
page 20. 21. whether I again refer you: because that stands still in full
force against you, you having said nothing against it, in your Reioynder. But
now I add further unto it, that it does moreover appear, even by the words
of the Text it self. that Solomon did not do this, as a Prophet, but as a
King; because he therein did no more, but execute that, which a Prophet, or
man of God, had before spoken from God, concerning the house of Ely: For so the
words of the Text do show, that, Solomon cast out Abiathar, from being Priest
unto the Lord: that he might fulfill the words of the Lord, which he spoke
against the house of Ely in Shilo, 1. King. 2.27. and 1. Sam. 2.27.28.29.30.31.
etc. where, the Prophet, or man of God, (as he is called,) that uttered the
Prophecy, and the King that executed the Prophecy must of necessity be
distinguished. And therefore as he that received, and uttered the Prophecy is
in the receiving, and uttering of it, to be called, and supposed a Prophet: So
King Solomon, that was only the executer, and performer of that Prophecy, is
in the execution, and performance of it, to be termed, and deemed a King, and
not a Prophet. But whilst I thus prove, the authority of Kings, over the high
Priest, because King Solomon deposed Abiathar, and put Sadock in his place: You
would infer, that Elias, by the like reason, had the supremacy, because he,
(as you say,) deposed King Benhadad, and put Hazael in his place. Howbeit, you
are therein much deceived. For it is not read, in like sort, that Elias deposed
the one King, and put the other in his place. Dan. 4.12.22.17.25. Luke 2.52.
Dan. 2.37.
The power to depose Kings, belongs only unto God, who gives kingdoms, to
whomsoever he pleases. But what the Prophet Elias did, concerning Hazael to
be king over Syria, and concerning Iehu also, to be King over Israel, he had
a special, and direct commandment for it, from God himself. For the Lord
said thus unto Elias. Go return on thy way, 1. King. 19.15.
to the wilderness of Damascus, and when thou come, annoint Hazael to be
King over Syria: And Iehu the son of Nimshi, shall thou annoint, to be King
over Israel. So that it was God, (and not Elias,) that put down the one King,
and raised up the other. As for Elias, and Elisha, 2. King. 9.1.2.3, etc.
and other Prophets, they were but the publishers and declarers of Gods will
and pleasure, in all such cases, and not the deposers of any Kings. Touching
that you say of Queen Athalia, there was good reason for her to be deposed:
For she was a mere usurper, and Ioas was the true, and rightful heir. For,
Behold, (says the Text,) the Kings son must reign, 2. Chr. 23.3.
as the Lord has said of the sons of David. Neither was it Iehoida, the
Priest alone, but the rest of the rulers, and people also, that according to
their duties both to God and the King, by an unanimous consent, deposed that
wicked usurper Athalia, and put Ioas in the kingdom, to whom the right of it
appertayned. For the words of the Text are. 2. Chron. 23.11.
Then they brought out the Kings son and put upon him the Crown, and gave
him the testimony, and made him King: and Iehoida, and his sons, anointed
him, and said God save the King. And concerning King Vzziah, otherwise called
Ozias, (whom you also mention,) it is true, that he went into the Temple of the
Lord, to burn Incense, upon the Altar of ince^se and that Azariah the Priest
went in after him, and with him fourscore Priests of the Lord, which withstood
Eziah, and said unto him: It pertayneth not to thee Vziah, 2. Chron.
26.16.17.18.19.20.
to burn Incense unto the Lord, but to the Priests the sons of Aaron, that are
consecrated, to offer incense. Go thou forth of the sanctuary, for thou have
transgressed, etc. And for this his presuming to burn incense he was stricken
with a leprosy: which when Azariah the chief Priest, and the other Priests
saw, and beheld, they caused him hastily to depart from thence, and he was
even compelled to go out because the Lord had smitten him. So that he was not
compelled to go out of the Temple, by reason of any force, weapons, or
violence, offered to his person, by Azariah, or any other, of the Priests: but
because the Lord had smitten him, (viz.) with a leaprosie. And therefore even
your own translation, which you call S. Hieromes, has it thus. Sed and ipse
perterritus acceleravit egredi, eo qued sensisset illico plagam Domini. That
he made have himself to go out, as being terrified, with the present sense
of the Lords blow upon him. It is true, that Azarias the Priest, and the other
Priests with him, withstood the King. But how? by words only, as namely, by
telling him of his sin, advising him to go out of the Temple, and using
divine threats, and such other lawful, and allowable courses, as became
Priests to use, but not by swords, and weapons, force of arms, or such like
external power coactive. And thus does S. Chrysostom, also himself testify,
even in this very case, and therefore brings in the Priest, saying thus unto
God. Chrysostom. de verbis Esaiae, vidi Dominu^ homil. 4.
I have done, (says he,) my duty, to warn, and reprove him: I can go no
further: Nam sacerdotis est, tantum arguere, etc. For it is the Priests office,
only to reprove, and freely to admonish, and not, (says he,) to assail with
arms, not to use targets, not to handle spears, not to bend bows, not to
cast darts, but only to reprove, and freely to admonish, etc. But if it had
been so, that Azariah, and the rest of the Priests with him, had forcibly, and
by bodily and external violence, expelled, and thrust the King out of the
Temple, (which nevertheless you see S. Chrysostom expressly denies to have
been done,) yet were this no proof, that therefore, they expelled, deposed,
or deprived him of his kingdom. Yea this king, Vziah, otherwise called Ozias,
notwithstanding whatsoever these Priests did against him, and notwithstanding
his leaprosie, wherewith he was stricken, was nevertheless, not deposed, nor
deprived of his kingdom. For although he was a leaper, unto the day of his
death, and dwelt as a leaper in an house, apart from others, according to the
law: yet during the time, of that his leaprosie, 2. Chron. 26.21.23.
did he continue King of Judah, and all that while was Iotham his son over all
the kings house, and judged the people of the land, as a regent, or curator
like a Lord Protector, or Lieutenant to his father. Neither is it said, that
Iotham his son reigned in his stead, or governed as a king in his own right,
until after the death of that his Father. Joseph. antiq lib. 9. cap. 11 2.
Chron. 26 1.3.
And this appears to be evidently true, by computation of time: for, Vzziah
lived but sixty eight years in all, as Josephus witnesses: and he was
sixteen years old when he began to reign: and he reigned fifty two
years, as the Scripture it self testifies: So that from the time he began
to be a King, he continued a King unto his dying day. But what mean you by
all this? For if hereby you would prove it lawful for the Bishop of Rome, to
depose Kings, you see that the former precedents, and examples of those
Prophets, and Priests, which you produce, do warrant no such matter; admitting
that the Bishop of Rome were the chief or high Priest in the Christian Church,
which he is not as I have now, and often said, and showed before. Yea they
rather declare the clean contrary to that detestable, Romish and rebellious
position. But if I will needs still urge, that Solomon, as a King did depose
Abiathar the high Priest, and put Zadocke in his place: It may be answered,
(say you,) that this act of Solomon's was error facti, and consequently not
warrantable de Iure. It seems by this your manner of answering, that you care
not much what you answer, so that you make any answer at all, be it never so
gross, absurd, or unsound. For first, this your distinction, of, de facto,
and de Iure, in this, and the like cases, I have refelled, and confuted, before
in my Reply, page 13. and page 86. and 87. But, secondly, when the Text it
self, speaks of this fact of King Solomon, by way of approbation of it, does
it become you, or any man else, to say, or suppose, that it was, error facti,
in him? Or that it was an Act not lawful for him so to do? For has not the
Scripture it self, before expressly told us, That Solomon deposed, or cast
out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord, 1. King. 2.27.
that he might fulfill the words of the Lord, which he spoke against the
house of Ely in Shiloh. Now then, can that be said to be erroniously or
unlawfully done, which God himself well liked, and allowed, and would have to
be done, for the performance, and fulfilling of his own words? Yea, consider
yet further that the Kings of Israel, and Judah, had power, and authority over
the Priests, not only to depose them, but also, to put them to death. And this
you may see in King Saul, who put to death diverse Priests, ^ Sa. 22.18. ^.
Chron. 24.^0 21.
and in King Ioash also, who put to death Zachariah, the son of Iehoida the
Priest: How justly, or unjustly, worthily or unworthily, these Priests were put
to death, I here dispute not: but I mention these examples, to show the power
and authority that the Kings had in those times, namely even to put Priests to
death, as well as lay-persons, upon just cause, and if they did offend so far,
as to deserve it.

11. But, now, though there were a supremacy over the high Priests, as well, as
over the other Priests, and Levites, in the Kings, under the Old Testament: and
that they also dealt in matters Ecclesiastical: yet thereupon, it follows
not, (say you,) That Kings and Princes under the New Testament, have the like
Supremacy, over Bishops, and other Clergy men, or the like Authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, and concerning religion. Why so? because, (say you,) there is
now a change and alteration of the Priesthood, and of the Law. Heb. 7.12. But
does not the same Epistle to the Hebrews, (which you cite,) tell you, wherein
that Alteration and change consists, namely, that it is, in respect of the
Leviticall Priesthood, under the old Law, or under the old Testament: which
is now changed into the Priesthood of Christ, under the new Law, or under the
new Testament? why then will you stretch, and extend it any further? yea,
neither does that Epistle, nor any other sacred, or canonical Scripture,
testify an Alteration or change, in this Point, or as touching this Particular
whereof, we now speak, but the clean contrary: videlicet: that as well under
the new Testament, as under the old, Kings, and Princes are to have a
supremacy, over all Bishops, Pastors, and other Ecclesiastical Ministers, and
an Authority also in causes Ecclesiastical, as well, as civil and temporal,
within their dominions. The first part of this Assertion, is manifest, by that
Text in the new Testament, which I have so often recited, and where S. Paul
says expressly thus: Romans 13.1. Chrysostom. in Romans hom, 23
Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers: yea, Though you be an
Apostle, though an Evangelist, though a Prophet, or whosoever you be, says S.
Chrysostom But what shall I need to prove this so clear a Point, so many
times, and so often? For both in my first Book, Cap. 1. page 1. 2. 3. etc. and
in my Reply, chap. 1. page 39. 40, 41. etc. and page 51. 52. 53. 54. etc. this
point is fully, and abundantly proved. Yea the Bishops of Rome themselves, in
former an ancient times, for the space of diverse hundredth years after Christ,
did acknowledge this Subjection, to these higher powers, namely to their
Emperors: as I have demonstratively showed by the examples of Milciades, Leo,
and Gregory the great, mentioned in my first Book, page 23. 24. 25. 26. And
by Anastasius the second, Pelagius the first, Agatho, Hadrian, and Leo the
fourth, mentioned in my Reply, chap. 1 page 11. 12. 13. 19. To all which,
though particularly alleged by me, you according to your wonted wise manner,
thought it best to answer nothing. Yea, both the parts of this Assertion,
namely, that Emperors, Kings, and Princes under the new Testament, have
Authority, not only over Persons Ecclesiastical, but in causes also
Ecclesiastical, I have so sufficiently proved throughout the first Chapter of
my first Book, and throughout the first Chapter of my second Book, which is
my Reply, and in this book also, as that all the Power, and force you have
brought or can bring against it, will never be able, so much, as to shake it,
much less to subdue, or overthrow it.

Yet for the more abundant proof of this Authority of Emperors and Kings in
matters Ecclesiastical, and concerning religion: I alleged in my Reply, chap.
1. page 13 14. the president, and Example of that famous Christian Emperor
Constantine the Great: whereunto, in your Reioynder, you have, (as well became
your great learning, and wisdom,) answered just nothing at all. I alleged
also, in the same my Reply, page 15. the example of Justinian, that Christian
Emperor: where, you deny not, this Emperors making of Constitutions and Laws,
in Ecclesiastical causes, and concerning Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical
Persons. But you say, those Laws be not observed, by the Protestant Clergy,
and you give an instance in one particular. What is this to the purpose? For,
the question was not, nor is, whether our Protestant Clergy, observe those
Laws, and Constitutions, yea, or no: But whether Justinian, that Christian
Emperor, made those, or any such laws, and Constitutions, concerning
Ecclesiastical causes, and Ecclesiastical persons. Now then whilst you
grant, that he made those Laws, and Constitutions concerning Ecclesiastic^ll
causes, and concerning Ecclesiastical persons, you grant so much as I
contended for, that is to say, you grant the whole matter that was in
question. And therefore why should I dispute any longer with you?
Nevertheless, you yet further say, that I much disadvantage my cause by
alleging Justinian the Emperor, who accounted and called the Bishop of Rome
the chief and head of all the holy Churches. But you should do well to
observe in what sense and respects, the Emperor so called, and accounted him:
namely not that he had in those days, a supremacy over Justinian who was
then the Emperor: ^uthen. constable (...). 15. Novel ^ 3.
For Justinian himself testifies the clean contrary to that conceit. We
command, (says he,) the most holy Archbishops, and Patriarchs of Rome, of
Constantinople, of Alexandria, of Antioch, and of Jerusalem. ^vag. lib. 4. c.
1. ^iceph: libr. ^7. cap. 27.
Yea the fifth general Council it self was also called by the commandment
of this Emperor Justinian. So that it clearly appears, that he had the
supremacy, and commanding authority over them all. But in respect of the
soundness of the faith, which the Bishop of Rome held in those times, against
heresies, and errors, it was, that the Emperor preferred him before the other
Bishops, accounting himself chief, or head amongst them, for that cause. In
which regard also, it is, that he would have the Eastern Churches, to be
imitators of him, and to follow him. Neither did this Emperor Justinian, write
unto him, as to an universal or supreme Bishop, in those days over all, but
only, as to a Bishop of a Province, or of a part of the Christian world, and
namely, in this sort Iohanni, Sanctissimo Archiepiscopo almae urbis Romae, ^de.
libr. 1.^.4. and lib. 4 ^.6.
and Patriarchae. To John the most holy Archbishop, and Patriarch, of the
famous City of Rome. Again, in that Epistle, he desired this John the Bishop
of Rome, to write his letters to him, and to the Bishop of that his royal
City of Constantinople, whom he there calls brother to the Bishop of Rome,
(and not his servant, or subject:) Whereupon, the Gloss it self, makes this
observation, and says thus: Hic eum parificat: Here the Emperor equalleth the
B shop of Constantinople, to the Bishop of Rome. And, indeed, the first
General Council of Constantinople, consisting of 150. Bishops, (Canon. 2. and
3.) and the General Council of Chalcedon also consisting of 630. Bishops.
(Act. 16.) and the sixth General Council of Constantinople, (Can. 36) do all
decree the Sea of Constantinople, to be equal to the Sea of Rome: except
only, that, in the meeting and assembly of the Bishops, the Bishop of Rome
was, for Order sake, to have the first Place, and the Bishop of Constantinople,
the second Place: which, together with the reason thereof, you may see more
fully declared in my first Book, chap. 1. page 17. 18.

I alleged further, in my Reply, page 15. 16. 17. 18. many and sundry
Chapters, and Laws, made by the Emperor, Charles the great, otherwise called
Charlemaine, concerning men, and matters Ecclesiastical, the Particulars
whereof, you may there see: which because you knew not how to answer, you
pass them over with this saying, that they are not worth the answering: why
so? in regard, (say you,) there is thereby no more discovered, then by those
before mentioned of Justinian. And is not that mough, if it were no more but
so? and yet is there more discovered in the one, then in the other. Howbeit,
Act. 2.36 and 5.31. John. 18.36.37. 1. Cor. 15.25 Heb. 1.8.13. Ephesians.
1.20.21.22.23. Coloss. 2.10.8.19.
the Laws of those two Emperors, (vizt,) both of Justinian and Charlemaine, I
alleged not to any such end, as you still, and evermore, untruly suppose,
(vizt,) thereby to prove the Spiritual Supremacy, to belong to Emperors, or
Kings, (for the spiritual Monarchy and Supremacy, I attribute, (as I said
before,) neither to Emperor, nor King, nor to Pope, nor Prelate, but to Christ
Jesus only, the sole Monarch, and head, of his whole Church,) but to this end,
and purpose only, namely to prove, that Emperors, and Kings, had in those
former, and ancient times, Authority over Persons Ecclesiastical and in
causes also Ecclesiastical: which because you neither do, nor can deny, what
do you else but grant them: and consequently, you here grant once again,
the thing that is in question, as a matter clear, and undeniable: and
therefore what need I to dispute or debate this matter (any longer) with you?
But here, (if I do not mistake you,) you seem much to restrain the Power and
Authority, of Emperors, and Kings, as though they might not make any new Laws,
or Constitutions, but only strengthen, confirm, and put in execution, the
old, and former Ecclesiastical laws: If this be your meaning, you see how
this conceit is confuted and confounded, even by those former precedents and
examples of Justinian, and Charlemaine. For it is evident, that Justinian, made
many new laws, and new Constitutions, which were not before: and so did also
Charles the Great, frame and make diverse and sundry new laws, Chapters, and
Constitutions. And did not Constantine that first famous Christian Emperor
also make many new Laws, and new Constitutions, concerning Ecclesiastical
persons, and Ecclesiastical matters, which were not made before his days? You
may also remember, Aug. Epist, 50.
that S. Augustine says: Serviunt Reges Christo leges ferendo pro Christ:
Kings serve Christ by making laws for Christ. And therefore they may, as
occasion requires, as well make new laws for Christ, as command those, that
were formerly made for him, to be put in execution. But if you mean, that you
would have Emperors, and Kings, to make no laws, nor cause any to be put in
execution, concerning the Church, but such as will well stand with the Laws of
God, his truth, Religion, and Ordinances, you therein say the same thing that
Protestants do. 2. Cor. 13.8.
For they say with S. Paul, that they may do nothing against the truth, but
for the truth. And, that the power, and authority of Emperors, Kings, and
Princes, (if it be rightly used, and not abused,) is for God, and not against
God, and for Christ, his Church, and Religion, and not for Antichrist, or any
untruths, heresies, or errors whatsoever. Or if your meaning be, that you
would have Emperors, Kings, and Princes, in their making of laws, concerning
God, his Church, and Religion, to take the advice, direction, and counsel, of
godly, learned, and Orthodoxe Bishops, and teachers, this is, also not denied,
but granted unto you: But then must you grant on the other side, that if they
be not Orthodoxe Bishops, and true teachers, but false teachers, or if they be
such as deliver errors, in stead of truths: such men's erroneous counsels,
directions, and advises, are not to be followed, but to be rejected, as I have
showed more fully in my Reply, page 37. 38.

12. But after these times of Charles the Great, mentioned in my Reply, page
18. you come next in your Reioynder, to your accusation of Luther, and Calvine,
mentioned in my Reply, p. 49. So that here you skip over no less then fifteen
whole leaves together in that my Reply. Yet what have you now to say against
Luther, and Calvine? In your first Answer, you took occasion, (for I gave you
none,) to inveigh against them, as if they had been Adversaries to Kings, and
Princes, and to the obedience due to them. In that my Reply, page 49. I said,
that the works, and writings of them both did show, and openly proclayme the
contrary to the world. And this is indeed, very apparent: Luth. tom. 1. in
Genesis cap. 9. and tom. 3. annota. in Deuteronomy capit. 6. fol. 4. and fol. 552. Romans
13.1.2 3.4.5.6. Luth. tom. 2. resp. ad Ambros. cather fo. 150. and 152
For, where as some objected, That the rule, or government of one man over
another, might seem, a tyrannous usurpation, because all men are naturally of
like condition: To this, (says Luther,) must we that have the word of God
oppose the commandment, and ordinance of God, who has put a sword into the
hand of the Magistrate, whom therefore the Apostle calls, Gods Minister.
Again, he says: I grieve, and blush, and groan to see, how scornefully, our
Emperors, and Princes of Germany, are abused by the Pope: whom he leads,
and handles, like brute beasts, both for spoil, and slaughter, at his own
pleasure. This Popery, (says he,) is lively described by S. Peter, 2. Pet.
2. where be says, They despise Rulers, or Governors: by Rulers, signifying
secular Princes. Now the Popish Clergy, have by their own authority,
exempted themselves, from tributes, subjection, and all charges of the
Commonweal, contrary to the doctrine of Peter, and Paul: Yea, so far is
the Pope, from acknowledging the soveraignetie of Princes, over him, that he
will scarce admit them to kiss his feet. Calvine, likewise, writes thus.
The word of God, Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 2. sect. 22.
(says he,) teaches us to obey all Princes, who are established in there
thrones, be it by what means soever: Yea, though they do nothing less, then
the office of Kings, yet must they be obeyed, and though the King be never so
wicked, and indeed, unworthy the name of a King, yet must subjects acknowledge
the image of Divine power, in his public authority, and, as touching
obedience, they must reverence, and honor him, as well as if he were the
godlyest King in the world. Nebuchadnezzar was a mighty invader and subduer of
other Nations: yet God says by his Prophet, that he had given those lands, and
countries unto him. Ezech. 29. and Dan. 2. Neither would he have any rebellion,
or resistance to be offered, but contrariwise commanded obedience to be
performed unto him. Iere. 27. And therefore we must never suffer these
seditious conceits, to possess our minds, as to think an evil King must be
so dealt withal, as he deserves, but we are directly charged to obey the
King, though he be a savage Tyrant, and never so bad. Beza confess. cap. 5.
sect. 45
Beza also speaks in like sort. Private men, (amongst whom, I account
inferior Magistrates, in respect of their King,) have no other remedy, (says
he,) against Tyrants, to whom they are subject, but amendment of their lives,
prayers, and tears: which God in his good time, will not despise. And if it so
fall out, that we cannot obey the commandment of the King, but that we must
offend God, the King of kings, Then must we rather obey God, then man: Yet so,
as that we remember, that it is one thing, not to obey: and, another thing,
Ibidem.
to resist, and to betake ourselves to Arms, which we may not do. Again he
says: The impudency of our Adversaries, is herein most notorious, that they
who contrary to the word of God, have openly subjected Kings, and kingdoms,
to their authority, and be themselves the most rebellious sect under heaven
yet dare netwithstanding to object the guilt of that crime unto us. These being
the doctrines, and positions of Luther, Calvine, Beza, and other Protestants,
concerning Kings, and kingdoms, let the equal Reader Judge, what, and how
great the wrong is, you do unto them, and whether also, that is, or can
possibly be true, which you write, both in your Answer, and, again, in your
Reioynder, namely, That Kings, and Princes may more confidently build the
safety of their persons, Act. 17.7. Ioh. 18.36. Ephesians. 1.21.22.23. Ephesians.
4.15.16. Coloss. 1.17.18.
and estates upon the loyalty, of their Catholic subjects, then upon any
Protestant subjects. Why, more confidently, I pray you? For, is this a good
reason which you bring, (viz.) because, although Papists give the spiritual
supremacy, headship, and Monarchy, over the whole Church upon earth, unto the
Pope, (which indeed, they should not do, in as much as it is a Regal right, and
Prerogative, properly belonging unto Christ Jesus,) yet do they acknowledge in
Kings, a supremacy in Temporal matters yea, this reason, (if you did well
observe it,) makes rather much against you: For, it shows that Papists be
revera, neither so good Christians nor yet so good subjects, Colos. 2.19.
as Protestants be. Not so good Christians: because, They bold not the head
CHRIST JESUS, (as S. Paul speaks,) but have, without any warrant, or
commission from him errected to themselves, another head, Monarch, and
Spiritual King, namely the Pope of Rome: Not so good subjects because they
acknowledge not, to belong unto Kings, an authority over persons
Ecclesiastical, and in causes also Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil, and
Temporal, as Protestants do. For, whereas you say that the Protestant
Subjects, do take from the King, the Temporal supremacy, as well as the
Spiritual, it is too lewd, and loud a slander. Yea what is there, that the
Protestants do more earnestly contend for, against the Pope, and against his
partakers, then the Spiritual supremacy, or Spiritual kingdom, to be given
to Christ Jesus? And the Civil, or Temporal supremacy over persons
Ecclesiastical, and in matters Ecclesiastical, as well as Temporal, to be
given unto Kings and Princes, within their Dominions? But because you yet
further object against the Protestants, both rebellious doctrines, and
rebellious practices, and affirm that many instances of this kind may be
read in the Book of dangerous Positions: For a clear and full Answer to all
that you have said, or rather Papists have, or can say, in that case, I refer
you unto that Book, which is called An exact Discovery of Romish Doctrine in
the Case of Conspiracy and Rebellion: and the Reply to him, that calls
himself, the Moderate Answerer thereof. In which Books so conjoined in one
Volume, you may read, and see at large, a clear justification of Luther,
Calvine, Beza, and other Protestants in this point, and contrariwise the
Papists, to be notoriously guilty therein. And this you may also see further
debated, and showed in that Book, which is called, The true difference
between Christian subjection, and unchristian Rebellion: In the third part
whereof, be refelled the Jesuits reasons, and authorities, which they allege
for the Popes depriving of Princes, and the bearing of Arms by Subjects
against their Sovereigns: and where the tyrannies, and injuries of Antichrist,
seeking to exalt himself above Kings, and Princes, be further discovered and
declared, etc. These things, I would not here thus far have spoken of, had
not you provoked me thereunto, not only by your first beginning, but by your
continuance, and still stiffe-standing in these your needless co^parisons, and
calumniations But you proceed, and come next from p. 50. in my Reply, to p. 79.
where, again you skippe over fourteen leaves more together, in the same
book. In that page 79. It is true, that I said. That not only those kings of
England before mentioned, namely King William Rufus, king Henry the First, and
King Henry the Second, and some others, thus contended, and opposed themselves
against the Pope of Rome: But King William the Conqueror also, who was before
all these, made the like Kingly opposition. For when Hildebrand, otherwise
called Pope Gregory the Seventh, was bold to demand of this King, an Oath of
fealty, to be made to him, as if the King were to hold the kingdom of him,
as of his Sovereign Lord: This King would by no means yield thereunto, but
sent him a full negative Answer, writing thus unto him. Fidelitatem facere
nolui, nec volo, quia nec ego promisi, nec antecessores meos, antecessoribus
tuis, id fecisse comperio. I neither would do, nor will do fealty, because I
neither promised it, nor do I find, that any of my Predecessors have done it
to any of your predecessors. I have here recited, the whole, and entire
sentence, and not produced only a part of it, as you did, very lamely, and
imperfectly. And now what have you to say against it? First concerning that of
King William the Conqueror, you answer not a word. And touching those
particulars, which I had before alleged, concerning the others Kings, namely
concerning William Rufus, King Henry the First, and King Henry the Second, and
other Kings of England, that contended, and opposed themselves against the Pope
of Rome, his encreachments, and usurpations, your answer is very idle and
impertinent. For you answer, as if I had affirmed, that those Kings had utterly
renounced, abolished, or put down, the Popes supremacy in their times,
whereas I affirmed only, that they contended, and made opposition against him;
which they might, and did do, although they then made not an utter
extirpation, and abolition of him, out of that their kingdom. And that they
made opposition to him, I have showed and proved in my Reply, page 75. 76. 78.
79. 80. And very ignorant are you in the histories of England, if you know not
so much: and very perverse, if knowing so much you will not acknowledge it.

13. From thence you come to page 81 of my Reply, where I write thus: But now
what means my adversary to be so extremely audacious, as to deny the
first four General Councels, to have been called by the Emperors? Here you
say, I was pleased to salute you with that language, which better fitted an
inconsiderative Iester, then a deliberate Judge. Why? what is the language, or
what are the words, which so much offend you? You afterward show, namely,
because I there used that term of extremely audacious? But what is it else,
but extreme audaciousnesse, to deny as you then did, and still do, so clear,
evident, and plain a truth? For my part, the matter considered, I see not, but
you might have thought, that I spoke moderately, and temperately enough, whilst
I spoke in that sort, and gave you no worse language: For some others possibly
would have said, that you had been, therein, extremely, and intolerably
impudent. But you forget, as it seems, or care not to remember, what language
or words, you here utter, concerning me, which I have more cause to take ill at
your hands, then you have to be offended, at those other words of mine. But to
come to those four General Councels: I affirmed them, (which you denied,) to
have been called by the Emperors. The first of them, is, The first General
Council of Nyce: That this was called by the Emperor, I proved in that my
Reply, page 81.82. by the testimony of Ruffinus, Eusebius, Socrates,
Theodoret, Sozomon, Zonaras, Nicephorus, Platina, and by the Synodall Epistle
of the Nycene Fathers themselves. And does not he then deserve to be
accounted, at least extremely audacious, that will dare to deny this so
manifest, and palpable truth, testified so abundantly, and by so many
witnesses? But whilst among other witnesses for proof of this point, I
produced Ruffinus, affirming, that Constantine, apud urbem Nicaeam, Episcopale
Concilium convocavit; R^ffin. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Called the Council of Bishops together, at the City of Nyce: You say, that I
there used, a little wile, which amongst the vulgar sort will be called Craft
or Cousenage: because, say you, I omitted those words, Ex sacerdotum
sententia: which be in Ruffinus, and which words, if they had been mentioned,
would have declared, that the Emperor Constantine summoned or called the
Council of Nyce, by the advice, consent, or approbation of the Priests.
Howbeit, first it is not of necessity, that the omission of those words, must
infer it to be done, with a mind and purpose to defraude, deceive, and
cosen, as you very odiously suggest. Yea, secondly, to show, that I did not
craftily, or couseningly, conceal, or omit those words, for mine own
advantage, as you allege, behold, you shall find, in the very next page,
namely, page 82. that I do expressly mention them, and do directly affirm,
Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 1.
out of the same Ruffinus, that this Council of Nyce, was assembled, or
called, Ex sacerdotum sententia, By the advice and consent of the Priests: and
thereby I also proved, that it was not done by the advice and consent of the
Bishop of Rome alone. Now then who is the wily, Crafty, and Cousening
Companion, I hope the honest; and equal Reader will by this time easily
discern, and judge. But thirdly, I did there further answer, (as I do
likewise here again,) that it makes nothing to the matter in question, at
whose suite, or request, or by whose advise or consent, that Council was
summoned: For the question, was not, nor is, by whose persuasion or suite, or
by whose advise, or consent, but by whose commanding authority, it was
called. Now it is very apparent, by those former testimonies, that it was
called, and assembled, by the commandment, or commanding authority of the
Emperor: which declares infallibly, the supremacy, and authority, which the
Emperor had in those days over all the Bishops, and even over the Bishop of
Rome himself, as well as over the rest, whilst he might and did thus command,
as well the one as the other, to appear in a General Council. I also cited
Eusebius, Socrates, and Theodoret, and their words, to prove likewise that the
Emperor Constantine, called, and assembled that General Council at Nyce: But
you are pleased not to see, or not to acknowledge, where those words are to
be found in their Authors: And yet might you have seen and found them, (if
you had so pleased,) in their several Authors: as namely in Eusebius de vita
Constantini, lib. 3 cap. 6. and lib 1. cap. 37 in Socrates, lib. 1. cap. 8. in
the Greek, and cap. 5 in the Latin: and in Theodoret, lib. 1 cap 7. So that
even that also which I cited out of Theodoret, is not a famous fiction (as you
infamously and untruely report it,) but a very certain, and apparent truth,
as there you may see. And all the rest of the Authors, which I there cited, do
likewise testify, and prove the same thing for which I there alleged them.
Yea, this point is so clear and evident, that whilst you thought to confute
it, you have your self further confirmed, and confessed it. Ruffin. lib. 1.
cap. 1.
For when you purposing to allege Ruffinus against me, do cite his words,
thus: Tumille, Then he, (meaning Constantine,) ex sacerdotum sententia, apud
urbem Nycaeam, Episcopale concilium, convocavit: By the sentence, or consent of
the Priests, did call the council of Bishops, at the city of Nyce: And when
again, you likewise intending to allege Damasus against me, do affirm, that
he says: That Constantine, did not gather the council, but cum consensu
Silvestri, Damasus lin Pont. council. 6 act. 18.
with the consent of Sylvester: and that so much also, is expressed in the sixth
council. Do you not, in all this, sufficiently confess, that the Emperor
Constantine, did, by his commanding authority, call this council of Nyce,
although he did it, by the consent, or approbation of Sylvester Bishop of
Rome, and of other Priests? Now then to come to the second general Council,
(which was the first Constantinopolitane,) I have likewise proved in my Reply,
page 83. by the testimonies of Theodoret, Socrates, Sozomen, Zonaras, and the
very Council it self, speaking to the Emperor, Theodosius the elder, that
it was called by the commaundment, or commanding Authority of the same
Emperor. To all which proofs, and testimonies, yon, (according to your wonted
learning and wisdom,) answer nothing in your Reioynder. But in your first
auswer, to prove this Council, not to be called by the commandment of the
Emperor, but of Damasus Bishop of Rome, you cited Theodoret libr. 5. cap. 9.
and in your Reioynder you prosecute it, and say, That the Bishops meeting in
this second general council, writing to Pope Damasus do testify, that they
assembled at Constantinople, by reason of his letter sent the year before to
Theodosius. But what mean you thus to abuse your Reader? For first there is no
such thing in that place of Theodoret, Theodor lib. 5 cap. 9.
that does prove this second General Council, to have been any more called
by Damasus, then by the other Bishops mentioned in the same Letter, or in the
same Epistle. For, that Letter, or Epistle, was not written, or directed to one
alone, as namely to Damasus, (as you would make men believe,) but to many and
diverse Bishops plurally. For thus is the direction, (viz.) To our most
honorable Lords, our very Reverend brothers, and fellows in Office, Damasus,
Ambrosius, Britton, Valerian, Acholius, Anemius, Basil, and the rest of the
holy Bishops assembled in the noble City of Rome. The holy Council of
Orthodoxe Bishops, gathered together in the great City of Constantinople, send
Greeting. So that, it was not Damasus alone, (as here you see,) but the rest of
those reverend Bishops also, assembled at Rome, that sent those Letters,
mentioned in that Epistle to the most holy Emperor Theodosius. And secondly,
even those Letters of Damasus, and of the rest of the Bishops, sent to the
Emperor, concerning that matter of calling the Council were only persuasive,
and not commanding Letters: In as much as it is before, by my Reply, very
evident, that this Council was assembled by the commandment, or commanding
Letters of the Emperor. And consequently it was not Damasus alone, but other
Bishops also joined with him, that sent those their Letters to the Emperor,
whereby he was excited, moved, and persuaded, to call, and command that
Council to be assembled at Constantinople. Now then, seeing that Theodoret
whom you cite to prove, that Pope Damasus by his commanding Letters, called
this Council, Theodor. l. b. 5 cap. 7.
proves no such matter: Yea he expressly witnesses the contrary, affirming
it directly, to have been called by the commandment of the Emperor: Does or
can this any way help to excuse you? Or does it not rather so much the more
enlarge, and aggravate your fault herein?

Concerning the third General Council, (which was the first Ephesine.) that,
That was called by the commandment of the Emperor Theodosius the younger, I
have also proved in in my Reply, page 83. by the testimonies of Evagrius,
Liberatus, Socrates, Zonaras, Nicephorus, and by the Synodall Epistle it self.
And yet you would make men believe, that it was called not by the commandment
of the Emperor, but of Celestinus Bishop of Rome. And for proof hereof, you
cite Prosper in Chronico, affirming it to have been held Caelestini
authoritate. By the authority of Celestine. But you still much mistake, for
this was no commandment, or commanding authority in Celestinus, but a
persuasive only, which Bishops might, and did use to the Emperors, very
often, for the obtaining of Councels. So that by these words, is no more
meant, or signified, but that Celestinus used such authority, that is, such
power, credit, and estimation, as he had with the Emperor, to cause, and
procure this Council to be assembled. And that this word, Authoritas, does so
signify, and is very often used in that sense, your Dictionaries, and Latin
writers, will sufficiently teach you. Yea, your self, in your Rejoinder, do
cite Paulus Diaconus, in his Historical collections, that he speaks of the
last of the first four General Councels, (which was the Council of
Calcedon,) in this sort. Papae Leonis auctoritate, etc. Paul. Diac. lib. 15.
By the authority of Pope Leo, and command of Martian the Emperor, the
Council of Culcedon was summoned. Here you see a plain distinction, made
between this authority, and the command. The command, or commanding
authority, being attributed to the Emperor Martian: and the other authority,
namely the persuasive, being attributed to Leo, Bishop of Rome. And yet
neither, was it only Celestinus Bishop of Rome, but other Patriarchs, and
Bishops, likewise, as namely Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, John Bishop of
Antioch, Zonar. in Theodos. Iuniore.
and Iuvenall Bishop of Jerusalem that persuaded, and excited the Emperor, to
call and command, this third General Council at Ephesus, as Zonaras
testifies.

And as touching the fourth General Council, which was, as I said, that at
Calcedon: I have proved in my Reply, page 85. by the testimony of the very
Council it self, and by sundry Epistles also, of Leo Bishop of Rome, that
this Council of Calcedon, was summoned by the commandment of the Emperor:
whereunto may be also added, that your own testimony of Paulus Diaconus,
before cited, who says, (as even your self alleged him,) that this fourth
General Council of Calcedon, was summoned or called by the commandment of
Martian the Emperor, and not of Leo, although Leo did also interpose and use
his authority, and credit with the Emperor, for the effecting of it. Now
then, when beside the cleerenesse of other proofs, you saw by this express
testimony or Prulus Diaconus, (whom your self alleged,) that this Council
of Calcedon, was summoned, or called by the commandment of the Emperor
Martian, why should you, or any man else, say, or suppose the contrary
thereunto? Yea even Leo himself, in diverse of his Epistles, shows, (as I
said before,) that neither he, nor any other Bishop of Rome did, in those
days, summon or call, either this, or any other General Council, but that it
belonged to the Emperors, so to do, as you may see more fully, by the words
and actions, of the same Leo, formerly mentioned in my Reply, page 84.85. But I
there also further alleged, a fifth General Council, called, Mandato
Iustiniani, By the commandment of Justinian the Emperor. And other Councels
I likewise there alleged, called by Emperors: to all which, you answer
nothing. Nor do you answer to Cardinal Cusanus, there also produced by me,
confessing, and affirming expressly, though it were against the Pope, that,
The first eight General councels, were called by the Emperors. Yea, this is
so clear a case, and so evident a truth, that S. Hierome makes it to be of
the essence of a General Council: Dic quis Imperator jusserit hanc Synodu^
convocari: Tell us, Hieron. lib. 2. in Ruffin.
(says he,) what Emperor commanded this council to be assembled: thereby
declaring, that it was held for no General Council in those days, unless it
were called, and assembled by the commandment of the Emperor. Now then, upon
all these premises, I leave it to the equal Reader, to judge, whether he
that denies this so clear, plain, and palpable, a truth, be not justly
worthy to be accounted, at least, Extremely audacious, if not extremely
impudent.

14. And yet you would seem to say further, that S. Peter by his authority
and commandment, called the Council which was at Jerusalem, in the Apostles
times, ( Act. 15.) and, that he was also the President therein. But you prove
it not, neither is there any such thing in the Text appearing, that he
commanded or called that Council. Yea, he had no such commanding, or
compulsive authority over the rest of the Apostles. The Greek Scholiast
says, That he did nothing imperiously, ^r. Schol. in Act. 2.
or with commanding authority, but all things by common consent. And
therefore, in those times of the Apostles, did that Council at Jerusalem,
(Act. 15.6.) come together, and was assembled by common consent, and agreement
amongst themselves: But afterward, indeed, in the succeeding times, when the
Emperors became Christians, The Ecclesiastical affairs, (says Socrates,)
did much depend upon them, so that the greatest Councels were in time past, and
still are, (says he, Socrat. libr. 5. in Prooemio.
) at this day, called by their appointment. Neither was Peter, the first man,
that spoke in that Council, (as you affirm, seeking thereby to prove him to
be also the President therein:) For the Text shows, that there had been
great disputation, before Peter rose up, and spoke, Act. 15.7. Yea, it seems,
that James rather then Peter, was the President in that Council: For James was
he, that gave the definitive sentence, Act. 15.19.20. and to that sentence of
his, did both Peter, and the rest of that Council, consent, and condescend,
and accordingly, was the decree drawn and made up, in that Council, and sent
unto the Churches, as appears, Act. 15.22.23 24.25.26.27.28.29. Neither is it
true, that to Preside, or to be President, in Councels, is a right properly
belonging to the Pope, whatsoever you say: Yea, it is very evidently, and
abundantly disproved in Ecclesiastical history, by sundry Councels, wherein
others, A^han. ad solitar. vitan: agentes.
and not the Bishops of Rome, were the Presidents. And Athanasius himself
says expressly, of Hosius, that he was, in his time, Conciliorum Princeps,
the chief, Prince, or President of the Councels.

15. But in my Reply, page 30. I said further, that Athanasius did approve of
the Authority of the Emperors, in Ecclesiastical causes: and this I proved
by two instances, and not by one only, (as you say:) The first was this, that
when Athanasius was commanded to confer, with one Arius, concerning matters
of faith: he answered: Who is so far out of his wits, that he dare refuse
the commandment of his Prince? The other, was this. That the Emperors
commandment made him to appear before the Council of Tyrus: and finding
that council, not to be indifferent, but partially affected, He and the rest
of the Orthodoxe Bishops, appealed to the Emperor. To the former you answer
nothing at all, in your Rejoinder. To the latter, you speak somewhat, and do
say, that, That which I call the council of Tyrus, was no council at all. And
this you would prove by the testimony of Athanasius himself, where he says
thus. Qua front, talem conventum, Synodum appellare audent, cui comes
Praesedit, With what face dare they call such an assembly! a Synod, or
Council, in which the Count did Preside? But do you think this, to be a
reason sufficient, to prove it to be no council at all, or in any sort,
because a Count being a Layman did Praeside in it, as Deputy, or Lieuftenant
to the Emperor, and in his stead? Does not your self say in your Rejoinder,
that the Emperor Theodosius the Younger, sent Count Candidianus, as his
Lieustenant to the Council of Ephesus? will you therefore conclude, that this
Council of Ephesus, was also therefore no Council at all, because this Count
Candidianus, being a layman, was President, or Lieuftenant it it, in stead of
the Emperor? For you may as well conclude the one, as the other by that reason.
Do not therefore misconster nor mistake, that holy man Athanasius, nor wrong,
nor delude your Reader by a fallacy, a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum
simpliciter. For if you read him diligently, and observantly, you will find,
that he denied it not to be a Council, simply and absolutely, but in some
respects; as, namely, in respect it consisted of Arrian Bishops, and of that
Arrian President, and that, their plotte, purpose, and endeavor was to advance
Arrianisme, against Gods truth, and the Orthodexe Bishops of that time, and
against the decrees of the former famous Council of Nyce, in that point: and
in respect also, that not justice, but violence, or tyranny was there intended,
and such like. And this you might have perceived, if you had gone on, with the
words of Athanasius, which are these, (viz.) Qua front, talem conventum,
Athan. apolo. 2 page 567.
Synodum appellare audent, cui Comes praesidet? Et ubi speculator apparchat? Et
Comentariensis sive Carcerarius, pro Diaconis Ecclesiae, adventantes
introducebat? ubi Comes verba faciebat, caeteri praesentes in silentio erant,
vel potius Comiti obsequium suum, accommodabant, etc. Again he there says.
Qua species ibi Synodi, Ibid. p. 566.
ubi vel caedes, vel exilium, si Caesari placuisset, constituebatur? And again
he says. Niceni Concilij Decreta irrita, sua autem, rata volunt: Et Synodi
vocabulo uti audent, qui tantae Synodo non obtemperant: Nihil illis Synodi
curae sunt, sed inanem speciem Synodi praetexunt, ut sublatis Orthodoxi viris,
ea quae verae, and magnae Synod^, Ibid. p. 619.
de Arianis, statuta sunt, demoliantur. And therefore he says further, thus
Quaeres cumita agerentur, ab ijs tanquam e concilio injurioscrum, recessimus.
Quod enim libuit, fecere. That whilst these things were thus done, we says
he, departed from them, as from a Council of injurious persons: For they did
what they listed: You see then in what respects it is, that Athanasius
disliked, and condemned this Council of Tyrus, as not worthy the name of a
Council: Yet, for all that, he affirmed it not to be no Council at all
simply and absolutely, and to all intents, and purposes, as you would persuade.
For if it had been no Council at all, or in any sort, why was it convocated or
assembled, as a Council? Or why was Athanasius commanded by the Emperor to
appear there? Or why did the same Athanasius afterward appeal from thence to
th Emperor? yea even Athanasius himself, affirms it to be a council, such a
one as it was, and gives it expressly, the name of a Council, when he says,
as you heard before, that he, and the rest of the Orthodoxe Bishops departed
from thence, tanquam e Concilio iniuriosorum, as from a Council of injurious
Persons. So that, a Council himself here acknowledged it to be, though a bad
Council, though a Council of injurious, and wicked Persons, and a Council
not worthy to be called a Council, because it thus intended and endeavored,
the advancement of Arrianisme. But what? Will you say, that the many and
sundry Councels convocated, and assembled in times past, wherein Arrianisme
was established, were therefore no Councels at all, or in any sort? Yea this of
Tyrus, (as well as those,) was held to be a Council, (though a wicked, and
impious one,) not only by Athanasius, but by Socrates also, and by Theodoret
likewise, Socrat. libr. 1. c 20. c. 21 ca. 22. Theodor. lib. 1. c. 28. c. 29 c.
30.31.
who in their several Ecclesiastical Histories, do often call it expressly
by that name, of the Council of Tyrus. And even that Christian Emperor also,
Constantine himself, wrote unto them, by the same name, calling them the
Council of Tyrus. And it is yet further recorded, that, by the Emperors
commandment, this Council of Tyrus, (expressly again so called.) was
removed from Tyrus, to Jerusalem.

But then you say, that the fact, whereof Athanasius was accused by the
Arrians, in that Council of Tyrus, was a mere civil crime, belonging to the
Temporal Tribunal: to wit the killing of Arsenius, and cutting of his hand.
But you are full deceived: For it was not only the killing of A^senius, and
the cutting of his hand, (as you allege,) but it was further, the using of
that hand, Socrat libr. 1. ^ap. 20.
(so suggested to be cut of,) to Magic, and Sorcerie, that was laid to his
charge: Yea, sundry other things also were laid to his charge, as namely, that
he had deflowred a virgin: Theodoret. lib 1. cap. 30.
and that one of his Clergy, had beaten down the Altar, overthrown the
Lords Table, broken the holy Cup, and burned the blessed Bible. For all which
misdemeanors, his accusers sought to get him displaced, and deposed in that
Council. So that it was not a mere Civil crime, that was laid to his charge,
as you suppose, but they were mixed offenses, partly Civil, and Temporal, and
partly Episcopal, and Ecclesiastical. And therefore well might it be called
in some respect, Negotium Imperatorium, Athan. apolog. 2. p. 568.
a matter Imperial, namely in respect of the accusation of killing of
Arsenius. and the cutting of his hand, if you go no further but to consider
these facts only, singly and apart from the rest: For so also did the
Emperor, Constantine himself, as it seems, for a while, conceive of it, and
therefore wrote to Dalmatius, the Censor, that he should call before him, such
as were accused, hear the matter, and punish the offenders: Socra. libr. 1.
cap. 20.
But afterward he altered his opinion, and stopped that course of hearing
Athanasius matters before the Censor, and would have them to be heard, and
determined before the Council of Bishops, which was assembled at Tyrus. (and
which was afterward removed from thence to Jerusalem, to consecrate a Temple or
Church, which the Emperor had builded there.) The Emperor, (says Secrates,)
willed the Bishops assembled at Tyrus, to debate, together with other matters,
the contentions raised about Athanasius, to the end, (all quarells being
removed,) they might afterward cheerfully solemnize the consecration of that
Church, and dedicate the same unto God. So that, all the matters laid to
Athanaesius his charge, being not singly and severally, but jointly together
considered, and they all tending, to the slander, defamation, and deposing of
so worthy, reverend, and renowned a Bishop, it appears by the event, that it
was at last, in those times, held, and concluded, to be Negotium Synodale, and
Episcopale, a matter meet for a Synod, or Council of Bishops, to consider
of, and to determine. And so indeed was it done accordingly. Now then, when
Athanasius went to the Emperor for refuge, appealing from this wicked, and
injurious Council of Tyrus, unto the same Emperor, in this his Episcopal,
and Ecclesiastical cause: Is it not thereby, very evident, that he approved
of the authority of the Emperor in a cause Ecclesiastical? But if yet, you
make any doubt hereof, you may see further in my Reply, page 68. that as the
Apostle Paul appealed to Caesar, so Athanasius himself says, that by that
example of the Apostle, he would likewise appeal to the Emperor of his time:
and he says there further, that beyond the Emperor, there was in his days
no appeal to be made to any, but to God only, and consequently not to the
Pope.

16. But you demand of me certain questions wherein you would be resolved:
The first is, whether I hold, and conclude the spiritual supremacy to be in
the King? I cannot but wonder at this question of yours. For I have often told
you, in my Reply, that it is a Civil and Temporal supremacy, over persons
Ecclesiastical, and in causes also Ecclesiastical, which I give unto Kings.
What? have we been so long disputing about the point of Supremacy? And do
you not yet know the state of the question betwixt us? S. Paul speaks of
some, that would be Doctors of the Law, 1. Tim. 1.6.
and yet understand not what they speak, nor whereof they affirm: Of this
sort, it seems, you are, by this question propounded. But I answer you once
more, that it is not, (as you have often said, and often mistaken,) a
spiritual, but a Civil and Temporal supremacy, that I attribute to
Emperors, Kings, and Princes, in causes Ecclesiastical, and over Persons
Ecclesiastical. And as for the Spiritual supremacy, it belongs rightly and
properly to Christ Jesus, the only Spiritual King, Head, and Monarch, of his
whole Church. For when he was demanded, touching his kingdom, he answered
thus: My kingdom is not of this world: Ioh. 18 36.
thereby declaring, that he was not a worldly, or terrestrial King, but a
spiritual King. And therefore also when they would have (...) him. a
terrestrial King, Ioh. 6.15.
he would none of it. (...) and departed from them. And so likewise testifies
(...) true, and faithful Apostle, (speaking of himself (...) of the rest of
the Ecclesiastical Ministers,) that the weapons of their warfare, ^. Cor. 10.4.
are not carnal, but mighty through God: that is, they be divine, and
spiritual, and not worldly or terrestrial. And in respect of this his
spiritual kingdom, or spiritual supremacy, all Emperors, Kings, Princes,
and Potentates, Psalm. 72.11. Phil. 2.9.10.11. Math. 28.18 Ephesians. 1.20.21.22.23.
as well as all Bishops, and others, of what degree soever, must acknowledge
their subjection unto him. For to him is given all power both in heaven and in
earth. And he it is, whom God has set at his right band far above all
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name, that is
named, not in this world only, but also in that which is to come. And he has
made all things subject, under his feet, and has given him, over all things,
to be the bead to the church, which is his body, the fullness of him that
fills all in all. 1. Cor. 15.25
And, He must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet. You
see then, that this spiritual kingdom, or spiritual Monarchy and supremacy,
belongs only to Christ Jesus, and not to any terrestrial Emperor, King,
Prince, Pope, or Prelate whatsoever. And therefore when you attribute, (as you
do,) the spiritual supremacy to the Pope of Rome, consider well, how great
and intolerable the offense is. For is it not (as I said before) direct high
treason in a subject, to intrude, and usurp upon the kingdom of his
sovereign, and to exercise his supremacy, Royal rights, authorities, and
Prerogatives therein, without any warrant, or commission from him? And is it
then any less then high treason, for the Bishop of Rome to do the same, in
the spiritual kingdom of CHRIST JESUS? If you say that the Bishop of Rome, is
but only the Vicar, or Viceroy, or Deputy, unto Christ, in that his
kingdom: I demand who constituted, or appointed him to bet so? For is not he
still a traitor to his King, that enters upon his kingdom, possesses, and
enjoys it, under color, and pretense, that he is appointed by his
sovereign, to be the Viceroy, or Lord deputy of the kingdom, when revera,
(whatsoever he pretends, he neither has nor can show any Letters Patent,
Warrant, or Commission from his King for the same? Such is the case of the
Bishop of Rome. For neither the Pope, nor all his partakers, do, or be able to
show any warrant or commission from Christ, in that behalf: They have been
long seeking out such a warrant and commission, but they could never yet, nor
ever will be able to find it. If then this be high treason against Christ, in
the Pope: do your self judge what offense it is in you, or others, that take
part with him therein, and be his adherents, followers, and maintayners. The
second question you demand of me, is, whether the whole Church being but one,
there be any more heads of it then one? I answer, that the whole Church, 1. Cor.
12.12 13.14. etc. Ephesians. 1.22.23. Ephesians. 4.15. Coloss. 1.8. Coloss. 2.10.
being (as S. Paul calls it,) The body of Ghrist: This one body, can have no
more then one head: and, that one head is CHRIST JESUS, as the same S. Paul,
again expressly teaches and affirms. And therefore, this head, is not the
Pope of Rome, as you very strangely dream your self incline to this, that
there should be but one Head to this one Body. How then can you admit any more
heads unto it, then this one, which is Christ Jesus? For, if you make CHRIST
JESUS to be one head, and the Pope to be another head, you make this one body
to have two heads, and so make it a Monster. As for your distinction, of a
Vital head, and a Ministerial head, it is before removed and taken away in my
first Book, page 94. 95. 96. 97. whereto you have not answered. And whereas you
say, that the Church Militant, consisting both of Jews, and Gentiles, is but
Vnum ovile, One sheepefould, and that this one Sheepefould, Ioh. 10.16.
there is but unus Pastor, on pastor, or one shepherd, it is true: but this
unus pastor, one shepherd, is not, Ioh. 10.11.14.
(as you still fondly fancy,) the Bishop of Rome, but CHRIST JESUS only, as
appears in the same Chapter. And in this respect, he is also called, Magnus
pastor ovium, The great shepherd of the Sheep. Heb. 13.20.
Yea, the chief, or supreme Pastor, over all the several Pastors of all the
several flocks in the world. 1. Pet. 5.2 3 4.
For thus S. Peter speaks to them all: Feed the flock of God, which
depends upon you, caring for it not by constraint, but willingly: not for
filthy lucre, of a ready mind: not as though ye were Lords over Gods
heritage, but that ye may be examples to the flock: And when the chief
Shepherd shall appear ye shall receive an incorruptible crown of glory.
Here you see, that S. Peter shows very plainly that not himself, (though
he were an Apostle,) much less the Bishop of Rome, or any other Bishop, was
to have this high and transcendent name of Chief or supreme Pastor, over all
the rest of the several Pastors: For to CHRIST JESUS only he attributes,
and appropriateth this tittle, as being his peculiar and prerogative: in as much
as it is Christ Jesus only, and not the Bishop of Rome, nor any other man
mortal whosoever that can give this incorruptible crown of glory he there
speaks of. Not the Pope then, nor any other, but CHRIST JESUS only,
appears to be the chief or supreme Pastor, or (which comes all to one
reckoning,) the Universal Bishop, over all the several Bishops, and several
Pastors, dispersed in the world. Your own translation in this Text of 1. Pet.
5.4. is, Princeps Pastorum, the Prince of Pastors: which likewise still
shows, that not the Pope, but CHRIST JESUS only, is the supreme Pastor, or
the Prince of the several Pastors dispersed on the face of the Earth. And
therefore was it also decreed in the Council of Carthage 3. ca. 26. that
Primae sedis Episcopus, non appelletur Princeps sacerdotum, vel summus
sacerdos, aut aliquid huiusmodi, sed tantum primae sedis Episcopus: The Bishop
of the first Sea, may not be called, the Prince of Priests, or the the chief
Priest, or any such like, but only Bishop of the first Sea. And Gratian adds
further as touching the title of Universal Bishop, Distinct. 99. prim. sed.
Neither let the Bishop of Rome be so called. Now then to come to answer you,
also touching Nero, and other Heathen, and persecuting Emperors, and Kings: It
is true, that they have the same Civil sword, power, and authority committed
to them from God, which the Christian Emperors, and the Christian Kings have,
and to the same end; namely, 1. Pet. 2.13.14. Romans 13.3.4
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well:
But if they punish good, and godly men, and well-doers, (as Nero did, when he
put S. Peter, and S. Paul, to death, and as the other Emperors, and Kings do,
which persecute the true and Orthodoxe Christians) This is not the right using,
but abusing of the sword and authority, committed to them. So that, the power,
and authority is the same to both: but the difference is in the use, or abuse
of that Authority. All the supremacy, power, and authority granted from
God, to any Emperors, Kings, and Princes, within their Dominions, ought to be
employed for God, and not against him, in any sort. And according hereunto, the
true Christian Emperors, and Kings, use their Civil swords, and authorities
for God, and for advancement of his service, truth, and religion. And although
Heathen, and Infidel Emperors and Kings do commonly abuse that sword, and
authority, (which God has given them,) against God, and against his service,
servants, and religion. Ezra 1.2.3. etc. Ezra, 6.1.2 3 etc. Ezra
7.12.13.14.15.16.17 18. etc. Dan. 3.28.29. Dan. 6.24.25.26.
Yet if any Heathen Emperor, or King do command any thing for God, or for
his service, worship, or religion, (as they may do, and sometimes have done,)
(as appears by the examples of King Cyrus, King Darius, King Artaxerxes, King
Nabuchadnezzar, and others:) therein, they are no less to be obeyed, then if
it had been commanded, by the godlyest, and best professed Christian King in
the world. And this you may see further declared, in my first Book, Chap. 1.
page 7. and in my Reply, page 44. 45. Wherefore, it is evident, that even Pagan
and Heathen Kings, have the same supremacy, power, and authority, within
their Kingdoms and Dominions, to command for God, his service, and religion,
which Christian Kings and Princes have: although, they do not, (as they
should,) evermore use, extend, and employ, that their power, and authority,
accordingly, for God, and his religion: and consequently, the defect, is not in
respect, of any power, or authority, (which they want not,) but in respect of
their understandings, wills, and affections, which being depraved, and
corrupted, and not rectified or sanctified, nor converted to Christ, and
Christianity, do carry them awry, and the wrong way.

But you propound unto me, yet further, another question, which is this. What
if the King of Slavonia, or any other king misled by frailty, ignorance, or
malice, should employ their powers to force their subjectes from the true
Religion, and thereby subvert, and ruinate, not only their own souls, but
the souls of their subjects also: Might not the King in this case, being, (as
you call him,) a scabbed sheep, (all other means failing of his recoverie,)
be compelled by the Bishop of Rome, to embrace Gods true faith and religion,
and to permit the same freedom unto his subjects? I answer, no. For, first,
what right, or authority, from God, has the Bishop of Rome in this case, to
compel Kings, and Princes, more th^n other Bishops, have? Yea, neither the
Bishop of Rome, nor any other Bishop, or Ecclesiastical Minister, has any
such power, or authority, included, or comprised, within those their
Ecclesiastical callings and Ministeries, as by worldly power, and external
force of Arms, to compel a King to the right religion. It is true, that the
Ministers of Christ may exhort, and persuade the best they can, a King erring
in his Religion, from his error, and may do, what their Ecclesiastical
commission granted them from Christ, will warrant them to do, but no further
may they go: for then do they, Fines alienos invadere, Rom 13.4.
Invade other men's bounds, (S. Bernard speaks,) as kings have the temporal
sword, to command, and to compel: Bishops, Pastors and Ministers
Ecclesiastical, have not that but another sword to use, namely, a spiritual
sword, or sword of the spirit, which is the word of God: Ephesians. 6.17.
as S. Paul calls and defines it. And therefore these two swords must be
distinguished, and not confounded. Yea, Christ Jesus himself, whilst he was
here upon earth, would not meddle with worldly, or temporal matters. For when
one spoke unto him, desiring him, to bid his brother, to devide the inheritance
with him, Luke. 12.13 14. Math, 16.19
he refused, and said: Man, who made me to be a Judge, or a devider over you?
If you object, that Christ said to Peter: Whatsoever thou bindest on earth,
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou loosest on earth shall be loosed in
heaven. Remember, that he spoke also the same thing plurally to all the
Apostles, giving to them all alike the same authority, Math. 18.18
saying thus Quicquid ligaveritis, etc. Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be
bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.
You cannot therefore by virtue of those words, infer, that Peter, or his
successors had any more authority, to depose Kings, or to compel them in any
sort, to the right religion, or to any thing else, then either James, or John,
or the rest of the Apostles, or any of their successors had, in the like case;
For, the same authority, and in the same words, is, (as you see,) granted
as well to the one, as to the other. Neither again, must you forget or omit the
former part of those words spoken by CHRIST unto Peter, which be these: I
will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 16.19.
For the subsequent words, (spoken to him,) of binding, and loosing, have
reference thereunto and: are therefore to be expounded, not of things earthly,
or concerning terrestiall matters, or worldly kingdoms, but of things
concerning another world and kingdom, namely, concerning the kingdom of
heaven. And so also does S. Bernard directly declare, saying thus, to Eugenius
Bishop of Rome: Ergo in criminibus, non in possessionibus, Bernard de
considerat. ad Eugen. lib. 2.
potestas vestra: Quoniam propter illa, non propter has, accepistu claves regni
coelorum. Your power, (says he,) concerns sins, and not matters of
possession: because, for those, and not for these ye have received the keys
of the kingdom of heaven. Yea, that the keys of the kingdom of heaven were
also granted equally and alike, to all the Apostles, I have further showed,
very fully, and plainly, in my first Book, page 292. 293. 294. etc. And that
no part of the power of those keys, no, not Excommunication it self, (were it
never so justly, or lawfully awarded,) is of any force, by Gods law and
institution, to depose Kings, or to disanall the duty and allegiance of
subjects, I have likewise showed in the same my first Book, page 299. 300.
301. By what right, or reason then, shall or can the Bishop of Rome, (who is
also revera no Minister of Christ at all, but the very apparent grand
Antichrist, (as I have proved at large, throughout the third part of my first
Book,) claim to have any such external power coactive, or compulsive over
Kings? But moreover this question here propounded by you was sufficently
answered, and resolved before, by S Chrysostom, in the case of king Vzziah,
otherwise called Ozias, where he puts this difference between the King,
and the Priest; that Ille cogit, Ch^ysosto. de verbis Esaiae, vidi Dominu^
homil. 4.
hic exhortatur: Ille habet arma sensibilia, hic arma spiritualia. The King
compels, the Priest exhorts: the King has the sensible weapons: the
Priest, the spiritual weapons. And when the Priest, or Ecclesiastical
Minister, has gone as far, as he can go in his Ecclesiastical Ministry, he
must not go any further, to use any external power coactive or compulsive, as
he there also teaches, (...) 21.1.
but must in every such case leave men unto God, who has the hearts of all
kings, as well as of others, in his hands, and moves, and turns them, when,
Chrysostom de Sacerlotis^h. 2.
and which way s^ever he pleases. Yea, S. Chryso^tome says yet further
expressly. That it is not lawful for a Bishop, to our men with so great
authority, as a shepherd does his sheep: for it is free for a shepherd
forcibly to bind his sheep, to drive them from their feeding, to scare them,
and to cut them: but in the other case, the facility of the cure, consists
no in him that gives, but only in him, that takes the medicine. This, that
admirable teacher perceiving, said to the Corinthians: Not that we have any
Dominion over you: under the name of faith, but that we are helpers of your
joy. For of all men, Christian Bishops must not correct the faults of offenders
by force or violence. External Judges, when they take any transgressing the
laws, they show themselves to be endued with great authority, and power, and
do compel them, whether they will or no, to change their manners: But here,
(says he,) non vim afferre, sed suadere tantum oportet, atque hac ratione
meliorem efficere, quem emendandum susceperis: You may not use violence but
persuasion only, and by this means, make him better, whom you have taken upon
you to amend. Again he says: If any sheep go out of the right way,
Chrysostom. de Sacerdotio lib. 2.
and leaving the plentiful pastures, graze on barren, and steep places: The
shepherd somewhat exalts his voice, to reduce the dispersed and straggling
sheep, and to force them to the flock: But if any man wander from the right
path of the Christian faith: The Pastor must use great great pains care, and
patience: Neque enim vis illi inferenda, neque terrore ille cogendus, verum
suedendu tantum, ut de integro ad veritatem redeat: For he may nor be forced,
or constrained with terror, but persuaded only, that so he may return again
to the truth. If then your late Council of Lateran, under Pope Innocentius the
third, decreed, (as you say,) this external power coactive, to be in the
Bishop of Rome: You see, it is not to be regarded: Because such a decree, (if
any such were,) is directly contrary to the testimony of all former approved
antiquity. But yet you must also remember what Platina writes concerning that
Council. Plantina de vita Innocen. 3.
Venere multa tum quidem in consultationem, nec decerni tamen quicquam aperte
potuit: Many things, (says he,) came into consultation, in that Council, but
nothing could plainly be decided: by reason, the Pope departing, to compose
some tumults, then suddenly risen, died by the way. So that, this your great
Council of Lateran, consulting how to defeat Kings and Princes, of their
Temporal kingdoms and Dominions, but not decreeing, or concluding any thing
therein, as being prevented by the Popes hastened and unexpected death, will
also do you no pleasure, in this case. But now, why may not I, after so many
questions of yours answered, propound you also one question? which is this.
What if the Bishop of Rome, for maintenance of his worldly pomp, pride,
pleasure, and ambition, carelessly neglect all right religion, and be so
extremely wicked, both for life, and doctrine, as that he cares not to carry
innumerable souls, together with his own, by heaps, to hell: who shall
correct, restrain, repress, or punish him? For answer whereunto, you might
say, that in former, and ancient times, The Emperors had the correction, and
the punishment, as well of the Bishops of Rome, as of other Bishops, that were
offenders, within their Dominions: But now the case is altered, and the world
turned topsie turvie, and the Bishop of Rome grown to that height and
licenciousnesse, as that he will not allow himself to be censured, or judged
by any men mortal, be they Emperus, Kings, Princes, Bishops, General
Councels, or whosoever they be. But whilst he is thus mounted, not only above
other Kings, and Princes, but even above the Emperors also himself. What
says Optatus of such a one? Optat. libr. 3. page 85.
Cum super Imperatorem non sit, nisi solus Deus, qui fecit Imperatorem: certe
quise super Imperatorem extollit, iam quasi hominum excesserit metas, se ut
Deum non hominem, aestimat: Forasmuch as, (says he,) there is none above the
Emperor, but God only, that made the Emperor: Certainly, be that exalts
himself above the Emperor, as one that has gone beyond the bounds of men,
esteems himself, not now any longer as a mac, but as God. And whilst
withal, he thus exempteth himself, from the Laws, censure, and judgment of
all men upon earth: what does he else, by all this, but show himself to be,
(...), That lawless person, mentioned by S. Paul, in 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. And which
also sits in the Church, or temple of God, as God, 2 Thessalonians.
2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.
and is exalted above all those men upon earth, that be called Gods in the
Scriptures, (of which sort be Kings, and Princes,) and even above the Emperor
also himself, to whom belongs that (...), sebasma, (mentioned in the same
place of, 2. Thessal. 2.4.) in as much as he is, (...), sebastos, that is,
Augustus, as the Scripture also it self expressly calls him, Act. 25.21.25.
But lastly, It is well known that by Gods own institutution, the power of the
Civil and Temporal sword, rightly, and properly belongs to Emperors, ^om.
13.1.2 ^.4.5.6.
Kings, and Princes, and not to Bishops, Pastors, or other Ecclesiastical
Ministers: and therefore may Kings and Princes lawfully command, compel, and
punish all Bishops, Pastors, and Ecclesiastical Ministers whatsoever, (if they
offend,) as well as lay-Persons, by authority of that their sword, committed to
them from God: But Bishops on the other side may not by that their
Ecclesiastical office and function use that temporal sword, nor any temporal
external power coactive thereunto incident or belonging, against any King, or
other Person, for any cause whatsoever: because that sword is not committed to
them from God: Yea, this opinion concerning compelling of Kings, savoureth more
of treason, then of reason, and therefore is utterly to be detested, and
abhorred.

17. But then you say further, that whatsoever I alleged to invest our King
with the supremacy, the same might be alleged by any Judge in Spain, or
Hungary, or other kingdoms, to prove the supremacy, to be likewise in their
kings. And why not? For it is a thing of right, belonging to all Kings, to have
the supremacy within their several Dominions, and to use, and extend that
their power and authority, for God, and for the advancement of his true
service, and right religion, as well as for the advancement of Civil Justice,
and external peace, amongst their subjects. And what hurt were it to any, if
all the Kings in Christendom, yea if all the kings in the world did this? or
rather how great, ample and unspeakeable a benefit, would thereby accrue and
come, not only to all Christendom, but to the whole world? If all the Kings
in Christendom, or in the whole world, did extend their authority, 2, These.
2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12. Rev. 17 1.2.3.4. etc. Revel. 18.4.
for the maintenance, and advancement of Popery, (which is indeed, the
adulterate, corrupt, and false Religion,) it being, (as the holy Scripture it
self has notified and declared it to be,) the Religion of the grand
Antichrist, and of the whore of Babylon, which all Gods people be commanded to
forsake,) even Papists themselves, out of the error of their judgment, would
think it to be well done: How much more, in true, judgment, ought you, and
they, to think it to be well done, if they did all employ their Civil sword,
power, and authority, for the advancement of that, which is indeed, the most
ancient, true, Christian, Catholic, and Apostolic Religion?

But you have yet still a conceit, that it is requisite, and necessary, to
have a Pope of Rome, as a supreme Pastor, or a supreme Judge, to decide, and
determine all heresies, errors, doubts, questions, and controversies concerning
faith, and religion, that arise in the Church, and so to preserve peace and
unity in it, by his infallible, and unerrable judgment. Howbeit, first, why
should the Bishop of Rome, be this supreme Pastor, or supreme Judge, more then
the Bishop of Antioch, Constantinople, Alexandria, Jerusalem, or any other
Bishop? For where has God constituted the one to be so, more then the other?
Secondly, how do you prove the Bishop of Rome, to have an infallible and an
unerrable judgment, more then other Bishops have? Yea even in the Preface of
my first Book, page 14.15. 16. and again in the second part of that same my
first Book, Chap. 1. page 54.55. I have proved, that the Bishop of Rome may
err, even in matters of faith, as well as any other Bishop: and the same does
also before appear in this Book likewise. Thirdly, if the supremacy, and
Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome, have this virtue in it, to keep and maintain
peace and unity in the Church, and to decide, and determine certainly,
truly, and infallibly, all doubts, questions, and controversies in Religion:
Why does he not decide and determine all those questions and controversies,
that so it might experimentally appear, to have that virtue in it? or what
need is there then, of General Councels, yea of any Councels at all? For, the
use, and end of Synods and Councels, is to decide, and determine questions, and
controversies, that do arise, and spread themselves, to the disquiet, and
trouble of the Church: all which, be superfluous, if the certain truth in
every question, may be had, immediately, from his mouth. But indeed this
institution of Synods, or Councels, is a divine institution, and therefore must
stand: although, that humane invention of the Popes supremacy, needelesly
erected for the same use, and end, do utterly fall, and be disanulled. And
what necessity is there of him. For even General Conncels, were summoned, and
convocated in times past by the Emperors: and may be still at this day
convocated, by the unanimous consent, and authority, of the several Kings,
and Princes, of the several Nations. Neither is the judgment of one man, (as
namely of the Bishop of Rome, or of any other,) so strong, or powerful, to
pull out errors, that be rooted in men's minds, Conc. Affric. cap. 138. epist
^ad Celestinu^.
as is the judgment, and consent of many in a Synod or Council: Unless there
be any, that thinks, God inspireth one particular person with righteousness,
and forsakes a number of priests, assembled together in a Council: which, the
Council of Africa, held to be very absurd, and repugnant to Christ his
promise, so long as they meet together, in his name, and for advancement of
his truth. And here you may observe a difference, between the wisdom of God,
and the wisdom of Men: For, in the Apostles times, there arose at Antioch, a
great question, which was, whether Circumcision were necessary to salvation:
Act. 15 1.2 3.4 5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12 13. etc.
what do they in this case? Do they choose, and appoint some one man as
chief, to whom they will refer the deciding, and determining of this
question? No such matter. And yet if they would have had the controversy
decided, and determined by One: who was fitter to have been that one, then S.
Paul, whom they had amongst them? But they take no such course, but send Paul,
and Barnabas, and certain others to Jerusalem. What to do? Was it to desire
the judgment only of some one man there, as namely of S. Peter, or of any one
other? No. But to have the matter decided, by a Synod or Council, of the
Apostles, Elders, and others, therein to be assembled, for that purpose: and in
which Synod, or Council, it was determined accordingly. If then, in those
times of the Apostles, when there was so great abundance of the gifts of God,
and when as controversies, might without danger of error, have been referred
unto one only, The rule of One above all the rest, was not held meet, and
convenient: Now when the gifts are less, and the danger of error more, Can is
be thought a wisdom consonant to the wisdom of the holy Ghost, to erect,
and constitute. (as the seduced world has done,) One man, namely, the Bishop,
or Pope of Rome, to be the Judge, and that a very sure, and infallible one,
(as they account him,) for the deciding and determining of all doubts,
questions, and controversies, that arise, throughout the whole world,
concerning Faith and Religion, and upon whom, as being, (in their opinions,)
the Monarch, and head of the whole, and universal Church upon Earth, they do,
(though overboldly, and dangerously,) rely, and depend? It is true, that the
regiment or government of the Church is Monarchiall: but that is not in
respect of the Pope, but in respect of CHRIST JESUS, who is, indeed, the
right, true, and sole Monarch, and head of his whole Church: But in respect of
the Bishops and Pastors, that be rulers, or governors under Christ, it is, (as
the Protestants have rightly taught, and defended against the Papists, not
Monarchiall, but Aristocraticall. Yea, Christ Jesus himself, told his
Apostles, (and, in them, all Bishops, their successors,) when they contended
for a Majoritie, or Monarchy among themselves: that Reges gentium
dominanturijs: vos autem non sic: Luke 22.24 25.26. (...). Quis eorum Mayor.
The kings of Nations bear dominion over them, but ye may not do so, one
over another. For, of this was the question, or contention: and therefore of
this must the answer be accordingly understood. These words then do clearly
declare, that there should be no Ecclesiastical King, or Ecclesiastical
Monarch amongst them, to rule, or reign over all the rest: although
terrestrial Kings and Monarchs did, and are well allowed to reign and rule
over the people of those Nations, whereof they be Kings. But again, has not
S. Gregory himself told us long agone, not only how needelesse and
superfluous, but how pernicious also and dangerous it was to the whole Church,
to admit of one to be an universal Bishop, or an Ecclesiastical Monarch,
to rule, Gregory.
and reign over all the rest? For then, (says he,) if he which is the
Ecclesiastical Monarch, or the universal Bishop, do fall, the whole and
universal Church falls with him. And what Gregory thus spoke, and as it were
prophesied so long since, was afterward found true and came to pass
accordingly, to the lamentable woe of the whole Church, in the succeeding
times, by that means. Yea the same S. Gregory has yet further certified us
how pernicious, and dangerous this was, and would be, not only to the whole
Church, but even to himself also, that would take upon him, to be the
Ecclesiastical Monarch, or supreme and universal Bishop over all. Gregory.
For, (says he,) what will thou answer unto Christ, who is the true head of
the universal Church, in that day of judgment, when by this name of
universal Bishop, thou seek to subiugate, all the members of his Body unto
thy self? Whom do thou imitate herein, save only him, who in contempt of
those legions of Angels, which were his fellows, sought to mount aloft to the
top of singularity, where he might be subject to none, and all others might
be subject unto him. As for the having of Bishops of Dioceses, and Provinces,
it no more proves that therefore there may or must be one universal Bishop,
or Ecclesiastical Monarch over all: then that, because there be diverse Kings
in diverse and several Kingdoms, therefore there should be one universal King
over all the Kings and kingdoms in the world. And besides, there were Bishops
of Dioceses, and Provinces in the times both of Pelagius, and Gregory, Bishops
of Rome, whom nevertheless they took no exception against, nor disallowed:
But him that would take upon him to be an Ecclesiastical Monarch, or a supreme
and universal Bishop over the whole Church, him they would not endure, but
vehemently impugned and detested him, and that not without very apparent,
just, and good cause, as here you see. But, moreover, did you never read John
Gerson de Auferibilitate Papae. What he affirmed in some cases, may generally
and absolutely be affirmed: namely, That the Pope may be utterly abolished,
and taken clean away, and that without any less or hurt at all to
Christendom, yea to the great, and ample good, not only of Christendom, but
of all the world beside, if the matter be well weighed and rightly and
thoroughly considered.

18. But touching this point of supremacy, you seem at last, in words, to
appeal to the judgment of the Primitive Church: I would you would do as you
say, and stand to the judgment of it, in very deed. For I have proved,
(which you have not disproved, nor ever will be able to disprove,) That for
the space of eight hundred years, and more, after Christ, even the Bishops of
Rome themselves, as well as other Bishops were subject to the Emperors. And
that the Christian Emperors, had also authority in matters Ecclesiastical,
as well as Civil and temporal, within their Dominions: and nothing do you, or
can you allege against it, but what has been many and sundry times
sufficiently, and abundantly answered, and confuted by the Protestants. As for
that Catalogue of Emperors, Kings, and Princes, which you affirm to have
been exemplarily punished in this world by violent, and miserable deaths, for
oppugning and striving against the Monarchy and supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome, you only say, and suppose it, but do not prove it. And it is an
overbold part in you, to enter into Gods secret counsels, and to affirm that
to be the cause which you know not, nor be able to prove. For there might be,
and so no doubt there were other just causes of their punishments. As for the
oppugning of the Popes supremacy that could not be the cause of those or of
any other punishments: in as much as the gross wrongs, and utter unlawfulness
of it, has before plentifully appeared: and that neither the Pope, nor all his
partakers, be able to show, any commission or warrant from God for the
approbation of it. Yea, how could the oppugning or contending against the Popes
Monarchy and supremacy, be any cause of punishment, when in the holy
Scriptures themselves it appears, (as in my first Book I have showed at
large,) that Papal Rome is the whore of Babylon, and that the Pope of Rome,
the head, and ruler of that adulterate, and Popish Church, is the very grand
Antichrist? Do not therefore deceive your self, nor others any longer, by
mistaking the cause, which is, you know, a fallacy, a causa non, ut causa.

Yet you further say, that I am argued by the wisest, in this Enterprise to
have discovered in consideratively, much arrogancy of wit, in not well
weighing the main importance of this difficulty, far surmounting the talent
of a Lawyer. But first, there is no such difficulty in it, Reges Gentium
domina^tur.
as you speak of: and this I have formerly declared. Secondly, why does it
surmount, or exceed a Lawyers talent and ability, more in me, then in you?
Wherefore, if I be, as you say I am,) censured, or argued, by the wisest, of
much arrogancy, because being a Lawyer, I meddle in this matter: Must not
those wisest, in all justice, and equity condemn you likewise, of much
arrogancy, for the same cause? For you have hitherto in your writings,
affirmed your self to be a Lawyer: and if all this while you nevertheless be
not a Lawyer, you have done your self a great deal of discredit and
dishonor in affirming it: Neither can any man then tell, how to believe you,
in any thing you speak, or write: So that herein you gull not me, but your
self, and others. It would therefore best become you, to unmaske your self,
and to discover your self plainly: For you must think, howsoever you would
conceal your self, that you are sufficiently known, and go not invisible.
But thirdly, who are those, whom you call and account, the wisest? For there
be some that be wise in their own conceit: and some that be Antichristianly
wise, and some that be worldly wise: 1. Cor. 3.19.
whose wisdom is, as S. Paul affirms it, foolishness with God. For, has
not God, (says he,) made the wisdom of this world, 1. Cor. 1.20.
foolishness? The world accounts the wisdom of God to be foolishness.
But, he says, that the foolishness of God, is wiser then men: and the
weakness of God, 1. Cor. 1.25.
stronger then men. The wisest men, then, doubtless be those, that humbly
submit all their learning, and wisdom, to Gods word, and wisdom, and that
be divinely, and Christianly wise: as for the rest, they must, (as the same S.
Paul teaceth them, 1. Cor 3.18.
) become fools, that they may be wise. Whatsoever therefore you say: I
believe, that which Christ Jesus himself has spoken, to be true, and that it
will ever be found verified, Luke 7.35.
(videlicet,) That wisdom is justified of all her Children. But lastly, what
arrogancy either of wit, or learning, do I show, or discover, when I neither
brag nor boast of either: and when I further, franckly and freely confess in
all my Books, that such matter, as is therein contained, I have learned of
others, and so attribute nothing to my self? The wit, and learning I have, how
small, slender, or mean soever you, or others, esteem it, I thank God for
it: and do humbly pray him, to give me the Grace, to use, and employ it to
his honor, and glory, and not to mine own. Yea, how weak or mean soever it
be, in respect of it self, yet such is the strength of the cause which I
defend, and the strength of the Almighty who has enabled me in it, and to
whom, I give all the thanks, and the glory, Psalm. 4.13.
as that it now appears, I hope to every understanding, equal, and
judicious Person, to be undoubtedly victorious, and triumphant. Hereafter
therefore I shall not need to write any more in it, which is now made thus
manifest, clear, apparent, and invincible. So that every man, that will
speak truly, may s^^ of it, that Magna est veritas and praevalet. God open
our eyes, (if it be his will,) and inlighten all our understandings, that we
may all see and know his truth, acknowledge, reverence, embrace, and profess
it, and walk in the ways of it evermore. AMEN.

FINIS.

