HEre Folowythe diverse Balettys and dyties solacyous deuysyd by Master Skeleton
Laureat. Arboris omne genus viridi concedite lauro.



with lullay lullay like a child. Thou slepyst to long thou art begylde.
My darlyng dear my daysy flower.
Let me quod he ly in your lap.
Ly still quod she my paramoure.
Ly st^ll hardely and take a nap.
his head was heavy such was his hap.
All drowsy dremyng dround in sleep.
That of his love he took no keep.
with hey lullay. etc.
with ba ba ba and bas bas bas.
She cheryshed him both cheke and chyn.
That he wist never where he was.
he had forgoten all dedely syn.
he wantyd wyther love to win.
he trusted her payment and lost all his pray.
She left him slepyng and stale away.
with hey lullay. etc.
The ryuers rowth the waters wan.
She spared not to wete her fete.
She wadyd over she found a man.
That halsyd her heartily and kyst her sweet.
Thus after her cold she cought a hete.
My lefe she said rowtyth in his bed.
I wys he has an heavy head.
with hey lullay. etc.
what dremyst thou drunchard drousy pate.
Thy lust and lykyng is from the gone.
Thou blynkerd blowboll thon wakyst to late.
Behold thou lyeste luggard alone.
well may thou sygh well may thou groan.
To dele with her so cowardly.
I wys powle hachet she bleryd thine I.
Quoth skeleton Laureate
THe au^cie^t acquai^ta^ce mada^ between us twayn
The famylyaryte the formar dalyaunce.
Causyth me that I can not my self refrain:
But that I must write for my plesaunt pastaunce.
Remembryng your passing goodly countenance.
your goodly port your bewteous visage.
ye may be countyd comfort of all courage.
Of all your feturs favorable to make true discripcio^
I am insuffycyent to make such enterprise.
For thus dare I say without tradiccyon.
That dame menolope was never half so wise.
yet so it is that a rumer begynnyth for to rise.
How in good horsemen ye set your hole delyght.
And have forgoten your old true loving knight.
with bound and rebound bounsyngly take up.
His Ientyll curtoyt^ and set nowght by small naggys.
S^ur up at the hinder gyrth with gup morell gup.
with Iayst ye Ienet of spain for your tayll waggys
ye cast all your courage upon such courtly haggys.
Have in sergeau^t ferrour mine horse behind is bare.
He rydyth well the horse but he rydyth better ye mare.
ware ware the mare wynsyth with her wanton hele.
She kykyth with her kalkyns and keylyth with a clench.
She goyth wide behind and hewyth never a dele.
ware gallyng in the widders ware of that wrenche.
It is perlous for a horseman to dyg in the trenche.
This greuyth your husband that right Ie^tyll knight.
And so with your seruantys he fersly does fight.
So fersly he fytyth his mind is so fell.
yt he dryuyth the^ down with dyntys on there day ^ach.
He bresyth their braynpa^nys and makyth the^ to swell.
Their browys all to brokyn such clappys they cach.
whose Ialawsy malycyous makyth the^ to lepe ye hach.
by their conusau^ce knowi^g how they serve a wilypy
Ask all your neybours whether that Ily.
It can be no counsel yt is cried at the cross
For your Ientyll husband sorrowful am I.
how be is he is not furst has had a los.
Aduertysyng you madame to warke more secretly.
Let not all the world make an out cry.
Play fair play madame and look ye play clean.
Or else with great shame your game wylbe seen.
Quoth Skeleton Laureat.
Knolege Aquaynta^ce resort favor with grace
Delight / desire / respyte / with lyberte.
Co^age with lust convenient time and space.
Dysdayns / dystres / exylyd cruelte.
wordys well set with good habylyte.
Demure demenaunce womanly of port.
Transendyng pleasure surmountyng all dysporte.
Allectuary arrectyd to redres.
These feuerous axys the dedely woe and pain.
Of thoughtfull hertys plungyd in dystres.
Refresshyng myndys the aprell shoure of rain.
Condute of comfort and well most sovereign.
herber enverduryd contynuall fressh and grene.
Of lusty somer the passing goodly queen.
The Topas rych and precyouse in vertew.
your ruddys with ruddy rubys may compare.
Saphyre of sadness enuayned with Indy blew.
The pullyshed perle your whytenes does declare.
Dyamand poyntyd to raze out hartly care..
Geyne surfetous suspecte the Emeraud come^dable.
Relucent Smaragd Obiecte Imcomperable.
Encleryd myrroure and perspectyue most bright.
Illumynyd with feturys far passing my report.
Radyent Esperus star of the clowdy night.
Lode star to light these lovers to their port.
Gain dangerous stormys their anchor of supporte.
Their sayll of solace most comfortably clad.
which to behold makyth heavy hartys glad.
Remorse have I of your most goodlyhod
Of your behauoure curtes and benynge.
Of your bownte and of your womanhod.
which makyth my heart often to lepe and spring.
And to remember many a praty thing.
But absens alas with tremelyng fere and dread.
Abashyth me albe it I have no need.
you I assure absens is my fo.
My dedely woe my paynfull heaviness.
And if ye list to know the cause why so.
Open mine heart behold my mind expres.
I would ye coud / then should ye se mastres
how there nys thing that I covet so feign.
As to enbrace you in mine armies ^wayne.
Nothing yerthly to me more desirous.
Than to behold your bewteouse countenance.
But hateful Absens to me so enuyous.
Though thou withdraw me from her by long dystau^ce.
yet shall she never out of remembrance.
For I have grauyd her within the secret wall.
Of my true heart to love her best of all.
Quoth Skeleton. Laureat.
Cuncta licet cecidisse putas discrimina rerum
Et prius incerta ^ tibi certa manent
Consiliis usure meis tamen aspice caute
Subdola non fallat te dea fraud sua
Sepe solet placido mortales fallere vultu.
Et cute sub placida tabida sepe dolent.
Ut quando secura putas and cuncta serenas.
Anguis sub viridi gramine sepe latet.
Though ye suppose all Ieperdys ar paste.
And all is done that ye lokyd for before.
ware yet I read you of fortunes dowble cast.
For one falls point she is wont to keep in store.
And under the fell often festerd is the sore
That when ye think all danger for to pas.
ware of the lesard lies lurkyng in the gras.
Quoth Skeleton laureat.
GO pytyous heart rasyd with dedly woe.
Persyd with pain bleding with wo^d smart
Bewail thy fortune with vaynys wa^ and blo.
O fortune unfriendly fortune unkind thou art.
To be so cruel and so overthwart.
To suffer me so careful to endure.
That where I love best I dare not dyscure.
One there is and ever one shall be.
For whose sake my heart is sore dyseasyd.
For whose love welcome disease to me.
I am content so all partys be pleasyd.
yet and God would I would my pain ^ easyd.
But fortune enforsyth me so carefully to endure.
That where I love best I dare not dyscure
Skelto^ laureat at ye insta^ce of a nobyll Lady.
Cum privilegio.

