PARADOXES OF DEFENSE, WHEREIN IS PROVED THE TRVE grounds of Fight to be in the
short ancient weapons, and that the short Sword has advantage of the long
Sword or long Rapier. And the weakness and imperfection of the Rapier-fights
displayed. Together with an Admonition to the noble, ancient, victorious,
valiant, and most brave nation of Englishmen, to beware of false teachers of
Defense, and how they forsake their own natural fights: with a brief
commendation of the noble science or exercising of Arms.

By George Silver Gentleman.

ANCHORA SPEI


LONDON, Printed for Edward Blount. 1599.

blazon or coat of arms HONI SOYT QVY MAL Y PENSE


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, ROBERT EARL OF Essex and Ewe,
Earl Marshall of England, Viscount Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Chartley,
Bourchier and Louaine, Master of the Queens Majesty's horse, and of the
Ordenance, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, Knight of the most noble
order of the Garter, and one of her Highness most honorable Privy Counsel.
FENCING (Right honorable) in this new fangled age, is like our fashions,
every day a change, resembling the Camelion, who alters himself into all
colors save white: so Fencing changes into all wards save the right. That it
is so, experience teaches us: why it is so, I doubt not but your wisdom does
conceive. There is nothing permanent that is not true, what can be true that is
uncertain? how can that be certain, that stands upon uncertain grounds? The
mind of man a greedy hunter after truth, finding the seeming truth but
changing, not always one, but always diverse, forsakes the supposed, to find
out the assured certainty: and searching every where save where it should,
meets with all save what it would. Who seeks and finds not, seeks in vain;
who seeks in vain, must if he will find seek again: and seek he may again
and again, yet all in vain. Who seeks not what he would, as he should, and
where he should, as in all other things (Right honorable) so in Fencing: the
mind desirous of truth, hunts after it, and hating falsehood, flies from it, and
therefore having missed it once, it assayes the second time: if then he thriues
not, he tries another way: when that has failed he adventures on the third:
and if all these fail him, yet he never fails to change his weapon, his
fight, his ward, if by any means he may compass what he most affect: for
because men desire to find out a true defense for themselves in their fight,
therefore they seek it diligently, nature having taught us to defend our
selves, and Art teaching how: and because we miss it in one way we change to
another. But though we often chop and change, turn and return, from ward to
ward, from fight to fight, in this unconstant search, yet we never rest in
any, and that because we never find the truth: English masters of defense,
are profitable members in the common wealth, if they teach with ancient English
weapons of true Defense, weight and convenient length, within the compass of
the statures and strength of men to command, because it makes them safe, bold,
valiant, hardy, strong and healthful, and victoriou (...) the wars, service
of their Prince, defense of their friends and country. But the Rapter in
reason not to be taught, nor suffered to be taught, because it makes men
fearful and unsafe in single combat, and weak, and unserviceable in the
wars.
and therefore we never find it, because we never seek it in that weapon where
it may be found. For, to seek for a true defense in an untrue weapon, is to
angle on the earth for fish, and to hunt in the sea for Hares: truth is ancient
though it seem an vpstart: our forefathers were wise, though our age account
them foolish, valiant though we repute them cowardes: they found out the true
defense for their bodies in short weapons by their wisdom, they defended them
selves and subdued their enemies, with those weapons with their valor. And
(Right honorable) if we will have this true Defense, we must seek it where it
is, in short Swords, short Staves the half Pike, Partisans, Gloves, or such
like weapons of perfect le^gths, not in long Swords, long Rapiers, nor frog
pricking Poiniards: for if there be no certain grounds for Defense, why do they
teach it? if there be, why have they not found it? Not because it is not: to
say so, were to gainesay the truth: but because it is not certain in those
weapons which they teach. To prove this, I have set forth these my Paradoxes,
different I confess from the maine current of our outlandish teachers, but
agreeing I am well assured to the truth, and tending as I hope to the honor of
our English nation. The reason which moved me to adventure so great a task, is
the desire I have to bring the truth to light, which has long time lain hidden
in the cave of contempt, while we like degenerate sons, have forsaken our
forefathers virtues with their weapons, and have lusted like men sick of a
strange ague, after the strange vices and devises of Italian, French and
Spanish Fencers, little remembering, that these Apish toys could not free Rome
from Brennius sack, nor France from King Henry the fifth his conquest. To
this desire to find out truth the daughter of time, begotten of Bellona, I was
also moved, that by it I might remove the great loss of our English gallants,
which we daily suffer by these imperfect fights, wherein none undertake the
combat, be his cause never so good, his cunning never so much, his strength and
agilitie never so great, but his virtue was tied to fortune: happy man, happy
doale, kill or be killed is the dreadful issue of this devilish imperfect
fight. If that man were now alive, which beat the Master for the scholars
fault, because he had no better instructed him, these Italian Fencers could not
escape his censure, who teach us Offense, not Defense, and to fight, as
Diogenes scholars were taught to dance, to bring their lives to an end by Art.
Was Ajax a coward because he fought with a seven foulded Buckler, or are we
mad to go naked into the field to try our fortunes, not our virtues? Was
Achilles a runaway, who ware that well tempered armor, or are we desperate,
who care for nothing but to fight, and learn like the Pigmeys, to fight with
bodkins, or weapons of like defense? Is it valor for a man to go naked against
his enemy? why then did the Lacedaemonians punish him as desperate, whom they
rewarded for his valor with a Laurel crown? But that which is most
shameful, To this it will be objected, that in the wars we use few Rapiers
or none at all, but short Swords. To that I answer: Those are insufficient
also, for that they have no hilts, whereby they are insufficient in their
defense, and especially for the hand, which being stricken although with averie
small blow, most commonly is the loss of a man, because the force of his hand
being taken from him, he is neither able to defend his life, nor greatly to
offend his enemy: and again, since the Rapier-fight has been taught, for
lack of practice they have lost the use of the blow.
they teach me^ to butcher one another here at home in peace, wherewith they
cannot hurt their enemies abroad in war. For, your Honor well knows, that
when the battles are joined, and come to the charge, there is no room for them
to draw their Bird spits, and when they have them, what can they do with
them? can they pierce his Corslet with the point? can they unlace his Helmet,
unbuckle his Armor, hew asunder their Pikes with a Stocata, a reuersa, a
Dritta; a Stramason, or other such like te^pestuous terms? no, these toys are
fit for children, not for men, for straggling boys of the Camp, to murder
poultrie, not for men of Honor to try the battle with their foes. Thus I
have (right Honorable) for the trial of the truth, between the short Sword and
the long Rapier, for the saving of the lives of our English gallants, who are
sent to certain death by their uncertain fights, and for abandoning of that
mischievous and imperfect weapon, which serves to kill our friends in peace,
but cannot much hurt our foes in war, have I at this time given forth these
Paradoxes to the view of the world. And because I know such strange opinions
had need of stout defense, I humbly crave your Honorable protection, as one in
whom the true nobility of our victorious Ancestors has taken up his
residence. It will suit to the rest of your Honors most noble co^plements, to
maintain the defense of their weapons whose virtues you possess. I^ agrees
with your Honorable disposition, to (...) with favor what is presented with
love. It (...) with your Lordships high authority, to weigh with reason, what
is fit for marshall (...). It is an usual point of your Honor, which win^^
your Lordship love in your country, to defend the truth in whomsoever: and it
adds a supply to that which your Lordship have of late begun to your
unspeakable honor and our inestimable benefit, to reduce the (...) with
hilts over the hands, Why should we leave the hand naked, since thereby our
limbs and lives are defended, our enemies discomforted, wounded, and executed?
I see no reason but that the hand should be as well armed and provided for, as
any other part of the body.
to the Roman discipline, no longer then they might draw them under their
arms, or over their shoulders. I call or any of these respects, I rest
assured that your Lordship will vouchsafe to receive with favor and maintain
with honor these Paradoxes of mine, which if they be shrouded under so safe
a shield, I will not doubt but to maintain with reason amongst the wise,
and prove it by practice upon the ignorant, that there is no certain defense
in the Rapier, and that there is great advantage in the short Sword against the
long Rapier, or all manner of Rapiers in general, of what length soever. And
that the short Staff has the vauntage against the long Staff of twelve,
fourteen, sixteen or eighteen foot long, or of what length soever. And
against two men with their Swords and Daggers, or two Rapiers, Poiniards and
Gantlets, or each of them a case of Rapiers: which whether I can perform or
not, I submit for trial to your Honors martial censure, being at all times
ready to make it good, in what manner, and against what man soever it shall
stand with your Lordships good liking to appoint. And so I humbly commend this
book to your Lordships wisdom to peruse, and your Honor to the Highest to
protect in all health and happiness now and ever.

Your Honors in all duty, George Silver.

AN ADMONITION TO THE NOBLE, ANCIENT, VICTORIOVS, VALIANT, AND MOST BRAVE
NATION OF ENGLISHMEN.
GEorge Silver having the perfect Italian Teachers of Offense done unto them,
the great errors, inconveniences, and false resolutions they have brought them
into have enforced me, even of pity of their most lamentable wounds and
slaughters, and as I verily think it my bounden duty, with all love and
humility to admonish them to take heed, how they submit themselves into the
hands of Italian teachers of Defense, or strangers whatsoever; and to beware
how they forsake or suspect their own natural fight, that they may by casting
off of these Italianated, weak, fantastical, and most devilish and imperfect
fights, and by exercising of their own ancient weapons, be restored, or
atchieue unto their natural, and most manly and victorious fight again, the
dint and force whereof many brave nations have both felt and feared. Our
ploughmen have mightily prevailed against them, as also against Masters of
Defense both in Schools and countries, that have taken upon the^ to stand upon
Schooletrickes and iugling gambalds: whereby it grew to a common speech among
the countrie-men, Bring me to a Fencer, I will bring him out of his fence
tricks with good down right blows, I will make him forget his fence tricks
I will warrant him. I speak not against Masters of Defense indeed, they are
to be honored, nor against the Science, it is noble, and in mine opinion to be
preferred next to Divinity; for as Divinity preserves the soul from hell
and the devil, so does this noble Science defend the body from wounds and
slaughter. And moreover, the exercising of weapons puts away aches, griefs,
and diseases, it increases strength, and sharpneth the wits, it gives a
perfect judgment, it expels melancholy, choleric and evil conceits, it
keeps a man in breath, perfect health, and long life. It is unto him that
has the perfection thereof, a most friendly and comfortable companion when he
is alone, having but only his weapon about him, it puts him out of all
fear, and in the wars and places of most danger it makes him bold, hardy,
and valiant.

And for as much as this noble and most mighty nation of Englishmen, of their
good natures, are always most loving, very credulous, and ready to cherish
and protect strangers: yet that through their good natures they never more by
strangers or false teachers may be deceived, once again I am most humbly to
admonish the^, or such as shall find in themselves a disposition or desire to
learn their weapons of them, that from henceforth as strangers shall take upon
them to come hither to teach this noble and most valiant, and victorious nation
to fight, that first, before they learn of them, they cause a sufficient
trial of them to be made, whether the excellency of their skill be such as
they profess or no, the trial to be very requisite and reasonable, even such
as I my self would be contented withal, if I should take upon me to go in
their country to teach their nation to fight. And this is the trial: A great
favor to give them choice of their weapons, because professors of arms ought
to be skillful with all manner of weapons.
they shall play with such weapons as they profess to teach withal, three
bouts apeece with three of the best English Masters of Defense, and three
bouts apeece with three unskillful valiant men, and three bouts apeece with
three resolute men half drunk. Then if they can defend themselves against
these masters of Defense, and hurt, and go free from the rest, then are they
to be honored, cherished, and allowed for perfect good teachers, what country
men soever they be: but if of any of these they take foil, then are they
imperfect in their profession, their fight is false, and they are false
teachers, deceivers and murderers, and to be punished accordingly, yet no
worse punishment unto them I wish, then such as in their trial they shall find.

There are four especial marks to know the Italian fight is imperfect and
that the Italian teachers and setters forth of books of Defense, never had the
perfection of the true fight.
The first mark is, Yet they persuade us that the cross of the Rapier without
hilt or gantlet is sufficient.
they seldom fight in their of their best scholars do never fight, but they
are most commonly sore hurt, or one or both of them slain.

The third mark is, they never teach their scholars, nor set down in their
books any perfect lengthes of their weapons, without the which no man can by
nature or Art against the perfect length fight safe, for being too short, their
times are too long, and spaces too wide for their defense, and being too long,
they will be upon every cross that shall happen to be made, whether it be done
by skill or chance, in great danger of death; because the Rapier being too long,
the cross cannot be undone in due time, but may be done by going back with
the feet; but that time is always too long to answer the time of the hand,
therefore every man ought to have a weapon according to his own stature: the
tall man must have his weapon longer then the man of mean stature, or else he
has wrong in his defense, and the man of mean stature must have his weapon
longer then the man of small stature, or else he has wrong in his defense; and
the man of small stature must beware that he feed not himself with this vain
co^ceipt, that he will have his weapon long, to reach as far as the tall man,
for therein he shall have great disadvantage, both in making of a strong cross,
and also in vncrossing again, and in keeping his point from crossing, and when
a cross is made upon him, to defend himself, or endanger his enemy, or to
redeem his lost times. Again Rapiers longer, then is convenient to accord
with the true statures of men, are always too long or too heavy to keep
their bodies in due time from the cross of the light short sword of perfect
length, the which being made by the skillful out of any of the four true
times, upon any of the four chief Actions, by reason of the uncertainty and
great swiftness in any of these times, they are in great danger of a blow, or
of a thrust in the hand, arm, head, body, or face, and in every true cross
in the vncrossing, in great danger of a blow upon the head, or a full thrust in
the body or face: and being taken in that time and place, the first mouer in
vncrossing speedeth the Rapier man of imperfect length, whether it be too long,
too short or too heavy, and goes free himself by the direction of his
governors.

The fourth mark is, the crosses of their Rapiers for true defense of their
hands are imperfect, for the true carriage of the guardant fight, without the
which all fights are imperfect.

Of six chief causes, that many valiant men thinking themselves by their
practices to be skillful in their weapons, are yet many times in their fight
sore hurt, and many times slain by men of small skill, or none at all.
THe first and chiefest cause is, the lack of the

The second cause is, the lack of knowledge in the due observance of the four
Actions, the which we call bent, spent, lying spent, and drawing back: these
Actions every man fights upon, whether they be skillful or unskillful, he
that observes them is safe, he that observes the^ not, is in continual
danger of every thrust that shall be strongly made against him.

The third cause is, they are unpracticed in the four true times, neither do
they know the true times from the false: therefore the true choice of their
times are most commonly taken by chance, and seldom otherwise.

The fourth cause is, they are unacquainted out of what fight, or in what manner
they are to answer the variable fight: and therefore because the variable fight
is the most easiest fight of all other, most commonly do answer the variable
fight with the variable fight, which ought never to be but in the first
distance, or with the short Sword against the long, because if both or one of
them shall happen to prese, and that in due time of neither side fight be
changed, the distance, by reason of narrowness of space, is broken, the place
is won and lost of both sides, then he that thrusts first, speedeth: if both
happen to thrust together, they are both in danger. These things sometimes by
true times, by change of fights, by chance are avoided.

The fifth cause is, their weapons are most commonly too long to vncrosse
without going back with the feet.

The sixth cause is, their weapons are most commonly too heavy both to defend
and offend in due time, and by these two last causes many valiant me^ have lost
their lives

What is the cause that wisemen in learning or practicing their weapons, are
deceived with Italian Fencers.
No fight perfect that is not done in force and true time.
THere are four causes: the first, their schoolmaisters are imperfect: the
second is, that whatsoever they teach, is both true and false; true in their
demo^strations, according with their force and time in gentle play, and in
their actions according with true force and time in rough play or fight, false:
for example, there is as much difference betwixt these two kind of fights, as
there is betwixt the true picture of Sir Beuis of Southampton, and Sir Beuis
himself, if he were living. The third, none ca^ judge of the Craft but the
Crafts-man; the unskillful, be he never so wise, can not truly judge of his
teacher, or skill, the which he learneth, being unskillful himself. Lastly, and
to confirm for truth all that shall be amiss, not only in this excellent
Science of Defense, but in all other excellent secrets, most commonly the lie
bears as good a show of truth, as truth it self.

Of the false resolutions and vain opinions of Rapier-men, and of the danger
of death thereby ensuing.
IT is a great question, and especially amongst Southampton even as they were
going to take shipping upon the key, fell at strife, drew their Rapiers, and
presently, being desperate, hardy or resolute, as they call it, with all force
and over great speed, ran with their rapiers one at the other, and were both
slain. Now when two of the contrary opinion shall meet and fight, you shall
see very peaceable wars between them: for they verily think that he that
first thrusts is in great danger of his life, therefore with all speed do
put themselves in ward, or Stocata, the surest guard of all other, as Vincentio
says, and thereupon they stand sure, saying the one to the other, thrust and
thou dare; and says the other, thrust and thou dare, or strike or thrust and
thou dare, says the other: then says the other, strike or thrust and thou
dare for thy life. These two cunning gentlemen standing long time together,
upon this worthy ward, they both depart in peace, according to the old
proverb: It is good sleeping in a whole skin. A gain if two shall fight,
the one of opinion, that he that thrusts has the vantage, and the other of
opinion, that the warder has the vantage, then most commonly the thruster
being valiant, with all speed thrusts home, and by reason of the time and
swift motion of his hand, they are most commonly with the points of their
rapiers, or daggers, or both, one or both of them hurt or slain; because their
spaces of defense in that kind of fight, are too wide in due time to defend,
and the place being won, the eye of the Patient by the swift motion of the
Agents hand, is deceived. Another resolution they stand sure upon for their
lives, to kill their enemies, in the which they are most commonly slain
themselves: that is this: When they find the point of their enemies rapier out
of the right line, they say, they may boldly make home a thrust with a Passata,
the which they observe, and do accordingly: but the other having a shorter time
with his hand, as nature many times teaches him, suddenly turns his wrist,
whereby he meets the other in his passage just with the point of his rapier
in the face or body. And this false resolution has cost many a life.

That the cause that many are so often slain, and many sore hurt in fight
with long Rapiers, is not by reason of their dangerous thrusts, nor
cunningnesse of that Italienated fight, but in the length and vnweildinesse
thereof.
IT is most certain, that men may with

Of running and standing fast in Rapier fight, the runner has the vantage.
Imbrocata or Stocata, or howsoever, the place will be at one instant won of
one side, and gained of the other, and one or both of them will be hurt or
slain: if both shall prese hard upon the guard, he that first thrusts home
in true place, hurts the other: and if both thrust together, they are both
hurt: yet some vantage the runner has, because he is an uncertain mark, and
in his motion: the other is a certain mark, and in a dead motion: and by
reason thereof many times the unskillful man takes vantage he knows not
how, against him that lies watching upon his ward or Stocata guard.

Of striking and thrusting both together.
certain (say they) that an inch will kill a man: but if their swords be much
longer then the other, then their advantage is so great, that they will be sure
by thrusting and striking just with the other, that they will always hurt him
that has the short sword, and go clear themselves, because they will reach
him, when he shall not reach them. These men speak like such as talk of Robin
Hoode, that never shot in his bow; for to strike or thrust just together with a
man of skill, lies not in the will of the ignorant, because the skillful man
always fights upon the true times, by the which the unskillful is still
disappointed of both place and time, and therefore driven of necessity still
to watch the other, when and what he will do; that is, whether he will strike,
thrust, or false: if the unskillful strike or thrust in the time of falsing,
therein he neither strikes nor thrusts just with the other: he may say, he
has stroke or thrust before him, but not just with him, nor to any good
purpose; for in the time of falsing, if he strike or thrust, he strikes or
thrusts too short: for in that time he has neither time nor place to strike
home, and as it is said, the unskillful man, that will take upon him to strike
or thrust just with the skillful, must first behold what the man of skill will
do, and when he will do it, and therefore of necessity is driven to suffer
the skillful man to be the first mouer, and entered into his Action, whether it
be blow or thrust, the truth thereof in reason cannot be denied. Now judge
whether it be possible for an unskillful man to strike or thrust just together
with a man of skill; but the skillful man can most certainly strike and thrust
just together with the unskillful, because the unskillful fights upon false
times, which being too long to answer the true times, the skillful fighting
upon the true times, although the unskillful be the first mouer, and entered
into his Action, whether it be blow or thrust; yet the shortness of the true
times makes at the pleasure of the skillful a just meeting together: in
perfect fight two never strike or thrust together, because they never suffer
place nor time to perform it.

Two unskillful men many times by chance strike and thruste together, chance
unto them, because they know not what they do, or how it comes to pass: but
the reasons or causes be these. Sometimes two false times meet and make a just
time together, and sometimes a true time and a false time meets and makes a
just time together, and sometimes two true times meet and make a just time
together. And all this happens because the true time and place is unknown unto
them.

George Silver his resolution upon that hidden or doubtful question, who has
the advantage of the Offender or Defender.
a frivolous thing to learn to ward, or at any time to seek to ward, since
in warding lies disadvantage. Now may it plainly by these examples appear,
that if there be any perfection in fight, that both sides are deceived in
their opinions, because if the striker or thruster have the advantage, then is
the warder still in danger of wounds or death. And again, if the warder has
the advantage, then is the striker or thruster in as great danger to defend
himself against the warder, because the warder from his wards, takes
advantage of the striker or thruster upon every blow or thrust, that shall be
made against him. Then thus I conclude, that if there be perfection in the
Science of Defense, they are all in their opinons deceived; and that the truth
may appear for the satisfaction of all men, this is my resolution: there is no
advantage absolutely, nor disadvantage in striker, thruster, or warder: and
there is a great advantage in the striker thruster and warder: but in this
manner, in the perfection of fight the advantage consists in fight between
party and party: that is, whosoever wins or gains the place in true
pace, space and time, has the advantage, whether he be striker, thruster or
warder. And that is my resolution.

Of Spanish fight with the Rapier.
THe Spaniard is now thought to be a better that in all the course of a man's
life it shall be hard to learn them, and if they miss in doing the least of
them in their fight, they are in danger of death. But the Spaniard in his
fight, both safely to defend himself, and to endanger his enemy, has but one
only lying, and two wards to learn, wherein a man with small practice in a
very short time may become perfect.

This is the manner of Spanish fight, they stand as brave as they can with their
bodies straight upright, narrow spaced, with their feet continually moving, as
if they were in a dance, holding forth their arms and Rapiers very straight
against the face or bodies of their enemies: and this is the only lying to
accomplish that kind of fight. And this note, that as long as any man shall lie
in that manner with his arm, and point of his Rapier straight, it shall be
impossible for his adversary to hurt him, because in that straight holding
forth of his arm, which way soever a blow shall be made against him, by reason
that his Rapier hilt lies so far before him, he has but a very little way
to move, to make his ward perfect, in this manner. If a blow be made at the
right side of the head, a very little moving of the hand with the knuckles
upward defends that side of the head or body, and the point being still out
straight, greatly endangereth the striker: and so likewise, if a blow be made
at the left side of the head, a very small turning of the wrist with the
knuckles downward, defends that side of the head and body, and the point of
the Rapier much indangereth the hand, arm, face or body of the striker: and
if any thrust be made, the wards, by reason of the indirections in moving the
feet in manner of dancing, as aforesaid, makes a perfect ward, and still
withal the point greatly endangereth the other. And thus is the Spanish fight
perfect: so long as you can keep that order, and soon learned, and therefore
to be accounted the best fight with the Rapier of all other. But note how this
Spanish fight is perfect, and you shall see no longer then you can keep your
point straight against your adversary: as for example, I have heard the like
jest.

There was a cunning Doctor at his first going to sea, being doubtful that he
should be sea-sicke, an old woman perceiving the same, said unto him: Sir, I
pray, be of good comfort, I will teach you a trick to avoid that doubt; here
is a fine pibble stone, if you please to accept it, take it with you, and when
you be on ship-bord, put it in your mouth, and as long as you shall keep the
same in your mouth, upon my credit you shall never vomit: the Doctor believed
her, and took it thankfully at her hands, and when he was at sea, he began to
be sick, whereupon he presently put the stone in his mouth, and there kept it
so long as he possibly could, but through his extreme sickness the stone with
vomit was cast out of his mouth: then presently he remembered how the woman had
mocked him, and yet her words were true.

Even so a Spaniard having his Rapier point put by, may receive a blow on the
head, or a cut over the face, hand, or arm, or a thrust in the body or face,
and yet his Spanish fight perfect, so long as he can keep straight the point
of his Rapier against the face or body of his adversary: which is as easy in
that manner of fight to be done, as it was for the Doctor in the extremity of
his vomit to keep the stone in his mouth.

Yet one other pretty jest more, scarce worth the reading, in commendation of
outlandish fight. There was an Italian teacher of Defense in my time, who was
so excellent in his fight, that he would have hit any English man with a
thrust, just upon any button in his doublet, and this was much spoken of.

Also there was another cunning man in catching of wild geese, he would have
made no more ado, when he had heard them cry, as the manner of wildgeese is,
flying one after another in rows, but presently looking up, would tell them,
if there had been a dosen, sixteen, twenty, or more, he would have taken
every one. And this tale was many times told by men of good credit, and much
marvelled at by the hearers: and the man that would have taken the wildgeese,
was of good credit himself: marie they said, indeed he did never take any,
but at any time when he had looked up, and seen them fly in that manner, he
would with all his heart have taken the^, but he could no more tell how to do
it, then could the cunning Italian Fencer tell how to hit an Englishman, with a
thrust just upon any one of his buttons, when he listed.

Illusions for the maintenance of imperfect weapons and false fights, to fear
or discourage the unskillful in their weapons, from taking a true course or
use, for attaining to the perfect knowledge of true fight.
Italian, or false teacher) I hold it to be a perfect good weapon, because the
cross hinders not to hold the handle in the hand, to thrust both far and
straight, and to use all manner of advantages in the wards, or suddenly to cast
the same at the adversary, but with the Sword you are driven with all the
strength of the hand to hold fast the handle. And in the wars I would wish no
friend of mine to wear Swords with hilts, because when they are suddenly set
upon, for haste they set their hands upon their hilts in steed of their
handles: in which time it happens many times before they can draw their
swords, they are slain by their enemies. These counterfeit shows are enough to
carry the wisest that know not the true fight from the false, out of the right
way.
And for Sword and Buckler fight, it is imperfect, because the buckler blinds
the fight, neither would I have any man lie aloft with his hand above his
head, to strike sound blows: Strong blows are naught, especially being set
above the head, And if their weapons were short, as in times past they were,
yet they could not thrust safe at body or face, because in gardant fight they
fall over, or under the perfect cross of the sword and to strike beneath the
waste, or at the legs, is great disadvantage, because the course of the blow
to the legs is too far, and thereby the head, face, and body is discovered: and
that was the cause in old time, that they did not thrust nor strike at the
legs, and not for lack of skill, as in these days we imagine. Again, if a
man in those days should have fought with a long sword, they would presently
have put him into Cobbes Trauers.
because therein all the face and body is discovered. Yet I confess, in old
times, when blows were only used with short Swords and bucklers, and back
Sword, these kind of fights were good and most ma^ly, but now in these days
fight is altered. Rapiers are longer for advantage the^ swords were wo^t to be:
when blows were used, men were so simple in their fight, that they thought him
to be a coward, that would make a thrust or strike a blow beneath the girdle.
Again, if their weapons were short, as in times past they were, yet fight is
better looked into in these days, than then it was. Who is it in these days
sees not that the blow co^passeth round like a wheel, whereby it has a
longer way to go, but the thrust passes in a straight line, and therefore
comes a nearer way, and done in a shorter time the^ is the blow, and is more
deadly then is the blow? Therefore there is no wise man that will strike;
unless he be weary of his life. It is certain, that the point for advantage
every way in fight is to be used, the blow is utterly naught, and not to be
used. He that fights upon the blow especially with a short sword, will be sore
hurt or slain. The devil can say no more for the maintenance of errors.

That a blow comes continually as near a way as a thrust, and most commonly
nearer, stronger, more swifter, and is sooner done.
A confutation of their errors.
whereby it has a longer way to come, as the Italian Fenser says, and that
the thrust passing in a straight line, comes a nearer way, and therefore is
sooner done then a blow, is not true: these be the proofs.

Let two lie in their perfect strengths and readiness, wherein the blades of
their Rapiers by the motion of the body, may not be crossed of either side, the
one to strike, and the other to thrust. Then measure the distance or course
wherein the hand and hilt passes to finish the blow of the one, and the thrust
of the other, and you shall find them both by measure, in distance all one. And
let any man of judgment being seen in the exercise of weapons, not being
more addicted unto novelties of fight, then unto truth it self, put in
measure, and practice these three fights, variable, open, and guardant, and he
shall see, that whenever any man lies at the thrust upon the variable
fight, (where of necessity most commonly he lies, or otherwise not possibly
to keep his Rapier from crossing at the blow and thrust, upon the open or
gardant fight,) that the blows and thrustes from these two fightes, come a
nearer way, and a more stronger and swifter course then does the thrust, out of
the variable fight. And thus for a general rule, wheresoever the Thruster
lies, or out of what fight soever he fights, with his Rapier, or Rapier and
Dagger, the blow in his course comes as near, and nearer, and more swift and
stronger then does the thrust.

Perfect fight stands upon both blow and thrust, therefore the thrust is not
only to be used.
THat there is no fight perfect without both This in truth cannot be denied.
In fight there are many motions, with the hand, body, and feet, and in
every motion the place of the hand is altered, and because by the motions of
the hand, the altering of the places of the hand, the changes of lyings, wards,
and breaking of thrustes, the hand will sometimes be in place to strike, some
times to thrust, sometimes after a blow to thrust, and sometimes after a thrust
to strike, and sometimes in place where you may strike, and cannot thrust
without loss of time, and sometimes in place where you may thrust, and cannot
strike without loss of time, and sometimes in place where you can neither
strike nor thrust, unless you fight upon both blow and thrust, nor able to
defend your self by ward or going back, because your space will be too wide,
and your distance lost. And sometimes when you have made a thrust, a ward or
breaking is taken in such sort with the Dagger or blade of the Sword, that you
ca^ neither thrust again, nor defend yourselfe unless you do strike, which
you may foundly do, and go free, and sometimes when you strike, a ward will be
taken in such sort, that you cannot strike again, nor defend your self,
unless you thrust, which you may safely do and go free. So to conclude,
there is no perfection in the true fight, without both blow and thrust, nor
certain rule to be set down for the point only.

That the blow is more dangerous and deadly in fight, then a thrust, for proof
thereof to be made according with Art, an Englishman holds argument against
an Italian.
Italian.


Englishman. This question is not propounded according to art, because there is
no fight perfect without both blow and thrust.


Italian. Let it be so, yet opinions are otherwise holden, that the thrust is
only to be used, because it comes a nearer way, and is more dangerous and
deadly, for these reasons: first the blow compasses round like a wheel, but
the thrust passes in a straight line, therefore the blow by reason of the
compass, has a longer way to go then the thrust, and is therefore longer in
doing, but the thrust passes in a straight line, therefore has shorter way to
go the^ has the blow, and is therefore done in a shorter time, and is therefore
much better then the blow, and more dangerous and deadly, because if a thrust
do hit the face or body, it indangereth life, and most commonly death ensues:
but if the blow hit the body, it is not so dangerous.


Englishman. Let your opinions be what they will, but that the thrust comes a
nearer way; and is sooner done then the blow, is not true: and for proof
thereof read the twelfth Paradox. And now will I set down probable reasons,
The blow more dangerous then the thrust.
that the blow is better then the thrust, and more dangerous and deadly. First,
the blow comes as near a way, and most commonly nearer then does the thrust,
and is therefore done in a shorter time then is the thrust: therefore in respect
of time, whereupon stands the perfection of fight, the blow is much better
then the thrust. Again, the force of the thrust passes straight, therefore
any cross being indirectly made, the force of a child may put it by: but the
force of a blow passes indirectly, therefore must be directly warded in the
counterchecke of his force: which cannot be done but by the convenient strength
of a man, and with true cross in true time, or else will not safely defend him:
and is therefore much better, and more dangerous the^ the thrust, and again,
the thrust being made through the hand, arm, or leg, or in many places of the
body and face, are not deadly, neither are they maimes, or loss of limbs or
life, neither is he much hindered for the time in his fight, as long as the
blood is hot: for example.

I have known a Ge^tlema^ hurt in Rapier fight, in nine or ten places through
the body, arms, and legs, and yet has continued in his fight, and
afterward has slain the other, The blow cutteth off the hand, the arm, the
leg, and sometimes the head.
and come home and has been cured of all his wounds without maime, and is yet
living. But the blow being strongly made, takes sometimes clean away the hand
from the arm, has many times been seen. Again, a full blow upon the head
or face with a short sharp Sword, is most commonly death. A full blow upon the
neck, shoulder, arm, or leg, indangereth life, cutteth off the veins,
muscles, and sinews, perishes the bones: these wounds made by the blow, in
respect of perfect healing, are the loss of limbs, or maimes incurable for
ever.

And yet more for the blow: a full blow upon the head, face, arm, leg, or legs,
is death, or the party so wounded in the mercy of him that shall so wound
him. For what man shall be able long in fight to stand up, either to revenge,
or defend himself, having the veins, muscles, and sinews of his hand, arm,
or leg clean cut asunder? or being dismembered by such wound upon the face or
head, but shall be enforced thereby, and through the loss of blood, He that
gives the first wound with a strong blow, commands the life of the other.
the other a little dallying with him, to yield himself, or leave his life in
his mercy?

And for plainer deciding this controversy between the blow and the thrust,
consider this short note. The blow comes many ways, the thrust does not so.
The blow comes a nearer way then a thrust most commonly, and is therefore
sooner done. The blow requires the strength of a man to be warded; but the
thrust may be put by, by the force of a child. A blow upon the hand, arm, or
leg is a maime incurable; but a thrust in the hand, arm, or leg is to be
recovered. The blow has many parts to wound, and in every of them
commands the life; but the thrust has but a few, as the body or face, and
not in every part of them neither.


Of the difference betwixt the true fight and the false: wherein consists (the
Principles being had with the direction of the four Governors) the whole
perfection of fight with all manner of weapons.
THe true fights be these: whatsoever is

Of evil orders or customs in our English Fe^ce-schooles, and of the old or
ancient teaching of weapons, and things very necessary to be continued for the
avoiding of errors, and reuining and continuance of our ancient weapons, and
most victorious fight again.
THere is in my opinion in our Fence-schooles That is this, at the single
Sword, Sword and Dagger, and Sword and Buckler, they forbid the thrust, and at
the single Rapier, and Rapier and Dagger, they forbid the blow. Either they are
both together best, or the thrust altogether best, or the blow altogether best.
If the thrust be best, why do we not use it at the single Sword, Sword and
Dagger, and Sword and Buckler. If the blow be best, why do we not use it at the
single Rapier, Rapier and Poinyard? But knowing by the Art of Arms, that no
fight is perfect without both blow and thrust, why do we not use and teach both
blow and thrust? But howsoever this we daily see, that when two meet in fight,
whether they have skill or none, unless such as have tied themselves to that
boyish, Italian, weak, imperfect fight, they both strike and thrust, and how
shall he then do, that being much taught in school, never learned to strike,
nor how to defend a strong blow? and how shall he the^ do, that being brought
up in Fe^ce-schoole, that never learned to thrust with the single Sword, Sword
and Dagger, and Sword and Buckler, nor how at these weapons to break a thrust?
Surely, I think a down right fellow, that never came in school, using such
skill as nature yields out of his courage, strength, and agilitie, with good
down right blows and thrusts among, as shall best frame in his hands, should
put one of these imperfect scholars greatly to his shifts. Besides, there are
now in these days no gripes, closes, wrestlings, striking with the hilts,
daggers, or bucklers, used in Fence-schooles. Our ploughmen by nature will do
all these things with great strength and agility: but the Schooleman is
altogether unacquainted with these things. He being fast tied to such
schoolplay as he has learned, has lost thereby the benefit of nature, and
the plowman is now by nature without art a far better man then he. Therefore
in my opinion, as long as we bar any manner of play in school, we shall
hardly make a good scholar: there is no manner of teaching comparable to the
old ancient teaching, that is, first their quarters, then their wards, blows,
thrusts, and breaking of thrustes, then their Closes and Gripes, striking with
the hilts, Daggers, Bucklers, Wrastlings, striking with the foot or knee in
the Coddes, and all these are safely defended in learning perfectly of the
Gripes. And this is the ancient teaching, In the wars there is no observation
of Stoccatas, Imbro^uas, times, nor answers.
the perfectest and most best teaching; and without this teaching, there shall
never scholar be made able, do his uttermost, nor fight safe. Again their
swords in schools are too long by almost half a foot to vncrosse, without
going back with the feet, within distance or perfectly to strike or thrust
within the half or quarter sword. And in serving of the Prince, when men do
meet together in public fight, are utterly naught and unserviceable. The best
lengthes for perfect teaching of the true fight to be used and continued in
Fence schools, Long weapons imperfect.
to accord with the true statures of all men, are these. The blade to be a yard
and an inch for mean statures, and for men of tall statures, a yard and three
or four inches, and no more. And I would have the Rapier continued in
schools, always ready for such as shall think themselves cunning, or shall
have delight to play with that imperfect weapon. Provided always, that the
Schoole-maister or Usher play with him with his short Sword, plying him with
all manner of fight according to the true art: this being continued the truth
shall flourish, the lie shall be beaten down, and all nations not having the
true science, shall come with all gladness to the valiant and most brave
English masters of Defense to learn the true fight for their defense.

The grounds or Principles of true fight with all manner of weapons.


The wards of all manner of weapons.


The Sword and Buckler, and Sword and Dagger are double weapons, and have eight
wards, two with the point up, and two with the point down, and two for the
legs with the point down, the point to be carried for both sides of the
legs, with the knuckles downward, and two wards with the Dagger or Buckler
for the head. The Fo^^est bill is a double weapon by reason of the head, and
therefore has eight wards, four with the Staff, four with the head, four
of them to be used as with the staff, and the other four with the head, the
one up, the other down, and the other sidewaies.

The names and numbers of times appertaining unto fight both true and false.
THere are eight times, whereof four are

The time of the hand.

The time of the hand and body.

The time of the hand, body and foot.

The time of the hand, body and feet.

The false times be these.
The time of the foot.

The time of the foot and body.

The time of the foot, body and hand.

The time of the feet, body and hand.

Thus have I thought good to separate and make known the true times from the
false, with the true wards thereto belonging, that thereby the rather in
practicing of weapons, a true course may be taken for the avoiding of errors
and evil customs, and speedy attaining of good habit or perfect being in the
true use and knowledge of all manner of weapons.

Of the length of weapons, and how every man may fit himself in the perfect
length of his weapon, according to his own stature, with brief reasons
wherefore they ought to be so.


If the sword be longer, you can hardly vncrosse without going back with your
feet. If shorter, the^ you can hardly make a true cross without putting in of
your feet, the which times are too long to answer the time of the hand.
The like reasons for the short staff, half Pike, Forest bill, Partisan, or
Gleue, or such like weapons of perfect length.
man with swords

AS I have here made a figurative demonstration, to know the perfect length of
the Sword, as before is said; so have I in the page following, for the plainer
understanding of the Reader, set forth a form of standing, to know the
lengths of the short Staff, half Pike, Forest Bill, Partisan and Gleue, or
such like weapons of advantage, as shall also best fit the statures of all men.

man with pike

The perfect length of your two hand sword is, the blade to be the length of
the blade of your single sword.

To know the perfect length of your short staff, or half Pike, Forest bil,
Partisan, or Gleue, or such like weapons of vantage and perfect lengths, you
shall stand upright, holding the staff upright close by your body, with your
left hand, reaching with your right hand your staff as high as you can, and
then allow to that length a space to set both your hands, when you come to
sight, wherein you may conveniently strike, thrust, and ward, and that is the
just length to be made according to your stature. And this note, that these
lengths will commonly fall out to be eight or nine foot long, and will (...),
although not just, the statures of all men, without any hindrance at all unto
them in their fight, because in any weapon wherein the hands may be removed, and
at liberty, to make the weapon longer or shorter in fight at his pleasure, a
foot of the staff behind the backmost hand does ^o harm. And wherefore these
weapons ought to be of the lengths aforesaid, and no shorter, these are the
reasons: If they should be shorter, then the long staff, Morris Pike, and such
like weapons over and above the perfect length, should have great vantage
against them because he may come boldly and safe without any guard or ward, to
the place where he may thrust home, and at every thrust put him in danger of
his life: but if these weapons be of their perfect lengths, then can the long
staff, the Morris Pike, or any other longer weapon ly no where in true space,
but shall be still within compass of the cross, to cross and vncrosse,
whereby he may safely pass home to the place, where he may strike or thrust him
that has the long weapon, in the head, face, or body at his pleasure.

Of the lengths of the Battle axe, Halbard, or black Bill, or such like
weapons of weight, appertaining unto guard or battle.


Thus ends the length of weapons.
Of the vantages of weapons in their kinds, places, and times, both in private
and public fight.


The single Sword has the vantage against the single Rapier.

The Sword and Dagger has the vantage against the Rapier and Poiniard.

The Sword and Target has advantage against the Sword and Dagger, or Rapier
and Poiniard.

The Sword and Buckler has advantage against the Sword and Target, the Sword
and Dagger, or Rapier and Poiniard.

The two hand Sword, has the vantage against the Sword and Target, the Sword
and Buckler, the Sword and Dagger, or Rapier and Poiniard.

The Battel-axe, the Halbard, the Blacke-bill, or such like weapons of weight,
appertaining unto guard or battle, are all one in fight, and have advantage
against the two hand Sword, the Sword and Buckler, the Sword and Target, the
Sword and dagger, or the Rapier and Poiniard.

The short staff or half Pike, Forrest-bill, Partisan, or Gleue, or such like
weapons of perfect length, have the vantage against the Battel-axe, the
Halbard, the Blacke-bill, the two hand sword, the Sword and Target, and are too
hard for two Swords and Daggers, or two Rapiers and Poiniards with Gantlets,
and for the long staff and Morris Pike.

The long Staff, Morris Pike, or Iauelin, or such like weapons above the
perfect length, have advantage against all manner of weapons, the short staff,
Welsh hook, Partisan, or Gleue, or such like weapons of vantage excepted: yet
too weak for two Swords and Daggers or two Swords and Bucklers, or two Rapiers
and Poiniards with Gantlets, because they are too long to thrust, strike, and
turn speedily: and by reason of the large distance, one of the Sword and
Dagger-men will get behind him.

The Welsh hook or Forest bill, has advantage against all manner of weapons
whatsoever.

Yet understand, that in battles, and where variety of weapons be, amongst
multitudes of men and horses the Sword and Target, the two hand Sword, the
Battel-axe, the Blacke-bill, and Halbard, are better weapons, and more
dangerous in their offense and forces, then is the Sword and Buckler, short
staff, long staff, or Forest bill. The Sword and Target leads upon Shot,
and in troops defends thrusts and blows given by battel-axe, Halbards,
Blacke-bill, or two hand swords, far better then can the Sword and Buckler.

The Morris Pike defends the battle from both horse and man, much better
then can the short staff, long staff, or Forest bill. Again, the
Battel-axe, the Halbard, the Black bill, the two hand sword, and Sword and
Target, amongst armed men and troops, when men are come together, by reason of
their weights, shortness, and great forces, do much more offend the enemy,
and are then much better weapons, then is the short staff, the long Staff, or
Forest bill.

Of the insufficiency and disaduantages of the Rapiers fight in Battle.
cloven. And for Wards and Gripes, they have none, neither can any of these
fine Rapier men, for lack of use, tell how to strike a sound blow.

Of the vantages and sufficiency of the short Sword fight in battle.
THe short Sword, and Sword and Dagger, Italians, or Italienated with the
Rapiers.

That all manner of double weapons, or weapons to be used with both hands, have
advantage against the single Rapier or single Sword, there is no question to be
made. That the Sword and Buckler has the vantage against the Sword and Dagger.
point of the Sword, they can better see to ward then with a Buckler. But I
never knew any, that wanne the Close with the Dagger upon the Sword and
Buckler, but did wish himself out again: for distance being broken, judgment
fails, for lack of time to judge, and the eye is deceived by the swift
motion of the hand, and for lack of true Space with the dagger hand, which
cannot be otherwise, for lack of the circumference to defend both blow and
thrust, it is impossible for lack of true Space in just time, the agent having
gotten the true place, to defend one thrust or blow of an hundred. And it is
most certain, whosoever closes with Sword and Dagger, against the Sword and
Buckler, is in great danger to be slain. Likewise at the point within
distance, if he stand to defend both blow and thrust with his Dagger, for lack
of true space and distance, if he had the best eye of any man, and could see
perfectly, which way the thrust or blow comes, and when it comes, as it is
not to be denied but he may, yet his space being too large, it helps him
nothing, because one man's hand being as swift as another man's hand, both being
within distance, he that strikes or thrusts, hurts the warder: the reason
is this: the Agent being in the first motion although in his offense, further
to go then the warder to defend, yet the warders space being too large, the
blow or thrust will be performed home, before the warder can come to the true
place to defend himself, and although the warder do perfectly see the blow or
thrust coming, so shall he see his own ward so far from the true place of
his defense, that although he do at that instant time, plainly see the blow or
thrust coming, it shall be impossible for him to recover the true place of his
ward, till he be wounded. But let the warder with the dagger say, that it is
not true which I have said, for as he has eyes to behold the blow or thrust
coming, so has he as good time to defend himself. Herein he shall find himself
deceived to; this is the reason: the hand is the swiftest motion, the foot is
the slowest, without distance the hand is tied to the motion of the feet,
whereby the time of the hand is made as slow as the foot, because thereby we
redeem every time lost upon his coming by the slow motion of the foot, and
have time thereby to judge, when and how he can perform any actio^ whatsoever,
and so have we the time of the hand to the time of the feet. Now is the hand in
his own course more swifter then the foot or eye, therefore within distance the
eye is deceived, and judgment is lost; and that is another cause that the
warder with the dagger, The eye is deceived by the swift motion of the hand.
although he have perfect eyes, is still within distance deceived. For proof
that the hand is more swifter then the eye, and thereby deceives the eyes: let
two stand within distance, and let one of the^ stand still to defend himself,
and let the other flourish and false with his hand, and he shall continually
with the swift motions of his hand, deceive the eyes of him that stands
watching to defend himself, and shall continually strike him in diverse places
with his hand. Again, take this for an example, that the eyes by swift motions
are deceived: turn a turne-wheele swift, and you shall not be able to discern
with your best eyes how many spokes be in the wheel, no nor whether there be
any spokes at all, or whereof the wheel is made, and yet you see when the
wheel stands still there is a large distance between every spoke. He that
will not believe that the swift motion of the hand in fight will deceive the
eye, shall stare abroad with his eyes, and feel himself soundly hurt, before he
shall perfectly see how to defend himself. So those that trust to their sight,
the excellency of a good eye, their great cunning, and perfect wards of the
daggers, that they can better see to ward then with a buckler, shall ever be
deceived. And when they be wounded, they say the Age^t was a little too quick
for them; sometimes they say they bare their dagger a little too low: sometimes
they are thrust under the dagger, then they say, they bare it a little too high:
sometimes a thrust being strongly made, they being soundly paid therewith, say,
they were a little too slow, and sometimes they be soundly paid with a thrust,
and they think they were a little too quick. The Dagger is an imperfect ward.
So they that practice or think to be cunning in the dagger ward, are all the
days of their lives learning, and are never taught.

That the Sword and Buckler has the vantage against the Sword and Target.
THe Sword and Target together has but two

The short Staff.


Yet again for the short staff: the short staff has the vantage against the
Battel-axe, blacke-bill, or Halbard: the short staff has the vantage, by
reason of the nimblenesse and length: he will strike and thrust freely, and in
better and swifter time then can the Battel-axe, Blacke-bill, or Halbard: and
by reason of his judgment, distance and time, fight safe. And this resolve
upon, the short staff is the best weapon against all manner of weapons, the
Forest bill excepted.

Also the short staff has advantage against two Swords and Daggers, or two
Rapiers, The short staff or half Pike has the advantage against two sword and
dagger men, or two Rapiers. Poiniards, and Gantlets.
Poiniards and Gantlets, the reasons and causes before are for the most part
set down already, the which being well considered, you shall plainly see,
that whenever any one of the Sword and Dagger men, or Rapier and Poiniard
men shall break his distance, or suffer the Staff man to break his, that man
which did first break his distance, or suffer the distance to be won against
him, is presently in danger of death. And this cannot in reason be denied,
because the distance appertaining to the Staffe-man, either to keep or break,
stands upon the moving of one large space always at the most, both for his
offense or safety. The other two in the breach of their distance to offend the
Staffe-man, have always four paces at the least therein they fall too great in
number with their feet, and too short in distance to offend the Staffe-man. Now
there rests no more to be spoken of, but how the Staffe-man shall behave
himself to keep that distance, that one of the Sword and Dagger men get not
behind him, while the other shall busy him before: to do that is very easy, by
reason of the small number of his feet, for by a very small turning of his
feet, as it were in the Center point of a wheel, the other two to keep their
distance, are driven to run twenty foot for one, as it were upon the
uttermost part or circle of the wheel: all this while the Staffe-man is very
well. Then it comes thus to pass, whether they both labor to get behind
him, or one keep directly before him whilst the other get behind him, yet
before that be brought to pass, they shall either be both before him or just
against both sides of him: at which time soever the Staffe-man finding either
of them within distance, he presently in making of his play, slays with blow
or thrust one of the^, or at the least puts him in great danger of his life.
If the Staffe-man take his time, when they are both before him, that is to say,
before they come to the half ring, just against both sides of the Staffe-man,
then he that is nearest within distance is slain by blow or thrust, or put in
great danger of his life. But if the Sword and Dagger men do keep their
distance until they come to the just half ring right against the sides of the
Staffe-man, and then break distance, that man that first breaks distance is
slain with blow or thrust, or sore hurt, and in great danger of death: and the
Staffe-man in making that play at that instant, must turn with one large pace,
the which he may easily do, before the other can get near enough to offend
him, by reason that he has to make with his feet but one large pace, but the
other has at the least three paces. But if the Sword and Dagger-men will in
the time that they be before him, keep their distance in the time of their
being upon the middle part of the outside of the circle, right against both
sides of him, and will labor with all heed and diligence to be both or one of
the^ behind him, that troubles the Staffe-man nothing at all, for in that very
time, when he finds them past the middle part of the circle, he presently
turns, by the which he shall naturally set himself as it were in a triangle,
and both the sword and dagger-men, shall thereby stand both before him in true
distance of three paces, from offending of him at the least, as at the first
they did. And take this for a true ground, there is no man able to ward a sound
blow with the Sword and Dagger, nor Rapier, Poinyard, and Gantlet, being
strongly made at the head, with the Staff, and run in withal, the force of
both hands is such, being in his full motion and course, that although the
other do carry his ward high and strong with both hands, yet his feet being
moving from the ground, the great force of the blow will strike him with his
ward, and all down flat to ground. But if he stand fast with his feet, he may
with both weapons together, strongly defend his head from the blow, but then
you are sufficiently instructed, the thrust being presently made, after the
blow full at the body, it is impossible in due time to break it, by reason of
the largeness of his space.

The short Staff has the vantage against the long staff, and Morris Pike,
and the Forest bill against all manner of weapons.
THe reasons are these. The short Staff or Morris Pike, that is to say, four
with the Staff, and four with the head, and is more offensive then is the
Staff or Morris Pike: yet a question may be made by the unskillful, concerning
the fight between the long Staff and the short,

Again of the vantages of weapons.
the longest have the advantage, and all manner of weapons to be used with one
hand, that are above the perfect length of the single Sword, the shortest have
the vantage, and all manner of weapons under the just length of the short Sword,
as Fauchions, Skaines, or Hangers, Woodkniues, Daggers, and such like short
weapons of imperfect lengthes, the longest have the advantage, because the
fight of these weapons consist within the half or quarter Sword, wherein by
the swift motions of their hands, their eyes are deceived, and in those
weapons, commonly for their hands lies no defense. And if two shall fight
with staves or Swords, or what weapons soever, the one of them having his
weapon longer then the perfect length, and the other his weapon shorter then
the perfect length, he that has the longest has the vantage, because the
shortest can make no true Cross in true time. The short Staff or half Pike,
Forest bill, Partisan, or Gleue, or such like weapons of perfect length, to be
used with both hands, have the advantage against two Swords and Daggers, or
two Rapiers, Poiniardes, and Gantlets, and against all other weapons
whatsoever, the Forest bill excepted.

Again for the short Staff or half Pike.
THe short Staff is most commonly the the Staff is very uncertain, but the
Bill is a more certain mark, by reason of the breadth of the head, whereby as
the Bill has advantage in his wards in the head, so therefore has the Staff
the like defense, or rather more, to play upon the head of the Bill, not only
to make a perfect good ward, but thereby, the rather to cast the Bill out of
the right line, whereby the Staffe-man may thrust safe, and endanger the
Bill-man: and the rather because therein he is the first mouer, wherein there is
great vantage, both in time and force. And if the Bilman be not very skillful
(all vantages and disaduantages of both sides considered,) the short Staff
will prove the better weapon. Note this.
Lastly note this, that long Staves, Morris Pikes, and such like weapons of
imperfect lengthes, being to be used with both hands, notwithstanding their
imperfect lengthes, are perfect weapons to be used, the one against the other,
and their fightes therein perfect, because in drawing of them back betwixt
their hands, their motions are swifter backewardes, then is the time of the
Agents feet forwards, by the which all their lost times are redeemed:
therefore these weapons in their fightes, the one against the other are
perfect. And these weapons in the night are the best weapons of all other, and
have great advantage against the forest Bill, short Staff, or any manner of
short weapons whatsoever: for these causes, they boldly make home their
fightes, and if need be against desperate men, that will venture themselves to
run in, they redeem their lost times. But the other with shorter weapons for
lack of light, can make no true defense. Thus ends the vantages of weapons.

Questions and answers between the Scholar and the Master, of the vantages
and disaduantages between a tall man, and a man of mean stature, having both
the perfect knowledge in their weapons.
Scholar. WHo has the advantage in fight, of a tall


Master. The tall man has the vantage, for these causes: his reach being
longer, and weapon unto his stature accordingly, Tall men have the vantage
against men of mean stature.
he has thereby a shorter course with his feet to win the true place, wherein
by the swift motion of his hand, he may strike or thrust home: in the which
time a man of mean stature cannot reach him, and by his large pace, in his
true pace in his regression further, sets himself out of all danger, and
these are the vantages that a tall man has against any man of shorter reach
then himself.


Scholar. What vantage has a man of mean stature against a tall man?


Master. He has none: because the true times in fight, and actions
accordingly, are to be observed and done, as well by a tall man, as by a man of
mean stature.


Scholar. Why then if this be true, that tall men have the vantage against me^
of mean stature, it should seem in fight there is no perfection, other then
this, when men of like stature, reach, and length of weapon, shall fight
together, the which will seldom or never happen, but either in the length of
their weapons, statures or reaches (if their swords should be of just length)
some difference most commonly there will be in their reaches.


Master. Yes verily, the tall man has still the vantage, and yet the fight is
perfect, although the men that shall happen to fight, shall happen to be
unequal in their statures, reaches, or lengths of their weapons.


Scholar. That can I hardly believe, unless you can tell me by Art how to
avoid or safely defend my self, being but a man of mean stature, against a
tall man.


Master. I will tell you: there belongs unto this Art of defense only to be
used with the feet, progression, regression, traversing, and treading of
grounds: in any of these you playing the part of the Patient, or Patient Agent,
your feet are swifter in their motions then are the Agents, because his weight
and number of his feet in his coming to win the true place to strike or thrust
home, are greater then yours, and therefore the true time is yours to avoid
him, or safely to defend your self: so the Art is still true, and the tall man
has still the vantage.


Scholar. Yet I am not fully satisfied herein, because you tell me still that
the tall man has the vantage, and notwithstanding you say the Art is true,
wherein then has the tall man the vantage, when by your Art you can defend
your self against him.


Master. I will satisfy you therein thus. The tall man has the vantage, he
can maintain his fight, both by nature and Art, with more ease then can the
man of mean stature, because the man of mean stature has thereby a further
course with his feet to pass to the place, wherein he may strike or thrust
home, and in winning of that place, is driven by Art to come guarded under his
wards to defend himself, because in the time of his coming, the tall man may
both naturally or artificially strike or thrust home, in the which time, if the
man of mean stature should fail in the least jot of his Art, he should be in
great danger of death or hurt. But the tall man can naturally and safely come
to the true place open, without any artificial wards at all, and therein also
endanger the other, Four invincible advantages consist in a tall man against a
man of mean stature. Long reach. Short course. Length of weapon. Large pace.
or drive him still to trauerse his ground, with all the artificial skill that
he has to defend himself; and all this the tall man does by reason of his
length of weapon, large pace, short course, and long reach, with great safety,
pleasure and ease. And for those causes the tall man has still the vantage of
men of mean stature, and yet notwitsta^ding the noble Science of Defense most
perfect and good.


Of the long single Rapier fight between valiant men, having both skill, he
that it the best wrastler, or if neither of them can wrestle, the strongest man
most commonly kills the other, or leaves him at his mercy.
WHen two valiant men of skill at single Rapier the close; but having both
skill, not without special care of their guard or cross, the which they may
safely do, by reason of the length of their Rapiers: but happening both of one
mind, the rather do bring themselves together: that being done, no skill with
Rapiers avails, they presently grapple fast their hilts, wrists, arms,
bodies or necks, as in lustring, wrestling, or striving together, they may
best find for their advantages: whereby it most commonly falls out, that he
that is the best wrastler, or strongest man (if neither of them can wrestle)
overcomes, wresting by strength, or fine skill in wrestling, the Rapier from
his adversary, or casting him from him, either to the ground, or to such
distance, that he may by reason thereof, use the edge or point of his rapier, to
strike or thrust him, leaving him dead or alive at his mercy. But if but one
of these valiant men shall seek to run into the close, and that the other
shall use his skill in traversing of his ground, or otherwise by standing upon
his guard or Stocata ward, to take all manner of adua^tages at his coming, yet
all avails him not, because the Rapiers being long, the crossing of the
blades cannot be avoided: that being made, the oppressor runs faster
forwards then can the defendant backwards, and so are brought together, as in
the first assault they were, and every action therein accordingly performed.

Of the Rapier and Poiniard fight betwixt valiant men, having both skill.
be of one mind, the time is doubled in winning the same: whereby it comes to
pass, that then he that first thrusts, endangereth, kills or hurts the
other: and if they both thrust together, as they may do by the equal time of
their feet, then they are most commonly both slain, or both hurt. And this is
well known unto all men of skill, that the place being once gotten, there is
neither judgment, space, pace, nor time, either by wards with their Rapier
blades, or by breaking with their Poiniards, or flying back, that can preserve
or defend them. But if but one of them will seek to win by passage, hard
pressing, or otherwise the place, wherein in his judgment he may thrust home,
it is impossible for the other to deny him the same, because the length of the
Rapiers wins him the cross; the cross being taken, the place is had; the
place being had, he that first thrusts, first speedeth: if both thrust
together, they are both in danger: the^ presently follows (unless it please
God otherwise to have it) the stabs with their daggers, wherein there lies no
defense.

Of the long Rapier and Poiniard-fight between two valiant men, the one having
skill, the other none: that he that has no skill has the vantage.
WHen two valiant men shall fight with long manner of coming toward him, will
presently yield to take the advantage of his coming, or else with all speed
put himself into his short ward, to be ready at his coming to make out a
strong Stocata (as the Italians call it) the other knowing his imperfection in
fight, assures himself there can be no great good for him to stand long out
at the point, presently redoubleth or reuiueth his spirits with perfect
resolution, to make short work, courageously with some offensive action, such
as nature shall best yield unto him, flies in with all force and agilitie, the
skillful man stands watching to take such advantages as his schoolemaister
has taught him, in the which time, many times it falls out, he is taught a
new time, even by an unskillful man that never fought before, is sore hurt or
slain: and if it happen they both miss in their offensive actions, then by
reason thereof, and of the imperfect length of their Rapiers, they come to
stabbing with their Poiniards, wherein there lies no defense, because distance
being broken, judgment fails, time is lost, and their eyes (by the swift
motions of their hands) are deceived.

Of the long single Rapier, or Rapier and Poiniard-fight between two
unskillful men being valiant.
Rapiers is done in a moment, and presently will grapple and wrestle together,
wherein most commonly the strongest or best Wrastler overcomes, and the like
fight falls out between them, at the long Rapier and Poiniard, but much more
deadly, because in stead of Close and Wrestling, they fall most commonly to
stabbing with their Poiniardes.

Of the imperfection and insufficiency of Rapiers in general, of what length
soever they be.
IF two fight with long Rapiers, If they stand upon breaking with their
Daggers, he that first wins the place, and thrusts home, hurts the other
for lack of the circu^ference: if both thrust together, they are both sped,
because their Spaces of Defense are too wide to answer the time of the hand,
and by the swift motion thereof, the eye in that distance is by the same
deceived.

The feet in their course, but not in the first motion, always note for the
avoiding of great errors.


upon every Cross made within the half Rapier, if they have Poiniardes, they
most commonly stabbe each other, which cannot be avoided, because the Rapiers
being long, the Cross cannot be undone of either side, without going back
with their feet, the which likewise in due time cannot be done, because the
hand is more swifter then the feet, and the feet more swifter in their course
forwards then backwardes, neither can the Cross be prevented, because the
point of necessity lies too far off in his offense, or else within compass
of the true time of the hand and body, by reason of his imperfect length, and
so by the like reasons, if two fight with long single Rapiers, upon every
Cross made therewith, within the half Rapier, the Close cannot be avoided,
whereby it comes to pass, most commonly, that the strongest man or best
Wrastler, overcomes. Now if two do fight with short Rapiers, or Rapiers of
convenient length, such Rapiers be inconvenient and insufficient also for lack
of an hilt to defend the hand and head from the blow; for no eye (in making a
perfect ward for the head, to defend a blow, can discern to take the same
within three or four inches, whereby it may as well and as often fall upon the
hand, as upon the blade of the Rapier. Again, the hilt as well serves to
defend the head as the hand, and is a more sure and strong ward, then is the
blade of the Rapier. And further, understand this for truth, that in gardant
and open fight, the hand without an hilt lies open to most blows that shall be
stricken by the Agent, out of the gardant or open fight, because in the true
carriage of the gardant fight, the hand must lie above the head, in such
straightnes and narrownes of space, that which way soever the Agent shall
strike or thrust at the head, face, or body, the removing of two or four
inches shall save all. And now some what more for the shortness or convenient
length of Rapiers.

Rapiers having no hilts to defend the head, the Rapier-man is driven of
necessity to lie at the variable fight or low ward, and being there he can
neither defend in due time, head, face, nor body from the blows or thrustes
of him, that shall fight out of the gardant or open fight, but is continually
in great danger of the Agent, for these causes following. First, because his
space is too wide to defend his head from blow or thrust. Secondly his Pace
standing upon that fight, will be of necessity too great or too narrow: if too
narrow, too weak: if too large, his weight and number of his feet, are too
great to endanger him, that is upon his gardant or open fight.

Of the imperfection and insufficiency of the fight of the single Rapier,
Rapier and Poiniard, Rapier and Buckler, Rapier and Cloak, and Rapier and Glove
of maile.
THe Rapier fight, whether it be single or accompanied best fights, gardant and
open fight, and to fly from the^, and trust only unto variable fight, and
close fight. Now having proved through the imperfection or insufficiency of
the Rapier, the imperfection of the Rapier fight, it remains that I speak of
the rest of the weapons, or instruments appertaining unto Rapier fight.

The Rapier and Poiniard fight, the Rapier and Buckler fight, the Rapier and
cloak fight, and the Rapier and glove of male fight: all these fights by reason
of the imperfection of the Rapier, and Rapier fight, are all also imperfect
fights: and for proof of the uncertainty and impossibilities of safety in
any of these fights, thus it stands. These fights depend altogether upon
variable fight and close fight: in any of these fights it is impossible in
true space of Offense to keep the blades of their Rapiers from crossing, or
from breaking with the Poiniards, buckler, cloak, or breaking or catching with
the glove of male; because in any of these two fights, the Agent has still in
true space the blade of the Patients Rapier to work upon. These things by
letters cannot be made more plain, neither is it unknown to the skillful, or
in fight by any means to be avoided, the weapon being too far in true space
to be wrought upon, the place cannot be denied, do the patient Agent what he
can for his life to the contrary, either by blows, thrusts, falsing, or
doubling of thrusts, going back, indirections, or turnings of the body, or
what else soever may in the highest touch of wit or strength, or agilitie of
body be devised or done, to keep out the Agent: but still the Agent by
narrowness of space brings himself by strong guard to the place, where being
brought, it is as impossible to fight safe, as as it is for two desperate men
set together being both blind, because in the the true place (won in Rapier or
variable fight) their eyes by the swift motions of their hands are deceived,
the crosses in that fight are false, their distance, judgments and times are
lost, either to offend in safety, or safely to defend themselves: and these
reasons, rules, or grounds of the feats of arms are infallible and invincible.

Now, o you Italian teachers of Defense, where are your Stocatas, Imbrocatas,
Mandritas, Puntas, and Puynta reuersas, Stramisons, Passatas, Carricados,
Amazzas, and Incartatas, and playing with your bodies, removing with your feet
a little aside, circle wise winding of your bodies, making of three times with
your feet together, marking with one eye the motion of the adversary, and with
the other eye the advantage of thrusting? What is become of all these iugling
gambalds, Apish devises, with all the rest of your squint-eyed tricks? when as
through your deep studies, long practices, and apt bodies, both strong and
agilious, you have attained to the height of all these things. What then
avails it you, when you shall come to fight for your lives with a man of
skill, you shall have neither time, nor place, in due time to perform any one
of them. Nor gardant nor open fight safely to keep out a man of skill, a man of
no skill, or scholar of your own teaching, from the true place, the place of
safety, the place of uncertainty or mischief, the place of wounds or death,
but are there enforced to stand in that mischievous, uncertain, dangerous, and
most deadly place, as two men having lost in part their chiefest senses, most
furiously with their rapiers or poiniards, wounding or slaying each other.

Thus ends the imperfect fights of the rapier with all manner of weapons or
instruments thereto appertaining, with their imperfections, through the true
grounds and rules of the Art of arms, truly displayed and brought to light.

All laud be unto the Almighty God.
That the reasons used by the Italian Fencers in commending the use of the
Rapier and Poiniard, because it makes peace, makes against themselves.
There are few frayes, but more valiant Gentlemen slain now then were the^.
they will not now give the lie, nor with such foul speeches abuse themselves,
therefore there are fewer frayes in these times then were wont to be: it cannot
be denied but this is true, that we are more circumspect of our words, and more
fearful to fight, then heretofore we have been. But whereof comes it? Is it
from this, that the Rapier makes peace in our minds; or from hence, that it is
not so sufficient defense for our bodies in our fight? He that will fight when
he is armed, will not fight when he is naked: is it therefore good to go naked
to keep peace? he that would fight with his Sword and Buckler, or Sword and
Dagger, being weapons of true defense, will not fight with his Rapier and
Poiniard, wherein no true defense or fight is perfect: are these insufficie^t
weapons therefore the better, because not being sufficient to defend us in
fight, they force us unto peace? What else is it, but to say, it is good for
subjects to be poor, that they may not go to law: or to lack emunition, that
they may not fight, nor go to the wars: and to conclude, what more follows
through the imperfect works of these Italian peacemakers? They have made many
a strong man in his fight weak, many a valiant man fearful, many a worthy
man trusting to their imperfect fight, has been slain, and many of our
desperate boys and young youths, to become in that Rapier-fight, as good men
as England yields, and the tallest men in this land, in that fight as very
boys as they and no better. This good have the Italian teachers of Offense
done us, they have transformed our boys into men, and our men into boys, our
strong men into weakness, our valiant men doubtful, and many worthy men
resolving themselves upon their false resolutions, have most wilfully in the
field, with their Rapiers ended their lives. And lastly, have left to remain
amongst us after their deaths, these inconveniences behind them, false
Fence-bookes, imperfect weapons, false fightes, and evil customs, whereby for
lack of use and practice in perfect weapons and true fight, we are disabled
for the service of our Prince, defense of our country, and safety of our
lives in private fight.

That the short Sword has the advantage against the long Sword or long Rapier.
WHereas for the most part opinions are Italian teachers of Defense, by their
false demonstratio^s have brought us to believe. I have thought good that the
truth may appear which has the vantage, to add my help unto the reasons
they use in their own behalf, for that yet I could never hear them make a
sound reason for the same. These are the reasons. First with my long Rapier,
These reasons are used by the Italians.
I will put my self into my guard or Stocata, holding my hilt back by the
outside of my right thigh, keeping in short the point of my Rapier, so as he
that has the short Sword, shall not be able to reach the point of my Rapier,
to make his ward or Cross with his Dagger, Buckler, Sword, or Cloak, without
stepping in of his foot, the which time is too long to answer the time of the
hand, by reason of my distance. I can there stand safe without danger of blow
or thrust, playing the Patients part: if you strike or thrust you do it too
short, by reason of my distance: if you seek to come nearer, you must do it
with the time of your foot, in the which time I may safely thrust home: if in
that distance you break it not, you are slain: if you do break it, yet you
do me no harm, by reason of my distance, and I may stand fast and thrust
again; or fly back at my pleasure: so have you put your self in danger of
your life, and having hardly escaped, are driven again to begin a new bought,
as at the first you did. Again, if I please, I can be the oppressor, keeping
the same guard, and my point in short as I did before, and pressing strongly by
putting in by little and little of my feet, until the place with my foot be
gotten, wherein (in my judgment) I may thrust home, the which I may boldly and
safely do, without respect of any ward at all, by reason of my distance, in
which time of my coming he must strike, thrust, ward, or go back: if he go
back, it is a great disgrace: if he strike or thrust, it is too short: if he
stand to defend, the place being already gotten, where I may thrust home, the
thrust being very quick and strongly made, such is the force and swiftness
thereof, that it is impossible by nature or art, for any man to break one
thrust of an hundred. These reasons in my opinion may suffice to confirm the
wise, that there is no question to be made, but that the long Rapier has the
advantage against the short Sword.

Sir you hue pretily handled your discourse, A confutation of the Italians
reason.
concerning the vantages of the long Rapier against the short Sword, especially
at the first show, and according to common sense, but for the substance and
truth of the true fight, you have said nothing, because for the performance of
any of your allegations, you have neither true Pace, Place, Time, nor Space:
these are the reasons. Your Pace of necessity must be too large, because
otherwise you cannot keep safe the point of your long Rapier, from the Cross
of the short Sword, unless you will with a narrow Pace keep back your hilt
so far, that the space of your offense will be too large or too long in
distance, and your body unapt to move and to thrust strong and quick in due
time, nor aptly to keep your distance, to win the place with your feet, to
thrust home. So now you may plainly see, if you have skill in the art or
science of Defense, that to perform any thing which you have alleged, you
have neither true Pace, Place, time nor Space. But if you will stand upon the
largeness of your Pace, to keep back or save the point of your long Rapier
from the ward or Cross of the short Sword, or upon your Passatos, in all these
you have great disaduantages: and these are my reasons: Your number will be too
great, as thus: whenever you mean out of your large pace to thrust home, you
must of necessity make four times with your feet, and one with your hand, or
two times with your feet, and one with your hand at the least: and whenever
you make any of your passages, the number of your feet are greater then the
greatest of any of these times done out of the large pace: but the patient with
his short sword, to avoid you, or disappoint you of your thrust, has but one
time with his foot, at or before the which time, as he in his judgment shall
find you in your motion, has by the slow and great number of your motions or
times, sufficient time safely out of all danger to make himself ready to take
his cross with his short sword. Now Sir, whether you thrust or not thrust,
whether you play the part of an Agent, or Patient, it helps you nothing, for
he that has the short sword has four times or motions against the long
Rapier, namely, bent, spent, lying spent, and drawing back, in all manner of
fights these are to be observed both by the Patient and Agent. Now note, he
that has the long Rapier must of necessity play upon one of these four
motions, or be Patient, which soever he shall do, he is still in great danger
of the cross of the short sword, because if he be Agent, his number is too
great, he falls into one of the four motions, the Patient with his short
sword, having but the time of the hand, or hand and foot, safely upon these
actions or times takes his cross with the short Sword: that being done, he
presently vncrosseth and strikes or thrusts at his pleasure him that has
the long Rapier, in the head, face, or body. Now here is again to be noted,
that when the cross is made, if he that has the long Rapier stand fast, he is
wounded presently in the vncrossing of the short sword, if he step or leap
back to save himself, yet the time of the hand being swifter then the time of
the foot, ouertaketh him, with blow or thrust in the arm, hand, head, face and
body. Now if he that has the long Rapier will be patient and make no play,
but lie still watching to make his thrust or Stocata just in the coming or
moving of the Agents feet with his short sword, then he has as great
disadvantage as he had when he was Patient, because the^ the Agent with his
short Sword has but hand and foot to make his cross: which is most safely to
be done in that time, which we call Bent, and is as impossible for the
Rapier-man to prevent, as it is for an unskillful to strike or thrust just
together with a man of skill. Then thus I conclude, that he that fights with
a long Rapier, against him that fights with a short Sword, can do nothing in
due time to defend himself, or hurt the other, but is still in danger of his
life, or at the mercy of him that has the short Sword, or else has no safe
way to help himself, Cobs Trauerse.
but only Cobs Trauerse. This Cob was a great quareller, and did delight in
great bravery to give foul words to his betters, and would not refuse to go
into the field to fight with any man, and when he came into the field, would
draw his Sword to fight, for he was sure by the cunning of his Trauerse, not to
be hurt by any man: for at any time finding himself ouermatched would
suddenly turn his back and run away with such swiftness, that it was
thought a good horse would scarce take him. And this when I was a young man,
was very much spoken of by many Gentlemen of the Innes of the Court, and was
called Cobs Trauerse and those that had seen any go back too fast in his
fight, would say, he did tread Cobs Trauerse.

George Silver his military riddle, truly set down between the Perfection
and Imperfection of fight: containing the handling of the four fights: wherein
true consists the whole sum and full perfection of the true fight, with all
manner of weapons, with an inuicible conclusion.
GArdant fight stays, puts back, or beats gardant fight.

Open fight stays, puts back, or beats open fight.

Variable fight answers variable fight in the first distance, and not
otherwise, except it be with the perfect length against the imperfect.

Close fight is beaten by gardant fight.

Variable close and gardant fight, beats gardant fight, open fight, variable
fight, and close fight.

Gardant fight in the imperfection of the Agent or Patient, wins the half
sword, and preuenteth the close, and whosoever first ventureth the close,
loses it, and is in great danger of death, and not possible to escape or get
out again without great hurt.

There attends most diligently upon these four fights four offensive
actions, which we call certain, uncertain, first, before, just, and
afterward: they are to be performed through judgment, time, measure, number
and weight, by which all manner of blows, thrusts, falses, doubles, or slips,
are prevented, or most safely defended. And thus ends my riddle.

Now follows the conclusion, that whosoever shall think or find himself in
his fight too weak for the Agent, or Patient Agent, and therefore, or by
reason of his drunkenness, or unreasonable desperateness shall prese within
the half Sword, or deserately run in of purpose to give hurt, or at least
for taking of one hurt, to give another, shall most assuredly be in great
danger of death or wounds, and the other shall still be safe and go free.

Veritas vincit.
A BRIEF NOTE OF THREE ITAlian Teachers of Offense.
I write not this to disgrace the dead, but to show their impudent boldness
and insufficiency in performance of their profession when they were living:
that from henceforth this brief note may be a remembrance and warning to
beware of had I wist.
THere were three Italian Teachers of Offense in my time. The first was Signior
Rocko: the second was Ieronimo, that was Signior Rocko his boy, that taught
Gentlemen in the Blacke-Fryers, as Usher for his master in steed of a man. The
third was Vincentio. This Signior Rocko came into England about some thirty
years past: he taught the Noblemen and Gentlemen of the Court; he caused some
of them to wear leaden soales in their shoes, the better to bring them to
nimblenesse of feet in their fight. He disbursed a great sum of money for the
lease of a fair house in Warwick lane, which he called his College, for he
thought it great disgrace for him to keep a Fence-schoole, he being then
thought to be the only famous Master of the Art of arms in the whole world.
He caused to be fairly drawn and set round about his School all the
Noblemens and Gentlemen's arms that were his Scholars, and hanging right under
their arms their Rapiers, daggers, gloves of male and gantlets. Also, he had
benches and stools, the room being very large, for Gentlemen to sit round
about his School to behold his teaching. He taught none commonly under
twenty, forty, fifty, or an hundred pounds. And because all things should be
very necessary for the Nobleme^ and gentlemen, he had in his school a large
square table, with a green carpet, done round with a very broad rich fringe
of gold, always standing upon it a very fair Standish covered with Crimson
Velvet, with ink, pens, pin-dust, and sealing wax, and quiers of very
excellent fine paper gilded, ready for the Noblemen and Gentlemen (upon
occasion) to write their letters, being then desirous to follow their fight, to
send their men to dispatch their business. And to know how the time passed, he
had in one corner of his school a Clock, with a very fair large Dial, he
had within that school, a room the which was called his privy school, with
many weapons therein, where he did teach his scholars his secret fight, after
he had perfectly taught them their rules. He was very much beloved in the
Court.

There was one Austen Bagger, a very tall gentleman of his hands, not
standing much upon his skill, but carrying the valiant heart of an Englishman,
upon a time being merry amongst his friends, said he would go fight with
Signior Rocco, presently went to Signior Rocco his house in the Blackefriers,
and called to him in this manner: Signior Rocco, thou that art thought to be the
only cunning man in the world with thy weapon, thou that take upon thee to
hit any Englishman with a thrust upon any button, thou that take upon thee
to come over the seas, to teach the valiant Noblemen and Gentlemen of England
to fight, thou cowardly fellow come out of thy house if thou dare for thy life,
I am come to fight with thee. Signior Rocco looking out at a window, perceiving
him in the street to stand ready with his Sword and Buckler, with his two hand
Sword drawn, with all speed ran into the street, and manfully let fly at
Austen Bagger, who most bravely defended himself, and presently closed with
him, and stroke up his heels, and cut him over the breech, and trod upon him,
and most grievously hurt him under his feet: yet in the end Austen of his good
nature gave him his life, and there left him. This was the first and last fight
that ever Signior Rocco made, saving once at Queen Hith he drew his Rapier
upon a waterman, where he was thoroughly beaten with Oars and Stretchers, but
the odds of their weapons were as great against his Rapier, as was his two
hand Sword against Austen Baggers Sword and Buckler, therefore for that fray he
was to be excused.

Then came in Vincentio and Ieronimo, they taught Rapier-fight at the Court, at
London, and in the country, by the space of seven or eight years or
thereabouts. These two Italian Fencers, especially Vincentio, said that
Englishmen were strong men, but had no cunning, and they would go back too
much in their fight, which was great disgrace unto them. Upon these words of
disgrace against Englishmen, my brother Toby Silver and my self, made
challenge against them both, to play with them at the single Rapier, Rapier and
Dagger, the single Dagger, the single Sword, the Sword and Target, the Sword
and Buckler, and two hand Sword, the Staff, battle Axe, and Morris Pike, to
be played at the Bell Savage upon the Scaffold, where he that went in his fight
faster back then he ought, of Englishman or Italian, should be in danger to
break his neck off the Scaffold. We caused to that effect, five or six score
Bills of challenge to be printed, and set up from Southwarke to the Tower, and
from thence through London unto Westminster, we were at the place with all
these weapons at the time appointed, within a bow shot of their Fence school:
many gentlemen of good account, carried many of the bills of challenge unto them,
telling them that now the Siluers were at the place appointed, with all their
weapons, looking for them, and a multitude of people there to behold the fight,
saying unto them, now come and go with us (you shall take no wrong) or else you
are shamed for ever. Do the gentlemen what they could, these gallants would not
come to the place of trial. I verily think their cowardly fear to answer
this challenge, had utterly shamed them indeed, had not the masters of Defense
of London, within two or three days after, been drinking of bottell Ale hard
by Vincentios school, in a Hall where the Italians must of necessity pass
through to go to their school: and as they were coming by, the masters of
Defense did pray them to drink with them, but the Italians being very
cowardly, were afraid, and presently drew their Rapiers: there was a pretty
wench standing by, that loved the Italians, she ran with outcrie into the
street, help, help, the Italians are like to be slain: the people with all
speed came running into the house, and with their Cappes and such things as
they could get, parted the fraie, for the English masters of Defense, meant
nothing less then to foil their hands upon these two faint-harted fellows.
The next morning after, all the Court was filled, that the Italian teachers of
Fence had beaten all the masters of Defense in London, who set upon them in a
house together. This wan the Italian Fencers their credit again, and thereby
got much, still continuing their false teaching to the end of their lives.

This Vincentio proved himself a stout man not long before he died, that it
might be seen in his life time he had been a gallant, and therefore no
marvel he took upon him so highly to teach Englishmen to fight, and to set
forth books of the feats of Arms. Upon a time at Wels in Somersetshire, as
he was in great bravery amongst many gentlemen of good account, with great
boldness he gave out speeches, that he had been thus many years in England,
and since the time of his first coming, there was not yet one Englishman, that
could once touch him at the single Rapier, or Rapier and Dagger. A valiant
gentleman being there amongst the rest, his English heart did rise to hear this
proud boaster, secretly sent a messenger to one Bartholomew Bramble a friend
of his, a very tall man both of his hands and person, who kept a school of
Defense in the town, the messenger by the way made the master of Defense
acquainted with the mind of the gentleman that sent for him, and of all what
Vincentio had said, this master of Defense presently came, and amongst all the
gentlemen with his cap off, prayed master Vincentio, that he would be pleased
to take a quart of wine of him. Vincentio very scornefully looking upon him,
said unto him. Wherefore should you give me a quart of wine? Marie Sir, said
he, because I hear you are a famous man at your weapon. Then presently said
the gentleman that sent for the master of Defense: Master Vincentio, I pray
you bid him welcome, he is a man of your profession. My profession said
Vincentio? what is my profession. Then said the gentleman, he is a master of
the noble science of Defense. Why said master Vince^tio, God make him a good
man. But the master of Defense would not thus leave him, but pryaed him again
he would be pleased to take a quart of wine of him. The^ said Vince^tio, I have
no need of thy wine. Then said the master of Defense: Sir I have a school of
Defense in the town, will it please you to go thither. Thy school, said
master Vincentio? what shall I do at thy school? play with me (said the
master) at the Rapier and Dagger, if it please you. Play with thee said
master Vincentio? if I play with thee, I will hit thee 1. 2. 3. 4. thrustes in
the eye together. Then said the master of Defense, if you can do so, it is the
better for you, and the worse for me, but surely I can hardly believe that you
can hit me: but yet once again I heartily pray you good Sir, that you will go
to my school, and play with me. Play with thee said master Vincentio (very
scornefully?) by God me scorn to play with thee. With that word scorn, the
master of Defense was very much moved, and up with his great English fist,
and stroke master Vincentio such a box on the ear that he fell over and
over, his legs just against a Butterie hatch, whereon stood a great black
Jack: the master of Defense fearing the worst, against Vincentio his rising,
caught the black Jack into his hand, being more then half full of Beer.
Vincentio lustily start up, laying his hand upon his Dagger, and with the other
hand pointed with his finger, saying, very well: I will cause to lie in the
Gaile for this gear, 1. 2. 3 4. years. And well said the master of Defense,
since you will drink no wine, will you pledge me in Beer? I drink to all the
cowardly knaves in England, and I think thee to be the veriest coward of them
all: with that he cast all the Beer upon him: notwithstanding Vincentio having
nothing but his guilt Rapier, and Dagger about him, and the other for his
defense the black Jack, would not at that time fight it out: but the next day
met with the master of Defense in the street, and said unto him, you remember
how misused a me yesterday, you were to blame, me be an excellent man, me teach
you how to thrust two foot further then any Englishman, but first come you
with me: then he brought him to a Mercers shop, and said to the Mercer, let me
see of your best silken Points, the Mercer did presently show him some of
seven groates a dozen, then he pays fourteen groates for two dozen, and
said to the master of Defense, there is one dozen for you, and here is another
for me. This was one of the valiantest Fencers that came from beyond the seas,
to teach Englishmen to fight, and this was one of the manliest frayes, that I
have hard of, that ever he made in England, wherein he showed himself a far
better man in his life, then in his profession he was, for he professed arms,
but in his life a better Christian. He set forth in print a book for the use
of the Rapier and Dagger, the which he called his practice, I have read it
over, and because I find therein neither true rule for the perfect teaching of
true fight, nor true ground of true fight, neither sense or reason for due
proof thereof. I have thought it frivolous to recite any part therein
contained: yet that the truth hereof may appear, let two me^ being well
experienced in the Rapier and Dagger fight, choose any of the best branches in
the same book, and make trial with force and agility, without the which the
truth between the true and false fight cannot be known, and they shall find
great imperfections therein. And again, for proof that there is no truth,
neither in his rules, grounds or Rapier-fight, let trial be made in this
manner: Proofs against the Rapier fight.
Set two unskillful men together at the Rapier and Dagger, being valiant, and
you shall see, that once in two boutes there shall either one or both of them
be hurt. Then set two skillful men together, being valiant at the Rapier and
Dagger, and they shall do the like. Then set a skilful Rapier and Dagger-man
the best that can be had, and a valiant man having no skill together at Rapier
and Dagger, and once in two bouts upon my credit in all the experience I have
in fight, the unskillful man, do the other what he can for his life to the
contrary, shall hurt him, and most commonly if it were in continuance of
fight, you shall see the unskillful man to have the advantage. And if I should
choose a valiant man for service of the Prince, or to take part with me or any
friend of mine in a good quarrel, I would choose the unskillful man, being
vnencombred with false fights, because such a man stands free in his valor
with strength and agilitie of body, freely takes the benefit of nature,
fights most brave, by loosing no opportunity, either soundly to hurt his
enemy, or defend himself, but the other standing for his Defense, upon his
cunning Italian wards, Pointa reuersa, the Imbrocata, Stocata, and being fast
tied unto these false fightes, stands troubled in his wits, and nature thereby
racked through the largeness or false lyings or Spaces, whereby he is in his
fight as a man half maimed, loosing the opportunity of times and benefit of
nature, and whereas before being ignorant of these false Rapier fightes,
standing in the free liberty of nature given him by god, he was able in the
field with his weapon to answer the valiantest man in the world, but now being
tied unto that false fickle uncertain fight, thereby has lost in nature his
freedom, is now become scarce half a man, and every boy in that fight is
become as good a man as himself.

Ieronimo this gallant was valiant, and would fight indeed, and did, as you
shall hear. He being in a Coch with a wench that he loved well, there was one
Cheese, a very tall man, in his fight natural English, for he fought with his
Sword and Dagger, and in Rapier-fight had no skill at all. This Cheese having a
quarrel to Ieronimo, ouertooke him upon the way, himself being on horseback,
did call to Ieronimo, and bad him come forth of the Coch or he would fetch him,
for he was come to fight with him. Ieronimo presently went forth of the Coch
and drew his Rapier and dagger, put himself into his best ward or Stocata,
which ward was taught by himself and Vincentio, and by them best allowed of,
to be the best ward to stand upon in fight for life, either to assault the
enemy, or stand and watch his coming, which ward it should seem he ventured
his life upon, but howsoever with all the fine Italienated skill Ieronimo had,
Cheese with his Sword within two thrustes ran him into the body and slew him.
Yet the Italian teachers will say, that an Englishma^ cannot thrust straight
with a Sword, because the hilt will not suffer him to put the forefinger over
the Cross, nor to put the thumb upon the blade, nor to hold the pummell in
the hand, whereby we are of necessity to hold fast the handle in the hand: by
reason whereof we are driven to thrust both compass and short, whereas with
the Rapier they can thrust both straight and much further then we can with the
Sword, because of the hilt: and these be the reasons they make against the
Sword.

FINIS.

