THE SPIRITVALL FAVORITE AT THE THRONE OF GRACE. By the late learned, and
reverend Divine RICHARD SIBBS Doctor in Divinity. Published by the Authors own
appointment, subscribed with his hand; to prevent unperfect Copies.

Proverbs 29. 26. Many seek the Rulers favor, but every man's judgment
comes from the Lord. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Pain, for Ralph Mabb. 1640.

THE SPIRITVALL FAVORITE AT THE THRONE OF GRACE.
NEHEMIAH I. II. O Lord I beseech thee, let now thine ear be attentive to the
prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants who desire to fear
thy name: and prosper I pray thee thy servant this day, and grant him mercy in
the sight of this Man.
IN the ninth ver. the holy man minds God of his promise made to his people,
that if they should turn unto him, and keep his Commandments and do them:
though they were cast out to the utmost parts of Heaven, yet he would gather
them thence, etc. I will touch a little on them two verses, and then come to
that I mean to dwell on, from the words read.

If you turn unto me, No promise of mercy, but to those that re.+turn.
and keep my Commandments. There is no promise of mercy, but to those that
turn, the Scripture is peremptory in denial of mercy to such as go on in
their sins: Heaven could not brook the Angels themselves having sinned, and
neither such, nor such shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Yet how many are
there that bless themselves, that it shall go well with them, though they cast
off all Gods yoakes, and Divine bonds, that might bow them to better courses,
as if words were but wind; when we see here God made his word good against his
own dear people, If ye sin I will scatter you to the farthest parts of the
world, we see in the former verse.

A proud, presumptuous sinful disposition, may slight God, and the messengers
of the word and all; now when we come to threaten: but when God comes to
execute, will he shake it off then? will swearers, and blasphemers, and filthy
persons shake off the execution as they can the threatenings? God says none
that are such shall enter into heaven, but his wrath shall smoke against them,
and shall be as a fire that shall burn to hell, against such persons as bless
themselves in wicked courses; and when God comes to the execution, they desire
the mountains to fall upon them. There are none more presumptuous against the
threatenings, and none more base and fearful when it comes to execution. As
we see in presumptuous, profane Belteshazer, that was quaffing in the boules
of the Temple, and scorning Religion, and God; when there comes a handwriting
on the wall, his knees knock together, and his joints tremble: so let there be
any evidence of execution; and we see all the Tyrants in the book of God, and
that have been in the world that have trifled at religion, of all men they are
most disconsolate and fearful, as we see in Belteshazer and others.

I beseech you therefore take heed: God will seal all his threatenings with
executions in due time, as he did to his own people, what is the reason we
should promise our selves more immunitie then they had?

If ye turn and keep my Commandments, and do them. Here are three
conditions. Though you were were cast to the utmost parts of the world, I will
gather you thence.

If you turn. The holy man Nehemiah, puts God in mind of his promise, and his
argument is from the like, and indeed from the less to the greater: Because,
God would rather of both perform his promises then his threatenings; because
mercy is his own proper work. Now, as he had been just in punishing his
people, so he would be merciful in restoring of them again; therefore he
says, Return and keep my Commandments and do them, and though ye were
scattered to the utmost parts of the earth, yet I will gather you thence. And
he did gather them thence upon their repentance, he did perform his promise
at length.

Beloved, the full accomplishment of this yet remains; for this people to this
day, since the death of Christ, since they drew the guilt of that sacred blood
on them, they are scattered about the earth to every Nation, and have not a
foot of land of their own, but are the scorn and hissing of Nations:
notwithstanding this promise will be performed upon their repentance, God will
bring them again, as Saint Paul calls it a kind of a resurrection, the
conversion of the Jews. So it is true of us all, though we were scattered as
dust, as we shall be, in the grave ere long turned to dust, God will gather
the ashes, he will gather all those parts of ours: even as his power gathered
his people together, so his power at length will gather us all; we have his
promise for the one, as well as the other.

Therefore let us comfort our selves with the performance of this promise, for
the performance of the grand promise of the resurrection. Indeed the grand
promise of the resurrection, is the ground of the performance of all other
promises. As you have it in Ezekiel, concerning the dry bones: says God, I
will cloathe these dead bones with flesh and skin, etc. therefore I will
restore you again. God that will restore our dust, and bring our bodies
together, that were scattered here and there, he will restore us out of sickness
and trouble, if it stand with his glory and our good.

Now, after the argument that he uses to persuade God from his word of
threatening and promise, he comes to the argument from their relation.

These are thy Servants.
THough sinful servants, yet they are thy servants: These are thy people, thou
have no other people in the world but these, and thou art their God: He pleads
from former favors. Thou have redeemed them by thy great power and strong hand.

It is a good argument to plead with God by former favors: It is a good
Argument to plead with God for former favors.
Because there is no shadow of change in him; he is always like himself, he
is never drawn dry. And it is a great honor to go to him for new favors upon
former; because he has an infinite supply. We may draw so much from men, as
they have not afterward to make good, but we cannot honor God more, then to
go to him with a large faith, to fetch large favors from him: the more he
gives, the more he can give, and the more he is willing to give, To him that
has shall be given. We cannot honor God more, then to go to him upon former
favors, and with enlarged desires, thou have redeemed us and been gracious to
us before.

We may much more take this argument in our mouths, and press the Majesty of
God: Thou have redeemed us, not out of Egypt or Babylon, the land of the North,
but with the blood of thy Son, from hell and damnation; and therefore thou
can redeem us from this petty misery, from these enemies: we may allege that
grand favor to all other petty redemptions, whatsoever they are. He that has
given us Christ, that has not spared his own Son, but gave him to death for
us all, how shall he not with him give us all things else? Romans 8. He that has
been so large and bountiful as to give us his own Son, that gift to
admiration, So, God loved the world, how cannot we plead with him for all other
favors whatsoever, whether they concern the life of grace or glory, or our
present condition while we live in this world? We may plead it much more I
say, Thou have redeemed us. But these things I will not press further now.

In the eleventh verse he comes to press it still, and repeates that which he
had said before, Lord I beseech thee, let thine ear be attentive to the
prayer of thy servant, and of thy servants that desire to fear thy Name.

Let thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servants. It is a prayer, and
thou art a God hearing prayer. They be thy servants, and thou regardest thy
servants. Here are but a few petitions in this large request: remember, be
attentive, and give me favor. The most of the prayer is spent in a preparative
considering the Attributes of God, and in confession, and strong reasons from
the Word, of promises and threatenings, and from their relation; and then he
makes good the relation, We are thy servants, because we desire to fear thy
Name.

To show that indeed:

It is an excellent skill and art in Prayer, to have strong Arguments.
THen the suit comes off easily: It is an an excellent skill and art in prayer
to havestrong arguments.
As in Psalm. 90. It is a prayer of Moses the man of God, and yet the least part
of the Psalm is prayer: Teach us to number our days, etc. That is all the
petition, though the petition be short, yet it is efficacious when the heart is
warmed and strengthened with strong reasons before; when the heart is elevated
and raised with the consideration of the Majesty and the truth of God; and when
the heart is strengthened with strong convincing reasons, that God will hear,
when we press him with his word: I say, when the heart is thus raised and
warmed, all the petitions come easily off.

Therefore it is an excellent thing, Beloved, to study the Scriptures, and to
study all the arguments whereby holy men have prevailed with God in Scripture,
and to see in what case those Arguments were used; they are of use and force to
prevail with God.

It is a pitiful thing now, for Christians under the glorious light of the
Gospel, to come to God only with bare neked petitions (if they come from a true
heart, they have their force that GOD should regard them) and have not reasons
to press God out of his own word, they cannot bind God with his own promise,
nor with Arguments that he has been bound with before. Simile.
Let a child but cry to the father or mother, there is relief presently for
the very cry: but if it be not one that is a child but is of grown years,
the Father looks for arguments that are mooving to press him with: So here,
Nehemiah he presses God with moving and strong arguments, and he repeates and
forces them; he does not only allege them, but inforceth them, Oh Lord I
beseech thee let thine ear he attent to the prayer of thy servant, and of thy
servants that desire to fear thy name.

He desires God to be attentive. He presses God, and indeed he does it to
warm his own heart: forwhen we have humbled our heart low enough, and broken
it with the consideration of our own unworthiness; and then warmed it with the
consideration of Gods goodness, and strengthened it with the consideration of
Gods promise and truth; then we are sure of a gracious success.

Let thine ear be attent to the prayer of thy servant, and of thy servants.

How did they know that they were thine?

Because there was no other people in the world that knew God but they. And he
knew that the Saints where ever they were had a spirit of prayer, and would
remember the case of the Church; therefore he says remember my prayer, and the
prayer of thy servants: For if the prayer of one righteous man prevail much,
much more the prayer of many. If there had been but ten righteous in Sodom,
Sodom had been preserved. Now this he aleageth to God, remember the prayer
of thy servant, of mine, and the prayer of thy servants. As Tertullian an
anciant Father says very well, Tertul.
when men join together, they offer a holy kind of violence to God: prayer is
a kind of wrestling, and contending with God, a striving with him. Let me
alone says God to Moses. It is a binding of him with arguments, and promises
of his own; and it is so forcible that he desires (as it were) to be let
alone: Now if the prayer of one, be a wrestling, and striving and forcing of
him, as it were against his will, (that he said, Let me alone; as if he could
do nothing except he gave over praying) What are the prayers of many, when
there is a multitude of them?

Therefore we may look for a comfortable issue of our prayers, and humiliation,
that is performed at this time. The desires of so many Christian souls touched
with the spirit of God, and with the case of the Church (which God does tender)
cannot be unefectuall, it must needs draw plenty of blessings from heaven. I
will not enter into the common place of prayer, having spoken of it upon
another occasion: but surely you see the holy man Nehemiah stood so much upon
it, that he hoped to speed, because he, and others prayed; (holy Daniel, and
others with him) It was such a gracious messenger to send to heaven for help
and for all good, that Daniel, though it cost him his life, that he should be
cast into the Lions den, he would not omit it for his life. Take away prayer,
and take away the life and breath of the soul; Take away breath, and the man
dies: as soon as the soul of a Christian begins to live he prays. As soon
as Saul was converted, behold he prays. A child as soon as he is borne,
he cries; and a Christian will not loose his prayer for his life, as we see in
holy Daniell. For what is all the comfort that he has, but that that is
derived from God? and God will be sued unto for all the favors he bestows:
Whatsoever is from his favor it comes as a fruit of prayer (for the most part)
though he go beyond our desires many times: yet ordinarily what we have if we
be his children, we have it as a fruit of prayer. Therefore I beseech you let
us be stirred up to this duty, as we see Nehemiah here, remomber the prayer of
thy servant, etc.

And when we pray to God, let us press him, as we see here, be attentive,
verse 6. and here again, be attentive, he presses upon God. It is no sinful
tautologie to come again and again. God loves to hear the same song again
and again; this music is nottedious, but pleasing to him. And this pressing
is for us to warm our hearts, perhaps one petition will not warm them, and
when they are warmed by a second, let us labor to warm them more and more,
and never give over till we have thoroughly warmed our hearts, Be attentive, be
attentive to my prayer, and if mine will not prevail, be attentive to the
prayers of others, let the prayers of al prevail, The prayer of thy servant,
and of thy servants.

But how does he make it good, they are thy servants?

They desire to fear thy name.
Empty relations have no comforts in them: Empty relations have no comforts in
them.
To profess ones self a servant, and not to make it good that he is a servant.
We must make good the relation we stand in to God, before we can claim
interest in the favor of God by our relation. Servants and Christians, and
professors; here are glorious titles, but if they be empty titles, if we
cannot make them good when we come to God with them: we cannot say we have any
interest in God from empty titles, it is rather an aggravation of our sin.

God will be honored in all those that come near him, either in their
obedience, or in their confusion: therefore here, the holy man did not think
it enough to say, Thy servant, and thy servants, but who desire to fear thy
name.

He goes to make it good that he was the servant of God, not from any outward
thing, but from his inward disposition, the fear of God, which I will not now
stand to speak largely of. God requires the heart, Religion most seen in the
affections.
and Religion is most in managing and tuning the affections, for they are the
wind that carries the soul to every duty. Simile.
A man is like the dead sea without affections: Religion is most in them. The
Devil has brain enough, he knows enough; more then any of us all; but then
he hates God, he has no love to God, nor no fear of God, but only a slavish
fear, he has not this reverentiall fear, childlike fear. Therefore let us
make it good that we are the servants of God, especially by our affections,
and chiefly by this of fear, which is put for all the worship of God: it is
put in stead of those conditions spoken of ver. the 9 If you turn to me; and
keep my Commandments and do them, then I will make good my promise: Now
(says he) taking up the same strength of argument; We desire to fear thy
name. As if he should have said, we turn to thee, and obey thy Commandments,
and desire to do them; it is all one, we desire to fear thy name: for those
that fear God, will turn to him, and to desire to obey his Commandments and
to do them, it is all one as to do them. If a man should do them and not
from the fear of God, all were nothing but a carcass of obedience. I will not
stand longer on that.

How does he make it good, that he feared the name of God?

He makes it good from this, that he had good desires, We desire to fear thy
name. We desire it for the present, and for the time to come; whence we will
observe two or three things shortly, as may be useful to us. First of all out
of this, that this desire to fear the name of God, is brought as an argument
to prevail in prayer, We may observe that,

Those that will prevail with God in prayer, must look to the bent of their
souls for the time to come, and for the present.
REgard thy servants that desire to fear thy name: Those that will prevail in
prayer must look to the bent of their affections.
For to come to God without such a f^ame of soul as this, to desire to please
God in all things for the present, and for the time to come, it is to come as
Gods ene^y; and will God regard his enemies? When one comes with a purpose to
live in any sin, without a desire for the time to come, to regard all Gods
Commandments, he comes as Gods enemy: he comes as it were with his dagge to
shoot at God, he comes with his weapon. Who will regard the petition of a man
that comes to wound him at the same time? When a man comes to God with a
purpose to sin, he comes to wound God at the same time as an enemy, and is
he like to speed? For what are our sins, but that that makes us enemies to
God? they are oposite to him as can be, they make us hateful to God. Therefore
we must be able to say with good Nehemiah, when we come to God to make it good
that we are servants indeed, We desire to fear thy name. As Ieremias tells
them, Ier. 7. Will you steal and oppress and commit adultery, and yet stand
before me? will you do this and this villainy, and stand before me? What have
thou to do (says God) Psalm 50. to take my name into thy mouth and hate to
be reformed? If we hate to be reformed, and do not desire to serve God for the
time to come, what have we to do to take his name into our mouths,
especially in the holy exercise of prayer? Psalm 66. If I regard iniquity in
my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer. If a man do but regard to live in
iniquity for the time to come, the Lord will not hear his prayer. Therefore
if we will be able to prevail with God in our petitions, we must say with
holy Nehemiah, We desire for the time to come to fear thy name. I beseech you
let us remember it.

And then (to omit other things) We desire to fear thy name, we see that

REligion, Christianity consists especially in holy desires.
especially is in holy desires.

The greatest part of Christianity is to desire to be a sound Christian with
all his heart. Religion is more in the affections of the soul, then in the
effects and operations: It is more in the resolutions, and purpose of the
soul, then in any effects we can yield to God. There is much desire in all our
performances: therefore says the holy man here, We desire to fear thy holy
name.

Why are desires, such trialls of the truth of Grace?

Because they are the immediate issues of the soul: Holy desires the imediate
issues of the soul.
desires, and thoughts and such like* they are produced immediately from the
soul without any help of the body, or without any outward manifestation, they
show the temper and frame of the soul. Thereupon God judges a man by his
desires; and that which he desires, if it be a true desire, he shall have and
be partakers of. The godly man desires to serve God all the days of his life;
and for ever he shall do it: a wicked man desires to offend God if he might
live everlastingly: God looks upon him as his desire is, he shall not always
sin here: but because he has an infinite desire of sin, he shall be
punished, in hell eternally; God looks upon him as he desires, God values men
by their desires.

But how are the truth of these desires known?

I will name a few signs. Trial of desires whether true.
The truth of those desires may be tried thus, If constant
if they for then they come from a new nature. Nature is strong and firm: Art
is for a turn, to serve a turn: when men personate a thing they do it not
long; creatures that are forced to do so and so, they return to their own
nature quickly: but when a man does a thing naturally, he does it constantly.
So constant desires argue a sanctified frame of soul and a new creature; they
argue that the image of God is stamped upon the soul. Thereupon we may know
that they are holy desires, that that they spring from a holy soul, if they be
constant, if they be perpetual desires, and not as a torrent that is vented
for the present on a sudden, and then comes to nothing after: they are constant.

If strong and growing.
if these desires be hearty strong desires, and not only strong but growing
desires; desire upon desire; desire fed with desire still, never satisfied till
they be satisfied. Strong and growing desires argue the truth of desires: as
indeed a child of God has never grace enough, never faith enough, never love
enough, or comfort enough, till he come to heaven. They are growing desires
more and more: the Spirit of God that is the spring in him, springs up still
further and further, till it spring to everlasting life, till it end in heaven,
where all desires shall be accomplished, and all promises performed, and all
imperfections removed, till then they are growing desires still. We desire to
fear thy Name, and to please thee in all things.

Again, true desires, they are not only of the favor If for grace as well as
mercy.
of God, but of graces for the altring of our nature: as Nehemiah here, he
desires not the favor of God so much, as he desires to fear Gods Name. Now
when desire is of graces, it is a holy desire. You have not the worst men, but
would desire with Balaam, to dye the death of the righteous, etc. that they
might enjoy the portion of Gods people: but to desire grace, that is opposite
to corrupt nature, as fire and water, this is an argument of a holy principle
of grace in us, whence this desire springs, when we desire that, that is a
counter poison to corrupt nature, that has an antitipathy to corruption.
Therefore, when a man from the bottom of his heart can desire, oh! that I
could serve God better, that I had more liberty to serve him, that I had a
heart more enlarged, more mortified, more weaned from the world; Oh! that I
could fear God more. And of all graces, if it be a true desire, it is of such
graces as may curb us of our sinful delights, and restrain us of our carnal
liberty, and knit us near to God, and make us more heavenly minded: the desire
of these graces show a true temper of soul indeed.

True desire is carried to If more for holiness then happiness in heaven.
and the desire of heaven it self. A true spirit, that is touched with grace,
with the Spirit of God; it desires not heaven it self so much for the glory,
and peace, and abundance of all contentments, as it desires it, that it is a
place where it shall be freed from sin, and where the heart shall be enlarged
to love God, to serve God, and to cleave to God for ever: and as it is a
condition wherein he shall have the image and resemblance of Jesus Christ
perfectly upon his soul: Therefore we pray Thy Kingdom come, that is, we
desire that thou would rule more and more largly in our souls, and subdue
all opposite power in us, and bring into captivity all our desires and
affections, and let thy Kingdom come more and more. Let thy will be done by
us, and in us more and more, In earth as it is in heaven. Here is a sweet
prayer now serving to the first petition, the hallowing of Gods name, when we
desire more to honor God, and to that purpose that he may rule in us more, and
make us better: these desires argue an excellent frame of soul, as we see in
Nehemiah, our desire is to fear thy If accompanied with desire after the means
that convey grace.


True desires are likewise to the means of salvation* and to the means of
salvation as they convay grace, as sincere milk; as you have it 1 Pet. 2. 1
Pet. 2.
As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word. Where a man has
holy desires of any grace, and has them in truth, he will desire those
means, whereby those graces may most effectually be wrought in his heart:
therefore he will hear the word, as the word of God; he comes not to hear
the Word because of the eloquence of the man that delivers it, that mingles it
with his own parts, he comes not to hear it as the tongue of man: but he
sees God in it; it is the powerful Word of God, because there goes the
efficacy of the Spirit with it, to work the graces he desires.

Therefore a man may know by his taste of divine truth, whether he desire grace:
he that desires grace, desires the means that may convay grace, and
especially so far as they convay grace. As newborn babes desire the sincere
milk of the Word. You cannot still a child with any thing but milk, he
desires no blending or mixing, but only milk: so a true Christian desires
divine truths most; because the Spirit of God is effectual by them, to work
grace and comfort in him. I will not enlarge my self in the point.

The comfortable observation hence is this, Use.
that weak Christians, Comfort for weak christians.
that find a debilitie, and faintness, and feebleness in their performances;
hence they may comfort themselves, by their desire to fear God, and to worship
God, and to serve him: if their desires be true. Therefore in Isaiah 26. the
Church alleges it to God, in the way of thy judgments have we sought thee,
etc. The desire of our souls is toward thy Name: they bring it as a
prevailing argument to God. So when we come to God, The desire of our souls is
toward thy Name. Lord our endeavors are weak and feeble, but the desire of
our souls is to thy name, and thou will not quench the smoking flax:
therefore we come to thee with these weak and poor desires that we have: The
Lord will fulfill the desires of them that fear him, Psalm. 145. Psalm. 145.
If they be but desires, if they be true, and growing, and constant desires,
and desires of grace as well as of happiness, as I showed before.

The reason why God accepts them, is partly because they spring from his own
spirit: these desires they are the breathings of the spirit. Why God accepts of
desires. Because they are the breathings of his Spirit.
For even as it is in places where fountains and springs are dug up, Simile.
they are known and discovered by vapors, the vapors show that there is some
water there, some spring, if it were dug up: so these desires, these
breathings to God for grace and comfort, these spiritual breathings, they show
that there is a spring within, and spirit within, whence these vapors and
desires come; therefore they are accepted of God, because they spring from his
own Spirit.

And because they are pointed to heavenward, Because they manifest the change
of the soul.
to show that a man is turned; for it is put here instead of turning, Turn ye
to me, says the Lord; and he answers here instead of turning, My desire is
to fear thy name. Because, when the desire is altered, then the frame of the
soul is altered, a man is turned another way; the desire is the weight of the
soul. What carries the soul, but desire? Now when the soul is carried
another way then before, it argues an alteration of the frame, therefore it
pleases God to accept of the^.

I beseech you let us often enter into onr own souls, and examine what our
desires are, which way the bent of our souls is; what cause we would have to
flourish and prevail in the world, Christ's, or Antichrists, for God esteems
us by the frame of our desires: Who desire to fear thy Name.

And prosper I pray thee thy servant this day.
NOw he comes to his petition, Prosper I pray thee thy servant this day. He
does not capitulate with God for particular matters much, (for he knew he had
to deal with an all-wise God) but he commends his petition in general,
Prosper I pray thee thy servant, etc. He was to attend the King, and he was in
his attendance to mind the state of the Church, for the re-edifying the walls
and gates of Jerusalem: now says he in general, Prosper thy servant, he
leaves it to God, how, and in what manner, being to deal (as I said) with an
infinite wise God: only he prays in general, prosper thy servant this day.

He comes again with his relation of servant, The true knowledge of our
relation to God a means to strengthen faith in prayer.
to teach us always when we come to God, to look in what relation we stand to
him, whether we be true servants or no: what work we do for him, in what
reference we do what we do, whether we do it to please him as servants, or
no. I said something of the relation of servant before: I will add a little
here, because he repeates it four or five times in this short prayer.

In all our services we should look to God: for our aim in our works show
what they are, Simile.
whether they come from servants, or no. As the stamp upon a token makes it, if
there be a good stamp on it, it is not the matter that makes it current. A
stamp on silver makes it current as well as gold, though the metal of gold be
better. So when things are done, because God commands them, to please God, as a
service to him: this makes it good that we are servants indeed, that the
relation is good. When we go about the service of the Church or Country, or
place we live in, to think I do God service here, and do it as a service to
God, who will be honored and served in our service to others: herein I am a
good servant, though the matter of my service be a common, base, and mean
matter; yet it has a stamp upon it, it is Gods will, God has placed and
planted me here, and he will be served of me in this condition at this time,
though the matter of it be an ordinary thing. I know it may help the good of
the Church: it has reference to the will of God, and the good of the Church.
Thus if we do what we do with an eye to God in the place where he has set
us, that we do it as to him, we are Gods servants whatsoever the work is.

And let us remember often to think of it, to bring it in our prayers: Master
(say they when they were ready to be drowned) do thou not care that we
perish? They put him in mind of the relation they were in to him. So when we
can put God in mind of our relation, Father, we are thy children, Lord, we are
thy servants; it will strengthen our faith and hope of all good. Will a Master
suffer his servant to miscarrie in his service? surely God will never turn
away true hearted servants, that have served him a long time. It puts us in
mind of our duty, and serves to strengthen our faith: for as it is a word of
fervice on our part, so it is a promising word of all good from God. Does he
expect, that Masters should be good to their servants because they have a
Master in heaven, and will not the great Master of Heaven be good to his
servants? you see how he follows the relation.

Prosper thy servant this day.
WHat is included in this word prosper? What is included in the word prosper.


It includes not only success, (which is the maine upshot of all, but all
that tends to good success: prosper thy servant this day; that is, direct thy
servant this day how to do, and to carry himself. And likewise assist thy
servant; when thou shall direct him, assist him by thy strength, direct him by
thy wisdom, prosper him with thy grace, give him good success in all. It
includes direction, and assistance, and good success; in that he says,
prosper thy servant, it includes these things.

First of all, that in our selves, there is neither direction nor wisdom, nor
ability enough for success: we have not power in our selves to bring things
to a comfortable issue: so it inforceth self denial; which is a good
disposition when we come to God in prayer.

And then again to attribute prosper thy servant this day.

Then in the third place, Prosper me Lord, I cannot prosper my self; and thou
who art the Creator, have wisdom and strength, and goodness enough:
therefore I depend upon thee; upon thy wisdom for direction, and upon thy
strength for assistance, I depend upon thy goodness, and all for a blessed
issue, here is dependence.

In our Petitions to God for any prosperity or good success, we must bring
self denial.
Now Lord prosper thy servant.

So that when we come to God for any prosperity and good success, let us
remember that we bring self-denial, and an acknowledgement of all
excellency to be in God* to guide and direct and assist, and bless us. And
remember to depend upon him, to cast our selves on him: to bring our souls to
close with the strong and wise, and gracious God, that God and our souls may
close together. And then commend all by prayer to cast our selves and our
affairs, and to roll our selves (as the Scripture says) and all upon God: and
then we shall do as the holy man Nehemiah did here, we shall desire to good
purpose that God would prosper us. Indeed it is not in man to guide and direct
his own way. We are dark creatures, and we have not wisdom enough: and we
are weak creatures, we have no strength: we are nothing in our own strength.
And for success, alas a thousand things may hinder us from it; for success is
nothing but the application of all things to a fit issue; and foreseeing all
things that may hinder, and a removing of them; now who can do this but God?

One maine circumstance that besieges and besets a business, may hinder an
excellent business: who can see all things that beset a business? all
circumstances that stand about a business? who can see all circumstances of
time, and place and persons, that are hindrances, or furtherances? it must be
an infinite wisdom that must foresee them, man cannot see them. And when men
do see them, are there not sudden passions that come up in men that rob them
of the use of their knowledge? that though they know them before: yet some
sudden passion of fear or anger may hinder the knowledge of a man, that he is
in a mist, when he comes to particulars: when he comes to apply the knowledge
that he had before, he knows not what to do. So that unless God in a
particular business give success, (who is infinitely wise and powerful to
remove al hindrances) there will be no success.

As it is in the frame of the body, Simile*
it stands upon many joints, and if any be out of tune, the whole body is
sick. And as it is in a clock, all the wheels must be kept clean and in
order: so it is in the frame of a business, there must all the wheels be set
a going, if one be hindered there is a stop in all. It is so with us in the
affairs of this world, when we deal with Kings and States, if all the
wheels be not kept as they should there will be no success or prosperity.
Nehemiah knew this well enough, prosper thou therefore.

He meant not to be idle when he said this, With our prayer for success, we
must use the means.
prosper thou: for he after joined his own diligence, and waited. Therefore
join that, if we would have our prayers to God, and our dependence upon him
effectual for prosperity and success, be carefully to use the means, as he
did, he stands before the King, and observed how he carried himself to see
what words would come from the King; and then he meant after to put in
execution, whatsoever God should discover.

It should teach us (to make this use of it) when we deal in any matter, Use.
to go to God to prosper it, and give success, and direction, and assistance,
and a blessed issue. For God, that we may always depend upon him, he keeps one
part in heaven still: when he gives us al likelihood of things upon earth, yet
he reserves still the blessing, till the thing be done, till there be a
consummation of the business, he keeps some part in heaven: because he would
have us sue to him, and be beholding to him, he will have us go up to heaven.
Therefore when we have daily bread, we must pray for daily bread; because the
blessing comes from him. Our bread may choke us else, we may dye with it in
our mouths, as the Israelites did: but when we have things, we must depend on
him for a blessing, all is to no purpose else.

Let us learn by this a direction to piety and holy walking with God: in all
things to pray to God for a blessing. And to that purpose we must be in such a
condition of spirit, as we may desire God to prosper us: that is, In what
condition of soul we may expect prosperity from God
we must not be under the guilt of sin when we come to God to prosper us. And
we must be humble, God will not prosper a business till we be humble. As in
the case of the Benjamites, when they came, they were denied, the first,
second, and third time, till they prayed and fasted, and were thoroughly humbled,
they had their suit denied: If the cause be never so good, till we be humbled,
God will not prosper it: because we are not in frame for the blessing; if we
had it we would be proud. God, in preventing mercy and care will grant nothing
till we be humbled. Therefore let us see that we be humble; and see that the
matter be good that we beg God to bless and prosper us in, or else we make a
horrible idol of God, we make (with reverence be it spoken) a devil of God.
Do we think that God will give strength to an ill business? This is to make
him a factor for mischief, for the Devils work: We must not come with such
strange fire before God, to transform God, to the contrary to that he is: but
come with humble affections, with repentant souls for our former sins. And
let the thing it self be good, that we may come without tempting of him* let
the cause be such that we may desire Gods assistance without tempting of him,
as we do when it is good and when we come disposed. Then com with a purpose to
refer all to his service. Lord, if thou will bless me in this business, the
strength and encouragement I have by it, I will refer it to thy further
service. Let me have this token of love from thee, that I have a good aim in
all, and then I am sure to speed well.

Prosper now thy Servant.
IT is an excellent point, if I had ^ime to stand on it. I beseech you let it
have some impression upon your hearts.

What is the reason that God blasts, and brings to nothing many excellent
endeavors, and projects? men set upon the business of God, and of their
callings in confidence of their wit and pride of their own parts, they carry
things in the pride, and strength of their parts. Men come as Gods to a
business, as if they had no dependence upon him for wisdom or direction, or
strength; they carry things in a carnal manner, in a humane manner with humane
spirits: therefore they never find either success, or not good success. Let
us therefore commend all to God, prosper thy servant. Before he went about the
business, holy Nehemiah, he sowed prayers in Gods bosom, and watered the
seed with mourning; as it is in this chapter he mourned and prayed: when this
business was sown with prayers, and watered with tears, how could he but
hope for good success, he mourned and prayed to God, hear thy servant.

Now when we deal with things in a holy manner, we may without tempting God
trust him. That which is set upon in carnal confidence and pride, it ends in
shame: when men think to conceive things in wit, I, and in faction, and
humane affections, God will not be glorified this way, God will be glorified
by humble dependant creatures, that when they have done the business will
ascribe all to him; Not unto us, but to thy name give the praise. The direction
and assistance and blessing was thine. Says God in Isay 50. toward the end,
Go too now ye that kindle a fire, walk in the light of your own fire: but
be sure you shall end in sorrow. You will kindle a fire of your own devises,
and walk in the light of your fire, you will have projects of your own, and
be your own caruers, but be sure you shall lie down in darkness and
discomfort; you shall lie down in sorrow.

A proud unbroken heart accounts these courses poor courses: it is but a
course of weak and poor spirits to pray and fast, and humble themselves to
God, and to fear God: alas what are these? these are weak courses: I hope
we have stronger parts, and means to carry things. So they have a Kingdom in
their brain. What is the issue of these vain men, when God discovers all
their courses to be vain at length, to be wind, and come to nothing. Prosper
now thy servant, says he.

Let us learn this lesson likewise. If we come to God in a particular
business, that we are not so confident in, to be pleasing to God: yet in
general to submit our selves, Lord prosper thy servant, go before thy
servant, let me deal in nothing against thy will, direct me what is for thy
glory; and not to prescribe or limit God. Prosper thy servant this day.

And grant him mercy in the sight of this man.
HE comes more particularly to his request, Grant me mercy in the sight of
this man. We see that

A King is a great organ or instrument to convay good things from God (the King
of Kings) to men. The King a great instrument to convey good things from God to
to men.


Therefore he prays that God would give him favor in the sight of the King.
For a King is the first wheel that mooves all other wheels, and as it were
the sun of the common wealth; or the first moover that mooves all inferior
orbs: therefore in heavenly wisdom he desires God to give him favor with
him. For if he had that, the King could turn all the inferior orbs to his
pleasure. Indeed it were a point worthy enlarging; but that it is not so
seasonable for this time, the time being already spent. You see what great good
God conveyes by Kings and Princes. And when God means to do good to a Church
or state, he raises up nursing fathers and nursing mothers, he will raise up
both Kings, and subordinate Nehemiah's, excellent men, when he has excellent
things to do.

But the maine thing here intended, which I will but touch, is, That
considering they stand in such a subordination to God, as to be instruments to
convey so much good, or so much ill, as they may as it is said of Jeroboam;
they either cause others to sin, or to worship God. Therefore we should do
as good Nehemiah, he prays that he might find favor in his sight.

A wise and holy prayer, he begins at the head, he goes to the spring of all
good. Prayer is the messenger, or ambassador of the soul; being the
ambassador of the soul, it goes to the highest, to the King of Kings first,
to the Lord of Lords first; it goes to the highest moover of all: Observe.
and then desires him to moove the next immediate subordinate moover, In
business with great men look first to God.
that is, the King, that he may moove other orbs under him, that things may
be carried by a gracious sweet course to a blessed issue. Therefore the
observation hence is this. That when we have to do any thing with great men,
with Kings, etc. how ever begin with the King of Kings, and do all in
heaven, before we do it in earth: for heaven makes the laws, that earth is
governed by. Let earth conclude what it will, there will be conclusions in
heaven that will overthrow al their conclusions. Therefore in our prayers we
should begin with God, and desire him with earnest and fervent entreaties,
that he would set al a going, that he would set in frame these inferior
causes. And when we have gotten what we would in heaven, it is easy to get
in earth. Let us win what we desire in heaven at Gods hands, and then what an
easy thing is it to work with Princes, and other governors in state, when we
have gotten God once? has not he the hearts of Kings in his hand as the
rivers of waters: to turn this way or that the^ way? As a skillful man derives
water by this channel or by that, as he opens a vent for the water. So God
opens a way to vent the deliberations, and determinations of Kings and Princes
to run this way or that to this good or to that, as he pleases Therefore
considering that there is an absolute dependence of all inferior things from
God, when we have to do with Kings or great men, let us always begin with
prayer.

As Jacob when he was to deal with Esau, he falls down and prays first, and
when he had gotten of God by prayer, God, that makes even of enemies friends,
he turned Esaus heart, of an enemy to be a friend. And God put into Jacobs
heart a wise course to effect this, as to offer a present, and to give him
titles, My Lord Esau, etc. God, when he will effect a thing amongst men, and
hear the prayers that are made to him for the favor of men, he will put into
their hearts such ways whereby they shall prevail with men, as Jacob did with
Esau. So Hester, before she goes to Ahasueros, she gate in heaven first by
prayer, when she had obtained of God by prayer^, how placable and sweet was
Ahasueros to her? So we see in other places of Scripture; when holy men have
been to deal with men, they began with God.

I beseech you therefore learn this point of Christian wisdom; if you would
speed well (as we all desire to speed well in our business) especially those
that have public employments, that they would pray to God, that has the
hearts of Kings and Princes in his government and guidance, that he would make
them favorable. And not to think to carry things in a violent course; for then
God does not usually give that good success: but to carry things in a
Religious course to the King of heaven, and then to know in what terms to
stand in all inferior things, as may stand with the will of God in heaven.

If so be there be a dependence of all inferiors to God; then we must not
offend God, and go against conscience for any: because he is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords. He does not set up authority against himself, to disarme
and disable himself: he never went to set up Gods under him, to make him a
Cipher, that he should make them Gods, and God a man, or no body; to alter
all the frame of things. He never meant to set up any ordinance to nullify and
make himself nobodie. Therefore I say we ought to pray to God for Kings, that
so in our obedience we may be sure to do nothing against conscience for any
creature; we must do all things that possible can be, that may procure the
favor and ingraciate us, because it is in vain to pray, unless we use all
possible means to win their favor: but if it cannot be upon good terms,
Then whether to obey God or man judge ye. And as the three young men, we take
no thought to answer in this matter; our God can def^nd us if he will. And as
Hester said, If I perish, I perish. When things are clear, we are to be
resolute. Yet reserving due respect to Gods ordinance, and to his lieftenant
upon earth, I say always reserving due respect, and using means to win
favor, and also to use prayer.

Holy Nehemiah, he prays here, and together with that he attends upon the
King; as good Jacob observed Esau: so all good means must be used, or else
God will not bless our proceedings.

Remember, that all inferior governors whatsoever, they are subordinate and
dependant, and therefore they must be regulated by a superior. They are
limited, they are dependant, they are derivative: they are dependant upon God,
they are derived from him. Therefore as the Apostle says that servants must
obey their masters in the Lord. So we must obey, and do all in the Lord; that
limitation must be always added: but reserving that, it is a good thing to
pray that there may be favor from the King: because it is of much consequence
to bring business to a good issue. And with prayer there must be a using
means to get favor, always with this liberty, to do it so far as we can
with preserving a good conscience.

As they have a distinction among civilians, there is a parting with a thing
Cumulative and privative. Cumulative, that is, when we part with a thing so,
as that we reserve the propriety: privative, when we give away the propriety
and all. Now so GOD parts with nothing below, as to strip himself, but
cumulative, he derives authority to others, but reserves the propriety to
himself. Therefore we must obey them in him, and with this limitation as it
may stand with his favor.

To draw to a conclusion, A good Christian, is a good Statesman
in a word. You see here that any good Christian may be a good statesman in one
good sense; what is that? A good Christian has credit in Heaven, and he has a
spirit of prayer, and his prayer can set God on work, and God can set the King
on work, and he can set his subjects on work. Now he that can prevail with
God, to prevail with the Gods upon earth here: surely such a man is a
profitable man in the state. And you know God, he can alter all matters, and
mould all things: it is but a word of his mouth. And what God can do, prayer
can do; for prayer binds God, because it is the prayer of faith: and faith
(as it were) overcomes God. Now prayer is the flame of faith; the vent of
faith, and faith is a victorious triumphant grace with God himself. If it be
any, it is Christians that can prevail with God for a blessing upon a State;
then certainly there is no good Christian but is of excellent service in the
state, though in particular perhaps he has not policy, and wisdom and
government: yet he has Gods ear to hear him, and he can pray to God, that
God would make the King, and other subordinate Magistrates, favorable.

You see what great good, a good man may do in a State. The Innocent man
delivers the Island, as it is in Job. And the poor wise man delivers the city,
as it is in Eclesiastes. A few holy gracious men, that have grace and credit in
Heaven above, they may moove God to set all things in a blessed frame below.
And surely if this holy means were used, things would be better then they
are: and till this be used, we can never look for the good success and issue
of things that otherwise we may hope for.

Diverse things might be spoken of the doctrinal part, I will give you but a
word of it. That God has our hearts in his government more then we our
selves. God has our hearts in his government more then we our selves.
I speak it to inform our judgment in a point of doctrine, whether God
foresee and determine of things below upon foresight which way they shall go;
or whether he foreordaine, that they shall go this way, because he directs
them thus; that is to make God, God indeed: He determines that these things
shall be, because he determines in the series, and order of causes to bring
things to pass, and to guide Kings and Princes and Magistrates, and all this
way. Again, whether God has set all men at liberty (in matters of Grace
especially) that they may apply grace at their liberty, which way they will, and
in foresight which way they will apply their liberty to determine thus, or
thus of them. This is to make every man's will a God, and to divest God of his
honor, as if God could foresee the inclination of the creature without
foresight that he meant to incline it this way, or that way.

Can God foresee any entitie, and thing that has a being in nature, or grace
without foresight to direct it this way or that way? he cannot, this is to make
him no God. We see God has the hearts of Kings in his power, and that is the
ground of prayer for grace to them. Why should we pray for them, if they could
apply their own will which way they would? Why should we give thanks for that
we have liberty to do this way, or that way? It stopps devotion, and
petition, and thankesgiving, to say that the creature has liberty to apply it
self, and God seeing it would apply it self thus, determined so. Oh, no; we
must go to God, he has set down an order and course of means, and in the use
of those means desire him to guide us by his good spirit, to enlighten our
understandings, to guide our wills and affections by his holy spirit, because
our hearts are in his government more then our own. If it were needful to
prove it, I could prove it at large: if there had been such aliberty, good
Nehemiah would never have made this prayer. But God does strangely put thoughts
and guide all, even of himself: as we may see excellently in the story of
Hester) I will give you but that example and instance*) what a strange thing
was it that Ahasueros could not sleep, and when he could not sleep to call
for the book, and then that he should read of Mordecay; and thereupon to
advance Mordecay: all this tended to the good of the Church; it was a strange
thing. And so in other things. It is a strange thing that God should put little
thoughts and desires into great persons, and then follow it with this
circumstance, and that, and so bring things to pass: all this is from God
Except we hold this, that God rules al without, and especially the hearts of
men, where it is his especial prerogative to set up his throne: we shall never
pray heartily, or give thanks. And if we do pray and give thanks, he will
put thoughts into governors minds, strange thoughts and resolutions for the
good of the Church, that we could never have thought off: nor could come
otherwise but from the great God of heaven and earth. We shall see a strange
providence concur to the good of al. But I must leave the enlargement of
these things to your own thoughts and meditations.

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

Thomas Wykes.
August 24. 1639.

