TWO SERMONS: PREACHED By that Faithful and Reverend Divine, RICHARD SIBBES,
D. D. and sometimes Preacher to the Honorable Society of Grayes Inn; And
Master of Katherine Hall in CAMBRIDGE.

Printed at London by T. Cotes, for Andr. Kembe, and are to be sold at his Shop
at S. Margarets Hill in Southwarke. 1639.

Imprimatur

Tho. Wykes.
April 12. 1638.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sir John Howland, Knight.
SIR,
THese two Sermons were brought unto me for the Sermons of that learned and
religious Divine, whose name they bear: and, so far as I am able to judge,
the style and spirituality of the matter argue no less. Being earnestly
requested to peruse them, I thought fit to commend them to the world under your
name, because I know that you so well affected the Author. Now my request unto
you is, that you would be pleased to accept the Dedication of them as a
testimony of his sincere affection, who labors, and prays for your good in
the best things,

Your Worships to be commanded in all Christian service; R. T.

THE SPOUSE, HER Earnest desire after Christ her Husband.

OR, A Sermon preached on CANT. 1. Verse. ^.

By that Faithful and Reverend Divine, Richard Sibbes, D. D. and sometimes
Preacher to the Honorable Society of Grayes-Inne: And Master of Katherine Hall
in Cambridge.

PSALM. 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth
that I desire besides thee. THE SPOUSE, Her earnest desire after Christ.
CANT. 1. ^. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for thy love is
better then wine.
THE HOLY Ghost is pleased here to co^descend to Loquitur ad modum nostrum,
agit ad modum suum, Augustine.
our infirmities, and that we might help our selves, in our spiritual
estate, by our bodily; he speaks here of heavenly things after an earthly
manner, and in a comfortable mystery. As in other places the Holy Ghost sets
out the joys of Heaven by a sweet Ban quet: so here he sets out the union
that we have with Christ, by the union of the Husband with the wife. And that
we might the better understand what this union is, he condescends to our
weak capacities, that we might see that in a glass of resemblance which we
(through our corruptions) cannot discern in the own nature. This book
therefore is nothing else but a shadowed demonstration and setting forth of the
love of Christ to his Church, and of the love of the Church to Christ under
certain earthly similitudes so familiarly and naturally, that the Jews took,
and do take great scandal at it, and therefore would not have any to read
it, till they should come (at least) to the age of thirty years; and this,
least they thereby should be tempted to wantonness and foul incontinency;
where in they should seem wiser then God himself, and teach the holy Ghost to
speak. But the Holy Ghost is pleased thus by corporal, to set out spiritual
things, which are of a higher strain, that by some deeper thoughts, and more
then a taste of the one, they might be made to transpose their affections
(which in your youthful age are most strong) from the heat of natural love
to a flame of spiritual desires, and to the things of God. All therefore who
are spiritually minded, (for whom chiefly the Scriptures, and this holy book
of Scripture were written) must endeavor out of this shell, to take out the
sweet kernel of our blessed Communion with Christ, howsoever others
(otherwise minded) take offense hereat; for here, the union between Christ and
his Spouse is so familiarly and to the life pensilled out by that union which
is between the Husband and the Wife, that though ungodly men may stumble here,
as at some stone of offense, yet the godly may by a better hand receive
instruction and much bettering from the same.

To come to the words themselves, they are the words of the Spouse to Christ,
containing in them two particulars.

First, an earnest desire in 1.
these words, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth.

In which note 3. things further; as,

First the person desiring, the Church.

Secondly, the person desired, Christ.

Thirdly, the thing desired, A familiar kiss of his mouth.

Secondly, the ground of the desire, fetelit from the excellency of the thing
desired, in these words, For thy love is sweeter then wine.

From the whole in general; observe a spiritual contract Doct. General.
between Christ and his Church. There is a civil contract between man and
wife; answerable to which the spiritual between Christ and his Chuch holds fit
resemblance.

1. That this civil contract may hold; both parties must consent. So it is
between Christ and his Spouse; he was so in love with mankind that he has
taken our nature upon him, and this his incarnation is the ground of all this
union of ours with him. For first, his incarnation is the cause or ground of
our union with him in grace here: and secondly, our union in grace is the
ground of our union with him in glory. And now that we may be a Spouse to him,
he gives us his Spirit to testify his love to us, that we might give our
consent in love to him again; and that we might be made a fit Spouse for him.

2. Likewise in marriage there is a communicating of all good things; and so it
is here. Christ here in this spiritual contract gives himself, and with
himself all good things unto us. The Spirit therefore is the Churches; his
happiness the Churches, his graces are the Churches, his righteousness the
Churches; In a word, all his privileges and prerogatives are the Churches; as
says the Apostle, all things are Christ's, and Christ is yours; and the reason
is given for all are Christ's, and all that are 1 Cor. 3. 21.
Christ's are yours by this spiritual symbolizing contract. This excellency is
spoken of by the Prophet Hosea; where speaking of Hos 2. 19. etc.
this spiritual contract between Christ and his Church he says;

In that day when he shall marry her unto himself in faithfulness, he will
make a covenant for her with all creatures; with the beasts of the field, the
fowls of heaven, and all that creeps upon the earth: so that upon this
contract comes in a train of familiarity, or league of close union between
the Church and all the creatures. All that he has done, all that he has
suffered, by this contract is made ours, and we have the benefit of all, by
being his members, and of his body.

Object. But what have we to bestow upon him again?

Sol. Nothing at all, neither portion nor proportion; neither beauty nor
riches; but a miserable and base condition that he took upon him. For use:

This is a welspring of much comfort, and a ground Use. Twofold.
of many duties. For our comfort.

Christ condescended so First of comfort.
far unto us, and into such a near aquaintance took us as to make us his
Spouse, he who did so has al things at his command: and then what can we want
at the fountain? We can want no protection; for that is the covering of this
Well: we can want no good thing, for all goodness is in this Well of life; we
have free access unto Christ as the wife has to her hus band, for who should
have free access to the husband but the wife; or who so free as she? So, who
has free access to Christ, but the Spouse, or so as she has.

Yea, but we have infirmities, Object.
and are by them a wife too far unfit for such a husband?

True indeed: but shall Sol.
man bear with his wife, because she is the weaker vessel, and will not
Christ much more with his Spouse? But this union of man with wife is but for a
short time; death cuts that wife, but here (which is our chiefest comfort) this
contract is not for a time but for ever. I have married thee unto my self for
ever says the Lord. And therefore we shall never want potection or direction,
or good thing while we are his; and his we shall he ever. And thus stands the
case between Christ and us

Now for the duty on our part it is to love him again with a mutual and
obedient love, to honor him as Sarah did Abraham, when 1 Pet. 3. 6.
she called him Lord; and to manifest it by doing what he would have us to
do, and by suffering what he would have us to bear for his sake.

But to come to particulars.

First, we have the person desiring, Let him kiss me; Secondly the person
desired, let Him; Thirdly, the things, the kisses of his mouth.

For the first; Me, it is here the speech of the whole Church, and so of every
particular member, every of which is the Spouse of Christ. The point from hence
is:

All Christian savours belong Doct.
to all Christians alike; we (all alike) have one Faith, one Baptism, one
Spirit, and every Christian may say me: so says the whole Church; and every
Christian as well as it may so say: for all Christian privileges belong to all
alike.

Herein take comfort then, Use 1.
that whosoever belongs to the Church in general, belongs to thee as a
particular of the whole. I name but this.

Now secondly, this teaches Use 2.
us by steps of reason to ascend from one spiritual privilege to another, as
thus; Abraham believed, and it was counted to him for righteousness; and
therefore if I believe, I shall be counted righteous. David sinned; and David
sinning repented and found mercy, and therefore if I repent I shall find
mercy. And thus all privileges belong alike to all Christians. Every Christian
soul is the Spouse of Christ as well as the whole Church. Therefore Saint Paul
thus propoun's himself an example to all that would believe in Christ, 1 Timothy
1. 16. God had mercy on me. Where therefore he encourages all to come unto
Christ, by his own experience, videlicet, that he will have mercy on thee, as
he had on him. Whatsoeever then is promised to the whole Church, that apply to
thy own soul in particular; and whatsoever is required of the whole Church,
that know to be required of thee in thy particular by Christ, if thou be a
member of his body, and be in his service. But though in spiritual favors
all have alike portion and proportion; yet it is not so in outward things. For
here some are rich, some poor, some honorable, and some base, and all with
some difference: but in the best privileges and best gifts there is an equal
extension to all; to the poor Christian as much and as soon as to the rich:
to him that is base in the eye of the world, as well and (perhaps) sooner then
to him that is honorable.

And now secondly, for the person desired; Let him.

Many make love to this Spouse; the devil, the world and the flesh. The devil
and carnal persons make love to the soul to draw her away from Christ, but
she will not turn aside, but looks to Christ still, Let him kiss me. She
goes not (as Papists do) to Peter and Paul, or any Saint; but to Christ, and
to him only. Says she, he is my welbeloved Cant. 2 16.
and I am his, he is my enclosure, and I am his peculiar; none have I in
heaven but him, and there is none that I desire in comparison of him. He has
singled out me, and I him; Let Him kiss me, says the Spouse, and I will kiss
none but him.

For the third thing, the thing desired; Let Him kiss me, etc.

The thing desired here, is a kiss. There are diverse sorts of kisses spoken of
in Scripture: there is a kiss of superiors to inferiors, and of inferiors
to superiors. Also there is an holy Romans 16. 16.
kiss, and an hypocritical kiss, as 2 Samuel 20 10.
Ioabs was to Amasa, and as Mat. 26. 49.
Judas kiss to 1 Cor. 16. 20, etc.
Christ. There are kisses of love, so 1 Samuel 20 41.
Jonathan kissed David; there are kisses of subjection; and here what is said,
may well be taken in sense as there, Psalm. 2. 12.
kiss ye the Son, etc.

But this kiss is of a superior to an inferior; Let Him kiss me with the
kisses of His mouth: that is, let him show me a further testimony of his love
by his presence; and let me enjoy a further communion with him: or let him
further assure me of his love. Consider the Churches meaning here: the Church,
however she had good interest in this spiritual jointure at the marriage
making; yet she, (according to the different degrees of time) had different
degrees of desires to be further and further assured. From Solomon's time, and
before, even from the beginning, there was ever a desire in the Church to these
kisses of Christ's mouth; which is, that he would come in our nature; and that
he would manifest by little and little, and clearer and clearer, his coming in
the flesh; which accordingly he did by degrees, and with open countenance at
last. As first in Paradise; Genesis 3. 15.
The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head; then to Abraham, Genesis
12. 3
In thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed; afte^r that, to
one Tribe, the Tribe of Genesis 49. 10.
Judah; then to one Family of that Tribe, the house of David; Heb. 7. 14. Romans
5. 5.
and sweetly to his Prophet Esaias, Esa. 7. 14.
A Virgin shall conceive; and after with the finger of the Baptist, John
pointing to Christ; Ioh. 1. 29.
Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world; and so you
see how Christ did reveal himself often, and by degrees unto his Church;
answerable to which were the desires of the Church for the coming of Christ;
as the Prophet Isaiah, where he Esa. 64. 1.
says, Oh that thou would break the heavens and come down. Where he
prophesied of those that should wait for the consummation of Israel: And thus
before Christ came in the flesh; the Church had a great longing after his
incarnation; as here: Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. But this
is not all, and she was not ignorant that this could not be till the last
time of days; therefore she desires some further means of aquaintance with
Christ, and knowledge of him; desiring that he would manifest himself more
and more by his word, by his graces, and by his Spirit. As therefore then the
desire of the Church was for the coming of Christ, so now that which
Christians should desire and long after, is not that Christ might come to them,
but that they might go to him, and that they might be with him in glory. They
love his appearance; but because this cannot be yet; (though the Church be
still in expectation) therefore he desires to hear his words, or that he
would kiss her with his mouth in his Word. And yet that is not all neither;
but that she might find his Spirit now walking with her here; and further
that he would kiss her with his mouth, by increasing his good graces in her,
and by manifesting his love unto her: this is the desire of her soul. This is
the whole suit of the Christian Church, and of every Christian soul: namely
that Christ would thus kiss her, and that he would reveal himself every day
more and more unto her, in his Word, in his Sacraments, by his Spirit, and by
increase of graces with a plentiful addition. This I say, is the desire of the
Church; and it is the desire also of every Christian faithful soul, even that
Christ would thus breath upon her with the holy kisses of his lips.

And now we come to the ground of this desire taken from the excellency of the
love of Christ, which is here said by an experience of the whole of
Christianity, and by the particular of every Christian soul, to be sweeter
then wine.

From hence we note two things.

First, that every Christian Doct. 1.
soul and the Spouse in general has a sweet taste of the love of Christ,
even in this life.

2. That after this contract Doct. 2.
and taste of this love, she has ever springing up in her a further desire of
the increase and manifestation thereof.

For the first; As after the Doct. 1.
contract there is a more and more evident manifestation of love then was
before; yet not so full as after the marriage: so Christ, though he do give
his Spouse a taste of his love here, and sends certain love tokens unto her
from heaven, some graces whereby his love is made more manifest then before it
was, (as Isaac Genesis 24.
sent to Rebecka some Jewels and Bracelets to manifest his love to her:) yet
his love is not fully manifested in this life, but is kept close until the day
of the great solemnity. But because Christ cannot delight in his Spouse,
unless she be decked with some of his graces here; therefore here he gives
he some hand sells of them, which are not only a taste of his favors but the
fruit of his love.

The reasons are diverse.

The first reason is because Rea. 1.
he would minister to her some solace after the long time of her absence from
him, and that she might not faint, but having some sweet taste of his love
here, might stay her stomach upon that, somewhat in hand, till the day wherein
the Lord Christ will fully manifest his love unto her. The Lord sees that his
children are apt to be oppressed with heaviness here; and therefore he gives
them a taste as the earnest of the bargain, till the whole come; that is,
somewhat to comfort them till that come that will wipe away all tears, and
shut out sorrow; when there shall be no woe.

Secondly, the Lord gives his children a sweet taste of Reas. 2.
his love here, that by weakness and frailty they might not fall away and so
lose their first love (but if they should slip) that then they might recover
their first grounds, and say with the Church; we will go and return to our
first husband; for it was better with us then, then now, Hos. 2. 7. so strong
was that love, and so sweet that we had from him.

Thirdly, and this is because Reas. 3.
the manifestation of this his love does wonderfully strengthen a Christian,
causing him to go lightly through the heaviest affliction: for when Christ
assures a Christian of his love, then no affliction will seem grievous, but
he will through all, he will suffer whatsoever shall be fall him for Christ's sake
with joy.

Lastly, Christ gives his Reas. 4.
Church, and so every Christian a taste of his love in this life, because he
knows we have many temptations in this world which are ready to steal away
our affections, and, to rob God of his part in us; as carnal pleasures,
riches, honors, and the like. Now that these might not draw away our
affections; he gives us a taste of his love, which is better then all these,
and all things else; sweeter then the sweetest wine, or best thing that can be
desired. I say God gives us the first fruits of his love here; and it is that
our affections might be preserved chaste to him, and we kept from wandering in
the love of a stranger. And so he gives us a sweet taste of his love in this
life; that neither afflictions, on our left hand, might too much press us
down or discomfort us; nor the pleasures and delights of this life on our
right steal us from God.

The use is to teach us to admire at the goodness of Use.
God in this, that he is pleased so to provide for us, that is, so sufficiently
as to keep us from being too much overcome with heaviness, through the
multitude of temptations and afflictions, which in this life we are subject
unto, and to expel the bitterness there of with the sweetness of his love,
as with Sugar in the cup; and all to have us fast unto himself, and our
affections proper unto him.

And so we come to the second Doctrine, which is this:

That the Church (and so Doct. 2.
every Christian) after this contract and first taste of Christ's love, and
evermore springing up in him, an insa. tiable desire after a further taste and
deeper pledge of that love.

The reasons why are two.

The first may be taken from the nature of true Reas. 1.
love, which is never satisfied. And hence it is that though Christ give his
Spouse a taste of his love in his word, by sending his Ambassadors, his
Ministers with his love letters, unto her in the Gospel, giving her therein a
large volume of his love; as also in the seal of his Spirit, and Sacrame^nts
(those love tokens) and in many other worthy influences; yet all this cannot
satisfy her thirsty and more desiring soul; but Christ, having thus
manifested his love unto her, in the first fruits, she must have more of the
same, and still longs to have a further assurance.

The second reason may be drawn from Christ's Reas. 2.
infinite riches, who (therefore) is so infinite in his gifts and glory, in his
power, in his bounty, in his pleasures, joys, and the like, that we know no
end thereof. He has all things, All power is given him in Mat. 28. 18
heaven and in earth; every way infinite in himself and in his bounties
infinitely magnificent, and how (then) can the Spouse but have an infinite
desire to a further and still further taste of his love, and of a nearer
communion with him? And so whether we regard the nature of love, which is never
satisfied; or whether we consider Christ's infinite riches manifest in his
truth; there must be an in satiable mind of desire in a Christian, to be
further filled with, and more fully assured of the love of Christ. Where grace
is, there is a further desire of growing in grace; and it is an higher degree
of love to desire an enjoying of the presence of Christ, then to desire to
enjoy heaven it self, which cannot be yet.

Therefore here let us try Use 1.
our love by our laboring, for that sight of Christ which we may have of him in
this life below; and here lot us desire often and much to see him in his
ordinances, where he manifests himself in a special manner. Therefore I say,
art thou sick and in prison, or so lame of thy limbs that thon can not come
to the assembly? and is it therefore thy greatest trouble, and the great grief
of thy soul that thou art thus shut out from the presence of Christ and the
Angels in his ordinances, and from the congregation of the Saints, where he by
familiar kisses uses to manifest his love to thee and to them? and if so, it
is well. But here I cannot but wonder how some persons dare to take upon them
the name of Christianity; and yet think the men too holy, and the course too
strict that looks that way. Surely such want the true Character of a right
Christian, which is to have a further and further desire of the manifestation
of Christ's love. Many of these neglect the ordinances of God, or if they come
where they may be had, never desire by them a further increase, as it were the
inward kisses of Christ's mouth: but content themselves with the outward; even
the bark of those ordinances.

When the Spirit should witness and seal up this love, the love of Christ to
their souls by an inward kiss, they content themselves with the outward, the
bare hearing of the word: But mark what I say; where this further desire of
familiarity with Christ is not, there is but a barren soil and soul of a
Christian: there is no true taste of Christ's love; for if there were, there
would be a further desire of growth in that affection. There are some that make
a fair profession like unto many that marry to cloak their adultery; for so,
such profess Christ to cover their strong covetousness and other strong
faults, that they may have more liberty to commit sin. But Christians, truly
religious must not content themselves with outwardnesse in these kisses, but
give, as the outward man, so the sacrifice of the inwaid (the soul) unto God.
Let those that find (after such trial) these desires springing up in them;
comfort themselves in this, that they are Christ's, and that Christ will
manifest his love more and more unto them. For he has promised to grant the
desires Psalm. 37. 4.
of the righteous. Have thou then a longing desire to have a further taste of
the love of Christ? Use the means conscionably, and then be sure that Christ
this Joseph will open himself further and further unto thee, and thy soul
shall know it. This for one use;

Another is for exhortation and spiritual direction, Use 2.
as how we shall come to a further assurance, sign, and fruit of this love of
Christ. My beloved if we desire it; we must labor to have; first, chaste
judgments, and secondly, chaste affections. A chaste judgment from error,
heresy, and schism; and affections chaste from the world, from pleasures and
the like: for Christ is wonderful jealous both of our judgments, and of our
love. Therefore Paul desires to present the Corinths a pure Virgin unto Christ.
2 Cor. 11. 2.
And further as we must affect goodness, so we must profess truth; we must
have chaste judgments, as well as chaste affections: the Spouse of Christ as
she is pure in affections, so she is is pure in judgment; she hears his
voice and follows him. Whatsoever comes not from the Word she receives not but
rejects it. And as her judgment is right set, so her affections are pure and
holy.

Now therefore labor for these; that is, for chaste affections. Christ will not
have us to divide our affections; some for him, and some for the world; or
partly for pleasures, and partly for him; no, he will not have it so: for, a
fire divided has less heat. He will have the whole heart and the whole of
our affections, or he will have neither heart nor affection. If we give our
hearts to the world or to the pleasures of the world, (the love of which is
enmity with God) then Iam. 4. 4.
have we an adulterous heart: which to do is a double sin, as it is for a
wife to commit whoredom; for in her whoredom there is a breach of chastity,
and breach of the marriage band. And indeed to embrace the world after we are
contracted unto Christ, what is it less then whoredom, and a breach of
covenant in our spiritual contract with Christ? therefore, beware of
worldly-mindednesse, which as glue will tie all thy affections so fast to the
earth, that thou shall not be able to lift any to Christ. Take heed of the
pleasures of the world, least they drown thy soul in perdition and
destruction, as the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6. 9. for many souls has this Sea
covered, even of those that have professed with the best, and have gone for
good Christians.

But thirdly, if we will 3.
grow in the assurance of the love of Christ, and have more familiar kisses of
his mouth; then labor we to get an humble heart, by searching out our own
great unworthiness, in respect of what we are, or were by nature. Indeed, we
may disparage our credits by abasing our selves in respect of men, but never
can we be too much humbled to our Savior, in acknowledging our selves
unworthy of all that we have. There is no danger in debasing our selves to our
Savior; nay it is for our greater honor with God: for, those that thus honor
him, he will honor and grace with his blessings, who gives grace to the
humble. In such a Spirit he delights to dwell as a man at home, Esaias 66. 3. Let
us with all humility (then) acknowledge all to be from his free grace; and
with Jacob, that we our selves are less Genesis 32. 10.
then the least of his mercies.

Again fourthly, if we 4.
will grow in the assurance of the love of Christ; let us give Christ no peace,
nor take any nay of him till he has given us the sweet kisses of his love.
Many times he delays the manifesting of his love; but what though? yet wait
thou his pleasure; he has waited long upon thee. We see Mary Magdalen, what a
do she made when she could not find Christ; at last he manifested himself
unto her, and called her by Luke 7. 47.
her name, demanding for what she wept, and whom she sought; but it was some
time first. Do thou as she, give him no rest, take no denial of him, nor give
off till he answer thee: for, he will do it first or last. What did the woman
of Canaan? she gave Christ Mat. 15. 22.
no rest till he did incline unto her. So Jacob wrestled Genesis 32. 24
with God, and would not let him go till he had assured him of his love and
favor; he I say, who has promised to grant the desires of Psalm. 37. 4.
the righteous. O then has he given thee any the like strong desire after him?
continue constant, importuning him by earnest and fervent prayer, and not
taking off, till he incline unto thee. He cannot stand out with thee long, he
cannot deny thee though he differ for some time and cause best known to
himself; the assurance will come, and though it tarry, do thou wait, Hab. 2.
3.

Fifthly, and again, take every thing for thine advantage, and improve thy
former experience as what former love, and favor, and power and fidelity and
stabilitie thou have had, and make thy benefit of them all to thy best help,
and till he answer thee as he will at last, and as he did the woman of
Canaan; plead hard for thy self (as she) till then. Christ accounts her a
Dog, Matthew. 15. 26. I am indeed so, says she; but, mean time, takes good
advantage of his words, and thereby pleades strongly for herself: no otherwise
then the servants of Benhadad, who watched the words of Ahab, and drew comfort
from them, 1 King. 20. 33. So here, make thou thy plea strong by thine own
experience, and take all advantages. God has been thus and thus good unto
thee for many years; these and these means he has given thee, and thus and
thus they have wrought for thy good; therefore say then: I will for this follow
him still, and until he assure me of his love in a further degree, and
further do for me.

Sixthly, but see thou be 6.
modest in thy desires of this kind. Desire no great matter at the first, that
is, not so full an assurance of this love of Christ, at the beginning of thy
desires, but with observation and attendance fitting. And here observe the
degrees of these kisses, and manifestation of this love. The thief on Luke 23.
42.
the Cross desired but to be remembered of Christ when he came into his
Kingdom no more but to be remembered, and so no great matter. So do thou; do
but desire a taste of his love, though never so little. For so the dear
children of God have done. They have first desired the pardon of their sins;
which obtained, they have proceeded to more, as humbly to beg such and such
graces of the Spirit as seals to assure them further and further to seal up
his love unto them with his nearer communion.

But this communion is Object.
not always felt.

I answer, if Christ be Sol.
strange to us, the fault is our own not his; for he is all love. And so it is
either 1.
because our loose hearts run after some carnal contents; and what marvel
then that Christ should show himself strange unto us who run from him? and
that we should go mourning all the day long without any sense of his love? Or
else it is because 2.
we will not seek for these his kisses; that is, for a further taste of his
love as we should in his ordinances; or because we do not exercise those
graces that we have as is required by our attending upon them, and by resting
by Faith upon Gods promise for a blessing: Or because we 3.
are negligent to stir up those graces of God in us by private duties: or
because we trust our selves to bad companies, and to persons led about with
evil desires, or possessed with an evil Spirit: Or because God would exercise
and try our Faith, and so let us see our selves; that is in our own natural
state of weakness. For thus he left Peter. Otherwise it is Christ's nature to
manifest himself and his love unto his by the familiar kisses of his mouth.
Now search into your hearts, and you shall find that these or such like as
these are the causes why Christ is strange unto you, and why you are so
senseless of your communion with him.

Consider yet again 7.
when it is, and at what time that we have Christ's sweetest kisses, and are
most refreshed with his loving countenance. It is not when we lay our strength
(all of it) upon good means? and so when we strive with God in prayer, and
labor in all humility, rightly, and profitably to use all his holy ordinances?
Mark these well, as the means to preserve and increase the assurance of
Christ's love in you.

And further consider by what means and how you may fall into this deadness
of heart, and what were the causes of it.

Secondly, observe how you may come to have most communion with Christ, and at
what time, and after what performances: as to be able to say, I was thus and
thus dead and senseless of Christ's love; but now I am thus and thus comforted
and refreshed with it, I was strong for my pleasures; now I am strongly bent to
please God, and my self no way with his dishonor; I was all for my self, now
I am the least part of my self, so God may have all: I denied my self
nothing, now I pull in all things, and resign up my self and all to Gods
will. If thus we deny our selves in every thing and serve God in all, and this
because we will break away from all impediments in heavenly courses, God will
be sure to recompense us in spiritual things abundantly, yea and in temporal
also, so far as he shall see them to be good for us.

Add yet this consideration more, that when thou wast afflicted and had none
to comfort thee, that then, and even then the Lord was most sweet unto thee,
that then he refreshed thy soul with the balsome of his love. Consider this
and thou can not but know what mouth has kissed thee.

These may help us much in getting a further assurance of Christ's love; ^^e
stirred up therefore to a desire to be where Christ is, and to have the kisses
of his love in his ordinances, so often as we have a tender of them: So shall
we get more store, and further testimony of his favor, and so shall we more
increase in grace, and communion with Christ. So shall we never want good
assurance for a good estate in heaven, or comfort in any other estate. For cast
such a man into a Dungeon, he has a Paradise there. And why there? Because
Christ comes to him. Further, if we have this communion with Christ, then
though we are compassed about with death, death Psalm. 23 4.
shall not affright us, because the great God is with us. Do with such a man
what you will; cast him into hell if it were possible; he having a sweet
communion with Christ would be joyful even in that prison of the damned. And
take this with you: the more sense you have of the love of Christ, the less
you will regard the pleasures, the riches or contempts of the world. And indeed
what joy can be compared with this, that the soul has communion with Christ?
All the world is nothing to this.

And now seeing you cannot require this love of Use. 3.
Christ, yet show your love to him as you may, and as you may manifest your
love to his members, and kiss them with the kisses of your love. Do good to
the poor; especially to those poor that have the Church of God in their
Families. As the woman powered her oil on the head of Christ; so do you power
some of yours upon the feet of Christ. That which ye would do to him if he
were here, that do to his members, in whom he is after a sort present with
you. Thereby you may further your communion with him, and make him your debtor;
then, as one says well: he can be no loser, that makes God his debtor.

THE POWER OF Christ's Resurrection.
COLOS. 3. 1. If ye he risen with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits at the right hand of God.
THis Verse has dependence on the second Chapter Coherence.
before, the twelve and thirteen Verses of that Chapter; where the Apostle
tells the Colossians, that they were risen with Christ from the dead by Faith,
and quickened by the Spirit that raised him: hereupon follows this inference;
If therefore ye be risen with Christ, show it by seeking after those things
which are in heaven, or are heavenly.

The Apostle had much ado to root out those dangerous seeds of conceit which
false teachers had sown upon these Colossians, touching some legal
ceremonies; as touch not, taste not, handle not; he tells them that these dead
things have no life of use now, and that therefore, if they be risen with
Christ they must fall to other matter, seeking those things that are above.
These ceremonies were indeed appointed by God at the first, but now being
ended and brought to their grave, they must be buried, there never to rise
again. And therefore no more to be revived as being not dead only, Non solum
mortuae sed mortifera.
but deadly.

As I said, the Apostle finding their hearts tainted with this false doctrine,
having first sought by purging to drive it out of their hearts and liking; he
now begins to season them with that truth which is after godliness, that is,
with heavenly and other truths and doctrines, not of men, such as were those of
these false Apostles, but of God, where he begins with general instructions,
and then proceeds to particular callings; as of husbands and wives, of parents
and masters, of children and servan's. Now because the well managing of the
particular duties of these particular callings depends on a good principle;
that is, that they be sound in Christianity, which is the general: Therefore
he begins first to season their hearts with that grace of their general
callings; knowing that it is so much the easier to be good in their particular
callings, when they are first good in the general. But if not good in the
general, then never good in the particular. If a good man, then a good
husband, a good father, and a good master, fit for any good service; but if not
a good man, then good for nothing. So a woman, if a good woman, then a good
wife, and good in any calling. So for children and servants, if good in the
general, Divis. 2. Parts.
then good in the particular also.

But to come to the order of these words: they contain first a ground, and
then an inference upon that ground. If you be risen with Doct From the first
part.
Christ, there is the ground: then seek the things that are above, there is
the inference. 1.
From the ground 2.
observe two things; First, that Christ is risen himself; Doct. 1.
Secondly, that we therefore shall rise.

For the first, It is an Article of our Faith, and the Holy Ghost has taken a
F id^ia Christiana,
great deal of pains to prove it. It is the confidence of Christians; it is
the maine, or free hold that Tertullian deresurrect. cap. 1.
we have; for we hold all by the resurrection of Christ, as of fee; and we
have sixteen apparitions of him to prove this. Besides, it was impossible that
he should be held of the bonds of death. Impossible I say, being invested
with these three offices of King, Priest and Prophet. Impossible as he was
King; for how then could he have triumphed over his enemies here and in hell?
Impossible as he was Priest; for, if he had not risen, how could he have
made daily intercession for us as he does? And lastly, impossible as he was a
Prophet, for else how could he have instructed his people in doctrines of
salvation?

But when rose he? we say with the Scriptures and Doct. 2.
our Creed, the third day. Now as Christ rose, and rose the third day,
(manifesting thereby that he was dead) and this after so great baseness, for
his greater glory. So it is to teach us, that as it was with him; so it is with
all his members: never nearer help then when at the worst; nor more glorious
then when basest for Christ, for then it appears to be Gods own work, who
therefore will raise them to glory, that he may be glorified in and by them.

When therefore we are in any distress, void of the help of man, then God
will come in and raise us up, whether in our credit, estate or persons, etc.
only therefore let us have patience for a while and wait his coming.

But as Christ is risen so Doct. 3.
we shall rise. He is the meritorious cause of our resurrection; he has
deserved that we should rise. Also he is the worker of it; and by that same
power whereby he rose again; by the same will he raise up us at the last day.
He is every way the cause of our rising, (and hereupon) we are risen with him:
As he was a public person in his death; and as upon the Cross he stood in
the place of all the elect; so as all their sins (committed, or foreseen to
be committed) were laid upon him, and he bare the iniquity of us all: so
after and now he freed himself and us by his Resurrection. First, he freed
himself of his suretiship, our bond was taken up, and our debt paid; where
justice lost not a penny by us. So we were freed in him, and for him, and
therefore he rising we are to rise with him. for what should hold us in the
grave, now that deaths bands are loosed, or shall the head be above water, and
the members perish in it? But further to speak of the Resurrection. This
Resurrection of Christ is twofold; spiritual and corporal: spiritual, when
we take life from Christ; and, (being quickened by him) begin to rise with him;
corporal when our bodies shall be raised at the last day. When we believe
that Christ is dead for our sins; our sins are then in their grave, and
Christ is then crucified to us: and when we believe that he (that was dead)
is now risen from death, and dies no more: we believe that our graves also
shall be opened, and that we shall rise (as he rose) to immortality of life.

Hence every true Christian Use 1.
may draw water of life to comfort him in all his distresses. For Christ has
conquered all his spiritual enemies; and the resurrection of Christ is an
evidence of his most certain conquest of them all. For if he had not so
conquered, he could not have risen: and therefore when he rose the third day,
he bad his Disciples not to fear, Matthew. 28. 10. as much as to say; fear not
death, for I have overcome death with the power of my resurrection from death.
Fear not sin, for I have satisfied for sin; nor the devil, for I by my
resurrection have laid him flat upon his back, bruised his head, and led him
in triumph openly. Fear not this evil world; for I have overcome it. And what
shall I say more? I have trod upon the necks of all your spiritual enemies, I
have conquered them all. So then, what cause of fear? therefore, fear not;
for if you be risen with Christ, you are begotten to a lively hope; where
spiritual Resurrection is, there is hope of life, as the Apostle does soundly
reason, 1 Pet. 1. 3. A ground therefore of precious comfort to every true
Christian.

Now in that we are raised by the same power to a Use 2.
spiritual life, whereby Christ rose from the grave; it teaches us how we
should conceive of the work of the new birth; also of the Image of God in us;
and of the new creature. The work of grace in a Christian, is not a slight
work (a word and away, as many think) but it is a powerful work; as
appears in that there are so many hindrances to keep a man (dead in sin)
from rising out of it: many more then there were to keep Christ from rising
out of the grave of the earth. Yet in his resurrection did the power of God
mightily appear, as Ephe. 1. 19, 20. Now as Christ was killed and had a stone
rolled over his Tomb: So he, that is dead in sin, has the stone of long
custom rolled upon his heart; which to remove requires as great a work of
Gods power as was required to raise Christ. Wherefore let those that find a
change in their hearts (the stone removed) break forth into the praise of God
for an inestimable favor such as this is, which is the powerful work of God,
more powerful then the making of the world of nothing; for there are many
adversaries.

For another use: Consider this rightly, either to Use 3.
provoke unto thankfulness if you have been wrought upon; or to prayer if
not; seeking unto God for this in the use of the means, who only is able to
work this change in you, and will in his good time.

But to cut off many things that might here be spoken of; we will (to be
short) now speak of the inference; If you be risen, and risen with Christ by
his power, then seek those things which are above. The inference or reason is
thus much: they that are thus risen have a new life, (for every resurrection
notes a new kind of being) if spiritual then a spiritual being, if bodily
Romans 6.
then a glorious life. This life is suitable to our Resurrection; as if the
Apostle had said, you are risen with Christ from the death of sin, therefore
manifest your Resurrection by the life of righteousness: more specially by
actions proportionable and cohaerent with your new estate. This is the meaning,
from whence we note this Doctrine;

That every life and state of life requires answerable Doct. General.
actions; If you be risen with Christ, and so have a spiritual life as you
profess to have, then carry your selves answerably, and seek those things
that are above; that is, such things as may maintain, and are suitable to that
life of yours. This is the Apostles manner of reasoning in this place. And this
is so in nature, yea and so in corrupt nature; it is so in grace, and shall be
so in glory.

For the first, it appears plainly; for even those creatures that are in the
water, delight in it, because it is their proper element, and they cannot live
without it. Secondly, it is so in corrupt nature, he that is covetous, the very
conceit that he has of his riches does as it were feed him, he cannot live
without them. So he that lives a carnal life here, dies if he be taken from
it; then he is as a Fish upon dry ground. Take a Fish out Tanquam picis in
arido,
of his element, and he cannot live: So for this man, take his wealth and take
his life; it is so in grace, and shall be so in glory, when the body is risen
glorious. There is a forsaking of all communion with sinful men, and there we
shall have communion with God and Christ, and Christ shall be all in all unto
us. Then Col. 3. 11.
that which all creatures supply to us here, Christ will there. Then our songs
will be holy, and our actions holy, fitting such a glorious condition. And this
heaven is begun here, or it will never be. Grace is therefore called heaven,
because heaven is begun where grace enters: and because glory, that is,
heaven cannot begin but where grace is.

So then a Christian that is risen with Christ, must Use 1.
have nothing to do with carnal men; nothing I say further then he is thrust
upon them, or that he may convert them. They must not familiarly company with
men of a contrary spirit; they must seek by all means to act godliness in
their conversation. And thus should the life of a Christian be set, suitable to
his new estate and holy calling.

But if we should try all Use. 2.
by this rule: how few would be sound to be risen with Christ? for how few
would delight in heavenly company, or in heavenly actions; as to praise God, or
to commune with God in prayer? This is a death to most men, and to be so, is to
be out of the world; also to have such company, and to be so exercised is a
dead life in their fleshly opinions.

And now again to the Expl. 1. What is meant by seeking.
Apostle; the Apostle says here, We must seek those things which are above
with Christ. Seeking implies first a want; a man will never seek for that
which (he knows) he has. Secondly, 2.
it implies a valuation and esteem of the excellency of that thing which we
seek. Thirdly, it implies hope to get 3.
it; else who would seek it, but leave it rather as a thing desperate?
Fourthly, it 4.
does imply means, and the use of means to attain to that we seek through
want or other ways, with hope of finding it. Lastly, 5.
he that wants a thing which he does highly esteem, and may attain unto in
the use of the means; will by all means avoid all contraries that may
disappoint his hope of speeding.

And here consider what 2. What we must seek.
this thing is that we must seek for. Briefly and in short, it is Christ Jesus
the joy of all hearts; in whom are hid all the treasures of knowledge and
wisdom. Him we seek in capite, and together with him all those things which
are above, and whatsoever tends to true blessedness. And indeed all the
excellency which we have, or can hope to have is from above. Our full
happiness and glorious inheritance is kept for us in the Heavens. All our
privileges are from above; our kingdom is in heaven; and qualification for
this happy estate spoken of there. Our holiness and heavenly mindedness is
from above; fullness of grace is from thence, and all graces that lead to
perfection are there. Power to enable us to any holy duty is from above, yea
the means are from above; as the ordinances, the word and Sacraments. To sum
up all; thus much the words import, seek for a nearer communion with Christ;
for a further assurance of heaven; for a further qualification for heaven, and
so as you may be more and more in heaven while you are below on the earth, by
enjoying through faith, your heavenly privileges, prerogatives and
excellencies: seek for further increase of holiness, for a greater measure of
grace; and for grace to bring you to the fruition of whatsoever is from above.
And here attend upon the Word of God, upon the Sacraments, upon holy
conferences where Christ is present in a special manner; and by holy actions
seek for glory in the use of the means. Reach not too high, nor above your
pitch, which is arrogance, pride and high mindedness; but seek for heavenly
things by heavenly means, and in humble manner.

Again, where we must seek the things above, because we are risen with
Christ, (the Resurrection of Christ being an article and ground of Religion;)
we learn, That heavenly duties have their spring from the articles and
grounds of Religion.

The reason is; The ground of our faith is the cause of holy duties; and
therefore corrupt in faith, corrupt in obedience in that degree. Evil opinions
breed an evil life; and a sound understanding an holy conversation.

The use is to admonish us to labor to understand the Use.
maine grounds of Religion, with like labor, to digest them: So as to see the
truth of them in the regularitie of our lives. And here labor with God by
prayer to write them in your hearts with the pen of his holy Spirit.

Again, in that the Apostle wills them to seek heavenly graces, and that
because they are risen with Christ; note further this inference;

That as a Christian ought Doct. 2.
to be heavenly minded, that is, minded to seek heaven ly graces; so he must
do it for this reason, viz. because he is in an estate fitting for it.

Therefore let none say, Use
he cannot for outward troubles or business; unless he will deny himself to
be a Christian, by denying to have any leisure for holy business. He that will
be a Christian must pretend to no impossibilities this way. For, art thou
risen with Christ? then thou must find time to seek those things that are
above, and to be heavenly minded. A Christian that is risen with Christ will;
God here does not as Pharaoh; bid us to do our work, and to gather the straw
our selves: but he bids us do upon a power given us, and by quickening us with
his Spirit, and enabling us to do what he requires to be done. He fits us for
such actions as he taskes us unto, and gives us the power of doing them.

Again, so far as a Christian Doct. 3.
is raised by Christ, so far he cannot but seek those things that are
above. We need not teach a bird to fly, for she is taught of her nature so
to do; flight is natural to her. So a Christian cannot but do the things
answerable to his Christian nature. He is of a new nature, and therefore
cannot but be heavenly minded; he cannot profane the Lords day, he cannot
swear, he cannot lie, he cannot blaspheme, he cannot delight in carnal
courses, he cannot do these things, so far as he is a Christian. And it is
in this sense that the Apostle says, He that is borne of God sins 1 Ioh. 3.
9.
not, that is, so far as he is borne again.

Again, as he is a Christian he may do it, and ought to do it, and cannot
but do it.

But I add further, and for a further point, He glories Doct. 4.
in it. To be heavenly minded, and exercised in spiritual duties, is his
happiness, and his joy. He is never so well, never so much himself, as when
he is most possessed of a heavenly mindedness, and most frequent, or not often
exercised in spiritual duties: so far forth as he is a Christian and
enlarged by the Spirit of Christ, so far forth he glories in holy actions and
in heavenly mindedness.

Is this in all true Christians, if such? what then may Use 1.
we think of the most part of the world, that profess religion but from the
teeth outward? Surely they are still in the grave of old nature, they are not
risen with Christ. Such is the ambitious man, the covetous man, the voluptuous
man, for they savor not the things that are above, the truth is, they have no
new nature in them: for if they had, it would lead them higher then these
underfoot things, or things below. They that live in the defilements of the
flesh, show too well that they have none of this new mould in them; for if they
had, they would get strength against them; at least they would have a
continual conflict, and wrestling in themselves to overcome them.

Another use may be for trial of thy estate; and here see what power there is
of the Spirit of God in thee to make thee heavenly minded, to joy in things hat
are above, more then in all the world again. If thou find this power in thee,
then thou art a Christian indeed; thou can then speak by experience, what
is the work of the Spirit, and thou know well what is the virtue of the
Resurrection of Christ. Then thou can say with Saint Paul, that thou art
still striving to find the virtue of Christ more and more in Psalm. 3. 9. 10.
thee, to make thy self more fully assured of thy part in Christ, and to find
the power of his Spirit mastering the power of corruption in thee in an
excellent degree. Let us therefore labor for this power; for this is to seek
the things that are above; and here let us labor to find the want of it, and
to greeve that we have not so much of it as we have need of. And further let
us labor to know the excellency of this power, esteeming more of it then of
any power else, and better then of all powers of darkness in this flattering
world, for when all other things leave us; the things above will comfort us,
and (for our comfort) go with us. Let us therefore labor to see some hope of
growing in them. Thou have a promise (using the means) to attain unto them;
for the same Spirit is set over by assurance unto thee that raised up Christ
from the dead: use therefore all sanctified means for the attaining of these
spiritual good things, use heavenly ways for thy way to heavenly things:
attend upon the ordinances of God: labor with him in prayer to make thee such
a one as he may delight in, and fit thee for that estate that he has provided
for thee. Labor to increase in virtuous actions, and fly all contrary courses;
as worldly mindedness, and the pleasures of this present world. Beware that
none of these draw away thy heart, and with it, thy self from an earnest
seeking of heavenly things, (so) as thou should. We are all seekers, we are
a generation of seekers, as the Psalmist says; We seek Psalm. 2 4.
while we are here, our possession is hereafter.

Labor therefore to see the want of heavenly graces, and to esteem of them
aright, and to see hope to attain them, and hope to attain them, and use the
means, and avoid all contrary courses. Doing thus you shall find the virtue
of Christ's Resurrection raising you up more and more to seek after heaven and
heavenly things, even those things that are above.

FINIS.

