ELYNOVR RVMMIN, The famous Ale-wife of England.

Written by Mr. Skeleton, Poet Laureat to King Henry the egiht.

depiction of Elynour Rummin

When Skeleton wore the Laurel Crown,
My Ale put all the Ale-wiues down.
LONDON, Printed for Samuel Rand. 1624.

depiction of Elynour Rummin

SKELTON'S GHOST.
TO all Tapsters and Tiplers,
And all Alehouse Vitlers,
Inne-keepers, and Cooks,
That for pot-sale looks,
And will not give measure,
But at your own pleasure,
Contrary to Law,
Scant measure will draw,
In Pot, and in Can,
To cozen a Man
Of his full Quart a penny,
Of you there is to many:
For in King Harry's time,
When I made this Rhyme
Of Elynor Rumming,
With her good Ale tunning;
Our Pots were full quarted,
We were not thus thwarted,
With froth-Canne and nick-pot,
And such nimble quick-shot,
That a dowzen will score,
For twelve pints, and no more.
Full Winchester gage,
We had in that age,
The Dutchmans strong Beer,
Was not hopt over here;
To us 'twas unknown.
Bare Ale of our own,
In a Bowl we might bring,
To welcome the King,
And his grace to beseech,
With Wassall my Leigh.
Nor did that time know
To puff and to blow
In a piece of white clay,
As you do at this day,
With fire and coal,
And a leaf in a hole,
As my Ghost has late seen,
As I walked between
Westminster Hall
And the Church of Saint Paul,
And so through the City,
Where I saw and did pity,
My Countrymens cases,
With fiery-smoke faces,
Sucking and drinking
A fylthie Weed stinking
Was never known before
Till the Devil, and the More,
In th'Indies did meet,
And each other there greet,
With a health they desire
Of stink, smoke and fire:
But who e're does abhor it,
The City smoakes for it;
Now full of fire shops,
And foul spitting chops,
So neesing and coughing,
That my Ghost fell to scoffing,
And to my self said,
Here Is filthy fumes made:
Good Physic of force
To cure a sick horse.
Nor had we such slops,
And shagge-haire on our tops:
At wearing long hair,
King Harry would swear,
And gave a command
With speed out of hand,
All heads should be powl'd,
As Well young as old,
And his own was first so,
Good ensample to show.
You Are so out of fashion,
I know not our Nation,
Your Ruffes and your Bands,
And your Cuffes at your hands,
Your Pipes and your smokes,
And your short curtall Clokes,
Scarfes, Feathers, and Swerds,
And thin bodkin Beards;
Your Wastes a span long,
Your knees with points hung,
Like Morris-daunce Bells,
And many toys else,
Which much I distaste,
But Skelton's in haste
My Masters, Farewell,
Read over my Nell,
And tell what you think
Of her and her drink;
If she had brewed amiss,
I had never wrote this.
THE TVNNING OF ELYNOVR OF RVMMING.
TEll you I chill, if that you will,
A While be still, of a merry Gyll,
That dwelt on a Hill, but she is not grill:
For she is somewhat sage, and well worn in age,
For her visage it would assuage
A man's courage.
Her lothly leere, is nothing clear,
But ugly of cheer, droupy and drowsy,
Scuruy and lousy, her face all bowsie;
Comely cryncled, wondrously wrinckled,
Like a roast Pigges ear, bristled with hair,
Her lewd lips twain, they slauer men said
Like a ropie rain.
A gummy glaire, she is ugly fair,
Her Nose somedeale hooked, and camously crooked,
Never stopping, but ever dropping,
Her Skin loose and slack, grained like a sack,
With a crooked back.
Her Eyne gowndy, are full vnsoundy,
For they are bleared, and she gray-haired,
Iawed like a Ietty, a man would have pity,
To see how she is gumd, fingerd and thumbd,
Gently ioynted, greased and anointed*
Up to the knuckels, the bones her buckels
Together made fast, her youth is far p^st*
Footed like a plane, legged like a Crane,
And yet she will iet, like a jolly set,
In her furred flocket, and gray ru^^ed rocket,
With symper the cocket.
Her Huke of Lyncolne green, it had bin h^^^ I ween
More then forty year, and so it does appear,
The green bare threeds, look like feere weeds
Witherd like hay, the wool worn away,
And yet I dare say, she thinks her self gay,
Upon the holyday, when she does her array,
And girdeth in her geetes, stitched with pleetes,
Her Kirtill Bris^ow red, with clothes on her head,
That weigh a sow of lead.
Writhen in a wonder wise, after the (...) guise,
With a whim wham, knit with a trim tram,
Upon her brain-pan, like an Egyptian
Capped about, when she goes out
Her self for to show, she drives down the dew
With a pair of heels, at broad as two wheels;
She hobbles like a Goose, with her blauked hose,
Her (...) smeard with tallow greased upon dyrt,
That ^^^deth her skirt.
Primus Passus.
And this comely dame, I understand her name
Is Elynour Rumming at home in her wonning,
And as men say, she dwelt in Sothray,
In a certain steed, beside L^derhede.
She is a Tonnish gib, the devil and she be sib,
But to make up my tale, she brueth nappy ale,
And makes thereof pot-sale.
To Travelers and Tinkers, to sweaters and swinkers
And all good-Ale drinkers, that will nothing spare,
But drink till they stare, and bring themselves bare,
With now away the Mare, and let us sley care,
As wise as an hare.
Come who so will, to Elinour on the hill,
With fill the cup fill and sit thereby still
Early and late, thither comes Kate,
Cisly and Sare, with their legs bare,
And also their feet, hardly unsweet.
With their heels dagged, their kirtles all to iagged,
Their smockes all to ragged.
With titters and tarters, bring dishes and platters,
Withal their might running, to Elinour Rumming,
To have of her Tunning.
She gives them of the same, and thus begins the game,
Some wenches unbraced, and some all unlaced,
With their naked paps, their flips and flaps,
It wigs and it wags, like tawny saff'ron bags;
A sort of foul drabs, all scuruie with scabss,
Some be flye-bitten, some skew'd like a kytten.
Some with a shoe-clout, bind their heads about;
Some have no haire-lace, their locks about their face,
Their tresses untrust, all full of unlust,
Some look strawry, some cawry mawry;
Some vntydie tegges, like rotten eggs,
Such a lewd sort to Elinour resort,
From tide to tide, abide, abide,
And to you shall betold, how her Ale is sold
To Mawte and to Mold.
Secundus Passus.
Some have no money, that thither commy
For their Ale to pay, that is a shrewd array:
Elinour swears nay, ye bear not away
My Ale for naught, by him that me bought,
With hey dog hey, have these dogs away,
With get me a staff, the swine eat all my draffe,
Strike the Hogs with a club, they have drunk up my tub;
For be there never so much prese, the swine go to the hy dese,
The sow with her pigges, the bore his tail wrigges,
Against the high bench, with fough here is a stench,
Gather up then wench, see thou not what is fall,
Take up dirt and all, and bear out of the hall,
God give it ill preeuing, clenly as evil chieuing,
But let us turn plain, where we left again,
For as ill a patch as that, the hens run in the mash-fat;
For they go to roust, straight over the ale just,
And dong when it comes, in the ale tonnes:
Then Eliinour takes the mash-boule, and shakes
The hens dong away, and scomes it in a tray
Where the yeast is, with her mangie fistis,
And sometime she blens the dong of her hens
And the ale together, and says Gossip come hither,
This ale shall be thicker, and flower the more quicker,
For I may tell you, I learned it of a Jew,
When I began to brew, and I have found it true,
Drink now while it is new,
And ye may it brook, it shall make you look
Younger then you be, years two or three,
For ye may prove it by me, behold I say and see
How bright I am of blee,
Ich am not cast away, that can my husband say,
When we kiss and play in lust and in liking,
He calls me his whiting, his mulling and his mittine,
His nobes and his conny, his sweeting and honny,
With Basse my pretty bonny, thou art worth good and money,
This make I my falyre fanny, till he dream and dronny,
For after all our sport, then will he rout and snort,
Then sweetly together we lie, as two pigges in a stye,
To cease me seems best of this tale to rest,
And leave this letter, because it is no better,
Because it is no sweeter, we will no farther rhyme
Of it at this time, but we will turn plain,
Where we left again.
Tertius Passus.
In steed of quoine and money, some bring her a conny,
And some a pot with honny, some a salt, some a spone,
Some their hose, some their shoone, some ran a good trot,
With skillet or pot, some fill a bag full
Of good Lemster wool, an huswife of trust,
When she is a thirst, such a web can spin,
Her thrift is full thin.
Some go straight thither, be it slaty or slidder,
They hold the highway, they care not what men say,
Be they as be may. Some loath to be espide,
Start in at the backside, Over hedge and pale,
And all for good ale, some ran till they sweat,
And bring Malt or Wheat, and Ellinour entteate,
To byrle them of the best; then comes another guest,
She swear'd by the roode of rest, her lips are so dry,
Withont drink she must die, therefore fill by and by,
And have her pecke of Rye.
Anon comes another, as dry as the to there,
And with her does bring meal, salt, or other thing,
Girdle or wedding ring, to pay for her scot,
As comes to her lot: Some brings their husbands hood,
Because the Ale is good; another brought his cap
To offer at the Ale-tap, with flax and with toe,
And some brought sower dowe, with hey and with hoe,
Sit we down arow, and drink till we blow,
And pipe tirly, tirly low.
Some laid to pledge, their hatchet and their wedge,
Their hickell and their reele, their rock and spinning wheel,
And some went so narrow, they laid to pledge their wharrow,
Their ribskin and spindle, their needle and thimble;
Here was scant thirft, when they made such shift,
Their thirst was so great, they never asked for meat,
But drink still drink, and let the cat wink,
Let us wash our gummes from the dry crummes.
Quartus Passus
Some for very need lay down a skaine of thread,
Some beans and pease, some chaffer does ase;
Sometime now and than, another there ran
With a good brass pan, her cullourfull wan;
She ran in all haste, vnbrac'd and (...),
Tawny swart and sallow, like a cake of tallow,
I swear by all hallow, It was a stare to take
The Devil in a brake.
Then came balting Jove, and brought a (...)
Of Bacon that was (...), but Lord how (...),
Angry and waspie, she began to yawne and gaspie,
And bad Elinour go bet, and fill in good met,
It was dear that was far fet.
Another brought a spicke, of a Bacon stick,
Her tongue was very quick, but she spoke somewhat thick.
Her fellow did sammer and stut, but she was a foul slut;
For her mouth foamed, and her belly groaned.
Jove saine she had eaten a fyest, queen (quoth st;he) thou lie,
I have as sweet a breath, as thou with shameful death,
Then Elinour said, ye Callets, I shall break your pallets,
Without you now cease, and so was made a drunken peace.
Then came drunken Ales, and she was full of tales
Of tidings in Walls, and St. James in Gales,
And of the Portingales, with lo Gossip I wis,
Thus and thus it is, there has been great war
Between Temple Bar and the Cross in Cheap,
And there came a heap of Millstones in a rout,
She speaks thus in her snout, sniueling in her nose,
As though she had the pose, lo here is an old tippet,
You shall give me a sippet of your strong Ale,
And God send good sale, and as she was drinking,
She fell in a winking with a barley hood,
She pist where she stood, then began she to weep,
And forthwith fell a sleep: Elinour took her up,
And blessed her with a Cup of new Ale in corns,
Ales found therein no thorns, but supt it up at once,
She found therein no bones.
Quintus Passus.
Now in comes another rabble, first one with a ladle
Another with a cradle, and with a side sadle
And (...) began a fable, (...) and a babble,
(...) silly (...) with willy,
Up she start half lame, and scantly could go,
For pain and for woe.
In came another dant, with a Goose and a Gant,
She had a (...) wesant, she was nothing pleasant,
Necked like an Elephant, it was a Bullifant,
A greedy (...)
Another brought Garlike-heads, another brought her bends
Of let or of Cole, to offer to the Ale pole.
Some brought a wimble, and some brought a thymble:
Some brought a silk lace, and some a pin-case:
Some her husbands Gown, some a Pillow of down;
And all this shift they make for the good Ale sake.
Then start forth a Phisgigge, and she brought a Bore-pigge,
The flesh thereof was rank, and her breath strongly stanlke,
Yet ere she went she drank, and gate her great thank
Of Elinour for her ware, that she thither bare,
To pay for her share. Now truly to my thinking,
This was a solemn drinking.
Septimus Passus.
Soft quoth one hight Sibbill,
First let me with you bibbill;
She sat down in the place
With a sorry face,
Whey-wormed about,
Garnished was her snout,
With here and there a puscull,
Like a scabbed muscull:
This Ale said she is noppy,
Let us sipp and soppy,
And not spill a droppy,
For so more I hoppy,
It cools will my copy.
Dame ellinour said she,
Have, here is for me,
A clout of London pins,
And with that she begins
The pot to her pluck,
And drank a good luck,
She swing'd up (...)
At once for (...)
Her paunch was so (...)
And so with (...),
Had she (...)
She had (...)
Then began the (...)
Amongst the (...)
Dame Ellinour said they,
Lend here a lock of (...),
To make all things (...),
You wot well (...).
But sir among all:
That sat in (...)
There was a (...)
Sat like a Sainty,
And began to painty,
As though she would fainty,
She made it as coy
As a lege demoy,
She was not half so wise
As she was pecui^^ (...),
She said never a (...),
But rose from the (...),
And called for our Dame,
Ellinour by name.
WWe supposed Iwis,
That she rose to piss^,
But the very ground,
Was to compound
With Ellinour in the speace,
To pay for her expense,
I have no penny nor great,
To pay said she, God wot,
For washing of my throat,
But my Beads of (...),
Bear them to your chamber,
Then Ellinour did there hide
Within her bedside;
But some sa^^ (...),
That nothing had,
There of their own,
Neither gelt nor paw^^,
Such were (...),
That had not a penny:
But when they should walk,
Were (...) chalk,
To score on the balke,
Or score on the tail,
God give it ill (...),
For my singers itch,
I have written to much,
Of this mad (...)
Of Ellinour Rumming
Thus ends the (...),
Of this worthy feast.
FINIS.

