HEPTAMERON, THE SEVEN DAYS: That is, MEDITATIONS AND PRAYERS, Upon the work
of the LORDS CREATION. Together with other certain Prayers and Meditations,
most comfortable for all Estates, etc.

By M. A. Symson, Minister at Dalkeith.

SAINCT-ANDREWS, Printed by Edward Raban, Printer to the University. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY, DAME MARGARET HAY, Countess of
Dumfermeling, Eternal Felicity.
MADAME,
SInce it has pleased our OMNIPOTENT CREATOR, and gracious Redeemer, to heap
upon your Ladyship many and sundry honorable Privileges of Nature, and
Grace; and by them, amongst many others, your good Friends and Servants, to
engage me, of a long time, to honor and serve your Ladyship with such Graces
and Duties by many Testimonies of your comfortable kindness and care of me,
as I have hitherto (with a constant intention to be thankful) declared my
willingness to express, that I should not come (with the common sort of this
declining Age) guilty of the foul imputation of Ingratitude, as the weakness
of my wit and skill might afford, I did communicate with your Ladyship (for
your private use) these MEDITATIONS, upon that fundamental ground of Faith
which is THE LORDS CREATION OF THE WORLD, to be used of your Ladyship with
daily Prayer and Meditation, that ye might never want matter wherein ye
might rejoice in the goodness, wisdom, and power of that Creator; with a
persuasion, that his wise Providence reaches unto the conseruatio^ of the
same, in Mercy and Justice, unto the consummation of the World, wherein your
Ladyship has your comfortable entresse, even according to the Lords
everlasting Decree of your Election Calling, Justification, Sanctification, and
hope to be glorified, with all the rest of his Saints and elect Angels, in
the everlasting sellowship of his Kingdom, besides the many Obligations
wherewith I stand indebted to my Lord your Noble Husband, for his Lordships
fatherly care and patrocinie of me in all mine affai^es, that your honor
should not be smoothered in the Christian affection which ye carry to the
Commonwealth of the Lords Church, not only in permitting, but likewise in
urging that this Benefit might be made of a public privilege, to the use
of all them that by a common affection with you strive to work out their
salvation in fear and trembling, and so make their election sure, I have,
according to my duty, dedicated this little Treatise to pass forth under
your Ladyships protection; that the thanks of the pains which I have taken in
contriuing the same for your Ladyships private use, may redound unto your
self, Madame, from as many as shall find the benefit thereof for their
information, and stirring up unto any duty of Religion. And as it can
neither stand with my Profession and your Ladyships sincerity, nor yet the
superlatiue dignity of such a glorious subject to pollute the same with the
intising words of humane wisdom: knowing your Ladyship to be as far from
all delight in assentation and flattering, as ye are from the affectation of
salfe and undeserved praise; I have contented my self in the simplicity of
the Lords truth, to commend unto your Ladyship, and all the rest of Gods
Saints, the constant and careful practice of the Faith and knowledge which
may be reaped by the reading and meditation of this Doctrine, with Prayer and
thanksgiving to the Lord, for the happy success of the same: not that I
would wish your Ladyship by this distinction of the matter to several days,
to be so superstitiouslie tied unto the same, as if the whole particulars of
the Creation should not be at all times before your Eyes, as a fair Garden,
whereof ye should behold the beauty, and smell the fragrant Odours together:
But heerewithall (if it may please the Lords gracious Majesty) ye may resent
the goodness, power and wisdom of God in the Creation of every creature
upon its own day when it was made.

So wishing the success of these exercises to be according to mine affection,
and intention, for the Christian profit and progress in the faith of the
truth, which is according to godliness, I beseech God to bless your
Ladyship, with my Lord your Husband, and your hopeful Son Lord CHARLES, with
all Prosperity in this Life, and everlasting happiness in the Life to come, I
rest.

Your Lad. seruitour, A. SYMSON.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
GEntle and Christian Reader, since ye received so tenderly my first Book, Of
the seven words which our Lord spak upon the Cross, I have taken courage to
present this Book, Of the Creation, also to your consideration: which suppose
it preceed the other in time, so long as the Creation of the World does Man's
Redemption purchased by the death of Christ, yet they succeed in effect and
worth: for it had been far better that neither the World for us, nor we
for our selves, had been made, than that we should not have been redeemed by
him.

This, if ye peruse diligently, and meditate consideratiuelie, I doubt not
but that ye shall see the Lord more clearelie in his own works: this being,
as it were, a mirror and looking Glass, wherein we may perfectly behold
Himself, his Omnipotency Wisdom, Love, Goodness, etc.

By this also ye may draw nearer and nearer unto the Lord your God, and become
more frequent and acquainted with him, by daily meditating upon his worthy
Works, praising him, giving him thanks for the same, and praying unto him to
continue his graces toward you still unto the end.

I did read Saint Ambrose his HEXAMERON, and the worthy D. BARTAS: and I
trust ye shall perceive the direction of one Spirit, guiding us all unto one
and the self same End.

I persuade my self that there are many well minded Christians, who will
likewell of this Book; and again others will perhaps dislike of it, even such
as esteem of nothing but that which is forged in their own Shop: yea, they
know no better means to grace themselves than by disgracing others, as Saint
Hierome says in his Epistle unto Saint Augustine.

But I crave at thine hands (most courteous Reader) that (since in any man's
work there will ^ee some Dross amongst Gold) thou would choose the best,
(if i^ were but in the Dongue-hill) and pass by the other with a cha^itable
construction: in the mean time accepting this in good part: and if it please
God to continue his graces with me, thou may expect more. (...).

A. Symson.

ON THE BOOK.
GOD binding with hid Tendons this great ALL,
Did make a LVTE, which had all parts it given:
This LVTES round Belly was the azur'd Heaven;
The Rose those Lights which He did there install:
The Basses were the Earth and Ocean:
The Treble shrill the Air: the other Strings,
The unlike bodies, were of mixed things:
And then His Hand to break sweet Notes began.
Those lofty Concords did so far rebound,
That Floods, Rocks, Meadows, Forests did them hear:
Birds, Fishes, Feasts danced to their silver sound.
Only to them Man had a deafned Ear.
Now him to rouse from sleep so deep and long,
God wak'ned has the Echo of this Song.
W. D. ON THE SEVEN DAYS.
THe glorious God the First Day made the Light:
Next stretched the Firmament in breadth and hight:
The Third dryde Earth, and it with Plants He stored:
The Fourth the Heavens with Lamps of light decor'd:
Fifth The Air with Fowls, with Fishes filde each Flood:
The Sixth made Beasts and Man: and all were good.
On the Seventh Day the Lord from work did rest;
Therefore that Day He sanctified and blessed.
I. A. AN ANTIPHONE, or EPODE, For VV. D. his Heptachordon, TO THE AVTHOR.
THis seven string'd Lute, as shows the sacred Story,
GOD made to show the brightness of his Glory.
On which, by diverse Hands, six thousand Springs
Been playde; and all to praise that King of Kings.
Now last the Son of that sweet Swan-like Singer,
Who Christ in Arms embracing would not linger
Longer on Earth, harmoniouslie does raise
On it Notes fit the furious fits to appease
Of Souls Saule-like, and of their frantic folly
Them charm, to sound his praise who is only holy.
Therefore, my Brother dear, well may thou think
Employde thy Pains, thy Paper, Pen and Ink,
Whereby poor Souls are saved, Gods Name's extolled,
And thine amongst neuer-dying names enrolled.
M. I. ADAMSON. THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
AN humble Confession of sins. Page 1 A Meditation on the first days work.
Page 19 A Prayer on the first Day. Page 22 A Meditation on the second Day. Page
27 A Prayer on the second Day. Page 30 A Meditation on the third Day. Page 36 A
Prayer on the third Day. Page 38 A Medit. on the fourth Day. Page 50 A Prayer
on the fourth Day. Page 62 A Med. on the fifth Day. Page 68 A Pr. on the f^fth
Day. Page 74 A Meditat. on the sixth Day. Page 79 A Prayer on the sixth Day.
Page 85 A Meditation on the seventh Day. Page 91 A Prayer on the seventh Day.
Page 102 Morning Prayer. Page 108 Evening Prayer. Page 114 A Meditation on the
Church. Page 120 A prayer for the Church. Page 125 A meditation on the holy
Communion. Page 133 A prayer before the Communion. Page 139 A thanksgiving
after the Communion. Page 141 A Medit. of the trouble of Conscience. Page 143 A
prayer for a troubled Conscience. Page 149 A meditation of Kings. Page 155 A
Prayer for the King, etc. Page 158 A Meditation of Sickness. Page 161 A prayer
for a sick person. Page 163 A prayer for a Woman in travel. Page 169 A
meditation of Persecution. Page 173 A prayer for one persecuted. Page 177 A
meditation of Famine. Page 182 A prayer in time of Famine. Page 184 A
meditation of Pestilence. Page 187 A prayer in time of pestilence. Page 189 A
Meditation of the Sword. Page 191 A prayer in time of the Sword. Page 194 A
Meditation of Death. Page 197 A Prayer at the hour of Death. Page 200
FINIS.
AN HVMBLE CONFESSION OF SINS.
OEternall God, and most merciful Father, I confess and acknowledge before
thine heavenly Majesty, that I am a most miserable sinner: first, Sin by
nature.
because I was conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity: next, by reason I
have added to the sins of my nature, the sins of a damnable life. For there
i^ no Precept of thy Law which I have not broken; neither is there any
judgeme^t which I have not deserved. Insensible.
But yet this increases my woe, that when I am thus wounded, I feel not my
wound; but do lie sleeping, as Jonas did, when the tempest of thy judgments
does assault me But (alace) this is most grievous of all, Jonah 1.5.
that when thy Majesty by the sweet voice of thy word, Against knowledge.
have called me to repentance, I closed mine cares to thy warninges. If those
who transgressed the law of Moses, Deu. 19.15
under two or three witnesses, died without mercy; much more I, who have trodden
under my feet the blood of the New Testament, Heb. 10.29
and have accounted light of the offers of thy grace, and by the testimony of
mine own conscience, am worthy of condemnation. And seeing I am arraigned
before thy Tribunal, I flee to thy self, as to a City of refuge, Deuteronomy. 19.3
where I will plead my cause by an humble Confession. Therefore I sall down
upon the knees of mine heart, before the ports of thy mercy, begging of thee
the spirit of unsained repentance; that acknowledging my sin, I may find
grace in thine eyes. But because the beginning of repentance is to see my
sin, open mine eyes, O Lord, that I may see my nakedness, and bewail the
days of my sin. I will give up dittie against my self: I will give out
doom against my soul: I will condemn my self, that thou may absolve me: I
will have my sins before mine eyes, that thou may cast them behind thy
back: I will remember them, that thou may forget them: I will repent them, and
thou will forgive them. I acknowledge my sins, Psalm. 51.3.
and mine iniquity is ever before me: O Lord, thou love the truth in the
inward affections. Ibid. 6.
I am content that shame be to me, if honor come thereby to thee, that thou
may be just when thou speak, Ibid. 4.
and pure when thou judge.

First, I confess, that I was created to thy Image, but sin has so
disgraced and defaced it in me, that there appears no print thereof in my
nature. I was white as the snow, Ier. 13.23
but am become black as the More: my righteousness is as a menstruous
garment. Esa. 64.6.
Restore thine Image in me, and repare thy ruinous building. Thine honor shall
be greatter in reforming, than in forming me: as in my resurrection thy glory
shall kythe more than in my creation. The liberality of thy goodness appeared
when as thou stamped such graces in my nature: but thy mercies, which endure
for ever, may be seen when thou renewest those gifts, which I have
prodigally wasted and spent upon sin. Transform me, O Lord, to thy
similitude; that as thou art holy, wise, merciful, patient, bountiful, etc.
so I may represent thee (in some measure) in them all. As for mine infancy,
Man's state in infancy.
I know not what I was: a poor Suckling, upon my Mothers Breasts: I could no
ways help my self, but by weeping. I was casten upon thee from the womb: by
thy providence I was kept, and thine Angels guarded me. But this I know, that
an Infant of one day, is not clean before thee: have mercy upon me,
therefore, O my God, and by the holy infancy of my Savior, I beseech thee,
abolish whatsoever guiltiness I have contracted in my Childhood, even from my
birth. Childhood.
Then I grew a Child, which I do well remember: and the poysonable root of
sin, which lay hid in mine infancy, sprang forth in my childhood. And then
(for as little as I was) I began to disdain, yea, to snite my fellows. I had
no delight to pray, nor hear thy word, albeit my Parents and Masters many
times did command me. I spent that time, even the first fruits of my youth,
in idleness. My sinful life, and wicked nature, delighted not to be
instructed in learning and virtue: which my neglect of time is now punished in
mine age, for the which I crave thy mercy. O remember not, good Lord, the
sins of my youth: neither how ignorant I have been of thy truth. Psalm.
25.7.
But by the holy childhood of thy Son, purge the sins of my childhood: and
of thy great mercy. O Lord, pity mine ignorance.

But when I passed the years of my childhood, Adolescencie.
I entered into mine Adolescencie, in a middle age, betwixt a Boy and a Man.
Alace, for pity! when I call to mind that time of my life, my soul is
astonished; fearing that thou will make me to inherit the sins of my youth.
Thou gave me strength of body, and quickness of mind: but how vyldlie
abused I all thy benefits? I with the prodigal son, have spent all my
precious youth in sin. Oh, when I think upon the months of vanity, when I
gave my strength to sin, and did consecrate the first fruits of my life to
Satan, my soul faints. O Lord, I am ashamed when I think upon my lend and
beastly behavior; more beseeming a Beast, than a Man. O Lord, thou have not
suffered all my follies to be made patent to the world, neither did thou slay
me in my sin. Let not my secret sins stand in the light of thy
countenance: for thine honor is to cover sins: therefore, let them pass
like a shadow. If Joseph did pardon those sins of his Brethren, will thou,
Genesis 45.1.
O Lord, call to mind the follies by the which I have offended thee? Alace, I
was not only foolish, and insolent, but I was mad: I contemned all admonitions
of thy servants: I thought my Parents, and Elders, were but foolish; and I
euanished in my mad rage. I was nigh unto the gates of Hell: I posted, and
ran, as swiftly as the Dromadarie, Ier. 2.24.
or the wild Ass. But thou tookest me in my month: and when I was ladened
with sin, then thou mercifully chastisedst me: while I was burning in the
flame of my lusts, thou tamedst me by a grievous disease, and sickness,
which thou layedst upon me; by which my body was brought under. Blessed be
thou, O Lord, who had that care of me, that thou chastisedst me, and
nurturedst me, that I should not perish with the wicked world. Thou did
meet thy servant Paul, when he went to Damascus, Act. 9.3.
and smotest him to the ground with blindness, that he might rise again a new
man, to honor thee. Thou did prevent David, by the hand of Abigall, 1.
Sam. 25.23.
who stopped him from sheeding of blood. O most merciful Lord, thou did
meet me by thy rod, and did cast me down, and raysedst me up again.
Before I was afflicted I went astray: but now I have learned to follow thy
Commandments. Psalm. 119.67.
Now I thy poor Supplicant, upon the knees of a sorrowful soul, crave
pardon, and grace, for all the transgressions of my youth.

But, O my God, as I grew in years, so I grew in sin, Age.
and I forgot thy former mercies. I went to Jericho, and mine enemies wounded
me upon the way, Luk 10.33
and left me for dead: my fellows passed by me, but gave me no comfort. But
thou, O pitiful Samaritane, had mercy upon me: thou filledst my wounds
with the wine of thy blood: thou powredst in the oil of thy spirit to soften
them: thou tookest me upon thy shoulders, and broughtest me to the Inn of
thy Church, where I might remain until I was perfectly cured. Praise be unto
my God, who left me not in my sin, but had compassion upon me. But, Lord,
have pity, for my soul is inwardly tormented, when I think on my former
days, and how I have sinned against thee.

My Senses are defiled, my Seeing, my Hearing, my Tasting, The sight.
my Smelling and my Touching. Alace, I made not a covenant with mine Eyes, but
they were full of filthiness:therefore now do I water my Couch with the
tears of my complaint. Forgive, O Lord, Psalm. 6.6.
my wandering looks; and now set min^ Eyes upon thee: that the Eyes of min^
Heart being purified, with a pur^ Heart I may see God. Math. 5.8


I opened the doors of mine Ears, unto the strange voices of thine enemies. I
welcomed Sin, The hearing.
whenever it came to my Soul: But, alace, I repent, and wish at God, that I
had not done so. Yet now, O Lord, open the doors of my Soul; that thou
may sound the voice of joye and gladness, that the. Psalm. 51.8.
Bones which thou have broken may rejoice.

Woe is me, that ever I tasted the delicates of sin; and that as Eua, The
^^sting G^^. 3.6.
by her taste and sight, brought that guiltiness upon her self and us: so I,
by mine abusing of these good benefits, have procured, that with the prodigal
Child thou should bring me to poverty. O God, keep me, that I never
taste the food of the king of Babel; but let me eat the pottage of Daniel
thy servant. Daniel. 1.8.


The Smelling.
Oh, that the stinking smell of sin were away from mine head. Let me smell
the savor of thine Oyntmentes, thy Myrrh, Psalm. 45.8.
and thy Cassia, when thou come from thine Yuorie Palaces.

The Touching.
Oh, that ever I stretched forth mine hand to sin. Now, Lord, extend d mine
hand to thy service; to be bountiful to the Poor, and to sow my seed upon
m^nie waters, that I may reap eternal joye. My mind is replenished with
ignorance, mine heart is endured, my will is rebellious to thy will, my mouth
an open sepulcher, and my feet are swift to run to evil.

O Lord, have pity on me, and remember that Christ, my Lord, was wounded in
all the members of his body, and in all the members of his body; that by his
wounds I might be cured. Preventing grace.
Prevent me by thy grace: ^^eke thy lost Sheep: and light the ^andle of thy
word, Matthew. 15.24.
that thou may ^^de thy lost Penny: And when thou ^ast found me, Lord,
give me thine ^^companying grace, Accompanying grace
that it do not ^^rsake me. Put the Ring on my sin^er, even the Ring of thy
love and fa^our. And last, I beseech thee, bestow upon me thy following grace,
^ollowing grace.
which ^ay crown the whole mercies that I ^aue received all my life.

Sin, alace, sticks faster to me ^an does my flesh, yea, the marrow
^ithin my bones. O Lord, make diui^on betwixt us, Sin separateth us from God.
and separate it from ^ee, which has made so long separa^^on between thee and
me. It is a ^urthen, which lies upon me, and is ^oo heavy for me to bear;
therefore, (...) my God, ease me thereof, that with ^acritie, and readiness
of heart, I may ^erue thee all the days of my life, as I ^aue served sin
before. Alace, was ^ot I the cause that thy Son died, ^ine Angels are
offended, and thy Church grieved? O Lord, let me be ^omforted before my
departure, that I may be the occasion of all their joye^ by my repentance; as
I was the cause of their sorrow, by my fall, and foul defection.

But, alace, when that I have repented me of my former wickedness, I am
ready to run back unto that filthy puddle of sin, from the which I was
newly washen: yea, I have fallen more often than seven times every day: but
thou, O Lord, with thy merciful hand, did lift me up again. Therefore,
dear Father, have mercy upon me, I beseech thee, and continue thy love and
favor toward me; and let me not fall as do the wicked, who fall, and rise
no more.

Send unto me, O my God, faithful Admonishers, and let the Righteous rebuke
me: yea, let me not want the checkes of mine own Conscience, that I durst
forswear my promise to my God. Breach of promise to God.
I promised to amend my life, but I have not performed mine oath, and have come
under a double guiltiness. I purposed to cease from sin, even when I vowed,
thinking to stand by mine own strength: But now, good Lord, I beseech thee,
that thou would give me thy constant Spirit, that I may stand by thy power,
Psa. 51.10
and fall no more.

If thou would narrowly mark mine iniquities, O Lord, Job 5.3.
I could not answer thee to one of a thousand: yea, mine own mouth condemn
me, Job 9.20.
and mine own clothes would defile me. Wash me, therefore, O my God: Purge
me with Hyssope, Psalm. 51.7
and I shall be clean: with Myrrh and pure Water, and I shall be whiter than
Snow. O, pass by my great sins: for mercy pleases thee. Mich. 7.8.


Remember not, O Lord, mine ingratitude, and unthankfulness toward thy
Majesty, Ingratitude
for all thy manifold and rich benefits, which thou have so bountifully
bestowed upon me from time to time: Ne yet, good Lord, remember mine
hypocrisy, and superficial service, Hypocrisy.
which many times I have done unto thee, both privately, and in thine House.
I crave pardon for these two sins, which are most heinous: and I most humbly
beseech thee, ever hence forward, to give me a thankful mind and heart,
unto thee, for all thine innumerable benefits and blessings, and sincerity
in thy worship: that with a single eye, and a true heart, I may glorify thee,
O my Creator, all the days of my pilgrimage here in this life, and
hereafter with thy Saints for ever.

Oh, and alace, I am sorry, and do most heartily repent me, for those
manifold injuries which I have done unto my Neighbors, Injuries to our
neighbor.
even for lack of love toward them. But, O Lord, I am no ways able to
reckon mine heinous sins, and grievous offenses, which I have committed both
against God and man, no more than I am able to count the hairs of mine head,
or the sands of the Sea, or the Stars of Heaven. But bind thou all my
transgressions in the bundle of thy mercy, and burn them in the fire of thy
love: Oh, bury them all in the bowels of thy CHRIST, and in the grave of
perpetual oblivion. For why? O Lord, thy Name is Mercy, 1. Gods Name is
Mercy.
and thy nature merciful; yea, thy mercy is above all thy works, and in
dureth for ever. 2. His nature merciful.


Thy promise is, O God, that thou will not cast off those that come unto thee.
Thou have sworn, that thou delightest not in the death of a sinner, 3. His
promise and oath.
but that he be converted, and live. Thou command all that are weary, 4.
His Commandment. Matt. 11.28. Luke 18.1.
and laden with sin, to come unto thee, and thou will ease them. Thou
commendest the unjust Judge, who at last yielded to the importunity of the
Widow. Therefore, O Lord, according to the riches of thy mercies look upon
mine infirmities. Bestow upon ^e, O Father, the Comforter, Ioh. 14.26
even the Spirit of truth, who may lead me in all verity through this
Wilderness: and thy constant Spirit, who may establish mine heart by his
grace; and who may sanctify me, and purify the sountaine of my soul, that
all good actions may abundantly spring from thence.

And finally, O Lord, I resign my body and soul into thine hand; beseeching
thee most entirely, that thou will keep thine own Lodging; that I may be
directed, by thine holy Spirit, in the course of this transitory life: that I
having the assurance of the forgiveness of all my former sins, and likewise
a care, fear, and revenge of my corruption, I may learn to number my days,
Psa. 90.12
and redeem the time, and spend (and end) my life to thine honor, praise,
and glory, through JESUS CHRIST, my Lord and only Savior. Ame^. So be it.

MEDITATIONS AND PRAYERS, upon the Lords seven days work.
MOSES, albeit he was borne after the Flood, yet he prophecieth of things
done from the beginning of the World, and has written five Books of the
same: GENESIS, GENES.
which signifies Generation, because it contains the beginning both of the
World, and of the Church. EXODUS
EXODUS, an Out-passage, or delivery of the Church from Egypt. LEVITICUS,
LEVIT.
sets down both the Orders and Offices of the Leuits, for the right
ministration of Gods service. NVMBERS, a Reckoning of men, NVMB.
wherein God performs his promise to Abraham, Genesis 22.17
that his seed should be like the stars of heaven. DEVTERONOMIE, DEVT.
or a Second Law, or Declaration of the will of God, before the death of Moses.
He begins at the Creation, by which he confuteth the Opinion of the Eternity
of the World. To such as inquire what God was doing before the Creation, What
God was doing before the World.
I answer with S. Augustine, He was preparing Hell for such curious brains.
And to such as ask where he was, I say that God needed no place, who is
comprehended in no place. Places are made for bodies, which are conprehensible:
the Creator being incomprehensible, has no need thereof. Neque tempus habet
quando, neque locum ubi, Augustine.
neque modum quomodo, neque causam cur fit: that is, He has neither a place
wherein he is, nor a time when, nor a manner how, nor a cause why he is. But
he was in himself, and had a perfect delectation in his own Trinity.

A MEDITATION UPON THE LORDS first days work.
THE first Creature which GOD made out of the Chaos and Mass, was the Light,
Light admirable.
which is admirable in two respects: First, 1. Out of darkness.
because it proceeded out of Darkness: as he does produce one Contrare out of
another; 2. Without and before the Organes: letting us see, how GOD binds not
his works to instruments
Life out of Death, Honor out of Infamy, etc. whereby his own Glory may
appear the greater. Next, the Light was made without any Organe where from it
should proceed. For the Sun and Moon were made upon the fourth day: by
which God would teach us, that we should not bind his operation to any
instruments: for he can work by them, and without them, and against them.
Therefore, it is natural Idolatry, to bind the actions to the creatures, and
to spoil the Creator of his due honor.

Light excellent for five respects
Now the Light is most excellent in five respects: First, because it is
necessary for the direction of our actions: for he that walks in darkness,
1. Necessary. John 8.12
knows not whither he goes.

Secondly, the Light is most pleasant, for it adds beauty unto all
inferior creatures; 2. Beautiful.
who if they had no light shining upon them, they would be under disgrace.

Thirdly, the Light is most comfortable: for Darkness is the Image of Hell:
3. Comfortable.
and a little light will greatly comfort those that are in darkness.

Fourthlie, the Light is most pure and simple, 4. Pure, and simple.
and can admit no corruption: for albeit it shine upon filthy places, yet it
neither receives, nor admits, any infection therefrom; but it illuminateth
them, that they seem to be purged.

And fiftlie, the Light is most celestial, 5. Celestial.
because it proceeds not from the Earth, but from the Heavens.

Our Savior CHRIST is compared to the Light, Christ the true Light in all
respects.
for all these five reasons following: First, Without him we must walk in
darkness. Secondly, He is most pleasant, and beautifieth us. Thirdly, He
only comfort us. Fourthlie, He receives no corruption of our flesh. And
fiftlie, He came from above.

Christ exceeds the Light in four things:
But there are other four things, wherein our Savior exceeds this
material Light: First, The Light is created; and he is an uncreated Light.
Next, Ex. 10.20.
to which Christ cannot shine. Thirdly, The Light can shine to a seeing eye,
the material Light alters and changes unto darkness;

A PRAYER, Upon the Lords first Days Work.
O Pure and Everlasting Light! who dwell in a light inaccessable, I beseech
thee to look and blink into my darkened mind, with the gracious beams of thy
countenance; Psalm. 36.9.
that I may look up, and see light in thy light. O Lord, I reverence and
worship thee, for all thy works of wonder, which thou have made for the
profit and pleasure of man. Gods works a clear myrrour, wherein to behold
himself. Genes. 1.3.
There is not one of thy works which is not a lively myrrour, to represent thy
glory, thy wisdom, thy power and thy goodness: But my mind is blind, and
cannot see thee in them. Thou createdst the Light, on the first day, by the
word of thy mouth, and it sprang out of darkness. That senseles creature obeyed
the voice of thy mouth: but alace, thou have many times cried unto me, Arise
from the works of darkness; and I did not obey thee. I am not worthy that
the light should shine upon me, which will be a witness against me. When I
behold the Light, how pleasant and beautiful it is, and that it gives an
ornament to all other creatures: who, If light be beautiful, far much more
the Father of Lights.
if they were wrapped up in darkness, were utterly disgraced. But, O Lord,
how much more art thou beautiful in thine holy Temple, when thou have put
only a little spark of thy glory into this creature. Our Savior says,
Blessed are those who have clean hearts, Matt. 5.8.
for they shall see GOD. As thou have given me the benefit of this present
light, so let me see thy self, with a pure heart. Thine enemies, yea, the
Beasts, see this light: but, Lord, let me see thy self, the Father of
Lights. As this Light is glorious, so it is very comfortable unto me, O my
God: for this night I was covered with darkness: I turned to and froe, and
mine heart was sore perplexed, and my ^ones sore vexed: but when thou did
blinke in, early in the morning, then I revived, mine heart was comforted, and
I said unto thee, If the light be comfortable, much more is God. Ex. 15.23.
O Lord, is there such great comfort to me in this little light? abstract not
thy presence from my soul. All the comfortes of thy creatures will be like to
the waters of Mara, which were bitter, if thou season them not with thy
presence, and make them sweet, by the Cross of Christ. Break open the doors
of my soul, that thou may enter in: and lighten the eye of mine
understanding, that I may see thy will, thy glory, and the excellency of
thine House.

But, Lord, be merciful unto me, that I have enjoyed so many lights, and
have abused them unto sin: Misspent time repented.
I spent them ydlie, profanelie, and wickedlie. Thou may justly close mine
eyes, that I should never see any new light, who have thus misspent so many.
Thou may cast me into the bed of Sickness, or into a Prison, where I
should see no light. But, O Lord, I was blinded by ignorance: mine affections
did blinde-folde me. Have mercy upon me, that I have spent so long a light,
in the works of sin. 1. These. 5.5 Ephesians. 5.8.
Let me walk as the Child of light: and let me put on the works of light,
that I be like thee, and shine here, and walk in light; that from light, I
may go to light for ever.

Oh, let thy word, and thy law, be a light to my feet, Psalm. 119.105.
that I may see to do thy will, and to keep thine holy Commandments. Let
me be a Lamp of light, and not a lump of darkness. O God, I have this one
comfort, God, an unchangeable Light.
that albeit this present light be alterable, yet Thou art an unalterable GOD,
and thy presence shines at all times. Therefore, I beseech thee, let not the
light go out of the Tabernacle; Ex. 30.25.
but nourish it continually, by the fresh and new Oil of thy Spirit; that
thou may dwell in me, and may delight to abide in thine own Building;
and keep in thine own light, which thou have brought in, and nourish it
within thy Sanctuary; that I (being brought through this shaddowe of the
dark world, by thine external and internal light) may come to that place
where there shall be no night, and where there needs no Candle, Rev. 21.23
neither the Sun, nor the Moon, to give light: even where thy glory
shines, and where the Lamb himself gives light: To whom, with thee, O
Father, and the holy Spirit, be all honor, praise, power, and dominion, now,
and evermore. So be it.

A MEDITATION UPON THE LORDS second days work.
THE Heavens were created the second Day. The word (...) in the native
language is taken from the Waters, because the Waters are there, and descend
from thence. The Greek word (...), Plato takes, as it were (...),
conspicable, because it is objected to the sight of all men. The Latin Coelum,
because it is Coelatum, carved with goodly Ornaments: and Firmamentum, from
the surenesse of it: and Expansum, because GOD has spread it forth as a
Curtain. Ps. 104.2.


The Heavens have three significations in the Scriptures: First, it is taken
for the Air, wherein the Fowls and Birds do fly: Mat. 6.26 Heaven has
three significatio^s
Secondly, for the Firmament: And thirdly, for the Seat of the Angels, and
blessed Souls: Paradise: the Bosom of Abraham: the third Heavens, whereunto
the Apostle Paul was ravished. These three were made this day. God created a
fair Theater to himself this day, wherein there should be innumerable
Quiristers, near unto his Throne, of pure Seraphims, and Cherubims, every one
provoking other to his praise, and saying, Holy, Revel. 4.8.
holy, holy, LORD GOD Almighty, etc. And again, there are infinite Aeriall
Quiristers, who fill the ears of men with their pleasant Songs; by their
example provoking men to laud their Creator. And there is a Parpane, and
middle inter-stise, which is the sole and ground of his upper House, and the
Roof of his nether House, to cover the World, by an admirable manner.

I mark three things in the Creation of the Heavens: Three things observed.
First, the order which GOD uses in the making of them: for seeing Man was to
be made of an Heavenly Soul, and an Earthly Body, and was to dwell in
Heaven for ever, and on the Earth only for a little time; he makes the
Heaven first, If Heaven was first made, then seek it first.
setting it above the Earth, and making Man to bow vpwardes, and look unto it,
(and not downward toward the Earth, as the Beasts do,) being the place of his
abode, and perpetual remaining. The consideration whereof should make us to use
that same order in our actions, which God did in his. Albeit our bodies be on
the Earth, let our heart be in Heaven.
Let us put Heaven in our heart, before the Earth: let us look unto it, and
have our conversation in it: albeit our bodies be captiuate in the earth, let
our hearts be in our own Country, where we shall dwell for ever.

Next, God grounded the Heavens upon the second day, and perfected them upon
the fourth day. God works by degrees.
This is his common form, both in his Spiritual works, and in his natural:
he works by degrees: he lays the foundation of his benefit, and after he
finisheth it. Therefore, let us not hasten nor precipitate, but attend Gods
will, who will perfect our earthly and heavenly comfort in his own time.

Last, ye see he binds up the Clouds in the Air, that they cannot drown
the Earth; as he wards the Seas by the sands; By weak means God preserves
man.
to teach us, how God by these weak means does preserve Mankind. Which if
he do to his enemies, what should his Elect Children look for at his hands?

A PRAYER, Upon the LORDS second Days Work.
O Almighty GOD, Thou who created the Heavens the second day, inspire my
soul, I beseech three, with heavenly Meditations: enlarge mine heart, and
loose my tongue to thy praise. Ouer-shadow mine heart with thy grace, as thou
couerest the Eearth with the Heavens, that I may consider thy power and
goodness toward me in this thy workmanship.

Thou need not the Heavens, O Lord, for before the Heavens were, thou wast:
the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee: 1. King. 8.27.
but thou made them for me. Therefore, lift up my mind, by a spiritual
meditation, that with heart and mind I may seek for thee in them, and love
them for thee, who is in them. Thou dwell in a light inaccessable: I cannot
enter into thy Throne to see, but I prostrate my soul, before the gates of thy
grace, wrapped in the beggersie clouts of my sin, and at thy commandment I
knock. Long for Heaven, where thou may see God. Cant. 5.12.
Cast the crumms of thy mercy to me, that I faint not in this wilderness:
Look with the eyes of the Dove out of thine holy Temple, Hear the voice of
my prayer, and gather my tears into thy Bottle; who am in a strange country,
and so long absent from my Lord and Husband, who is now dwelling with thee.
Look forth at the grates of thy Fathers window, Cantic. 2.9.
O thou whom my soul loves: and cure the grief of mine heart, by thy
gracious countenance. Should we dwell sundry so fare, I here, thou in the
heavens? hasten thy coming in the Clouds, or hasten my departure, by death,
that I may enjoye the sight of him whom my soul loves. O Lord, the Heaven is
full of thy glory, when thou come out of thine Yourie Palaces, Psalm. 45.8.
and out of the most holy places, and show the signs of thy presence
amongst thy Saints: then the foundations of the Heavens shake: then the
innumerable legions of the Celestial Spirits raise up their voices, Psalm.
18.7.
sounding thy praises: they fill al thy Temple, and speak words which cannot
be expressed. Thine holy Army of twenty thousand thousands of Angels,
Revel. 7.4. and 9.
and of every Tribe of Israel twelve thousand, and of all the Nations under
the Heavens, innumerable thousands. Their voices are like the sound of the
Thunder, Rev. 14.2.
or as the noise of many Waters. O, our God, how glorious art thou in thine
holy Temple! O that Spiritual Music, and the Harpes of God, whereupon thy
Saints do play, both day and night. The twenty and four Elders, Rev. 7.14
and 15.
and the rest, who made their long Robes white in the blood of the Lamb; thou
leadest them to the pure Fountains of Waters: thou have wyped away all tears
from their eyes: They sing, Praise, Glory, and Wisdom; Thanks, Honor,
Power, and Might, be unto our GOD for evermore. The foundation of that City
is of precious Stones: The Jasper, the Saphyr, Rev. 21.19 20.21 and 27
and the Emarald; the Topaz, and the Hyacinth. The twelve Gates, are twelve
Pearls. The Street of the City, is pure Gold, as shyning Glass. There is
none unclean thing in that City: but those who are written in the Lambs
Book of Life.

O that Water of Life, Rev. 22.1.2.
clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God! There is the Tree of
Life, which bears twelve manner of Fruits, and rendereth Fruit every
Month. O! that is the true Land of CANAAN, Exodus 3.17
which flows with Milk and Honey, which is promised to the Elect Children.
O, how blessed are those who stand before thee, O Lord, 1. king. 8.8
and hear thee, and see the beauty of thine House! O, how amiable are thy
Tabernacles, O Lord God of Hosts! It is better to be a Doorekeeper in thine
House, than to be a Monarch of the whole World. Psalm. 84.1
As the Heart brayeth after the Rivers of Waters, Psalm. 42.1.
so does my soul pant after thee, my living Lord. O my GOD, when shall I
appear before thee in Sion? Now, my soul, return unto thy rest; for the
Lord will pity thee, and will deliver thee from this Prison, and from these
wild Beasts, which vex thee on every side, and from sin, which daily
troubles thee; and will bring thee to the sight and fruition of the Eternal
Joy, which is in the Heavens.

O glorious GOD, I have not yet seen the Heavens, where the Saints are, but in
the myrrour of the Gospel: But I see daily these vi^^ble creatures, and the
Firmament, NOTA. If there be such beauty in the outward part of the heavens,
what is within?
which are even the works of thine own hand. Then, if there be such beauty
in the outward parts of thy Palace, O LORD, what will we look for in thy
Gabinet?

O my GOD! as often as I behold these outward Heavens, then let mine heart and
inward affections be mounted up, by an holy desire and meditation; that the
eye of my soul may pierce through these thy visible works, even to the
company of my Brethren, the Firstborn, and to that innumerable number of
Angels and Saints.

Oh, be thou my Guide, O my LORD, and bring me through the perils of this
Wilderness, unto thine heavenly Palace, even for the merits and blood of
JESUS CHRIST, thy well-beloued Son, our Savior.

AMEN.
A MEDITATION, Upon the LORDS third Days Work.
IN the Creation of the third Day, there be two principal things to be
observed: First, The manner of the Creation, by separation of the Waters;
whereby were created two Elements, the Water, and the Earth. Next, The
Blessing of GOD.

Since there is no difficulty in the words, I will observe four things.

First, That so long as those two Elements were in the confused Chaos, so long
they were both unprofitable, and each one hindered other: but as soon as they
were separated, Confusion is unprofitable.
they were both fruitful: Even so is it yet, where Anarchie has place, either
in Church or Policy, there shall be no Blessing in neither of them: But
happy is that Church and Commonwealth, where all things are ruled by order,
and no place is left to confusion.

Gods blessing inricheth.
Next, the Earth was created barren. God spoke the word, and it fructified. If
this was the estate thereof before Sin, how much less now, being subject
to a curse, will it bring forth any good thing, without GODS Blessing?

God provided for his creatures before they were.
Thirdly, ye see that God blessed it with Corns, Trees, and Fruits, for the
sustenance of Man; and Grass for Beasts, before he made any of them. He
provides the Milk in the Breast of the Woman, as a lively fountain, before
the Child be borne. Then, if he was so provident before Man was made, will he
neglect us, Much more when they are.
when we are made to his own Image? Let us seek him truly, and doubt not.

Fourthlie, there is a treasure, which God has hidden in the Earth for Man;
Gold and Silver, to enrich him: Coals, Wood, and other firing, for his heat:
Stones for his Building, etc. and on the face of the Earth, Gods hidden
treasures should provoke us to thankfulness.
Corns, Herbs, Trees, Wines, Oils, and variety of crearures, both for his
pleasure and profit. When we behold daily these good benefits, let us be
drawn, by each one of them, to thankfulness of our Creator: Let us seek the
right use of them, that we spend them not upon sin.

Finally, by these earthly blessings, call to mind the spiritual Riches,
Seek spiritual riches.
and Food of our souls; that we may not labor for the food that perishes,
but for that Food which does endure for ever. John 6.27


A PRAYER, Upon the LORDS third Days Work.
Eternal God, and most loving Father, as thou increasedst this thy hudge
workmanship of the World, and have created the Earth upon this third Day; so I
beseech thee to increase thy Spirit within me, and create in my barren, cold,
and earthly heart, fruitful considerations, to thy Majesty's Glory.

O Lord, as thou preparedst in the second Day the Heavens, to be the City
of our remaining; so have thou ordained and established the Earth, to be the
place of our Pilgrimage and wandering: as the people of Israel were in the
Wilderness forty years before they came to the land of Promise. Similitude.
Yet, O Lord, the Earth is thine, and the fullness thereof. There is no
constant abiding to me in this Earth, I lodge here in tents: I wander now
here, now there: help me, poor Pilgrim, in this desert place, that I may
find thee a Pillar of Cloud in the day to cover me, Exodus 13.21.22.
and a Pillar of fire in the night, and darkness of this world, to illuminate
me, to see the way to Canaa^. Thou openedst a fountain to Hagar, the
Bondwoman, and her child, Genesis 21.19
when they were steruing for thirst. I am not the child of the Bondwoman, but
of the freewoman. Open the fountain of the House of David, and give me of the
water of life, and satisfy my soul with the fatness of thine house. Ezech.
13.1. John. 7.38 Psa. 39.12
I am a Stranger here on Earth, as my Fathers were before me. Let me not walk
then as a stranger among the Philistims, and Babilonians. If I were a citizen,
and a man of their own, Ioh. 15.19
they would love me: But because I am not of them, neither follow them, nor
their manners, therefore they hate me. My Mothers sons, and familiar friends
count me a stranger: they stand far from me, Psalm. 69.8
in the day of trouble. Draw thou nigh unto me, when they go far from me.
Job 19.14
Will thou leave a poor Suckling, to die him alone in this wilderness? Though
my Father and Mother forsake me, yet thou will gather me up. I am a Widow, for
my Lord and Husband is with thee. Psa. 27.10
I am his Turtle Dove, lamenting mine alone, till I see him. Bring me through
the straits of this Pilgrimage. Psalm. 42.7
I step out of one deep to another: I go through Fire and Water; carry me
therefore from strength to strength, Psalm. 84, 7
till I appear before God in Sion. There are here innumberable wild Beasts,
young Lions, and fyrie Serpents, to sting me: but I look to thy Jesus, that
Serpent of Brass, Men in danger of the serpents of this world. John 3.14 Of
the thornie cares of this world. Of the tentations of Satan: moving to
desperation, or presumption. Similitude. 2. Sam. 3.39.
who was erected upon the Tree of the Cross, that he might cure and remede me.
And again, I walk upon Thorns, even the thornie cares of this earth; every
morning mine heart is vexed and pricked with them. They unquiet me, so that
they disturb that peace which my soul should have with my God. And whiles I
am scarce fred of these thoughts, Satan, with the temptation of sin,
assaulteth me: he buffetteth me, he sets my sin in order before me,
and lets me see in a Glass my whole iniquities. O Lord, be mine helper,
my comforter, and a strong Tower unto me: for the sons of Zerviah are too
strong for me: but I will not fear them, if thou be with me. Thy Rod, and
Shepheardes Staff, Psalm. 23.4.
will comfort me, though I were walking through the shadow of darkness, and
in the valley of death.

But, O Lord, I have yet farther to complain, that when I have escaped these
stormy tempests, and waves, which invaded me upon the left hand, then Satan
rises up on my right hand, as an Angel of light, and takes me up to the
Mountain, and offers me Riches, Honors, Pleasures, etc. if I will walk
in his ways, and worship him; Luke 4.6.
as he did unto Christ Jesus. Lord, let me not taste of these Delicates, or
of the poysonable Cup of sin. Let me not be allured with the fruits of
sin, albeit they present-faire things. Let me not run as a foolish Fish
upon the alluring bait of unrighteousness. Similitude.
I am more contented through poverty, 2. Cor. 6.8.
and reproaches, through a good report, and an evil report, to walk in this
Earth in a good conscience, with thy favor, than to possess all the Treasures
of Babel, and to have the loss of thy countenance. Let the Earth be sour
unto me, that the Heavens may be sweet to me. Although the Earth smyle upon
me, vet it is but the smyle of mine enemy. But albeit thou would cast down
thy countenance upon me, yet it is the downe-looking of my Father, who will
gladden my soul at last.

O my God, thou have commanded the Earth (which of its own nature is dry and
barren) to yield Food for my necessity. Thou have commanded me to crave my
daily Bread at thine hand, with a promise, that if I ask, Mat. 6.11. Matt.
7.7.
it shall be given me. Therefore, O Father, give, I beseech thee, a blessing
to the Earth, and my labors therein, that I may prosper. Give me such a
measure of thy creatures, whereby I may not be chargeable, but rather helpful
unto others. Thou did feed thy People with the MANNA in the Desert, Ex.
16.13 and 17.6. 1. King. 17 4.9
and broughtest them the Water out of the Rock. Thou fedst Eliah by the Raven;
and likewise the Widow of Sareptah, by thy secret blessing O Lord of Hosts,
thou art no less careful of thy people whom thou have redeemed by thy Sons
blood, than thou wast of the seed of Abraham thy servant. Hos. 2.19
Send therefore, to the Earth the first rain. Marry me to thee in mercy and
compassion, that thou may hear the Heavens, and the Heavens may hear the
Earth, and the Earth may hear us thy people. Lord, let me take them out of
thine hands as tokens of thy favor, and earnest-pennies of better things
prepared for me in Heaven.

O Lord, the Earth is defiled with cruelties and filthiness, and casts up
horrible cries to thy Majesty, against the inhabitans thereof: it is ladened
with a burden of sinful creatures: Romans 8.23.
it lifts up its head, and cries and groaneth, as traueling with child,
waiting for the day of our redemption: for then it shall be delivered from the
burden. O Lord, take away the burden of sin from the Earth, and purge, by
thy blood, the transgressions of us thy people. Sanctify us, O Lord, that the
creatures may be sanctefied to our use, and we to thy seruie through Christ.

Thou have hid in the Earth thy great treasures of Gold, Silver, Iron,
Brass, and Coals, etc. and the world is set on fire in presute of those
things: yea, for Gold they will renounce their God; forswear their Father,
perish their soul, and their life, their King, country, and their Parents. O
Lord, this is a covetous people, whose heart is set upon these perishing and
uncertain things. But, O Lord, thou art better to me than thousands of Gold
and Silver. All say, Psalm. 119.72. Psalm. 4.6
Who will show us any good thing? but, Lord, lift up the light of thy
countenance upon me. Their treasures are hid in the depths of the Earth, and
they tread upon them: but thou, O my treasure, art hid in the height of the
Heavens. The Theife diggeth, Mar. 6.20
and the Roust does consume their treasures: but thou art incorruptible. Their
treasures are stolen from them; but nothing can separate thee from us; neither
death, nor life; neither things present, nor things to come. Romans 8.35.
Let mine heart be with thee, and where thou art; for thou art my treasure. Let
me find mercy with thee, Gen 33.11
and then I have all these things: for thy love is better than Gold. Thy
servant Solomon made choice thereof, 1. king. 3.9
and it was David's his fathers choice, who for love of thee craved one thing,
That he might dwell in thine House all the days of his life. Psalm. 27.4. Luke
10.42
And Marie, the sister of Martha, desired that one thing. Gold is not able to
save me from the Grave, but, my God, thou will raise me up at the last day.
What pleasure has man of Gold, when he dies? but he casts it away, and
calls himself a fool, that he should have taken pleasure in it: he bids
distribute to the Poor, whom he spoiled all his days. But when I die, then I
possess my treasure which I longed for: death which separateth me from the
Earth, conjoyneth me to thee, and fills up my joye, when I have received my
treasure. Further, O Lord, as thou have hidden these treasures under the Earth,
so thou have decored the face of the Earth with thy great blessings. O, when I
look under my feet, and behold every one of thy creatures, I see in them
thy power, and thy glory: yea, I see thou have appointed the Worm to beat
down my pride. In the basest creature may be seen Gods glory.
Thou have painted the face of the Earth with all sorts of colors, delectable
to the sight: yea, the Lilly passes the glory of Solomon. What Flowers for
the smell, Mat. 6.28
what Herbs, with such rare virtues, for the preservation of man? yea, there
is not the basest weed, wherein there is not enclosed some special virtue for
the maintenance of man's nature. All things on earth created for man's use.
Psalm. 105.16. Ibid. 104.15. NOTA.
The Corns are again brought forth, which are the staff of bread, to
strengthen him: and the wynes, which do glad man's heart: and the Oil, which
makes him to shine: the Figs, which are sweet to the taste. Then, Lord, if
thy creatures do yield such comforts to me, is there not much more
consolation in thee? Thou have given me a large portion of all these benefits,
which thou have withholden from others. Give me thy self with them, or else
take them all from me. Three things I do ask at thy Majesty: Three requests:
1.
first, let not these benefits which I receive daily become snares to me, to
draw me from thee. Give me no more of them than may further me to thy service.
When thou give me any new earthly gift, then presently with it give me a
new remembrance of thee; that it may be a Loue-token of my Lord, whereby I
may be kindeled to love thee the more. Next, I beseech thee, that whatsoever
earthly gift I get,

O Lord, let my Cup ouer-flow, and let not my left hand know what my right
hand does: psalm. 23.5. Matt. 6.3.
but as thou give liberrallie and freely, so with a free heart I may give to
thy Saints, who are of the Family of Faith. psalm. 16.3
Let me be a servant of them, and wash their feet. And seeing thou art wise
in the dispensation of thy benefits to me: sometimes thou will have me to
abound, and sometimes to want: in the one, to have a proof of thy liberality:
in the other, of thy chastisements, learn me in every estate to be content,
Pray for contentme^t.
and give me that heavenly benefit of contentation, the Note and Mark of
thy Children. And since I brought nothing into the world, Job 1.21.
I will carry nothing out of it. Give me Meat and Raiment with contentment.
And give me, thy poor creature, the assistance of thy principal Spirit: that
when I shall depart from these creatures, and they from me: even as thou
gave them unto me, so I may be heartily content: that I, by the separation
from them, may perfectly be united unto thee: for thou art my portion, my lot,
and everlasting inheritance. So be it.

A MEDITATION Upon the LORDS fourth Days Work.
GOD made the azury Heavens upon the second Day, and now he carueth them
upon the fourth Day, and decoreth them with a multitude of Celestial Lights,
as is wonderfulll to behold such glorious Tortches, so infinite in number, and
powerful in operation.

Notwithstanding Pharoahs daughter brought up Moses in the Sciences of the
Egyptians; (and namely, in Astronomy, as some Writers testify, wherein they
with the Caldeans were most curious:) Yet the Spirit of God, by his Pen, To
avoid curiosity.
describes the Stars simply, without any curiosity. Whereby God would
teach us to be wise, with sobriety, and search no deeper in these profound
actions of God, than it does please him to reveal unto us; or that may be to
his glory; lest through our deep searching, our wit be dazeled, and so befall
us as it did to the Astronomer, who in a Winter Night, searching the Stars,
fell into a Well, Similitude.
and died. He curiously seeking the knowledge of the Stars, forgot the Earth:
and so lost both Heaven and Earth.

In the TREATISE of the fourth Day, Moses first sets down the creation of
the Sun, Moon, and Stars. Next, the ends for which they were made, which
were three. First, for Dominion, the Sun should rule the Day, and the Moon
the Night. Secondly, for Distinction, that they might separate the Day from the
Night. And thirdly, to be significations, for signs and seasons.

First, he sets the Sun in his Tabernacle, who comes forth daily like
a Bridgroome, psalm. 19.5
or like a valiant man ready to run a race. God has put into the Sun such
beauty, and such wonderful operations, which are but sparks of that Majesty,
and wonderful operation and power which is in himself. The majesty which is
in the creatures, is but a spark of that which is in the Creator. Ezech. 8.16.
Ier. 7.18. 2. King. 23 5.
The admiration whereof made not only the ignorant Gentiles to adore them as
Gods, in consecrating the days of the week to the seven Planets: but also
the superstitious Jews did adore the Sun and Moon, as the King and Queen
of Heaven, and did maintain that they did wail, against Jeremy and Ezechiel.
I will speak first of the Sun, by Gods help, without curiosity, seeking
only out those things of him by which we may praise God. I observe then in him
three things: to wit, his qualities, his courses, and his defects.

His name is Sol, quasi solus, alone domining over the rest to whom he
imparteth his light. Sol, quasi solus.
And again, by the brightness of his appearance, he obscureth them all. 1.
The Sun gives light


Now, I would ye considered, that if a created Sun contains such measure
of light as illuminateth all the world, yea, the Heaven also, who will not
think but Jesus Christ, If one created Sun can give light to all, may not
Christ give light unto all?
who is God himself, Sol justitiae, the Sun of Righteousness, is able to
give life and light to all the world, without the help of the light of these
halfepennie Candles, the merits of men? For a thing imperfect, may be made more
perfect by addition, and augmentation; as one Candle by another: Similitude.
but a thing perfect is disgraced by addition, as if ye would bring a pot of
water to the Sea, or light a Candle to the Sun, Things perfect are disgraced
by addition.
or breath in the Air: So to augment or add any thing to him, is to dishonor
him, and pulls his glory from him, as though he were not sufficient. I am
the Lord (says he) and none besides me. And again, if the Stars dare not
appear before the Sun, what madness is it to present the filthy, and
menstruous clouts of men's merits before God, Job 4.18.
who did find folly in his Angels? and the Heaven it self is not clean
before him.

2. The Sun gives life.
The other quality of the Sun is hot, by which he reuiueth, quikneth, and
comfort all the inferior creatures, by his coming to the Earth in Summer.
Psalm. 19.6
By his removing they are, as it were, comfortless and dead. So Christ is both
the light and life of the world, by whom we have not only our natural being,
but also the life of our souls. I am the Way, the Life, and the Truth, John.
14.6
says he. So that without him there is nothing but death. Therefore, as we
see light and heat in the Sun, Light and heat together.
let us follow these two qualities of the Sun, that we have light and heat,
says and love. And as the High Priest carried in his Ephod his Vrim, Simil.
Ex. 28.30.
and his Thummim: that is, Illumination and Perfection: So should all
Christians have the true knowledge of God, and faith working by love.

As for the course of the Sun, he is in continual course, The course of the
Sun.
without interruption, since his creation, (But in the days of Joshua, when he
stood, and in the days of Ezekiah, Josh. 10.12 2. king. 20.2.
when he stayed his course, and came back ten degrees.) By which his constant
course, we are taught to run forward in that good race of Christianity,
without wearying: Learn at the Sun to run a constant course NOTA.
and we must stay never, except it be to see the exterminion of Gods enemies,
and turn back, unless it be from sin, to Gods obedience.

The course of the Sun is through the Zodiac, which deuydeth the
Aequinoctiall in two equal parts; the one half to the North, the other half
to the South, painted under the figures of Beasts the twelve signs
celestial, the Lion, Bull, Ram, etc. It is called Zodiac from the word
(...), What the Zodiac is
a Beast.

The Sun in his course passes monthly through one of these twelve signs,
whereby he compleateth his course in twelve months. He knows his appointed
times given him by God, Ps. 104.19
which he transgresses never. He arises daily in his proper time to give
light to us: let us then rise early out of the bed of sin, Simil. It rises
early let us rise early from sin.
that as he goes forward every hour of the day in light, so we may go
after him, to do the works of light, which God has commanded us. This way
made David his Progress at Morning, Noonetide, and at Even, and in the Night:
he arose with the Sun, and went forward, and when he sat, he ended with the
praising of God.

Ordinary defectes of the Son.
His defects are some ordinary, by the in^erposition of the Moon betwixt him
and the Earth; which are rare, and sometimes prodigious, presaging the
eclipsing, and death of some rare Prince: as the eclipse in the year of God
1596. presaged the death of the most Christian King HENRY the fourth of
FRANCE: HENRY, the Pearl of France. Prince Henry, of Britane.
and the eclipse of the Sun the year 1612. wherein that excellent Prince
HENRY, the Prince of Great BRITANE, the Pearl of the World, died, and was
removed, to all our griefs.

Some defectes are extraordinary, as that which was at the death of Christ,
for the space of three hours: Extraordinary defects.
of the which Dionysius Areopagita said, Aut Deus Naturae patitur, aut Mundi
machina dissolvitur: that is, Either the God of Nature is suffering, or else
the World is dissoluing.

The Moon is compared to the Church, as the Sun is to Christ. The Moon
This is a prodigious thing, when the Church, which should be the light of
the darksome world, she goes betwixt Christ and us, and hides his
beautiful face from us: the which truly the Church of Rome has done many
years. The Lord let her see, how she has been the cause of that great
Ignorance, wherein our forefathers were plunged for a long season: yea, she
still has a desire to nourish Darkness, and calls Ignorance the Mother of
Devotion.

The Moon is the other great light, but inferior to the Sun: first, in
place: secondly, in quality: thirdly, in light, because it has less light
than the Sun: and some do think, that she borrows her light from the
Sun. Fourthly, in honor, for she governs the Night, but not the Day. And
fifthly, in that the Sun is constant, she mutable: he hot, she cold: he
dry, and she moist.

As the Sun does represent Christ, so does the Moon the Church, which shines
in the dark night of this world, The comparation of the Moon, with the Church.
being ruled by Christ, who can rule and govern his Light. When the Moon is
in the point nearest the Sun, then her light is darkened, and hid from the
world, and she is in her change. NOTA.
But when she is farthest from the Sun, then she is in her greatest
perfection; The Moon the nearer the Sun, the lesser light: the Church the
nearer Christ, the greater.
far differing from Christ and his Church: For when the Church is nearest
Christ, then she shines in her perfect glory: and she decreasseth, when
she flies farthest off from him. But herein she resembles the Church, for
that part of the Moon which is toward the Sun, is ever illuminated, the rest
of her body being darkened: The Church as far as she looks to Christ, is
light.
so likewise the Church, so far as she looks to Christ, the Sun of
Righteousness, she is light in the Lord: but so far as she is turned from
him, she is nothing but darkness.

The Eclipse of the Moon happens when the Earth is interponed betwixt her
and the Sun. Eclipse of the Moon,
And so the Church of Christ (alace) suffers this Eclipse, when the earthly
cares of this life go betwixt Christ and her: whereby it does come to pass,
that the world is spoiled of light: as we see in the Romish Church, which was
so long glorious, as in her Martyrdom she contemned the world: but after, when
she enjoyed peace, and was promoted to honor and wealth, she became earthly
minded, and her Godliness was soon turned into Greediness.

The Stars.
As for the rest of the Stars, they are innumerable, and yet I will affirm,
that there is not one of them which is idle, but has a special use for which
it was created: For as in the Earth the Lord made nothing in vain; for he
saw, that whatsoever he did, it was good. Then, if it was good, Genesis 1.10.
it behooved to serve for some good use. So in the Heavens likewise he saw that
all was good.

Some fixed.
For the Stars, there be some fixed, as their name, Stella, a stando, bears.
So we should study to be fixed Stars in the right hand of CHRIST. Rev.
1.16 and 20.
Some of these are remarkable, whereof GOD himself speaks unto Job: as the
Hyades, Job 9.9.38 3.
Pletades, and Orion.

The Planets have their name from erring, for so (...) does signify: Some
Planets.
but each one of them has a several office, and compleateth his course in his
appointed time, as the Sun and Moon do, and have their particular
operations upon the inferior creatures.

As for the Comets, they take their name from (...), Comets.
which is called the hair, because they seem to carry as it were hair about
them: of whom Plinius makes mention in his second Book of his natural
history, and twenty five Chapter.

The ends of their creation. Simil.
As for the ends of their creation: First, the Sun was created to rule the
Day, and the Moon the Night. So this dark and blind world is ruled by the
light of Christ, and of his Church, which is illuminated and directed by him.
But I marvel how the Church of Rome can call her self the Sun, and the
Princes of the world the Moon: for if she be the Spouse of Christ, then must
she be the Moon, of whom is spoken in the Scripture, and Christ must be her
Sun. So, in comparison of her, the secular persons are the Earth.

I marvel likewise of these (against whom Jeremy and the rest of the Prophets
so often speaks) who think, that their life, and the events thereof, still
depend upon the Stars, or Plannets: which is a manifest idolatry, putting
them in Gods place. NOTA.


But let us learn that the superior creatures have so power over the
inferriour bodies, that we leave all the event of them to God, Against the
curiosity in searching our events. 1. Sam. 28.18.
the maker and guider of all: and let us seek his favor, and depend on his
providence, without any curious searching of our event, lest we receive the
answer of Saul.

A PRAYER, Upon the LORDS fourth Days Work.
GRACIOUS GOD, and merciful Father, who have filled the Heavens with such
infinite Lights upon this fourth Day, inlighten mine understanding, I beseech
thee, that I may see thy power, and thy glory, in these thy good creatures:
and through them, as through spectacles, let me look in to the Father of Lights.

Thou have created the Sun, who by his beauty and bounty has adorned the
whole Earth: As the Sun shines on the body, pray that Christ may shine on the
soul.
he arises each morning on my body; so I pray thee, that the Sun of
Righteousness, the Sun Jesus Christ, may shine upon my darkened mind every
day and hour, and chase away the clouds of ignorance, and of sin, from my
soul, that thou may shine brightly in me. Woe is me, my Lord, how many
times has the Sun shined upon me? and as Absalom before the Sun committed
wickedness; 2. Sam. 16 22.
so I before the Sun, in the pride of my wicked heart, have often times
sinned against thee, O my Father: and therefore I confess that I am not
worthy that the Sun should shine upon me. O Lord Jesus, spread thy Mantle
over me, that thy Father behold not my wickedness. Thou put light in the
Sun, that he may shine: therefore, Lord, put knowledge and understanding in
me. Thou have put hotnesse in the Sun: Oh, warm mine heart with thy love;
that through the love I bear to thee, I may also break forth in the love of
my Neighbors. And as the Sun runs constantly in his course at thy
commandment; so, Lord, let me run all my days in the path of thy Law: for
hitherto I have run as a wild Ass, in the broad way of destruction: yea, I
brayed after the desires of sin, psalm. 42.1.
as the Heart does after the Rivers of Waters: and nothing could have satisfied
me, unless I had obtained my sinful desire.

Now, Lord, have mercy upon me: draw my feet out of the unhappy way of sin,
and let me run with as speedy a course in the way of thy service; Let us be
more dilligent to serve God, than we were before to sin against him.
that as Saint Paul thy servant was more diligent in thy employment, than he
was in the destruction of thy Church, so I may be more busied in thy honorable
service, than I was in serving mine own affections, and in the service of
Satan. Alace, O Lord, how slow am I to do thy service? But if thou will
draw me, I will run after thee. Oh, draw me by the Cords of thy love:
Cantic. 1.3
yea, rather than I should lie behind, force me with the Cords and Whippes
of thy visitation; that I may learn to run a quicker and swifter pace than I
have done heretofore. But alace, NOTA.
that the Sun, which is a senseless creature, should never be weary; and
that I should so soon be tired in serving of thee. The Sun constant in its
course.
O loving Father, stir up a constant zeal of thine honor in mine heart, I
beseech thee; that as I go forward in years, so I may make greater progress
in godliness.

O LORD, when I see the Sun and the Moon, and the Stars, etc. which are
the works of thine own hands, O, then I think with my self, What is Man,
that thou should visit him? or the son of man, that thou should
magnify him? For albeit the Sun were in the highest top of its beauty and
glory, yet it is but my servant, and likewise the Moon, The Sun serves us:
let us serve GOD.
and the Stars. Then fie upon me, if I shall not, in whatsoever estate I am,
serve thee, O my gracious God, who have made so glorious creatures for my use.

LORD, I pray thee, let my light so shine before men, that all who behold my
conversation may take occasion to glorify thine holy Name.

O Father of Lights, lighten thou my Candle, that it may shine clearelie; and
furnish it with the Oil of thine holy Spirit and Word, that it may shine
even as a bright Morning Star in thy Kingdom. Thy servant Paul, O Lord, 1.
Cor. 15.41.
says, that there is one glory of the Sun, and another of the Moon, and
another of the Stars. It is true, there is great diversity amongst the
Saints here on Earth, and likewise great difference of glory in the Life to
come: But, O my God, let me shine but as the least of thy Stars, that I may
be fixed in thy Firmament, and give out my light of knowledge and good life
unto this dark Age.

The Moon knows the time of her change; and as she changes, so do all the
inferior creatures with her: for all men are grass, and there is no steadfast
abiding for them here. But, O Lord, herein is my comfort, The Moon changes,
but God can not change. Ps. 90.^.6 Psalm. 90.2. Luke, 1.5.
that there is no shadow of changing with thee: Thou art from everlasting to
everlasting: yea, my God, thy kindness and truth, abides from generation to
generation, even unto such as fear thee, and attend upon thy mercies and
goodness.

O unchangeable God, I find none alteration with thee: for although men run
far from me, yea, albeit mine own kinsmen stand aloof, and my father and
my mother forsake me; yet thou, O Lord, drawest near unto me, and
immediately make me feel thine help at hand, in my greatest tribulations.

O Lord, suffer me never to change from thee: but give me thy constant
Spirit, I beseech thee; that in all the cares of my life, both in wealth and in
woe, I may depend upon thee, serve thee, and rejoice in thee, the only
comfort of my soul; that I be not like a wandering Planet, but a fixed
Star, honoring thine holy Name in this Wilderness, that afterward I may
shine with the rest of thy glorious Stars and holy Angels in the eternal
Firmament of thy Kingdom.

Amen.
A MEDITATION, Upon the LORDS fifth Days Work.
THE Element of Water, which God created on the fifth Day, produces unto us
two Treasures: The one, which fills the Seas with Fishes: the other
plenisheth the Air with Birds and Fowls: for the Lord would leave nothing
empty. ^is^es necessary for our nature.


As for the Fishes, we know how necessary they are for our nature, and
constitution of our body, which of a part is humide. The providence of God, in
sending ^ishes to Scotland in dve season.
God has furnished this Nation with such abundance of Fishes, that they have
obtained the names of Schools, and Droues: he sends them in the mouth of
Harvest in our Seas, both East and West, in such abundance, that they may
feed the poor Laborers in cutting down their Corns. Such is his rich
dispensation in due time for the comfort of his people.

Daintiness of some, who contemn fish.
How much are they to be blamed, who for delicateness of their bellies do
contemn these good creatures, which God thought so necessary for their
nature? And herefore the Laws of our Realm are better made than practiced,
whrein days are appointed, and days are forbidden for the eating of Fish,
which men will violate, under the color of Conscience, because all Meats are
free.

I grant, the difference of Meats is taken away by Christ, but thou must not
use thy liberty to the prejudice of thy Brother, and the whole Country: yea,
to offend the Prince, who gave not out that Law to strain thy Conscience, but
for the benefit of his Subjects, whom to offend were great Conscience in so
lawful commandments.

As for the superstitious difference for Conscience, as though one were holier
than another: Superstitious differencie in Meats. Heb. 13.4. Psalm. 107.23. Gods
power seen in the Seas.
that is the work of Antichrist, who bids abstain from Meats which God
has created: and forbids to marry, which God has said is honorable
amongst all.

Further, they who go down to the Sea, have experience of Gods power, to
deliver them from the stormy waves thereof; where they should call to mind
how often they have raised up the waves of their sin against God, and beseech him
to assuage his wrath against their sins: that he who has power over the
Winds and Waters, may rebuke them with the word of his mouth. Mat. 8.27


If thou be sailing in the Disciples Boat, Comfort to Seafaring men in
tempests. Matthew. 14.23.
and be a true member of his body, remember Christ is in the mountain of
Heaven; look up to him with apenitent eye of a sinner, and he will look unto
thee with a pitiful eye of a Savior, and will pray to his Father for thine
help. The Fishes come not to the Nets, but by Gods direction. The Apostles
were fishing all night, but received nothing, till Christ came, and then they
drew out their Nets full, to them and their partners. Luke 5.5. John 23.1
Therefore, it is in vain to rise early, except the Lord build thine house,
Psalm. 127.1.2.
and bless thy work. Herefore, whether we be on Sea or Land, let us ever
study to get Gods blessing.

Further, God declares his power, not only in creating Fishes for our
necessity and pleasure, which we have daily, but also in creating Fishes both
for quantity, as the Leuiathan, (of whom Job speaks) and in quality, Job
40.20 21.22. etc. Plin. lib. 32 cap. 1
miraculous, as Echeyneris, or Remora, so called from her virtue, who being
three foot long, will cleave to a great Ship, and hinder her to sail. And
again, the Mare-maides, Maremaids
whose face and upper parts are like a Woman's, and the nether parts like a
Fish. Many other might be brought in, which I omit, affirming this, that the
Lord is marvelous in all his works.

Finally, Allegory of the Sea. Mat. 4.19.
the Allegory which our Savior brings in of the fishing, is remarkable: The
Sea is the world: the surges of waves and winds are the tentations of the
Devil and his children: the Fishes are Men, who go through the world: the
Boat is the Church: the Fishers are the Apostles and Ministers, who should be
fishers of men, who must spread forth the Net of the Gospel in the
turbulent Sea. of this world, albeit with great hazard and perrill, to draw men
from the Sea of this life, to the kingdom of Heaven. They are called
Piscatores hominum, Fishers of men: Matthew. 4.
and they are sent to seek men, and fish after the souls of men.

As for the Fowls of the Air, Fowls.
they are infinite in number, and there is such variety in their colors, which
is admirable, with such heavenly notes and harmonies, as their celestial
Music should provoke us all to the praise of God, when the Birds do after
their manner praise him.

The Peacoke is glorious in his colors, Job 39.16 and 17.
and he scorneth the glory of Kings. The Ostridge an unnatural Foul, like
unto unnatural Mothers. The Dove is full of love and simplicity, Matthew. 13.16.
which we should imitate. The Turtle a pattern of chastity, the contrary
whereof she condemns in us. The Eagle full of rapine, Job 39.33 Matthew. 10.29.
Ierem. 7.8.
which we should flee. The Sparow is an example of Gods providence; who will
much more care for man. The Storke and the Swallow know their times, which we
do not; neither can we find that time wherein we should turn from our
wandering. The Swallow brings up her little ones near unto the House of God,
Psalm. 83.3.
and we flee from it: yea, and the young Ravens seek their meat at God, who
gives it them in due season. So all these Fowls praise God, some by their
voices, and some by their example. Let us learn at the Birds to praise God.
Let us then be ashamed, to be inferior to them, certifying our selves, that
these same, if we do it not, shall be witnesses against us at the last day.

A PRAYER, Upon the LORDS Fifth Days Work.
HEarken unto my Prayer, I beseech thee, O mine heavenly Father, and most
merciful God: Oh, I entreat thine heavenly Majesty, that thou will be
merciful unto me, and forgive me all mine ouertreadinges. Great and many are
thy benefires, O Lord, and I have been a great abuser of the same. Thou did
make the Light upon the first Day, and I have abused it: yea, when thou sent
me a better Light for my soul, I continued still in the works of darkness.
Thou upon the second Day, did create the Heavens; but I have sinned against
the Heavens, Luk 15.18
and against thee, and am not worthy to look vpwardes. Thou did make the
Earth upon the third Day; but I am an unprofitable burden unto it. Thou did
make the Sun and Moon upon the fourth Day, to shine; but whilst they were
sh^ning, I was sinning: as though those glorious Vessels were appointed to
carry light to let me see to commit iniquity. And now upon the firth Day,
thou furnishest two extraordinary great Commodities for man's use: the Sea is
prepared with Fishes, and the Air with Fowls and Birds unto my necessity. O
Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them: all the
Earth is full of thy Riches: thou have commanded the Sea to give me Fishes,
and the Air Fowls: thou have put life into them, and they are appointed to
die for the maintenance of my life. God lets his creaturs die, that we may
live.
Is not then my life precious unto thee, who make so many to die, that I may
live? But I am not only fed with them, but am the price of thy Sons Blood.
O Lord, what am I, that thou should have made them al to die, that I might
live? Then, I beseech thee, let my life serve to thine honor: yea, if my death
might honor thee, I desire to live no longer. Thou give me daily Fishes out
of the Seas, and out of the R^uers. Many are steruing with Hunger, and yet
thou feedest me. Oh, forgive me, that sometimes I have loathed those thy good
creatures: and abstract them not from me, although I have contemned them
heretofore.

O Lord, what proves of thy delivery have I had! Thou broughtest me to the
Haven, and I forgot the Vows which I promised unto thee in the bitterness of
mine heart. Now, Lord, I praise thee for thy notable deliueries whereby thou
have kept me: and henceforth let me not do what I will, but what thou will;
and command me as long as I live. Thou might have made me a bait, and
food for the Fishes; but yet thou have made them food for me. Let it be, O
God, to thy glory, and for the good of thy people: for thou sendest them to
the Net of thy providence. Let me therefore depend upon thee. I cast me over
upon the knees of thy favor. The Lion shall be hungry, Ps. 34.10.
but those that fear thee shall lack nothing which is good for them. Oh, that
if I could be allured, by these thy louetokens, to praise thee aright, and that
I might be stirred up unto a duty to the Poor, who are in necessity. O
liberal God, why should I receive so abundantly, and give back so
niggardly, and sparingly? Open and enlarge mine heart, O Lord, Psalm. 119.
that mine hand may distribute these thy creatures to the hungry, poor, and
needy, as a sure token which thou requirest of my thankfulness toward thee.

Faithful Fishers.
O Lord, send forth unto the Sea of this World faithful Fishers, who may
draw many souls from it unto thine heavenly kingdom. Purge thine holy
Church, O God, from all Hyrelinges, and such as are not fishers of men.

And again, O Lord, as thou have prepared the Fishes in the Seas for my
sustenance, so have thou likewise commanded the Air to furnish all manner of
feathered Fowls to my use: Therefore I give thee thanks, with my whole heart,
that thou sacrificest thy creatures out of al places for me: beseeching thee
that I may sacrifice the corruptions of my nature. Further, O Lord, I learn by
the Fowls, that they fly in the Firmament, but they feed on the earth. Simil.
Lord, howsoever that I must seek my food here, yet let my conversation be in
the Heavens. When that in the Summer I hear the sweet voice of these Birds,
which by their Angelical Harmony may justly be called the Ministers of
Music, I beseech thee to have mercy upon me, thy poor creature, and open my
Lips, and loose my Tongue, that I may sound forth thy praises: and that by
these thy creatures I may still find new prouocations to be stirred up to
proclaim thy goodness: that I being initiate, and entered into thy praise
here, may glorify thee eternally in Heaven, through Christ my Lord and
Savior.

Amen.
A MEDITATION Upon the LORDS Sixth Days Work.
Upon the sixth Day the LORD opens the Earth, and makes it to bring forth
his Treasures, and brings forth Beasts of all sorts for Man's use: and last
of all he made Man.

Gods power out of the dead Earth brings Man and Beast.
First, ye see the power of the word of God, which of that dead and cold
body of ehe Earth, brought forth so many living creatures which were not
before. This is a great Argument for the affirmance of the resurrection of our
dead bodies: Argument, for the resurrection of the body.
for if he brought out of the bosom of the Earth, and gave life which was
not, how easy is it then for him to raise out of the Earth the bodies which
were living? and to cause the Sea, the Air, and the Earth, render an account
of the Bodies consumed in them?

The Lord created Kyne, and Sheep for his Raiment, the Oxen to labor his
Ground, and the Horses for Carriage: yea, and the Worm to decore him with
Silk. As for the Lion, and other wild Beasts, which are enemies to Man, it
is to be understood, that it was not so at the beginning: for at the first
the Lion, the Tiger, etc. were as obedient to Man as the Lamb: Sin has
ina^med Man aganst God, and the Beasts aganst Man. 1. King. 13 24. 2. King.
2.23. Nota. Creeping things not created in vain. Exodus 8.6.
but (alace) sin stirred up, and inarmed Man against God, and the Beasts
against Man: as the Lion against the young Prophet, and the Bears against the
young Children which mocked Elisha. Therefore, when we get any injury by the
creatures, let us call to mind that it is for our sins, and study to be
reconciled to our Creator.

As for the innumerable creeping things, let us not think that God has
created them in vain; for he has used them as great Hosts to punish his
adversaries whenever he pleased: as the Frogs for Pharaoh, and the little
Vermin for Herod: yea, Act. 12.23.
the Worms to sease upon the Bodies of all Flesh, which (although never so
daintilie fed) must be a Prey unto them.

And again, Men are compared to Beasies, whose nature is beastly. Psalm. 10.9.
Psa. 17.12 Psa. 22.12 13.16.20.21. etc. Isa. 56.10.11. Genesis 49.14 16.
let us remember that Men are often times in the Scripture compared unto
diverse Beasts, and get the names of such Beasts whose fashions and
conditions they are most addicted to follow: They are called Lions, Ravens,
Bears, Bulls of Dashan, Swyne, Dogs, Vipers, etc. The covetous Pastors are
called dumb and greedy Dogs, who cannot bark, and never are satisfied:
Issachar is compared unto a wild Ass, which concheth betwixt two Burdens: and
Dan unto a Serpent, (and there are many of the Trybe of Dan) which byteth the
Horse heels and the ryder also. And albeit there be many (Adulterers and
Murderers) of the Trybe of Dan which shall enter into Heaven, yet the
Serpent-kynde of the Trybe of Dan shall not come there. Plinius says, that
there are three kinds of Serpents, One which kills all Strangers, and
spares Country folks: Plin. lib. 8. cap. 59.
another which kills Country folks, and spares Strangers: and the third
which spares none of them: and there are people of all these sorts.

But I mark one thing in the Serpent, wherein it differs in cruelty from
all other Beasts: A remarkable mark of the Serpit against Man.
for the Lion and Wolf seek after Men's Blood, for the love of the Blood
whereupon they feed: but the Serpent, which feeds upon the Dust, out of an
hateful desire of natural revenge, thirsts after Man's Blood, albeeit it
gets none other gain thereby but only the satisfaction of her cruel
mind: representing many deuilish and serpent-like people, Nota.
who albeit they get none other commodity by the destruction of godly
persons, yet they hold their selves satisfied that they have gotten the
malicious intent of their wicked hearts brought to pass.

Man (of grea^est price) is made last.
Now, when the Lord had furnished his House with store of al good things, as a
loving and careful Father, he builded an House to his Son, and he ^illed it
with all plenishing, Simil.
and then he puts his Son into it, as God placed Man. He makes Man with
aduisement: Let us make Man, said the Father to the Son, and to the Spirit.
Genesis 1.26.
For this aduisement tells us, that the Creation of Man is more than the
Creation of the whole World: for Man is called a little World, because in him
is comprehended a world of wonders, in his Body and Soul (...). When he
says, To our Image, then he clearlie designeth the Trinity of the persons,
Trinity.
by the word plural. And when he says Image, in the singular, Unity.
then he notes the Unity of the substance.

The Image of GOD stands not in the bodily representation, Wherein Gods
Image stands. Isa. 40.18.20. etc.
but in the gifts of the mind: therefore, it is a gross Idolatry for
Christians who know God to be an infinite Spirit, to close him within the
compass of a finite Image, or to picture him with colors, who is capable of
no quality, Levit. 26.1
and which he himself discharges by his Laws. For his Image stands in
Righteousness and Holiness, Mercy and Love.

GOD made Man and Beast of one substance, The substance whereof we are made
should teach us humility.
even to teach us humility: and if we had not souls we differ very little
from Beasts. But the power of God appeared so much the more, who could produce
out of so base a Subject such a glorious Workmanship: As the cunning of the
Artificer is much more admired, Simil.
who out of a base matter can work fynelie, than of a strong Metal. Then
Man's body being so artificially made, he breathed in him an heavenly
substance, which is a spirit, as God is, who can neither be seen nor felt.

As the Heavens are more excellent than the Earth, The wonderful vnio^ betwixt
the Soul and the Body.
and could work without it, which the Earth could not do without the Heavens;
so can the Soul without the Body, praise God, as it does in Heaven, which
the Body could not do without the Soul: In this life they have mutual
operations: the Soul directs, and the Body is directed: the Body is blind
without the Soul, and the Soul would be creeple without the Body. Let the
Soul therefore command the Body in those things which are lawful, and let
the Body obey the good direction of the Soul: which both being made up to the
Image of GOD, they may represent Him in all their actions.

A PRAYER, Upon the LORDS sixth Days Work.
O Lord God, Father of Mercies, and God of all consolation, look down upon
me, I beseech thee, with the Eyes of thy mercy: and sithence thou have
created Man upon the sixth Day, create mine heart anewe, and anoint it with a
fresh remenberance of thy power and goodness, that I may become a new
creature. Upon the fifth day thou plenishedst the Air with Birds, and the Sea
with Fishes innumerable, Genes. 1.21
and now the Earth yields all sorts of Beasts likewise even to man's use:
and they are brought under subjectio^, that I might be free: they lay down
their lives for me, that I may live by them: and albeit both I and they be
made of one substance, yet thou have preferred me above them all, and have put
them under my feet, Psalm. 8.6.
so dear am I unto thee. I thank thee, O Lord, that thou of thine undeserved
mercy and love have made thy choice of me: Nota. God made choice of ^s, let
us therefore make choice of God. Genes. 2.20
Oh, Lord, cause me to make mine only choice of thee. Amongst thy creatures
there is none like unto thee. Adam could not find one equal to himself
amongst all thy creatures, till out of himself thou made one like unto
himself.

O Lord, there is nothing in Heaven nor in the Earth can satisfy my soul:
thou art the perfection of beauty: thou have given me the rest, give me thy
self, without whom neither the creatures visible, nor invisible, will content
me. Yet seeing it pleases thee, that they should be appointed to feed,
cloathe, and ease me, make me the more able by them to go forward in thy
service: let not that malediction and curse fall upon me, Let us beware, that
we fight not against the Lord with his own benefits.
that I should fight against the God of my life with his own benefits, to whom
I am so infinitely oblished for his gracious gifts bestowed on me.

O Lord, I have received some new comfort in the day of my trial, when for my
humiliation it pleases thee to punish me with poverty, then Satan bids me
turn the stones into bread (as he did unto Christ) and seek unlawful means
for my relief: But, Matthew. 4.3
Lord, augment thou my faith, and let me depend upon thy promises, that I may
build upon them, as upon a sure Hold, and speak boldly with thy servant
David, The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. Psalm. 23.1.
No Prince of the Earth can say this word: Nota.
but a poor christian depending upon thee may say it.

O Lord, thou have appointed thy creatures to labor for me: then seeing I am
eased by them, make me to go forward more busily in thy service, that they
may bear me in all my journeyes to glorify thee; and not carry me to sin,
Numb. 22.21.
with Baalam the son of Beor, who caused Israel to sin. And as thou have
appointed the Beasts for my commodity, so through my sin thou have inarmed
thy creatures aganst me: for now the Earth brings forth as many enemies as
friends unto me: For the wild Beasts do multiply, as our sin grows,
which destroys both Man and Beast: and the Corns, and Fruits, before our
eyes are consumed by thy great Host. The residue of the Palme-worme the
Canker-worme has eaten; Joel 1.4.
and the residue of the Canker-worme the Grasshopper has eaten. O Lord, waken
us in mercy out of the bed of sin, that being reconciled to thee, thou
may rebuke thy great Host, and drown them in the Sea.

Further, O Lord, when I consider how thou made me little less than an
Angel, Psalm. 8.5.
and crownedst me with honor and glory, and yet I am become like a Beast in
my sensualities and pleasures: Yea, oftentimes like a Swine I return to the
puddle of sin, from which I was cleansed. Wash me, O Lord, thoroughly from an
evil conscience. Many are like Bulls, Lions, and Bears, in this Wilderness
where I dwell. O blessed God, thou have rescued me from the claws of the
Bear, and the paw of the Lion, 1. Sam. 17.34. Psalm. 23.2.4.
as David did his Fathers Sheep. O Lord, thou art my shepherd: when I feel
my self near lost, thy Staff will deliver me: Therefore will I sacrifice to
thee my body and my life: for thou art the God of my salvation, mine hope,
mine help, my Savior, and my God. O Lord, Matthew. 12 34.
this is a generation of Vipers, and unnatural people: they have recompensed
me evil for good. Alace, as I have done to thee, so have they done to me. Nota.
I requite thy kindness with unkindness; and thy benignities, with mine
iniquities. But pity, O pity me, I will do so no more. Let my ways please
thee, O Lord, let my soul be thankful unto thee: that thou may tame those
Wild Beasts, and make them friendly unto me.

Now seeing thou have made my body and soul this sixth day, grant that all
the days of my life I may glorify thee in them both, that while they are
together in this world, every one may provoke other to serve thee; Let Soul
and Body provoke one another to Gods service.
my soul may be commanded by thee, and so may direct my body aright, and my
body may be obedient to the directions of thine holy Spirit, that so I may use
all thy creatures to the glory of thine holy Name: that when it shall please
thee to divide them, then I may render my body to the dust, whereof it was
made, and my soul to thee, of whom it was created, waiting when they shall
meet and be united together again at the last day, to praise and glorify
thee for evermore. Amen.

A MEDITATION UPON THE SEVENTH DAY, Upon the which the Lord rested from all
the Works which He had made. Genes. 2.2.

We have taken a view of the first six days, wherein we have seen the
wonderful works of GOD in the creation of the whole World, and all things
therein: And now we come to the seventh Day, which is the sweet day of our
Lords rest, wherein he ceased from any new creation, but by his providence
sustained those things which he had made. By this his example he instituted
one Day only to be celebrated as a Sabbath to the end of the world.

This Day ought to be had in an honorable regard, as Augustine observes in
his 154. Sermon. de temp. Tom. 10. in these words, Venerabilis est hic dies qui
Dominicus dicitur, etc. that is to say, This day which is called the Lords
day, is venerable: on the which the Light was first seen: Genes. 1.3. Exodus
14.22. Ibid. 16.15 Mat. 3.13 John 2.1. Luke 9.17 Ioh. 20.1. and 20.26
2. The people of Israel passed through the red Sea: 3. Manna rained in the
Desert: 4. The Lord was baptized in Iordane: 5. Christ turned Water into Wine
in Canah of Galilee: 6. Christ fed five thousand people with five Loaves: 7.
Our Lord arose from death: 8. Entered through the close Doors where the
Disciples were gathered for fear of the Jews: Act. 2.1.
9. The holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles, etc. and on which Day we look
for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ to judgment, when as the Church shall
be reformed to a Light seuenfolde greater than the Sun and Moon, etc.

This is a Day, not an Hour: not of Idleness, but of Rest: Nota.
not unto our selves, but to the Lord: not for a time, but for ever.

God craves a whole Day, which consists of all the parts, Morning,
Noonetyde, and Evening. The whole Sabbath is to be sanctified.
So it is a very gross abuse to part or divide the Lords Day at our own
pleasure. We give the beginning of this Day to sleep, and many (Craftesmen
without conscience) to work: the mid-time of the day (perhaps) to the service
of the Church: and the afternoon to Drink or Pastime: even as though God had
not right and title to the whole Day, who commands it by his Precepts, and
commends it by his own example, as we have shown before.

But seeing ignorant people, and (I am the more sorry) even those who would
have some appearant show of knowledge, do object, saying, How shall they
spend the Sabbath? they have kept Church-time: what shall they do afternoon?
it were better for them to play than to drink: so that they think Plays to
be lawful at afternoon, and that upon the Sabbath.

First, I answer, that to use any sort of playing, gaming, or pastime upon
the Lords day, An answer unto those who ask how they should bestow the
Sabbath.
is altogether unlawful: for upon this day especially we have to do with
God, in a serious and earnest matter, which business will chase away all
follies and wantonness, and bring us into a due consideration how we may
attain unto a reconciliation with our God, for our manifold sins, wherewith
we have so often and hainouslie provoked him unto wrath against us.

How the Sabbath should be spent.
But I will more peremptorily answer to their demand, What they should do?
First, for the morning of the day, rise early, and pray, confessing the sins
of the week bygone, and prepare thy heart to receive the word of God, as thou
would prepare the ground in breaking it up, Simil.
before thou would cast seed into it. In the midday hear the word, and
sing praise to the blessed Trinity. Blessed is the man who delights in the
law of the Lord. Psaelm. 1.2
And last, at afternoon, meditate upon the word which thou have heard, and
harow the ground by conference: and visit the sick: break thy Bread to the
hungry, and thou shall find such infinite occasions of spiritual exercises
upon the Sabbath, that thou have no need to spend it ydlie for lack of
better exercise.

Great differance betwixt Rest and Ydlenes
But it is to be understood, that there is a great difference betwixt Rest and
Idleness: for idleness is ever taken in an evil part, and is the
foster-mother of all sin, and there is no day in the week, wherein God has
permitted it: Six days shall thou labor, says the Lod. Exodus 20.9 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
And the Apostle Paul discharges to give food to those who work not. But
Rest is ever taken in a good sense, when we are commanded to cease from one
sort of exercise, that we may be occupied in a better: for the thornie cares of
this world will impede devotion: therefore God willl that we lay them aside for
a while, to the end we may the better wait and attend upon Gods divine
Service. Whereupon upon it follows necessarily, that the Sabbath is not only
abused by such as work their earthly business thereon, but also by such as
cease in body, and their minds and mouths are filled with worldly affairs.
Then this Rest consists in two things, ceasing, and working, and must be the
most diligent day in the whole week, Spiritual rest.
both in regard of the soul that has her principal operation that day, and
the end of her labor, which is God, and his kingdom, which only we should
seek that day.

This Rest must be total, and not partly; The Sabbath days rest must be
total, and not parted.
for the so^le, and all the faculties thereof, and the body with her members,
must be put to work for Gods glory. We must not employ our cogitations to
think upon these earthly things: Have not our minds been worn as Milstones,
grinding gain to the world these days bygone? The Beast cares but for things
present, Simil.
but thy care has been for things to come: thou will serve God this day with
thy mouth, and thy god Mammon with thy mind. God esteems and judges thy
service from the inward disposition of thine heart, as he does all things:
for he looks not as man does. God judges of man by his heart 1. Sam. 16.7.
If with thy heart thou drawest near unto him, then thou have observed his
Sabbath: for the heart will carry thy body, which the body cannot: for thy
soul will go where she pleases, albeit the body be in the Temple of God.

Next, upon the Sabbath it is required that our hearts and affections be
spirituallie disposed, with a delight and pleasure in the Lord. Heerefore the
Lord craves by his Prophet that his Sabbath should be a day of delight: Isa.
58.13
for there is none action which a man inte^deth with hope of gain or pleasure,
albeit it be painful, that he has not delight into; but specially in the
works of sin, which Satan baiteth with wonderful delights. If we have taken
such pleasure in the service of sin, whose end is death, shall we not
rejoice when we go to the house of our God? seeing only that service which is
done with joy of the heart on the Sabbath is acceptable to God, and profitable
to thy soul?

What shall we think of such Recusants who will not hear the voice of their
Bridegroom, Recusants damned, and such as for fear come to the Church. Simil.
neither will come to the Sanctuary of God? or of such who for fear of laws,
for shame, or custom do come? I will compare them to a shrewde wife, married
to an Husband, who refuses to him cohabitation, and if sometime she be
enforced to come to his society, she signifies by her countenance and outward
behavior, that her heart is not with him, and therefore is not worthy that he
should delight in her.

As also those Christians, of whatsoever estate they be, which use their games
and pastymes on the Sabbath, Gamesters rebuked.
whether in the house or in open, albeit the one is more offe^siue tha^ the
other, yet in themselves they are both sinful: for in so doing they declare
how little delight they have in things which are better. 1. King. 3.24. Simil.
Then ye would cut the child in twain, as the whore would have done: but the
Lord, to whom the Sabbath belongs, says, Either give me the whole day, or
take it all to thy self. The Lord, is the Lord of the Sabbath: it is his own
day, the rest he has given to thee: take of thy six days, and rob not him
of his one. As the Rod of Aaron swallowed up the Rod of the inchanters of
Egypt, Simil. Exodus 7.12
so let the delight of God devour all other pleasures.

And as we must make conscience of our thoughts, and all actions, so we must
beware of idle speeches on his Sabbath: Idle speeches on the Sabbath.
for if the tongue be a most noble member, when should it be occupied in his
service, if not on the day of his rest? will not thy tongue find in that
infinite God, Nota.
infinite matter of speech, of the proofs which thou have had of his power,
favor, wisdom, justice, patience, etc? that thou need not for lack of
spiritual purpose to talk ydlie. Besides that, his word is an Ocean of
matter, furnishing thy tongue so well to sing his praises. And so on the Lords
day let us speak the language of Canaan. Further, Isa. 19.18.
we must not go our own ways, or do our will: the way which he has
prescribed us to go, is to his House, and to visit the sick and indigent: and
not to go make our merchandise upon this day. The people of Israel went out to
seek Manna upon the sabbath, Exodus 16.27.
but they found nothing: neither shall our Sabbath erra^ds find any benediction.
So on the Lords Sabbath let our minds, and our members, On the Sabbath let all
our members be occupied in Gods service.
cease from the world, and much more from sin, that we may meditate upon the
Law of God. Our eyes may behold his works and glorify him in them: our ears
may hear his word: our tongue may proclaim his praise: our knees may bow
down, and worship him: we may lift up our hands to heaven: our feet may go
to his house: so all may concur in his majesty's Sabbath to his honor. The
promise which God gives, if we observe it, is, That we shall mount up to the
high places of the earth: Isa. 58.14.
(this is temporal:) and he will feed us with the heritage of Jacob our
father: (this is spiritual.)

Godliness then has the promise of this life, and the life to come:
Godliness has a twofolde promise.
for there is no doubt, but the diligent service of God upon this day, shall
procure a blessing unto all the rest of the week: Seek the kingdom of God,
and the righteousness thereof, Mat. 6.33
and all other things shall be casten unto you: where by the contrary there
are Curses denounced aga nst the profanators of the Sabbath; Ier. 17.27
that God shall curse the works of their hands, and the Land shall enjoye
many Sabbathes of years, even as it did in the Captivity of Babylon.

Now, Three kinds of Sabbaths. 1. Of Creation. 2. Of Redemption. Revel. 1.10
there are three kinds of Sabbathes: the first of the Creation, as a memorial
that GOD ceased from his work upon the seventh day: this lasted till Christ's
death and resurrection. The second Sabbath began upon the day of his
resurrection, which is called THE LORDS DAY, in rememberance of a new
Creation of the world: 3. Of Perfection. Isa. 66.23.
and this will end with the world. And the third Sabbath shall be eternal,
when as the six days of this miserable life shall be finished, we shall
rest from all our earthly businesses and travels, that our continual exercise
may be to glorify him, in mind, heart, and with all our strength, in his
Kingdom. Then let us occupy this Sabbath wholly in his praise, which shall
be a sure pledge of that in the Heavens.

A Prayer upon the seventh Day.
MOst mighty Lord, and merciful Father, distill, I beseech thee, and power
down into mine earthly heart, thy divine Dewes, which may moysten it;
together with such heavenly meditations as may stir up mine heart unto thy
praise and glory: that as upon these six days I have been musing and
meditating upon all thy most glorious works; so I may repose my self upon the
day of Rest, and find quietness to my soul in thee: for all the rest of the
creatures, albeit they be glorious, yet they be subject unto a curse; not
because of themselves, but for man, who has defiled them. I have trusted to
the pleasures which I saw in the creatures: and I see that it is true that
Solomon said, All is but vanity, and vexation of the spirit: Eccles. 1.2
as Riches increase, so Care grows. But, O Lord, let me come to thine Arc,
as the Dove did, which found no rest till she came back to Noah. Genes. 8.9.
Pull in thine own dove, O my Lord, unto thee, for the floods of sin have
ouerflowed the face of the Earth, that I find no rest here. I am weary, and
loadned, Lord, give me rest to my soul in thee.

This day is joyful to me, because that my Lord rose this day from death. I
beseech thee, my God, Nota.
raise up my soul from the grave of sin, that I may be partaker of the first
Resurrection: and make my thoughts spiritual this thy Sabbath day: banish from
my mind all earthly cares this day: forgive me in that I have so many times
abused these thine holy days. Oftentimes when I was praying to thee, or thou
preaching unto me, Satan did cast into my mind carnal cogitations, which
interrupted that communication betwixt my soul and thy majesty. O Lord,
forgive me, and fill my soul with thy reverence and fear in all the days of
my life to come; that all such idle purposes may be dispatched by thine holy
Spirit: shut the door of my soul when thou art speaking unto me, or when I
pray to thee, that none get entry to unquiet me, and stay my joy: for alace,
mine heart was casten open unto many of thine enemies. I will close the door
of mine ear to the voice of all others, that thou may speak to me. Alace,
my God, I find a great decay of that spiritual joy in me, that I have not
that spark of delight, and that inward and spiritual joy which I should have,
or had sometimes: I loath the exercise which I loved, mine hands are weary,
and fallen down: I have lost my first love: it was sweeter to me tha^ the
honey, Revel. 2.4.
and now it is loathsome unto me, as the Manna was unto the Isralites:
therefore, I beseech thee, Numb. 11.6.
kindle up an holy fire of thy love in my soul, as was in the Disciples going
to Emmaus, and that the zeal of thine House may eat me up. Luk 24.32 Psalm.
69.9. and 52.8. and 27.4.
Let me flourish as a green Olive in the house of my God. O, would to God I
could abide in thine house all the days of my life, that I might pray with
good Anna, 1. Sam. 1.13.16.
out of the bitterness of my soul, making my supplications to thee.

O Lord, I crave thee pardon, for the earthly and idle speeches which I spoke
upon the Sabbath. I will hold mine hand upon my mouth, and speak no more. Job
39.37 Luk 24.15
The Disciples which went to Emmaus were speaking of Christ, and he came unto
them: alace, when I spoke of the world, he went from me, and my heart was
cold. Lord, forgive me, for it was a great sin which I did: yea, I made no
matter to deal in mine earthly business on thy Sabbath. All mine excuses are
now accusations against me: they burn me when I am trying mine heart. But,
Lord, I found never any blessing in those mine actions which I enterprysed upon
thy Day. I have sinned, I will do it no more: let the world be crucified to
me, and me to it, upon thy Sabbath. I have resolved in mine heart that I shall
spend my days, while I live, to thine honor. Help my resolution by thine
holy Spirit, that neither the corruption of my nature, my weakness and
forgetfulness, Nota.
neither the evil example of these wicked and profane people, among whom I
live, suffer me to break my promise which I do make unto thee; but that thou
may be my speech, my thought, and my delight upon the Sabbath days. Let me
be fervent in prayer and supplications to thee upon the day of thy rest: Let me
hear what thou speak to me by the mouth of thy servant: Let me gather thy
Manna when it is rained down from the clouds of Heaven, Ex. 16.15
as the people gathered Manna in the Desert, that I may hear it as thy word, I
may gather it, and lay it in the storehouse of mine heart, against the year
of famine: Genesis 41.48
and give me thy grace, that upon thy holy day I may proclaim thy praises with
the rest of the Saints. This day let me break my bread to the hungry, seeing
thou satisfiest me with thy spiritual graces: let me cloathe them that are
naked, visit those that are sick, and that I may so rest from earthly vanities
this day, that I may most diligently work the works of God, that I may
gather out the flowrs of thy most holy Scriptures, that I may study to
practice which I hear, in a godly life and conversation, and so I may redeem
the time which I have spent in vain, Ephesians. 5.16.
that I now getting mercy for the abusing of thy former Sabbathes, may here
begin my spiritual Rest in thy Sanctuary, that after I may accomplish it in
thine holy Temple, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior.

AMEN.
CERTAIN PRAYERS AND MEDITATIONS, MOST COMfortable for all estates.
Morning Prayer.
Almighty God, and most merciful Father, I beseech thee, that thou would
chase away, with the brightness of thy presence, my sins, as a cloud, that
I may come before thee, Psa. 18.12
and with a clean heart behold thee, and offer up my Prayer as a Morning
Sacrifice, and as Incense of sweet Odor unto thee. Revel. 8.4.
I thank thy Majesty for the quiet rest of this night, and that thou have so
safely conuoyed me through the perils of darkness, and saved me from the
prince of darkness, and brought me to the light of this day, and given me a
new day of repentance, wherein I may seek thee. O Lord, it was of thy mercy
that I was not consumed: Thou the watchman of Israel neither sleep, nor
slumberest. Psa. 121.4
Albeit my body was lying as dead, and all my senses were asleep, so that I
was a ready prey to my spiritual foes: Yet, O Lord, thou wast careful of me,
when I was careless of my self: and thou pitchedst about my body the muisible
company of thine holy Angels, Psalm. 34.7
who have graciously carried me, and kept me from all evil. Thou smotest the
first borne of Egypt in one night by the destroyer, Exo. 12.26 2. King. 19 35
and the host of Senacherib by thine Angel: But, O Lord, thou have kept me and
mine house, safe by their hand: thou foundest the blood of the Lamb upon the
door of my soul, and I have escaped: praise be given unto thee, O Lord, Ex.
12.13
who have delivered me, and glory to the Lamb by whom I have escaped. But
especially I praise thee that my spiritual enemies have not prevailed over
me, to snare me in sin: Satan most busy in the night to cause men sin.
Job 24.16
for the Prince of darkness works his works of darkness in darkness; by
the which he leads the world unto everlasting darkness: in the night they
steal, they murder, and commit adulteries: but the Lord has delivered me
from the temptations of the Devil. Blessed be thy Name; for I know the night
is to the Lord as the light: Psalm. 139.12
he beholds me, and sees me, therefore I glorify thee this morning, that
thou did keep me, and gave me not over to be illuded by my spiritual
foes. Thou wast a light unto me in darkness. But alace, that my natural
heart cannot acknowledge thy goodness. I have rested in my body, and my mind
has been at great peace. This is a double rest, which thou have given to thy
beloved. But alace, thou have so tenderly dealt with my flesh, that I am
displeased that I should spend the whole night (which is the half of my
days) Nota.
so ydlie, (in my judgment) that I should do nothing but feed my flesh with
sleep. I am displeased, and think within my self, Shall I lie so long, and
so many nights, and shall not praise my God? for thy servant DAVID not only
prayed unto thee in the morning, Psa. 55.17 and 6.6. and 63.6. and 77.6. and
119.62 148.
at noone-tide, and at Even, but also prevented the night watches, to meditate
on thy word, and watered his Bed with tears, thanking and thinking on thee,
and communing with his own heart. And likewise, O Lord, I would rather be
content, that mine eyes were holden waking with thee, to remember thee, than I
should sleep to forget thee. I beseech thee, O my God, to forgive me, thy
poor creature, who ever do forget my duty to thee both day and night: and
when I am sleeping sanctify me so by thy grace, that my soul may be waking
with thee. Lord, wash me from all the uncleanness of body and soul, which I
have contracted this night: and as thou have made separation betwixt the night
and day, so divide me from all sin. Lift up the light of thy countenance
upon me this day, and inlighten my mind with understanding, that I may see
the secret of thy Law. Visit me with thy sweere mercy this morning, Job 7.18.
that I may rejoice in thee all my days. I will rise in the morning, and
compass thine holy Altar. Psalm. 43.4. and 26.6.
Thou art my Father, and I am thy Child. I crave thy blessing, for Christ's
sake, to all the actions of this day: that thou will accompany them with thy
special presence, and direction, and so I am sure that whatsoever I shall take
in hand will prosper.

Further, my merciful Father, I beseech thee to slay the corruptions of this
wicked nature this day. Bring in captivity every cogitation of my heart,
which rebelleth against thy will. Put a watch to the door of my lips, that
no unsavory speech come out of my mouth, Psa. 141.3
but that which may tend to edification. And dispose so all the actions of
this day, that no corruption which is in me may burst forth, either in word or
deed, whereby I may offend thee, or my neighbor. Mortify the lusts of my
flesh: my pride turn it unto humility: my covetousness unto liberality,
mine insolency, into gravity, Change from evil to good.
my prodigality unto abstinence, my lies unto truth, mine uncleanness to
chastity, my profanitie to reverence, etc: yea, make that alteration and
change in me this day, that whatsoever delight of sin is in me, it may be
consumed, and thy graces as fruitful herbs may be planted in place of these
weeds. Forsake me not, O Lord, this day, lest I forsake thee: give me not over
unto my self, and to mine own counsel and will, lest I perish. And because
these are days of defection and apostasy, wherein, if it were possible the
Elect would perish; Matthew. 24.22.
I beseech thee, that I fall not back from thy grace, but let me make some
progress in godliness, to approach near unto thy kingdom: that as the
powers of nature do decay in me, and I hasten to the grave, so the strength of
thine holy Spirit may fortify mine inward man; that I may grow from grace to
grace, until I pass the dangers of this pilgrimage, and thou bring me to thy
glory, through Christ our Lord.

AMEN.
Evening Prayer.
O Lord, let my prayer come before thee, as pure Incense, and as the Evening
Sacrifice: I present it upon the golden Altar my blessed Savior, that he,
Revel. 8.3.
through the perfume and sweet smell of his sacrifice, may make my petitions
acceptable unto thee.

I thank thee, O gracious and dear Father, that thou have so favorably
conuoyed me, and preserved me from the perils of this day, both of my soul,
and body: And also I praise thee for thy fatherly care whereby thou have
abundantly fed, by thy word, my soul, and by thine earthly creatures my
body. I thank thee that thou have nurtured me by thy Rod, and that thou have
not suffered my spiritual enemies to triumph over me, and forsook me not,
neither left me to my self, nor to be a prey to them. O Lord, pardon me all
the sins of this day and purge me from my secret sins, even those which are
hidden from my self. Who can know or understand them? no doubt I have sinned
this day. My conscience may err, and deceive me, but thou searchest the depth
of the heart. But I praise thee, that thou kepedst me from presumptuous sins
this day. Psa. 19.13
Forget, O Lord, my negligence in thy service. Alace, I have been wearied of
thy worship. And seeing thou art and have begun to bring darkness upon the
face of the earth, break in, O Lord, with the glorious beams of thy presence,
and illuminate my darkness. Psalm. 16.7. When the body is at rest, let the
soul be busy with God.
Instruct my reins in the night season, and speak familarlie unto my soul:
when I sleep in my bed, then open mine ears: when my senses are asleep, then
let my soul enjoy thy presence, without interruption. Let thy Spirit teach my
spirit, and inform her ignorance: rebuke my spirit, and correct her
sinfulness: strengthen my spirit, and help her weakness: comfort my spirit,
and cure her sorrows. Give me sleep and rest to my body, if it may make me
the more able to serve thee: But if it may stay thine honor, Nota.
I will be content to want it. And if thou have appointed this night that I
shall awake, Lord, hold the eyes of my soul waking, that I may repent for the
abuse of that great rest which I have received already, without rendering
thanksgiving unto thee. Lord, let me lie with a peacable mind under the hand
of a reconciled God. Suffer not my soul this night to be disquieted with the
cares of this world, which bereaueth worldlings of their rest: but I cast my
burden upon thee, and all mine affairs unto the bosom of thy providence, for
thou will bear them. Why art thou troubled my soul? Psalm. 42.5. and 43.5.
and why art thou disquieted within me? trust yet in thy God, and he will be
thy relief. Ly down in peace, and sleep, Psalm. 4.8.
for he will care for thee. And again, O Lord, deliver my soul from the
fearful terrors of this night. Give me faith, with David, Psalm. 3.6.
and I shall not be affrayde of ten thousand: for thy presence is a sufficient
defense to me against all mine enemies. But, O Lord, especially deliver me
from the fears of thy wrath, when Satan lays my sins in order before me,
and that they stand in the sight of thy countenance, then thou make me to
mourn like a Dove, Isa. 38.14
and chatter like a Swallow. Mine eyes were lifted up on high. I reckoned till
the morning: Psalm. 58.6.
but thou brake my bones like a Lion. From day to night thou will make an end
of me. Then I cried, My sins have opressed me; comfort me, O Lord, remove the
clowd of my sins, which interueaneth betwixt thy mercy and me, and let me
see thee this night, sitting upon thy mercy seat, stretching out the point of
the golden Scepter, Hest. 5.2.
and retreating the sentence of death given out by thy justice against me. Cast
my sins behind thy back, and drown them in the bottom of the Sea of thine
oblivion, that this night I may lodge in the Fort of thy grace, as in a City
of refuge, and find rest to my soul.

Keep me, O Lord, from the curse threatened by thy Prophet against such as in
the night are plotting evil things against their neighbors. Mica 2.1.
Let me remember (O Lord) that darkness is to thee as light; Psalm. 139.12
and thou have an eye of fire, whose light can pierce the most hard places.
Where can I hide any thought from thee? for thou who plantedst the eye, do
not thou see most clearly? Psalm. 94.9.
Therefore keep my soul this night, that I admit no purpose therein, whereof
thou will not be content. Be thou my Counselor, my Witness, and Judge, that
by thy presence my soul may be kept in that holy reverence to thee, that it
consent to no unclean or injust action to offend thee. Thou have tried, and
proved mine heart in the night, and have found nothing: for I was purposed not
to displease thee. And because my Lord will come (as a thief in the night) and
I do not know what hour he comes, let me watch and pray, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2
Matthew. 24.43. and 25.13.
that at the voice of thine Angel I may be watching, with mine oil in my
lamp. Let me praise thee in the night, with feruencie. Keep me from the Arrow
which flies in darkness, and from the temptations of the Prince of darkness.
Preserve me, O Lord, and my family, and every thing which thou have given me:
I do resign all to thy keeping, who art a faithful keeper of all things
which are committed to thy custody. Thou will suffer nothing to be taken out
of thine hand. O GOD, be thou a pillar of fire to give light to me this night,
and carry thy child in the arms of thy mercy, through all perils of body
and soul. I leave my soul into thine hand, and when I awake I will seek my
soul in thee.

And finally, O Lord, this bodily sleep teaches me to die; and when I lie
down in my Bed, I remember that I shall once be casten into the bed of my
grave, that I may sleep there til the day dawne, and the Sun of
Righteousness arise, that then I may arise also, and praise thee, O my God,
together with the Son, and the holy Ghost, for evermore.

AMEN.
A MEDITATION UPON THE CHVRCH UNIVERSAL.
EVen as it is necessary unto Salvation, to believe in GOD our Father; so it
is necessary to believe the holy Church our Mother, Believe the Church, but
not in the Church.
that she is the Queen, the Spouse of Jesus Christ. We must believe in God,
and put our whole trust and confidence him. We must believe also that the
Church is his Spouse, and believe whatsoever she speaks unto us, of him, out
of his own mouth: for if she be his Spouse, she will not adulterate, inuert,
or corrupt her Lords speeches. And if an Angel taught another Gospel, let him
be accursed. Gal. 1.8.
In the Nicene Council, and in Athanasius his Symbol, the particle [In] is
added. But ye must understand, that the Apostolic Symbol, which is called
the Creed, must be a Rule of perfection and antiquity unto all the rest,
Then (God willing) I shall define the Universal Church unto you, that ye may
know her.

The Universal Church is the Members of the Elect, whom God has called by his
word unto Life everlasting. What the Church vniuersallis.
She takes not her name from (...), which is, to elect; but from (...), which
is, to call others, which maguifieth the preaching of the word: which is the
very voice of God, by which he calls us unto repentance. Whereby it is
evident, that we cannot be called the true members of the Church Catholic,
if we contemn that voice by the which God calls us unto him. The word
Catholic, or, The Catholic Church is not tied to any certain place. Judge.
16.9.
Throughout all places, tells us, that she is bound to no certain place, as
the Papists would bind her (with Dalidaes rope) to the seat of Rome. But our
Samson, Christ, will break such ropes as Flax. But the Spouse of Christ, the
Church, stretches her arms, and her feet, to the ends of the world: for God
gave him the ends of the Earth to be his possession and inheritance. Psalm.
2.8.
From her they will be called Catholics, rejecting the name of Christians,
from Christ. But I think they merit to be called Cacolyci, which is by
interpretation, Evil Wolfs, devouring the flock of God under the Skins of I
ambes. The Church invisible. The beauty of the Church is spiritual, in virtue
and godliness. Ps. 45.13.


This Church is invisible, because her faith and love cannot be seen, which
makes her a Church. Neither is it necessary that with an outward splendour or
beauty she should appear in any one place of the earth. She is altogether
beautiful within. An honest Matron studieth not to deck her self: her
virtue, her natural color, her obedience, her love, etc. are her ornaments,
by which she purchases credit with her Husband, and is famous with men:
Prover. 31.11.12, etc. and 7.16.
as that womam in the last of the Proverbs. But the whore of whom Solomon
speaks, decketh her self with Carpets and Laces of Egypt. So the true Church
contenteth her self: albeit she be back, yet she is comely, Cantic. 1.4
to please Christ her husband, who looks not to the outward mask, but to the
heart. Christ her Husband had neither form nor beauty external: he was a
Worm, but not a Man. Psalm. 22.6.
Should not the Spouse be like her Lord? Her Apostles were beaten, and sent to
prison: the holy Bishops and Martyrs, to Fire, and to Lions: But when she
attained, Nota.
by peace under Constantine, to Honor and Riches, then she was defaced, and
rent asunder, by the Heretical Doctrine of Arrius, and others; and at the last
the Pope arose in the West, and the Mahomet in the East, who have wounded
Religion at the heart, and have made up, and coined two new Faiths, which are
neither old nor new; whereby the Church is spoiled of her Husbands Vestures:
and being clothed with the Whoorish habit, she does keep nothing, but the
bare name of the Church, wherein she glories, and gives her self out to the
world. The true Spouse hears only the voice of her Husband. Ioh. 10.27.
But the Roman Church admits strange voices, which are contrary to the
voice of God. Also the true Church, as it were, trauelleth in pain, to bring
forth children to Christ. Gal. 4.19. 2. King. 11.1.
The Roman Church, like to Athaliah, murthereth the Kings seed, the Sons of
God, and embreweth not her hands in the blood of Turks and Jews, who deny
Christ, but grants them Synagogues, to dwell amongst themselves: But poor
Christians they will persecute, 1572. Aug. 24. Math. 12.20.
and massacre an hundredth thousand at once in France. Christ the husband, in
all his life, brake not one bruised Reed; he did harm to none: he helped all.
(So she is an Harlot Church, albeit professing the word, The Cnurch is as mount
Sion.
if she be cruel.) His Spouse is compared to mount Sion. For she being founded
upon the rock Jesus Christ, is invincible, let her not be affrayde. She is the
bush of Moses, Moses his Bush. A Dove.
but the Lord is in the fire that it cannot consume her. She is a Dove, for
her simplicity and love. The Romanists are Foxes. She is Jerusalem, Jerusalem.
for the vision of peace is in her.

A PRAYER FOR THE CHVRCH UNIVERSAL.
I Confess, O Lord, that I am most bound to love thee, as my Father, who have
both made me a creature, and in the bosom of thy Church have made me over
again a new creature, after thine Image. Thou have commanded me also to
honor my Mother the Church, who conceived me, and who traveled in pangues
for me, whose breasts and pappes I have sucked, and out of them I have received
the sweet Milk of thy word, who did keep and bear me in her arms: upon
whose knees I was fostered, and in whose house I have been fed ever since.
She pitied my wanderinges: she corrected mine errors: and in a word, O
Lord, I acknowledge that she has done more than the duty of a loving Mother
unto me: for whose honor, health, wealth, peace, prosperity, succession,
yea, and for all earthly and heavenly blessings, I am oblished to pray upon
the knees of my soul and body continually.

And first, O Lord, seeing that thy Church is the only glory and beauty of
the world, without the which there would be confusion: yea, the world would
turn to the old Chaos: And seeing that the world hates her, because she is
not of them; O Lord, our God, bless her in the midst of her enemies.
Beautify thy Lilly in the midst of Thorns. Cantic. 2.2
Power down all the graces of thine holy Spirit upon her. And because the
world is wrapped up in ignorance, and darkness, like unto the darkness of
Egypt: Ex. 10.23.
and seeing that there is no light, but in the land of Goshen, O Lord, I
beseech thee to nourish, and continue that light of knowledge in her, that all
the world may know thee the true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ,
1. John. 4.14.15.
to be the Savior of the world. Yea, refresh, I beseech thee, this light of
thy blessed Euangel, that it may illuminate the blind world. And because thy
word is the life and light of the world, O Lord, let it be a Lantern, ever
shining in this darkness, to quicken these dead people. And to this effect, O
God, raise up faithful Preachers of thy word, Pray for faithful Preachers.
Prover. 10.13.
men according to thine own heart, who will carry this light: give them
knowledge and understanding, that their lips may observe vvisdome, that they
teach not the people the lying vanities of a deceitful and lying heart: but
that they may instruct them rightly in all thy Precepts: that thou may feed
thy Stewardes, who will feed thy people with the Bread of Heaven, and the
Wine which comes out of thy Wine-cellers: and not with the foysted bread,
Cantic. 2.4.
nor the poison of Heresies, to destroy the souls of thy people. O Lord,
cloathe thy Priests with Righteousness, Psa. 132.9
and let thy Saints rejoice. Open the door of utterance unto them, Coll. 4.3.
that they, with evidence and demonstration of thy Spirit, may make the whole
counsel of God known to the people: that they keep nothing back, nor add
nothing; lest thou, O God, add unto them the curse of thy Law, Rev. 22.18
and scrape their names out of the book of Life.

And because thy Church is under continual dangers, O Lord, keep her, and all
her members, from the cruel rage of all her enemies. Lord, let the malice of
her adversaries turn to themselves: and bring confusion upon all such as hate
Sion. Lord, give peace to her Walls, and her Palaces: and bless those that
bless her, Psalm. 122.7
and curse those that curse her: keep her like the Apple of thine Eye, Psalm.
17.8.
which thou love. Thou will be with her in the midst of the fire, and the
water, that she be not destroyed, nor ouer-whelmed. By thine hand, O Lord, she
has been preserved. They lay shares for the poor Church, but cut thou them
asunder; yea, Psalm. 7.16. and 57.6.
trappe them in the net which they have laid. They have dug a pit, let
them fall into the midst of it. So shall come to all the enemies of our God,
and his Church. Let them be as a turning Wheel, and 83.13
and a rolling Ball. Let them be as smoke, which vanishes before the wind;
and. 68, 2.
and as Wax, which melts in the Sun. Let them be like a lump of Lead,
which sinketh to the bottom of the Sea. O Lord, if it were any particular
revenge of mine own, I would pardon their vvronges: But, alace, it is done to
my Mother, thy Spouse: how shall I bear it? Bury them in eternal
forgetfulness, who have done such despitefulnesse to her, as that cruel
Antichrist, and his adherents have done. And to the effect that thine enemies
may be discomfited, arise, O Lord, sharpen the Arrows of thy Word, by which
thou may pierce the hearts of the Kings enemies. Psalm. 45.5.
Draw the Sword of thy Word, Heb. 4.12.
which is twoedged, that it may cut to the division of the marrow from the
bones. Let not thy holy Word be as a dead letter any longer in the mouths of
thy Ministers, but make it a quickening spirit, to bring down great Holds, and
let the breath of thy mouth confound thy foes, that thy Ministry may be
powerful, and the world may see that thou have not left thy Church without
both counsel and comfort, 1. Pet. 1.22
and that men are not only hearers, but also doers of thy word.

And again, I pray for thy Ministry, that they may be faithful Stewards of
thy Mysteries, 1. Cor. 3.12
vigilant Watchmen, diligent Shepheardes, and wise Builders; not of stubble, 1.
Pet. 2.4.
but of Gold, upon the foundation which is Christ: and that their only care be
to see the glory of thy Name, and for the good of the Church, which is our
Mother. Bless and increase the fruit of her Womb: let her grow in number like
the Stars of Heaven: let her be fruitful in her age: let her sons be like
Olive Plants, bringing forth fruit: let her daughters be like carved corner
Stones, Psalm. 144.12.
in whose hearts thou will carue thine Image, in the similitude of a Palace.
And bless her with the blessing of Heaven, and of the earth, and of the deep,
Genesis 49.25
and let all the eternal blessings which my soul can wish, be upon thy
Spouse, my Mother, the universal Church, upon all her children, friends and
servants: yea, whosoever loves the peace of thy Church let them prosper.

I pray namely to thee, O Lord, for thy Church in France, and Bohemia, Pray
for the Church in France, and Bohemia.
which thou began with the blood of innumerable Martyrs, and which thou have
made to grow amongst the midst of thine enemies. Maintain, O Lord, the
work which thou have begun amongst them: give them wisdom, that they be
not circumueaned with the policies of their adversaries: and that in this
dangerous time they may cleave only to thee, who will be both their wisdom
and protection.

O Lord, look upon this Church which thy right hand has planted in this Isle
of Britane: thou translated this Vine out of Egypt, and did plant a
Vine-yarde to thy self: thou did hedge it about with thy providence: thou
confoundedst all her enemies, thou buildedst a watchtower in the midst
thereof, Isa. 5.1.2. etc. Psalm. 80.8.
and sent watchmen accordingly to give warning to them. But, O Lord, thou
crauedst and lookedst for wine-grapes, and they yielded thee wilde-grapes. So
that now we deserve that thou should pull down the hedge, and suffer the
wild Boar to enter into thy Planting. Remember, O Lord, thine ancient
mercies, and forget our iniquities: dig us, O Lord, and take pains upon us,
that we may be fruitful.

And finally, O Lord, bless all the visible Congregations of people, who call
upon thy Name, and all the particular persons whose names are written in the
Book of Life: fill up the number of thine Elect: call them effectually, by thy
word, that we may be all one Fold, under one chief Shepherd. Shorten, O
Lord, the days of sin, Ioh. 10.17.
and hasten thy coming, Lord Jesus: that thy Spouse being prepared, a pure
Virgin, she may be taken up to the new Jerusalem, to Heaven, Rev. 21.10
where after the infinite Battles, and temptations of this world, she may reign
eternally, and be crowned in thy Kingdom, with Christ, her blessed Lord and
Savior.

AMEN.
A MEDITATION UPON THE HOLY COMMUNION.
THERE are two great Seals which God has affixed to the Charter of his word:
to wit, Two Seals affixed to the Word.
the Sacrament of Baptism, and of the Lords holy Supper. Albeit the Church of
the Jews was loadned with many Sacraments, as the Passover, Circumcision,
Manna, Christians have fewer Sacraments in numbe^ than the Jews, but m^re in
sig^ification, and amplification.
the Rock, the Cloud, the Sea, etc. Yet God has given the Christian Church
Numero pauciora, factu faciliora, and significatione ampliora: that is, Fewer
in number, easier to be done, and of more large signification.

The Sacrament of Baptism, is a Sacrament of Initiation, when we are entered
into the Family of God: and the Sacrament of the Supper is a Sacrament of
Confirmation, whereby the Children of God, who are spirituallie borne in
Baptism, in the Bath of Regeneration, by the remission of their sins, in
Christ's blood, which is signified by the washing of water, the same are fed
at his Table, in the Sacrament of the Supper; and are fed by Christ's body
and blood, Po^h the Sac aments ha e one substance.
unto everlasting Life.

Both these Sacraments offer one Christ, who is the substance and matter of
them both, The Sacraments differ in ^^e things.
for Baptism must go before the Supper: neither can any communicate who are
not first baptized. Next, Baptism to one, the Supper to many; Luke 22.19 1.
Corin. 11 25 Simil.
and cannot be reiterated: the Supper as often as we do it, says our
Savior. There is a reiteration: for as a child is once infested in his
fathers heritage, but he is fed daily at his fathers table: so once
baptized, may often communicate.

The necessity of the Word and Sacraments.
But now (God willing) we shall speak something of the necessity of the Word
and Sacraments. The Word is necessary to salvation, (...), simply, those who
are come to age, without the which they cannot be saved. The Sacraments are
necessary, (...), conditionally they may be had. So I say with Augustine,
August.
Non carentia, sed contemptis Baptismi damnat: that is, Not the want, but the
contempt of Baptism condemns men. Josh. 5.
For as in the Wilderness many died, who were not circumcised, Circumcision
then being more strictly urged than Baptism is now, Exodus 4.24
and of a like power and signification, yet we will not judge those who so
died to be damned: no more reason is it, that those who are prevented by death,
or excluded by necessity, be in danger of damnation, lacking Baptism.

Preparation to the Sacrament is necessary.
A man should not set himself to any grave action, without deliberation, much
less unto this, which is the grauest of all others, the Supper of the Lord: he
should first try, and examine himself. First let us try our repentance: next,
our faith: and thirdly, our love. Our repentance must be tried by the Law,
How to try thy repentance.
without the which there is no knowledge of sin. Examine our selves, and
judge our selves, that God do not judge us. Spare not to search all the
corners of thine heart, that there be no hid leaven therein: try what sorrow
thou have for thy former life, and in what measure: for many sins, do crave
many tears; Luke 7.38
as the Magdalen washed Christ's feet with her tears, and David his bed. Next,
Psalm. 6.6
try the truth and sincerity of thy repentance: for God does love the truth
in the inward parts. And be sorrowful, Psalm. 51.6
not for any pain which has befallen thee for thy sins, but for offending
God thereby.

Try thy faith, and see that thou have knowledge to understand what is given
thee: How to try thy faith.
for ignorance secludeth thee from the Sacraments. And next, that thou can
apply to thy felt that which thou do receive, externally in the elements,
and internally by faith in Christ.

Finally, try thy love, that it be without hypocrisy: for there is no
conjunction with the head, How to try thy love.
unless there be communion with the members of the body. Therefore, purge
your selves from the leaven of maliciousness and bitterness: 1. Cor. 5.7
yea, pardon your enemies heartily, and pray for them, if ye desire that at
this holy Sacrament God should be merciful unto your sins.

The honorable receiving of the Sacraments.
Both the Sacraments crave a like reverence, as they are of a like substance
and weight: and therefore we ought to come with all humility and reverence to
that most holy Supper, both in body and soul, praying that God Almighty
would bless this his ordinance, and make it steadable to our salvation: and
then receiving it in all deautifull reverence, let us apply it to our own
comfort, rendering thanks to God for this inestimable benefit, in giving his
Son to the death for our redemption.

A PRAYER BEFORE THE RECEIVING OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
O Lord God, most gracious, most holy, and most glorious, I thy poor creature,
most filthy, and unworthy, most graceles, and ingracious, most contemptible
and vilde worm, do here present my self before thine holy Majesty, craving
at thine hands, that I may be worthily prepared to receive the body and blood
of Jesus Christ, to mine eternal salvation: and to this effect, I beseech
thee, that thou will remove from me all impediments which might hinder me from
the right receiving of the same: and namely, ignorance, which blinds my
mind: infidelity, and damnable hypocrisy. O merciful father, replenish me
with th^ne holy Spirit, that I may know and understand the mystery of my
redemption, and truly apply it to mine own soul, and in all sincerity and
singleness of heart render all praise, honor, and glory, to thy Majesty for
the same. O Lord, the blind dullness of my mind will not suffer me
sufficiently to acknowledge these thy most ample benefits: the height, the
length, the breadth, and the deepnesse whereof neither man nor Angel ever was
able to sound: yet I am persuaded that all my salvation consists in the death
and passion of thy Son JESUS CHRIST, who died for the sins of the world:
and therefore I humbly beg at thy Majesty, that as I receive these outward
elements at thy commandment, and eat and drink thereof in rememberance of
him, Nota.
so it will please thee, secretly to communicate the virtue of his blood to my
soul, which may feed the hidden man of mine heart to eternal life: by whose
power also, and force of his death, all my wicked and sinful affections may be
crucified: and finally, by the aid and protection of his blood I may be
defended from all my spiritual and temporal enemies, from all temptations and
dangers, and by the self same his body and blood, I may be strengthened to
fight my spiritual battles, and to go forward in my spiritual journey, to
that Land of Canaan: in the which battle and journey help me, good Lord, by
the precious merit of thy dear SON, CHRIST JESUS, to whom with thee and
thine holy spirit, be all honor, glory, and dominion, for ever.

AMEN.
A THANKESGIVING, AFTER THE RECEIVING OF THE COMMUNION.
O Most gracious God, I heartily thank thee for this thy most excellent
benefit which thou have bestowed upon me, even the body and blood of thy
Son, Christ Jesus, for the salvation of my soul. I beseech thee, most
merciful father, that thou would bestow thine holy spirit upon me, that I
may honor and serve thee all the days of my life, that the corruption of my
nature may be beaten down, and the Image of God may be more clearly seen in
me, that I may cast off the old man, Colloss. 3.9.
with the lusts thereof, and put on the new man, which is formed after God, in
holiness and righteousness.

Now, O Lord, thou have fed me with the most excellent food which thou had,
and have slain thy fatted Calfe for me: Luke 15.23
Therefore grant that I may honor thee, as my Father, and bestow all the
actions of my life, the motions of my mind, and the speeches of my mouth, to
set forth thy praises in this world: that I become never unthankful and
ingrate, to meet thy good benefits with my sins. To thee therefore, O Lord,
with thy Son, and holy Spirit, be all praise, and honor, for evermore.

Amen.
A MEDITATION OF THE TROVBLE OF CONSCIENCE.
AS it is easy to speak of Sicknesses, and deadly Diseases, incureable; so
men may speak of a troubled Conscience: but none can speak of either of them
more powerfullie or comfortablie, than those who have experimented them both:
therefore let us speak first of Conscience it self: and next, of her diseases
and troubles: and last, of the remedies anenst a grievous and troubled
Conscience.

Conscience is a composed word of Con and Science; so that it must have a
knowledge of sin, What Conscience is.
and somewhat more; that is, a feeling, conjoined with the knowledge. There are
many who sin ignorantly, thinking that they do God good service, as Saul
did, and the Jews, 1. Timot. 1.13. Romans 10.2.
of whom he bears witness, that they have the zeal of God without
knowledge: others know their sin, and that they are into a wrong course,
having Science, without Conscience; and Knowledge, without Feeling: and these
are in a worse case: for their knowledge makes to their farther damnation.

God has erected a Tribunal in man, Conscience is Gods Tribunal. Judge,
Accuser, and Burrio.
and has set it in his heart, fensing the Court of Conscience, wherein he
makes both Index, Index, and Vindex: that is, Attorney, Judge, and Burrio.
There is no Subterfuge against the accusations of the conscience, no excuses,
no replies, no dilators, but she must simply confess: And as she gives up
dittie against her self, so she gives sentence of condemnation for her
sins, according to the law of God: whereupon arises such torments, and
tortures in the conscience, and an Hell begun, and a fire kindled, which shall
never be quenched, unless God by the blood of his Christ quench the same.

The tenderness of the Conscience.
The Conscience is a very tender thing, and does examine the quietest thoughts
of the mind, which other men do pass lightly; it censureth the smallest
words, or idle speeches; challenging man that he must be comptable for them:
it charge men's looks, as Job says, I have made a covenant with mine own
eyes, his hearing, tasting, Job 51.1.
and all his other senses, so that the smallest thought is more grievous to a
feeling conscience, than the worst actions are to a sleeping conscience, or to
a reprobate.

This Conscience is common to the Elect, and reprobat. Romans 1.24.25.26. etc.
The Hethniks looked to the glass of nature, and their conscience mutually
accusing or excusing them: but Christians look unto the glass of the Law, and
see there what they have done, well or evil.

The Hethniks describe Conscience, Magna est vis conscientiae in vtramque
partem, vt neque timeant, qui nihil commiserint, Cic. pro Milone.
and poenam semper ante oculos versari putent qui peccarint: that is, Great is
the force of the Conscience on both sides, that neither they are feared who did
no wrong, and those who have offended, suppose punishment ever to be before
their eyes. Then if this be into the Hethniks, much more ought it to be in
Christians, who see clearly either God allowing their good actions, whereby
there is bred an unspeakable tranquillity and peace to their souls: or
dissallowing them, whereby the infernal furies are kindled within them.

In the trouble of Conscience there arises a fire of the wrath of God, The
trouble of Conscience.
conceived against our sins: out of the which fire arises such a smoke,
which lets us see nothing in God but justice: and where the Creator is
obscured, and his light eclipsed, nothing appears unto us on earth but
darkness. All the creatures, yea, the dearest unto them, seem to be their
enemies: for when the Sun is darkened, Simil.
what marvel is it that there be no light on the earth? or what comfort can
all the creatures minister unto us, when the Creator draws back his
countenance from us? Simil.
As if the King would look down upon a Subject, who dare countenance him any
longer?

This sort of temptation befell David, Psalm. 22.1. Narke 15.34. Christ had
trouble of conscience. John 5.4.
and to our Lord himself upon the Cross, who cried, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? Neither shall we account them the less beloved of God, who
are thus tried; for as the poole of Bethesda, being troubled by the Angel,
brought present health to him who was casten into it; so a troubled conscience,
in Gods mercy, brings salvation and comfort to a Christian. And as Medicine
that works vehemently, after brings health, Simil.
so does tranquillity and peace come after a troubled conscience.

Pretended trouble, and true differ.
But many pretend a trouble of conscience, when there is nothing in them but a
furious madness, and a melanchollious desperate diffidence in God, for
perplexities and miseries whereinto they are brought: where there is a manifest
difference betwixt that their pain and the other, in that the godly are only
pained for the sins which they have done against God; Trouble works
diversely in the godly and wicked.
the other for the calamities whereinto their sins have brought them. True it
is, they acknowledge their sin to be the cause of it, but they are not moved
for the sin, but for the pain.

Now seeing the spirit of man can bear all external pains, Prou. 18.14.
but who can bear a wounded spirit? therefore let us see what remedies can be
applied to cure the diseases of the Conscience.

Remedies against a troubled conscience.
First, it is necessary that the doctrine of faith be propounded, whereby the
conscience terrified with Gods judgementes, may be strengthened by his
mercies: and it is requisite that all the places of Scriptures, which promise
Gods mercy, should be propounded unto the patient.

Next, that an interpreter, one of a thousand, may be sought, who may pray for
him, as a spiritual Physician to his soul.

Thirdly, that he be frequent in reading, and praying, that he enter not into
temptation: and then thus being exercised, by Gods help he will recover.

And after his recovery, let him take heed to himself, that he grieve not
Gods Spirit, but walk in fear and trembling; and he shall find such
excessive joy after that trouble, as he never did in all his life before. For
as after the Winter blasts, Simil.
the Sun shines more comfortably in Summer, so after a troubled conscience
comes greatest tranquillity to our minds: and after the raging storms of
the Sea, comes greatest tranquillity, and calmnesse, Simil.
so after a disquieted mind God sends greatest consolations.

A PRAYER FOR A TROVBLED CONSCIENCE.
O Lord, art thou also become mine enemy? have thou hid thy countenance in
displeasure? Oh, that my grief were well weighed, Job 6.2.
and my miseries laid together in the Balance: they would be far heavier
than the sand of the Sea: for thine Arrows are in me, and the venom thereof
drinks up my spirit. I eat Gall for my Meat, Psa. 69.21
and my Drink is mingled with Vinegar. Oh, that God would destroy me. I burn
with sorrow: spare me not, O Lord: yet have I not denied the words of the
holy One: Job 6.10.11. Job 7.6. etc
my strength is not the strength of a stone: my days are swifter than a
Weauers shottle, Job 7.6. etc
and fly away like the wind. I speak to thee, O Lord, in the trouble of my
spirit, and move in the bitterness of my mind. Am I a Whale fish, that I am
kept in ward? I abhor my life, for my pain is greater than I am able to
bear. Genes. 4.13 Job 19.13. etc.
I have none now to help me: all have forsaken me. I am left to be a prey to my
spiritual enemies: thou have set my secret sins in the light of thy
countenance. I inherit now the sins of my youth, Job 20.11. and 7.3. Psa.
50.21
and the months of vanity, which I passed. Thou have put my sins in order,
and those things which I thought light, by idle thoughts and speeches, now I
find them like mountains: so terrible is thy Tribunal, and thy Face burning
like fire. The Heavens are not clean before thee: Job 4.28. and 15.15 and 15.16
thou foundest no steadfastnesse in the Angels, how much less can I, who have
drunken in iniquity like water, be justified before thee? If I would justify
my self, when thou have reasoned with me, and 9.3.20.
mine own mouth would condemn me: though I were just, yet I could not answer,
but I would make supplication to my Judge. and 9.15.
If I wash me with snow water, and purge mine hands most cleanly, and 9.30.31
yet shall thou plunge me into the pit, and mine own clothes shall make me
filthy.

What shall I do, O thou Savior of men? Will thou absent thy self for ever?
Has God forgotten to be merciful? Psalm. 77.7.8.9. etc.
Will he show no more favor to my miserable soul? does his promise fail for
evermore? has he shut up his tender mercies in displeasure? He has lifted me
up, and casten me down again. He has shot at me with his Arrows, as at a
mark. Then I said, This is my death. Job 7.20. and 16.13 Psa. 77.10
Yet I remembered the years of the right hand of the most High, and how he
delivered his children by his mighty arm. Is the Lord like man, that he can
repent? and, Whom he loves, 1. Sam. 15.29.
does he not love to the end? Many pledges of thy favor I have received in
my youth: will thou now reject me, in my gray hairs? Is there any shaddowe of
change in thee? Albeit all men be liars, yet thou art faithful, and constant
for ever. Thy Son said, Heaven and Earth should perish, but one jot of thy
word should not fall to the ground. Matthew. 24.35.
But all the Scriptures proclaim thy mercy: thou cryedst in the Camp of
Israel, with thine own voice, The Lord is merciful, full of compassion, and
of great kindness, Exo. 34.16
showing mercy unto thousands. Therefore, O Lord, have mercy upon me
miserable wretch, cure my wounds, power in the Oil and Wine of thy Sons
blood and spirit, that I may be made whole. For out of the deep places of a
grieved heart have I called Psa. 130.1
upon thee. If thou would observe mine iniquities, who can be saved? Psa.
130.3 4.
But mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared: For even as when the
Sun departs in Winter, then all tempests arise, Snow, Hail, Frost, Simil:
Winds, etc: so when thou obscurest thy countenance from me, then the Winter
of all temptations arises aganst me: the Devil, my spiritual enemy, raises
up such fearful temptations, that through the multitude of sins, he
terrifieth me; even in the night, when I would have slept, he thought to have
made me to despare of thy mercies: but, O Lord, I know that thy mercies are
more infinite than my sins are, or can be: yea, though my sins be more than
the hairs of mine head, Psa. 40.12
yet thy mercies are as the Sands of the Sea, or the Stars of Heaven, which
cannot be numbered. Therefore, O God, let thy face shine upon me, and I shall
be saved. Psa. 31.16
Mine enemies are risen up against me, and as thorns they prick me on every
side: Psa. 42.10 Psalm. 22.8.
they say, Now where is thy God? he trusted in the Lord, let him deliver him:
let him save him, seeing he loves him. Psa. 38.20 and 11. Psalm. 41.9.
Yea, those who render evil for good are mine enemies, because I follow
goodness. My friends and familiars have forsaken me, and he that ate at my
table, has lifted up his heel against me: yea, he with whom I went unto the
House of God, and communed with him of spiritual matters, and who prayed with
me, and exercised the parts of divine worship, does scorn me, saying, Where
is thy confidence, thine hope, and thy fear, which thou have of God? But, O
Lord, let me not be ashamed, Psalm. 25.3.
because I put my trust in thee.

O thou Sun of righteousness, come with the bright beams of thy
countenance: disperse and chase away the clouds of my sins, and of all these
temptations: chase away my spiritual adversaries, and give not my temporal
enemies cause to rejoice over me, neither yet to dishonor thine holy Name;
that when others say, Behold, this poor man called upon the Lord in his
misery, Psalm. 34.6.
and he heard the voice of his prayer; they may turn also unto thee, and be
saved: for I will consecrate my self to thy Name for ever, through Christ
Jesus, my Lord and Savior: to whom, together with thee, O Father, and the
holy Spirit, be all praise, honor, glory, power, and dominion, World
without end. So be it.

A MEDITATION UPON THE ESTATE OF KINGS.
KINGS are the principal and chief members of the Church, and are Heads of
that Church which is within their Dominions: and therefore every King ought to
do the part of an Head unto her: that is, To foresee her wealth, maintain
her liberty, speak for her, hear those things which concern her weal,
defend her from persecution and oppression, and that she be not craftily
dealt withal, as Pharaoh did to the Israelites: Exodus 1.10 11 Psalm. 45.7.
lest they touch the Lords Anointed, and he rebuke them, and root them out,

All good Christians are most duetifullie bound to pray for Kings, 1. Tim. 2.2.
(yea, although they were evil, as Samuel prayed for Saul: 1. Sam. 16.1.
and the Apostle Saint Paul in very many places of his Epistles, admonishes
and charge us to pray for Kings, Magistrates, and all such as are in
authority) and not to say with some phantasticke persons, that they cannot
find an heart to pray for them: for these sort of people are Wells without
Water. 2. Pet. 2.17


If the Kings be persecuters, let us heartily pray to GOD to convert them:
if they be Nourish-fathers, let us beseech the Lord long to continue them, and
their posterity. Yea, we ought not only outwarldlie and publicly to pray
for Kings; but also inwardly, and in our secret thoughts, to nourish a
reverent and honorable rememberance of them, NOTA.
and to speak reverently of them, lest the Fowls of the Air carry it away:
and we ought by all means to procure for their preservation: for they are (as
was said to David) better than ten thousand of us. 2. Sam. 18.3.


To oppone our selves against Kings, Princes, or other Magistrates, does
greatly smell of Antichristianisme and Popery, Antichristianisme to oppone to
Princes.
whatsoever color of zeal it seems to have. And indeed Kings have power of
Procuration, for the prosperity of the Church: but as for Administration, it
belongs only to the Clergy. 1. Chronic. 13.10.
The example of Vzza may be a sufficient warning for Princes, that they pass
not the limits prescribed unto them by God: For if there be a woe threatened
against those who remove the ancient Marches, Deuter. 27.17.
far greater shall the malediction be upon such as shall remove those
Marches which God has set betwixt himself and Man, Exodus 19.24.
and which He interdicted upon Mount SION.

A PRAYER FOR THE KINGS MAJESTY, AND HIS ROYAL SEED.
O KING of Kings, unto whom all the World does appertain, I thy poor
creature, according to thy commandment, and as I am bound, do humbly pray to
thy most excellent Majesty, that thou would bless and preserve all KINGS,
Princes, and Magistrates, that they may be mindful of thee, and of their
Calling; that they were raised up by thee: (for preferment comes not from the
East, nor from the West:) to the end that they may lead thy people in thy
ways. O Lord, sanctify them, and bless them, that they may discharge their
duty faithfully, to the glory of thy Name, and the weal of thy Church.
Convert, o Lord, the persecuters of thy Church, inform their ignorance by thy
word, and let them acknowledge their only honor to stand in the service which
they do to Christ. But those who maliciously set themselves aganst thee, and
against thy Kingdom, O Lord, overthrow them in the righteousness of thy
judgeme^t, as thou did Herod, Pharaoh, Saul, Achab, Julian the Apostate,
Act. 12.23 Exo. 14.28 1. Sam. 31.4. 1. King. 22 34.
and all others, who opposed themselus to thee, and to thy Christ; as the
Turk, and Antichrist the Pope does, whom, O Lord, we beseech thee, to
confound.

But in special, O Lord, I pray to thee for our Sovereign Lord, the KINGS
Majesty: indue him with the gifts of thine holy Spirit, answerable for his
high Calling: give him wisdom and understanding, as thou gave Solomon; 1
King. 3.9 2. King. 18 4. etc. 2. King. 23 4. etc. 1. Sam. 6.7
by the which he may go in and out wisely before the people: give unto him the
zeal of Josias, and Ezechias, and make him like David, a man after thine own
heart, who may guide thy people in thy ways, that he may prosper. Bless his
Majesty's Royal body, with long life, and good health, and guard him by thine
invisible protection, that none of his enemies have power against him: but as
thou have kept his sacred person even from his mothers womb to his gray
hairs, now thou will not cast off thine ancient care toward him; but keep him
in thy right hand. And above all, preserve him from the secret and treasonable
invasions of the Pope, and his treacherous Jesuits, who already interprysed
his death by Powder, but thou disappointedst them. And for this we thank thee,
beseeching thee to keep him still from those blooddie murderers, and all
traitors, both foreign and domesticke, who attempt any evil against him.
Bless his gouernament, O Lord, that the Righteous may flourish in his days,
and that he may, by Justice, bring Peace unto thy people.

Bless, O Lord, Prince CHARLES his grace, print thy true fear and knowledge
in his tender heart, that he may be a blessing to all his fathers dominions.

Bless that royal Prince and Princess, the King and Queen of BOHEMIA, and
their Children: bless, keep, and defend them, that they may flourish in grace
and honor to the worlds end: that when they shall lay down their temporal
crowns at thy feet, then thou may crown every one of them, and their
royal Seed, with that unchangeable Crown of Glory, through Christ, our
only Savior, and Advocate.

AMEN.
A MEDITATION UPON SICKNESS.
Sickness is a School of God, Sickness is the Lords School.
whereunto he puts his Children to be nurtured, and Discipline there to be
used upon them. At this School we learn obedience, which we would not learn
at the School of the Word. We do learn at this School a perfect obedience
to the will of God, mortification of our affections, contempt of the world, love
to our enemies: and finally, he so does tame our nature, that our spirit
becomes obedient to his blessed will, (...), the greatest Sickness is never
to be sick. The greatest Sickness, is, never to be* sick.
It is good therefore that we should be corrected, that we perish not with the
wicked world.

Sickness is Medicine, somewhat painful, but wholesome in the end. The hand
which made thee, feeds thee, Sickness is painful, but yet healthful.
and it also nurtureth thee: therefore refuse not the correction of God, if
thou be his Child. Sickness is appointed to correct the abuse of our health,
therefore let us use our health wisely, that God be not forced to apply sharp
remedies to our misgouernaments. NOTA.


Diversity of sins has bred diverse diseases, Simil. Diverse sins,
diverse diseases.
and as the Apothecaries have drogges answerable to the soars, so God has
prepared such a sickness, which he thinks meetest to remedy such a soar as
thou have. Therefore think not thy disease to be fortuite, but by providence:
and pray that God may work by it in thine heart that for which he sent it:
that is, a true conuertion of thee unto thy God.

If thy disease be sharper, ask of God greater measure of patience: Patience
necesserie. 1. Corin. 10 13
for God is faithful, who will not suffer thee to be tempted above that which
thou art able to bear: thine external man, which is so greatly humbled,
shall raise up the hidden man of thine heart: so thou make a good change.

A PRAYER FOR A SICK PERSON.
O Most merciful Father, I ackowledge and confess that I am a most vild
creture, crying to thee, that thou would hear me, and let my prayer come
unto thee in thine holy Temple. Jonah 2.3. and 7
The waves of thy judgemens have gone over me, and have overwhelmed me, the
venom of thine arrows have drunken up my spirit, Job 6.4.
and thine hand is heavy upon me: I thought the day light should have comforted
me; but behold, my pangues increassed, and my pain ran upon me. Then I began
to think, My bed will give me some rest, but thou affrightedst me with
visions, Job 7.13.
and did keep mine eyes waking. My strength fails with pain, Psalm. 6.2.
and my bones are consumed: have mercy upon me, O Lord, mine eye, Psalm. 31.9.
my soul, and my belly are consumed with grief.

When thou chastisest man for his iniquity, Psalm. 39.5.11
thou make his beauty to fade as a Moth. Surely man in his best estate is
altogether vanity. O Lord, why art thou so far from mine health, Psa. 22.1.2
and the words of my roaring? I cry by day, and thou hear not; and in the
night I have none audience. My life is drawing near the grave, and my years
to the burial. There is nothing found in my flesh, Ps. 38.3.4
because of thine anger; neither rest in my bones, because of my sin. Mine
iniquities are gone over mine head, and as a weighty burden they are too
heavy. My reins are all full of burning, and there is no strength found in my
flesh: Ibid. 7.
mine heart pants, my strength fails me, and the light of mine eyes, Ibid.
10.
eue^ they are not mine own: I beseech thee pity me, and come in to this bed
to comfort me thy poor prisoner. For, Lord, I am a prisoner of hope, and I
trust in thee, though I said in mine haste, Thou have casten me out of thy
presence; Psa. 31.22
yet thou will hear the voice of my prayer, when I call upon thee. Take away
mine iniquities, which are the cause of my sickness. Purge me from these
filthy humors, which are the matter of my sickness: that these sins of
corrupt humors being removed, my pain may be mitigated. My sin inwardly
presses me down, and my diseases thereby are augmented. Hide thy face from my
sins, and put away mine iniquities. Create a new heart in me, Psa. 51.10
and renew a right spirit within me. Let my pain asswadge a little, that I may
gather my strength, yet before I go hence, Psa. 39.13
and be no more. Now I call to mind my sins, by the which I have provoked
thee to wrath, and I look to thee, whom I have rejected: I have multiplied
mine iniquities against thee, and thou most justly have doubled the stripes
upon me. Cure my sins by thy corrections: I refuse not to be corrected, but
do it to me in thy mercy, and let me feel the merciful hand of thy Spirit
bearing me up, and comforting me: let me hear his voice speaking peace to my
soul. Give comfort to mine inward man, as I have sickness which bears down
mine outward man. Thou wentest down with Daniel to the den, Dan. 6.22. and
3.25.
and with the thrie Children to the fire: refuse not to visit this thy poor
prisoner, in this bed of sickness: and if I find thee with me, I am content
ever to abide here. Forgive me, O Lord, the abuse of my former health: surely
thou have justly punished the abuse thereof in wantonness, in riot, and
excess, in the pleasures of my flesh. Now my flesh is punished; for my foolish
delights are turned unto gall and bitterness. Wash and cleanse me in thy
Son, Jesus Christ, his holy blood, that I may be as white as snow, and my
foolishness may not be in thy rememberance. Psalm. 51.7.


O, fie upon the world, which I loved, and thought it my felicity: now it is a
burden to me: when I desired to be rich, I fell into many temptations, and
with Zacheus greedily drew to me that which I do now most willingly reject,
and cast from me. Lord, Luke 19.8
thou art mine only Physician, neither have I gone with Ahaziah, 2. King. 1.2.
2. Chro. 16.12
to seek after Beelzebib the God of Ekron: neither with Asa put I my
confidence in Physicians; but in the living God.

O Lord, cure me: help me, O my God, who made me: thou art mine health, my
strength, and my Savior. If mine health may serve any ways to further for thy
glory, I pray thee for to restore me. Let me go to the House of the LORD, and
praise thee: Psalm. 6.5.
for the dead will not praise thee; and those who go down to the pit, will
not magnify thy Name. Let me not go out of this bed to dishonor thee, but
that I may receive a new life from thee, to lead a new life before thee. And
if thou have appointed that by this sickness thou vvilt draw me home to thee,
then I beseech thee prepare my soul, and make it ready, and give me before I
come to thee, a clear sight of thee, and an earnest desire to be with thee: 2.
Cor. 12.2 3.4.5. etc. Phil. 1.2 3.
for when Saint Paul saw the Heavens, it is no marvel that he desired to be
dissolved, and to be with thee. In the mean time, I commit my body, and my
soul to thy pleasure and good will: dispone them as thou think meetest for
thy glory, that whether I live or die, Christ may be mine advantage. Phil.
1.4.
Only I crave, holy FATHER, that I may so depend upon thee in this my
disease, that I never depart from thee to any other. I crave also holy
patience, by the which I may patiently abide to be corrected by this
visitation, Matthew. 11 29.
and to bear thy yoke willingly, and drink this cup cheerfully and
heartily; assuring my self, that all these troubles in end shall work
together for the best to me: that is, Simil.
that by them I may be tried as Gold in the fire; and my dross being purged,
I may serve thee more perfectly all the days of my life, through Christ my
Savior.

Amen.
A PRAYER FOR A WOMAN IN TRAVEL WITH CHILD.
O Lord God, and most merciful Father, I thy poor creature, whom thou have
bound up with the bands of this Sickness, do present my self upon the knees
both of my body and soul: even I thy poor supplicant, whom thou put
upon my knees in this my travel; that I may learn to know that there is no
help at all for me, but that which I must beg from thee in this my
tribulation.

And because this pain of mine has come to all Women, by the transgression of
Eua the first Woman, Genesis 3.16.
let me remember that sin is the mother of these pangues, forasmuch as all
have sinned, and must be partakers of their sorrows. O Lord, I confess I have
sinned with the rest of my Sex, and I am now punished with them, as thou
gave out sentence against them all. But, Lord, I pray thee, for Jesus sake,
who was the Seed of the Woman, that thou would loose the bands of my
sin. Genesis 3.15.
Pity me, pity me now, O dear Father, for thy Christ's sake. Woe is me,
that my pleasure in sin should have brought me to such displeasure. But
these are the wages of sin. Forgive me, O Lord, my sins, and let the bonds
thereof be broken, that thou may loose me out of the bonds of this disease
wherewith I am bound.

When thou spakest of the greatest pain, thou comparedst it to the pangues of
a woman who trauelleth with child: Isa. 13.8.
then, since my pangues are most vehement, most sudden, and have come to me
before I was aware, O Lord, let thy power be so much the more toward me, to
deliver me: let my greatest misery be the object of thy greatest compassion.
Therefore now, O Lord, help me, for the help of man or woman is all in
vain: pity the workmanship which it has pleased thee to frame in my womb:
alace, bring it, and draw it out of my belly. Thou have framed my Child in a
secret place: thou have brought it to the point of perfection, and there is no
strength in me to bring it forth: but, O my God, even when I am weakest, be
thou strongest, yea, then let thy power and mercy show it self to come in a
due and acceptable time. Glorify thy self, O Father, in my weakness: and
these persons which are now present with me, let them all be witnesses of thy
merciful delivery, and preservation of me and my Child: for I will here
lie down at thy feet, and cry out unto thee, Psalm. 69.3.
even till I be hoarce: neither will I cease my groaninges, and fearful
shouts, until it shall please thee to relieve me.

O God, thou Father of Heaven, let not this be my Benoni, Genesis 35.18
that is, the child of my trouble; but let it be my Benjamin, the child of my
days: and I will consecrate mine Infant unto thee and thy service, in
whatsoever calling thou please to employ it: give me it, and I will give it
to thee: 1. Sam. 1.27.
for, alace, I desire from thee no children to receive life, but such as shall
be partakers of Life eternal.

Now, Lord, help me, and renew my strength, that when thou have delivered
me, I may rejoice in the work of thy mercy, and feast not to my fleshly
desires, but to the honor of thee, my God, whose mercy endures for ever.
Psa. 136.1
Oh, Lord, my strength is dried up like a potsheard, Psa. 22.15
and yet I seek no means for my relief but only out of thine hand. I commit
my self wholly to thy Majesty's good will and pleasure; and I will not only
sacrifice unto thee the Calves of my lips, Hos. 14.2
but also of a most thankful heart, whenever it shall please thee to release
me: yea, and whatsoever I shall receive of thee, that shall I render back
again unto thee.

Even now thou gave me some relent and casment of my pangues: but now my
sorrows are increased again. Oh, for Jesus Christ's sake, who by his holy
Birth has taken away the sin of our birth, have mercy upon me, and purge
my birth. Give me, I beseech thee, a comfortable delivery of my child, that
we both may praise thee all our life, and spend our days in thy true fear
and service, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A MEDITATION OF PERSECVTION.
AMongst many Rods whereby GOD corrects his Children, there be chiefelie
three; to wit, the Sword, the Famine, and the Pestilence: which were all given
to David's choice: 2. Sam. 24.14.
of the which three he chose the Pest, vvilling rather to come under the Lords
hands, than man's: not but that the Sword and Famine were also in the hand of
God; but mediatelie, for the Pest is immediately the hand of God. It seems
hard that Susanna should choose the hands of man, rather than Gods, and David
rather the hand of God, than of men. It is to be understood, that David was
meaning of his mercy, Re^onciliation betwixt David's and Susannaes choice.
and Susanna of his justice: for the mercy of God is greater than the mercy
of men: but the fear of Gods justice is more terrible than all fears else
whatsoever.

As for persecution, it is the note and mark of the Church: others may be
persued, Persecution a mark of the Church.
but not persecuted: Treason is against Princes, and Parricide against Parents;
but persecution is against Christ: and look how high Treason is above
slaughter; so is persecution above Treason: because the person of God who is
persecuted, is the greatest Majesty.

Next, Christ persecuted with us.
it is to be marked, that Christians are persecuted with Christ: Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? We have our Head Partaker and Companion with us in our
troubles: may we not then be glad of such a party and yokefellow?

Thirdly, it is common to all Christians, who would live godly in Christ,
Persecution common to all Christians. Ioh. 15.20. Heb. 4.14.15.
to suffer persecution: then since it is the way of the head (who through
afflictions entered into Heaven) and of all his members, let us not refuse
persecution; for in so doing we refuse to be Christians. Then, since the way
of persecution is the Kings way, by the which he went into his Kingdom; and
again, since it is the way by which all the Saints, and the Brethren, and the
Firstborn, are entered into glory; then (I say) let us be bold to enter in
through that way: for who would refuse to go through a Wilderness, unto a
Kingdom? and by persecution to enter into Heaven? Sin raises up enemies to
us. Judge. 2.11. and 3.7.8. and 4.1.2.


Fourthlie, God rayseth up enemies against us, because we have been enemies
unto him; as he did to the people of Israel ever when they went unto
Idolatry, and 6.1.2. and 13.1. 1. King. 11.14.23.26.
and when as they provoked him by things which were no gods; so he punished
them by a People which were not a People: and so likewise did the Lord to
Solomon, when as he committed Idolatry.

God has our enemies in his hand. Simil.
Fiftlie, albeit our enemies be as sharp as Rasours, yet they are all in the
hands of God, who may well cut away our excrementes from us through our foes:
but they can do no more. For although God give them leave and liberty to cut
off our flesh, yet it is but an excrement of our soul. Only wicked men are
persecuters. Genesis 42.21 Exo. 14.27 1. Sam. 31.4 Psalm. 115.15. It is natural
for wicked men to persecute. Rev. 12.1.2.3.4. etc.


Sixtlie, none are chosen of God to persecute the Righteous, but evil men, whom
God either will convert, (with Joseph's Brethren,) after he has humbled them;
or else (with Saul and Pharaoh) he will plague them: for he says, Touch not
mine Anointed.

Last, it is natural for the seed of the Serpent, and the fiery Dragon, to
persecute the Woman, and her Child, as it is, that Foxes and Wolves should
persecute the Sheep: therefore let us prevail by patience, and blunt their
swords by our sufferinges.

A PRAYER FOR ANY PERSON, WHO IS PERSECVTED with his Enemies.
O Eternal God, and most merciful father, thou have commanded all those that
are weary and laden, to come unto thee, Matthew. 11.28.
and thou will case them: if thou have commanded me to come, thou will not
reject and cast me away when I am come: hear the voice of my prayer out of
thine habitation, and put not away the supplication of my mouth: enlarge my
heart to pray, and open thine care to my cry. O Lord, how long will thou
tarry? mine enemies are more than the hairs of mine head: Psalm. 22.12.13. etc.
they are strong, like the Bulls of Bashan: they are fearce and cruel, like
Lions, and Unicorns: they conueance against me, and say, that there is no more
help for me in God. O Lord, Psalm. 3.2.
when trouble draws near me, be not far from me. Lord, have mercy upon
me. It is true, O Lord, I have provoked thy wrath and indignation: I have been
thine enemy, and hated thee, who wast my Father: therefore most justly have
thou raised up these wicked men against me. Whatsoever I suffer, thou have done
it out of thy justice, Psalm. 51.4.
that thou may be just when thou judge. O Lord, forgive me my sins, and
keep them not in thy remembrance: for all the creatures which were in covenant
with me, are become enemies unto me. Oh, Reconcile me unto thy self, that the
stones of the field may be at peace with me. Job 5.23.
The waves of the Sea raged against Jonas, Jonah 1.4. and 2.1.2
when he fled from thy presence, but by his affliction thou broughtest him to
obedience, and conformity to thy will. I confess thou have enough to be angry
for against me: but, o Lord, what have I done to offend mine enemy? they
persecute me without cause. Psalm. 7.3
In the time of their trouble I prayed for them: when they were afflicted, then
I burnt: but when they saw thee afflicting me, and correcting me, then they
were alive: yea, smoat him whom thou did visit.

O Lord, I beseech thee to try me, and search mine heart, if ever I have done
any thing amiss unto these who persecute me, or was purposed to do them
harm; yea, Lord, I have ever done good unto them, and they have repayed me
with evil. Those who recompense me evil for good, are mine enemies. But, O
Lord, they have done unto me, as I did unto thee: for thy benefits, I have
loadened thee with sins: so ingrate and unthankful have I been unto thee,
and so justly have thou repayed me: 2. King. 18.19. 2. Sam. 16.5. 1. Sam.
17.10. Romans 8.28.
they rail aganst me, as Rabseketh did against Hezekiah, Simei against David,
and as Goliath cursed the Host of Israel: But, O Lord, turn thou their cursing
into a blessing; who have promised that all shall turn to the best to them
that love thee. I find that this short trial has wrought good unto me, and
therefore it is good for me, that I am humbled thereby: for I find my self
better disposed to thy service than I was before. Oh, sanctify this mine
affliction and cross, that howsoever Satan minds by this trouble to undo
me, thou may draw about his labor for my singular comfort; that by this
persecution I may serve thee more righteouslie, and live more duetifullie and
lovingly with my Neighbors, and more temperately in mine own person;
subduing my lusts and affections: so that this Cup which is most bitter to
my nature, and hardly of me to be drunken, may be converted into wholesome
Medicine, for the salvation both of my body and soul. O Lord, give me a good
Conscience, that breast plate of righteousness, Ephesians. 6.14.
and I will not be afraid neither for the multitude nor the malice of mine
adversaries. Guard me by thy divine providence, and secure me by the protection
of thine Angels: make me as a Seal on thine heart, Cantic. 8.6
and a signet upon thine arm: I commit my soul and body unto thine hands,
and faithful keeping. Give me not over to the lusts of mine adversaries, and
make me not a scorn to fools, Psa. 27.12
which understand not: let me possess my soul in patience. Psalm. 7.16.
Let their mischief turn upon their own head: slay them not, lest the
posterity should forget, Psa. 59.11
but rather let them live, that by their correction others may learn not to
persecute the members of thy body. O Lord, they are the stones which thou
castest at me, and the rods of thy fury. I crave thee mercy for my sin:
but as for them, thou can cast the rod into the fire, when thou have
chastised me. My Lord spoke seven words upon the Cross, and the first was,
Luke 23.34.
Forgive them, for they know not what they do: and I after his example,
forgive heartily my particular quarrel and revenge: for vengeance belongs
unto the Lord, Deu. 32.35
and thou biddest me bless those who curse me, Mat. 5.44.
and give mine enemies food when they are hungry, that I may heap coals of
fire upon Romans 12.20
their head. And albeit they have done me wrong both in my person and name by
their lies, and in my substance, yet Lord, I forgive them: let them repent,
that thou may pardon them. And finally, let me patiently endure all these
wrongs, that thou may make me meet for thy Kingdom: that being more than a
Conqueror, having made conquest of mine affections, I may inherit thy glory,
and reign with thee for ever.

Amen.
A MEDITATION OF FAMINE.
THere has been Famine through all Ages, by which GOD has corrected the abuse
of his People. The Famine comes either for the excess and abuse of Gods good
creatures, Causes of Famine. 1. Excess.
(as the example of the prodigal son bears witness, who was brought to
such poverty, Luc. 15.15
that he was feign to sustain himself with the Husks which the Swine ate,
because of his ryote, 2. Oppression. 2. Sam. 21.1.3. Idolatry. 1. King. 17 1.
) or for the oppression of the Poor, (as in the days of David, for the wrong
which was done to the Gibionites by Sauly) or else for Idolatry, (as in the
days of Achab.) And the Famine continues commonly three, five, or seven
years.

As in the time of Famine the Lord punishes the wickedness of his People, God
in time of Famine remembers his own. Genesis 21.22 and 30.43 and 47.12 Ruth 1.1.
1. King. 18 13. and 17.4.9 Psa. 34.10 Psa. 37.19 Job 5.22.
so by his providence he comfort the godly. He increased Abraham and
Israel amongst the Heathen People: He fed the House of Iaakob in Egypt by
Joseph, Elimelech and Naomi in Moab, the Prophets in the Cave by Obadiah, Eliah
by the Raven, and the Widow by Eliah. Though the Lions, says David, do
lack, and are hungry, yet those that fear the Lord shall want nothing that
is good: yea, in the days of Famine they shall have enough, and shall laugh at
Dearth and Famine.

But in the time of Famine let us remember how often times we have exceeded
measure in prodigality, and how we have hardened our hearts to the poor
and needy, and let us repent and mourn for the same.

Next, look that thou despare not, but humble thy self under the hand of the
Lord, and put thy whole trust in his promise, who is faithful: but beware that
thou seek none unlawful means for thy relief. And lastly, let us pray
fervently and often, attending Gods pleasure with patience: and then no doubt
He will provide means for our comfort unlooked for.

A PRAYER IN THE TIME OF FAMINE.
JUST and righteous art thou, O Lord God, who have so many ways to humble
me; for now thou have taken from me thy good benefits, which thou gave
me. I confe^^^, O Lord, that when my ways were ou^-flowing with Oil and
Butter, Job 29.6.
^en I brake not my Bread vn^^^^ ^u^^rie. Psalm. 30.6.
I say de in my prospe^^^, I will never be moved: but tho ^^^^nedst thy
countenance, and I per^^^d. Thou gave me, O Lord, Job 1^.21
and tho^ have taken from me: blessed be thi^^ holy Name. I repent me o^ my
former abuse, the contempt of thy benef^^es, and thy people. But I return to
thee. O my Father, Luke 15.19.
and with tears I confess, that I am not worthy that thou should bestow
any more upon me. Yet, Lord, I beseech thee to have mercy upon me, and let
me be as one of thine hired Servants. For I will put my confidence in thee,
and I will seek thee early, because I know thou have a thousand means for
my relief and comfort, which I see not my self.

O Lord, thou have wounded me: oh, Job 5.18.
heal me again. Thou filledst the Widows Barrels with Oil: 1. King. 17 16.
and the Rivers of thine Oil are not yet dried up, but continue still, for
they are everlasting: Power down, therefore, I beseech thee, o thou plentiful
God, some drop of thy goodness upon mine empty soul: for the time of my
necessity, is the time of thine opportunity. Make me an example of thy
liberality: that all the world may see, that thou leauest not those which put
their trust in thee. Show some toke^ of thy favor unto me, and I shall praise
thee. For since thou gave thy Christ for me, NOTA.
will thou not much rather give me other things, which are good for me? And
last, seeing thou have prepared that hidden Manna for me, and the Tree of
Life, Revel. 2.17 and 22.1.2.
and the Waters of Life, yea, and the whole Treasures and Crowns in thine
everlasting Kingdom; then I doubt not, O Lord, but that in this short time of
mine abiding here thou will be careful for my provision. But howsoever it
be, I am content of thy wise dispensation, and teach me, my God, I beseech
thee, to be contented to abound, and to want; Phil. 4.11.
that neither in wealth I presume and misknowe thee, nor that in poverty I may
faint, and tempt the Lord my God: but that in every estate I may glorify
thee, and speak good of thy Name: Even for Christ Jesus sake.

AMEN.
A MEDITATION OF PESTILENCE.
THe Pestilence is one of Gods three Arrows, Causes of Pestilence. Psalm. 91.6
which flies in the midday, and in the night kills many. The causes of it
are the contempt of the Lord, an extraordinary persecution of the Church, Lev.
26.25
or else the pride of Princes, who confide over much in the multitude of their
Subjectes, 2. Sam. 24.10.
as David did.

There are many sorts of the Plague, after which it obtains diverse names, as
Bubo, Blew-blawart, the Flexes, The Pest is most dangerous in 4 respects.
the Charbuckle, etc. The Pest is most dangerous in four respects: first,
because it is contagious, and infecteth the air: secondly, it is speedy, and
flies like an Arrow: thirdly, it is vehement, and extreme painful: and
fourthlie, it is cruel, separating those who are bound by nature, as Parents
from Children, Husbands from their Wives, etc. Under the time of the Plague
we should fall down before God. We should stoop, when we see the Sword in
the hand of the Angel. Let us confess our particular sins, with David,
saying, I and my fathers house have sinned. 2. Sam. 24.17. Psa. 51.17
We must offer up to GOD the Sacrifice of a contrite heart, and present unto
him the perfect Oblation of Christ.

That the Plague may cease, there is none Art, or diligence of man, or yet
Physic, to be used: but the next remedy is, only true repentance in
CHRIST'S Blood.

A PRAYER IN THE TIME OF PESTILENCE.
O Lord, I confess that I am worthy that thou should power forth all the
Violes of thy wrath against me, Rev. 6.14.
and all the plagues which are written in thy Law: for the stink of my sins
pierced the Heavens, and forced thee to send down this filthy and infectiue
Botch, to be avenged upon mine abominations, whereby I have polluted the
Earth. O Lord, be merciful to me, and take away mine iniquities. I retiere to
the shadow of the Almighty for a refuge and cover: Psalm. 9.9.
and I hide me in the secret of thy Tabernacle. Thou shootest thine arrows in
the midday, yea they slay innumerable thousands in darkness: at thousand
falls at thy side, Psalm. 91.7.
and ten thousands at thy right hand: and yet thou have spared me, praised be
thy Name for ever. If the men of Benjamin failed not in their shooting at an
haire-bredth, Judges 20.16.
can the eye of the Lord, or his hand, waver? all things are done by thy
providence. Mark me with the letter of mourning, and with the blood of the
Lamb: Ezech. 9.4 Rev. 20.15.
write me in the book of Life, that in the day of thy great slaughter the
Angel of thy wrath may pass by me. I ly wrapped in the mantle of my Savior,
before thy Mercy Seat, beseeching thee to deliver me from this plague, if it
please thee. And if thou have appointed that I should die therein, sanctify my
death, that it may be acceptable to thee: sanctify my faith with the
assurance of thy love, that albeit I be separated from men, yet thou will not
be separated from me: sanctify my patience, that I may drink in this Cup
cheerfully: sanctify in end my memory, that I may remember thy inercies in
the midst of thy plagues. Lord, let the joy of thy presence swallow up all my
pangues, that having received the final victory in the blood of Jesus, I may
sing the triumph, and render my spirit into thine hands, through Christ Jesus,
to whom, with thee, and the holy Ghost, be all praise for evermore.

Amen.
A MEDITATION OF THE SWORD.
THE Sword is Gods third Arrow, which he sends out either upon a whole Land,
Causes of the Sword.
to punish their wickedness, Deu. 28.49
or to his own chosen Children for their sins: as to David, the Sword of Saul
and Absolam. 2. Sam. 12.9.
The Lord threatened by the Prophets, and executed many times in the
Scriptures, this judgment upon his people: for he brought Nations upon them
from far, flying as swift as an Eagle to the prey: Terem 5.15
a people whose tongue they understood not, and of a fearce countenance, which
will not regard the persons of the old, nor have compass^on of the young, who
shall besiedge them in all their Cities, etc.

The Sword the greatest Plague. 2. Sam. 24.14.
This is the greatest temporal scourge that God ever sent to a Land, to give
them over unto cruel Tyrants: for which cause David made choice of the other;
because he thought it better to fall into the hands of God, than into the
hands of men.

First, we must consider that the author of all Wars, God the author of
Wars.
and first worker, is the eternal God; who being provoked by the sins of the
people, and especially by Idolatry, and innocent blood, as also Sacrilege,
raises up Wars either intestine among themselves, or foreign powers. The
Scriptures are furnished with insinit examples for the confirmation hereof.
Then we may learn, not to look unto the rod, but to him who smites us, and
to turn unto him by unfeigned repentance, that he may stay and bridle the
cruelcie of Tyrants.

Next, ye shall know the causes of War: Wars are lawful, if they be
warranded.
for we must not account that all Wars are unlawful: for as Augustine
says, Melius justum ^ellian, quam Pax iniqua: that is, A just War is better
than an unjust Peace. Therefore, Princes should consider that they raise no
Wars upon small grounds, neither by ambition or covetousness encroath upon
the possessions of their neighbor Princes; neither yet should they suffer
their people to be oppressed, or brought under thraldom, either of their
bodies, possessions, or their conscience: but rather ought to defend them by
the Sword.

As the commodities of Peace are many, (for in it Religion flourishes, The
commodities of Peace. 1. King. 4.25. Isa. 2.4.
and Learning is advanced, every man dwells under his own Fig Tree, and
the Sword is turned into a Mattocke, and the Spear into a Sithe, the voice of
the Bridegroom is heard in the City, and not the blooddie cries of the
Opressour, which our Savior Christ, when he came to the world, brought with
him, although it was attributed unto Augustus Caesar;) so are the incommodities
of War also many: The incommodities of Wars.
for in it all Religion euanisheth, good Laws are abolished, good manners
corrupted, good Sciences forgotten, Towns and Villages sacked, Fields and
Lands which were manured by great travel and cost, wasted by the incursion of
strangers; great Treasures are spent, men muthered, or made captives, women
made whoores, and slaves, etc. so that Wars are the beginning and mother of
all evils.

A PRAYER IN TIME OF THE SWORD.
O Lord, we confess that by reason we have abused so long and so gracious a
peace, and thy patience which should have led us to repentance, we are worthy
of all these stripes which are laid upon us by these Barbarous Tyrants, which
thou have raised up against us: but we have our refuge to the Throne of thy
mercy, beseeching thee, dear Father, to remember that we are the price of thy
Sons blood, and for his sake spare us: chastise us in mercy, and in measure,
with the rod of thy children: and suffer not thy Turtle Dove to be a prey to
the wild Beasts. Psa. 74.19
Our hearts are oppressed and wounded with sorrow, when we see thy glory
defaced, thy Name blasphemed by these blooddie Beasts, thy Temples burnt with
fire, and thy people daily put to the Sword. O Lord, the examples of others
that called upon thee in their troubles gives unto us hope that thou will not
suffer us to be confounded. Our enemies have raised up battle against us
without all deseruings or cause upon our side, or injury offered unto them:
therefore, O Lord, maintain our innocence, as thou did always defend a
righteous cause. O Lord, look to their cruelty and merciless tyranny, who
spare neither the gray hairs, nor tender sucklings, neither women with child:
and the rather, O Lord, they seek our destruction, because we have renounced
the Roman Antichrist, whose kingdom they defend in daily shedding the blood
of thy Saints. O Lord, look to their craft, and policies, whereby daily they
undermine us. In us, O Lord, there is no strength, no wisdom, no number nor
judgment to withstand their force, their craft, multitude, and diligence: and
therefore, O Lord, look thou mercifully upon us, and deliver us from their
cruelty, for thy Christ's sake. Thou have assisted thy Church even from the
beginning, and for the delivery of the same thou have plagued her cruel
persecuters from time to time. O Lord, thou remainest one for ever, thy nature
is unchangeable, thou can not but hate cruelty, pride, oppression, and
murder, and specially these blooddie Tyrants, who are sent against us by that
Romish Idol, and hired to root out all those who truly profess thy holy
Name. Put out thine arm, O God, for our relief, and let all the world know, 1.
Sam. 17.46.
that the God of Israel yet lives. Hear us, O Lord, help and deliver us, for
thy Christ's sake.

Amen.
A MEDITATION OF DEATH.
Death a dead enemy
DEath is our last and least enemy: for if Sin and Satan, who are living
enemies, be overcome by the power of Christ in us, what need we to fear
Death, which is a dead enemy, and altogether without power and strength?
Indeed Death is terrible to the Worldling; and no marvel, for it separateth
him from all his comforts, and enters him to all his pains: but it
possesses the godly in all their joys, and makes an end of all their
troubles: it is to them, Non obitus, sed abitus: non exitus, sed transitus:
Ambros.
iis funera sunt faenora: that is, Not death, but a departing: not an
out-going, In the hour of death remember what thou wast, what thou art, and
what thou shall be.
but a thorow-going: and to these their burials are gains.

In the hour of Death remember with remorse thy former life, thy future life
with joye and delight, and thy present estate with patience. If the troubles of
thy conscience, or pain of thy sickness, urge thee to impatience, Quid scis,
quid sue^is, quisque futurus cris.
then think, this is the high way to Heaven: for even by the Gates of Hell, by
Stripes, and Wounds, our Lord went before us. The fear of Death springs of
the weakness of faith, and our great love of the world begets in us great
desire of life, and our little sight of Glory makes over great fear of Death.

Remember that there are two Deaths, and fear the greater: There are two
deaths. Rev. 20.14
the first Death is the separation of the soul from the body: but the second
Death is the everlasting separation of God from the soul. If thou be partaker
of the resurrection from sin, the second Death shall have no power over thee:
therefore thou need not to be afraid of the first Death, if thou be delivered
from the second.

2. Thou need not to fear the first Death: Death is universal.
for it is a fatal necessity, laid upon all Flesh, Kings, Prophets, People,
etc. all must depart.

A profitable exchange by death.
3. There is great gain by the excha^ge: for we get a Palace for a Prison;
rest, for labor; liberty, for bondage; God, for men; the company of Angels,
for the company of sinners; and finally, the Heavens, for the Earth.

4. Thou may take comfort in thy death, Present joy by death, without delay.
Luke 23.43. NOTA. Sin is taken away. Simil. The-paines of death are short.
because thy soul shall not be holde^ in suspense, nor stand at the gates of
Heaven, nor go to Purgatory for new torments: for in the day of thy death
thou shall be with the Lord in Paradise

5. The sting of Death is taken from it, which is Sin: then Death can do
thee no more harm, than a Serpent which wants a Sting.

6. The pangues of Death which thou sustainest are but momentaneall, but thy
joys shall be eternal, as Paul says to the Romans, Chap. 8. Verse. 18.

Inward comfortes. The soul shall shortly return.
7. God mixeth his inward comforts with thine outward crosses.

8. Thy body shall sleep a little, thy soul shall return shortly, the
Comforter shall assist thee, Christ is praying for thee in Heaven, the Saints
on Earth are crying to the Redeemer, and the Angels are ready to conuoy thy
soul to eternal bliss.

9. Here is thy comfort, Christ thy Savior suffered the pangues of Death in
the highest degree. Christ suffered death Matthew. 10.24.
Shall the servant be above his Master? And as he died, so he rose again, and
overcame Death in his own den. Then, if the Head be risen, will he not
raise after him all the members of the body? Yes surely.

Lastly, The right desire to live or die. Psalm. 6.5 Isa. 38.7.
if thou find a desire in thee to live longer, let the cause of thy desire be,
that thou may live better; as Ezechias and David said, Shall the dead
praise thee? And, What sign shall I have to go to the House of the Lord? And
if thou desire to die, Christ advantage in life and death.
see that it be not for thine earthly burdens, but for sin, which thou
weariest to bear; and for the desire of the fruition of the glory of God.

A PRAYER AT THE HOVRE OF DEATH.
EVerlasting God, and my most merciful Father in Jesus Christ, I thy poor
Prisoner, bound by the Chains of Sickness to this Bed, and upon whom the
bonds of Death are seasing, and taking hold, I fall down before the throne
of thy Mercy, and beseech thee to give me thine holy Spirit: that seeing I am
going the way of all flesh, I may rightly resolve, 1. King. 2.2
with solid judgment, and perfect memory, anent my departure: that as thou
have prepared a place for me, Job 14.2.
so thou will prepare me for it: that I being purged by the blood of Jesus,
and sanctified by thy Spirit, may enter into the present possession of that
inheritance promised to me. And because many times I learned by thy Word
that I must die, and by daily experience in the death of others thou gave
me warning, as also I have carried in mine own body the marks of death by
diverse diseases; yet, Lord, now at last I learn by mine own proof, that
which I would not learn by others. Now therefore, O Lord, when I look back
to my former life, and consider the sins of my childhood, and mine age, what
things I did ignorantly, and what I did against mine own conscience, my
forgetfulness of thy mercies, and mine ingratitude to thee for thy goodness,
mine open sins, and my secret sins, my presumptions, mine injuries to
others, mine intemperancie, my slothfulness, and neglect of thy worship: all
these sins, so often committed by me, being put in a mass, and many more
with them, I beseech thee most merciful Father, that thou would vouchfase
to bind them up together in the bundle of thy mercy, and burn them in the
fire of thy love: bury them in the grave of eternal oblivion, and make me
now quite of them, that they burden me no more: and I beseech thee, that now
in this my last battle thou will so strengthen my faith against infidelity
and distrust, that as by thy power I have overcome the maine host of sin, so
by thy grace these remnants of a defeated Army, and those straggling
Soldiers, who are shaking their weapons upon me, they may be scattered by
thine hand, that the work of my salvation may now in mercy be crowned and
finished: that now I may cry with my Savior at his death, Consummatum est: It
is finished. Ioh. 19.30
He finished upon the Cross the work of salvation for me: now, O Lord, finish
it in me upon this bed.

I acknowledge, o Father, that I am infinitlie obliedged unto thy Majesty, for
thine innumerable benefits, which I have received at thine hands in the time
of my life: for thou ever did love me with a Fatherly affection, thou
caredst for me, thou prouidedst in due season to my necessity, thou fedst me,
thou defendedst me, thou nurturedst me, etc. Simil. Exodus 19.4
And as the Eagle carries the little ones, so have thou carried me in the
arms of thy mercy. But in special thou broughtest me from ignorance, to the
knowledge of the truth, and made me to be borne in the bosom of the
Church, and gave me that eternal life, John 17.3.
which is to know thee to be the true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus
Christ, the Savior of the World. Yea, when I fell into manifold dangers in
this Wilderness, the perils of waters, of fire, of poverty, of sickness, of
decietfull and wicked men, etc. thou deliueredst me from them all by thy
mighty and outstretched arm, and have given me this time to resolve with
thee, to repent, and thank thee for thy benefits. For all which thy mercies
and excellent benefits, both spiritual and temporal, I render unto thee
most hearty thanks, praise, and glory, to continue for evermore.

As for any good thing which is now wrought in me, it is not of me, O Lord,
but thy grace working in me, who make thy power to be known in my
weakness. And if thou would look narrowly to my best actions, thou would
find in them a thousand imperfections. Therefore I couch under the Garment of
my Lords righteousness: oh, spread the Mantle of thy Mercy over me.

And as for the World, I disclaim and renounce it, as a false and deceitful
friend, which promises fair things to those that seek it: but for golden
offers, it crowns them with thorns.

I bid goodnight to all my Friends, Acquaintances, and good Christians: and I
exhort all you who would have peace in your latter end, and die the death of
the Righteous, Numb. 23.10. Mat. 7.13.
that ye would tread the footesteps of Jesus Christ, and go through the
strait way: keeping faith and love with the Saints to the end: 2. Tim. 4.8.
that seeing I have gone before you, and run my race, and shortly shall
receive the Crown of Righteousness, ye would rejoice in my victory, and not
be for^e for my remoouing. And I pray God to be with you all, and to conuoy
you safely unto his Kingdom; that we may all meet joyfullie in his glory.
And seeing I feel all the members of my body decaying, and giving over their
office, my grinders sailing, my sight and hearing decaying, Eccl. 12.3.
and my strong men trembling, let the hidden man of mine heart be sanctified by
thy grace, that I may have a clear sight of my Lord and Savior, and so depart
in peace, with old SIMEON thy Servant.

Now my Soul, return to thy rest, for the Lord has been beneficial to
thee. Psa. 116.7
I commit my spirit into thine hands, O LORD: take it, and by the conuoy of
thy most holy Angels carry it unto thy Kingdom. And for my body, I commit
it to the dust, from whence it came, to sleep there till the Day dawne, and my
LORD return, and raise it up again; that thou with it may receive that
eternal glory which is prepared for us, through Christ, Amen.

FINIS.
THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
BEcause it is impossible that Books of any quantity (in the first
Impression) should escape all Faults, and especially in the absence of the
Author: therefore it shall please the Christian Reader to avoid partiality,
judge charitablie, and correct diligently such errors as (on our behalf)
unwillingly have escaped our correction: all which (God willing) at another
time we shall amend most attentively.


