A Declaration of the Sentence and deposition of Elizabeth, the usurper and
pretensed Queen of England.
SIXTVS the fifte, by Gods providence the universal pastor of Christ's flock,
to whom by perpetual and lavvful succession, apperteyneth the care and
government of the Catholic Church, saying the pittyfull calametyes which
heresy has brought into the renoumed cuntryes of England and Irelande, of
old so famous for virtue, Religion, and Christian obedience; And how at this
present, through the impiety and perverse government of Elizabeth the
pretensed Queen, with a few her adheare^tes, those kingdoms be brought not
only to a disordered and perillouse state in them selves, but are become as
infected members, contagious and trublesome to the whole body of Christendom;
And not having in those parts the ordinary means, which by the assistance of
Christian Princes he has in other provinces, to remedy disorders, and keep in
obedience and ecclesiastical discipline the people, for that Henry the 8. late
king of England, did of late years, by rebellion and reuolte from the Sea
Apostolic, violently separate him self and his subjects from the communion
and society of the christian comonvvelth; And Elizabeth the present usurper,
does continevve the same, with perturbation and peril of the cuntryes about
her, shevvinge her self obstinate and incorrigible in such sort, that
without her deprivation and deposityo^ there is no hope to reform those
states, nor keep Christendom in perfect peace and tra^quillety: Therefore our
Holy Father, desyringe as his duty is, to provide present and effectual
remedy, inspired by God for the universal benefit of his Church, moved by
the particular affection which him self and many his predecessors have had to
these natyons, And solicited by the Zealous and importunate instance of sundry
the most principal persons of the same, has dealt earnestly with diverse
Princes, and specially with the mighty and potent King Catholic of Spain,
for the reverence which he bears to the Sea Apostolic, for the old Amity
between his house and the Croune of England, for the special love which he
has showed to the Catholics of those places, for the obteyninge of peace and
quietness in his cuntryes adioyninge, for the augmentinge and increase of the
Catholic faith, and finally for the universal benefit of all Europe; that he
will employe those forces which almighty God has given him, to the deposition
of this woman, and correction of her accomplices, so wicked and noisome to the
world; and to the reformation and pacification of these kingdoms, whence so
great good, and so manifold public commodeties, are like to ensue.

AND to notefy to the world the justice of this act, and give full
satisfaction to the subjects of those kingdoms and others whosoever, and
finally to manifest Gods judgments upon sin; his Holiness has thought good,
together with the declaratory sentence of this vvomans chasticement, to
publish also the causes, which have moved him to proceed against her in this
sort. FIRST for that she is an Heretic, and Schismatike, excommunicated by
two his Holiness predecessors; obstinate in disobedience to God and the Sea
Apostolic; presuminge to take upon her, contrary to nature, reason, and all
laws both of God and man, supreme jurisdiction and spiritual auctority over
men's souls. SECONDLY for that she is a Bastard, conceived and borne by
incestuous adultery, and therefore incapable of the Kingdom, asvvell by the
several sentences of Clement the 7. and Paul the 3. of blessed memory, as by
the public declaration of King Henry him self. THIRDLY for vsurpinge the
Croune without right, having the impediments mentioned, and contrary to the
ancient acorde made between the Sea Apostolic and the realm of England,
upon reconciliation of the same after the death of S. Thomas of Canterbury, in
the time of Henry the second, that none might be lawful king or Queen thereof,
without the approbation and consent of the supreme Bishopp: which afterward
was renewed by king John, and confirmed by oath, as a thing most
beneficial to the kingdom, at request and instance of the lords and Commons
of the same. AND FVRTHER for that with sacrilege and impiety, she continevveth
violating the solemn Oath made at her coronation, to mainteyne and defend the
ancient privileges and ecclesiastical libertyes of the land. FOR MANY and
grievous iniuryes, extorsions, oppressions, and other wrongs, done by her, and
suffered to be done against the poor and innocent people of both cuntryes. FOR
sturringe up to sedition and rebellion the subjects of other nations about her,
against their lavvfull and natural princes, to the destructyon of infinite
souls, overthrow and desolation of most goodly cittyes and cuntryes. FOR
harboringe and protectinge Heretics, fugetiues, rebels, and notorious
malefactors, with great injury and prejudice of diverse common wealths: and
procuringe for the oppression of Christendom and disturbance of common peace,
to bring in our pote^t and cruel enemy the Turk. FOR so long and barbarouse
persecution of gods saints, aflictinge, spolynge, and imprisoninge the sacred
Bishops, tormentinge, and pitifully murtheringe numbers of holy Priests, and
other catholic persons. FOR the unnatural and iniust imprisonment, and late
cruelty used against the most gracyous Princess, Mary Queen of Scotland, who
under promise and assurance of protection and succor, came first into England.
FOR abolishinge the true Catholic religion; prophaninge holy Sacraments,
Monasteryes, Churches, Sacred persons, Memories of saints, and what else so
ever might help or further to eternal salvation: And in the Common wealth,
disgraceing the ancient Nobility, erecting base and unworthy persons to all
the Civil and Ecclesiastical Dignetyes, sellinge of laws and justice, And
finally exercysinge an absolute Tyranny, with high offense to almighty God,
oppressyon of the people, perdition of souls, and ruin of those cuntryes.

WHEREFORE, these things being of such nature and qualety, that some of the^
make her unable to reign, others declare her unworthy to live; His Holiness,
in the almighty power of God, and by Apostolical auctority to him committed,
does renew the sentence of his predecessors Pius 5. and Gregory the 13.
tooching the Excommunication and deposition of the sad Elizabeth: and further a
nevve does Excommunicate, and deprive her of all auctority and Princely
dignety, and of all title and pretensy on to the said Croune and Kingdoms of
England and Ireland; declaringe her to be illegittimate, and an unjust usurper
of the same; And absoluinge the people of those states, and other persons
whatsoever, from all Obedience, Oath, and other band of Subjection unto her,
or to any other in her name. And further does straitely command, under the
indignation of almighty God, and nayne of Excommunication, and the corporal
punishment appointed by the laws, that none, of whatsoever condition or
estate, after notice of these presents, presume to yeilde unto her, Obedience,
favor, or other suceurse, But that they and every of them concur by all
means possible to her chastisement. To the end, that she which so many ways
has forsaken God and his Church, being now destitute of wordly comfort, and
abandoned of all, may acknowledge her offense, and humbly submitt her self to
the judgments of the highest.

BE IT THEREFORE notefyed to the inhabitants of the said Cuntryes, and to all
other persons, that they observe diligently the premises, withdrawinge all
succor public and private, from the party pursued and her adherents, after
they shall have knowledge of this present: And that forthwith they unite them
selfs to the Catholic army conducted by the most noble and victorious Prince,
Alexander Farnesius, Duke of Parma and Placentia, in name of his Majesty, with
the forces that each one can procure, to help and co^curre as is aforesaid (if
need shall be) to the deposition and chasticement of the said persons, and
restitutio^ of the holy Catholic faith. Signifyenge to those which shall do
the contrary or refuse to do this here commanded, that they shall not escape
condign punishment.

MOREOVER BE IT KNOWN that the intention of his Holiness, of the King
Catholic, and the Duke his highness in this enterprise, is not to invade and
conquer these kingdoms; change laws, preuileges or customs; bereave of
liberty or lively hoode may man (other then rebels and ostinate persons) or
make mutation in any thing, except such, as by common accord, between his
Holiness, his Catholic majesty, and the states of the land, shall be thought
necessary, for the restitution and continuance of the Catholic Religion, and
punishment of the usurper and her adhearents. Assuringe all men, that the
controuersyes which may arise by the deprivation of this woman, or upon other
cause, either between particular parties, or touching the succession to the
Croune, or between the Church and Common vvelthe, or in other wise whatsoever,
shall be decyded and determined wholly according to justice and Christian equity
without injury or prejudice to any person. AND there shall not only due care
be had, to save from spoil the Catholics of these cuntryes, which have so
long endured, but mercy also showed to such penytent persons, as submitt them
selves to the Capitane general of this army. Yea for so much as information is
given, that there be many, which only of ignorance or fear be fallen from the
faith, and yet notwithstanding are taken for heretics; Neither is yt
purposed, presently to punish any such persons, but to supporte them with
clemency, till by conference with learned men and better consideration, they may
be informed of the truth, if they do not show them selves obstinate.

TO PREVENT also the sheadinge of Christian blood, and spoil of the cuntry,
which might ensewe by the resistance of some principal offenders. Be it known
by these presents, that it shall not only be lawful for any person public or
private (over and besides those which have undertaken the enterprise) to
areste, put in hold, and deliver up unto the Catholic part, the said
usurper, or any of her accomplices; But also holden for very good service and
most highly rewarded, according to the qualety and condition of the parties so
delivered. And in like manner, all others, which here to fore have assisted, or
herafter shall help and concur to the punishment of the offenders, and to the
establishme^t of Catholic Religion in these provinces, shall receive that
advancement of honor and estate which their good and faithful service to the
common welthe shall require; in which, respect shall be used, to preserve the
ancient and honorable famelyes of the land, in as much as is possible. AND
finally by these presents, fre passage is granted to such as will resort to
the catholic camp, to bring victuals, munytion, or other necessaryes;
promisinge liberal payment for all such things, as shall be received from the^
for service of the army. Exhorting with all and straitely commanding, that al
men according to their force and ability, be ready and diligent to assiste
here in; to the end no occasion be given to use violence, or to punish such
persons as shall neglect this commandment.

Our said (...), and favor to te (...), out of the spiritual treasures of the
Church, committed (...) custody and dispensation, (...), to at such as assist,
(...) and (...) of the (...), and to the (...) of those two ^^^^yes Plenary
Indulgences and p^rdo^ to all the^ (...), and confessed, (...) to the law of
God, and (...) customs of Christian people.


