A COVNTERPLEA TO AN APOSTATAES Pardon.

A SERMON PREACHED AT Paul's Cross upon Shroue-Sunday, February 15. 1617.

BY ROBERT SIBTHORPE, Preacher of the Word of God at Waterstratforde in
Buckingamshire.

JOHN 6.67. Will ye also go away.

Si ante mortem non Resipiscant, haudquaquam saluatum iri arbitror.

Just: Martyr: de veritate Christ: Relig: LONDON, Printed by Bar: Alsop, for
Richard Fleming, and are to be sold at his shop at the great South-door of
Paul's, on the right hand going up the Steps. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR ARTHVR THROCKMORTON of Paulerspury Knight, one of
his Majesty's Justices of the Peace and Coram in the County of Northampton; his
religious, learned and uncorrupted Patron.
Right Worshipful Sir,
WHereas the common excuse for the Press is ouer-pressing importunity, lest
the Author should seem inexorable; although I might set that face on it, sine
fuco; yet I will rather acknowledge ingenuously, that the especial Apollogie
for my presumption is opportunity, lest I might seem ungrateful.

Wherefore as al Rivers reuert unto the Sea from whence they come: Eccles. 1.7.
So I return this small spring of the Spirit into the immense Ocean of your
bounty whence I acknowledge it.

Which favor although I had not received; yet (to profess the truth without
flattery: Amongst all those who have vouchsafed the Sun shine of their
favors upon me, I know none so blessed in his own integrity, his Ladies
virtues, and his Ofsprings innocence, from those sins which are here
censured, as that he might equally protect it without impeachment from those
muddy aspertions which Sinne-shadowing Hypocrites may contend to cast upon it.

Most humbly therefore beseeching your Worship to sweeten this Current with
your good acceptance, and to vouchsafe a Conduct pipe for it unto others: with
my prayers for increase of your happiness, continuance of the virtues of
yours, and imitation of them in others, I rest.

From your Worships Gift at VVaterstratford, near Buckingham. Feb. 17.

Your Worships ever devoted, Robert Sibthorpe.

A COVNTERPLEA to an Apostataes Pardon.
IEREM. 5.7. How shall I pardon thee for this? Thy Children have forsaken me,
and sworn by those that are no gods. And when I fed them to the full, they
then committed Adultery, and assembled themselves by Troops in the Harlots
houses.


MEN, Fathers, and Brethren, Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and Beloved:
It is the position of the Apostle, that Ephesians. 6.12.
spiritual wickedness is in high places; To which we may add the exposition
of experience; That Quis mayor est populus cui miscemur hinc periculi plus est.
Seneca: Ep. 7.
Corporal corruption is not sequestered from great Assemblies: Wherefore being
called to this high place, in this great Assembly, where is accustomed to be a
concourse, not only from Act. 13.44.
all the parts of the City, but almost of Act. 2.5.
every Nation under heaven: I called to mind this expostulation of the Almighty;
2. Cor. 10.4.5.
Powerful to beat down the strong holds, and every thing that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God; whilst it proposes the difficulty of an
Apostataes Pardon; How shall I pardon thee for this? thy children have forsaken
me, and sworn by those that are no Gods, etc. Profitable for the 1. Cor 9.27.
taming of the fiesh, and bringing it in subjection: whilst it exposes the
filthy ingratitude, and ungrateful filthiness of those which are pampered
with plenty of provision: And when I fed them to the full, by troops they
haunt Harlots houses: A preservation of every soul against sin: How shall I
pardon thee for this? A caveat for Superiors, least they license others
looseness. Thy children have forsaken me? A salve against swearing, and
Antidote for Idolatry: And sworn by those that are no Gods: A gage for
Gluttony, and diet against drunkenness: When I fed them to the full: A
preparatiue against Impudency, and a purge against uncleanness. By Troops
they haunt Harlots houses: How shall I pardon thee for this? Thy children have
forsaken me, etc.

Wherein omitting (as not applyable to the present) the Time wherein our
Prophet preached, Paraphrasis.
which Hierom. l 1. c. 1. in Ierem:
S. Hierom upon infallible grounds affirmed to be Imminente Captiuitate; as
also ouer-slipping either general Anal^sis or argument of the Prophecy;
wherein the Prophet declares with tears and lamentation the destruction of
Jerusalem, and the captivity of the people for their Idolatry, covetousness,
subtilty, cruelty, excess, rebellion, and contempt of Gods word (as the
Geneuists observe) because that as I could wish, that there were Numb. 23 21.
Ecclus. 22.12.
no such iniquity in Jacob, nor such perverseness in our Israel: So I will
continually pray, that the Dan. 4.19.
effect may be to them that hate us, and the application thereof to our
enemies: Pretermitting (I say therefore) the premises, I will confine my
considerations, not only within compass of this second Sermon of Jeremy, as
Tremelius styles the 3.4.5. and 6. Chapters of this Prophecy, but even
restrain them, Ad hanc tertiam partem, as the aforesaid Interpreter entituleth
this Chapter. It being Confirmatio tum Peccati quod Propheta Iudaeis exprobrat,
tum supplicij denunciati, Both a conuincing of their preuaritation, and a
confirming of their punishment: By reason that not only all estates were
attainted, but also every particular person in a Praemunire. 1. For Estates:
First, the poor were not only perjured, ver. 2. Sed ne verecundiam quidem
suorum habuere vitiorum, as (Saint Hieron,) They had made their faces harder
then a Rock with Instar Petrae Indurentes frontes impudentiae nolue u^t ad
meliora conuerti. Hieron. i Loc.
impudency, and refused to return.

Secondly, The Rich, Ianuam totius Licentiae, sihi totique populo aperirent,
(as Trentelius) that for their children might forsake God, whilst by how much
the greater their authority was for suppressing; so imuch the more grievous,
their insolency was in sinning, (as Saint Hieron) so that they all had
altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds a sunder, ver. 5.

2 And as for persons, so universal was the infection, as that upon the
strictest inquisition, the Prophet could not find out one that executed
judgment, and sought truth, ver. 1. He could find some indeed, Qui simularent
cultum Dei (as Saint Hieron says) who would carry a counterfeit form of
hypocritical holiness, Though they they say the Lord lives, yet ^urely they
swear falsely
and say, the Lord lives: But if they were tried by the touchstone Veritatis
and Fidei, Of belief in their hearts, by the truth of their Acts they showed
all was but falsely; Whereupon the Prophet in the person of the Almighty,
inferres this seventh verse, as an Trem: in loc.
exornation of the confirmation of their impiety and punishment; and as a
Catalogue of the sins of the City; Dum dicit se ignorare Deus, qua poscit
eius occasion misereri, says a Father, whilst he breaks out into this
Emphaticall Expostulation: How shall I pardon thee for this, etc?

Wherein I will observe these two parts in general.

1 First an Expostulation; How shall I pardon thee for this? 2 Secondly, a
Reason of the Expostulation: Thy children have forsaken me, and etc.
Which second branch subdeuides it self into these two particulars.

1 First, the Persons, Thy Children. 2 Secondly, the sins, Have forsaken me,
etc.
Which sins are of a twofold Nature.

1 Capital which is Apostasy, Have forsaken me. 2 Criminal which accompany,
And sworn, etc.
Which are likewise fourefold.

1 Swearing, Have sworn. And sworn by, etc. 2 Secondly, Idolatry, By those
that are no Gods. And sworn by, etc. 3 Thirdly, Ingratitude, When I fed them
to the full. And when I fed them, etc. 4 Fourthly, adultery, by troops they
assembled themselves, etc. And when I fed them, etc.
Which last particular affoordes two special Aggrauations.

1 First their Impudency By troops, they assembled themselves by Troops, etc.
2 Secondly, their Pertinacitie, They assembled, etc. they assembled themselves
by Troops, etc.
In most of which, although some have been so long rebellious that they are
grown impudent, Ezech. 2.3.4.
because they and their fathers have been accustomed to transgress until this
day, as the Ier. 1, 16.
Prophet assures me; yet by Gods assistance, and your patience I will utter my
judgment against them, touching all these wickednesses.

Wherein,

First, of the Expostulation; Part. 1.
How shall I pardon thee for this, etc.

Ar: Mont, and Tremel translate it Vbi? (...)
Where shall I find a cause? Pagnin, and our Translators render it Quomodo?
How shall, etc? Saint Hierom terms it, Super quo? In whom shall I find
occasion. And all these Readings, as they may be borne without any repugnancy
or the Texts rackt extension: So will every one of them not unaptly affoorde us
matter of instruction.

1 And first (Vbi?) Where shall I find a cause to pardon thee? As if he should
say, Show me but one place, one street, one house, in which the perfect fear
of the Lord is, and I will pardon thee.

Whereby is shadowed the willingness of God, Gods willingness to mercy.
to show mercy, rather then to execute judgment upon the sons of men; which
is intimated even in the very Law, the seuerest part of his Word, the Messenger
of the curse, Gal. 3.10. And Instrument of death, Romans 7.5.10. Whilst in the
promulging of it, Exodus 20.5.6. For visiting sinners unto the third and fourth
Generation, he shows mercy on them that love him, unto thousands: For as the
Psalmist asseueres, Psalm. 116.5. Gracious is the Lord and righteous, yea, our
God is merciful; upon which words, Saint Amb: Orat: de obitu Theodos: Bis
Miscricordiam posuit semel Iustitiam; Signifying that he was twice so prone to
pardon as to punishing: Yea Exodus: 34.6.7. Himself divulging his own
description, proclaims six attributes of mercy for two of Justice; which is
Emblematically represented to us in a twofold passage of sacred Scripture; The
one, Luke 15.20. Expende quomodo no^ sit lenta neque tarda divine miser^^or
dia, adsubuentendum compunc it is cord Stella in Luc. 15. Non tantum procederet
obu^ am vententi, se^etiam accurreret: Iansen
In the Father of the Prodigal, who runs to meet his returning son, as if
he longed to be at him, to show his love and compassion: The other, Genesis 3.8.
At the eiecting Adam out of Eden where God walked, only a slow pace, as the
Original, (...) imports, as if he were loath to be too soon and swift in
indignation; when he was to show mercy: Cucurrit, he ran, as rejoicing in
it; but when to execute Judgment, Ambulauit, he walked, as grieved and pensive
for it; Deus enim tristatur, non de sua iniuria, sed de nostra perditione,
says Saint Chrysostom; Not for his loss, but for our loosing, not for his
want, but for our woe; not for need of our subjection, but for our needless
subversion: Whereupon here he makes this inquisition, (Vbi) Where shall I find
a cause to pardon thee?

2 Yea, that which is yet more; If thou can not show me a place; yet find
me out one person, in whom I may find integrity, and I will take that
occasion to pardon all the City: (Super quo?) In whom shall I do it? Run ye
too and fro, through the streets of Jerusalem, and see, and know, and seek
in the broad places thereof, if you can find one man, if there be any that
executes judgment, and seeks truth, and I will pardon it, v. 1. Whereout
as we may conceive Grandis amor iustitiae, as Saint Hierom: How great the love
of God is to innocence; Gods love of Innocence.
when not only according to Abraham's Petition for fifty, forty, thirty,
twenty, or ten just persons, he will spare Sodom, but even after his own
Essential inclination; for one righteous man he will pardon Jerusalem.

2. So also hereout the prophaner sort may see, Gods favor for the faithful
sake.
as in a mirror represented unto them, the undeserved favors which are showred
upon the^, and the deserved punishments which are prevented and auerted from
them not for their own sakes, but often times for those few devout souls
sakes which fear God and dwell amongst them; All Labans flocks blessed for one
Holy Jacobs sake, Genesis 30.27. The whole house of Putiphar blessed for one
righteous Joseph's sake, Genesis 39.5. Yea even the Prison prospered for his Piety,
ver. 23. As also Sodoms punishment prolonged for one just Lot, Genesis 19.22.
Isreal's plague appeased for one devout Phinehas, Psalm. 106.30. And their
destruction diuerted for one faithful Moses, v. 23. Together with the
earnestness of this Inquisition, may sufficiently satisfy on all parts
touching the soliditie of this assertion.

Whereout as we may take up Saint Bernards admiration, Quam dives es in
Misericordia, et magnificus in iustitia, et munificus in gratia, Domine, Deus
noster! Oh how rich art thou in mercy, how magnificent in justice, and how
munificent in grace, O Lord our God! There is none that is like unto thee;
Munerator copiosissime, Remunerator aequissime, Liberator piissime: O most
bountiful bestower of celestial inclinations, O most righteous rewarder of
humane actions, O most divine deliverer from Diabolic all destruction: Gratis
respicis, humilis inste iudicas innocents, Misericorditer etiam saluas
peccatores, Who respectest the humble for thine own mercy, not his merit, who
justly iudgest the innocent, in thy favor not thy fury; and mercifully sauest
the sinner, for thy sufferings, not his satisfaction, by his faith, not his
fidelity: Oh what shall I return unto thee for so ineffable favors bestowed
upon me, I will take the cup of salvation and give thanks unto thee my God.
Psalm. 116, 11.12. Who when there was none righteous upon earth, Psalm. 14.4.
Iustitia de Coelo prospe^^^ tan ^ua^ Dei dicentis parcamus ^urch^m^^^, etc. Aug
super Psalm 84.
Has sent one down from Heaven, and so has found a means how to pardon me
for this.

2 And as here hence we must take out that Sibillaean Saw: Diseite iustitiam
moniti, et non temnere Diuos.

3 So must we take heed that our hearts never turn, so that we hate Gods people,
nor deal untruly with his servants. Psalm. 105.25. Who may truly say to
licentious Libertines, Tertul^^^ Seapulam, c. 4. Marcus Aurelius in G^rma^^ca
expedi^^^^ Christian^^um militum orationibus ad Deum fa^lis ^^bres in (...)
petrauit, etc.
as the Christians to that Ethnicke Consul in Tertullian, Quoties ieiuniis et
geniculationibus nostris etiam siccitates sunt depulsae? How often have our
prayers like Iac. 5.18.
Eliahs 1. Reg 3.36
, opened the doors of Heaven, to draw down the former and later rain, to
Math. 5.45.
procure the sun to shine on the evil as well as good? to be a means of all
good things to you that hated goodness? And therefore Psalm. 105.15
Touch not his anointed, nor do his Prophets no harm: For he that touches
them, touches the Apple of his own eye, Ez. 2 8. And right dear in the sight
of the Lord shall be the blood of such Saints. And how shall he pardon thee
for it?

4 And lastly, since this Vera Misericordia (as Saint Chrysostom calls it) is
only effected: Vt iustitia per came non contemnatur, That Justice by it is not
neglected; Therefore let us take heed that we abuse not Gods mercy, to scoff
at his judgments, 2. Pet. 3.4. Nor presume on his patience, to persevere in
impiety; when it should inuit us to repentance, Romans 2.3. But as we find,
That the Lord has no pleasure in the death of him that dies, Ezec. Chap. 33.
V. 11. But rather would that none should perish, but that alshould come to
repentance, 2. Pet. 3 9. So let us reciprocally contend to bring forth Mat. 3,
7.8
fruits answerable to amendment, Act. 26.20. That so we may be meet for mercy.
For Ps. 85.10.
behold only mercy and truth shall meet together; only Righteousness and
Peace shall kiss each other: And therefore as he seeks, Gods justice ioynde
with his mercy.
so let us show how he may pardon us for this?

In which Interrogation, Sum iustus et sum misericors esse ostenditur (as
Zigedine) Merciful, because he would pardon exorbitant sins; Just, because
he will be satisfied. (How?) at the hands of Sinners.

3 Quomodo? How shall I pardon thee for this? As if he should say to those
which persevere in impenitent presumptions offending. Behold, I will make your
selves Judges, and see if you can devise a means how I shall pardon you for
it. The Judge of all the Earth must needs do right, Genesis 18.25. That he may
be justified when he speaks, and clear when he is judged, Ps. 51.4. (.i.)
Cum homines de illo iudicant, Hieron. Sauanorol: when men would pass their
opinions on his proceedings as partial they may find no fault at all: Deuteronomy.
32.4
A God of truth without iniquity, just and right, and of Habak. 1, 13
pure eyes that cannot endure the sight of evil: As Exodus 34.7.
merciful in forgiving iniquities and sins; so just in not clearing the
guilty; whereas, if he should pardon, when man presumptuously perseueres in
sin: what a preposterous course were that of justice? Who might not condemn
him, and say, That he was even like one of them, Psalm. 50.21. (.i.) Scelerum
patronus et approbator, A Patron and approuer of sin. (as Mollerus) Si enim
Deus impunitos demitteret Males, similis iniustorum inueniretur (as Haymo upon
the same place) How therefore is it possible for me to pardon thee? If thou
be not an Atheist, but beleeuest that God is, Then must thou acknowledge by
necessary consequence, that He is a rewarder, Heb. 11.6. Both of the righteous
and of the wicked, Ps. 11.5. Rendering to the one glory, honor and immortal
life, Romans 2.7. And to the other, Indignation, wrath, tribulation and anguish.
Ver. 8.9. And therefore if a sinner will not convert and change himself by
repentance, It is as possible to change and alter Gods Nature and Essence, as
to Psalm. 7.12.13.
escape the Instrument of death prepared for him. It is as possible (Absit
Blasphemia verbo) for God to be unjust, as the obstinate unjust person to be
pardoned, whilst he continues unrepentant.

How shall I pardon thee for this?

Which me thinks might strike such terror and astonishment into the most
obdurate Creatures (who had not like the Psalm. 14.2.
Poole said in their hearts, there is no God, and thereby given over
themselves unto corrupt imaginations; That like Dan. 5.6.
Belshazar, their countenance should be changed, and their thoughts troubled
so, that their joints should be loosed, and their knees smite one against
another: Seeing that we which are the lightest and slightest part of the
earth, even Genesis 3.19.
dust and ashes, may sooner turn heaven and earth at our pleasures; yea alter
Psalm. 93.1.
him that made and orders all; then we can give a counter-blast unto one Math.
5.18.
jot or title of his Word, which like the Dan. 6.15.
Law of the Medes and Persians may not be altered; or put a Ieofayle to his
justice, whose judgment is like the great deep, and his truth firm as the
mountains.

I would know of the cunningest excuser of Satan's slights; how, when Cor. 5.10
all shall appear before the judgment seat of Christ to receive according to
the things that they have done in the flesh; When 1 Cor. 4.5
all things that have been long hid in darkness shall be brought to light,
and the thoughts of every man's heart shall be made manifest, when Romans 2.15.16.
Every man's conscience shall bear witness, and their thoughts accuse them
according to this Gospel: And when as Math. 26.59.60. To put Christ to death,
they sought many witnesses but found none Many bare false witness against him,
but their witness agreede not together. Mar. 14.56.59
agreeing, until at the length the high Priest out of malice sought to
sentence him out of his own mouth, Ver. 65. So on the contrary to save man's
soul, all courses shall be excogitated, and none found consonant to Justice:
And at the length God in his mercy shall refer it to the sinners own self, to
devise a way for his delivery, With how shall I pardon thee for this? I would
know, I say, with what face he can affront him, or what answer he can
afford him, if he have not by 1. Cor. 11.31
judging himself for injustice, Illam ergo diem fratres charissimi tota
^^entione cogitate, vit am corrigite, mores mutate, mala tentamina resistendo
v^^cite, Perpetrata autem fletibus punite etc. Greg. mag, hom. 1. in Euang.
prevented by repentance the face of that most just Judges severe sentence:
Certe turpis aut nulla in Die Iuaicii erit excusatio (says Saint Chrysostom)
Surely, either confounded with shame the sinner shall stand speechless, Mat.
22.12. Or ex ore tuo te iudicabo serve nequam, Luc. 19 22. His Apology shall
be but the further pleading his impiety, and his excuse aggrauate his
accusation.

But peradventure some who thinks it not yet full time to take his leave of
the sweet delights of sin, and is of sufficient capacity to cozen his own
soul, Ob. Repentance deferred.
may secretly seem to have spied this starting hole; although I sin a long
season, yet I will repent at the last, and then I am not prejudiced for my
pardon: For Ezech. 18.
at what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins from the bottom of
his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the Lord.

To whom, let this solution satisfy, Besides that in that place, Ezec.
18.20.21. which is the place pretended (Or I know no other) It is required,
that repentance be from the bottom of the heart, Et serararo seria (as Saint
Multos solet ser^^ma poeninitentia decipere. Aug. ^er, 36.
Aug:) That which is late is seldom lively, but only pretended, and not
intended; Like Pharaohs during the present plague, Exodus 9.27. Or Antiochus in
his extremity, 2. Math, 9.7. Besides this (I say) which is seldom seen Luc.
23.43
and but once instaned in sacred scripture: Once, to the end that none
despair, and yet but once that none prefume: In the forenamed Text of Ezechiel
there is adjoined Doing: If he keep my statutes and do that which is lawful
and right; which must necessarily infer a Conclusion against deferring
Repentance, until the time of man's dissolution: for what doing, what work,
what device, what knowledge, what wisdom is there in the grave? whether thou
go, Eccles. 9.20. Si quis positus in extrema necessitate suae agritudin^s
voluerit accipere Poenitentiam and accipit cisi fateor vobis non illi neganius
quod petit, sed nec praesumimus quod been hine exit. Aug: de Mir^sacr: Scrip.
inconvenience of choosing out the end of sickness for the beginning of
repentance When as Saint Aug: lbi rapitur intensio mentis, vbi vis doloris: The
minds Meditation is distracted to the place where the body is disturbed: 2. Not
only from the Quem morbus vrget, and poena terret, ad vera^ vix veniet,
satisfactionem. Maxim cum silij quos illicite dilexit sint praesentes vxor and
Mundus ad se vocet: Aug: ser. 36.
inhability of a crazed Creature, to undergo so great a burden, and
numberless number of sighs, forrowes, troubles, tears, watchings, fastings,
prayers, perils, conflicts, conferences, and consultations, as the strongest
body in the perfectest state (unless God enable it) is not sufficient for. 3
But also from the impossibility of man's repenting at his own pleasure. In
culpam incidisse naturae est, Dolere virtutis: Amb: l. 1 de David.
Repentance being a grace of God, and not a gift of Nature: For there is no man
that has power over the Spirit, to receive the Spirit, neither has he power
in the day of death, Eccl. 8.8. There may be indeed a kind of sorrow or
heaviness in man, 2. Cor. 7.10. which is, but (like a Melancholy passion
forerunning a misfortune) the Prelude to eternal unhappiness; But to have a
godly sorrow; Repentance not to be repented of (as in the same place the
Apostle distinguishes) It must be granted of God, Act. 11.28. By the Prince
and Savior of Israel, Act. 5.31. But as a Father has religiously observed,
Qui promisit paenitenti veniam, non promisit delinquenti paenitentiam; He that
promised pardon unto the repentant, never promised repentance to the wilful
delinquent, neither has he given protection, Peccandi in crastinum, unto the
perseuering sinner: And therefore take heed, lest by deferring, as if thou
despisest Gods goodness and patience, which should lead thee to Repentance,
Romans 2.4. Thou at the length reap unto thy self a hard and reprobate heart
which cannot repent, Ver. 5. Which is neither unjust with God, as Romans 1.24.
The Apostle lays down the Axiom: Nor unaccustomed to miserable men, as Exodus,
10.20. Presumptuous Pharaoh, Heb. 12.17. Profane Esau. Ioh. 12.40. Apostatical
Israel, are set forth for fearful examples: Presume not therefore on Gods
mercy to bind one sin upon another, for in one thou shall not go
unpunished, Eccles. 7.8. Vis ergo liberari? Paenitentiam age, dum sanus es,
says Saint Augustine, Will thou be assured of deliverance, then repent whilst
thou art in health and prosperity, and hearten not thy self by thy former
sins, nor say not I have sinned; and what harm has come unto me, and
therefore I will still do so; for although the Lord be long suffering, yet in
no wise he will let thee go: Eccles. 5.4.

For though a Sinner do evil a hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet
it shall not be well with him at the last, but he shall be cut off as a
shadow, Eccles. 12.13. For if he dealt so with Pharaoh, as potent as thee in
power: If so with Esau, as importunate as thee in prayer. If so with Israel, as
inward as thee in affection. How shall he pardon thee for this?

And thus much shall suffice to have been spoken touching the first part which
is the Expostulation; now we descend unto the second, which is the reason; Thy
children have forsaken me, and sworn by those that are no Gods, etc. And
therein, Part. 2.


First of the persons (Thy Children) which is Metaphorically used for the
people of Iudath, Pro subditis et Discipulis (as Saint Hieron) For the subjects
unto the Prince, who is Nurcing Fathers, etc. Isai. 49.23.
Pater Patriae, the Father of his Country; And for the Disciples of the
Priests, who are 1 Cor. 4.15. Gal. 4.19.
Paerentes spirituales in Christo, The spiritual fathers of their Flocks in
Christ; To both whom, both those are Children.

Whereout as the care of Superiors shall hereafter be collected; Obedience of
inferiors.
so the obedience and honor which Inferiors owe unto them, shall first be
observed, because Nescit regnare, qui non didicit obedire, He knows not how to
Rule, who has not first learned to obey: And a Malach. 1.
son honors his Father, and a servant fears his Lord, if they be then
your Fatherss, where is their honor? If they be your Lords, where is their
fear? For even such children must be obedient unto these their Parents in the
Lord. For that is right, Ephesians. 6. Whether it be unto the King, as to the
superiors, or unto Governors, as unto those who are sent of him, 1. Peter,
2.13.14. 1. Whether they be in the Church, Eorum reprehensiones sicut ignis
vrens cauendae sunt, Ep. ad Trallian.
says Ignatius, You must fear their menaces as a consuming fire, Et
reuereamini eos tanquam Christum Iesum, cuius loci custodes; vt et Episcopus,
patris vniuer sorum Typus et forma est.

2 Or whether they be in the Commonweal, you must needs be subject, not
only for fear of wrath, but even for conscience sake, Romans 13, 5. For
otherwise you purchase to your selves damnation, Ver. 2.

How then will those disobedient Refractory children, in the diverse Diocese of
those reverend Fathers, the Bishops of this Church of England, plead their
exemption from conformable obedience; when if Vbi supra.
Ignatius may be credited; Talis polluta est conscientia, et omni infideli
deterior, Their pretended pure tender conscience is impurely polluted, and
their faith worse then infidelity: For, says the same Father, speaking of
Timothy, Lyncus, Anacletus, and Cletus, the Bishops that ministered unto, and
succeeded Saint Peter, and Saint Paul; and so in them, of all that lawfully
should obtain that calling, Loc. citat.
Qui his inobediens fuerit, Atheus and impius omnino fuerit, et Christum
improbans, ac eius ordinationem imminuens; He that shall be disobedient unto
these spiritual Fathers, he will not stick to spot himself with any impiety;
yea Atheism it self, upon occasion, whilst he dares to derogate from his
dignity, whom Christ has substituted to supply his own seat in this earthly
Consistory. And never trembles at those fearful thunderbolts of
Excommunication, which without Repentance must needs dart his soul into that
place where they lie imprisoned, with which this Father ranckes him. And how
shall he pardon them for this, when owing Childrens obedience they have
forsaken him.

Where will then those rebellious Children 2. Tim. 3, 6. Diceres ex profe^^o
Paulu^^ in^ viuam Monachisini effigrem pingere. etc. Calu. in loc. Et Paulo
ante, Tanta spurcities in Clero Papals, quae vel suo foetore totum mundum
inficit etc.
secretly crept into too many houses, and leading Captive simple women laden
with sins, and led away with diverse lusts; I mean the Romanists, his
Majesty's borne Subjects, but his Adversaries sworn servants; Where then will
they appear? Or what protection can they plead to procure their pardon? when
they have not only like the sons of Belial, cast of the yoke of obedience
with a Nolumus hunc regnare, Luc. 29.14. We will not have this man reign over
us; But even clothed themselves in the roabes of rebellion with a Venite et
occidamus, Luc. 20.14. Come and let us kill him: And as of one draught of the
cup of that Apoc. 17.4.5
whore of Babylon, had such Circaean operation as to transform them all to
more then Catelinarian Conspirators. Cum patent Portae, when their flight is
free enough, (as Ocat. 2. cent Catel.
Tully said of the Confederates with that Italian Traitor) So that they might
all enjoy the presence of their hallowing holy Father, if they thought him
worth the following to the seauen-hilde City Apoc. 17.9 Septem vrbs alta tugis
tibi qua prasidet orb, 1. Capt tolinus, 2. Palatinus, 3. ^uentinus 4
Exquilinus. 5. Celius, 6. Vamnalis, 7. Quirmalis.
, and but abide there Relegati, that so this land might be in safety; yet they
not herewith satisfied, but desiring to Duplici nomine punientur Impostores a
Deo; Et quod ipsi vero non obediant, vel ab ca desciuerint, et quod alios
quoque suo involuant errore. Marlarot: in verba.
deceive as they are deceived, 2. Tim. 3.13. Math. 12: 43.44.45.
Like that unclean Spirit in the Gospel, Return with seven worse then
themselves; Or at the least, seven times worse then they were: and so, yea
oftentimes even in those sacred assemblies, Cic. Orat. 2. cont. Catel.
Notant and designant oculis ad caedem vnumquemque nostrum; Nay let me join
vnumquemque vestrum: They marking out not only the Ministers for Martyrs, but
also the Magistrates to be massacred: not like sons, but like slaughter-men;
or if they be sons, they are like 2. Reg. 19.37.
Adramelech and Scharezer, which murder their Father at his sacrifice;
whereas, if their offense were only, Vetitum contingere limen: To set foot on
the forbidden shore, if that blessed Martyr Saint Cyprian were first
consulted withal, he would surely resolve them, that even that was Rebellion;
Cypr. Rogatiano, Ep. 7. Qui in eam Patriam vnde extorris factus est regreditur,
deprehensus, non iam quasi Christianus, sed quasi nocens perit, He that
returns without license, into the confines of that Kingdom, from whence the
laws have banished him, if he be apprehended and adjudged to execution, he
dies not as in case of Religion, but for the cause of Rebellion; Not as a
Martyr, but as a malefactor, not as a Christian, but as a commonweales
disturber. And how shall he pardon them for this? when owing childrens
obedience, they have thus forsaken him?

But now as the obedience of Inferiors has been thus herehence collected,
The care of ^^per^ours.
Relative, without any wresting: So the duty of Superiors is herein
propounded, Positive, without any perverting, which is, That what care Parents
ought to have of their children, to bring them up in the fear and nurture of
the Lord without provocation to wrath, Ephesians. 6.4. Ne immodica saeuitia
exasperent: Calu. in Loc. Least by too much cruelty they harden their hearts
against them. The same, or as great care ought Ministers and Magistrates to
have of the bodies and souls of the people, and subjects subordinate under
them: For as Ezech. 3.17.22. Son of man, I have made thee a watchman over the
house of Israel, etc. As you may read there at large; and if they miscarry
through thy default, their blood shall be required at thy hands; For thou
can not answer, as Genesis 4.9. Cain thought to have excused himself; Am I my
Brothers Keeper? For behold, like as Ruben, Genesis 43.9 became surety for his
younger brother Bentamin, so that his father should require him at his hands:
So is every elder Brother, who has the Luc. 12.13 14,
dividing of the inheritance in the Common weal, or the distributing of the
Ibid. v. 42.
portion in the Church (that is, Magistrates or Ministers) made sureties for
the younger Gen, 35.18.
Benonies, or sons of sorrow, that is, the common people, who are indeed Ver.
cod.
Beniamins, the sons of the right hand of strength unto their Sovereign: And
at their hands will God require them: For if it be just (as most just it is) to
visit the iniquity of the Fathers That does the like. Ezech. 28.
upon the Children, Exodus 20.5. The transgression of the Prince upon the
people, 2. Sam. 24.10. to 18. Although the child could neither reform the
Parent, nor 2 Samuel 3.4.
the people reclaim the Prince: How much more just shall it be to require the
blood of the child at the hand of the Parent, and the blood of the people, at
the hands of their Presidents if they perish through their default.

And therefore let the Minister stand upon his watch, and the Magistrate upon
his guard, 1. That the one may know what to answer when he is reproved, Habak.
2.1. Never coming from his Watchtower in the day time, nor from his ward in
the night, until he see the Chariot and Horsemen, which shall beat down
Babylon, and break all the graven images of her Gods unto the ground, Isai,
21.8.9. 2. And the other may be (...), as Aristotle describes him, A Keeper of
the Law by the sword, Which is commanded according to the word: Wherein Orat:
(...).
Isocrates counsel is not to be contemned, (...): At my hand take this to
heart, that no unjust person of a corrupt conscience be used as an instrument
in thine office: Quid predest bonas and vtiles adesse Leges, nisi commodus
adsit carum taterpres.
For what shall it profit the Law to be perfect, and thy intension upright,
if the execution be abused by inferiors. And therefore as the Magistrates
themselves 2. Chron. 19
take heed what they do, knowing that they deal not for man but for the
Lord, with whom there is no iniquity: So let the fear of the Lord be upon
those which minister about them, that they respect not persons; nor take no
gifts: For otherwise even Christ him self may be betrayed for a Quid dabitis,
Mat. 26.15. A League may be concluded with Tire and Sydon, by making friends to
Blastus, Act. 12.20. The Temple and Treasury be turnde over to Apollonius
Heliodorus, or Jason, for envy, or an office. 2. Match. 3. and 4. Chapters:
yea, all the people may be suffered to forsake God; by him who makes his gold
his God, or by such a Heb. 12, 15.16.
profane person, as has like Gen 24.30 to 34.
Esau sold his own Birthright for a mess of pottage: For he will sell Gods
inheritance for the Lentills that made it: And then how shall he pardon thee
for this? When thy children, etc.

Thy Children, Tui non mei: Hieron: Thine not mine: So long as they were
obedient throughout the passage of sacred Writ; God styles himself the Father
of Israel, And them my children, as Deuteronomy. 32.6. Is not he thy Father that has
bought thee? And Ier. 31.9 I am a Father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first
borne, but when multiplying and maintaining sin, they became backsliders,
then he calls them, not My, but Thy Children: And as Romans 9.25. Through faith he
called them his people, which were not his people, and her beloved which was
not beloved: Hos. 1.6.9. So through fall he figures her Lo-Ruhamah, and them
Lo-Ammi, to whom he had been a God, and they his people.

Whereout we may see the immediate, The effect of Sin.
inseparable effect of sin, which is a forsaking, and being forsaken of God:
For as Genesis 31. to 6. In that first offense was a forsaking of Gods
commandment, and relying upon the Serpent; So every sin since, is a
forsaking. God, and following Satan: Whereupon 1. Ioh. 3.7 8. As if they who
taught, or thought otherwise, were deceived: The Apostle confirms it by this
Caution; Little Children let no man deceive you, he that commits sin is of
the Devil, for the Devil sins (...), not (...). Non in nutio, sed ab
nutio, n^s quia formatus suerit a Deo malus sed quia ab usius peccati exordio.
(Quod ab ^o capit origine^: Nam ante illius lapsum non erat peccatum)
preua^icatus est Dei legem prolapsusque, a natiua bonitate sua, and decidit in
prauitatem, a qua nunquam destitit; sed in^^ continue perstat, semper mala
malis accumulans: Cyril. in Io. l. 5. c. 6. vbi tractat hac verba.
from the beginninning: Of the Devil, Non creatione, sed corruptione, not by
Creation, but by Corruption; Non Positive, sed Privative, as the Schoolmen
distinguish it; not by Forming, but by forsaking, as our Prophet phraseth it:
And how just is it then for the Almighty to pronounce against such Apostatates,
2. Esd. 1.25
Derelinque^tes mederelinqua^, They that forsake me, I will forsake the^.

1 He does not say, that have not known me; Although Ignorance it self be not
excusable, Psalm. 95.10. Especially, Si modo sit vincibilis. Pet: Lomb: l. 2.
sen: d. 22. If man might have got out of it by any industry which was omitted
by him; yea, In ijys qui non potuerunt paena peccati, As (...)
Saint Augustinr, In those who could not overcome it, if it self be not a
sin, yet is it surely the punishment of sinning. 2 Neither does he say, That
have not believed in me, although such as hear and believe not, have no cloak
for their sin, John 15.22. Neque vt ab omni Damnatione liberarentur, neque vt
aliquanto leuius damnarentur, As Saint Augustine, super Ioh: Tract. 89. Neither
vrterly to free themselves from damnation, nor to purchase therein some degree
of mitigation. 3 But he says, That have forsaken me, signifying, that it is
the most grievous sin which can seize upon the soul of man, Apostasy.
that when God has vouchsafed him the gracious calling of his sacred Spirit:
Luke 9.62.
He then takes his hand from the Plough, and looking back, makes himself
unfit for the Kingdom of Heaven: For, as Saint De^ern. M^^.
Augustine says, That Tribus gradibus ad Peccatum peruenitur, suggestione
Delectatione, Consensione, We come to sins secret Chamber by three stayres,
Suggestion, Delight and Consent: and as L. 1. de Sum. 60. c. 17. Apud Lomb.
Isidore distinguishes sins into a Tripartite order: Of Ignorance, Infirmity
and Industry, Making those of Infirmity greater then those of Ignorance, and
those of Industry, greater then those of Infirmity; So may I not unaptly alter
them in matters of Religion, Vnde Paulus insi nem earn defeitunem quae
Antidusts ad^^eatu^ pracedet. (...) (...), 2. (...) 2.3. ac^dent in
into sins of Ignorance, Infidelity and Apostasy: wherein how much Infidelity
exceeds Ignorance, so much Apostacy surpasses Infidelity: for it had been
better never to have known the way of righteousness, then after they have
known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered to them, like the
Dog to his vomit, and the Sow to her Mire, 2. Pet. 2.21.22. It being almost
impossible for them who were once enlightened, and had tasted of the heavenly
gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and had tasted of the good
Word of God, and the powers of the world to come, That they falling away Vide
Deering on the Heb. etc. I^. Denison Sermen at Paul's Cross.
(.i.) 1. Wittingly, 2. Willingly, 3. Maliciously, and 4. Totally, that they
should be renewed again by repentance, Heb. 6.4.5.6. And without that there is
no Pardon, Luc. 13.3. Oh therefore take heed Brethren, lest there be in any of
you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God; But exhort
one another daily whilst it is called to day, least any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of Sin, Heb. 3.12.13. And so at the length you
hear this reason, as a Counterplea against your pardon, Thy Children have for
saken me, etc. And thus much of the first part, and first particle of the
second part, of the Reason which is the persons, and their Apostasy. Now to
the second, which is the ensuing sins: And sworn by those that be no Gods,
etc.
First of Swearing; And sworn, Wherein, that we might at once meet with the
impiety of the Papist, the profaneness of the Atheist, and the error of the
Anabaptist; We will briefly run through those Swears.

1 First, What an Oath is? 2 Secondly, Whether it be lawful to swear at all,
or not? 3 Thirdly, When it is lawful? 4 Fourthly, How we must swear? 5 What
is to be avoided in Swearing? 6 Sixthly, What is the punishment of offenders by
Swearing?
For the First, An Oath.
Perkins our English Schoolmasters, Cas: Cons: Lib. 2. c. 17. s. 1, has left
us this definition; An Oath is a religious and necessary confirmation of things
doubtful, by calling on God to be a witness of the truth, and a Revenger of
falsehood. 1. A Confirmation, according to that of the Apostle, Heb. 6.16. An
oath for Confirmation, is amongst men the end of strife, 2 And that a
religious, not a profane Confirmation, answerable to that of the Prophet,
Isai, 19.18. Thou shall swear by the Lord of Hosts (.i.) as part of thy
Religion, that thou swear by none other. 3, And that only necessary, and not
needless, Math. 5.34.4. And that always truly and not treacherously: For God
will come near to such in judgment, and be a swift witness against them, Mal.
3.5.

Whereupon, sithence an oath is a Confirmation and end of strife, the
reuerentest league betwixt man and man, as appears in Isaac and Abimelech,
Genesis 26.28.29. Let there be an Oath betwixt us, and let us make a Covenant
with thee, that thou will do us no hurt: Yea the most sacred bond betwixt God
and man, Heb. 6.13. When God made promise to Abraham, because he had no greater
assurance then an Oath to gine him; Nor no greater then himself to swear by,
He swore by himself. 1. As this does admonish us, how inuiolably it should
be observed. 2. So does it inform us how Charily it should be taken.

As concerning the awful observing of it, Religious antiquity never made
question, Reverence of an Oath, by 1 Beleeners.
but it surpassed the power of all Obligations; Whereupon Genesis 24 2. to 10.
Abraham being to oblige his servant most surely to perform the greatest trust
that ever was committed to him, even for the earthly weal or woe of his Genesis
22.2, 2 Infidels.
only son, he preferres an Oath before all promises, threats, or pledges,
yea even amongst (...) Homer. Odys. E.
superstitious Idolaters, it was held so sacred, that Ahab trusted the Oath of
any Nation, above his own diligentest Inquisition, in his personal inquiry
after Eliah, 1. Reg. 18.10. Yea both amongst Believers and Infidels it was
esteemed so absolute, as that upon an Oath, Gc. 31.44. to 54
Jacob trustes Laban, and Laban Jacob; Although not only they differd in the
manner of service, but even for the Matter served different Gods: The one the
Idols, the other, the God of his Fathers: And how religiously then should this
sacred Ceremony be observed amongst Christians, that they might never
disappoint their Neighbors of that they swear unto them, although it were to
their own hinderance, Psalm. 15.5. And how much more immutably should it bind
them to the performance of so lawfully confirmed promises, beyond all humane
Articles, or covenants: Since we do not swear by him that is no God, but by
him, Exodus 20.7
Who will not suffer those to go unpunished, who take his Name in vain.

Which since it is so: How wary should we be in entering into such a bond,
correspondent to the Counsel of the Preacher, Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash with
thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any Oath or Vow before
God: Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy soul to sin, Neither say thou before
the Angel, that it was thine error: Wherefore should. God be angry at thy
rash voice, and destroy the work of thine hands, Ver. 6. Which that we might
avoid, it is not impertinent to consider.

In the second place, whether it be lawful to swear at all or not; The
Lawfulnes of an oath.
When Mat, 5.34. and Iae. 5.12. Our Savior and his Disciples direct us not to
swear at all? To which the Geneuists Gloss may serve for sufficient answer;
That by those words, all superfluous Others are utterly debarred; whether the
name of God be therein mentioned, or otherwise; But by this he takes not from
the Magistrate his Authority; who may require an oath, for the maintenance of
Justice, judgment, and truth: For these words are to be understood, like
unto those, Mark. 10.23.24. How hardly shall a rich man enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, that is, which trusts in Riches: So swear not at all (that is) in
your ordinary communication; Ne scilicet iura^do ad facilitatem iurandi
veniatur, et de facilitate ad consuctudinem, de consuetudine in Periurium
decidatur (as Saint Augustine) Least swearing grow to facility, facility to
custom, custom to habit, habit to perjury; Non penitus iurare probibuit:
sed occasione^ perturij (quod perfectius est) euitare docuit,) says Gregory)
He did not forbid all lawful Oaths in a Christian Communalty, but that
which is more laudable, he taught how to avoid Perjury: Whereby the Hares^^
videtu^ anc^^ata, ex Tradition^^^: Clement Str^m^^d 7. Vbi dis^utat serfe^tum
non (...) bereu^^ar, and, (...) non pole (...) Genesis ^^u, nec cora^ San lis. etc
Anabaptisticall error is confuted, who imagine it unlawful to swear
iudicially, which one absurdity being granted, all sin might be protected,
and no way for discovery: All Truth concealed, and no means for enquiry, which
Exodus 22.10.11. The Lord appointed should be done by an Oath. But omitting this
because I fear there are more which abuse it too ordinarily, then there are,
which will not use it at all.

I descend to the third question, which is, When an Oath is lawful? Which even
the Catechisticall Principles will resolve to be at any of these three times;
1. When the glory of God is sought: 2. Or the good of our Brethren, 3. Or
before a Magistrate, 1 In Truth, 2. in judgment, and in 3. Righteousness,
Ier. 4.2. For these are those Comites iuramenti, as 2 da. 2 dae part. 1. Qu. 89.
Aquinas calls them as indivisible from a true lawful oath, as a voice from
speech, a sound from a voice, or air from a sound; Which that they might be
perpetually present in our Oaths, We must be circumspect, The Cautions for
Oathe.
that we only swear, 1. First, in rebus veris, Appertaining to true things:
Secondly, 2. Certis, Undoubted in our own knowledge. Thirdly. 3. Licitis,
Lawful to be performed: Fourthly, 4. Possibilibus, possible to be
accomplished; Fifthly, 5. Necessariis, Necessary touching, which we should be
so informed: And Sixthly, 6. Granibus, weighty and worthy to be so confirmed.
Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Ioui, GOD may not be called to witness upon
every idle occasion, least he turn a Revenger of man's presumption; Which,
would it were equally pondered of the ruder Multitude, and riotous Magnificoes:
1. Who as the one sort is accustomed Os suum in caelum ponere, Psalm. 73.8.9. To
stretch forth their mouth against Heaven, Whilst their swearing tongues
thunder through the world: So that al me^ tremble at their talking against the
most high, except it be those who are corrupted with their wicked blasphemy. 2.
So the other suppose it lawful to swear, so long as they perform it, which
indeed often times they will do, were it Mark. 6.24.
With Herod, to cut off John Baptists head, Or with Act. 23.12
the Jews to murder Paul: I would, I say the observation of Saint Ambrose
might inform the one, Amb. offic. c. 1
that Est contra officium, nonnunquam promissum soluere sacramentum: It is
oftentimes a double breach of Christian duty to perform that Oath, which a
man vows rashly: It being a sin to make it, and a greater not to break it:
And the example of Nicanor might reform the other, Whose blasphemous tongue the
same day it offended was cut out of his head, and cast to the Fowls of the
air, 2. Macha. 15.33. That so they might fear to accustom their mouths to
swearing, or to use themselves to the naming of the holy one; For as a servant
that is continually beaten, shall not be without a blew mark: So he that
swears, and names God continually, shall not be faultlesse. A man that
uses much swearing, shall be filled with iniquity, and the plague shall never
depart from his house, if he offend, his sin shall be upon him, and if he
acknowledge not his sin, he commits a double offense, and if he swear in
vain, he shall not be innocent; but his house shall be full of Calamities:
There is a Word that is clothed about with death: God grant that it be not
found in the Heritage of Jacob, for all such things shall be far from the
godly, and they shall not wallow in their sins. Use not thy mouth then to
intemperate swearing, for therein is that word of sin, Eccles. 23.9. to 13.
And what can thou say, Why God should pardon thee for this? Since therein
worse then Nicanor, thou blasphemest him: for he knew not GOD, but Thou have
forsaken him, and sworn by those that he no Gods, or else by him as if he were
no God.

Since therefore, although an Oath be lawful. yet it is liable to so many
Cautions, as that only, 1. Piety, 2. Charity, or 3. Necessity, must exact it.
Herein is context and wouen.

The fourth Question: The manner of taking an Oath.
How we must take an oath when we do swear? And that must be plainly
without inuerting others words or understanding; Or equiuocating in our own
intensions. 1. First, Plainly; If they be witnesses betwixt Plea and Plea,
for Life or goods, according to his iutension of whose words or doings they
give Testimony; and not according to their own perverse exposition of them:
Like those false witnesses against our Savior, who applied that speech which
he uttered touching his Body, Ioh. 2.19. as au occasion to accuse him for an
enemy to the temple, Math. 26.61.

2 Secondly, Plainly; If they be parties upon whom the Job. 17.18.19
Lot is fallen, to give glory to God, that they Ioh. 1.20.
confess plainly, and deny not, according to the common understanding of him
which administreth the Oath unto them; For as Isiod: de sum: bo: l. 1. Quacunque
art verborum quis iuret, Deus tamen qui Conscientiae testis, est ita boc
accipit, sicut ille cui iuratur intelligit: With what soever art of words a
man endeavor to delude in swearing God who is the witness of the heart does
so accept it, as he who is the Minister in giving the oath does understand it;
and therefore must every one speak the truth from his heart, yea though it be
to his hinderance.

How then will our Iesuited Artius being demanded to subscribe, and also urged
to an oath for Confirmation of his subscription, did both, Swearing that he
believed, as he had written, when indeed he had written his own op^^ on in a
Paper, which he carried under his arm, when he laid his hand upon the book,
and so some now eqiruocate, but whether Papist or Puritan, for such will
equivocate also Let them take heed and fear Atrius his end, Socrat, Scholast.
Hist. l. 1. c. 25. Pe^^ty.
Arrian Equiuocators excuse themselves, for their euasions and reseruations,
with Lingua iuraui mentem iniuratam gero, If we appeal but to the Fathers, on
whose shoulders they boast, that their Religion leans: Surely, they must send
us another Index Expurgatorius, or a new supply of Censuraes, upon their
spurious passages, or another Elench of their errors, or else how will they
be pardoned for this? when not only they forsake him, and swear by those
that are no Gods, but also they blaspheme his Name, foreswearing by him that is
the true God.

Out of that which has already been delivered, it is not uneasy to
conjecture, what contraries are to be avoided.

Of which

1 The first is swearing falsely, Leu. 19.12. Thou shall not swear by my name
falsely; For behold a flying Book is gone forth upon the Earth, and it shall
enter into the House of him that swears falsely by my Name, as well as of him
that steals, and it shall remain in the midst of his House, and shall
consume it With the timber thereof, and with the stones thereof, says the
Lord, Zech. 5.1. to 5. And that worthily; for whilst man by Fore-swearing calls
God to testify an untruth, What does he else but say in his heart, Tushe,
thou God carest not for it, Psalm. 11.11. But thou will willingly justify
mischief and wrong, ver. 14. And what greater blasphemy can there be against
the Deity, Or what more to be avoided?

Which that we may take heed of, 2. We must secondarily shun swearing
familiarly; For as Chrysest. Usual swearing
super Math. 5. Nemo est qui frequenter iuret, qni aliquando non periuret,
Look how in many words there will be folly: So in many oaths will follow
perjury: And therefore attend to the Iniunction of the Almighty, Swearing by
Creatures.
touching this particular So often as thou hear, or vtterest his name, thou
shall fear this glorious and fearful name, the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 28.18. So
that as Phil. 3.10. At the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow, Semblaby, at the
name of Jehovah every heart shall tremble, and not dare to use it familiarlie:
For such fall to abuse it falsely. And then how shall he pardon them for this?

Nor are they to suppose that they can shift the guilt of this sin, by
swearing fondly, as by creatures, or superstitiously as by Idols. Let 2 dae. 2
dae. part. 1. Q. 89. Loc. Citat.
Aquinas and the other Schoolmen herein follow their fantasies, I am not for
them, Neither Quoad Simplex Contestatio innitur diuinae veritati sicut and
sides, etc. Exceratione vero indueitur Creatura, etc. Ibid.
Contestationem, Nor Quoad Execrationem, Neither In quantum diuina veritas
manifestatur in Creaturis; Nor, In quantum Diuinum Iudicium exercetur in
Creatura. As they distinguish: For Perk. Golden Chain, c. 22 As Pledges and
Cognizances of Gods glory, etc. 1, Cor. 15.31 1. Sam. 20, 3. As the Lord
lives, and as thy soul lives, etc. (...) Homer Odys.
howsoever in asseuerations the creatures may be used, yet in oaths, They as
well as Idols are absolutely to be eschewed; for as the Almighty with great
circumspection interdicts the Israraelites that they should not make mention of
the names of other Gods, Neither let them be heard out of their mouth, Exodus
23.13. So our Savior expressly prohibeteth the swearing by any Creature, Mat.
5.35.36. V^le D. Hylar. de (...). 12 paulo a principio super his verbis.
Lest thereby they should seem To worship and Jerue the creature more then
the Creator, who is blessed for evermore, Romans 1, 25. For what does man else
whilst he swears by them, but attribute Omniscience and Omnipotency to them,
which are peculiar only to God. And therefore as Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.20. Thou
shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and to him shall thou cleave, and
swear only by his Name, and not by those that are no Gods: For otherwise in
stead of taking his name in vain, by swearing by the true God, thou
committest Idolatry, by swearing by those that are no Gods.

How then can the Papists, who maintain and practice the swearing by
Creatures, as the Blessed Lady, Angels, and Saints departed; Yea (that which is
more) by those which either are, or were no Creatures, before their own
superstition made them Idols; How can they, I say, excuse themselves from being
guilty of this sin? Or what is it possible they should plead^ for their
pardons, Who have thus forsaken him, and sworn by those that are no Gods.

But if the Case be so hard to procure a pardon; then me thinks I hear some
scoffer say, We would know the punishment.

Which is the last Circumstance considerable in this sin, The punishment, etc.
as in all others, For so in sin, still punishment makes the period.

To whom I return this Resolution, Besides, that the Wages of every sin is
death, Romans 6.23. Both Animae and Corporis, Temporal and Eternal, and so
consequently may be concluded of this, There are many great and grievous
punishments, both private and public, which especially attend upon this sin
of 1. Swearing 2. For-swearing, and 3. Idolatrous swearing Fondly by those that
are no Gods.

For as the Psalmist says expressly, The mouths of those that swear by false
Gods shall be stopped, and confounded shall they be that worship them that are
no Gods; So utterly will he have their names taken out of our mouths, as that
there may be no more remembrance of them, Hos. 2.16.17. -- And Ier. 23.10.
Hos. 4.1, 23. Swearing is ranckt in the prime place of those sins, for which
the Lord enters such a controversy with the Land, That the whole shall mourn
for it, and every particular inhabitant that dwells therein shall languish,
with the very beasts of the Fields, and the Fowls of heaven, yea the fishes
of the sea. And I pray God it be now no occasion, that the creatures grown so
under, yea suffer so for our sins.

And as for forswearing, Not only the particular punishment of Zidkiiah, may
show how hateful it is, and how rigorously revenged; who was himself taken
Captive, and saw his sons slain before his face; and lastly, had his eyes
put out, and being bound in Fetters of Brass, was (though a King) carried
prisoner to Babylon, 2. Reg. 25.6.7. because he forsware himself, and brake
that oath (in his own person) which Nebuchadnezar had caused him to swear by
GOD, 2. Chr. 36.23. But the punishment of Perjury, even upon the posterity of
those who durst to violate their Forefathers vows, may more the^ manifest to
any who will understand the severe indignation of him, whose name is blasphemed
by it.

Three years fearful famine ouerrunnes al Israel, 2. Sam. 21.1. until
seven sons of Saul are hanged up against the Sun, Ver. 6. for breaking but
one Oath, and that none of his own, Josh. 9 13.19.20.
but made three hundred years before by Joshua to the Gibeonites, Ver. 14, 22
2^.
yea and that procured by fraud too; So Religious should the reverence of an
Oath be, (even to deceyuers) And so great is the Divine revenge upon the
violaters, even in posterity.

Nor is it only of this obliging efficacy, if it be taken by such parties, as
are both servants of the true God; but even betwixt Believers and Insidels,
Christians and Mahumetans, Jews or Pagans: As besides that the before cited
approving practices of Isaac, and Ahimelech, Jacob and Laban, do sufficiently
prove it, appears most evidently in the success of B^nsinus apud B^^^le,
Theater of Gods judgments.
Vladislaus K. of Hungary, who breaking that league with Amurath the Turk, of
which there were Articles engrossed in both Languages, and a solemn Oath taken
for confirmation on both parties, and by means of that perfidious
truce-breaking, the Hungarians at first having the upper hand; No sooner
Amurath (although almost overcome) pulled out of his bosom the Articles of the
violated Truce, and lifting up his eyes to Heaven, uttered these speeches; O
Jesus Christ, these are the Leagues that thy Christians have made and confirmed
by swearing by thy Name, and yet have broken them again; If thou be a God
as they say thou art, Revenge this injury which is offered both thee and me,
and punish those Truce-breaking Varlets. No sooner, I say, had Amurath uttered
those words, but the Christians Battle and courage began to rebate;
Vladislaus him self was slain by the Ianizaries, his whole Army discomfited,
and all his people put to the sword, saving a few that fled; So powerfully
should an oath bind; or so apparently will the Lord punish Perjury, although it
were to the prophanest persons.

The Pope then must send for another Julian to his Legate ( D. Bearde, vbi
supra.
for it was he that brake the foresaid League, and he had need be Julian the
Apostata too) to maintain the Position; That Haereticis fides non est
seruanda, oaths are not to be kept with Heretics: for that absurd Blasphemy
being granted, what perjury may not be patronized? yea what Ita vt Reges l^dint
Paclis, and iuramentis sicut Puers astragalis ludere solent, vt olim (...) on
suit in Apothegmate and vt nue Pontificia conciliabula Anathemat is, etc.
Chemmi: Exam: Conc. Trid. part. 2 Can. 9. p. 25.
Alterations in Religion, upon a States advantage, might not be abetted? or
what condemning the Orthodoxe for Heretics in a Conclaue of Cardinals, to the
violating a Lay-League for hostile policy, or infringing an Ecclesiastical
safe Conduct for Andraduis advantage, in a Tridentine Assembly may not be
maintained? yea what Private spirited Periurer could ever be conuinceel, if
he would (as we have indifferent experience that they will) but hold others
to be Heretics? Upon this ground Galeaceus may have as many wives as Gallus
Gallinaceus, if he can but accuse his former of superstition: That I may omit,
because it has been often insisted upon; how a Subject may dispense with his
allegiance to his Sovereign, if he dissent from him in Religion; But O good
God, what safety for Princes? what security for States? What peace for the
public? what Piety for the Private? could ever be expected provided, or
preserved? If the infectious air of these Apoc. 16.13 14.
unclean Spirits, which thus come out of the mouth of the Dragon, the Beast and
the false Prophet, against Religion, Kings and States should be suffered to
set the World at battle, against the great day of GOD Almighty? How should he
pardon thee for this? If thy children should so forsake him, and not only
swear, but also forswear by these that are no Gods?

But as they thus forsake him and his precepts: So we forsake them and their
Positions; and prosecute against those other and their practices.

Who when he fed them to the full, they by troops haunted Harlots Houses?

First, Ingratitude and Plenty.
When I fed them to the full: Whereout appears their great ingratitude; Nor
is it their case alone, but incident almost to all the sons of Adam, to be
then most faulty, when God is most favorable; So Psalm. 49.20.
foolish is man that Prosperity slayes him' Psalm. 119.67.
whom misery makes remember God (as the Psalmist long since observed) When
Iesurun was fat he kicked with the heel, and when he was grown thick,
and covered with flesh, then he forsook God that made him, and lightly
esteemed the Rock of his Salvation, Deuteronomy. 32.14. And take heed, Luc. 16.19
O ye that are clothed in purple and fine Linen, and fare delitiously every
day, Psalm. 144.12.13.
whose sons grow up as the young plants, Luxuriae Currus quaderga voluitur
r^^^um, Ingluuie vent, is libidme cottus, vestium mollute oly soporisque
resolutione Trahitur equis duobus prosperitate vitae, and re^um abundantta:
Bern^m Cant:
and your daughters as the polished Corners of the Temple, whose Garners be
full and plenteous with all manner of store, and whose sheep bring forth
thousands and ten thousands, or whose 1. Reg. 10.11.15.27.
Ships bring home spices, Almuggin trees, and gold of Ophir in such plenty,
that you have Cedars like the Sicauiore, and silver like the stones. Take heed
(I say) that you Psalm. 106.13 19.
forget not God, or lightly esteem his counsel, so that Lust should come upon
you, That neither you, nor those about you, take not Ezech. 16.17 18.19.
your fair Jewels of gold and of silver, your broydered garments, flower,
Oil, and Incense, your meat and honey wherewith he sedde you, to commit
whoredom, spiritual or corporal by them, least God give you into your
enemtes hand, to throw down your eminent places, and break down your high
places, and strippe you of your clothes, and spoil you of your fair Jewels,
and leave you naked and bare, Ezech. 16.39. For how should he pardon thee for
this? if thou forsake him, and swear by those that are no Gods. And when he
has fed thee to the full, thou then committest adultery, and by troops
hauntest Harlots Houses.

Which is the ugly Issue of that deformed Impe Ingratitude, monstrously brought
forth against the course of Nature of so fair a mother, as Plenty.

When I fed thee to the full, thou then committedst adultery, and by Troops
bauntest Harlots Houses: Which that I might not palliate, Adultery and
uncleanness.
I will not only restrain it to that Capital Colonel of the crime, which
Mars-like marches, Ad alterius Thorum, to wit Adultery; but as the sin is
large, so will I extend the understanding, even so far as the bitter root of
Concupiseence. Mat. 5.28. From whence it has the beginning: for as the gross
sin is so to be shunde, as that it ought not once to be named amongst
Christians, Ephesians. 5.3. So are the most specious Quis eius multiplices species
enumerare valeat Hac Pentapolin cum adaac nte Regione subuertit, Syenem cum
populo interemit: Filios Iudae pe^cussit, Iudaeum and Madia^item pugione
transsodit, Tribum Benjamin deleuit; filios H^lt prostrauit, Vriant occidit,
Ammon intersecit, Ruben maledixit, Sampsonem seducit, Salamontem peruertit,
etc. Hug.
Species so pernicious, That it is a shame even to speak those things which
are done of them in private, Ephesians. 5.12. They being amongst those extremes,
Quae carent nominibus, which want Names bad enough to their Nature, as
Aristotle speaks of some vices, or almost allied to those nefarious offenses,
against which Lycurgus aueares the making of no Laws; least man should thereby
learn that which before he looked not after: And therefore to avoid infecting
some fayrer Plants, whilst we should anotomize so many filthy haunts, as
should uncover all the skirts of this sin. We will only a far off, as
through a Perspectiue or Opticke Instrument, survey these three Deformities in
this den of Cacus, 1 First, the general unlawfulness of it. 2 Secondly,
certain particulars to be eschewed of those, who would not fall by it. 3
Thirdly, the punishments of Offenders in it.


The unlawfulness of it is offered to our view, insomuch as in that short Law
of the Decalogue; Ten words (as some style them) or commandments of God; One of
them is, Exodus, 20.14.15.
Thou shall not commit Adultery, yea, and that before the Prohibition of Theft,
signifying that it is more heinous before God, and hateful to man, then
stealing: for men do not despise a Thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul
when it is hungry: but if he be found, he shall restore seuen-fold, or he
shall give all the substance of his house: But who so commits Adultery with
a Woman, lacks understanding: He that does it destroys his own soul, A
Wound and dishonor shall he get, and his Reproach shall not be wiped away:
For Jealousy is the rage of a man, therefore he will not spare in the day of
Vengeance: He will not regard any ransom, neither will he be content though
thou give many gifts. Prou. 6.30. to 35. But because this was spoken in the
time of the Law, when Adultery was Death, Leuiticus 20.10. Least some
licentious Libertine nourced amongst the Nicolaitanes, or proceeding from the 1
an l. 1. c. 1. etc. 9.
Achamoth of the Gnostickes, pretending himself to be Naturaliter
spiritualis, And yet will give Carnalia Carnalibus, as Ireneus observes of
them, should dream of a dispensation for this sin under the Gospel, because
Christ seems to abrogate the severity of the sentence, John 8.2. to 10. There
was an especial care Act. 15.29.
at the first Council of the Apostles, to enjoin Abstinence from Fornication,
That as Deuteronomy. 23.17
no Whore might be found amongst the Daughters of Israel, so 2 Cor. 6.9.10.
Heb. 12.16.
no Whoremonger amongst the sons of Emanuel, Whereupon Gal. 5.19 20 21. The
Apostle places Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, and Lasciviousness;
before Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath, strife, and
Sedition: Vel ideo praemittit alijs operibus caernis. quia ad hac caro magis
prochuis est Marlorat.
as if it were more dangerous then any of the other, and that not unworthily.
Hae ommasrequentu esequenter ad Luxuria^. Lyra.
It indeed oftentimes producing all the other: If thou will see Adultery beget
Idolatry, thou need but cast an eye on Reg. 11.1. to 9.
Solomon; If Witchcraft, reflect on 2. Reg. 9.22.
Iezabel: If thou will behold Lust in Travel with Hatred and Revenge; Genesis
39.20.
Putiphars Wife is at full time of Delivery; And if thou dare endure to see
Murder hatched out of it, because Mark. 6.17 to 29.
Herod's is not high enough, bring on a stranger (although a Prophet) 2 Samuel
13.1. to 30.
Amon and Absolon shall bring it to light, even amongst Brethren: Wherefore,
except a man will open the sluice for all sins to flow with a full current,
and prostitute himself to the vassalage of every vice without resistance, he
may palpably perceive the vnsufferablenesse of this sin, which as that
Dragon, Apoc. 12.4. Draws down the third part of the Stars of Heaven with
his Tail: Or as Sampsons Foxes, Judges 15.4.5. Coupled by Firebrandes in their
tails, burnt the Philtstines Corn upon the Earth: So this Tayletying sin
extinguisheth the greater part of the Virtues and Faculties of the Soul,
which should shine like the Stars for light and direction in man's Heavenly
half: And schorcheth, dries up and consumes the Radical moisture,
strength and vigor of the Body, which should flourish like the corn for
maintenance and sustentation in man's earthly half.

Wherefore sithence that although the Holy Ghost aggrauates this sin above
all other, as being Non solum maculat animain sed faedat personam: Omne namque
pectatu^ quo. leunque secerit home extra corpus suum est qui autem formicatur
in corpus suum peceat; Semper allam praecedit Ardor and Petulantia semper
comitatur, Foetor and immund tiae. H^^g.
within the Body, whereas others are without; 1. Cor. 6.15. Yet Act. 7 51.
Stiff-necked man, who always resists the sacred Spirit, endeavors to
extenuate it, as being most Natural to the body and inherent; which indeed is
too true as all Divines determine, that Act. 7 51.
Manet fomes et Concupiscentia, even in Renatis, which except it be soon
extinguished, will set the best Fabric Dimittitur Concupiscentia Carnis in
Baptismo, Non vt non sit sed vt non imputetur. Aug. l. 1. c. 25. ex Nustis
on fire. Therefore I have deemed it not unworthy the time and labor, to sound
the Syrces and shelfes which are to be declined, of those whose Souls would
not be suncke in this devouring 1 Cor 7.9 2 Cor 12.7.
Scylla.

Of which,

The first is Idleness and Sloth: For then and not till then sins D^^llo
aestu Charibdis luxuriae salutem vorat, Ibiore Virgineo ad pudicitiae
perpetrands naufragia, Scylla seu renidens libido blanditur: Hieron. ad Heliod.
David with Bathsheba, when he sent out Ioab to his wonted Warfare, and
himself walks at ease in his Palace; Which the Poet spyed by the eye of
Nature.

Quaeritur Aegisthus quare sit factus Adulter?
In promptu causa est desidiosus erat.
Unchaste folly is for the most part begotte of an idle brain, and hatched in a
lazy body, as our D. Boys super Euang. d. 15. p. Tr.
English Postiller observes (as he does all things very ingenuously;
Whereas, Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis arcus,
Contemptaequ, iacent, et sine luce faces. 2 Samuel 11.1 to 6.



For Cupid shoores in a slugge, and hits few but the sloathfull: This therefore
should be no small care in all parts of the Kingdom, and in this renowned
City, deserves no small commendations, That he which will not work, may not
cate, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. But be exterminated as a Citizen of Sodom, Who will he
sloathfull in their Vocation, Ezechiel, 16.49. Or else be committed to that
Gymnosophisticall Discipline, Where he shall render not an Annual, but a
Diurnall Account of his Doings: For as amongst all the gifts of the Spirit,
and all the Callings in the Church, There are none for Idleness, but all for
Working and Edefying, Romans 12.6. to 16. 1. Corinthians 12. Ephesians, 4.11.12.
So amongst all the Estates, Degrees, and Offices in the Commonweal, though
there be many Overseers, there must be no Lookers on: for otherwise
Idleness will engender Adultery: So That when they are fed to the full, by
Troops they will haunt Harlots Houses.

The second Syrte to be shunned, is filthy communication, foolish talking,
and jesting, that is not convenient, Foolish talking
Ephesians. 5.3, 4, For evil Words corrupt good manners, 2. Cor. 15.33. Let
therefore no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouth, but that which
is good, to the use of Edifying, that it may minister Grace to the Hearers,
Ephesians. 4.29. A Lesson needful to be learned in these our days, when not
only the elder sort amongst the Psalm. 2.1.
raging multitude use their Tongues Psalm. 12.4.
as if there were no Lord over them: or rather, as if Tob, 3.8.
Asmodeus, the Spirit of uncleanness were Regent in them, but even teach
their Children so soon as they can Charter, lewd, lascivious, and ribauld
rimes: As if the Psalm. 8.2.
mouths of Infants, Babes, and Sucklinges which were ordained for the praise
of God, should now only serve for Cupids Cryers, Belzebubs Beadles, and Helles
Herrolds; Whereupon it is no wonder, being so educated at the first, and Quo
semel est imbuta recens seruabit odorem Testae diu. Horat. Wanton be hauiour.
seasoned with sin, if when they are grown up and sedde to the full, they by
Troops haunt Harlots Houses.

The third Rock to be retired from, If thou will not suffer Shippe-wracke by
this sin, Is wanton Looks, and light Behavior: That the Daughters of Syon
may not walk with stretched forth necks and wanton Eyes, mincing as they go,
and making a tinckeling with their feet, Isai, 3.16. For if the Prince of the
Apostles had been made Judge of such, I doubt he would have applied this
place unto them, Si vir, vel mulier se ornauerit, vt vultus hominum in se
prouocaeuerit, etsi nullum inde sequatur damnum induium tamen patietur aternum,
quia venenum attu lit, si fuisset qui biberet: Hieron: Auro and Margaritis
adornata, and Monilibus ornamenta Mentis and Corporis pe^ds lecunt: Cyprian: de
Habit: Virg.
They have eyes full of Adultery, and cannot cease from sin, 2. Peter, 2.14.
And unless Joseph be a Steward in such a house; Putipher may well fear the
loosing that one thing, which he has only reserved; which if you will have
preserved; those prouocations, (that I may not say Proclamations) of Impurity,
must be prevented.

A fourth thing to be forborne, is the frequenting lewd places, Lewd Company
or associating with lascivious persons: For Pro. 6.27.28.29.
Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes be not burnt? Can one go
upon hot Coals, and his feet not be burnt? So he that goes into his
neighbors wife, Whosoever touches her shall not be Innocent. Prou. 5.8.9
Remove thy way therefore far from her, and come not nigh the doors of her
house, least thou give thine honor unto others, and thy strength to the
Cruel: For, Cum Peruerso peruerteris, With the Perverse thou shall be
perverted (as Hieron.
the Father reads it) Psalm, 18.26. And therefore if thou will escape the
Hook, then swallow not the bayte; for otherwise thou shall not rest, until
thou have done evil, Prou. 4.16.

The fifth and last dangerous arriving, Drunkenness
is at the Deepes of Drunkenness, and unsounded Shore of Surfeiting; Another
of the supreme Implicit sins, depending upon Plenty; When he fed them to
the full?

A vice so vile, so base, so beastlike, as that it Fbrietas tudicium Rutonis
obfuseat, contentiones and bella pro^urat, robur and Naturalem virtutem
eueruat, Infirmitatem generas, mortem naturalem adducit, Hugo, de Sancto Victor.
transsorms the soul, deformes the body, bereaues the Brain; betrays the
strength, desiles the affection, and metamorphoseth the whole man, making the
understanding ignorant, the strong staggering, the trusty trothlesse, the
virtuous vicious, and the preciseft person, a Pander to the prophanest sin:
Drunkenness as Saint Augustine observes) being the Flagitirrum omnium matter,
Radix Criminum, Culparum materia, Origo vitiorum, Turbatio Capitis, subuersio
sensus, Tempestas Lingua, Procellae Corporis, Naufragium Castitams, etc.
Augustine. ad Sacr: Virg.
mother of misdemeanors; the matter that ministers all mischief, the root of
wretchedness, the vent of vice, the Subuerter of the Senses, the Confounder of
the Capacity, raising astorme in the Tongue, Billows in the Body, and
Shippe-wracke in the soul, the loss of Time, the corrupter of Conversation,
the discredit of Carriage, the Infamy of Honesty, the Sincke that swallows
Chastity, the Infirmity whose Physician is Ignominy, and the madness whose
Medicine is Misery: Whereupon Solomon is so careful to prevent the danger
before it seize, least afterward it be neither removed with ease, nor abide
alone with all man's industry; Pro. 23.31.32.33.
That he will not have a man look upon the Wine when it is Read, when it
gives his color in the Cup, or when it sparkleth aright, least at the last
it bite him like a Serpent, and sting hius like an Adder, cause his eyes to
behold strange Womeu, and his Heart to utter perverse things. When Noe ad
vnius borae ebrietatent nudauit semoralia sua, quae ad Sexcentos annos
contexerat. Hieron. Ep. 1. ad Occan.
lay Noah uncovered, but when he was drunk, Genesis 9.21. When committed Lot
incest but in his Wine, Genesis 19.32. to 38. And when thought David's Arch-policy,
the fittest time to veil his Adultery, but at a device of drinking, 2, Sam.
11.13. Sine Cerere et Libero friget Venus: For she dwells only at the
Iuie-Bush, But Ebrietas quid non defignat; It infecteth the Soul worse then
Sodom: Pro. 23.29 Assumit inter pocula angusta certamina, and malis
existentibus causis aspen ram excitat rixam. Aug. vbi supr.
To omit the woes, sorrows, bablings, contentions, and wounds without cause
which attend it, as also 1. Esdr. 3 22. Refertur Alexandri Macedo tae exemplum
qu Clituim charissimum sibi as sidelissnnum inter epulas transfodit, and
intellecto facinore mori voluit. Sense. Ep. 34. ad Lucil.
How men in their Cups forgette their love to friends, and rashly draw their
swords: And how, Sam. 13.28
when men's hearts are merry with wine, they are easily smitten to death: So that
a Judith. 12.20 and 13. to 9.
silly woman may slay the strongest man of Arms, if Holifernes himself be
made the Instance. To omit, I say, these and a thousand other Inconveniences,
which are Appendixes to this vice, And only to insist upon the Affinity of it
with that sin which in the present is proposed for the effect of it.

Is not Drunkenness the mother Nurce and Cater to Adultery? Or at least
Lasciuiousnes the daughter of Luxury? Is not Pro. 20.1.
wine a mocker, and strong drink raging? Let Ahashuerosh, who could forbear
Vashti all the time of his feasting, but must have her brought forth when his
heart was merry with Wine, Esther, 1.10, 11. And here these Israelites be the
Instance, who when they were fed to the full, By troops they haunt Harlots
Houses. And therefore as he that will not be defiled, must not touch Puch,
Eccles. 13.1. So he that will not be enflamed to uncleanness must not only
take heed of being drunken with wine, wherein is excess, Ephesians 5.18. But
even avoid keeping company with wine-bibbers, or riotous eaters of flesh,
Proverb. 23.20.21. For as Poverty is their Pedisseque, so Esus carnium and
potus vini, ventrisque satu ritas Seminariu^ libulinis est, Arist. Ethie. 7.
Chambering and wantonness will be their associate, Romans 13.13.
Lasciviousness. Lusts, riotings, and banquetings are joined by the Apostle, 1
Peter, 4.3. And will be seldom severed by Apostataes; Do we not see by
ordinary experience, the lasciuions steal to maintain drunkenness, when
drunkenness was delighted in, only for the desire of uncleanness? So Luxuriae
ad praesins voluptatem deliniens, futuram non simt cogita epaupertatem Aug.
doctr. Christ:
reiking in this riotousnes, that they never wreake that woe which shall be
unto them which rise up early to follow strong drink, and continue until they
be enflamed, Isal, 5.11. Whereby it comes to pass, that Hell opens her mouth
wide, and they in multitudes descend into it, whilst they so lie weltering in
their wickedness, that they never consider the curse which shall fall upon him,
who gives his neighbor strong drink, and puts his bottle to him; and makes
him drink also, that he may look on his nakedness, Habak. 2.15.16. How he
shall be filled with shame in stead of glory, and himself drink also till
his foreskinne be uncovered, how the cup of the Lords right hand shall be
turned unto him, and shameful showing shall be his honor. But Psalm. 50.22
oh would they would consider this, that thus forget God, least he take them
away in a Time, when there is none to deliver them. Would I say, they would
consider with Saint Augustine: that Quicunque ad bibendum pronus fuerit, velin
Conuiuio suo alios suos adiurauit, pro se and pro ipsis in Die Iudicij reus
erit. Whosoever is prove himself, or provoke others to drinking, shall
answer both for his own, and their offense, at the day of judgment, which
might teach them to take heed unto themselves, that their hearts may not at any
time be ouercharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and so that fearful day
of the Lord (or their death, come upon the^ unawares, Lu. 21.34.35. for as a
snare shall it com upon all such inhabiters of the earth; yea with all the
snares and punishments which are due unto Adultery, that issues from this sin
of drunkenness, Which is the next object of our observation.

What punishments are due to offenders in it? The punishments.
Wherein to omit the particular personal pains of the Body, which God
inflicteth according to his own pleasure, answerable oftentimes to the quality
of the Constitution, or Wisd. 11.15.16.
correspondent to the form of the offense, when Occultam culpam sequitur
aperta percussio, because these are not always apparently incident to all
Offenders. And those of which Antiquity durst aueare that.

Quatuor his poenis punietur quisquis Adulter,
Aut erit hic pauper, aut hic subita morietur,
Aut aliquod subito franget de corpore membrum,
Aut cadet in famam qua debet carcere trudi.
That every Adulterer shall be overtaken with one of these four extremities,
1. Either he shall be poor and beg his bread, yea and seek it out of
desolate places; 2. Or else he shall die suddenly, and be unexpectedly cut
off in the day that he thinks not of it: 3. Or else he shall have his bones
shattered, and broken a sunder in his security, even as a man breaks and
heweth wood upon the earth: so that he shall live so miserably, as he shall
seek death, and not find it; That body being the greatest grief and burden
unto him, which before he pampered to follow the delights and lusts of the
flesh, 4. Or else he shall fall into such reproach and infamy, that he shall
be deservedly cast into prison for his Impiety To omit (I say) these, We will
infer as inevitable, That as the Lepreians carried those which were de
prehended for the Fact, three days bound through-the City, and afterward
despised them during their life time: So the Apostle appointed amongst
Christians, that if there were any fornicator amongst them he should be bound
with the chains of Excommunication, and published through the Synagogues, That
they should have no commerce nor company with him, 1. Cor. 5, 11. And as in the
old World, Non habentes cum eis societatem vel communione^: Aq: in Ep.
they which defiled themselves with strange flesh, were reserved unto the
vengeance of eternal fire, Jude, 7. So in this latter age, all Adulterers and
unclean persons are liable to the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death, Apoc. 21.8. Where, Pro breui voluptate perpetua
poena; For a moment of pleasure they shall suffer many millions of pain, (as
Saint Bede says) yea, and that which is, if any thing can be, yet more
fearful; not only them selves, but even their posterity, which are the issue
of such unlawful seed, yea, and the goods which are gotten by such unlawful
means shall all be consumed, and utterly rooted out, one month shall devour
them, their strange Children, and all their portions. Hosea, 5.7. For the
multiplying brood of the ungodly shall not thrine, nor take deep rooting from
Bastard shppes, nor lay any fast foundation; for though they flourish in
branches for a time, yet standing not fast, they shall be shaken with the
VVinde, and through the force of the wind they shall be rooted out: The
imperfect branches shall be broken off, their fruit unprofitable, not ripe to
eat, yea meet for nothing: For children begotten of unlawful beds are
witnesses of wickedness against their Parents in their Trial, Wisd.
4.3.4.5.6. For howsoever to some this seem so sweet a sin, as that they
will not leave it till they dye, Eccles. 23.17. yet as you may read (and it is
well worth the reading to this purpose) in the same Chapter to the 27. verse.
The Whoremonger shall be taken in a time when he suspecteth not, and punished
in the streets, And the wife that leaves her husband, and brings in hyre by
another, shall be brought out into the Congregation, that Inquisition may be
made of her Children, who shall take no root, And she shall leave her memory
to be cursed, and her reproach shall not be blotted out.

Who would not therefore fear this fatal fault, and affrighted, take up Saint
Hieromes exclamation against this sin, O lgnis infernalis, Luxuria, Cuius
materia Gula, Cuius flamma superbia, Cuius Scintillae praua colloquia, cuius
fumus infamia, cuius cinis immunditia, cuius finis Gehenna: O thou infernal
fire of Lust, whose fuel is full feeding, whose flame is proud flourishing,
whose sparckles are ribald speaking, whose fume is Infamy, whose ashes
uncleanness, Whose Vrne is hell, and whose extinguishing eternal burnings,
whose kindling occasionates such a Counter-Plea to man's Pardon, that the
Almighty thus exaggerates his offenses: How shall I pardon thee for this? Thy
children have forsaken me, and sworn by those that are no Gods, and when I
fed them to the full, by troops they haunt Harlots Houses.

And so I descend to the first aggrauation, which is Their Impudency; By
troops; Impudency.
Custom having confirmed them so shameless in sinning, as that they not only
proclaim their impiety in the ears of their Abettors; and They were as fed
horses, etc. ver. 8.
beastlike communicate their contamination with their Associates, but even
publish their impuritie to the eyes of the offended obseruers, declaring their
sins as Sodeme, and hide it not, Isay, 3.9. But like Zimri and Cosby in the
very door of their Tents, when Israel wept before the Taberuacle, Numb: 25.6.
Or like Absolon, that pitched his tents upon the very roof of the Palace, to
demonstrate in the eyes of Israel his corrupting of his Fathers Fathers
Concubines, 2. Sam. 16.22. So they not only in the Evening, or at Twilight, or
in the black and dark of the night, when they may flatter themfelues that
none do see them: Like Solomon's Fool with his Female, Prou. 7.9. to 1. But
even then (that I may not say now) when the Congregations are assembled to
sorrow for this sin, do not only Ezech. 33.
stand single by the Walls of the streets, and in the doors of their Houses,
but even by troops haunt Harlots Houses. Adeo, qui cum periit semel redire
nescit, periit pudor: So far has shame (which being lost can seldom be
regayned) forsaken them, and so fast flock they by troops unto those Houses,
Where shameless is the Sewer. Whose vnparralelde Impudency not once to be
vnapparelled for the ugly apparitio^, lest it should enforce me to break the
bounds of modesty, in ripping up those deunes of darkness, I will only
Mathematically describe unto you a threefold situation, of such sinckes of
sin, that so you may the speedilier address an Inquisition for the
suppressing of them, (if any there be) as many there were in Judah and
Jerusalem.

1. The first, Josh, 2.1.15. Upon the town wall, where they had their secret
passage through Windows. 2. The second, Judge. 16.4. In a Valley by a Brook
side, where they might have intercourse without observing. 3. The third, 1.
Reg. 3.16, A couple of Victualers in the City, where under pretente of Repast,
they might repose more freely, And so by troops assemble them selves in
Harlots Houses.

Assembled Here, Pertinacity.
Is the last circumstance which aggrauates this sin, which is Pertinacity: For
as woe shall be unto those which have lost Greg. Mag: mort in Job. lib. 1 super
his verbis: Sic faciebat Job assi ^ue.
Perseuerantian; Their Perseverance is good, Eccles. 2.14. So no less we
shall be unto those, who will not leave Pertinaciam, their Pertinacity in
evil. Whereas, Look how without Perseverance, no Virtue is auayleable upon
reuolting: So without Pertinacitie, no sin is unpardonable, upon Repenting:
And therefore if any have fallen The Kings Bible reads, overtaken in a fault,
etc.
upon occasion (as the Apostle calls, it) Gal. 6.1. That is to say, Through
Heming in loc. Luther in Gal
Infirmity into any of these sins: Let him take heed how he haunt them,
that is to say, continue obstinately.

Genesis 9.21.
Noah, Gen 19.33. to 36.
Loath, Genesis 38.15.16.
Iudath, 2. Sam. 11.4 15, and 11.13.
David, Math. 26.70. to 75.
Peter; They all fell; but they haunted them not, And peradventure as Isidore
affirms; Vtile sit arrogantibus deseri a Deo, quatenus suae infirmitatis,
conscii ad humilitatem redeant, vt humiles post lapsum existant, God may see it
sometimes profitable for the proud to be forsaken of him for a season, to the
end that experimentally understanding their own inability, they may after
their fall humble themselves with the greater feruencie. But let them take
heed, That they draw not iniquity with coardes of vanity, and sin as it were
with Cartroapes. Isai. 5.18. That they haunt not that by which they have
harmde: For then Woe shall be unto them. Whereas otherwise if they forsake
their sin, convert and cry for merey Let no Nouatian or Puritan say, as it
was objected against S. Augustine, That we give a gappe to sin, when we
offer a haven of safety to every repentant sinner, for to those that deny it,
we reply with Constantine, to Acestus. Erege tibi scalum Acest, and adcoelum
solus afcende: Erect a Stayre Atesius, for thy self, and climb to Heaven
alone without a slip, So Meridith Hanmir translates (...) Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. l. 6. c. 42. vide Epiphan. Tom. 1. Hares. 59. Socrat lib. 4 c. 7. 2.
Aug. Him: 27.
Ecclesia nunquam claudet gremium redeunti: And Christ came not to call the
Righteous but sinners to Repentance, Math, 9.13. Yea; he will admit Repenting
Publicanes and Harlots into the kingdom of heaven before self-Iustifying
Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 21.31. Where else had Tamar stood in the Math.
1.3.
Line of Christ for all her Genesis 38.25.
Tokens: What Josh. 2.18.21.
red list could have rescued Rahab Josh. 6.17.20.
when the Walls of Ierico fell down flat, to give the enemies entrance? What
Luc. 7.38.
Rivers of tears might have wasted Mary Magdalen from Ioh. 8 4. to 12.
the cape of condemation, so near unto the haven of Heaven, As be to the first
that beheld Ioh. 20, 15.16
our SAVIOVRS Resurrection: Yea what 1. Reg. 5.10.11.
Abanah, Pharphar or Jordan could have purified all the Fornicators, Idolaters,
Adulterers, effeminate Persons, Abusers of themselves with mankind, Thieves,
Covetous Persons, Drunkards, Raylors and Extortioners, which without Repentance
were not capable of the Kingdom of Heaven; yea, (and to be bold in the
Apostles words to converted Christians) Even some of you, which sometime were
such, but that after Repentance you are now washed, and sanctified, and
justified, in the Name of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and by the Spirit of our GOD,
1. Cor. 6.9.10.11. Oh therefore whosoever you be that have Wisd 5.7.
wearied your selves in the way of these wickednesses and destruction, and have
not hitherto known the way of the Lord: Cast away from you all your
transgressions whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a
new spirit, ^or why will ye dye O house of Israel, since I have no pleasure in
the death of him that dies, (says the Lord, Wherefore turn your selves and
live ye, Ezech. 18.31 Return, Return, Sun^rites quippe captiuae
interpretatue, etc. Que infidelitatis iugo a Daemembus, captiuatur, etc. Greg.
Mag. in Cant:
O Shunamite, Return, return, that he may look upon thee, Cant. 6.13. Even
with that eye of Compassion, by which, when none other pitties thee, yet he
may say unto thee, Live, Ezech. 16.5.6. And whilst thou leauest thy old
haunts, Leuit. 19.30
and frequentest his house, forsakest thy swearing, and Psalm. 42.4.
reuorencest his Sanctuary, turnest thy Troops that haunted Harlots Houses
Psalm: 42. vbi su
into multitudes that keep his Holy day; thy sloth into his service, thy
wantonness to warmness, thy disobedience to dutifulness, thy Joel. 27.19.
Idolatry to devotion, thy profane speeches to praises, thy Perjury to
Prayers, thy Luc. 21 34. Mark. 13.33
drunkenness to watch for the day of Doom: and thy Greg Mag. homan Aug.
sins to sacrifices, He will find a means, How to pardon thee for this?

Which God grant of his mercies for his Sons Merits, through the powerful
Operation of the Holy Ghost; which only prepares man to Repentance: To which
Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, be ascribed Apoc. 4.11. and 5.12.13
al glory, power, praise, might, and Majesty by the conuerts in this Church
upon Earth, as there is Luke 15.10.
Reioising at their Conversion, by the Angels in that Church in Heaven, from
this time forth for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

