SAMSONS SEVEN LOCKS OF HAIR: Allegorically expounded, and compared to the
seven Spiritual Virtues, whereby we are able to overcome our spiritual
Philistims.

By M. A. SYMSON, Minister of the Euangell at Dalkeith.

stylized flower

Printed at Sainct-Andrewes, by Edward Raban, Printer to the University, 1621.

To the right Noble and virtuous Lady, D. MARIE ARESKIN, Lady Keith, Grace,
Peace, and Happiness.
IT is the accustomable use of this foolish Age (MADAME) to claim Nobility
unto it self; drawing the Original thereof from diverse Fountains: some from
the descent of their Progenitors, which the Poet scorned; not thinking that to
belong to them which they themselves did not atchieue: Nam genus, and proavos,
and quae no^ fecimus ipsi Vix ea nostra voco.

Others, wiser than these, affirmed that only Virtue did nobilitate; it being
a gift of the mind, of more worth than any fleshly prerogative: By which the
ancient Romans Lacedaemonians, and Athenians, studied to be famous through the
world. But what were all these Cardinal Virtues? (though they could have
attained unto the perfection of them) but shining sins, (as Saint AUGUSTINE
says) without CHRIST. For true Religion only perfecteth Nobility, and
makes men partakers of the Divine Nature, which consists in the knowledge of
the true God, and his worship, according to his will. This makes David, who
sprang of the base root of Iesse, more famous than Nebuchadnezar; and Solomon
to be preferred to Cyrus, Alexander, or Julius Caesar, even till this day. And
again, since God has trained up your Ladyship under the hand of a blessed
Mother, that ye have sucked (with your Milk) the knowledge of the Truth from
a Child, and growing in grace with your years, I wish that as your Lad. is
borne noble by birth, and by your singular virtues become more noble; so by the
sincere profession of the Truth ye may become most noble. Therefore I have
presented these Seven golden Locks of Spiritual Virtues to be worn of your
L. as Ornaments (of more worth than brodered Gold or precious Pearls) upon the
hid man of your heart: which will make you more beautiful in the eyes of Jesus
Christ, your spiritual Husband, than if ye had all the glory of the world.
Your spiritual Philistims, who creep into Noble men's houses, will labor to
rob you of your Ornaments: therefore beware of Dalilah, and her entising
speeches; that ye may hold fast the Truth to the end, which ye have by
hereditarie possession; and I trust shall deliver it to your children. So
beseeching God to multiply all the graces of his Spirit upon your Lad. with
temporal felicity, and hereafter heap upon you the eternal weight of
glory, I rest

Your Ladyships servant A. Symson.

TO THE READER.
BEcause (good Reader) thou have so favorably accepted mine other two Looks
before, as well this last of The first seven Days, as likewise the former upon
The seven words which Christ spoke on the Cross, even at the accomplishment
of our Redemption; therefore I am encouraged to present to thee this third
Septenarie also, of Samsons seven Locks of Hair, mystically expounded of the
seven necessary Virtues, without the which none can be true Christians. And if
ye read the Fathers, how they allegorize both these and all other parts of the
old Testament, ye will not be offended that I handle these Locks by
spiritual interpretation. Receive this kindly, I pray thee, and by Gods help
thou shall have The seven Psalms of Repentance as soon as possibly I may.

Farewell.

A. SYMSON.

ON THESE LOCKS.
Locks, Ornament of Angels, Diadems
Which the triumphing Quires above do crown:
Rich Curles of Bounty, Pinnions of Renown;
Of that immortal Sun immortal Beams.
Locks, sacred Locks, no, adamantine Chains;
Which do shut up, and firm together bind
Both that Contentment which in Life we find,
And Bliss which with unbodied Souls remains.
Fair Locks, all Locks compared to you (though gold)
Are Comets-Locks, portending Harm and Wrath;
Or bauld Occasions-Locke, that none can hold:
Or Abasaloms, which work the Wearers death.
If henceforth Beauty e're my Mind subdue,
It shall (dear Locks) be for what shines in you.
W. D. Judge. chap. xvi. verse. xix. And she made him sleep upon her Knees: and
she called a man, and made him to shave off the seven Locks of his head: and
she began to vex him: and his strength was gone from him, etc.
THis History of Samson declares unto us the infirmity and weakness of Gods
chiefest Vessels, The infirmity of Gods Sancts.
whenever they are left unto themselves: for albeit Samson had both
spiritual and natural strength above others, yet when God lest him but a
little he lost them both, and became a pitiful prey and spectacle to his
enemies, whom before he vanquishe. So this History is a faithful Recorder,
as well of the Vices as Virtues of the Sancts, and a perfect mirror wherein
every one may behold both the deformity and beauty of his own person. Simil.
Judge. 4.8. and 8.27. and 11.39.
Barac the Captain had his own faintheartednes, Gedeon his Ephod, Iephtah his
unnatural offering, etc. These things are manifest by the Scriptures, and like
Bekons set upon the shore, Simil.
to warn us who seem to stand, to take heed lest we fall. Yea, they are the
Cicatrices, and marks of their wounds, to remember us to beware of the like
snares of Satan.

But although our spiritual enemies beguile us, and ensnare us in the grossest
sins, yet let us not despare: for there is still mercy with God: Prove. 24.16.
and howbeit the Righteous may fall seven times aday, yet he shall rise
again. For sure it is, that whom the Lord loves, he loves to the end:
which we shall easily perceive in this short Treatise hereafter, God willing.
For albeit the Lord externally chastise us for our humiliation, yet he takes
not his holy Spirit from us. For when he thought good he renewed his graces in
Samson, and as his hair grew, the Lord gave him growth of strength also: so
that in his death he became more victorious over Gods enemies than in all his
life.

The grounds of doctrine.
Locks of Samsons head,and the mystical interpretation thereof.

Philistims, and the crafty devise to supprise Samson by Dalilah.

Samsons facility in yielding, and security in sleeping, being overcome by
his fleshly affections. Together with the just punishment thereof, in putting
out of his eyes, which he abused unto his lust. As also his captivity, and
that shameful spectacle which was made of him before the uncircumcised.

Samsons Triumph, the restitution of his strength, and destruction of Gods
enemies; representing therein Christ Jesus, our true Samson, who by his death
gave the greatest foil to our enemies, and led captivity captive.

SAMSONS SEVEN LOCKS OF HAIR.
THe number of seven in the Scriptures is a Number of perfection; The number
of seven.
as the seven Days, seven Lamps, seven Angels, seven Viols, etc. So under
the seven Locks of SAMSONS Hair, which were the Marks of his NAZAREISME,
are signified the perfect Graces of the holy Spirit, which the LORD had
bestowed upon him, and through which (as long as he kept them) he was more
than a Conqueror.

For albeit the Gifts of GODS holy Spirit be innumerable, and infinite, as
He is himself; yet there are some more principal, and most necessary; (sine
quibus non) without the which none can perswade-themselues that the Spirit of
GOD dwells in them, These gifts are absolutely necessary.
nor yet that they shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. And these Seven are
so platted together, even as SAMSONS LOCKS were, and as the links of a golden
Chain, that the one of them cannot be without the rest, and all of them
cannot be without one. And these are the Locks which CHRIST prayseth, in the
fourth Chapter of the Canticles, at the beginning.

THE FIRST LOCK. FAITH.
THe first work which the SPIRIT works in a Christian, Faith, the Mother of
the rest.
is FAITH; which is the Root and Grandmother of all the rest; and without the
which it is impossible to please GOD: and again, Heb. 11.6.
hereby he persuades our Consciences, that the Promises of Salvation
(contained in the Word of GOD) appertain unto us, even through CHRIST JESUS.
Therefore, those who are ignorant, and do not know these things, they have
not the Spirit: Ignorance lacks the first Lock.
Neither yet those persons who have an Historical Faith, as the Devils have,
and do not apply these Promises unto themselves: they have no part (I say) in
this Business, neither any fellowship with the Spirit of Grace. For which
cause we should most earnestly try our selves, whether the Spirit of God be
in us, (unless we be Reprobates;) and that especially by Faith; to wit, If
we know what are the Promises of Salvation; of the remission of our sins;
of the resurrection of our bodies; and of Life eternal. For albeit these
things are not seen by the eye of natural reason, and although flesh and
blood does not reveal it unto us; yet the Spirit of GOD works an assent and
consent in our minds, unto the truth of them, and fully persuades us
thereof.

But because many (alace) have a vain opinion of Faith, Three remarkable
Notes to try Faith.
(and who is he (of what Religion or Sect soever) that does not boast himself
of Faith?) therefore (GOD willing) I shall give you three marks, by the which
ye may discern whether this be a natural Lock, growing out of SAMSONS own
head; or gilded and colored, and false Hair, which never grew out of SAMSONS
brain.

1. By the grounds of the word.
The first mark whereby to distinguish true Faith from that which is
counterfeit, is, by the ground thereof: for true Faith groundeth her self only
upon the word of GOD, and Canonical Scriptures: for it is the word only
which warrandeth the Conscience: My Sheep hear my voice, John 10.4.
says our LORD: for if Angels, or men, would speak Oracles unto us, Act.
17.11
or Paul preach unto us, yet with the men of Berea we must search the
Scriptures, and try whether he speak according as it is written. And if an
Angel should preach a contrary Doctrine, Galat. 1.8.
we should count him Anathema. Then we must not build our Faith upon the
Decrees of the Church, and believe Fide implicita, The Papists infolde^ faith.
1 Pet. 3.15
with an in-folded Faith, or rather euill-folded Faith. When the Apostle
commands us to give a reason of our Faith to every one that asks it, shall
we have none other reason to render, but to wrap our selves in the Clouts of
Ignorance? and say, we believe as the Church belieueth? For the men of Samaria
answered to the woman of Samaria far better, saying, Now we believe, not
because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves, John 4.42
and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world. Neither
should our Faith be grounded upon the sand of the Popes Traditions, his
ridiculous Golden Legends, (which the Papists themselves scorn) nor yet upon
the ancient Fathers, as Augustine says, Non quid dicit Donatus, aut
Augustinus, sed quid dicat DOMINVS: that is, We must not take heed what
Augustine (that Divine Doctor) says, neither what Donatus (that damnable
Heretic) says; but what the LORD says in his holy Scriptures. And let us
hold fast that which the Apostle Saint Peter recommendeth unto us, saying, We
have also a more sure word of the Prophets, whereunto ye do well that ye take
heed, 2. Pet. 1.19
as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the
day star arise in your hearts. For the word of God is able to make that man
of God absolute, 2. Tim. 3.17.
being made perfect unto al good works. Then true Faith must altogether lean
to the Scriptures, which only are sufficient to lead us unto perfection.

The next trial of our Faith, is by the certainty thereof, 2. Certainty. Heb.
11.1.
which the Apostle Paul calls (...), that is, A full persuasion of the
certainty of those things which we believe: yea, an Evidence and
demonstration of things which are not seen: For whatsoever things we
believe, transcende and are above the reach of reason, or are flat contrary to
nature, sense, and reason, which flesh and blood cannot persuade us of, (as of
the least article of our Faith,) they must be revealed to us by our Father
which is above. Now when I speak of the certainty, I mean not the quantity;
as though I did affirm, that a weak Faith could debar us; but I crave a
true Faith, which persuades our consciences of Gods favor in Christ, and
makes us say with Saint Paul, I believed, and therefore did I speak: 1. Cor.
4.13
and to say also with the Centurion, Mark 9.24
I believe, Lord, help my Faith.

The third mark whereby this true Faith is discerned, 3. Trial of their works.
is by the fruits thereof: For it is not like the Fig Tree which was decked
only with the green Leaves of an outward show, and yielded no fruit unto
the LORD JESUS, Matthew. 21.19.
who hungered for it: But this true Faith is like the Tree which grows by the
Rivers of waters, Psalm. 1.3.
and brings forth fruit in due season.

This surely very greatly condemns all these godless Atheistes of our
time, who brag of an idle Faith, without any care of a good life.

THE SECOND LOCK. The love of God.
THE Spirit of GOD works not so soon Faith in a Christian heart, but
likewise as soon he sheddeth abroad also the Love of GOD in his soul: For as
the Fire has these two principal qualities, to wit, Light and Heat; Simil.
even so has the true knowledge of GOD the Love of GOD conjoined therewith.
For how can we love the thing which we know not? Yea, the measure of the Love
grows according to the measure of the knowledge: For no man can love the
Pearl, Simil.
unless he know the validity, virtue, and price of it; and then he
esteems of it. He that loves not the LORD JESUS let him be accursed. He
asked three times at Peter, Job. 21.15
if he loved him? not if he knew him; to declare, that the knowledge of GOD,
without his love, is unprofitable.

Try the love which you bear toward GOD by these five marks: First, Five
marks whereby to try our love. 1. Principal.
if it be principal: and when ye compare other things (which ye love) with
him, try which of them ye love best. He that loves Father, or Mother, or
Wife, or Land, etc. better than me (says our Savior) is not worthy of me.
Matthew. 10 37.
For he first loved us: yea, he loved us more than all the other creatures,
and took our flesh upon him, and died for us: what should we then do for
him? But the swinish Gadalenes of this world love their Swine better than him:
Matthew. 8.34.
these rich Gluttons love their Bellies better than him: and these covetous and
earthly minded men love Mammon better than GOD.

Next, 2. Sincere.
try thy Love by the sincerity thereof, and for what cause thou love GOD;
whether for his own cause, and the sweetness which is in him; or for some
temporal gain and reward that thou look for at his hands because thou
love him: If it be for gain, it is but mercenarie, and the love of an
Hyreling: But we ought to love the LORD as a chaste woman does her Husband:
Simil.
not for his Riches and Honors, but for love of himself: yea, she counts
it no burden to beg with him. Even so must we love the LORD for himself,
and the goodness which is in him: Yea, it is a part of mercenarie wages to
love GOD for eternal Life: but rather we must love eternal Life for him,
that we may be with him; for without him eternal Life were eternal Death.

Thirdly, 3. The love of GODS House.
we may try the love of GOD to be true in us, if we find in our selves
that we love GOD himself, and his House. Psa. 116.1
I love the LORD dearly (says the Prophet David.) And, O LORD, I have loved
the Habitation of thine House, Psalm. 26.8.
and the place where thine Honor dwells. And again, Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I craved of the LORD, that I will require, That I may dwell in
the House of the LORD all the days of my life, to behold the Beauty of the
LORD, and to visit his Temple. Read the fourscore and eight Psalm, which
begins, O LORD of Hosts! how amiable are thy Tabernacles! and read it unto
the end, and ye shall perceive how well David loved the LORDS House. Which
manifestly argues, that these ungodly Atheistes, and faythlesse Papists,
who refuse GODS public House, but at some superstitious times, have no love
of GOD in their hearts.

Farther, ye shall try the love of GOD which ye have in your heart by the
love that you carry toward your Neighbors, 4. The love of the Brethren.
the Brethren, and Members of CHRIST: For how can ye love the invisible GOD,
the Father, 1. Ioh. 4.20
whom ye see not, if ye love not his Children whom ye see? David says that
he was a Companion unto all them that feared the LORD: Psalm. 119.63.
as also he hated all those that hated the LORD.

And finally, 5. The hatred of sin
if ye would try whether ye love the LORD truly, and whether or not ye
have the second Lock of Hair on your head, then see how ye are affected
toward every sin: Psa. 97.10
For he that loves the LORD hates all evil: So that of necessity we must
hate all kind of sins, both in our selves, and in all others.

And now by these marks ye may try whether ye have the true love of GOD in
your hearts, or not.

THE THIRD LOCK. The fear of God.
THIS may seem strange, that we must both love and fear GOD; when as the
Apostle says, 1 Ioh. 4, 18
that perfect Love chaseth away Fear. But ye must understand that there is
both a slavish fear, and a childish fear: the Slave fears for pain; the
Child out of love fears to offend: Childish fear.
so that the greater love there is, there is also the greater fear to offend
him whom thou love.

But because men may deceive themselves concerning this Fear of GOD, I shall
here (God willing) give you a brief Rule, which can very hardly ^ayle:
NOTA. Be af aid to offend God in the smallest thoughts. Pro. 28.14
that is, If thou make conscience, and fear to offend GOD in the smallest
thought of thine heart: For he that is afraid to offend in lesser things, will
he not be more loath to offend in greater matters? as is said, Blessed is he
that fears continually.

But (alace) we may say with Abraham, that the sear of GOD is not in this
place. Genes. 20.11.
For if the fear of GOD were in your hearts, it would be a Bridle to
restrain you from every evil, althoug there were neither King, Law, nor
Justice. But if it be an external Fear which stays you from doing evil,
then ye lack the third Lock of Samsons Hair.

THE FOVRTH LOCK. Obedience to God.
THIS Obedience to GOD is the first fruit of the former three: for Abraham's
faith was known by his obedience, Genes. 12.4 and 22.16
in leaving his native Country, and sacrificing ^is son. If ye love me,
Ioh. 14.21
says CHRIST, keep my Commandementes. This Obedience is not only in doing,
Obedience active and passive.
but also in suffering for him. As CHRIST was obedient to the death of the
Cross, so we must learn of him obediently to suffer for his Names sake,
whenever we are called thereunto. 1. Sam. 15.22.
This obedience is better than Sacrifice: and disobedience is like the sin of
Witchcraft, and Idolatry. But to try thine Obedience, whether it be true,
ye shall mark these three things in it. Marks of true obedience. 1.
Material points, and substantial. Mat. 15.9


First, let us beware, that in every part of GODS worship, which is material,
we have a warrant out of his word, or else we worship GOD in vain,
following for Doctrine the Traditions of men. If it be circumstantiall, as
concerning Times, Places, Behauiours, Habites, etc. see that they be not
against the material grounds, and that they import no superstition, nor
profanitie; and then it is obedience. For he that is not against us, is with
us. But if they be Idolatrous, Impious, or Scandalous, they ought not to be
obeyed, lest we should obey Men rather than GOD.

Next, that our obedience be free, and without compulsion: 2. Free obedience.
For GOD loves not coacted service, but a willing Sacrifice.

And last, our obedience must be in every thing: 3. Total.
that as the Centurion said of his servantes, I say to one, Go, and be
goes: and to another, Come, and he comes, Matthew. 8.9.
etc. so must we, without reasoning with flesh and blood, simply obey GODS
will in every thing.

But because we are not able to perfect either the active or the passive
obedience of our selves, therefore our Savior CHRIST has done well for us,
who has perfectly satisfied both the Law and GODS Justice for our sins,
even by his own righteousness.

THE FIFTH LOCK. Mortification of our lusts.
THIS is the fifth necessary gift of the holy Spirit, of the which The Apostle
says, Colos. 3.5.
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth: fornication,
uncleanness, etc. And again he desires the Corinthians to keep themselves
from all pollution of the flesh. 2. Cor. 7.1
And likewise he wills the Galatians, not to fulfill the desires of their
flesh. Gal. 5.16.17.
And this is a continual exercise: for so long as we live here on earth our
flesh will still rebel against the Spirit: therefore must we strive
continually to beat down the corruptions of our vilde and wicked nature.

Now the true trial of Mortification is, Trial of Mortification.
first if it be universal; lest that ye resist your flesh in one affection,
and yield unto it in another. As if ye would refuse Papistrie, 1. Universal.
and embrace Sacrilege; Judge. 15.15. and 16.4 1. Sam. 15.9.
fight against the Philistims, and play the Harlot with Dalilah; kill the poor
Agagits, and the lean Cattle, tell, and spare the King and his fat Beasts
alive. So ye will entertain a sin which is pleasant, and profitable for
you, and think to cast off the rest. No, no, make no division, I beseech you,
in this slaughter of sin; but cut it wholly down, and pull it up by the
roots, that all its branches may perish. Be not only an enemy unto one
sin, but unto all; lest that one sin being left alive, and nourished
without repentance, it opens the door unto all the rest.

Next, if ye humble your body, and chastise your flesh, without hypocrisy,
and desire of vain glory: 2. Without hypocrisy.
without superstition, and without any pride, and a vain opinion of merit.
For what will thy silly Sufferinges, Pilgrimages, Fastinges, and Abstinences
avail thee before GOD? for He delights not in the torture and tormenting of
men's flesh; neither does His Kingdom consist in Meat or Drink: but He
requires of us a perpetual mortification, and sanctification: and not that we
should take liberty to sin, under hope of Pardon, and think to acquit our
selves by doing of Penance. But let us continually study to mortify and
subdue our vilde lusts and affections, purting our whole trust and confidence
in the mercies of GOD, and merits of CHRIST our Savior.

THE SIXTH LOCK. Prayer and Praises.
THE sixth Lock is PRAYER and PRAISES, which are the life of Religion: for
either we lack some things for which we must pray unto God; or have received
some, for which we ought to be thankful. So all our life time, that is,
every day, every night, yea every hour and moment, we must pray: 1. These.
5.17.
Pray continually, says the Apostle. But our Prayer must not only be
verbal: for words serve more for men, than for God. Our Prayer must be
mental: Prayer mental. Exodus 32.10.
as God is a Spirit, and heard Moses cry, although he uttered no words. Let
us not bind our selves unto words, as many do: but as our necessity
increases, so let us power out our heart unto God. Reverent in prayer.
But above all things let us speak reverently unto God, and consider with
what Majesty we have to do: and as he is the most excellent Majesty, so we
should dress and compose our speeches, and draw in our wandering affections
and cogitations, that our Prayers be not turned into sin, and that he cast
not back the dongue of our sacrifices upon our faces: (for the Lord abhors the
sacrifices of fools:) lest our Prayer, which is the Key to open the Heavens,
become a Bar to shut them upon us.

Pray in faith.
Let us pray also in faith, persuading our selves that the Lord hears us, and
will grant us all things which are necessary and expedient for us. Let us
pray ardentlie and earnestly, not fainting in prayer, Luke 18.5.
following the importunate widow. Let us not prescribe times unto him, nor
grudge against him, limiting the holy One of Israel: No prescription of time.
but attend patiently his Majesty's good pleasure: for he is faithful who
has promised. As also, let us praise him cheerfully, and rejoice in him with
all Hymns, and Psalms, and Spiritual Songs, with grace in our hearts.

THE SEVENTH LOCK. Constancy to the end.
ALl these former graces of the Spirit are beginning and accompanying graces;
Constancy a finishing grace.
but this gift of Constancy is a perfecting grace, crowning all the rest:
whereunto the Apostle many times exhorts the Churches, 2 Timothy 4.10
and complains of the back sliding of many, with Demas, who embraced this
present world: of whom he spoke weeping, that they were enemies to the Cross
of Christ. Phil. 3.18.
Our Savior says, He that perseuereth unto the end shall be saved: Matthew. 24
13.29
and it is prophesied, that those who seemed to be stars, shall fall from
Heaven. Let us therefore crave of God, Qui dat velle, and perficere, who both
gives us to will, and to perfect; that he may, (after we have suffered a
little,) make us perperfect, confirm, 1. Peter 5.10
strengthen, and establish us.

The conspiracy of the Princes of the Philistims, against Samson.
WE have heard already the extraordinary graces and strength which was in
Samson: and now we shall take a view also of the extraordinary temptations of
his enemies, whereby they rob and spoil him of the same: by the which we may
learn, that the greater gifts of God men have, Greatest gifts, greatest
temptations.
they shall look for the greater temptations. God has not given us Armor to
roust, or hing or lie beside us; but that we should use them. Therefore let no
man brag in his gift: for when it is tried, our weakness will be also tried.

Next, the Philistims were not able to withstand Samson by their strength;
Satan preuailes more by policy than power.
but they circumuene him by their policy and crafty dealing. The Devil is
both a Lion and a Serpent, yet he prevails more by his craftiness than by
his cruelty. A Lion is heard when he roareth afar off, and is eschewed: but
a Serpent comes creeping softly, and whistling, and poysoneth us craftily. O
the deepnesse of Satan! beware of him, and of his sleights. Genes. 3.1
He came not to Eua in the shape of a Lion, but of a Serpent. Therefore let us
take heed of the crafty temptations of the Devil, lest he deceive us by his
subtilties. The first Church grew and increased under the ten bloody
Emperors, even whilst the Lions roared, and devoured her members: but when
she came to peace under Constantine, Constans, and Constantius, then the Devil
poisoned her with the damnable Heresies of Arrius, Pelagius, and Donatus: so
that the Church was more miserably rent and consumed by the craft and subtlety
of the Devil.

We are also to pray to God, to keep us from the policy of Pharaoh, Exodus
1.10 and 14.9.
(who says, Let us deal wisely with the Israelites, and cunningly undermine
them) more to be feared in his policies, than when he came after the
Israelites with his Horses and Chariots. And the Philistims prevailed more
against Samson by the craft of Dalilah, Judge. 16.3.18
than by their Ports and Bars in Azza.

Thirdly, ye see that sin becomes a snare to the sinner. Sin a snare to
the sinner.
Samson was greatly addicted to his fleshly pleasures, and they brought him to
destruction. Harlots hunt for the precious soul of a man: yea, they are a Pit,
Prove. 6.26 and 22.14
wherinto man falls, and cannot rescue himself. Let us therefore mortify
our affections, and give no liberty to our flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof:
for the baits of our pleasures seem delectable; but we see not the hook
which lies under them: Prove. 5.3.4
they seem to be Honey in our mouth, but they will be bitter as Wormwood, and
sharp as a two-edged Sword.

The Allegory of the Princes of the Philistims and Dalilah.
THE Princes of the Philistims do viuely represent Beelzebub, and the rest of
the Princes of darkness; and Dalilah represents the flesh, their associate,
who confederate themselves against all those whom they see marked with the
graces of God, and stre^gthened by his Spirit, to resist and overcome them: for
we have not a fight with flesh and blood, but against Spiritual wickednesses,
and the Princes of darkness: and therefore, seeing we have to do with so
potent enemies, who have so many advantages of us; they being Spiritual, Nota.
and we earthly; they in the Air, and we on the Earth; they strong, and we
weak; they wise, and we foolish; they many and we few; etc. should we not
crave at God, that we might, sight a good Fight? and that he would furnish us
with all Armor convenient for that combat; and strenghthen us by his grace,
that we be not overcome of our enemies?

The fittest instrument which the Devil can find out to suppryse a Christian,
Our flesh is our Dalilah
is his own flesh, and fleshly lusts, which are coupled nearer to him, than
Dalilah was to Samson; bred within us, and which we intertaine in our bosom;
which carry us, or rather miscarrie us whithersoeuer they please. The
Philistims knew what power Dalilah had over Samson; and the Devil knows how
we are addicted to our own lusts; and therefore he chooses them as the fittest
instruments to deceive us. Samson overcame the Philistims, and Lust overcame
him: Quem non vincit ferrum, Augustine.
vincit libido: Lust overcomes him whom the Sword could not overcome.
Therefore seeing Satan knows us so well, and can find within our selves our
own Dalilah to deceive us, let us take heed that our fleshly lusts have no
commandment over us, but that we may lead them captive, to the obedience of
Christ Jesus.

The Argument which the Philistims use to make Dalilah to betray Samson, is
taken from commodity or gain.
THe five Princes of the Philistims agree with Dalilah for each one eleven
hundredth shekles of Silver, Matt. 26.15.
which was a great price: and both Christ and Joseph were sold for lesser.
Genesis 37.28.
They knew what hope of gain could work: for if it can blind the eyes of the
wise, what will it not work at the hands of an Harlot? for as Harlots are
prodigal, so are they also auaritious, and make merchandise both of themselves
and of all others for gain.

An honest heart is not mercenarie. 1, Tim. 6.6
A religious and honest heart is not mercenarie, neither can be bought or
sold; and it accou^teth godliness to be great gain: whereas a slavish and
earthly minded man accounts gain to be godliness, and will not stick to
sell Christ, his Religion, his King, his Country, his Conscience, his Soul,
his friend, and quid non? for Money.

This offer of the Princes of the Philistims embraced by Dalilah, presents
unto us the price whereby the Devil allureth our sinful nature to consent
unto his temptations: for he knows what Gain (and the offer of earthly
commodities) can do at our hand. He will buy us at a dear rate, to betray our
true Samson Christ Jesus. He knew the covetous heart of Judas, Matthew. 26.15.16.
and therefore presented unto him thirty pieces of Money to betray his Master.
But he knew that Peter nor John could not be seduced thereby. When Peter said
to Simon Magus, (who offered him Money to sell the gift of the holy Ghost) Let
thy Money perish with thy self; Act. 8.20.
so they are not the successors of Simo^ Peter, (from whom the Roman church
affirm to draw their descent,) but of Simo^ Magus, who either buy or sell
holy things.

Samsons facility and security.
SAMSON being overcome of his lusts, yields so much to Dalilah, that after a
threefold dissimulation (whereby he would have seemed to resist the temptations)
he gives her three advantages, and his dissimulation opens a door to his
defection; Dissimulation a door to defection
where if he had resisted in the beginning, and altogether refused to show her
wherein his strength lay, he could not have made such Apostasy, with the
loss of the marks of his Nazareisme and religion.

And this policy of Samson, and dissimulation, would seem to be very
plausible to flesh and blood, that we should put off time with our enemies,
and shoot off one shoure by keeping fair words with them; thinking thereby
that through tract of time they will be slacker in their suits: by the
contrary it falls out, that yielding to them in one fair word, and going
with them in the smallest thing, augmenteth their hop and stirs them up to
be more vehement, to be suting after farther: As if an house that were
besiedged would open the first entry to the enemy, Simil.
he gives him advantage to pursue the rest of the building more (...).
Therefore let us learn of the Apostle S. James to resist the Devil, James 4.7.
and he will flee from us, and not to capitulate or parley with the Devil in
matters of faith and Religion, or to yield unto him in the smallest thing; lest
he suit farther: Ex. 10.26.
but with Moses, (when Pharaoh himself sought only the Sheep of the
Israelits to remain in Egypt, Moses hoof.
) refuse him any hoof at all. So dangerous a thing it is to yield the smallest
point or intch to any person of the world in matters of Gods service: lest by
yielding in one thing, at last we be brought to yield to all: as we see by
the pitiful example of Samson. And when the Devil can obtain thus much at
our hands, that we may admit the badges or colors of Antichrist; yea, the
smallest Ceremony of that Roman Church; shall we doubt that he will stand
there? no, but he will seek farther, and will not be satisfied that we
receive his colors, unless we receive himself also, and make shipwreck of
our consciences, and deny the Faith. Like as a whoore-hunter sending some of
his rings, or other loue-tokens, to a young woman, Simil.
if she accept of them, he persuades himself he has obtained her favor:
so if we receive the marks of Antichrist, and take upon us his colors, it
shall be inevitable to refuse himself, but that we shall embrace that doctrine of
devils. 1. Tim. 4.1.
Wherefore let us resist the beginning of every evil. Samson in his greatest
danger became secure, Security.
and fell asleep upon the Harlots knee: and this designeth the fragility of
man's nature: yea, the regenerate, that the wicked be more vigilant to perform
their deuilish devises, than the godly be to escape them. For ye see here
Dalilah is waking, while Samson is sleeping: Matthew. 26.40.47.
so was Judas, when the Apostles were fast asleep in the Garden.

Next, the security of Samson represents the dullness of our nature, We are
most secure, when we should be most vigi- Jonah 1.5.
that we are then most secure, when we are in greatest danger. So was Jonas in
the ship, when the tempest of Gods wrath, and the surges of the Sea were
persuing the ship, all were waking, only Jonas was asleep, who should have
been most vigilant. And so is our Church this day, when Antichrist, and all his
confederates and suppostes, are triumphing upon the graves of Christians, we
are drinking in Bowls, and making merry with Beltaschar. Dan. 5.3.4.30.
But out of question, God will waken us, either in his mercy, or in his
Judgment, out of this dead-sleepe, wherinto Princes, Pastors, and people are
lulled over at this present time.

The Philistims are upon thee Samson.
THe Harlot has two voices: the first voice when she is tempting him to
sin, If thou love me, thou will tell me wherein thy great strength stands.
Dalilah has two voices.
But when he has yielded, her second voice is a voice of destruction, The
Philistims are upon thee Samson. So the Devil has two voices to a sinner: the
one when he is alluring and persuading us to sin, then he seems to pretend
love and kindness, and promises us fair things: but when he has persuaded
us to sin, then he terrifieth us with his second voice, and says, The
Philistims are upon thee Samson, and the judgments of God. First he lulleth us
asleep, with an hope of Gods mercies: but when he has snared us, he
proclaims war, and nothing but Gods judgments. Therefore let us beware to
hear the whistling of the Serpent; lest afterward we hear the roaring of the
Lion.

SAMSONS WEAKNESS.
HIs weakness is described, that when his enemies came upon him, he conceated
with himself, that he had his former strength: but in effect he proved to be
as other men. Whereof we may learn two remarkable lessons: first, that the
strength we have is only of God; The Lord our strength.
and once being left by him to our selves, we are a ready prey to our spiritual
enemies. The^ if we cast off our armor, we are naked before an armed man, and
our strength is turned to weakness: therefore let us put on our armor, and shake
it not off. Next, we see the false confidence of flesh and blood, False
confidence in our selves.
that will ascribe to it self strength, wisdom, faith, etc. when it has
nothing in it, but as it were one dreaming of victory in prison. Simil.
But when Samson comes in his enemies hand, then he feels his own
weakness, by doleful experience. Let us therefore not presume of our gifts,
lest we deceive our selves in our imaginations, and prove dross, Simil.
where we supposed our selves to be gold: as ye Spirit says to the Church,
Thou say, Apoc. 3.17
I am rich, and lack nothing etc.

Samsons fourefolde punishment.
God winkes not at sin.
NOw God justly chastises his own servant, with four rods; to let us see, that
the Lord will not wink at the faults of his Elect: albeit he will not take
his holy Spirit from them, as he did from the house of Saul; but chastise them
with the rod of his children, and visit them with his temporal corrections,
that they might escape eternal judgments. So did he to David, and the rest
of his Saints; and so will he still do to his chosen children for evermore.

Now the first punishment which the Lord lays on Samson, is BLINDNESS. Samsons
first punishment. Judge. 16.21.
And it is the just recompense of God, that wherein man sins, therein he is
punished. Samsons eyes were full of uncleanness, and they were pulled out of his
head. Wherein we sin, therein shall we be punished.
Our eyes are appointed for better uses, to wit, that we may behold Gods
works, and glorify him therein. But when they are instruments of wantonness,
and through which windows we send forth the unclean lusts of a polluted
heart, and open them to admit and give entry to wicked allurementes of others;
then no doubt God may justly punish those members which sinned. We have an
example of Adonebezek, Judge. 1.7.
king of Bezek, who cut off the thombs and toes of LXX. kings, whom he bound in
chains under his table, and says, As I have done to others, God has done to
me. The Allegory holds well of our spiritual enemies, who when they layhold on
us, and get us first into their hands, they pull our eyes, that we neither see
God, heaven, hell, nor our selves. But as the Raven first plucketh out the eyes
of the Lamb, Simil. Satan first blinds us, and then kills us. Isa. 6.9.
and then deuours the rest of the flesh; so does Satan first blind us, and
then kill us. When God threatened a judgment upon his people, by his Prophets,
he said he would smite them with a blindness, yea, a double blindness, that they
shall have eyes, and not perceive; surely prognosticating their temporal
destruction. This blindness befell the men of Sodom before the fire: Genesis 19.11
Numb. 22.23.
and to Balaam (that he saw not the Angel) before the Sword: and to the
Aramites, before they came to Samaria. 2. King. 18 6
But David, the servant of God, saw the Angel with a drawn sword, and humbled
himself before the Lord. 2. Sam. 24.17.
Therefore let us study to use the light which we have, rightly, that it be
not turned into darkness: for if the light that is in us be darkness, how great
shall this darkness be? But to apply this doctrine, they are more than blind who
see not a double blindness seized upon us, and both our eyes to be
blind-folded: Double blindness.
for we see pleasures, honors, and wealth, as the great Courteour saw after
the siedge of Samaria, though he never tasted thereof. 2. King. 7.20.
Let us dream to our selves by offending our God to purchase honors and
wealth, but in the morning our hand shall be empty. Next, we are blind in this,
Zach. 5.2.
that we see not the flying book of Zacharias, of XX. cubits long, and X.
cubits broad, bringing woe to the inhabitants of this miserable Land, for
Blasphemy, Sacrilege, Idolatry, Perjurie, Witchcraft, Adultery, and
Drunkenness, besides innumerable other vices, wherewith this Land is defiled.
The Lord open our eyes, that we may see our sins, and behold those letters
which are written on the wall, at which Beltaschar trembled: Dan. 5.5.
that the scales falling down from our eyes, we may repent, amend, and be
saved. Samsons second punishment. Judge. 16.21.


Samsons second punishment, is HIS BANDS. By which ye see how sin spoyleth
and robs men of liberty, and brings them to captivity and slavery: for
there is nothing which al creatures wish more after, Sin makes free men
slaves.
than Liberty, (so that the Poet called Liberty, The best of all things:) and
that Nature abhors nothing more than Bondage. Yet sin makes a man a slave,
and depriues him of that liberty which God and Nature gave him. Sin bound the
Israelites in Egypt and Babylon: and I greatly fear, that our sins also
bring us under slavery both of body and conscience, because we abuse the
liberty which we have under our gracious Prince. We may see what it is to
abuse the liberty that God gives us: for it provoke him to cast bonds on
us: as Christ said to Peter, When thou wast young, Job. 21.18.
thou walked whither thou would: but when thou art old, thou shall be carried
by others. For unto Samsons misery is added the third affliction: for being
casten as a slave into prison, he is forced to grind to the Philistims. The
abuse of Gods patience brings correction.
Because in his liberty he would not serve God, therefore in his captivity
he must serve his enemies: so the Lord is forced to use extremities, and to
deal sharply with his best children, if they abuse his patience by the
lice^tiousnes of their corrupt nature. Then ye may see, by the bonds and
imprisonment of Samson, what are the rewards and recompenses of the flesh, and
of such as follow Harlots: they are carried as an Ox to the slaughter, Prove.
7.22.
and as fools to the stocks for correction: for God has many bonds and
prisons, wherein he can fasten our feet: bonds of iron, and of sickness, tying
us to our beds: he has prison-houses and wards to keep us fast: Dan. 4.20.
he bound Nabuchadnezar with chains of iron: he bound Adonebezek under the
table, and Zedekiah, Judge. 1.7. 2. King. 25.7.
king of Judah, was carried bound to Babel, and cast into prison. And have we
not seen with our eyes, heard with our cares, and read in histories, that the
prison-houses have been so plenished with Noble Persons, Princes, Earls, and
lords, (I omit Gentlemen and other Commons, because it is so usual) that they
could scarce contain them? If ye inquire the cause why they are casten into
bonds: it is answered, For debt. And next, if it be asked, how did they
contract that debt, and spend their revenues? was it upon the honorable
affairs of their country and king? was it for the provision of their children,
to bestow them honorably in marriage, or such like? It is answered, No
forsooth. Then it is demanded thirdly, What it can be that has brought so
great Men to strait wards? And then it is replied, He was take in the prison
of a whoores chamber, and she by her prodigal maintenance has brought him to
this prison. Whoores bring men to Prison.
So Samson being first caught with Dalilah, is afterward conuoyed to the
prison of the Philistims, and constrained to grind in their Milns. But let us
sarre rather bind and imprison them first, that they bind not us. Better slay
them, than they us. But would to God that these external cords, bonds of
iron, and prisons of stone, Man is bound with his own sins. Jude verse. 6
Matthew. 22 13
were the worst. But the eternal God will lay hand upon that wicked and
profane man, and bind him hands and feet, with the bonds of his own sin,
(which are spiritual bonds) and cast him into everlasting chains, under
darkness, to be reserved to the last day; delivering him to the lailor, and the
lailor shall cast him into utter darkness: Esaias 30.33
into Topheth, which is prepared for the king: the fire whereof is kindled by
the breath of Gods own nostrels, as a river of brimstone: Zach. 9.11
which is a pit without water, and the prison of which Peter speaks, 1. Pet.
2.4. and 3.19.
whereinto the Angels were casten, and delivered into chains of darkness, to be
kept in damnation. If ye therefore be not afraid of these earthly prisons,
into the which no doubt your sin will bring you, if ye do not repent in
time, and namely those sins of adultery and whoordom; yet fear the eternal
chains and prison, whose doors shall never open, Nota.
neither is there any means to escape them; but ye shall be sure to lie there
perpetually, tormented with the Devil and his angels. Judge ye then, I pray
you, if ye have not bought so short a pleasure at a dear rate, Samsons third
punishment. Judge. 16.21. The abuse of liberty brings men to slavery. Ier.
2.24.
which will cost you everlasting pains.

Samsons third punishment is, that be must grind in the Milne. Which lets
us see yet farther how that the abuse of liberty brings us to slavery. When
we are young in sin, we go where we will, even with the wild Ass, till
our month come, when we shall be taken. The Israelites abusing their liberty,
became slaves to the Egyptians, Exodus 1.14 Matthew. 17.24 1. Sam. 8.12.
and made Brick to Pharaoh. They became tributaries to Caesar. Saul took
their daughters to be washers, and their sons to run after his Chariots. Let
us take heed then, even by the example of others, that wobecome not slaves to
sin and our own corruptions, lest sin make us slaves to men, and their
affections. Let us grind no longer to the Devil, lest he cause us to grind
to our temporal enemies here, and in hell for ever. He will put us to the
Galleyes, and bind us to row in chains: he will cast us under his table, as a
dog, with Adonebezek, when he has cut off our right thombs and toes. Therefore
let us resist Satan in time, and all our filthy lusts, that we be not brought
into perpetual slavery both of body and soul.

Samfons fourth punishment. Judge. 16.25.
Now Samsons fourth punishment is OPEN SHAME: wherein we may observe the just
recompense of Samson in every thing: his lustful eyes are pulled out: the
abuse of his liberty is turned to bonds: his slavery to sin, is turned to the
slavery of his flesh: and now last, his dishonor to God, God recompenseth
Samson justly in all his punishments. 2. Sam. 12.14.
turns to his open shame. For as the Lord will honor them who honor him; so
he will dishonor them who dishonor his glorious Name. Samson made Gods Name
to be evil speke^ of (as David did) before the Heathen, and slandered his
profession: now he is made a public spectacle before the eyes of Gods enemies.
Let no man think those pure in their profession that cry, The Temple of the
Lord, Ier. 7.4.
the temple of the Lord, if they denle their body, which is the true Temple of
God. Fie, and fie again, upon the swinish life of the professors of the Euangel
of Christ: for the Ethniks (who made more conscience in their honest behavior)
Turks, Jews and Papists, shall condemn them: and it shall be easier for them
at the Great Day, than to such who brag of their purity in religion, and yet
they live in a shameless impuritie of life: witnessing to all the world, Titus
1.16.
that they confess Christ with their mouth, and deny him in their works:
showing themselves to be hypocrites, prepared for utter darkness.

But let no man misconstruct the children of God, as though he had casten off
those whom he brings to be publik examples to the world upon open scaffolds, or
such like. For God thereby will proclaim that he will not countenance those
sins in his children, God punishes the sins of his own children here more
rigorously than he does the wickeds. 1. Cor. 4.9.
which he will punish in the reprobate; albeit he chastise the one, while he
plague the other. Yea, I read in all the Scriptures, that externallie God
deals more rigorously with his own, than with his adversaries. Christ was
made a public spectacle to the world: and Paul says, We are made a public
gazing stock to man and Angels: but we differ, in that we are made spectacles
for our own sins, and he was made a spectacle for us. And if it please God
to bring us to be open martyrs, and so spectacles to the world, let us see it
be for the Lords cause, as Samson did: for Causa, non mors, facit martyrem,
the cause, not the death, makes a martyr. Here is the goodness of God, that he
might have punished Samson by this shame for his sin, Nota.
and yet he turns it unto his own glory, and makes him suffer for his
cause.

Samsons Triumph.
IT is true which is spoken by the Spirit, Weeping may be at evening, Psalm.
30.5.
but joye comes in the morning: and that which our Savior says, Matt. 5.4.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall receive consolation: for this
Tragoedie of Samsons life ends with a joyful plauditie, with the delivery
of the Church from her enemies, and his own delivery from sin and shame.
But first let us observe, Man's greatest necessity is Gods chiefest opportunity.
that when Samson is farthest dejected and brought to the last and greatest
point of disgrace, then the Lord comes: and it is his proper time when he
works, which is contrary to the doeings of men: for when we see any exalted
to the top of their honor, then all men bow their knee to Haman: Hester 3.2
and 5.14 and 6.1. etc.
but when the Gallows is set up for Mordicai, and sentence given out against
the Jews, then comes the Salvation of God: for when Jonas said, Jonas 2.4.
I am cast out of thy sight, then his eyes were toward his holy place. The
necessity of Job was the opportunity of God: Job 42.10
for being deprived of al worldly comfort, his wife, children, friends,
servants, etc. and all had forsaken him, then the Lord comes, and restores
him to all things. David found this same proof, and all the Saints in all
ages, that in their greatest extremities his strength may be manifested to the
world, to the glory of his grace, that flesh and blood should have no place of
rejoicing in it self, but give all glory to God; All men forsook me, says
the Apostle, 1. Tim. 4.16.17. Job. 9.35.
But the Lord assisted me. As the borne blind being casten forth of the
Synagogue by the Pharisees, was found by Christ, so when we are rejected by
the world, the Lord shall find us. Therefore let this encourage the Church of
God at all times, and all her members; that howsoever the Ship of Jesus be
tossed with waves all the night, Matthew. 14.24.25.
yet in the fourth vvatch the Lord will come, and rebuke the vvind and the
waves, and make calm the tempests of the Seas, and bring peace to Israel.
Next, we see that when the enemies of the Church cry peace, then comes
their sudden destruction. The Philistims are triumphing over Samson, and
reuiling his God, and praising their god Dag^^, Judge. 16.24.
that dead monster: and in the mean time God brings sudden destruction upon
them. When the wicked are most secure. then comes destruction. Matthew. 24.38.
As in the first world they were eating, and drinking; marrying, and giving
in marriage; and the flood came: So when the enemies of the Church are in
their greatest joy, then they are singing (with the Svvan) their own
funeral song. Thirdly, we must observe that God restores strength to
Samson, which he had lost by his own folly: As God casts down, so in his
own time he raises up again.
wherein the constancy of God is to be seen; that whom God loves, he
loves to the end. Samsons foolishness could not prejudge Gods goodness. So
it is certain, that albeit the Lord vvil hide himself a little from his
Saints, and abstract his spiritual gifts from them for a season, as well to
their own sense and feeling, as to the sight of the world; Numb. 23.19.
yet it is impossible that God can repent as man, or change his nature, who is
immutable, and with him (as the Apostle says) there is no shadow of changing.
James 1.17
Then let us take heart, even when we seem to be farthest casten down, and
that the graces of God are dried up upon us. For the Lord will always be like
himself, and immutable. And this is also remarkable, that when the inward
graces are restored to the soul, Simil.
he recouereth also the strength of his body: for as it is in corporal
diseases, when the noble affected parts are cured and purged, then the exterior
parts of the body begin to conualesse: That same order God keeps in our
spiritual cure, saying first, Mat. 9.2.5
Thy sins are forgiven thee: and then, Take up thy Bed, and walk. David felt
the proof hereof, when he confessed his sins, and says, And thou tookest
away the punishment of my sins. Psa. 32.50 If we first seek spiritual
Physic, then we shall find ease in our temporal troubles.
So let us labor in all our extremities to seek first spiritual physic,
and reconciliation with our God: and then if it please him, he will soon ease
us of our temporal troubles. Farther, let us observe that the external seal
of his graces and mark of his Nazareisme, which was in Samsons hair, is also
restored to him before his death. So that in whatsoever thing sin had made
him deficient, now grace makes him sufficient. What sin makes deficient in
us, grace makes sufficient.
So the presence of God by his grace is able to supply all our wantes, and
losses. As for the pulling down of the house, It may be thought that Samson
desperately overthrows himself, with the Philistims: but it carries no
reason with it: for first he is reckoned ( Heb. 11.32.) in the catalogue of the
faithful captains of Israel, Whether Samso^ died desperately or not.
who by says wroght righteousness, and overcame Kingdoms: which the Spirit
of God would not had done, if he had died desperately. Next, God had not
restored unto him his graces after his fall, but only to use them to his
glory. Thirdly, Samson intended nothing but the destruction of Gods enemies,
albeit with his own loss, whereto he offered himself willingly, being a
Magistrate, and having power to give his life for the Salvation of the people.
The ancient Romans thought it a great honor, Mori pro Patria, to die for their
country, as Samson does here. Samson a type of Christ.
Samson was a figure of Christ, who in his life killed many of our Spiritual
enemies; but in his death he pulled down the pillars of Satan's Kingdom, and
overcame sin, Hell, and death, that we may cry now, O death, where is thy
sting? O Hell, 1. Cor. 15.55.
where is thy victory?

The application of these seven Locks.
Now ye have heard the seven Locks of Samson (...) ^^^^gorically the
seuenfold grac^^ of Gods Spir^^ bestowed upon his children: which seven Locks,
as marks of Christianity, we should try if we have them growing in our hearts.
Next, we should learn a caveat by Samsons security and facility. lest we
give place to the Devil, and lest he spoil us of our Spiritual graces.
Thirdly, by his punishments let us remember that God will not spare his
dearest children, if they dishonor his Name. And finally, by his recovery
we have to praise the goodness of God, who mixeth his mercies with his
Justice, and forgets the sins of the elect, and crowns them with
compassions, to his everlasting glory: to whom be praise and honor for ever
and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

