AN APOLOGY for Poetry.

Written by the right noble, virtuous, and learned, Sir Phillip Sidney, Knight.

Odi profanum vulgus, et arceo.



AT LONDON, Printed for Henry Olney, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the George, near to Cheap-gate. Anno. 1595.

Four Sonnets written by Henry Constable to Sir Phillip Sidneys soul.
Give pardon (blessed Soul) to my bold cries
If they (importund) interrupt thy song,
Which now with joyful notes thou sing'st, among
The Angel-Quiristers of heavenly skies:
Give pardon eake (sweet Soul) to my flow cries,
That since I saw thee now it is so long,
And yet the tears that unto thee belong,
To thee as yet they did not sacrifice:
I did not know that thou were dead before,
I did not feel the grief I did sustain,
"The greater stroke astonisheth the more,
"Astonishment takes from us sense of pain,
I stood amazed when others tears begun,
And now begin to weep, when they have done.
SWeet Soul which now with heavenly, songs do tell
Thy dear Redeemers glory, and his praise,
No marvel though thy skillful Muse, assayes
The songs of other souls there to excel:
For thou did learn to sing divinely well,
Long time before thy fair, and glittering rays
Increased the light of heaven, for even thy lays
Most heavenly were, when thou on earth did dwell:
When thou did on the earth sing Poet-wise,
Angels in heaven prayed for thy company,
And now thou sing'st with Angels in the skies,
Shall not all Poets praise thy memory?
And to thy name shall not their works give fame,
When as their works be sweetened by thy name?
EVen as when great men's heirs cannot agree:
So every vertne now for part of thee does sue,
Courage proves by thy death thy heart to be his due,
Eloquence claims thy tongue, and so does courtesy,
Invention knowledge sues, Judgment sues memory,
Each says thy head is his, and what end shall ensue
Of this strife know I not, but this I know for true,
That whosoever gains the suit, the loss have we,
We, (I mean all the world) the loss to all pertains,
Yea they which gain do loose, and only thy soul gains,
For loosing of one life, two lives are gained then:
Honor thy courage moved, courage thy death did give,
Death, courage, honor, makes thy soul to live,
Thy soul to live in heaven, thy name in tongues of men.
GReat Alexander then did well declare
How great was his united Kingdoms might,
When every Captain of his Army might
After his death with mighty Kings compare:
So now we see after thy death, how far
Thou do in worth surpass each other Knight,
When we admire him as no mortal wight,
In whom the least of all thy virtues are:
One did of Macedon the King become,
Another sat in the Egiptian throne,
But only Alexanders self had all:
So courteous some, and some be liberal,
Some witty, wise, valiant, and learned some,
But King of all the virtues thou alone.
Henry Constable.

To the Reader.
THE stormy Winter (dear Children of the Muses, which has so long held back
the glorious Sunshine of divine Poesy, is here by the sacred penbreathing
words of divine Sir Phillip Sidney, not only chased from our fame-inuiting
Clyme, but utterly for ever banished eternity: then graciously regreet the
perpetual spring of euer-growing invention, and like kind Babes, either
enabled by wit or power, help to support me poor Midwife, whose daring
adventure, has delivered from Obliuions womb, this euer-to-beadmired wits
miracle. Those great ones, who in themselves have interred this blessed
innocent, will with Aesculapius condemn me as a detractor from their Deities:
those who Prophet-like have but heard presage of his coming, will (if they will
do well) not only defend, but praise me, as the first public bewrayer of
Poesies Musaeus. Those who neither have seen, thereby to interre, nor heard,
by which they might be inflamed with desire to see, let them (of duty) plead to
be my Champions, since both their sight and hearing, by mine incurring blame is
seasoned. Excellent Poesy, (so created by this Apology,) be thou my
Defendresse; and if any wound me, let thy beauty (my souls Adamant) recure
me: if any commend mine endeavored hardiment, to them commend thy most
diuinest fury as a winged encouragement; so shall thou have devoted to thee,
and to them obliged

Henry Olney.

Faults escaped, thus corrected.
D. 3. page 1. line. 12. for fruitless, read fruitful.

D. 3. page 2. line. 23. for maddesse, read madness.

E. 1. page 1. line 18. for mark, read mark's.

E. 1. page 2. line. 6. for Candida, read Canidia.

E. 4. page 1. line. 21. for humiane, read humane.

I. 1. page 2. line. 4. between Poetas, and republica put in and

I. 4. page 1. line. 20. for conabor, read conabar, and for discere, read
dicere.

An Apology for POETRY.
WHen the right virtuous Edward Wotton, and I, were at the Emperors Court
together, we gave our selves to learn horsemanship of John Pietro Pugliano:
one that with great commendation had the place of an Esquire in his stable. And
he, according to the fertilnes of the Italian wit, did not only afoord us the
demonstration of his practice, but sought to enrich our minds with the
contemplations therein, which he thought most precious. But with none I
remember mine ears were at any time more laden, then when (either angered with
slow payment, or moved with our learner-like admiration,) he exercised his
speech in the praise of his faculty. He said, Soldiers were the noblest
estate of mankind, and horsemen, the noblest of Soldiers. He said, they
were the Masters of war, and ornaments of peace: speedy goers, and strong
abiders, triumphers both in Camps and Courts. Nay, to so vnbeleeued a point he
proceeded, as that no earthly thing bred such wonder to a Prince, as to be a
good horseman. Skill of government, was but a Pedanteria in comparison: the^
would he add certain praises, by telling what a peerlesse beast a horse was.
The only serviceable Courtier without flattery, the beast of most beutie,
faithfulness, courage, and such more, that if I had not been a piece of a
Logician before I came to him, I think he would have persuaded me to have
wished my self a horse. But thus much at least with his no few words he
drove into me, that self-love is better then any guilding to make that seem
gorgious, wherein our selves are parties. VVherin, if Pugliano his strong
affection and weak arguments will not satisfy you, I will give you a nearer
example of my self, who (I know not by what mischance) in these my not old
years and idelest times, having slipped into the title of a Poet, am provoked to
say something unto you in the defense of that my vnelected vocation, which if I
handle with more good will then good reasons, bear with me, since the scholar
is to be pardoned that follows the steps of his Master. And yet I must say,
that as I have just cause to make a pitiful defense of poor Poetry, which
from almost the highest estimation of learning, is fallen to be the
laughingstocke of children. So have I need to bring some more available
proofs: since the former is by no man barred of his deserved credit, the silly
latter has had even the names of Philosophers used to the defacing of it, with
great danger of civil war among the Muses. And first, truly to al the^ that
professing learning inueigh against Poetry, may justly be objected, that they
go very near to vngratfulnes, to seek to deface that, which in the noblest
nations and languages that are known, has been the first light-giuer to
ignorance, and first Nurse, whose milk by little and little enabled them to
feed afterward of tougher knowledges: and will they now play the Hedghog, that
being received into the den, drove out his host? or rather the Vipers, that
with their birth kill their Parents? Let learned Greece in any of her manifold
Sciences, be able to show me one book, before Musaeus, Homer, and Hesiodus,
all three nothing else but Poets. Nay, let any history be brought, that can say
any VVriters were there before the^, if they were not men of the same skill, as
Orpheus, Linus, and some other are named: who having been the first of that
Country, that made pens deliuerers of their knowledge to their posterity, may
justly challenge to be called their Fathers in learning: for not only in time
they had this priority (although in it self antiquity be venerable,) but went
before them, as causes to draw with their charming sweetness, the wild untamed
wits to an admiration of knowledge. So as Amphion was said to move stones with
his Poetry, to build Thebes. And Orpheus to be listened to by beasts, indeed,
stony and beastly people. So among the Romans were Liuius, Andronicus, and
Ennius. So in the Italian language, the first that made it aspire to be a
Treasure-house of Science, were the Poets Dante, Boccace, and Petrarch. So in
our English were Gower and Chawcer.

After whom, encouraged and delighted with their excellent foregoing, others
have followed, to beautify our mother tongue, as well in the same kind as in
other Arts. This did so notably show it self, that the Philosophers of
Greece, durst not a long time appear to the world but under the masks of
Poets. So Thales, Empedocles, and Parmenides, sange their natural Phylosophie
in verses: so did Pythagoras and Phocilides their morral counsels: so did
Tirteus in war matters, and Solon in matters of policy: or rather, they being
Poets, did exercise their delightful vain in those points of highest
knowledge, which before them lay hid to the world. For that wise Solon was
directly a Poet, it is manifest, having written in verse, the notable fable of
the Atlantic Island, which was continued by Plato.

And truly, even Plato, whosoever well considers, shall find, that in the
body of his work, though the inside and strength were Philosophy, the skin as
it were and beauty, depended most of Poetry: for all stands upon Dialogues,
wherein he faineth many honest Burgesses of Athens to speak of such matters,
that if they had been set on the rack, they would never have confessed them.
Besides, his poetical describing the circumstances of their meetings, as the
well ordering of a banquet, the delicacie of a walk, with enterlacing mere
tales, as Giges Ring, and others, which who knows not to be flowers of
Poetry, did never walk into Apollos Garden.

And even Historiographers, (although their lips sound of things done, and
verity be written in their foreheads,) have been glad to borrow both fashion,
and perchance weight of Poets. So Herodotus entitled his History, by the name
of the nine Muses: and both he and all the rest that followed him, either stole
or usurped of Poetry, their passionate describing of passions, the many
particularities of battles, which no man could affirm: or if that be denied
me, long Orations put in the mouths of great Kings and Captains, which it is
certain they never pronounced. So that truly, neither Philosopher nor
Historiographer, could at the first have entered into the gates of populer
judgments, if they had not taken a great pasport of Poetry, which in all
Nations at this day where learning florisheth not, is plain to be seen: in all
which they have some feeling of Poetry. In Turkey, besides their lawe-giuing
Divines, they have no other VVriters but Poets. In our neighbor Country
Ireland, where truly learning goes very bare, yet are their Poets held in a
devout reverence. Even among the most barbarous and simple Indians where no
writing is, yet have they their Poets, who make and sing songs which they call
Areytos, both of their Ancestors deeds, and praises of their Gods. A
sufficient probability, that if ever learning come among the^, it must be by
having their hard dull wits softened and sharpened with the sweet delights of
Poetry. For until they find a pleasure in the exercises of the mind, great
promises of much knowledge, will little persuade them, that know not the
fruits of knowledge. In Wales, the true remnant of the ancient Brittons, as
there are good authorities to show the long time they had Poets, which they
called Bardes: so thorough all the conquests of Romans, Saxons, Danes, and
Normans, some of whom did seek to ruin all memory of learning from among
them, yet do their Poets even to this day, last; so as it is not more notable
in soon beginning then in long continuing. But since the Authors of most of
our Sciences were the Romans, and before them the Greeks, let us a little
stand upon their authorities, but even so far as to see, what names they
have given unto this now scorned skill.

Among the Romans a Poet was called Vates, which is as much as a Diuiner,
Fore-seer, or Prophet, as by his conjoined words Vaticinium and Vaticinari, is
manifest: so heavenly a title did that excellent people bestow upon this
hart-rauishing knowledge. And so far were they carried into the admiration
thereof, that they thought in the chaunceable hitting upon any such verses,
great fore-tokens of their following fortunes were placed. VVhereupon grew the
word of Sorts Virgilianae, when by sudden opening Virgils book, they
lighted upon any verse of his making, whereof the histories of the Emperors
lives are full: as of Albinus the Governor of our Island, who in his
childe-hoode met with this verse, Arma amens capio nec sat rationis in armis.
And in his age performed it, which although it were a very vain, and godles
superstition, as also it was to think that spirits were commanded by such
verses, whereupon this word charms, derived of Carmina comes, so yet serves
it to show the great reverence those wits were held in. And altogether not
without ground, since both the Oracles of Delphos and Sibillas prophecies, were
wholly delivered in verses. For that same exquisite observing of number and
measure in words, and that high flying liberty of conceit proper to the Poet,
did seem to have some dyuine force in it.

And may not I presume a little further, to show the reasonablenes of this
word Vates? And say that the holy David's Psalms are a divine Poem? If I do,
I shall not do it without the testimony of great learned men, both ancient
and modern: but even the name Psalms will speak for me, which being
interpreted, is nothing but songs. Then that it is fully written in meeter, as
all learned Hebricians agree, although the rules be not yet fully found. Lastly
and principally, his handeling his prophecy, which is merely poetical. For
what else is the awaking his musical instruments? The often and free changing
of persons? His notable Prosopopeias, when he makes you as it were, see God
coming in his Majesty. His telling of the Beasts ioyfulnes, and hills
leaping, but a heavenly poesy: wherein almost he shows himself a
passionate lover, of that unspeakable and everlasting beauty to be seen by
the eyes of the mind, only cleared by faith. But truly now having named
him, I fear me I seem to profane that holy name, applying it to Poetry,
which is among us thrown down to so ridiculous an estimation: but they that
with quiet judgments will look a little deeper into it, shall find the end
and working of it such, as being rightly applied, deserves not to be
scourged out of the Church of God.

But now, let us see how the Greeks named it, and how they deemed of it. The
Greeks called him a Poet, which name, has as the most excellent, gone
thorough other Languages. It comes of this word Poiein, which is, to make:
wherein I know not, whether by luck or wisdom, we Englishmen have met
with the Greeks, in calling him a maker: which name, how high and incomparable
a title it is, I had rather were known by marking the scope of other Sciences,
then by my partial allegation.

There is no Art delivered to mankind, that has not the works of Nature for
his principal object, without which they could not consist, and on which they
so depend, as they become Actors and Players as it were, of what Nature will
have set forth. So does the Astronomer look upon the stars, and by that he
sees, sets down what order Nature has taken therein. So do the
Geometrician, and Arithmetician, in their diverse sorts of quantities. So does
the Musician in times, tell you which by nature agree, which not. The natural
Philosopher thereon has his name, and the Morrall Philosopher stands upon the
natural virtues, vices, and passions of man; and follow Nature (says he)
therein, and thou shall not err. The Lawyer says what men have determined.
The Historian what men have done. The Grammarian speaks only of the rules of
speech, and the Rethorician, and Logitian, considering what in Nature will
soonest prove and persuade, thereon give artificial rules, which still are
compassed within the circle of a question, according to the proposed matter.
The Physician waigheth the nature of a man's body, and the nature of things
helpeful, or hurtefull unto it. And the Metaphisick, though it be in the
second and abstract notions, and therefore be counted supernatural: yet does
he indeed build upon the depth of Nature: only the Poet, disdayning to be
tied to any such subjection, lifted up with the vigor of his own invention,
does grow in effect, another nature, in making things either better then
Nature brings forth, or quite a new forms such as never were in Nature, as
the Heroes, Demigods, Cyclops, Chimeras, Furies, and such like: so as he goes
hand in hand with Nature, not enclosed within the narrow warrant of her gifts,
but freely ranging only within the Zodiac of his own wit.

Nature never set forth the earth in so rich tapistry, as diverse Poets have
done, neither with pleasant rivers, fruitful trees, sweet smelling flowers: nor
whatsoever else may make the too much loved earth more lovely. Her world is
brazen, the Poets only deliver a golden: but let those things alone and go to
man, for whom as the other things are, so it seems in him her uttermost
cunning is employed, and know whether she have brought forth so true a lover
as Theagines, so constant a friend as Pilades, so valiant a man as Orlando, so
right a Prince as Xenophons Cyrus: so excellent a man every way, as Virgils
Aeneas: neither let this be iestingly conceived, because the works of the one
be essential: the other, in imitation or fiction: for any understanding
knows the skill of the Artificer, stands in that Idea or fore-conceite of
the work, and not in the work it self. And that the Poet has that Idea, is
manifest, by delivering them forth in such excellency as he has imagined
them. Which delivering forth also, is not wholly imaginatiue, as we are wont
to say by them that build Castles in the air: but so far substantially it
works, not only to make a Cyrus, which had been but a particular
excellency, as Nature might have done, but to bestow a Cyrus upon the world,
to make many Cyrus's, if they will learn aright, why, and how that Maker made
him.

Neither let it be deemed too saucy a comparison to balance the highest point
of man's wit with the efficacy of Nature: but rather give right honor to the
heavenly Maker of that maker: who having made man to his own likeness, set him
beyond and over all the works of that second nature, which in nothing he
shows so much as in Poetry: when with the force of a divine breath, he
brings things forth far surpassing her doings, with no small argument to the
incredulous of that first accursed fall of Adam: since our erected wit, makes
us know what perfection is, and yet our infected will, keeps us from reaching
unto it. But these arguments will by few be understood, and by fewer granted.
Thus much (I hope) will be given me, that the Greeks with some probability of
reason, gave him the name above all names of learning. Now let us go to a more
ordinary opening of him, that the truth may be more palpable: and so I hope,
though we get not so unmatched a praise as the Etimologie of his names will
grant, yet his very description, which no man will deny, shall not justly be
barred from a principal commendation.

Poesy therefore is an art of imitation, for so Aristotle terms it in this
word Mimesis, that is to say, a representing, counterfetting, or figuring
forth: to speak metaphorically, a speaking picture: with this end, to teach
and delight; of this have been three several kinds. The chief both in
antiquity and excellency, were they that did imitate the inconceiuable
excellencies of GOD. Such were, David in his Psalms, Solomon in his song of
Songs, in his Ecclesiastes, and Proverbs: Moses and Debora in their Hymns, and
the writer of Job; which beside other, the learned Emanuell Tremelius, and
Franciscus Ianius, do entitle the poetical part of the Scripture. Against
these none will speak that has the holy Ghost in due holy reverence.

In this kind, though in a full wrong divinity, were Orpheus, Amphion, Homer
in his hymns, and many other, both Greeks and Romans: and this Poesy must
be used, by whosoever will follow S. James his counsel, in singing Psalms
when they are merry: and I know is used with the fruit of comfort by some,
when in sorrowful pangs of their death-bringing sins, they find the
consolation of the neuer-leauing goodness.

The second kind, is of them that deal with matters Philosophical; either
morrall, as Tirteus, Phocilides, and Cato, or natural, as Lucretius, and
Virgils Georgicks: or Astronomicall, as Manilius, and Pontanus: or historical,
as Lucan: which who mislike, the fault is in their judgments quite out of
taste, and not in the sweet food of sweetly uttered knowledge. But because
this second sort is wrapped within the fold of the proposed subject, and
takes not the course of his own invention, whether they properly be Poets or
no, let Gramarians dispute: and go to the third, indeed right Poets, of whom
chiefly this question arises; betwixt whom, and these second is such a kind
of difference as betwixt the meaner sort of Painters, (who counterfeit only
such. faces as are set before them;) and the more excellent: who having no
law but wit, bestow that in colors upon you which is fittest for the eye to
see: as the constant, though lamenting look of Lucrecia, when she punished in
her self an others fault.

Wherein he painteth not Lucrecia whom he never saw, but painteth the
outward beauty of such a virtue: for these third be they which most properly
do imitate to teach and delight, and to imitate, borrow nothing of what is,
has been, or shall be: but range only rayned with learned discretion, into
the divine consideration of what may be, and should be. These be they, that as
the first and most noble sort, may justly be termed Vates, so these are
waited on in the excellenst languages and best understandings, with the fore
described name of Poets: for these indeed do merely make to imitate: and
imitate both to delight and teach: and delight to move men to take that goodness
in hand, which without delight they would fly as from a stranger. And teach,
to make them know that goodness whereunto they are moved, which being the
noblest scope to which ever any learning was directed, yet want there not idle
tongues to bark at them. These be subdivided into sundry more special
denominations. The most notable be the Heroic, Lirick, Tragic, Comic,
Satirick, Iambick, Elegiack, pastoral, and certain others. Some of these
being deemed (according to the matter they deal with, some by the sorts of
verses they liked best to write in, for indeed the greatest part of Poets have
apparelled their poetical inventions in that (...) kind of writing which is
called verse: indeed but apparelled, verse being but an ornament and no cause
to Poetry: since there have been many most excellent Poets, that never
versified, and now swarm many versifiers that need never answer to the
name of Poets. For Xenophon, who did imitate so excellently, as to give us
effigiem iusti imperij, the portraiture of a just Empire under the name of
Cyrus, (as Cicero says of him) made therein an absolute heroical Poem.

So did Heliodorus in his sugared invention of that picture of love in Theagines
and Cariclea, and yet both these writ in Prose: which I speak to show, that it
is not riming and versing that makes a Poet, no more then a long gown makes
an Advocate: who though he pleaded in armor fhould be an Advocate and no
Soldier. But it is that fayning notable images of virtues, vices, or what else,
with that delightful teaching which must be the right describing note to know
a Poet by: although indeed the Senate of Poets has chosen verse as their
fittest raiment, meaning, as in matter they passed all in all, so in manner to
go beyond them: not speaking (table talk fashion, or like men in a dream,)
words as they chanceably fall from the mouth, but peyzing each syllable of each
word by just proportion according to the dignity of the subject.

Now therefore it shall not be amiss first to weigh this latter sort of
Poetry by his works, and then by his parts; and if in neither of these
Anatomies he be condemnable, I hope we shall obtain a more favorable
sentence. This purifiing of wit, this enritching of memory, enabling of
judgment, and enlarging of conceyt, which commonly we call learning, under what
name soever it comforth, or to what immediate end soever it be directed, the
final end is, to lead and draw us to as high a perfection, as our degenerate
souls made worse by their clayey lodgings, can be capable of. This according
to the inclination of the man, bred many formed impressions, for some that
thought this fellcity principally to be gotten by knowledge, and no knowledge
to be so high and heavenly, as acquaintance with the stars, gave themselves
to Astronomy; others, persuading themselves to be Demigods if they knew the
causes of things, became natural and supernatural Philosophers, some an
admirable delight drew to Music: and some, the certainty of demonstration, to
the Mathematickes. But all, one, and other, having this scope to know, and by
knowledge to lift up the mind from the dungeon of the body, to the enjoying his
own divine essence. But when by the balance of experience it was found, that
the Astronomer looking to the stars might fall into a ditch, that the
enquiring Philosopher might be blind in himself, and the Mathematician might
draw forth a straight line with a crooked heart: then lo, did proof the over
ruler of opinions, make manifest, that all these are but serving Sciences,
which as they have each a private end in themselves, so yet are they all
directed to the highest end of the mistres Knowledge, by the Greeks called
Arkitecktonike, which stands, (as I think) in the knowledge of a man's self,
in the Ethicke and politic consideration, with the end of well doing and not
of well knowing only; even as the Sadlers next end is to make a good saddle:
but his farther end, to serve a nobler faculty, which is horsemanship, so the
horsemans to soldiery, and the Soldier not only to have the skill, but to
perform the practice of a Soldier: so that the ending end of all earthly
learning, being virtuous action, those skilles that most serve to bring forth
that, have a most just title to be Princes over all the rest: wherein if we
can show the Poets noblenes, by setting him before his other Competitors,
among whom as principal challengers step forth the morrall Philosophers, whom
me thinks, I see coming toward me with a sullen gravity, as though they
could not abide vice by day light, rudely clothed for to witness outwardly their
contempt of outward things, with books in their hands against glory, whereto
they set their names, sophistically speaking against subtility, and angry
with any man in whom they see the foul fault of anger; these men casting
larges as they go, of Definitions, Divisions, and Distinctions, with a
scornful interogatiue, do soberly ask, whether it be possible to find any
path, so ready to lead a man to virtue, as that which teaches what virtue is?
and teaches it not only by delivering forth his very being, his causes, and
effects: but also, by making known his enemy vice, which must be destroyed,
and his combersome servant Passion, which must be maistered, by showing the
generalities that contains it, and the specialities that are derived from it.
Lastly, by plain setting down, how it extends it self out of the limits of
a man's own little world, to the government of families, and maintayning of
public societies.

The Historian, scarcely gives leisure to the Moralist, to say so much, but
that he laden with old Mouse-eaten records, authorizing himself (for the most
part) upon other histories, whose greatest authorities, are built upon the
notable foundation of Hearsay, having much a-doe to accord differing
VVriters, and to pick truth out of partiality, better acquainted with a
thousand years a go, then with the present age: and yet better knowing how
this world goes, the^ how his own wit runs; curious for antiquities, and
inquisitiue of novelties, a wonder to young folks, and a tyrant in table
talk, denies in a great chafe, that any man for teaching of virtue, and
virtuous actions, is comparable to him. I am Lux vitae, Temporum magistra, Vita
memoriae, Nuncia vetusiatis. etc.

The Philosopher (says he) teaches a disputatiue virtue, but I do an
active: his virtue is excellent in the dangerlesse Academie of Plato, but mine
shows forth her honorable face, in the battles of Marathon, Pharsalia,
Poitiers, and Agincourt. He teaches virtue by certain abstract
considerations, but I only bid you follow the footing of them that have gone
before you. Olde-aged experience, goes beyond the fine-witted Philosopher, but
I give the experience of many ages. Lastly, if he make the Songbooke, I put the
learners hand to the Lute: and if he be the guide, I am the light.

Then would he allege you innumerable examples, conferring story by story,
how much the wisest Senators and Princes, have been directed by the credit
of history, as Brutus, Alphonsus of Aragon, and who not, if need be? At
length, the long line of their disputation makes a point in this, that the one
gives the precept, and the other the example.

Now, whom shall we find (since the question stands for the highest form
in the School of learning,) to be Moderator? Truly, as me seems, the
Poet; and if not a Moderator, even the man that ought to carry the title from
them both, and much more from all other serving Sciences. Therefore compare we
the Poet with the Historian, and with the Morrall Philosopher; and, if he go
beyond them both, no other human skill can match him. For as for the Divine,
with all reverence it is ever to be excepted, not only for having his scope as
far beyond any of these, as eternity exceeds a moment, but even for passing
each of these in themselves.

And for the Lawyer, though Ius be the Daughter of Justice, and Justice the
chief of Virtues, yet because he seeks to make men good, rather Formidine
paenae, then Virtutis amore, or to say righter, does not endeavor to make men
good, but that their evil hurt not others: having no care so he be a good
Citizen, how bad a man he be. Therefore, as our wickedness makes him
necessary, and necessity makes him honorable, so is he not in the deepest
truth to stand in rank with these; who all endeavor to take naughtines
away, and plant goodness even in the secretest cabinet of our souls. And
these four are all, that any way deal in that consideration of men's manners,
which being the supreme knowledge, they that best breed it, deserve the best
commendation.

The Philosopher therefore and the Historian, are they which would win the gole:
the one by precept, the other by example. But both not having both, do both
halte. For the Philosopher, setting down with thorny argument the bare rule,
is so hard of utterance, and so mistie to be conceived, that one that has no
other guide but him, shall wade in him till he be old, before he shall find
sufficient cause to be honest: for his knowledge stands so upon the abstract
and general, that happy is that man who may understand him, and more happy,
that can apply what he does understand.

On the other side, the Historian wanting the precept, is so tied, not to what
should be, but to what is, to the particular truth of things, and not to the
general reason of things, that his example draws no necessary consequence,
and therefore a less fruitelesse doctrine.

Now does the peerless Poet perform both: for whatsoever the Philosopher
says should be done, he gives a perfect picture of it in some one, by whom
he presupposes it was done. So as he coupleth the general notion with the
particular example. A perfect picture I say, for he yields to the powers of
the mind, an image of that whereof the Philosopher bestows but a woordish
description: which does neither strike, pierce, nor possess the sight of the
soul, so much as that other does.

For as in outward things, to a man that had never seen an Elephant or a
Rinoceros, who should tell him most exquisitely all their shapes, color
bigness, and particular marks: or of a gorgeous Palace, the Architecture,
with declaring the full beauties, might well make the hearer able to repeat as
it were by rote, all he had heard, yet should never satisfy his inward
conceits, with being witness to it self of a true lively knowledge: but the
same man, as soon as he might see those beasts well painted, or the house well
in moddel, should straightwaies grow without need of any description, to a
judicial co^prehending of them, so no doubt the Philosopher with his learned
definition, be it of virtue, vices; matters of public policy, or private
government, replenisheth the memory with many infallible grounds of wisdom:
which notwithstanding, lie dark before the imaginatiue and judging power, if
they be not illuminated or figured forth by the speaking picture of Poesy.

Tuslie takes much pains and many times not without poetical helps, to make
us know the force love of our Country has in us. Let us but hear old
Anahises speaking in the midst of Troyes flames, or see Ulysses in the fulness
of all Calipso's delights, bewail his absence from batraine and beggarly
Ithaca. Anger the Stoics say, was a short maddesse, let but Sophocles bring
you Ajax on a stage, killing and whipping Sheep and Oxen, thinking them the
Army of Greeks, with their Chieftaines Agamemnon and Menelaus, and tell me if
you have not a more familiar insight into anger, then finding in the Schoolmen
his Genius and difference. See whether wisdom and temperance in Ulysses and
Diomedes, valor Achilles, friendship in Nisus, and Eurialus, even to an
ignorant man, carry not an apparent shyning: and contrarily, the remorse of
conscience in Oedipus, the soon repenting pride in Agamemnon, the
selfe-deuouring cruelty in his Father Atreus, the violence of ambition in the
two Theban brothers, the sowre-sweetnes of revenge in Medaea, and to fall
lower, the Terentian Gnato, and our Chaucers Pandar, so expressed, that we now
use their names to signify their trades. And finally, all virtues, vices, and
passions, so in their own natural seats laid to the view, that we seem not
to hear of them, but clearly to see through them. But even in the most
excellent determination of goodness, what Philosophers counsel can so redily
direct a Prince, as the feigned Cyrus in Xenophon? or a virtuous man in all
fortunes, as Aeneas in Virgill? or a whole Commonwealth, as the way of Sir
Thomas Moors Eutopia? I say the way, because where Sir Thomas Moore erred, it
was the fault of the man and not of the Poet, for that way of patterning a
Commonwealth was most absolute, though he perchance has not so absolutely
performed it: for the question is, whether the feigned image of Poesy, or the
regular instruction of Philosophy, has the more force in teaching: wherein if
the Philosophers have more rightly showed themselves Philosophers, then the
Poets have obtained to the high top of their profession, as in truth, --
Mediocribus esse poetis,
Non Dij, non homines, non concessere Columnae:


It is I say again, not the fault of the Art, but that by few men that Art
can be accomplished.

Certainly, even our Savior Christ could as well have given, the morrall
common places of uncharitableness and humblenes, as the divine narration of
Dives and Lazarus: or of disobedience and mercy, as that heavenly discourse of
the lost Child and the gracious Father; but that his through-searching wisdom,
knew the estate of Dives burning in hell, and of Lazarus being in Abraham's
bosom, would more constantly (as it were,) inhabit both the memory and
judgment. Truly, for my self, me seems I see before my eyes the lost Childs
disdainefull prodigality, turned to envy a Swines dinner: which by the learned
Divines, are thought not historical acts, but instructing Parables. For
conclusion, I say the Philosopher teaches, but he teaches obscurely, so as
the learned only can understand him: that is to say, he teaches them that
are already taught, but the Poet is the food for the tenderest stomachs, the
Poet is indeed the right Popular Philosopher, whereof Esops tales give good
proof: whose pretty Allegories, stealing under the formal tales of Beasts,
make many, more beastly then Beasts, begin to hear the sound of virtue from
these dumb speakers.

But now may it be alleged, that if this imagining of matters be so fit for
the imagination, then must the Historian needs surpass, who brings you
images of true matters, such as indeed were done, and not such as
fantastically or falsely may be suggested to have been done. Truly Aristotle
himself in his discourse of Poesy, plainly determines this question,
saying, that Poetry is Philosophoteron, and Spoudaioteron, that is to say, it
is more Philosophical, and more studiously serious, the^ history. His reason
is, because Poesy deals with Katholou, that is to say, with the universal
consideration; and the history with Kathekaston, the particular; now says he,
the universal ways what is fit to be said or done, either in likelihood or
necessity, (which the Poesy co^sidereth in his imposed names,) and the
particular, only mark, whether Alcibiades did, or suffered, this or that.
Thus far Aristotle: which reason of his, (as all his) is most full of reason.
For indeed, if the question were whether it were better to have a particular
act truly or falsely set down: there is no doubt which is to be chosen, no more
the^ whether you had rather have Vespasians picture right as he was, or at the
Painters pleasure nothing resembling. But if the question be for your own use
and learning, whether it be better to have it set down as it should be, or as
it was: then certainly is more doctrinable the fained Cirus in Xenophon then
the true Cyrus in Iustine: and the feigned Aeneas in Virgil, then the right
Aeneas in Dares Phrigius.

As to a Lady that desired to fashion her countenance to the best grace, a
Painter should more benefit her to portraite a most sweet face, writing
Canidia upon it, then to paynt Canidia as she was, who Horace swears, was
foul and ill favored.

If the Poet do his part a-right, he will show you in Tantalus, Atreus, and
such like, nothing that is not to be shunned. In Cyrus, Aeneas, Ulysses, each
thing to be followed; where the Historian, bound to tell things as things were,
cannot be liberal (without he will be poetical) of a perfect pattern: but
as in Alexander or Scipio himself, show doings, some to be liked, some to be
misliked. And then how will you discern what to follow but by your own
discretion, which you had without reading Quintus Curtius? And whereas a man
may say, though in universal consideration of doctrine the Poet prevails;
yet that the history, in his saying such a thing was done, does warrant a man
more in that he shall follow.

The answer is manifest, that if he stand upon that was; as if he should
argue, because it rayned yesterday, therefore it should rain to day, then
indeed it has some advantage to a gross conceit: but if he know an example
only, informs a coniectured likelihood, and so go by reason, the Poet does
so far exceed him, as he is to frame his example to that which is most
reasonable: be it in warlike, politic, or private matters; where the Historian
in his bare Was, has many times that which we call fortune, to overrule the
best wisdom. Many times, he must tell events, whereof he can yield no
cause: or if he do, it must be poetical; for that a feigned example, has
as much force to teach, as a true example: (for as for to move, it is clear,
since the feigned may be tuned to the highest key of passion,) let us take one
example, wherein a Poet and a Historian do concur.

Herodotus and Iustine do both testify, that Zopirus, King Darius faithful
servant, seeing his Master long resisted by the rebellious Babilonians,
feigned himself in extreme disgrace of his King: for verifying of which, he
caused his own nose and ears to be cut off: and so flying to the Babylonians,
was received: and for his known valor, so far credited, that he did find
means to deliver them over to Darius. Much like matter does Liuie record of
Tarquinius and his son. Xenophon excellently faineth such another stratageme,
performed by Abradates in Cyrus behalf. Now would I feign know, if occasion
be presented unto you, to serve your Prince by such an honest dissimulation,
why you do not as well learn it of Xenophons fiction, as of the others
verity: and truly so much the better, as you shall save your nose by the
bargain: for Abradates did not counterfeit so far. So then the best of the
Historian, is subject to the Poet; for whatsoever action, or faction,
whatsoever counsel, policy, or war stratagem, the Historian is bound to
recite, that may the Poet (if he list) with his imitation make his own;
beautifying it both for further teaching, and more delighting, as it pleases
him: having all, from Dante his heaven, to his hell, under the authority of
his pen. Which if I be asked what Poets have done so, as I might well name
some, yet say I, and say again, I speak of the Art, and not of the Artificer.

Now, to that which commonly is attributed to the praise of histories, in
respect of the notable learning is gotten by marking the success, as though
therein a man should see virtue exalted, and vice punished. Truly that
commendation is peculiar to Poetry, and far of from History. For indeed
Poetry ever sets virtue so out in her best colors, making Fortune her
wel-wayting hand-mayd, that one must needs be enamored of her. Well may you
see Ulysses in a storm, and in other hard plights; but they are but exercises
of patience and magnanimity, to make them shine the more in the
neere-following prosperity. And of the contrary part, if evil men come to
the stage, they ever go out (as the Tragedy Writer answered, to one that
misliked the show of such persons) so manacled, as they little animate folks
to follow them. But the Historian, being captiued to the truth of a foolish
world, is many times a terror from well doing, and an encouragement to
unbridled wickedness.

For, see we not valiant Milciades rot in his fetters? The just Phocion, and
the accomplished Socrates, put to death like Traitors? The cruel Seuerus live
prosperously? The excellent Seuerus miserably murdered? Sylla and Marius dying
in their beds? Pompey and Cicero slain then, when they would have thought
exile a happiness?

See we not virtuous Cato driven to kill himself? and rebel Caesar so
advanced, that his name yet after 1600. years, lasts in the highest honor?
And mark but even Caesar's own words of the forenamed Sylla, (who in that
only did honestly, to put down his dishonest tyranny,) Literas nesciuit, as
if want of learning caused him to do well. He meant it not by Poetry, which
not content with earthly plagues, deuiseth new punishments in hell for Tyrants:
nor yet by Philosophy, which teaches Occidendos esse, but no doubt by skill
in History: for that indeed can afford you Cipselus, Periander, Phalaris,
Dionisius, and I know not how many more of the same kennell, that speed well
enough in their abominable injustice or usurpation. I conclude therefore, that
he excels History, not only in furnishing the mind with knowledge, but
in setting it forward, to that which deserves to be called and accounted good:
which setting forward, and moving to well doing, indeed sets the Laurel
crown upon the Poet as victorious, not only of the Historian, but over the
Philosopher: howsoever in teaching it may be questionable.

For suppose it be granted, (that which I suppose with great reason may be
denied,) that the Philosopher in respect of his methodical proceeding, does
teach more perfectly then the Poet: yet do I think, that no man is so much
Philophilosophos, as to compare the Philosopher in moving, with the Poet.

And that moving is of a higher degree then teaching, it may by this appear:
that it is well nigh the cause and the effect of teaching. For who will be
taught, if he be not moved with desire to be taught? and what so much good
does that teaching bring forth, (I speak still of morrall doctrine) as that it
moves one to do that which it does teach? for as Aristotle says, it is not
Gnosis, but Praxis must be the fruit. And how Praxis cannot be, without being
moved to practice, it is no hard matter to consider.

The Philosopher shows you the way, he informs you of the particularities,
as well of the tediousnes of the way, as of the pleasant lodging you shall have
when your journey is ended, as of the many by-turnings that may divert you from
your way. But this is to no man but to him that will read him, and read him
with attentive studious painfulnes. Which constant desire, whosoever has in
him, has already past half the hardness of the way, and therefore is beholding
to the Philosopher but for the other half. Nay truly, learned men have
learnedly thought, that where once reason has so much ouer-mastred passion, as
that the mind has a a free desire to do well, the inward light each mind
has in it self, is as good as a Philosophers book; seeing in nature we know
it is well, to do well, and what is well, and what is evil, although not in
the words of Art, which Philosophers bestow upon us. For out of natural
conceit, the Philosophers drew it, but to be moved to do that which we know,
or to be moved with desire to know, Hoc opus: Hic labor est.

Now therein of all Sciences, (I speak still of humiane, and according to the
humiane conceits) is our Poet the Monarch. For he does not only show the way,
but gives so sweet a prospect into the way, as will entice any man to enter
into it. Nay, he does as if your journey should lie through a fair Vineyard,
at the first give you a cluster of Grapes: that full of that taste, you may
long to pass further. He begins not with obscure definitions, which must
blur the margent with interpretations, and load the memory with doubtfulnesse:
but he comes to you with words set in delightful proportion, either
accompanied with, or prepared for the well inchaunting skill of Music; and
with a tale forsooth he comes unto you: with a tale which holds children
from play, and old men from the chimney corner. And pretending no more, does
intend the winning of the mind from wickedness to virtue: even as the child
is often brought to take most wholesome things, by hiding them in such other as
have a pleasant taste: which if one should begin to tell them, the nature of
Aloes, or Rubarb they should receive, would sooner take their Physic at
their ears, then at their mouth. So is it in men, (most of which are childish
in the best things, till they be cradled in their graves,) glad they will be
to hear the tales of Hercules, Achilles, Cyrus, and Aeneas: and hearing them,
must needs hear the right description of wisdom, valor, and justice; which,
if they had been barely, that is to say, Philosophically set out, they would
swear they be brought to school again.

That imitation whereof Poetry is, has the most conueniency to Nature of all
other, in so much, that as Aristotle says, those things which in themselves are
horrible, as cruel battles, unnatural Monsters, are made in poetical
imitation delightful. Truly, I have known men, that even with reading Amadis
de Gaul, (which God knows wants much of a perfect Poesy,) have found
their hearts moved to the exercise of courtesy, liberality, and especially
courage.

Who reads Aeneas carrying old Anchises on his back, that wishes not it
were his fortune to perform so excellent an act? Whom do not the words of
Turnus move? (the tale of Turnus, having planted his image in the
imagination,) -- Fugientem haec terra videbit,
Vsque adeone mori miserum est? --
Where the Philosophers, as they scorn to delight, so must they be content
little to move: saving wrangling, whether Virtue be the chief, or the only
good: whether the contemplative, or the active life do excel: which Plato
and Boethius well knew, and therefore made Mistres Philosophy, very often borrow
the masking raiment of Poesy. For even those hard hearted evil men, who
think virtue a school name, and know no other good, but indulgere genio, and
therefore despise the austere admonitions of the Philosopher, and feel not the
inward reason they stand upon; yet will be content to be delighted: which is
al, the good fellow Poet seems to promise: and so steal to see the form of
goodness (which seen they cannot but love,) ere themselves be aware, as if they
took a medicine of Cherries. Infinite proofs of the strange effects of this
poetical invention might be alleged, only two shall serve, which are so
often remembered, as I think all men know them.

The one of Menenius Agrippa, who when the whole people of Rome had resolutely
divided themselves from the Senate, with apparent show of utter ruin: though
he were (for that time) an excellent Orator, came not among them, upon trust
of figurative speeches, or cunning insinuations: and much less, with far fet
Maxims of Phylosophie, which (especially if they were Platonic,) they must
have learned Geometry before they could well have conceived but forsooth he
behaues himself, like a homely, and familiar Poet. He tells them a tale,
that there was a time, when all the parts of the body made a mutinous
conspiracy against the belly, which they thought devoured the fruits of each
others labor: they concluded they would let so unprofitable a spender starve.
In the end, to be short, (for the tale is notorious, and as notorious that it
was a tale,) with punishing the belly, they plagued themselves. This applied by
him, wrought such effect in the people, as I never read, that ever words
brought forth but then, so sudden and so good an alteration: for upon
reasonable conditions, a perfect reconcilement ensued. The other is of Nathan
the Prophet, who when the holy David had so far forsaken God, as to confirm
adultery with murder: when he was to do the tenderest office of a friend,
in laying his own shame before his eyes, sent by God to call again so chosen
a servant: how does he it? but by telling of a man, whose beloved Lamb was
vngratefullie taken from his bosom: the applycation most divinely true, but
the discourse it self, feigned: which made David, (I speak of the second and
isntrumental cause,) as in a glass, to see his own filthiness, as that
heavenly Psalm of mercy well testifies.

By these therefore examples and reasons, I think it may be manifest, that the
Poet with that same hand of delight, does draw the mind more effectually, then
any other Art does, and so a conclusion not unfitly ensues: that as virtue
is the most excellent resting place for all worldly learning to make his end
of: so Poetry, being the most familiar to teach it, and most princely to
move toward it, in the most excellent work, is the most excellent workman. But
I am content, not only to descipher him by his works, (although works in
commendation or disprayse, must ever hold an high authority,) but more
narrowly will examine his parts: so that (as in a man) though altogether may
carry a presence full of majesty and beauty, perchance in some one defectious
piece, we may find a blemish: now in his parts, kinds, or Species, (as you
list to term the^) it is to be noted, that some Poesies have coupled together
two or three kinds, as Tragical and Comicall, wher-vpon is risen, the
Tragi-comicall. Some in the like manner have mingled Prose and Verse, as
Sanazzar and Boethius. Some have mingled matters Heroical and Pastoral. But
that comes all to one in this question, for if severed they be good, the
conjunction cannot be hurtful. Therefore perchance forgetting some, and
leaving some as needless to be remembered, it shall not be amiss in a word to
cite the special kinds, to see what faults may be found in the right use of
them.

Is it then the Pastoral Poem which is misliked? (for perchance, where the
hedge is lowest, they will soonest leap over.) Is the poor pype disdained,
which sometime out of Melibeus mouth, can show the misery of people, under
hard Lords, or ravening Soldiers? And again, by Titirus, what blessedness is
derived to them that lie lowest from the goodness of them that sit highest?
Sometimes, under the pretty tales of Wolves and Sheep, can include the whole
considerations of wrong doing and patience. Sometimes show, that contention
for trifles, can get but a trifling victory. Where perchance a man may see,
that even Alexander and Darius, when they straue who should be Cock of this
worlds dunghill, the benefit they got, was, that the after-liuers may say, Haec
memini and victum frustra contendere Thirsin:
Ex illo Coridon, Coridon est tempore nobis.


Or is it the lamenting Elegiack, which in a kind heart would move rather
pity the^ blame, who bewailes with the great Philosopher Heraclitus, the
weakness of mankind, and the wretchedness of the world: who surely is to be
praised, either for compassionate accompanying just causes of lamentation, or
for rightly paynting out how weak be the passions of woefulness. Is it the
bitter, but wholesome Iambick, which rubs the galled mind, in making shame the
trumpet of villainy, with bold and open crying out against naughtines? Or the
Satirick, who Omne vafer vitium, ridenti tangit amico.
Who sportingly never leaves, until he make a man laugh at folly, and at
length ashamed, to laugh at himself: which he cannot avoid, without avoiding
the folly. Who while Circum praecordia ludit,
gives us to feel, how many headaches a passionate life brings us to. How
when all is done, Est vlubris animus si nos non deficit aequus.
No, perchance it is the Comic, whom naughty Play-makers and Stage-keepers,
have justly made odious. To the argument of abuse, I will answer after. Only
thus much now is to be said, that the Comedy is an imitation of the common
errors of our life, which he represents, in the most ridiculous and
scornful sort that may be. So as it is impossible, that any beholder can be
content to be such a one.

Now, as in Geometry, the oblique must be known as well as the right: and in
Arithmetic, the odd as well as the even, so in the actions of our life, who
sees not the filthiness of evil, wants a great foil to perceive the beauty
of virtue. This does the Comedy handle so in our private and domestical
matters, as with hearing it, we get as it were an experience, what is to be
looked for of a nigardly Demea: of a crasty Dauus: of a flattering Gnato: of a
vain glorious Thraso: and not only to know what effects are to be expected,
but to know who be such, by the signifying badge given them by the Comedian.
And little reason has any man to say, that men learn evil by seeing it so
set out (...) as I said before, there is no man living, but by the force truth
has in nature, no sooner sees these me^ play their parts, but wishes the^ in
Pistrin^ although perchance the sack of his own faults, lie so behind his
back, that he sees not himself dance the same measure: whereto, yet nothing
can more open his eyes, then to find his own actions contemptibly set forth.
So that the right use of Comedy will (I think) by no body be blamed, and much
less of the high and excellent Tragedy, that opens the greatest wounds, and
shows forth the Vicers, that are covered with Tissue: that makes Kings
fear to be Tyrants, and Tyrants manifest their tiranicall humors: that with
sturring the affects of admiration and commiseration, teaches, the
uncertainty of this world; and upon how weak foundations guilden roofes are
builded. That makes us know, Qui sceptra saeuus, duro imperioregit,
Timet timentes, metus in authorem redit.
But how much it can move, Plutarch yields a notable testimony, of the
abominable Tyrant, Alexander Pheraeus; from whose eyes; a Tragedy well made,
and represented, drew abundance of tears: who without all pity, had
murdered infinite nombers, and some of his own blood. So as he, that was not
ashamed to make matters for Tragedies, yet could not resist the sweet violence
of a Tragedy.

And if it wrought no further good in him, it was, that he in despite of
himself, with drew himself from harkening to that, which might mollify his
hardened heart. But it is not the Tragedy they doemislike: For it were too
absurd to cast out so excellent a representation of whatsoever is most worthy
to be learned. Is it the Liricke that most displeases, who with his tuned
Lyre, and well accorded voice, gives praise, the reward of virtue, to virtuous
acts? who gives morrall precepts, and natural Problemes, who sometimes rayseth
up his voice to the height of the heavens, in singing the lauds of the
immortal God. Certainly I must confess my own barbarousnes, I never heard the
old song of Percy and Duglas, that I found not my heart moved more then with
a Trumpet: and yet is it sung but by some blind Crouder, with no rougher
voice, then rude style: which being so evil apparrelled in the dust and
cobwebbes of that uncivil age, what would it work trymmed in the gorgeous
eloquence of Pindar? In Hungary I have seen it the manner at all Feasts, and
other such meetings, to have songs of their Ancestors valor; which that
right Souldier-like Nation thinck the chiefest kindlers of brave courage. The
incomparable Lacedaemonians, did not only carry that kind of Music ever with
them to the field, but even at home, as such songs were made, so were they all
content to be the singers of them, when the lusty men were to tell what they
did, the old men, what they had done, and the young men what they would do.
And where a man may say, that Pindar many times prayseth highly victories of
small moment, matters rather of sport then virtue: as it may be answered, it
was the fault of the Poet, and not of the Poetry; so indeed, the chief fault
was in the time and custom of the Greeks, who set those toys at so high a
price, that Phillip of Macedon reckoned a horse-race won at Olimpus, among
his three fearful felicities. But as the inimitable Pindar often did, so is
that kind most capable and most fit, to awake the thoughts from the sleep of
idleness, to embrace honorable enterprises.

There rests the Heroical, whose very name (I think) should daunt all
back-biters; for by what conceit can a tongue be directed to speak evil of
that, which draws with it, no less Champions then Achilles, Cyrus, Aeneas,
Turnus, Tideus, and Rinaldo? who does not only teach and move to a truth, but
teaches and moves to the most high and excellent truth. Who makes
magnanimity and justice shine, throughout all misty fearefulnes and foggy
desires. Who, if the saying of Plato and Tullie be true, that who could see
Virtue, would be wonderfully ravished with the love of her beauty: this man
sets her out to make her more lovely in her holyday apparel, to the eye of any
that will daine, not to disdain, until they understand. But if any thing be
already said in the defense of sweet Poetry, all concurreth to the maintaining
the Heroical, which is not only a kind, but the best, and most accomplished
kind of Poetry. For as the image of each action styrreth and instructs the
mind, so the lofty image of such Worthies, most inflameth the mind with
desire to be worthy, and informs with counsel how to be worthy. Only let
Aeneas be worn in the tablet of your memory, how he governs himself in the
ruin of his Country, in the preserving his old Father, and carrying away his
religious ceremonies: in obeying the Gods commandment to leave Dido, though
not only all passionate kindenes, but even the humane consideration of
virtuous gratefulnes, would have craved other of him. How in storms, how in
sports, how in war, how in peace, how a fugitive, how victorious, how
besiedged, how besiedging, how to strangers, how to allies, how to enemies,
how to his own: lastly, how in his inward self, and how in his outward
government. And I think, in a mind not prejudiced with a preiudicating humor,
he will be found in excellency fruitful: yea, even as Horace says, Melius
Chrisippo et Crantore.


But truly I imagine, it falls out with these Poet-whyppers, as with some
good women, who often are sick, but in faith they cannot tell where. So the
name of Poetry is odious to the^, but neither his cause, nor effects, neither
the sum that contains him, nor the particularities descending from him, give
any fast handle to their carping disprayse.

Since then Poetry is of all humane learning the most ancient, and of most
fatherly antiquity, as from whence other learnings have taken their
beginnings: since it is so universal, that no learned Nation does despise it,
nor no barbarous Nation is without it: since both Roman and Greek gave divine
names unto it: the one of prophesying, the other of making. And that indeed,
that name of making is fit for him; considering, that where as other Arts
retain themselves within their subject, and receive as it were, their being
from it: the Poet only, brings his own stuff, and does not learn a
conceit out of a matter, but makes matter for a conceit: Since neither his
description, nor his end, contains any evil, the thing described cannot be
evil: Since his effects be so good as to teach goodness and to delight the
learners: Since therein, (namely in morrall doctrine, the chief of all
knowledges,) he does not only far pass the Historian, but for
instructing, is well nigh comparable to the Philosopher: and for moving, leaves
him behind him: Since the holy scripture (wherein there is no uncleanness) has
whole parts in it poetical. And that even our Savior Christ, vouchsafed to
use the flowers of it: Since all his kinds are not only in their united
forms, but in their severed dissections fully commendable, I think, (and think
I think rightly,) the Laurel crown appointed for tryumphing Captains, does
worthily (of al other learnings) honor the Poets triumph. But because we have
ears as well as tongues, and that the lightest reasons that may be, will seem
to weigh greatly, if nothing be put in the counter-ballance: let us hear, and
as well as we can ponder, what objections may be made against this Art, which
may be worthy, either of yielding, or answering.

First truly I note, not only in these Mysomousoi Poet-haters, but in all
that kind of people, who seek a praise by dispraysing others, that they do
prodigally spend a great many wandering words, in quips, and scoffs; carping
and taunting at each thing, which by styrring the Spleen, may stay the brain
from a through beholding the worthiness of the subject.

Those kind of objections, as they are full of very idle easines, since there
is nothing of so sacred a majesty, but that an itching tongue may rub it
self upon it: so deserve they no other answer, but in steed of laughing at the
jest, to laugh at the iester. We know a playing wit, can praise the
discretion of an Ass; the comfortablenes of being in debt, and the jolly
commodity of being sick of the plague. So of the contrary side, if we will
turn Ouids verse, Vt lateat virtus, proximitate mali,
that good lie hid in neerenesse of the evil: Agrippa will be as merry in
showing the vanity of Science, as Erasmus was in commending of folly. Neither
shall any man or matter escape some touch of these smyling raylers. But for
Erasmus and Agrippa, they had another foundation then the superficial part
would promise. Mary, these other pleasant Fault-finders, who will correct the
Verb, before they understand the Noune, and confute others knowledge before
they confirm their own: I would have them only remember, that scoffing
comes not of wisdom. So as the best title in true English they get with
their merriments, is to be called good fools: for so have our grave
Forefathers ever termed that humorous kind of iesters: but that which gives
greatest scope to their scorning humors, is ryming and versing. It is already
said, (and as I think, truly said,) it is not ryming and versing, that
makes Poesy. One may be a Poet without versing, and a versifyer without
Poetry. But yet, presuppose it were inseparable (as indeed it seems Scaliger
judges,) truly it were an inseparable commendation. For if Oration, next to
Ratio, Speech next to Reason, be the greatest gift bestowed upon mortality:
that can not be praiselesse, which does most pollish that blessing of speech,
which considers each word, not only (as a man may say) by his forcible
quality, but by his best measured quantity, carrying even in themselves, a
Harmony: (without (perchance) Number, Measure, Order, Proportion, be in our
time grown odious.) But lay a side the just praise it has, by being the
only fit speech for Music, (Music I say, the most divine striker of the
senses:) thus much is undoubtedly true, that if reading be foolish, without
remembering, memory being the only treasurer of knowlede, those words which
are fittest for memory, are likewise most convenient for knowledge.

Now, that Verse farte exceed Prose in the knitting up of the memory, the
reason is manifest. The words, (besides their delight which has a great
affinity to memory,) being so set, as one word cannot be lost, but the whole
work fails: which accuses it self, calls the remembrance back to it
self, and so most most strongly confirms it; besides, one word so as it were
begetting another, as be it in ryme or measured verse, by the former a man
shall have a near guess to the follower: lastly, even they that have taught
the Art of memory, have showed nothing so apt for it, as a certain room
divided into many places well and thoroughly known. Now, that has the verse in
effect perfectly: every word having his natural seat, which seat, must
needs make the word remembered. But what needs more in a thing so known to
all men? who is it that ever was a scholar, that does not carry away some
verses of Virgill, Horace, or Cato, which in his youth he leanned, and even to
his old age serve him for howrely lessons but the fitnes it has for memory, is
notably proved by all delivery of Arts: wherein for the most part, from Grammar,
to Logic, Mathematick, physic, and the ^ it must be in jest that any man can
speak, against it. ^ many other more fruitful knowledges a man might better
spend his ryme in them, then in this. Secondly, that it is the mother of lies.
Thirdly, that it is the Nurse of abuse; infecting us infecting many pestilent
desire: with a Sirens sweetness, thawing the mind to the Serpents tail of
sinful fancy. And herein especially, Comedies give the largest field to err,
as Chaucer says: how both in other Nations and in ours, before Poets did
soften us, we were full of courage given to martial excersices the ^
knowledge. To the second therefore, that they should be the principal liars; I
answer paradoxically, but truly, I think truly; that of all VVriters under
the sun, the Poet is the least lier: and though he would, as a Poet can
scarcely be a liar, the Astronomer, with his cosen the Geometrician, can hardly
escape, when they take upon them to measure the height of the stars.

How often, think you, do the Physicians lie, when they aver things, good for
sicknesses, which afterward send Charon a great number of souls drowned in a
potion before they come to his Ferry. And no less of the rest, which take upon
them to affirm. Now, for the Poet, he nothing affirms, and therefore never
lies. For, as I take it, to lie, is to affirm that to be true which is false.
So as the other Artists, and especially the Historian, affirming many things,
can in the cloudy knowledge of mankind, hardly escape from many lies. But the
Poet as (I said before) never affirms. The Poet never makes any circles
about your imagination, to conjure you to believe for true what he writes. He
cites not authorities of other Histories, but even for his entry, calls the
sweet Muses to inspire into him a good invention: in troth, not laboring to
tell you what is, or is not, but what should or should not be: and therefore,
though he recount things not true; yet because he tells them not for true,
he lies not, without we will say, that Nathan lied in his speech, before
alleged to David. Which as a wicked man durst scarce say, so think I, none so
simple would say, that Esope lied in the tales of his beasts: for who thinks
that Esope writ it for actually true, were well worthy to have his name
cronicled among the beasts he writes of.

What child is there, that coming to a Play, and seeing Thebes written in
great Letters upon an old door, does believe that it is Thebes? If then, a
man can ariue, at that child's age, to know that the Poets persons and doings,
are but pictures what should be, and not stories what have been, they will
never give the lie, to things not affirmatively, but allegorically, and
figuratiuelie written. And therefore, as in History, looking for truth, they
go away full fraught with falsehood: so in Poesy, looking for fiction, they
shall use the narration, but as an imaginatiue groundplot of a profitable
invention.

But heereto is replied, that the Poets give names to men they write of, which
argues a conceit of an actual truth, and so, not being true, proves a
falsehood. And does the Lawyer lie then, when under the names of John a style,
and John a noakes, he puts his case? But that is easily answered. Their naming
of men, is but to make their picture the more lively, and not to build any
history: paynting men, they cannot leave men namelesse. We see we cannot play
at Chesse, but that we must give names to our Chesse-men; and yet me thinks,
he were a very partial Champion of truth, that would say we lied, for giving
a piece of wood, the reverend title of a Bishop. The Poet names Cyrus or
Aeneas, no other way, then to show, what men of their fames, fortunes, and
estates, should do.

Their third is, how much it abuses men's wit, trayning it to wanton
sinfulnes, and lustful love: for indeed that is the principal, if not the
only abuse I can hear alleged. They say, the Comedies rather teach, then
reprehend, amorous conceits. They say, the Lirick, is larded with passionate
Sonnets. The Elegiack, weeps the want of his Mistress. And that even to the
Heroical, Cupid has ambitiously climed. Alas Love, I would, thou could as
well defend thy self, as thou can offend others. I would those, on whom
thou do attend, could either put thee away, or yield good reason, why they
keep thee. But grant love of beauty, to be a beastly fault, (although it be
very hard, since only man, and no beast, has that gift, to discern beauty.)
Grant, that lovely name of Love, to deserve all hateful reproaches: (although
even some of my Masters the Philosophers, spent a good deal of their
Lamp-oyle, in setting forth the excellency of it.) Grant, I say, what soever
they will have granted; that not only love, but lust, but vanity, but, (if
they list) scurrilitie, possesses many leaves of the Poets books: yet think
I, when this is granted, they will find, their sentence may with good manners,
put the last words foremost: and not say, that Poetry abuses man's wit, but
that, man's wit abuses Poetry.

For I will not deny, but that man's wit may make Poesy, (which should be
Eikastike, which some learned have defined, figuring forth good things,) to
be Phantastike: which does contrariwise, infect the fancy with unworthy
objects. As the Painter, that should give to the eye, either some excellent
perspectiue, or some fine picture, fit for building or fortification: or
containing in it some notable example, as Abraham, sacrificing his Son
Isaac, Judith killing Holofernes, David fighting with Goliath, may leave those,
and please an ill-pleased eye, with wanton shows of better hidden matters. But
what, shall the abuse of a thing, make the right use odious? Nay truly, though
I yield, that Poesy may not only be abused, but that being abused, by the
reason of his sweet charming force, it can do more hurt then any other Army
of words: yet shall it be so far from concluding, that the abuse, should give
reproach to the abused, that contrariwise it is a good reason, that whatsoever
being abused, does most harm, being rightly used: (and upon the right use
each thing conceiueth his title,) does most good.

Do we not see the skill of Physic, (the best rampire to our often-assaulted
bodies,) being abused, teach poison the most violent destroyer? Does not
knowledge of Law, whose end is, to even and right all things being abused, grow
the crooked fosterer of horrible injuries? Does not (to go to the highest)
Gods word abused, breed heresy? and his Name abused, become blasphemy?
Truly, a needle cannot do much hurt, and as truly, (with leave of Ladies be
it spoken) it cannot do much good. With a sword, thou may kill thy Father,
and with a sword thou may defend thy Prince and Country. So that, as in
their calling Poets the Fathers of lies, they say nothing: so in this their
argument of abuse, they prove the commendation.

They allege heere-with, that before Poets began to be in price, our Nation,
has set their hearts delight upon action, and not upon imagination: rather
doing things worthy to be written, then writing things fit to be done. What
that before time was, I think scarcely Sphinx can tell: Since no memory is so
ancient, that has the precedence of Poetry. And certain it is, that in our
plainest homelines, yet never was the Albion Nation without Poetry. Mary, this
argument, though it be leaueld against Poetry, yet is it indeed, a
chaine-shot against all learning, or bookishnes, as they commonly term it. Of
such mind were certain Goths, of whom it is written, that having in the
spoil of a famous City, taken a fair library; one hangman (be like fit
to execute the fruits of their wits,) who had murdered a great number of
bodies, would have set fire on it: no said another, very gravely, take heed
what you do, for while they are busy about these toys, we shall with more
leisure conquer their Countries.

This indeed is the ordinary doctrine of ignorance, and many words sometimes
I have heard spent in it; but because this reason is generally against all
learning, as well as Poetry; or rather, all learning but Poetry: because it
were too large a digression, to handle, or at least, to superfluous: (since it
is manifest, that all government of action, is to be gotten by knowledge, and
knowledge best, by gathering many knowledges, which is, reading,) I only with
Horace, to him that is of that opinion, Iubeo stultum esse libenter:
for as for Poetry it self, it is the freest from this objection. For Poetry
is the companion of Camps.

I dare undertake, Orlando Furioso, or honest King Arthur, will never displease
a Soldier: but the quiddity of Ens, and Prima materia, will hardely agree with
a Corslet: and therefore, as I said in the beginning, even Turks and Tartares
are delighted with Poets. Homer a Greek, flourished, before Greece flourished.
And if to a slight conjecture, a conieture may be opposed: truly it may seem,
that as by him, their learned men, took almost their first light of knowledge,
so their active men, received their first motions of courage. Only Alexanders
example may serve, who by Plutarch is accounted of such virtue, that Fortune
was not his guide, but his foote-stoole: whose acts speak for him, though
Plutarch did not: indeed, the Phaenix of warlike Princes. This Alexander, left
his Schoolemaister, living Aristotle, behind him, but took dead Homer with
him: he put the Philosopher Calisthenes to death, for his seeming
philosophical, indeed mutmous stubburnnes. But the chief thing he ever was
heard to wish for, was, that Homer had been alive. He well found, he received
more bravery of mind, by the pattern of Achilles, then by hearing the
defination of Fortitude: and therefore, if Cato misliked Fuluius, for carrying
Ennius with him to the field, it may be answered, that if Cato misliked it,
the noble Fuluius liked it, or else he had not done it: for it was not the
excellent Cato Vticensis, (whose authority I would much more have (...),) but
it was the former: in (...) of faults, but else, a man that had (...)
sacrificed to the Graces. He misliked and dried out upon all Greek learning,
and yet being 80 years old, began to learn it. Be like, soaring that Pluto
understood not Latin. indeed, the Romance laws allowed, no person to be
carried to the wars, but he that was in the Soldiers role: and therefore,
though Cato misliked his vnmustered person, he misliked not his work. And if
he had, Scipio Nasica judged by common consent, the best Roman, loved him.
Both the other Scipio Brothers, who had by their virtues no less surnames,
then of Asia, and Afric, so loved him, that they caused his body to be buried
in their Sepulcher. So as Cato, his authority being but against his person,
and that answered, with so far greater then himself, is herein of no
validity. But now indeed my burden is great; now Plato his name is laid
upon me, whom I must confess, of all Philosophers, I have ever esteemed most
worthy of reverence, and with great reason: Since of all Philosophers, he is the
most poetical. Yet if he will defile the Fountain, out of which his flowing
streams have proceeded, let us boldly examine with what reasons he did it.
First truly, a man might maliciously object, that Plato being a Philosopher,
was a natural enemy of Poets: for indeed, after the Philosophers, had picked
out of the sweet mysteries of Poetry, the right discerning true points of
knowledge, they forthwith putting it in method, and making a Schoolearte of
that which the Poets did only teach, by a divine delightfulnes, beginning to
spurn at their guides, like ungrateful Prentises, were not content to set up
shops for themselves, but sought by all means to discredit their Masters.
Which by the force of delight being barred them, the less they could
overthrow them, the more they hated them. For indeed, they found for Homer,
seven Cities strove, who should have him for their Citizen: where many
Cities banished Philosophers, as not fit members to live among them. For
only repeating certain of Euripides verses, many Athenians had their lives
saved of the Siracusians: when the Athenians themselves, thought many
Philosophers, unworthy to live.

Certain Poets, as Simonides, and Pindarus, had so prevailed with Hiero the
first, that of a Tirant they made him a just King, where Plato could do so
little with Dionisius, that he himself, of a Philosopher, was made a slave.
But who should do thus, I confess, should requite the objections made against
Poets, with like cauillation against Philosophers, as likewise one should do,
that should bid one read Phaedrus, or Symposium in Plato, or the discourse of
love in Plutarch, and see whether any Poet do authorize abominable filthiness,
as they do. Again, a man might ask out of what Commonwealth Plato did
banish them? insooth, thence where he himself allows community of women: So
as belike, this banishment grew not for effeminate wantonness, since little
should poetical Sonnets be hurtful, when a man might have what woman he
listed. But I honor philosophical instructions, and bless the wits which bred
them: so as they be not abused, which is likewise stretched to Poetry.

S. Paul himself, (who yet for the credit of Poets) alleges twice two
Poets, and one of them by the name of a Prophet, sets a watchword upon
Philosophy, indeed upon the abuse. So does Plato, upon the abuse, not upon
Poetry. Plato found fault, that the Poets of his time, filled the world, with
wrong opinions of the Gods, making light tales of that unspotted essence; and
therefore, would not have the youth depraved with such opinions. Heerin may
much be said, let this suffice: the Poets did not induce such opinions, but did
imitate those opinions already induced. For all the Greek stories can well
testify, that the very religion of that time, stood upon many, and
many-fashioned Gods, not taught so by the Poets, but followed, according to
their nature of imitation. Who list, may read in Plutarch, the discourses of
Isis, and Osiris, of the cause why Oracles ceased, of the divine providence:
and see, whether the Theology of that nation, stood not upon such dreams,
which the Poets indeed supersticiously observed: and truly, (since they had not
the light of Christ,) did much better in it then the Philosophers, who shaking
off superstition, brought in Atheism. Plato therefore, (whose authority I had
much rather justly conster, then unjustly resist,) meant not in general of
Poets, in those words of which Julius Scaliger says, Qua authoritate, barbari
quida^, atque hispidi, abuti velint, ad Poet as republica exigendos: but only
meant, to drive out those wrong opinions of the Deity, (whereof now, without
further law, Christianity has taken away all the hurtful belief,) perchance
(as he thought) norished by the then esteemed Poets. And a man need go no
further then to Plato himself, to know his meaning: who in his Dialogue called
Ion, gives high, and rightly divine commendation to Poetry. So as Plato,
banishing the abuse, not the thing, not banishing it, but giving due honor unto
it, shall be our Patron, and not our adversary. For indeed I had much rather,
(since truly I may do it) show their mistaking of Plato, (under whose Lions
skin they would make an Asse-like braying against Poesy,) the^ go about to
ouer-throw his authority, whom the wiser a man is, the more just cause he shall
find to have in admiration: especially, since he attributes unto Poesy, more
then my self do; namely, to be a very inspiring of a divine force, far
above man's wit; as in the aforementioned Dialogue is apparent.

Of the other side, who would show the honors, have been by the best sort of
judgments granted them, a whole Sea of examples would present themselves.
Alexanders, Caesar's, Scipios, al favorers of Poets. Lelius, called the Roman
Socrates, him self a Poet: so as part of Heautontimorumenon in Terence, was
supposed to be made by him. And even the Greek Socrates, whom Apollo confirmed
to be the only wise man, is said to have spent part of his old time, in
putting Esops fables into verses. And therefore, full evil should it become
his scholar Plato, to put such words in his Masters mouth, against Poets. But
what need more? Aristotle writes the Art of Poesy: and why if it should not
be written? Plutarch teaches the use to be gathered of the^, and how if they
should not be read? And who reads Plutarchs either history or philosophy,
shall find, he trymmeth both their garments, with gards of Poesy. But I list
not to defend Poesy, with the help of her underling, Historiography. Let it
suffice, that it is a fit soil for praise to dwell upon: and what dispraise
may set upon it, is either easily overcome, or transformed into just
commendation. So that, since the excellencies of it, may be so easily, and so
justly confirmed, and the low-creeping objections, so soon trodden down; it
not being an Art of lies, but of true doctrine: not of effeminatenes, but of
notable stirring of courage: not of abusing man's wit, but of strengthening
man's wit: not banished, but honored by Plato: let us rather plant more Laurels,
for to engarland our Poets heads, (which honor of being laureat, as besides
the^, only tryumphant Captains wear, is a sufficient authority, to show the
price they ought to be had in,) then suffer the ill-sauouring breath of such
wrong-speakers, once to blow upon the clear springs of Poesy.

But since I have run so long a careere in this matter, me thinks, before I
give my pen a full stop, it shall be but a little more lost time, to inquire,
why England, (the Mother of excellent minds,) should be grown so hard a
stepmother to Poets, who certainly in wit ought to pass all other: since all
only proceeds from their wit, being indeed makers of themselves, not takers
of others. How can I but exclaim, Musa mihi causas memora, quo numine laeso.
Sweet Poesy, that has aunciently had Kings, Emperors, Senators, great
Captains, such, as besides a thousand others, David, Adrian, Sophocles,
Germanicus, not only to favor Poets, but to be Poets. And of our nearer
times, can present for her Patrons, a Robert, king of Sicil, the great king
Francis of France, king James of Scotland. Such Cardinals as Bembus, and
Bibiena. Such famous Preachers and Teachers, as Beza and Melancthon. So learned
Philosophers, as Fracastorius and Scaliger. So great Orators, as Pontanus and
Muretus. So piercing wits, as George Buchanan. So grave Counselors, as besides
many, but before all, that Hospital of France: then whom, (I think) that
Realm never brought forth a more accomplished judgment: more firmly builded
upon virtue. I say these, with numbers of others, not only to read others
Poesies, but to poetise for others reading, that Poesy thus embraced in all
other places, should only find in our time, a hard welcome in England, I
think the very earth lamenteth it, and therefore decketh our Soil with fewer
Laurels then it was accustomed. For heertofore, Poets have in England also
flourished. And which is to be noted, even in those times, when the trumpet of
Mars did sound loudest. And now, that an ouer-faint quietness should seem to
strew the house for Poets, they are almost in as good reputation, as the
Mountibancks at Venice. Truly even that, as of the one side, it gives great
praise to Poesy, which like Venus, (but to better purpose,) had rather be
troubled in the net with Mars, then enjoy the homely quiet of Vulcan: so
serves it for a piece of a reason, why they are less grateful to idle
England, which now can scarce endure the pain of a pen. Upon this,
necessarily follows, that basemen, with servile wits undertake it: who think
it enough, if they can be rewarded of the Printer. And so as Epaminondas is
said, with the honor of his virtue, to have made an office; by his exercising
it, which before was contemptible, to become highly respected: so these, no
more but setting their names to it, by their own disgracefulnes, disgrace the
most graceful Poesy. For now, as if all the Muses were got with child, to
bring forth bastard Poets, without any commission, they do post over the
banckes of Helicon, till they make the readers more weary then Posthorses:
while in the mean time, they Queis meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan,
are better content, to suppress the out-flowing of their wit, then by
publishing them, to be accounted Knights of the same order. But I, that before
ever I durst aspire unto the dignity, am admitted into the company of the
Paper-blurrers, do find the very true cause of our wanting estimation, is
want of desert: taking upon us to be Poets, in despite of Pallas. Now,
wherein we want desert, were a thanke-worthy labor to express: but if I knew,
I should have mended my self. But I, as I never desired the title, so have I
neglected the means to come by it. Only ouer-mastred by some thoughts, I
yielded an inckie tribute unto them. Mary, they that delight in Poesy it
self, should seek to know what they do, and how they do; and especially,
look themselves in an vnflattering Glass of reason, if they be inclinable
unto it. For Poesy, must not be drawn by the ears, it must be gently led;
or rather, it must lead. VVhieh was partly the cause, that made the
auncient-learned affirm, it was a divine gift, and no human skill: since all
other knowledges, lie ready for any that has strength of wit: A Poet, no
industry can make, if his own Genius be not carried unto it: and therefore
is it an old Proverb, Orator fit; Poeta nascitur. Yet confess I always, that
as the firtilest ground must be manured, so must the highest flying wit, have
a Dedalus to guide him. That Dedalus, they say, both in this, and in other,
has three wings, to bear it self up into the air of due commendation: that
is, Art, Imitation, and Exercise. But these, neither artificial rules, nor
imitatiue patterns, we much cumber our selves withal. Exercise indeeede we
do, but that, very fore-backwardly: for where we should exercise to know, we
exercise as having known: and so is our brain delivered of much matter, which
never was begotten by knowledge. For, there being two principal parts, matter
to be expressed by words, and words to express the matter, in neither, we
use Art, or Imitation, rightly. Our matter is Quodlibit indeed, though wrongly
perfourming Ouids verse: (Quicquid conabor discere versus erit:)
never marshalling it into an assured rank, that almost the readers cannot
tell where to find themselves.

Chaucer, undoubtedly did excellently in his Troylus and Cresseid; of whom,
truly I know not, whether to marvel more, either that he in that mistie time,
could see so clearly, or that we in this clear age, walk so stumblingly
after him. Yet had he great wants, fit to be forgiven, in so reverent
antiquity. I account the Mirror of Magistrates, meetely furnished of beautiful
parts: and in the Earl of Surries Liricks, many things tasting of a noble
birth, and worthy of a noble mind. The Sheapheards Calendar, has much Poetry
in his Eglogues: indeed worthy the reading if I be not deceived. That same
framing of his style, to an old rustic language, I dare not allow, since
neither Theocritus in Greek, Virgill in Latin, nor Sanazar in Italian, did
affect it. Besides these, do I not remember to have seen but few, (to speak
boldly) printed, that have poetical sinnewes in them: for proof whereof, let
but most of the verses be put in Prose, and then ask the meaning; and it will
be found, that one verse did but beget another, without ordering at the first,
what should be at the last: which becomes a confused mass of words, with a
tingling sound of ryme, barely accompanied with reason.

Our Tragedies, and Comedies, (not without cause cried out against,) observing
rules, neither of honest civility, nor of skillful Poetry, excepting
Gorboduck, (again, I say, of those that I have seen,) which notwithstanding,
as it is full of stately speeches, and well sounding Phrases, clyming to the
height of Seneca his style, and as full of notable morality, which it does
most delightfully teach; and so obtain the very end of Poesy: yet in troth it
is very defectious in the circumstaunces; which greeueth me, because it might
not remain as an exact model of all Tragedies. For it is faulty both in place,
and time, the two necessary companions of all corporal actions. For where the
stage should always represent but one place, and the uttermost time
presupposed in it, should be, both by Aristotle's precept, and common reason,
but one day: there is both many days, and many places, inartificially
imagined. But if it be so in Gorboduck, how much more in all the rest? where you
shall have Asia of the one side, and Afric of the other, and so many other
vnder-kingdoms, that the Player, when he comes in, must ever begin with
telling where he is: or else, the tale will not be conceived. Now ye shall have
three Ladies, walk to gather flowers, and then we must believe the stage to
be a Garden. By and by, we hear news of shipwreck in the same place, and
then we are to blame, if we accept it not for a Rock.

Upon the back of that, comes out a hidious Monster, with fire and smoke, and
then the miserable beholders, are bound to take it for a Cave. While in the
meane-time, two Armies fly in, represented with four swords and bucklers, and
then what hard heart will not receive it for a pitched field? Now, of time
they are much more liberal, for ordinary it is that two young Princes fall in
love. After many trauerces, she is got with child, delivered of a fair boy,
he is lost, grows a man, falls in love, and is ready to get another child,
and all this in two hours space: which how absurd it is in sense, even sense
may imagine, and Art has taught, and all ancient examples justified: and at
this day, the ordinary Players in Italy, will not err in. Yet will some bring
in an example of Eunuchus in Terence, that contains matter of two days, yet
far short of twenty years. True it is, and so was it to be played in two days,
and so fitted to the time it set forth. And though Plautus has in one place
done amiss, let us hit with him, and not miss with him. But they will say, how
then shall we set forth a story, which contains both many places, and many
times? And do they not know, that a Tragedy is tied to the laws of Poesy,
and not of History? not bound to follow the story, but having liberty, either
to feign a quite new matter, or to frame the history, to the most tragical
conueniencie. Again, many things may be told, which cannot be showed, if they
know the difference betwixt reporting and representing. As for example, I may
speak, (though I am here) of Peru, and in speech, digress from that, to the
description of Calicut: but in action, I cannot represent it without Pacolets
horse: and so was the manner the Ancients took, by some Nuncius, to recount
things done in former time, or other place. Lastly, if they will represent an
history, they must not (as Horace says) begin Ab ouo: but they must come to
the principal point of that one action, which they will represeut. By example
this will be best expressed. I have a story of young Polidorus, delivered for
safeties sake, with great riches, by his Father Priamus, to Polimnestor king of
Thrace, in the Troyan war time: He after some years, hearing the ouer-throwe
of Priamus, for to make the treasure his own, murthereth the child: the body
of the child is taken up by Hecuba, she the same day, finds a slight to be
revenged most cruelly of the Tyrant: where now would one of our Tragedy
writers begin, but with the delivery of the child? Then should he sail over
into Thrace, and so spend I know not how many years, and travail numbers of
places. But where does Euripides? Even with the finding of the body, leaving
the rest to be told by the spirit of Polidorus. This need no further to be
enlarged, the dullest wit may conceive it. But besides these gross
absurdities, how all their Plays be neither right Tragedies, nor right
Comedies: mingling Kings and Clownes, not because the matter so carries it:
but thrust in Clownes by head and shoulders, to play a part in maiesticall
matters, with neither decency, nor discretion. So as neither the admiration
and commiseration, nor the right sportfulnes, is by their mungrell
Tragy-comedie obtained. I know Apuleius did somewhat so, but that is a thing
recounted with space of time, not represented in one moment: and I know, the
Ancients have one or two examples of Tragy-comedies, as Plautus has
Amphitrio: But if we mark them well, we shall find, that they never, or very
daintily, match Horne-pypes and Funerals. So falls it out, that having
indeed no right Comedy, in that comicall part of our Tragedy, we have nothing
but scurrility, unworthy of any chaste ears: or some extreme show of
doltishnes, indeed fit to lift up a loud laughter, and nothing else: where the
whole tract of a Comedy, should be full of delight, as the Tragedy should be
still maintained, in a well raised admiration. But our Comedians, think there
is no delight without laughter, which is very wrong, for though laughter may
come with delight, yet comes it not of delight: as though delight should be
the cause of laughter, but well may one thing breed both together: nay, rather
in themselves, they have as it were, a kind of contrariety: for delight we
scarcely do, but in things that have a conueniencie to our selves, or to the
general nature: laughter, almost ever comes, of things most disproportioned
to our selves, and nature. Delight has a joy in it, either permanent, or
present. Laughter, has only a scornful tickling.

For example, we are ravished with delight to see a fair woman, and yet are
far from being moved to laughter. We laugh at deformed creatures, wherein
certainly we cannot delight. We delight in good chances, we laugh at
mischaunces; we delight to hear the happiness of our friends, or Country; at
which he were worthy to be laughed at, that would laugh; we shall contrarily
laugh sometimes, to find a matter quite mistaken, and go down the hill
against the byas, in the mouth of some such men, as for the respect of the^,
one shall be heartily sorry, yet he cannot choose but laugh; and so is rather
pained, then delighted with laughter. Yet deny I not, but that they may go
well together, for as in Alexanders picture well set out, we delight without
laughter, and in twenty mad Anticks we laugh without delight: so in Hercules,
painted with his great beard, and furious countenance, in a woman's attire,
spinning at Omphales commandment, it breeds both delight and laughter. For
the representing of so strange a power in love, procures delight: and the
scornefulnes of the action, stirs laughter. But I speak to this purpose,
that all the end of the comicall part, be not upon such scornful matters, as
stirs laughter only: but mixed with it, that delightful teaching which is
the end of Poesy. And the great fault even in that point of laughter, and
forbidden plainly by Aristotle, is, that they stir laughter in sinful
things; which are rather execrable then ridiculous: or in miserable, which are
rather to be pitied then scorned. For what is it to make folks gape at a
wretched Beggar, or a beggarly Clown? or against law of hospitallity, to jest
at strangers, because they speak not English so well as we do? what do we
learn, since it is certain (Nil habet infaelix paupertas durius in se,)
Qua^ quod ridiculos homines facit. --
But rather a busy loving Courtier: a hartles threatening Thraso. A
selfe-wise-seeming schoolmaster. A a wry-transformed Traveler. These, if we
saw walk in stage names, which we play naturally, therein were delightful
laughter, and teaching delightfulnes: as in the other, the Tragedies of
Buchanan, do justly bring forth a divine admiration. But I have lauished out
too many words of this play matter. I do it because as they are excelling
parts of Poesy, so is there none so much used in England, and none can be more
pitifully abused. Which like an unmannerly Daughter, showing a bad education,
causes her mother Poesies honesty, to be called in question. Other sorts of
Poetry almost have we none, but that Lyricall kind of Songs and Sonnets: which,
Lord, if he gave us so good minds, how well it might be employed, and with
how heavenly fruit, both private and public, in singing the praises of the
immortal beauty: the immortal goodness of that God, who gives us hands to
write, and wits to conceive, of which we might well want words, but never
matter, of which, we could turn our eyes to nothing, but we should ever have
new budding occasions. But truly many of such writings, as come under the
banner of vnrelistable love, if I were a Mistres, would never persuade me they
were in love: so coldely they apply fiery speeches, as men that had rather red
Lovers writings; and so caught up certain swelling phrases, which hang
together, like a man which once told me, the wind was at North, West, and
by South, because he would be sure to name winds enovve: then that in truth
they feel those passions, which easily (as I think) may be bewrayed, by that
same forciblenes, or Energia, (as the Greeks call it) of the writer. But let
this be a sufficient, though short note, that we miss the right use of the
material point of Poesy.

Now, for the outside of it, which is words, or (as I may term it) Diction,
it is eue^ well worse. So is that honny-flowing Matron Eloquence, apparelled,
or rather disguised, in a Curtizan-like painted affectation: one time with so
far fette words, that may seem Monsters: but must seem strangers to any
poor English man. Another time, with coursing of a Letter, as if they were
bound to follow the method of a Dictionary: an other time, with figures and
flowers, extremely winter-starued. But I would this fault were only peculier
to Versifiers, and had not as large possession among Prose-printers; and,
(which is to be meruailed) among many Scholars; and, (which is to be pitied)
among some Preachers. Truly I could wish, if at least I might be so bold, to
wish in a thing beyond the reach of my capacity, the diligent imitators of
Tullie, and Demosthines, (most worthy to be imitated,) did not so much keep,
Nizolian Paper-bookes of their figures and phrases, as by attentive translation
(as it were) devour them whole, and make them wholly theirs: For now they cast
Sugar and Spice, upon every dish that is served to the table; Like those
Indians, not content to wear eare-rings at the fit and natural place of the
ears, but they will thrust Jewels through their nose, and lips because they
will be sure to be fine.

Tullie, when he was to drive out Cateline, as it were with a Thunderbolt of
eloquence, often used that figure of repition, Viuit, viuit? imo in Senatum
venit etc. Indeed, inflamed with a wellgrounded rage, he would have his words
(as it were) double out of his mouth: and so do that artificially, which we
see men do in choler naturally. And we, having noted the grace of those
words, hale them in sometime to a familier Epistle, when it were to too much
choler to be chollerick. Now for similitudes, in certain printed discourses,
I think all Herbarists, all stories of Beasts, Fowls, and Fishes, are rifled
up, that they come in multitudes, to wait upon any of our conceits; which
certainly is as absurd a surfeit to the ears, as is possible: for the force of
a similitude, not being to prove any thing to a contrary Disputer, but only
to explane to a willing hearer, when that is done, the rest is a most tedious
prattling: rather ouer-swaying the memory from the purpose whereto they were
applied, then any whit informing the judgment, already either satisfied, or by
similitudes not to be satis-fied. For my part, I do not doubt, when Antonius
and Crassus, the great forefathers of Cicero in eloquence, the one (as Cicero
testifies of them,) pretended not to know Art, the other, not to set by it:
because with a plain sensiblenes, they might win credit of popular ears:
which credit, is the nearest step to persuasion: which persuasion, is the
chief mark of Oratory; I do not doubt (I say) but that they used these
tracks very sparingly, which who does generally use, any man may see does
dance to his own music: and so be noted by the audience, more careful to
speak curiously, then to speak truly.

Undoubtedly, (at least to my opinion undoubtedly,) I have found in diverse
smally learned Courtiers, a more sound style, then in some professors of
learning: of which I can guess no other cause, but that the Courtier following
that which by practice he finds fittest to nature, therein, (though he know
it not,) does according to Art, though not by Art: where the other, using Art
to show Art, and not to hide Art, (as in these cases he should do) flies from
nature, and indeed abuses Art.

But what? me thinks I deserve to be pounded, for straying from Poetry to
Oratorie: but both have such an affinity in this wordish consideration, that I
think this digression, will make my meaning receive the fuller understanding:
which is not to take upon me to teach Poets how they should do, but only
finding my self sick among the rest, to show some one or two spots of the
common infection, grown among the most part of VVriters: that acknowledging
our selves somewhat awry, we may bend to the right use both of matter and
manner; whereto our language gives us great occasion, being indeed capable of
any excellent exercising of it. I know, some will say it is a mingled language.
And why not so much the better, taking the best of both the other? Another will
say it wants Grammar. Nay truly, it has that praise, that it wants not
Grammar: for Grammar it might have, but it needs it not; being so easy of it
self, and so void of those cumbersome differences of Cases, Genders, Moodes,
and Tenses, which I think was a piece of the Tower of Babilons curse, that a
man should be put to school to learn his mother tongue. But for the uttering
sweetly, and properly the conceits of the mind, which is the end of speech,
that has it equally with any other tongue in the world: and is particulerly
happy, in compositions of two or three words together, near the Greek, far
beyond the Latin: which is one of the greatest beauties can be in a language.

Now, of versifying there are two sorts, the one Ancient, the other Modern:
the Ancient marked the quantity of each silable, and according to that,
framed his verse: the Modern, observing only number, (with some regard of
the accent,) the chief life of it, stands in that like sounding of the
words, which we call Ryme. Whether of these be the most excellent, would
bear many speeches. The Ancient, (no doubt) more fit for Music, both words
and tune observing quantity, and more fit lively to express diverse passions,
by the low and lofty sound of the well-weyed silable. The latter likewise,
with his Ryme, strikes a certain music to the ear: and in fine, since it
does delight, though by another way, it obtaines the same purpose: there
being in either sweetness, and wanting in neither majesty. Truly the English,
before any other vulgar language I know, is fit for both sorts: for, for the
Ancient, the Italian is so full of Vowels, that it must ever be cu^bred with
Elisions. The Dutch, so of the other side with Co^sonants, that they cannot
yield the svveet slyding, fit for a Verse. The French, in his whole language,
has not one word, that has his accent in the last silable, saving two, called
Antepenultima, and little more has the Spanish: and therefore, very gracelesly
may they use Dactiles. The English is subject to none of these defects.

Now, for the ryme, though we do not observe quantity, yet we observe the
accent very precisely: which other languages, either cannot do, or will not
do so absolutely. That Caesura, or breathing place in the midst of the
verse, neither Italian nor Spanish have, the French, and we, never almost fail
of. Lastly, even the very ryme it self, the Italian cannot put in the last
silable, by the French named the Masculine ryme, but still in the next to the
last, which the French call the Female; or the next before that, which the
Italians term Sdrucciola. The example of the former, is Buono Suono, of the
Sdrucciola, is Femina Semina. The French, of the other side, has both the
Male, as Bon, Son, and the Female, as Plaise Taise. But the Sdrucciola, he
has not: where the English has all three, as Due, True, Father, Rather,
Motion, Potion; with much more which might be said, but that I find already,
the triflingnes of this discourse, is much too much enlarged. So that since the
euer-praise-worthy Poesy, is full of vertue-breeding delightfulnes, and void
of no gift, that ought to be in the noble name of learning: since the blames
laid against it, are either false, or feeble: ^^h the cause why it is not
esteemed in England, is the fault of Poet-apes, not Poets: since lastly, our
tongue is most fit to honor Poesy, and to be honored by Poesy, I conjure you
all, that have had the evil luck to read this inckewasting toy of mine, even
in the name of the nine Muses, no more to scorn the sacred mysteries of
Poesy: no more to laugh at the name of Poets, as though they were-next
inheritours to Fools: no more to jest at the reverent title of a Rymer: but to
believe with Aristotle, that they were the ancient Treasurers, of the
Graecians Divinity. To believe with Bembus, that they were first bringers in of
all civility. To believe with Scaliger, that no Philosophers precepts can
sooner (...) you an honest man, then the reading of Virgill. believe with
Clauserus, the Translator of Cornutus that it pleased the heavenly Deity, by
Hesiod and Homer, under the veil of fables, to give us all knowledge, Logic,
Rethorick, Philosophy, natural, and morrall: and Quid non? To believe with me,
that there are many mysteries contained in Poetry, which of purpose were
written darkely, least by profane wits, it should be abused. To believe with
Landin, that they are so beloved of the Gods, that whatsoever they write,
proceeds of a divine fury. Lastly, to believe themselves, when they tell you
they will make you immortal, by their verses.

Thus doing, your name shall flourish in the priters shoppes; thus doing, you
shall but (...)many a poetical Preface; thus doing, you (...)most fair, most
rich, most wise, most a(...) shall dwell upon Superlatiues. Thus do(...)
though you be Libertino patre natus, you shall (...) grow Herculea proles: Si
quid mea carmina possunt.
Thus doing, your soul shall be placed with Dantes Beatrix, or Virgils
Anchises. But if, (fie of such a but) you be borne so near the dull making
Cataphract of Nilus, that you cannot hear the Plannetlike Music of Poetry,
if you have so earth-creeping a mind, that it cannot lift it self up, to look
to the sky of Poetry: or rather, by a certain rusticall (...)daine, will
become such a Mome, as to be a (...)nus of Poetry: then, though I will not wish
(...) you, the Asses cares of Midas, nor to be dri(...) by a Poets verses, (as
Bubonax was) to hang himself, nor to be rimed to death, as it is said to be
done in Ireland: yet thus much curse I must send you, in the behalf of all
Poets, that while you live, you live in love, and never get favor, for lacking
skill of a Sonnet: and when you die, your memory die from the earth, for want
of an Epi(...)h.

FINIS.
AN APOLOGY.
1. Or rather a retraction. 2. Or rather a recantation. 3. Or rather a
recapitulation. 4. Or rather a replication. 5. Or rather an examination 6. Or
rather anaccusation. 7. Or rather an explication. 8. Or rather an exhortation.
9. Or rather a consideration. 10. Or rather a confirmation 11. Or rather all of
them. 12. Or rather none of them.

WHen I had finished the precedent pamphlet, and in mine own fantasy very
sufficiently euacuated my head of such homely stuff, of which it might seem
it was very full charged and showed how little conceit or opinion I had of mine
own ability, to handle stately matters, by choosing so mean a subject to
discharge my self upon: I thought now to rest me a while, and to gather some
strength, by feeding on some finer meats, and making some cullesses and
restoratiues for my self out of some other men's kitchins, and not open this
vain any more. But I labored al in vain to stop such a vain: for certain
people of the nature of those that first dwelt in the Canaries, have forced me
to a further labor. For ^
whether it were over watching my self a primero, or eating too much venisor,
which they say is a very melancholy meat: I


