A THEATER OF THE PLANETARY HOVRES FOR ALL DAYS OF THE YEAR.

Wherein may be gathered from the earth, under the Celestial influences,
diverse sorts of herbs, roots, leaves, barks, flowers, fruits, seeds,
stones, animals, etc. for the use of Physic: whereby both suddenly, and
happily infirmities may be Cured.

The evils too are set down, that happen, and are caused by the seven
Plannets: The friendship and hatred betwixt them: the Sun rising; and to
find the determinate hour of it.

A work not only curious and delightful, but likewise necessary for
Physicians, and all curious spirits.

Composed by George Simotta a Grecian, of Constantinople, Spagirick Physician,
to Monsieur, brother to his Majesty of France.

Translated out of Greek, into French, and now into English, fitted to our
Calculation.

Printed at London by August. Matthewes, and are to be sold by GEORGE BAKER,
near Charing Cross, at the Sign of the White Lion. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir ROBERT AETON, Secretary to the Queens most
Excellent Majesty.
SJR:
I Here presume to present you with a small thing, which stands in need of a
Patron of such worth as your self, considering that both this time and place,
are so much given to callumniate, censure, and deprave, even the best of Works
of what nature so ever. I crave your worthy Patronage, in respect it is a
Stranger lately come from France, put into this English habit by one which was
sometime yours, and sent thus into public view by him, that by your daily and
frequent favors you have made your, though unworthy Servant,

GEORGE BAKER.

A THEATER OF THE PLANETARY HOVRES FOR ALL THE DAYS OF THE YEAR.
HIs divine Majesty out of the inevacuable source of his uncreated wisdom,
by his infinite providence, in the Creation of this great universe, did
establish all the creatures for his glory, and the benefit of men. In so much
that the earth, his foo stool, embellished with so many beautiful creatures,
does abound in plants, herbs, trees, seeds, barks, woods, gummes, juices,
mettalls, mineralls, and demy-mineralls, All, as Moses says in the first of
his Genesis, Vt ijs subinde ad propulsandos morbos vteretur ab Adam propagata
soboles, That Adams progeny might use them to preserve health: And the living
creatures in so many several kinds have peopled the Sea, filled the air, and
inhabited the earth under the government of men, to whom, as to their
Sovereigns, they ought to be as subjected: and the heavens, replenished with a
thousand glittering lights, the cover of this lower world, by their motions and
light, being governed by the commandment of the supreme mover, send down
their powers on men, by intelligences moving; the opinions of sacred
Theologians, as Richardus in his second book, Art. 3. quest. 3. and also Saint
Bonaventure, and Saint Thomas, who will, that the highest or Empyreall heaven,
does infuse some effects into our lower earth. It is most certain that the
supreme Creator has ordained the heavens, as all the other creatures, not
only for men's present benefit, but for that to come; that if the heavens did
not infuse on us, it were enough to destroy that most great principle of our
Religion. And Damas. in his 3. book, Chap. 22. says in this behalf,
Impossible est aliquam substantiam expertem esse naturali operatione, vsui
hominum conference, ergo etc. It is impossible, that any substance can be
void of some natural operation, conducing to the profit of men, therefore etc.

The Theologians gather from the heavens three sorts of influences appropriated
to the three faculties of our immortal soul: The starrie heaven, with all the
first and wandering stars, power their influences into the Vegetative; the
Empyreall into the Reasonable; and the Christaline, or first mover, infuse into
the Sensitive; nevertheless, none of these influences can force our liberty,
although the heavens send them the one by their motions, the others by their
light, and the others by their virtue: So the Empyreall heaven, without moving
its self, sends down its virtue here below, notwithstanding that it be
distant from us so far, that, according to Beda in his book, De imagine
mundi, from the earth to the firmament, there are three hundredth thousand, one
hundredth and twenty five leagues. And from that, to the Empyreall heaven, are,
ten hundredth millions of leagues: But to say truth (if it be not by revelation
from God) no certain measure can be determined. I conclude, A majore ad minus,
from the greater to the lesser, that, since the influences do descend from
such a height, by a more strong reason may they come from the heavens, that are
near us; all which influences are not in the heavens by their nature, but by
their effects, as the Astrologians say: If Saturn be cold, the cause
proceeds from his motion, which is slow, and lingering, and for that he is so
far distant from us, and does not end his course but in thirty years,
according to the same Beda: Now, the other planets, that are of more speedy
motion, and do (as it were) with a swift, and rapid course, and in little
time, make their Revolution, are hot, and dry; as Sol, and Mars: But what
avails it us to bring so far fetched reasons? Since that, so near us, these
effects are declared unto us so evidently, in the four elements, in the living
creatures, in the plants, in the sea, in the air, in cutting, sawing,
gathering, grafting, and over all the creatures: So that if man know not the
reason of these things, he ought to seek it in the miracles of nature. To the
end then, that every one may the better know, how to make use of these
operations, even in matter of Physic, they must choose the days, the hours,
the plants, under such favorable aspects, and agreeable influences of the
Stars, as can, by their agreeable virtue, give health unto the sick; for the
Planets and fixed Stars, do cause all infirmities: wherefore they must choose
the Planet, that is enemy to that Planet that brought forth that evil; and
so, by the contrary effect, put it away and dissolve it. Wherefore Arnauld of
Villeneufe, in his book, De simplicibus Medicina, says these words, Ad hoc vt
ipsae herbae, flores, radices, and semina, habeant singularem virtutem, and
proprietatem ad morbos tollendos, sunt Colligenda secundum diversa signa
Zodiaci, quia citius and foelicius operantur in morbis. Moreover, that the very
herbs, flowers, roots, and seeds, may have a singular virtue, and quality to
remove diseases, they are to be gathered according to the several signs of
the Zodiac, because so they do more speedily and succesfully work on
diseases.

For which cause, first, I have thought good to set down the Planets in order,
and the infirmities that are caused by them.

Secondly, the certain hour of the Suns rising every day in the year, to
the end that you may easily find out the hour wherein you are to gather or
take the plants, stones, or animals, to cure your infirmities.

Thirdly, I have set down too, the unequal Planetary hour, as well of the
day as of the night, whereby you may know certainly what Planet shall govern.

Fourthly, you have in like order, the friendship, and enmity of the Planets;
which are enemies amongst them; that you may the more easily find the Planet,
enemy to it that shall cause the disease, and in the same hour that is
governed by it, the infirmity may be cured.

Lastly, the cures of all usual diseases are set down.

CHAP. I. What the infirmities and diseases are, which are caused by every of
the Planets.
Saturn governing, does cause all cold diseases, as the Gowt in the feet,
Leprosy, the Scab, the Palsy, Quartane Agues, the Dropsy, Catarres,
Diffluxions on the Lungs, Consumptions, Coughes, and the like cold and
Melancholic infirmities.

Jupiter causes the Cramp, stupidnesse, inflammation of the liver, the
headache, pains in the shoulders, the Squinance, Apoplexy, the Cardiaca
passio or heart sickness, the bloody flux, and the like.

Mars causes burning Fevers, Impostumes, tertian, quotidian, and intermitting
Agues, Saint Antonies fires, Carbuncles, Fistulaes, dissenteries, and the like
hot diseases.

Sol causes defluxions and rhewmes that fall on the eyes, coldness of the
stomach, and lyver, swoundings, red choler, the Catarre, blisters on the
Matrice, and such other infirmities on the lower parts.

Venus causes the Scab, the French Pox, the Lienterick Flux, Passions and
Suffocations of the Matrice, and all other diseases of the like nature.

Mercurius causes hoarcenesse, all passions of the senses, the falling
sickness, common impediments of the tongue, and its passions, obstructions of
the Gall, and all melancholic evils.

Luna causes the Palsy, the Chollick, the terms, the Dropsy, Phlegmatic
impostumes, and all the infirmities that proceed from the obstruction of the
veins.

Now, to cure any of these infirmities infallibly, and not as some Physicians
proceed, Saluo semper iure calculi, keeping still a just account, it is
requisite to make use of Astrology, and the aspects of the stars and of
their influences, and that is to be understood in cura regulari, in a regular
cure, and not coacta practica, by forced practice Wherefore in such a case, as
Hip. in his fourth book Aphor. 1. wills us, Medicari in valde acutis morbis
cadem die si materia turgeat, tardari in his malum est, To use remedies in very
sharp diseases on the first day, if the matter abound; Delays in these are
dangerous. Yet Menardus in his Epistles in the like case says, That, potius
lotium inspiciendum quam astra, The urine is rather to be looked into then the
stars. But that is to be understood, for letting of blood, and purging the
body. But as concerning other local or topicall remedies, it is requisite to
observe the Planetarie hours. And for this purpose, we must consider by what
Planet the infirmity is caused, then take the herb, or flower, seeds,
roots, or such other things, in such an hour as shall be governed by the
Planet, that is enemy to the causer of the evil: Quia contraria contrarijs
curantur. Contraries are cured by their contraries.

Now, for to know the certain hour of such a Planet, you shall mark at what
hour of that day the Sun shall rise, attributing ever the first hour of the
Su^en-rising, to the Planet that bears the name of that day: As, on Sunday the
first hour shall be the hour of Sol or the Sun: On Monday the first hour,
shall be the hour of Luna or the Moon: On Tues. the first hour, shall be the
hour of Mars: On Wed. Mercury governs the first hour: On Thurs. Jupiter:
Fridayes first hour Venus rules: And on the first of Saturday Saturn. After
the certain knowledge of the Planet, that governs the first hour of the
Sunne-rising on every day, you must follow the natural order of the Planets,
attributing still the succeeding Planet to every succeeding hour. The natural
order of the Planets is this, Saturnus, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercurius,
Luna.

The Planet governor of each day in the week, is as follows: The days of
the week, The Planet gover. Sunday, Sol, Monday, Luna, Tuesday, Mars,
Wednesday, Mercurius, Thursday, Jupiter, Friday, Venus, Saturday. Saturnus.

The days whereon it is dangerous to let blood.
January. 11. 14. 16. 21. 26. 30. February. 26. 27. 28. March. 26. 27. 28.
April. 15. 17. 25. May. 17. 25. 30. June. 18. July. 23. 26. August. 28. 30.
September. 25. 28. October. 16. 26. November. 25. 26. December. 16. 17. 21.
The days whereon Physic being taken, does not purge the body.
January. 19. 27. February. 14. 26. March. 13. 23. April. 10. May. 7. 17. June.
04. 12. July. 17. 20. August. 14. 18. September. 10. 17. October. 8. 16.
November. 5. 12. December. 2. 10.
The days whereon Physic provokes Vomiting.
January. 1. 18. 24. February. 14. 28. March. 13. 22. April. 10. May. 7. 17.
June. 4. 11. July. 17. 20. August. 6. 7. 24. September. 7. 23. October. 1. 18.
27. November. 15. December. 4. 13.
CHAP. II. At what hour the Sun rises in every day of the year.
FIrst must be understood, that in every hour are 60. minutes. Now for to
declare this more briefly, you have here set down the certain hour wherein
on the 10. 20. and 30. day of every month the Sun does rise. And if you would
know the certain minute of every the unexpressed days; divide the intermitted
minutes proportionably to every of the days that are not mentioned.

January. Hours. Minutes. The 10. day the Sun rises at 7 50 The 20. etc. at
7 37 The 30. etc. at 7 22 February. The 10. etc. at 7 54 The 20. etc. at 6 42
The 30. etc. at 6 24 March. The 10. day the Sun rises at 6 0 The 20. etc. at
5 42 The 30. etc. at 5 24 April. The 10. etc. at 5 0 The 20. etc. at 4 44 The
30. etc. at 4 48 May. The 10. etc. at 4 10 The 20. etc. at 3 58 The 30. etc. at
3 51 June. The 10. etc. at 3 47 The 20. etc. at 3 48 The 30. etc. at 3 53 July.
The 10. etc. at 4 6 The 20. etc. at 4 19 The 30. etc. at 4 33 August. The 10.
etc. at 4 55 The 20. etc. at 5 12 The 30. etc. at 5 30 September. The 10. day
the Sun rises at 5 54 The 20. etc. at 6 12 The 30. etc. at 6 30 October. The
10. etc. at 6 54 The 20. etc. at 7 11 The 30. etc. at 7 27 November. The 10.
etc. at 7 50 The 20. etc. at 8 2 The 30. etc. at 8 9 December. The 10. etc. at
8 13 The 20. etc. at 8 11 The 30. etc. at 8 5

CHAP. III. The unequal Planetary hours of the day and night, Calculated
according to the Ephimerides.
The hours of the day.
Sunday. Sol,1 Venus,2 Mercu.3 Lun.4 Satur.5 Jupiter.6 Mars,7 Sol,8 Venus,9
Mer.10 Lun.11 Saturn.12
Monday. Luna,1 Satur.2 Jupiter,3 Mars,4 Sol,5 Venus.6 Mercu.7 Lun.8 Saturn.9
Jupiter,10 Mars,11 Sol.12
Tuesday. Mars.1 Sol.2 Venus.3 Mercu.4 Luna.5 Satur.6 Iupit.7 Mars.8 Sol.9
Venus.10 Mercu.11 Luna.12
Wednesday. Mercu.1 Lun.2 Saturn.3 Jupiter.4 Mars.5 Sol.6 Venus.7 Mercu.8 Lun.9
Satur.10 Iupit.11 Mars.12
Thursday. Iupit.1 Mars.2 Sol.3 Venus.4 Mercu.5 Luna.6 Saturn.7 Iupit.8 Mars.9
Sol.10 Venus.11 Mercu.12
Friday. Venus.1 Mercu.2 Lun.3 Satur.4 Iupit.5 Mars.6 Sol.7 Venus.8 Mercu.9
Luna.10 Satur.11 Iupit.12
Saturday. Saturn.1 Iupit.2 Mars.3 Sol.4 Venus.5 Mercu.6 Luna.7 Satur.8
Jupiter.9 Mars.10 Sol.11 Venus.12

The hours of the night.
Sunday. Iupit.1 Mars.2 Sol.3 Venus.4 Mercu.5 Luna.6 Satur.7 Iupit.8 Mars.9
Sol.10 Venus.11 Mercu.12
Monday. Venus.1 Mercu.2 Lun.3 Satur.4 Iupit.5 Mars.6 Sol.7 Venus.8 Mercu.9
Luna.10 Satur.11 Iupit.12
Tuesday. Saturn.1 Iupit.2 Mars.3 Sol.4 Venus.5 Mercu.6 Luna.7 Satur.8
Jupiter.9 Mars.10 Sol.11 Venus.12
Wednesday. Sol,1 Venus,2 Mercu.3 Lun.4 Satur.5 Jupiter.6 Mars.7 Sol.8 Venus.9
Mercu.10 Luna.11 Satur.12
Thursday. Luna,1 Satur.2 Jupiter,3 Mars,4 Sol,5 Venus.6 Mercu.7 Lun.8 Saturn.9
Jupiter,10 Mars,11 Sol.12
Friday. Mars,1 Sol,2 Venus,3 Mer.4 Lun.5 Saturn.6 Iupit.7 Mars.8 Sol.9
Venus.10 Mercu.11 Luna.12
Saturday. Mercu.1 Lun.2 Saturn.3 Jupiter.4 Mars.5 Sol.6 Venus.7 Mercu.8 Lun.9
Satur.10. Iupit.11 Mars.12

CHAP. IIII. Which are friendly Planets one to another.
SOl is a friend to Jupiter and Venus.

Luna is friendly to Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn.

Mars is a friend to Venus.

Mercury is friendly to Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn.

Jupiter is friendly to Sol, Luna, Mercury, Venus, and Saturn.

The Planets that are enemies one to another.
Sol is enemy to Mars, Mercury, and Luna.

Luna is enemy to Mars and Mercurius.

Mars is enemy to Luna, Mercury, and Saturn: but most to Sol and Jupiter.

Mercury is enemy to Sol, Luna, and Mars.

Jupiter is enemy to Mars.

Venus is enemy to Saturn.

Excellent and approved Secrets; with the manner how, and when they are to be
taken, and made, under the Influences of the Stars, whereby the following
infirmities may in very short time be cured.
1. Against the headache.
IVpiter causes this evil: Take the herb called Psilio or Fleabane, in the
hour of Mars his enemy; stamp it, and mingle it with vinegar, and apply it
to the forehead.

2. Against Frenzies or sharp Fevers.
These diseases are caused by Mars: Take therefore in the hour of Luna,
Mercury, Saturn, Sol, or Jupiter his enemies, the milk of any beast, except
that of Goats; boil it, and with the skin that swimmes above it, bathe all
your head.

3. To cure the Falling sickness.
Mercury does cause this evil: Wherefore in the hour of Sol, Luna, or Mars
his enemies, you must get a Woolfe, and kill it in any of the aforesaid hours;
take the lights of it, and boil them in red wine, adding thereto some
Aromatic spices, and when they are sufficiently boiled, give them the Patient
to eat, and he shall be well.

4. Against weaknesses and dimnesse in the eyes.
Sol is the Author of these infirmities: Take in the hour of Mars, his enemy,
the herb called Euphragia, or Eyebright, beaten to powder, and mingle it with
the yelk of an egg, or wine, and lay it on the eyes.

5. To cure the waterings and fluxes in the eyes.
Sol is the cause of this evil: Take therefore in the hour of Mars, his
enemy, the slymie and gummie substance of the Snaile, with which you shall
mingle, Mirrh, Aloes, and Mastick, and then apply it to the temples of the head.

6. To take away Carnosities in the nose.
Saturn does cause this evil: To cure which, in the hour of Mars his enemy,
you must take the herb Dragon, and press out the juice of it, and mingle it
with the milk of wild Fennel, and any sort of Gall, that ye may most
conveniently come by: Then the powder of Nettleseede, Southernwood, Hellebore,
and Cypres: mingle all together, and let them be often snuffed up into the
nose, and it will infallibly cure it.

7. Against bleeding at the nose.
Saturn causes this infirmity: Take in the hour of Mars his enemy,
Balausti, or Pomegranate buds, and stamp them to powder, and mingle them with
the white of an egg, and apply it to the nosthrils.

8. Against pains and pushes in the ears.
Mercury causes these: Take in the hour of Sol, or Mars, his enemies, the
flower of the Ivy; boil it in oil, and power it in the ears, and it takes
away those pains.

9. Against deafness, and bussings in the ears.
Mercury is Author hereof: Therefore in the hour of Sol or Mars his enemies,
take a Hare, kill it, and wash the gall of it, with which ye shall mingle the
powder of black Hellebore; put it in the ears, and it cures those
infirmities.

10. To take away Blisters and hackes on the lips.
Mercury does likewise cause these evils: Take therefore in the hour of Sol
or Mars his enemies, Litarge of silver, Mirrh, Ginger, of each an equal
quantity; beat them into very fine powder, then with Virgin Wax, Honey, and
ordinary Oil, you shall make an Ointment; spread it on any fine cloth, and
apply it to the lips.

11. To ease the pain of the Toothache.
This evil too is caused by Mercury: Take in the hour of Sol, Luna, or Mars
his enemies, two grains of the seed of Acace, of Opium, Ioschtamum, of each
two drachmes, mix them with wine, and role them up like Pills: hold one of
these betwixt your teeth, and it will quickly assuage the pain.

12. To make hollow or pained teeth to fall of themselves.
Mercury is the causer of these: Take in the hour of Sol, Luna, or Mars his
enemies, the branches of wild Olives, boil them in veriuice till it become as
thick as honey; apply it to the tainted tooth, and it will cause it fall.

13. To strengthen the teeth.
This infirmity is caused by Mercury: Take in the hour of Sol, Luna, or Mars
his enemies, the skins of Pomegranates, Ireos, burned Salt, of each two
parts, of Gall two parts, of Mirrh one part; let them boil in wine, with which
wash your teeth often.

14. To facilitate the growth of teeth in young children without danger of
death.
This evil is caused of Mercury: Take in the hour of Sol, Luna, or Mars his
enemies, a Hare, kill it, take out the brains of it, boil them, and rub the
teeth often with them.

15. The Squinance.
Jupiter is Author of this evil: Take a Viper strangle it with a double
thread, and in the hour of Mars his enemy bathe it in Rattes blood, which
will cause the body of it to rise, then apply it to the neck, and it will cure
it.

16. To stop blood.
Saturn causes this evil: Take in the hour of Mars or Venus his enemies,
Pomegranate buds, Hypocistis, and Verbascum or Mullet, stamp them, and press
out the juice of them, and (as occasion shall require) administer to the
Patient a spoonefull at a time, well mingled with Sugar.

17. To help infirmities of the stomach.
These are caused by Sol: You shall take in the hour of Mars, Mercury or Luna
his enemies, the herb called Baulme, and Pimpernell, and eat fasting such
quantity of them, as you shall please; for even whilst you do it, it comforts
the stomach, opens obstructions, and strengthens the weakness of the heart.

18. To take away pains in the stomach.
Sol causes these pains; Wherefore in the hour of Mars, Mercury, or Luna,
his enemies, Take a Hen, kill it, and take out the little thin skin that
is in the little belly of it, make it into powder, and give it to be drunk
with wine. An excellent remedy.

19. To cure inflamed livers.
This evil is bred under Jupiter: Take in the hour of Mars his enemy, the
herb of the starry Thistle, press out the juice, and give half a glass full
to be drunk at a time, and it will work an admirable effect.

20. Against the Dropsy.
Saturn causes this evil: Take in the hour of Mars or Venus, his enemies, a
Pheasant, kill it, and give the diseased person two glass fulls of the blood
of it to drink, and it will undoubtedly cure him.

21. To cure the yellow Iaundize.
Mercury does cause this disease: Take in the hour of Sol, Luna, or Mars, his
enemies, the seed of Rosemary, make it into powder, and mingle it with the
juice of Pentasilion or Cinquefoyle, to what quantity shall please you, and it
will cure it.

22. To help obstructions, and hardness in the Milt or Spleen.
This disease does Luna cause: Wherefore in the hour of Mars or Mercury her
enemies, you shall take Bole Armoniack, dissolved in Vinegar, and drink the
weight of two drachmes of it at a time.

23. The stone in the kidneys.
Saturn causes this evil: Take in the hour of Mars, or Venus his enemies,
Pellitory of the wall, and give the juice thereof to be drunk with wine: it
purges the kidneys, and will break the stone.

24. To help the difficulty in making of water.
Luna causes this infirmity: Wherefore in the hour of Mars or Mercury her
enemies, take the leaves and seeds of Trifolie, and the seed of Southernwood;
boil them in water, to which decoction add a Spanish fly, without head,
feet, or wings, beaten into powder, a culously full whereof being drunk, does
miraspoone provoke Urine.

25. The stone in the bladder.
Luna does cause this disease: Take therefore in the hour of Mars or Mercury
her enemies, some Scorpions, put them in a new earthen pot, that has a narrow
mouth, and set it in an Oven that is not too hot the space of six hours; then
take them out, and stamp them small; and take one drachme at a time.

26. To ease the pain of the Chollick.
Luna causes this evil: In the hour of Mars or Mercury her enemies, take the
spriggs, and fruit of the Bay tree, beat them into powder, and give the Patient
two drachmes of it to be drunk in Hypocras, and in effect it will take away the
pain.

27. The Bloudie-Flux or Dysenterie.
This evil being caused by Luna, you must take in the hour of Mars or Mercury
her enemies, Pomegranate buds, and Hypocistis, made into powder, and give two
drachmes thereof to be drunk in red wine, or Pome-Citerne water. Probatum est.

28. Against difficulties in Child bearing.
Venus being the causer of these impediments, in the hour of Saturn her
enemy, you must take sweet Basil, beat it into powder, and give it to be
drunk with good wine, and she will be delivered instantly.

29. To provoke the terms and secondine, or afterbirth.
Luna causes this infirmity: Therefore in the hour of Mars, or Mercury her
enemies, take Agrimonie, stamp it with the seeds of of Montaine Smallage, and
administer two drachmes thereof to be drunk in Maydenhaire water, and their
desire shall be accomplished.

30. To stop the immoderate Flux of the terms, and to contract the mouth of
the Matrice.
This evil being caused by Venus, you must in the hour of Saturn, her enemy,
take the middle skin of the Chestnut, the skin of a Pomegranate, pound them
all very small, and in the wine of Quinces, administer one drachme to be drunk,
as often as occasions shall require.

31. To help chops in the feet.
Sol causes this: Take therefore in the hour of Mars, Mercury, or Luna his
enemies, Cypris Nutts beat into powder, then mingle them with the juice of
some sprigges, of the same tree, whilst they are green, which being applied
playster-wayes, takes away all chops in the feet.

32. To cure the Hemoroides.
Luna Causing this evil: In the hour of Mars or Mercury, her enemies, Swines
bread must be laid to the fundament, and it cures them.

33. To help all pains in the joints.
Saturn being the prime cause of these infirmities; In the hour of Mars or
Venus his enemies, the diseased must take a Hen of four years old, kill
it, and fill it full of Wormwood, and let it boil in three quarts of water,
till the half thereof be consumed away, and with the remainder let him anoint
the places affected.

34. Tertian Agues.
Mars does cause this Fever; wherefore in the hour of Luna, Mercury, Saturn,
Sol, and Jupiter his enemies, take the herb called Century, made in powder,
whereof you shall give the quantity of two drachmes to be drunk fasting, in
wine.

35. Quartane Agues.
This Fever is caused of Saturn: take therefore in the hour of Mars or Venus
his enemies, Mirrh, and Castoreum, of each a drachme, made into powder, and
give it to be drunk fasting with wine.

36. To take away all marks of the small Pox.
These Mars does cause, wherefore in the hour of Luna, Mercury, Saturn, or
Jupiter, his enemies, you must take Lytarge, the roots of dry reeds, the
meal of Chick Peason, the meal of Rice, and old Garlic, stamp all together,
and mingle them with the oil of sweet Almonds, Sheep sewet melted; wherewith
anoint your face, and let it remain so all night, and in the morning wash it
off with warm water.

37. To cure the Kings evil.
Luna does cause this evil: Take in the hour of Mars or Mercury, Caper
roots, stamp them, and apply them plaister-wayes to the place affected.

38. To heal all wounds.
Mars being the causer of these evils; you must take in the hour of Luna,
Mercury, Saturn, or Jupiter, the herb Savine beat into powder, which being
mingled with honey, and applied to the wounds, will heal them.

39. To cure the Scab and Leprosy.
These evils Saturn does cause; wherefore in the hour of Mars or Venus his
enemies, take Ivy, boil it, make a Bath of it, and bathe your whole body in
it, and it takes away the infirmity.

40. To take away all Corns on the feet.
Saturn causing these evils; Take in the hour of Mars or Venus his enemies,
the bark of the Willow tree, burn it, and mingle the ashes thereof with very
strong Vinegar, which plaster you shall lay on your Corns, and it will eat
them out by the root.

41. For Cankers.
Mars causes this evil, wherefore in the hour of Luna, Saturn, or Jupiter:
take the branches of white Sage, and the roots of Dragon, press out their
juice, and mingle them with honey, and apply them to the evil.

42. Against Fistulaes.
Mars being the causer hereof; take in any of the hours aforesaid of his
enemies, the Flower de lis root, make it into powder, mingle it with the
powder of burned Oyster shells, and Swines seame, and apply it to the Fistula.

43. A preservative against the Gowt in the feet.
Saturn is causer of this evil: Take therefore in the hour of Mars or Venus
the herb called Fetherfewle, stamp it, and mingle it with the yolke of an
egg, and fried in the fashion of a Tansie, which being eaten fasting, does
most surely preserve from the Gowt in the feet.

To know whether one that is sick shall live or die.
Diverse are the judgments that some men give, whether a sick person shall
live or die; But I will here set down a present infallible sign, whereby
every one may be assured, and give certain judgment of it. Take a Nettle, and
lay it in the Urine of the diseased person, immediately after he shall have made
water, so that the water be pure from any other minglings with it; Then let
the Nettle remain therein the space of 24. hours; and thereafter if the
Nettle be found dry and withered, it is a sign of death; but if it continue
green, it is a sign of life.

An admirable Secret to preserve us always in health, often used by Charles
the fifth.
Take in the hour of Sol, who is Author of life, four branches of Rue, nine
Juniper seeds, a Walnut, a dry Fig, and a little salt, pound all together in
a Mortar, and every other morning eat a little of it fasting.

FINIS.

