A REPLY TO AN ANSWER MADE BY A POPISH ADVERSARY, TO the two Chapters in the
first part of that Book, which is entitled a Friendly Advertisement to the
pretended Catholics in Ireland.

WHEREIN, Those two points; concerning his Majejesties SUPREMACY, and the
RELIGION, established by the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom, be further
justified and defended against the vain cavils and exceptions of that
Adversary:

By CHRISTOPHER SIBTHORP, Knight, one of His Majesty's Justices of His Court of
Chief Place within the same Realm.

PROVER. 24.21. Fear the Lord, and the King: and meddle not with the^ that are
seditious.

DVBLIN, Printed by the Society of STATIONER ^^ Anno Domini. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY VERY GOOD LORD, HENRY, LORD VISCOUNT FAVLKLAND,
LORD DEPVTIE of Ireland.
AT the divulging of my former Book, (Right Honorable), there were many great
and vaunting speeches uttered by the pretended Catholics, as if forthwith, or
at least, very speedily, it should have been fully and sufficiently answered.
And indeed within a while after, came forth an answer, not to the whole
Book, but only to a part thereof; namely, to the first two Chapters contained
in the first part of it, made by one that calls himself John at Style: who
knowing (as it seems), the weakness of his own answer, therein promised,
a better and further answer, that should then shortly come forth to the whole
Book: which should be so substantially done, as that it should be suitable and
correspondent to the three Conditions required by me. This manner of answer, to
the whole book, promised so long since, is the thing that I have all this
while expected; and in expectation whereof, I have hitherto deferred to publish
a Reply to any other answer. But having now thus long expected it in vain,
and not knowing when it will appear, or whether ever, or never: I think it not
amiss, in the interim, to reply to that answer, which marches and masketh
under the name of John at Style, as having no other, nor better, as yet, to
reply unto. Where, first of all, it were fit to learn, what this man's right
and proper name is. But because he is so loath to declare it, I care not much
to know it; for it is not so much the man, as the matter he delivers, that I
regard. Howbeit, for his own credit, and the credit of his cause, (if any
credit had belonged unto it), it had been much better for him to have put no
name at all unto that his work, then a wrong, false, and counterfeit name, as
he has done. For, if in the very first entrance, he thus misdemeaneth
himself, and fears not to utter so great an untruth: What good dealing, or
sincere truth, may we expect from him, in the residue of his discourse? Wherein
also, whilst he strived to make more have then good speed, he has showed
himself to be, like canis festinans, caecos edens catulos. For, howsoever he
thrusts himself forward, and will needs take upon him, to be Johannes ad
oppositum: yet he speaks very little, or nothing ad propositum. Insomuch,
that sundry, by reason of the futilitie and frivolousnes of that his answer,
have thought it not worthy or meet to be replied unto. Nevertheless, because
all be not of that understanding and judgment, as to be able to discern the
frivolousnes and weakness of it: and that the pretended Catholics, do, for
their parts, so highly esteem, approve, and applaude it, (for Regnat inter
caecos Luscus): and for that I am also, therein, so particularly touched and
taxed: but chiefly and especially, for that Gods Religion, and his Majesty's
Supremacy, (which two things ought ever to be most dear unto us all,) be
there purposely and professedly encountered and oppugned: I could do no less,
in good duty, and for all these respects, but make and publish this my Reply
unto it: for the further confirmation of the Protestants in those two maine and
most weighty points: and for the further confutation also, and conviction of
the Papists, and making them yet more and more inexcusable, if after so clear
and abundant evidence of truth, (and consequently against all good Conscience,)
they will still be wilful, stubborn, and unreformed herein: which yet I
trust they will not be. For, they know, that durum est contra stimulos
calcitrare: Act. 9.5. Act 5.29, Proverb. 21.30.
and that there is no hope, that ever they shall or can prevail, that be
(...), that is, Fighters and Contenders against God, and his Religion, or any
of his Sacred and Divine Ordinances. Yea, in such a case, what is fitter, then
duro nodo, durus cuneus? And so says Tertullian, Tertul. lib. cont. Gnostic.
cap 21. Aug. Epist. 48. and Epist. 204.
that duritia vincenda est, non suadenda; and this rule S. Augustine also
gives and teaches, that, men in error, are first to be taught, admonished and
instructed; but if after all this, they will notwithstanding (without any
ground of sufficient reason), be and continue perverse and obstinate, then must
terror, punishment, and coactive Laws, be put in execution, for the reclayming
of them. For, Qui Phreneticum ligat and Lethargicu^ excitat, ambobus molestus,
ambos amat, says the same S. Augustine. But of this point concerning the
authority of the Regal and Civil sword, and power coactive, to be extended
against refractary and contemptuous offenders, (as well in matters
Ecclesiastical, and touching Religion, as in matters temporal, and concerning
the Commonwealth), more is spoken in my former Book, and in this also
afterward, upon occasion given by mine Adversary: and therefore I shall not
need, here to speak any further of it, especially to your Lordshippe, whose
wisdom can, and does easily perceive, not only how lawful, but how
expedient, requisite, and necessary also it is, to be extended and used in his
due time and place. These things, (Right Honorable), I am humbly bold to
Dedicate unto your Lordshippe: Both, because unto you it is, that under his
most Excellent Majesty, the chief care of matters concerning the good of this
Kingdom, does appertain: And because also, such is known to be your noble
and pious disposition, as that a work of this sort, you are ever most ready
and willing to accept and patronize. God (if it be his will) convert the
Papists of this Kingdom from their errors, to his truth: and preserve your
Lordshippe to his glory, the good of his Church, the benefit of this
Commonweal, and to the increase of your own honor in this life, and to your
everlasting happiness in the life to come, through JESUS CHRIST. Amen.

Your Lordshippes humble at Commandment, Christopher Sibthorp.

TO THE Reader.
I Doubt not, (courteous Reader), but you well remember, that, in the
conclusion of my former Book, I desired of him that would make Answer
thereunto, these three things: First, that he would answer it, not by parts or
peece-meales, but wholly and entirely, from the beginning of it, to the end.
Secondly, that he would do it, not superficially and sophistically, but
substantially, soundly, and satisfactorily, if he could. Thirdly, I desired him
to do it, as in love and Charity, so also with an affection, only to follow
Gods truth; and withal to set his name unto it, as I had done to that Book of
mine. But none of these requests has this Answerer been pleased to perform
toward me. For, touching the first: he is so far from answering the whole
Book, from the beginning of it to the end, that he has endeavored to answer
only two Chapters thereof, namely the two Chapters, contained in the first
part of it, and no more: And whereas secondly I desired, a sound, sufficient,
and satisfactory Answer to be made; he has answered even to those two
Chapters, (which himself selected to make answer unto,) very slightly,
slenderly and superficially, and in no sort substantially, soundly and
satisfactory as shall afterward appear. And touching my third request, which
consists of diverse branches, let any man judge, that has seen and read his
Answer, whether it be made, (as I desired) in a good, loving and Charitable
manner, which would best have beseemed him: or, in a scoffing and deriding
fashion, in sundry places thereof, which does no way become him: as also
whether he has done it, with this affection, only to follow Gods truth, or
with an affection rather, to follow and advance man's errors and Constitutions,
against a manifest divine truth: and lastly, what reason he had, not only, not
to set his own right and true name unto it, but in steed thereof, to set a
false, fictitious and counterfeit name, calling himself, John at Style. What?
Is he ashamed of his own right name? Or do any use to get credit by putting
a wrong name to their work? But this is indeed, Dignum patella operculum: a
false and counterfeite name, being fittest, and most suitable to a false and
counterfeite cause, which is the thing he maintayneth.

Howbeit, as one desirous to excuse himself herein, he says, that my
requiring of the Answerer to put his name unto the Answer, is in effect
as much, as to debar any man from answering unto it: because of the Statute of
2. Elizabeth, which does, (says he), bind men's tongues and pens within this
Kingdom, with the cord of a Praemunire, from oppugning the Supremacy, either
by word or writing. Whereunto I reply, that he that in answering is required to
put his name to his answer, is so far from being debarred from answering,
that clean contrariewise, he is thereby permitted to answer, (if he
please), so as he put his name thereunto. Neither does that Statute of 2. Eliz.
in this Kingdom, inflict the penalty of a Praemunire for the first offense,
See the Statute of 2. Eliz. c. 1. in Ireland.
as he surmiseth, but only loss of goods and Chattels. It is indeed, after
once conviction, for the second offense, a Praemunire: and for the third, High
Treason. If then the penalty of a Praemunire, by that Statute, be the thing he
feared, you see there was no cause for him to fear it, he being never before
convicted or attaynted of that offense. And is it not strange, that he being a
Lawyer, (as he says he is,) and one of those, (as he likewise affirms,) that
were debarred from pleading, for not taking the Oath of Supremacy, should
nevertheless be so ignorant in his own profession, concerning that Statute,
(although himself also cite it,) as not to know what the penalty is, for the
first offense therein? May not then his own words be here rightly returned to
his own bosom, that seeing, in his own faculty he shows no greater skill;
Can it be imagined, that going out of his own element, into the great City of
Divinity, he will do any more, then the fish on the shore, to gasp a
little for air? But admit, that for the first offense upon that Statute, the
penalty had been a Praemunire, as he conceived: Will he therefore be so
faint-hearted, in that his supposed Catholic cause? How does this agree with
that, which he says afterward, that an Angel or a Man, is bound by the
instinct of Nature, to love God better then themselves? Yea, he observes that
in the Natural body of Man, the hand will be content to loose it self, for
the preservation of the head, and of the rest of the members: And that in the
Politic Body of the Commonweal, any good Subject will embrace death for the
conservation of his King, and the Commonweal: and thereupon he concludes,
that so also should any good Christian member of the Mystical body of Christ,
willingly undergo all disasters in the world, in attestation of his love to
Christ, and of his willingness to preserve the honor and common good of his
Church. And this motive, (says he, in that his Epistle Dedicatorie,) made him,
(though a Lawyer,) to interpose himself, for the defense of the Mystical Body
of Christ, and to answer, as he has done, in the behalf thereof. Now then
does it become him, who seems here to be so magnanimous and courageous in his
cause, to show himself nevertheless so extremely timorous, as for fear of a
Praemunire, not to dare to set his right and true name unto that his Answer?

Yea, the premises being well considered, what reason has he to tax me, (as
sometimes he does,) for that being a Lawyer by profession, I nevertheless
meddle in these matters of Divinity, and concerning Religion? For, I gave
before, as I think, a sufficient Apology for these my doings, in the Preface
of my former Book which he answers not, nor is able to answer. And here I
now may and do further add, that even this Man, (mine Adversary) has by his
own example justified me; inasmuch as he being likewise a Lawyer, (as himself
affirms), does nevertheless, (as you see,) by his answering those two
Chapters in my Book, meddle in these matters of Divinity, and concerning
Religion, as well as I. And not only his personal example, but the doctrine
also, and reason he delivers, (namely, that every good member of the
Mystical body of Christ, ought to interpose himself, for the defense of the
honor of Christ, and of his Church,) serves very strongly to justify my
doings herein, not only as lawful, but as requisite and necessary, and such
as in duty ought not to be omitted. But moreover, why does he Dedicate that
his Answer, being a work of Divinity, to his dearest Countrie-men, The
Lawyers of Ireland, if Lawyers had nothing to do in these matters of
Divinity, or if the knowledge of things of that kind, did not belong unto
them? Yea, who knows not, that Lawyers, and men of all professions and
estates, have souls to save; and that at the hour of their death, it is not
their skill or knowledge in Law, Physic, or any other their worldly callings
and professions, (which serve only but for this life,) that can do them that
good, or yield them that comfort touching the next world and eternal
happiness, that the knowledge of Divinity, and of Gods true Religion, and the
care and observance thereof, in their life time, will be able to afford.

But being debarred from pleading, for not taking the oath of Supremacy, he
says, he was desirous to read, what solid arguments I had made to invest the
King with the supremacy: and finding them, (as Belshazzar, being weighed was
found, in the Prophecy of Daniel,) minus habens, that is, too light, Dan. 5.27.
he says he was encouraged to answer them. But first, how comes he now to
answer any part of my Book, who had said before in the same his Epistle
Dedicatory, that he presented it to some of the most learned of his catholic
Clergy, and that none of them after a mature deliberation, held it worthy of
an answer? what? will he think it worthy of an answer, which those of the
most learned of his Catholic clergy thought it not worthy of? Secondly, if
he had weighed my arguments, not with false Romish weights, but with true and
divine weights, that is, in such a balance, as God weighed Belshazzar, he
would have found them weighty enough, though Belshazzar was found light.
Thirdly, little reason has he to call and account those arguments light,
somewhereof be such, as he dares not touch nor meddle with the^, but does, as
children use to do, who, what they cannot read, they skippe over: So, what he
can no way answer, he pretermitteth: and those which he dare be bold to touch,
do nevertheless show themselves to be of that weight and strength, as that he
is not able to stir, or move them, much less to remove them, or to lift them
up from that ground, whereon they rest. Himself does what he can, to answer
them; yet distrusting his own Answer, as minus habens, (to use his own
words against him,) that is, as being too light, weak, and insufficient, he
promises a more satisfying Answer that should afterward come forth from those
that have more Law and Divinity, then either he, or I. Yea, he says again,
That my Book shall be shortly answered, in my own strain of Divinity, with
the three conditions required by me. So that, both by this his own answer, as
also by that further future promised answer, it is very c^^dent, that
howsoe^^^ in words, he and his partakers would ^ ^^me to slight any ^^^ke, and
the matter therein contained, ye^ revera, and indeed, they think the force
and strength of it to be such, against both Pope, and Popery, as that they can
have ^o^^, nor quiet in their minds, until they have made, (which they
w^^never be able to do,) a good, sufficient, and satisfactorie Answer
thereunto. As for that he says, that if in steed thereof, I had made a solid
Compendium of the Law, I had gained an applause: I would have him know, that
neither in this kind of learning, nor in any other, do I seek o^ hunt after
ostentation, vainglory, popular applause, or praise of men, (which be the
things, that Papists in their writings do too much affect,) but both in that
my former work, and in this also, the things that I sought and still do seek
after, is Gods glory, and the advancement, and preferment of his truth and
religion, and the due authority, and true honor belonging to our most
gracious, and most godly and Christian Sovereign, which was then K. James, and
is now K. Charles his most worthy successor, whom God ever bless, protect, and
preserve: and therewithal the general and public benefit both of Church and
Commonweal. I grant that my profession and place, would have allowed me, to
have written of points of Law, and concerning Civil Justice, and external
Peace: But I have rendered the reason in the Epistle Dedicatorie of my former
Book, why I meddled not with those things, Namely, because the pretended
Catholics of this Kingdom, in those points, showed no refractarinesse or
opposition, but good conformity and obedience: And, that, their defect was
only in the two other points, (viz.) Concerning the Kings Supremacy, and the
Religion: whereof therefore, there then was, and still is, greatest need, and
most urgent occasion to treat. Wherefore, he that in such a Case, would
rather have had a Compendium of the Law, then these two most necessary, and
most important matters to be dealt in for the general good of the kingdom,
seems in my understanding, to have made a great dispendium of his wit and
judgment.

Nevertheless he proceeds, and says, that because he cannot command the
Press, he will employ his endeavors, to answer, in a Manuscript, my first
Book; (he means the first part of my Book, containing those two Chapters
aforesaid:) But what necessity was there for him thus to publish his Answer
in a Manuscript, which he might have put in Print, if he had so pleased? For,
although he could not command the Protestants Press (neither was it fit, he
should), yet the Press, which some say, the Papists have of their own, within
this kingdom, he might have either commanded or entreated: or if they have no
Press within this kingdom, he might have sent or carried his Answer unto
Doway, or to Rhemes, or to some other place beyond the Seas, where it might
have been printed, if they had held it worthy the Printing. Seeing then that
he might have printed it; Why did he rather choose to divulge it in a
Manuscript? Did he think, that by that course used, he might the more freely
speak and write what he listed, and that no man would answer or reply unto
it, though he be never so much touched in it, or be the cause, therein handled,
of never so great importance? But what reason is there for any man, to claim,
expect, or to be allowed such a privilege? Yea, inasmuch as men's hearts may be
poisoned, and seduced, as well by Manuscripts, and written Books and Pamphlets,
as by those that be Printed, especially after they be once scattered and
dispersed abroad, (as this his Answer is), into diverse men's hands, and are
withal supposed by the pretended Catholics, (for whose sake all that labor
is bestowed), to contain nothing but truth: I see not but I may be as bold to
reply to his Manuscript, in Print, (the cause also so requiring), as he made
bold to answer a part of my Printed Book, in a Manuscript. And therefore have
I here replied unto it, partly in respect of my self, whom it concerns to
justify, and make good the matter contained in those two Chapters of my former
Book, which he oppugneth: and partly in respect of himself, who seems to
be ^^o^ suffertus, and over highly conceited of himself, Prover. 26.5.
whom therefore Solomon in his Proverbs advises to answer: and partly and
chiefly in respect of the pretended Catholics of this Nation, whom by that
means he seeks to seduce and abuse, in the p^ints both of his Majesty's
Supremacy, and the Religion: Both which points, (they being so high and
eminent), it behooveth all good Christians, and all good Subjects, evermore
carefully and dutifully to defend and mantaine. As for that godly, learned,
Reverend, and worthy Bishop of Mead, whom my Adversary mentions in his
Epistle Dedicatorie: I shall need to say nothing of him, because himself will
ever be best able to speak for himself, whenever any shall show themselves
in opposition against him.

But to proceed with mine Adversary, if he be, (as he says he is) debarred
from pleading for not taking the Oath of Supremacy; Whom can he blame therein,
but himself, for his so unjust refusing to take so just an Oath? Against which
throughout all his answer, himself neither shows, nor is able to show any
good exception: which, no doubt, he would there have showed, where the
Supremacy was purposely debated, if he had been able to have showed it. But
to make him yet the more in excusable, (if he will still be obstinate, which I
would have, neither him, nor any others to be), I have here further, and at
large declared, the right of the Kings Supremacy, over all manner of Persons,
and in all kinds of causes, Ecclesiastical as well as Civil, for his, and all
other men's most ample and most full satisfaction in that point. And yet my
Adversary says, That he will Arm himself with little Divinity, and less
Philosophy, to enter the lists against me: which though it be spoken, (after
the Papisticall manner), proudly, scornefully, and like another Goliath; yet
therein he speaks truer then he was aware of. For not to speak of his
Philosophy, (which he shows indeed to be very little), this my Reply to his
Answer, will discover him to be as very a Punie in Divinity, (as touching any
good skill, or found judgment, in it), as he is in Law. In so much that upon
reading of this Book, his answer will appear to be as good as no Answer,
yea that it had been better for his cause, if he had been silent, and spoken
nothing in it: Such is the advantage that truth ever gets against falsehood,
when falsehood dare be so bold, to stand in opposition against it. As for the
multitude of his idle words, his many needelesse Sillogismes, his extravagant
sentences, and impertinent discourses, I pass them over, for the most part,
not vouchsafing an Answer to them: they being inserted, but to fill up paper,
to mispend time, and vainly to delight and please himself, and his followers.
But where he has alleged any thing that (...) material, and pertinent to the
cause, and of weight, or moment, to that have I answered and replied, as was
fit I should. In which my reply, I have considered him, not as he is John at
Style, (for in that respect, John at Down, had been fittest to reply unto
him) but as one that is an Adversary to that Cause I propounded in my former
Book, whatsoever his name, or profesion be. And therefore do I not so much
answer the Man, as the matter by him objected and alleged.

Now then, although these be the Works of a Layman, yet if you find truth in
them, esteem them never the worse, because of that: For, non quis dicat, sed
quid dicatur, attend: says Isocrates to Demonicus. And, Gerson de exam. doctr
Panor. tit. de Elect. Ca^^gnificasti.
Saepe etiam est Holitor valde opportuna locutus. And you know also, who taught
to this effect, that plus credendum est vel simplici Laico, Scripturam^^
proferenti, quam, vel Papae, vel toti simul Concilio. For my part, I desire no
further to be believed, then that shall be found true that I write: neither
ought any others in their writings, (he they professed Divines, or whosoever
else,) any further to be believed, then so. And yet if that would any thing the
more prevayle with the pretended Catholics, I can assure them, that the
Positions and Doctrine in both these Books of mine delivered, be the
Positions, and Doctrine, not only of one, but of many (and those learned)
professed Divines, as is to be seen at large in their sundry works and
writings, extant against the Papists: which the Papists were never yet able,
nor ever will be able substantially and soundly to refell, and confute. And
therefore, I have no cause to be ashamed of my Teachers, but do think it
rather honor and reputation, freely, ingeniously, and thankefully, to
acknowledge, as I do, where, and of whom, I have learned these things. But,
having thus answered his Epistle Dedicatorie, I now proceed to that which
follows.

Of the first Chapter of the former Book, Concerning the Sapremacie.
MY Adversary, before he comes to answer to that Chapter in the first part
of my former Book, concerning the Supremacy, busieth himself much to declare
two Positions: The first is, that the Regal and Priestly powers or Offices,
be distinct: and for proof of this, he cites Gelasius, and some other
testimonies. But why does he thus trouble himself in vain? For this the
Protestants do confess, namely, that the Prince-hood, and Priesthood; the
Regal and Episcopal Powers or Offices, be things distinct: So that neither
the King may administer, or execute that which is proper or peculiar to the
Office of Bishops, Pastors, or Ministers Ecclesiastical; nor on the other
side, may any Bishop, Pastor, or Minister, by virtue of that his
Ecclesiastical office or calling, intrude, or take upon him, the use or
exercise of the Civil, or Temporal sword which rightly and properly belongs
to Kings and Princes, Romans 13.4.
and to such as have that authority derived from them. And therefore does S.
Chrysostom, (distinguishing their Offices) say: Ille cogit, hic exhortatur:
Chrysostom. hom. 4. de verb Esai. V^ai Dom.
Ille habet arma sensibilia, hic arma spiritualia: The King compels, the
Priest exhorts: The King has sensible weapons, the Priest has spiritual
weapons. According whereunto, S. Paul also says of himself, and of all
Ecclesiastical Ministers, 2. Cor. 10.4.
That the weapons of their warfare, are not carnal, but mighty through God.
It is true (which my adversary says), that the subject, on which the
spiritual authority works, is the (...) of man: and the subject on which the
Regal or Temporal authority works, is the body of man: But this
difference, makes nothing for him, as touching the point in Question: For all
men know it, and himself will confess it, (if he be not extremely perverse),
that it is not the Souls of men, but their Bodies, that the King by his Regal
authority works upon, and which he commands, and externally compels to
duty, and good obedience (if otherwise they will not become obedient: (Neither
does he punish any offenders in Ecclesiastical causes, Ecclesiastically, and
by Church Censures, (as Bishops, and Ecclesiastical Ministers, do), but
Civilly, and in a Temporal manner, as, namely, by fining, imprisonment,
banishment, and such like corporal and pecuniarie punishments, as properly
belong to the Regal and Temporal authority, to inflict. But, mine adversary
says further, that the end whereat the Regal authority aymeth, is
correspondencie of humane society: witness, (says he). S. Paul: ut quietam
and tranquillam vitam agamus: But why does he leave out the other words, that
follow, namely, In omni pietate, etc? Take all the words of S. Paul together,
and they be these: I exhort, (says he) that, first of all, supplications,
prayers, intercessions, 1. Tim. 2.1.2.
and giving of thanks, be made for all men; for Kings, and all that are in
authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, (...), in all
godliness and honesty. By which words so put together, it appears, That S.
Paul would have Christians to pray thus specially for Kings, and Princes, not
only to this end, which my Adversary supposes, (viz.) for the mantainance and
preservation of external peace, and correspondencie of humane society; but to
this end also, (and that chiefly), that Piety, Godliness, and Religion, may,
by their means, be continued, countenanced, and protected amongst them. And
this had the Christian Emperors learned, in ancient time For, Justinian, that
Christian Emperor, in his days, Novel. Constable. 6.
spoke thus: The true Religion of God, and honest conversation of the Priests,
is our chiefest care. Legum Theod. No^^el. tit. 3. de In^ae^^ and Samaritaine.
And in this sort likewise spoke Valentinian, and Theodosius, Emperors, saying:
The search of true Religion, we find to be the chiefest care of the Imperial
Majesty. And therefore also did S. Augustine say long agone, That it is
enjoined Kings from God, Aug. contr. Crescun lib. 3 cap ^1
that in their kingdoms, they should command good things, and forbid evil
things, not only such things as belong to humane society, but such things
also as belong to Gods Religion. This clear and most evident testimony of S.
Augustine, to declare the authority of Kings, as well in matters Divine, and
concerning Religion, as in matters Civil, and Temporal, I alleged in the
first Chapter of my former Book, page 10. whereunto nevertheless, as to many
other things in my book contained, My Adversary is pleased to answer nothing.

The second Position he busieth himself in, is that the Regal Power or
authority, is subordinate to the S^cerdotall or Spiritual. It is true, that
Kings and Princes, notwithstanding their Regal power, be subordinate and
subject to God, and his authority. But what of this? Indeed, if
Ecclesiastical Ministers spoke to Kings and Princes, in their own names, and
by their own authority, and uttered their own will and pleasure, there might
be some reason in that which he would conclude: but seeing they are to speak
unto them, not their own will, but the will and word of the Almighty, and in
his Name, and as Ambassadors, Ministers, Messengers, and servants unto him, no
such consequent can be inferred. 2. Cor 5 20. 1 Cor. 4 1.2.
For if a King send an Esquier, or any other inferior servant of his, on a
message, to a Duke, Earl, or other Nobleman of the Realm: This servant
speaking in the King his Masters name, and delivering his message, is therein
to be obeyed: Will any thereupon conclude, Ergo, That Esquier or servant, is
greater, or superior, as in respect of himself, or of his own person, then
either the Duke or the Earl, or the Nobleman? No man, I think, will be so
absurd. And yet my Adversary goes on, and amplifieth the Sacerdotall, and
spiritual power, saying: That how much the Soul in perfection exceedes the
Body: The eternal bliss, the temporal felicity: The Divine Laws, the
humane laws: By so much does the Spiritual authority exceed the Temporal.
But all this while, he should remember and observe, wherein, and in what
respects, it is, that this excellency of the one, above the other, does
consist. For as it is true, that in respect of converting souls, and fitting
them for Gods kingdom, by preaching of Gods Word, Administering of the
Sacraments, and exercise of the Ecclesiastical Discipline; the Spiritual
function, and authority is to be preferred, before the Regal or temporal: So
no less true is it, that in respect of the temporal Power of the Sword,
externally to command, compel, and to punish offenders, in causes both
Ecclesiastical, and Civil, the Regal and Temporal, Office, and Authority,
is to be preferred before the Episcopal, or Sacerdotall. When therefore he
supposes, that the King or Prince, in respect of the Priest, is but as the
body is, in respect of the Soul; and that he has no more power and
authority, over Priests and Bishops, then the body has over the Soul: How
does he prove this fond conceit? For it is not the credit or testimony of
his S. Thomas, (as he calls him,) who lived more then 1200. years after
CHSIST, and was overwhelmed with the corruption of his time, and wedded to the
Sea of Rome, that can be any sufficient proof of that idle fantazie: Yea, it
is apparent that to some purposes, the Regal Power, and Office, has in it,
the nature, and resemblance of the soul, as well as the Sacerdotall, or
Episcopal has, to some other purposes. For as the soul commands the body,
so has the King, power to command the Priest, and may by as good right, punish
all manner of offenders, Civilly, and by temporal punishments, as Bishops and
Clergy men may punish any Ecclesiastically, and by the Church censures. To
make this the better to appear, beside that which is spoken in my former
Book, observe, first, that Moses, who was as a King or a Prince in Israel,
commanded, not only the Levites, Deuteronomy. 33.5. Deuteronomy. 31.2^.26.
which bare the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord, and that in a matter
Ecclesiastical, and concerning their very Office: but he commanded also, even
Aaron, the high Priest, in a matter likewise Ecclesiastical, and concerning
his very Office, saying thus unto him: Take the Censer, Numb. 16.46.4^
and put fire therein off the Altar, and put therein Incense: and go quickly
unto the Congregation, and make an Atonement for them: For there is wrath gone
out from the Lord, the plague is begun. Then Aaron took, as Moses commanded
him, etc. He, Exodus 32.21 2^
moreover, called Aaron, the high Priest, to an account, for his bad doings,
and removed him for the same: Whereupon Aaron answered humbly, and submissively
unto him as to his Sovereign Lord, saying: Let not the wrath of my Lord wax
fierce, etc. Numb. 12.11.
In like sort did Aaron speak unto Moses in another place, saying: My Lord, I
beseech thee, etc. 1. Sam. 22.12.15
So did also Abimelech the high Priest, answer to his king submissively and
dutifully, saying thus unto him: Here am I, my Lord, etc. Let not the King
impute any thing to his servant, nor to all the house of my Father, for thy
servant knew nothing of all this, less or more. The Prophets likewise, as well
as the Priests, and high Priests, did acknowledge this humble submission and
subjection unto their kings: as is evident by the example of the Prophet
Nathan; who when he came into the presence of the King, 1. King. 1 23. etc.
he made obeisance to the king, upon his face to the ground, etc.

Joshua, the successor of Moses did likewise, as a King or Prince, command
even the Priests and Levites, as well as the rest of the people: as appears by
the acclamation and answer they made unto him, Josh. 1.17.18.
saying thus: As we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee, etc.
Whosoever shall rebel against thy commandment, and will not obey thy words,
in all that thou command him, let him be put to death. Josh 6.6. Josh 5 3.4.
Josh. 5.10. Josh. 7.24.25. Josh 8 30. Josh. 8.34.35.
And it is further manifest that he also dealt in matters Ecclesiastical
as well as Temporal: for, he would have the children of Israel to be
Circumcised, and the Passover to be kept, and the Man that had offended in the
excommunicate thing, to be punished. He also builded an Altar for their
sacrifices and offerings: He read the whole Law unto them, the blessings and
cursings: There was not a word of all that Moses had commanded, which Joshua
read not before all the Congregation of Israel, as well before the Women, and
the Children, as the stranger that was conversant among them. He renewed the
Covenant between God and the people, and caused them to put away the strange
Gods that were amongst them: Josh. 24.23.24.25.31.
Insomuch that by his diligent care, and good government, Israel served the
Lord, all the days of Joshua.

Likewise of that Godly King Josiah, it is recorded, that he commanded the high
Priest, as well as the other Priests, and dealt in matters also Ecclesiastical,
and concerning Gods service and Religion For, thus it is written of him: That
he commanded Hilkiah the high Priest, 2 King. 23.4.
and the priests of the second Order, and the keepers of the Door, to bring
out of the Temple of the Lord all the vessels that were made for Baal, and for
the Grove, and for all the Host of heaven; and he burnt them without
Jerusalem, in the fields of Kedron, 2 King. 23.5.
and carried the powder of them into Bethel. And he put down the Chemarims,
whom the kings of Judah had founded to burn incense in the high places, and in
the Cities of Judah, and about Jerusalem: and also them that burnt incense unto
Baal, to the Sun, and to the Moon, and to the Planets, and to all the Host
of heaven, etc. He commanded also the Passover to be kept, etc. He purged
Judah and Jerusalem, verse. 21.
from the high places, the Groves, and the carved and molten Images: Yea, 2
Chro. 34. verse. 3.4.7.33.
he took away all the abominations out of all the countries that pertayned to
the Children of Israel, ^ compelled all that were found in Israel, to serve
the Lord their God. Had not also King Solomon authority over the Priests and
Levites, and did not he likewise deal in matters Ecclesiastical, and
concerning Religion, when he set the courses of the Priests to their offices,
according to the order of David his Father, 2. Chro. 8.14.15
and the Levites in their watches, to praise and minister before the Priests
every day, and the Porters by their courses at every Gate: For so was the
commandment of David, the man of God? And the Text says, That they declined
not from the commandment of the King, concerning the Priests, and the Levites,
etc. He removed also Abiathar, from being priest unto the Lord, and set Sadoc
in his room. 1. King. 2.27.35 1 King 8.22.23 24.25.26.27.
He also builded an house and Temple unto God: and did dedicate the Temple in
his own person.

Did not also King Asa meddle with men, and matters Ecclesiastical, 2 Chro.
14.3.4.5
when he took away the Altars of the strange Gods, and the high places, and
brake down the Images, and cut down the groves, and commanded Judah to seek
the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do according to the Law and
commandment, etc. Therefore the kingdom was quiet before him. And he took an
oath of all Judah, that, Whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel,
should be slain, whether he were small, or great, Man or Woman: And they swear
unto the Lord, with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with Trumpets, and
with Cornets: And all Judah rejoiced at the Oath: 2 Chronicles 15.12 13 14.15.16. etc.
for they had sworn unto the Lord with all their heart, and sought him with an
whole desire, and he was found of them: He also deposed Maachah his Mother,
from her regencie, because she had made an Idol in a Grove: and he broke
down her Idol, and stamped it, and burnt it, at the brook Kidron.

King Iehosaphat did the like, when he sought the Lord God of his Fathers, 2.
Chron. 17.3 4 5.6.7.8.9.
and walked in his commandments, and not after the doings of Israel.
Therefore the Lord stablished the kingdom in his hand. And all Judah brought to
Iehosaphat presents: and he had riches and honor in abundance. And he lift up
his heart unto the ways of the Lord. Moreover, he took away the high Places,
and Groves out of Judah. He also sent his Princes, and with them, Priests, and
Levites, to teach in the Cities of Judah, and they taught in Judah, and had the
Book of the Law of the Lord with them, and went throughout all the Cities of
Judah, ^. Chron. 19, 8.
and taught the people. Again, in Jerusalem, Iehosaphat set of the Levites,
and of the Priests, and of the chief of the Families of Israel, for the
judgment and cause of the Lord, etc.

Did not also that good and Godly king Hezekiah, show his authority over
Priests and Levites, 2. Chron. 29 3 4.5.6.7.8.9.10 11 12.13.14.15.16
and in matters also Ecclesiastical, when he opened the doors of the house of
the Lord, and brought in the Priests and the Levites, and said thus unto them?
Hear me, ye Levites, sanctify now your selves, and sanctify the house of
the Lord God of your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the
Sanctuary, etc. And they gathered their brethren, and sanctified themselves,
and came according to the commandment of the King, and by the words of the
Lord, to cleanse the house of the Lord: And the Priests went into the inner
parts of the house of the Lord to cleanse it, and brought out all the
uncleanness that they found in the Temple into the Court of the house of the
Lord: And the Levites took it, to carry it out, to the brook Kidron. He
also commanded the Priests, Verse. 21.2^.
the Sons of Aaron, to offer sacrifices, on the Altar of the Lord: And he
sent to all Israel, and Judah, and wrote Letters to Ephraim, and Manasseh, that
they should come to the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, to keep the Passover,
unto the Lord God of Israel: He appointed the courses of the Priests and
Levites, 2. Chron. 30.1.
by their turns, every man according to his Office, 2 Chronicles. 31.2.
both Priests and Levites, for the burnt offerings, to Minister and to give
thanks, and to praise in the Gates of the Tents of the Lord: He also took
away the high Places, 2. King. 18.41
and brake the Images, and cut down the Groves, and brake in pieces the brazen
Serpent that Moses had made: for unto those days, did the Children of Israel
burn incense to it.

Yea, read the history of all, and every one of the Godly kings of Israel,
and Judah, and you will find, that they all, as Supreme governors, within their
own Dominions, commanded as well the Priests, as the people, and dealt in
matters Ecclesiastical and concerning Religion, as well as in matters Civil
and Temporal. Why then should not Christian Kings and Princes have the like
Authority within their Kingdoms, which those good and Godly kings of Israel,
and Judah had within theirs? Will any say that those Kings of Israel, and Judah,
dealt in those matters Ecclesiastical, by the counsel and advise of the
Prophets, and the Priests? What if they did, or what is this to the matter?
For, the Question is not by whose Counsel, or advise, but by whose Authority
those things were done. Kings, even in Civil and Temporal affairs, be also
Counseled, and advised by learned, wise, and grave Men: Does this therefore
prove, that they have no Supreme Authority, in matters Civil and Temporal?
For, (by such a reason), you may as well conclude against the one, as against
the other. The direction then, advise, and counsel, which Bishops or others
give to Kings, and Princes in matters either Ecclesiastical or Civil, does
not impeach or oppugn their Supreme commands, or Supreme Authority, either in
the one case or in the other. But some do then here object, that those Kings
and Princes of Israel and Judah, had an high Priest, or chief Priest among
them, and therefore that there must be likewise, an high priest, or supreme
Pastor in the Christian Church. Howbeit, first the high Priest in that
Judicial, and Israeliticall Church, was not Supreme, but subject to those
Kings, and their command, as before appears. Secondly, it is granted, that
there is also an high Priest in the Christian Church, but it is not, (as they
fondly suppose) the Pope of Rome, but CHRIST JESUS only, (as the Epistle to
the Hebrews abundantly declares:) who is therefore expressly called and
affirmed to be our high Priest: Hebr. 9.11. Hebr 5.5. H b 4 14. Hebr 7 26.
For such an high Priest, (says that Epistle), it became us to have, which is
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the
heavens: of which sort, I am sure, the Pope of Rome is not. Again, S. Peter
shows, that not himself, much less the Pope of Rome, his pretended
successor, nor any other mortal man whatsoever, 1. Pet. 5.4.
but CHRIST JESUS only, is the Supreme Pastor, or chief Shepherd, over all
Pastors and Sheepheards of the several flocks of CHRIST, in the world; and in
respect of that his high Prerogative, Heb^. 13.20.
he is also called the great Sheepeheard of the sheep. So that if any would
know, whom God has appointed to be the high Priest, and the Supreme Pastor,
over the whole Christian Church Militant upon earth: They here see, that it is
not the Pope, but CHRIST JESUS only. Yea, as touching the Pope of Rome, whom
they so much dote upon, they were never yet able, nor ever will be able, to
prove, that God has any where in his Word, constituted and appointed him to
be, the high Priest, or Supreme Pastor, over all the Pastors and Bishops in the
world, much less, to bear the Supremacy over all Emperors, Kings, and
Princes: Yea, for the space of diverse hundred years after CHRIST, did even the
Bishops of Rome themselves, acknowledge, and perform, subjection to the
Emperors: as appears, not only by those three examples of Meltiades, Leo,
and Gregory the great, mentioned in my former Book, (whereunto my Adversary
is still pleased to answer nothing,) but by other Bishops of Rome likewise:
For also Anastasius the second, Bishop of Rome, spoke thus to the Emperor
Anastasius: Pro fide Catholica, humilis pietati tuae precator occurro, etc. I
come, (says he), Epist ad Anast.
an humble suppliant to your piety, for the Catholic faith. And he says
further, That God would have, not himself, though he were the Bishop of Rome,
but the Emperor, velut eius Vicarium praesidere in terris, as his vicar, or in
his stead, Jbid. cap. 6
to be the cbiefe upon earth. Pelagius also the first, a Bishop of Rome,
writing to Childebert King of France, being required to make a confession of
his faith, that so he might show himself not to differ from those, that were
of the Orthodoxe belief, Pelag Epist. 16. Council. edi^. Bin tom. 2. page 633.
speaks likewise in this humble and duetifull manner unto him: Quanto nobis
studio ac labor satagendum est, ut pro auferendo suspitionis scandalo,
obsequium confessionis nostra Regibus ministremus: quibus nos etiam subditos
esse, sanctae Scripturae praecipiunt: With how great care and labor, ought we
to strive, and endeavor, for the taking away of the scandal of suspicion, to
yield the obedience of our confession, unto Kings: to whom, the holy
Scriptures also command us to be subject. From him, pass to the times of
Agatho, another Bishop of Rome, in whose days, was assembled the sixth
Council of Constantinople: In that Council, there is an Epistle of his, to
the Emperor, who required him to send some to supply his place, Council.
Constant. 6. act 4 C^ncil. edit. Bin. tom. 3. page 13.
in that Council: To whom Pope Agatho answers, and writes in that Epistle,
That to those things which the Emperor commanded, he would promptam
obedientiam exhibere, yield ready obedience. Again, he says: Hoc Imperialis
benignitas vestra clementer jubens, hortata est, and nostra pusillitas, quod
jussum est, obsequenter implevit. This, your Imperial benignity, gently
commanding, has required: and our meanness, What was commanded has obediently
performed. Yea, he speaks yet further, in this most submissive sort, to the
Emperor: Obsecro itaque pi^ssime atque clementissime Auguste, atque una cum mea
exiguitate, Sub finem.
omnis Anima Christiana, flexo genu, suppliciter deprecatur, etc. I therefore
beseech you, most pious and clement Emperor, and together with my meanness,
every Christian soul with bended knee, humbly entreats, etc. Go on to the
times of Pope Hadrian, in whose days it was, That the second Nicene Council
was assembled: There also you may observe, in what humble sort, he likewise
writes to the Emperor: Council. Nicen 2 ^pist. 1. Council. edit. Bin. tom. 3.
page 257.
Deprecantes cum magna cordis dilectione mansuetissimam vestram Clementiam, and
tanquam praesentialiter humo stratus, and vestris vestigijs provolutus, quaeso,
and coram Deo deposco: Praying with great affection of heart, your most mild
Clemency, and as in your presen^e being cast upon the ground, and prostrate,
(says he,) before your feet, I beseech, and in the presence of God, do
earnestly desire, etc. And in another Epistle again, he speaks thus.
Obsecrantes ex animi fervore, In Conc. Ni^em. 2. act 2. ibidem page 312.
vestram mansuetudinem obtestando, and veluti praesentes genibus advoluti and
coram vestigia pedum volutando, ego cum fratribus coram Deo supplico, obtestor,
etc. Beseeching you out of the fervor of our mind, by entreating your
gentleness, and as if we were present, being cast upon our knees, and
kneeling before your presence, I with my brethren in the presence of God, am an
humble suppliant, and do earnestly beseech, etc. By all which you see, very
clearly and infallibly, that for the space of many hundred years after
CHRIST, even the Bishops, and Popes of Rome themselves, were, and so did
declare themselves to be, not superiors, but inferiors, yea humble suppliants
and subject to the Emperors: and consequently, that the Emperors in all those
times, as well de Iure, as de facto, had the Supremacy over them, as well as
other Bishpos. For, so it appears, (...) that they had, and ought to have: in
as much as Pope Pelagius himself, expressly affirms, (as you heard before,
Quibus nos etiam subditos esse, sanctae Scripturae praecipiunt: inquit Pelagius.
) that the holy Scriptures aid so command.

Secondly. It being a thing, very demonstratively evident, That the Christian
Emperors, in those former and ancient times, had the Supremacy and command,
even of the Bishops of Rome, as well as of other Bishops: let us now proceed,
and see, whether they did not also deal in matters Ecclesiastical, as well as
the good and Godly kings of Israel and Judah did: And it is also very apparent,
that they did. For proof whereof, Constantine, that Godly and Christian
Emperor, spoke in this sort: Eusebius. de vita Constable lib. 2 c. 28 Socrat. lib 1.
cap. 22. las.
By my Minister^, (says he) mankind is brought to the keeping and observing of
the most sacred Law: by the service which I perform to God, all things every
where, are settled in order. Yea the barbarous Nations, which till this time,
knew not the truth, now praise the name of God sincerely, whom they reverence
for dread of us. He also called Counsels, when cause required. Eusebius. de vita
Constable. lib. 1 c. 37 and lib. 3 cap. 63.
He decreed that Heretics should have no Temples and that in no place
public or private, from that day forward, any of their assemblies should be
permitted.

Socrat lib. 1. cap. 20. lat.
When the Council of Tyrus was assembled, he commanded them first, to discuss
the truth of such crimes, as were objected against Athanasius. Athanasius also
was loath to come before that Council, save that he feared the threatening
Letters of Constantine, written to this effect: If any, Eusebius. de vita Constable.
lib. 4. c. 42.
(says he) which I think not, in contempt of Our mandate, sail to come
before you, We will send a warrant from our Royal Authority, that he shall
be banished: To teach him, what it is for Bishops, and Clergy men, to
withstand the commandment of the Chief Ruler, defending the truth. Athanas.
apol. 2. C^m multas videre (...). Socrat. li. 1 ca. 21. lat.
Wherefore Athanasius and the Bishops of his part appeared: But finding that
Council very partial, they appealed from them to the Emperor. And Athanasius
himself fled to the Emperor, beseeching him to send for the Bishops of that
Council, and to examine their Acts, which that Christian Emperor did
accordingly, and thereupon wrote thus to the who e Council: Your Synod, (says
he), has decreed, Socrat lib. 1, cap. 22. lat.
I know not what, in a tumult, and uprore, whilst you seek to pervert truth,
by your pestilent disorder, for hatred against your fellow Bishops: But the
divine providence, will, I doubt not, scatter the mischief of your contention,
and make it plain in our sight, whether your Assembly has had an^ regard of
truth or no. You are therefore, all of you, t resort hither, to show the reas
n of your doings: for so it does seem good and expedient unto me. For which
end, I wi^ed this rescript to be sent unto you, That as many of you as were
present at the Council of Tyrus, without delay repair to the place of our
abode, there to give account, how sincerely and soundly ye have judged, and
that before me, whom your selves shall not deny to be the sincere Minister of
God, in these Cases. Observe yet further, Cod. lib 1. tit 4. 2 3. tit. ^.7.9.11.
That Justinian, that Christian Emperor, in his Code, ^citeth many and sundry
Laws, made by former Emperors, concerning matters Ecclesiastical: As namely,
touching the Christian Faith, Baptism, and Churches, Novel cons^. 5 7. and 42.
1^.
and touching Heretics, Apostatas, Jews, and Infidels. And in his
Authentickes, he makes many new Constitutions. Concerning the Sacraments, in
what places, by what persons, with what loudness of voice they should be
ministered: Novel. constable. 123 1^1. Novel. constable. 5. and 131 3 67 79. and 5 123.
133. and 6. and 12^.
Concerning Synods or Counsels, when they shall be k^pt, what things shall be
reformed in them, and what Canons of Counsels shall stand in the same
strength, with his Laws. Concerning Priests, Deacons, and other Servitors in
the Church, He limiteth their Age, Condition, Learning, and good report,
before they be received to that Office, and their diligent, sober and chaste
behavior afterward: And concerning Bishops, how they shall be chosen, what
manner of men they should be, both for life and doctrine, what causes they
should meddle withal in their Consistor^s, what punishment they should
undergo for wrongful excommunication, and other offenses, etc. Novel. constable.
^^3
And he says further, That there is no kind of thing exempted from the Prince
his inquisition, who has received from God, a common Regiment and
Soveraignetie, over all men. And those things which concern God, must, says
he, be preserved from corruption, by the Sa^red Prelat^s, and civil
Magistrates: but most of all, by our Majesty, who use not to neglect any
divine causes.

But proceed, Leg^m (...) libr. 1.
and go on further to the times of Charles the great, who was Emperor of the
West parts, about eight hundred years after CHRIST, and therein consider the
Directions, Chapters, or Laws made by him, which Ansegisus gathered together,
within a few years after his death. For thereby shall you likewise clearly
perceive, that Kings and Princes, even in those days, did meddle both with
Persons, and causes Ecclesiastical. I will here recite some of them unto you
for your better and most full satisfaction in this point. (viz.)

Cap. 1.
That no man excommunicate in one place, should be taken into Communion in
another place.

Cap 2.
That when any Clearke is Ordered, his faith and l^fe be first exactly tried.

Cap. 3.
That no strange Clearke be received or Ordered without Letters of
Commendation, and license from his own Bishop.

Cap. 50. and 25.
That no man be made Priest under thirty years of age: neither then at
random, but appointed and fastened to a certain Cure.

Cap. 11.
That no Bishop meddle with giving orders in another man's Diocese.

Cap. 2^. Cap. 42.
That only the Books Canonical be read in the Church.

That the false name of Martyrs, and uncertain memories of Saints, be not
observed.

Cap. 15. Cap. 82.
That Sunday be kept, etc.

That the Pastors and Ministers rightly preach and teach the people committed
to their charge.

Jbidem.
That they suffer not any man under them, to propose to the people opinions of
their own devising, not agreeable to the holy Scriptures, but shall themselves
teach profitable, and good doctrine, tending to life everlasting, and instruct
others to do the like. Cap. 22.
And first of all, they shall teach all men generally to believe, the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to be one Omnipotent, and Eternal, and
invisible God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, and of all things in them; And that
there is but one Godhead, Substance and Majesty, in the three Persons of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Item: They shall preach, E d^m cap. 82.
That the Son of God took flesh by the working of the Holy Ghost, of the
Virgin Mary, (she remaining always a Virgin,) for the salvation and
reparation of makinde. That he suffered, was buried, the third day rose again,
and ascended into heaven, and that he shall come again in Majesty to judge
all men, etc.

Item: Ibidem.
They shall diligently preach the Resurrection of the dead.

Item: They shall teach all men, with all diligence, Ibidem.
for what offenses they shall be condemned with the Devil, to pains
everlasting: The Apostle telling us, That the works of the flesh are manifest,
which are, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft,
enmities, emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, envy, murders,
drunkenesse, gluttony, and such like: of which I tell you now, as I told you
before, (says the Apostle,) That they which commit such things, shall not
inherit the kingdom of God. These things therefore, which the great Preacher
of the Church of God, recko^eth by name, let them be with all care prohibited;
remembering how terrible that saying is, That they which do such things, shall
not come into Gods kingdom.

Moreover, Admonish them, (says he, Ibidem.
) with all earnestness, concerning the love of God and of their neighbor,
concerning Faith and Hope in God, Humility, Patience, Chastity, Continency,
Liberality, Mercy, giving of Alms, acknowledging of their sins, And
concerning forgiving of such as trespass against them, according to the Lords
Prayer: assuring them, that they which do these things shall obtain the
kingdom of God. This we charge and enjoyne you, (says he, speaking to the
Bishops and Clergy men,) with so much the more diligence, because we know,
that in the latter times, shall come false teachers, as the Lord in the Gospel
foretold, and his Apostle Paul, to Timothy, testifies.

Caroli praefat. in Leges Franc.
And again he says thus; therefore, (you Pastors of Christ's Church, and
Guides of his flock, etc) have we directed Commissioners unto you, who
together with you, are, in our Name and by our Authority, to redress those
things which need reformation: And to this end, have we here annexed certain
brief Chapters of Canonical or Ecclesiastical institution, such as we
thought meetest. Let no man think or judge this our admonition to Godliness,
to be presumpteous, whereby we seek to reform things amiss, to cut off
things superfluous, and to bring men to that which is right, but let them
rather receive it, with a charitable mind. For in the Book of Kings we
read, what pains that Godly King Josias took, to bring the kingdom given
him of God, to the true worship of the same God, by visiting, correcting, and
instructing them: not that we compare our selves with his sanctity, but that
we should always imitate such examples of the Godly. Here we see, the
reason, why these Chapters or Laws were made, and Commissioners appointed, and
sent from the King, to put them in execution: and that also the examples of
Josiah, and such other Godly Kings of Israel and Judah, are to be made
patterns and precedents, and to be imitated by all Kings and Princes in the
Christian Church, as touching the good care, endeavor and pains, they are to
take every way they can, for the advancement of Gods Religion.

Legum Franc. lib. 2. cap. 1.
After Charles the great, were Lodowicke and Lotharius, Emperors: which Emperors
also spoke thus to the Bishops and Magistrates of their Dominions. You have
all, no doubt, either seen or heard, that our Fathers and Progenitors, after
they were chosen by God to this place, made this their principal study, how
the honor of Gods holy Church, and the state of their kingdom might be
decently kept: Cap. 2.
And we for our parts, following their example, seeing it has pleased God to
appoint us, that we should have care of his Church, and of this kingdom, are
very desirous, so long as we live, to labor earnestly for three special
things, viz. to defend, exalt, and honor Gods holy Church, and his servants,
in such sort, as is fit^ to preserve Peace and to do Justice to all the
people. And though the chief of this service consist in our person, Cap 9.
yet by Gods and Man's Ordinance, it is so divided, that every one of you, in
his place and calling, has a part of our charge: So that I should be your
admonisher, and you all my coadjutors. Yea, not only did these Emperors extend
their Authority to causes Ecclesiastical and concerning Religion, but had also
the Supremacy over all Bishops, even over the Bishop of Rome himself, in
their times: For so it appears by the submission, which Leo the fourth,
Bishop of Rome, made to this Lodowicke the Western Emperor, in these words.
If, (says he), we have done otherwise then well, Cause. 2 quast. 7. Cap. Nos si.
and not dealt uprightly with those that are under us, we will amend all that
is amiss, by the judgment of your highness: beseeching your highness, for
the better trial of these surmises, to send such, as in the fear of God, may
narrowly sift, not only the matters informed, but all our doings great and
small, as well as if your Majesty were present: So that by lawful examination
all may be finished, and nothing left undiscussed, or undetermined. In all
things, great and small, this Bishop of Rome, (as you see,) submitted himself
to the Emperor, and to those Commissioners, which he would please to send, for
the sifting and examination of those matters laid to his charge, promising to
amend all that was amiss in him, according to the Emperors own judgment.
Wherefore this was not a matter of modesty, or courtesy in the Pope, (as
Gratian most ungratiously would persuade,) but a matter of bounden duty,
Ibidem. Cap. Petrus.
and without all dissembling, and seriously meant and intended by him, in such
manner and sort, as he by those his words plainly declares. And consequently
you now perceive very fully, (I hope,) that for the space of eight hundred
years and more after CHRIST, the Bishops of Rome were subject to the Emperors,
and that the Christian Emperors also had Authority in matters Ecclesiastical,
as well as Civil, within their Empyres.

But here now do some Papists take exception and answer, as touching Solomon,
his displacing of Abiathar the high Priest, and putting Sadoc in his place:
that Solomon did this, as he was a Prophet, not as he was a King. But, first
this is but a mere supposition and conceit, not found warranted in the Text.
Yea, the untruth of it may appear if you please but to read the Chapter: For
the offense which Abiathar, 1. King. 2.22.23.24 25.26.27.28 29 etc.
the high Priest, had committed, was High Treason, in joining with Adoniah,
against King Solomon, for the kingdom: Ioah also was in the same Treason and
Conspiracy. The King therefore caused Adoniah to be put to death: he caused
also Ioab to be put to death: and touching Abiathar the high Priest, he was
also as worthy of death as the rest, although for some causes and respects, he
was spared for that time. Thou art worthy of death, 1. King 2 26.27.
(says the King:) but I will not this day kill thee, because thou barest the
Ark of the Lord God before David my Father, and because thou have suffered in
all, wherein my Father has been afflicted. So Solomon cast out Abiathar from
being Priest unto the Lord. And the King put Benaiah in the room of Ioab over
the Host: and the King set Sadoc the priest, Verse. 35.
in the room of Abiathar. In which words you see, that Solomon doing these
things, is not styled or called by the name of a Prophet, but expressly, by
the name of a King: thereby signifying and declaring, that what Solomon did
touching the removing of Abiathar, and putting Sadoc in his place, he did it as
a King, as well as when he put Benaiah, in the place of Ioab. Secondly, you see,
that the offense which Abiathar had committed, was treason, and that therefore
he deserved to die, as well as Adoniah, or Ioab, or any other of the
conspirators: But yet for the reasons and respects before mentioned, he would
not, then, put him to death, though he had deserved it, but was content, in
lieu thereof, for that time, to inflict this punishment upon him, to have him
removed from his Priesthood. Now to deal in cases of Treason, and to be a
Judge of matters concerning life and death, and to award execution of death, or
in mercy to mitigate, and alter the severitie of that punishment, and in lieu
thereof, to have a milder, or not so severe a punishment as death, to be
inflicted, be things, not properly belonging to the office of a Prophet, but to
the office of a King, they do rightly and properly enough belong. And
therefore what Solomon did herein, it is evident that he did it as a King, and
not as a Prophet. And consequently it still remains firm and sure, even by
this example of King Solomon, as also by other examples mentioned in my former
Book, (whereto my adversary is still pleased to answer nothing), that Kings,
as Kings, have power to place Bishops, and again to displace them, when there
is cause, and to put others in their room.

And as touching Moses, some Papists do also answer, that he was a Priest,
and the high Priest, Bellar. de verb. Dei lib 3. cap. 4^
(for so says Bellarmine,) and therefore, that Aaron performed that reverence,
obedience, and subjection to him that he did, as being high Priest. My
Adversary likewise says the same, that God Almighty made Moses an high
Priest, and cites for proof of it Number. 27. but there is no such thing written
in that Chapter, nor in any other Chapter of the whole Bible beside. Deuteronomy. 33.5.
I read, that Moses was as a King or Prince in Israel: but I no where read,
throughout the whole Book of God, that God constituted Moses to be the high
Priest: yea it is well known, that in Moses time, Aaron was the high Priest:
what necessity then was there for Moses also, to be an high Priest? But that
Moses was no Priest properly so called, much less an high Priest, is thus made
manifest. For if Moses were a Priest, it must be either before the consecration
of Aaron, or after: But after the consecration of Aaron and his Sons to the
Priesthood, it is clear, that not Moses, but Aaron, and his Sons were the
Priests, as having the Priesthood appointed, and specially given unto them by
Gods own direction. Thou (says God to Moses, Numb. 3.10.
) shall appoint Aaron, and his Sons, to execute their Priests offices: and
the stranger that comes here, shall be slain. So that none but Aaron, and
those that were of his seed might execute the Priests office. For which cause,
Moses neither did, not durst execute the Priests office, Number. 16.46.47
but commanded Aaron to burn Incense, and to make an atonement for the
people. Wherefore it is very apparent, that after the consecration of Aaron,
Moses was not a Priest. And, that Moses was also no Priest before the
consecration of Aaron, is likewise very evident: because before that time, the
priesthood was annexed to the birthright, and did belong to the first borne,
in whose place the Levites afterward came, Numb. 3.12.41.45. Lyra in Number. 3.12.
Ibidem.
and were appointed. So says Lyra, reporting the received judgments of the
best interpreters, that, Ante legem datam, ad Primogenitos pertinebat offerre
sacrificia: Before the Law given, it belonged to the firstborn to offer
sacrifices. Again, he says expressly, that Levitae successerunt loco eorum.
The Levites succeeded in their place. And again he says: Lyra. in Genesis 14.
Sacerdotium fuit annexum Primogeniturae, usque ad legem data^ per Mosem: The
Priesthood was annexed to the first borne, until the Law given by Moses. Now,
of these two brothers, Moses and Aaron, (the Sons of Amram,) it is manifest,
that, not Moses, but Aaron, was the eldest, and first borne. For we read in
Number. 33. Number. 33.39.
That Aaron was one hunded twenty and three years old, when he died: But
Moses, outliving Aaron, Deuteronomy. 34.7.
was but one hundred and twenty years old when he died. So that Aaron,
appears, questionless and undoubtedly, to be the elder brother and the first
borne: and consequently even by the right of Primogeniture, did the Priesthood
belong to Aaron, and not to Moses. If any say, that the birthright was sometime
taken from the eldest, by a special appointment of God, and given to the
younger: it has no place here. For no such especial appointment from God can
be showed in this case: Yea Aaron was so far from loosing this privilege of
his birthright, by any appointment from God, that clean contrariwise, he had
the Priesthood famously confirmed to him, by God himself. Thou, (says God
speaking to Aaron,) and thy Sons with thee, Number. 18.7.
shall keep your Priests office. In as much then as it is apparent, that Moses
was no Priest, neither before the consecration of Aaron, nor after, it must
therefore be concluded, that he was no Priest at all, but was, as the Scripture
calls him, as a King, or a Prince. A second reason is this, viz. Deuteronomy. 33.5.
That Joshua was appointed by God himself to succeed Moses in his place, and
office: But it is certain, that Joshua, Deuteronomy. 31.14. etc Number. 27 17.18. Ios.
1.16.17.18.
his successor, was no Priest, but a civil Magistrate: even the chief ruler
and commander under God, both of the Priests, and People of Israel in his
times, as before appears: and therefore also must Moses be so supposed. But
it is objected out of Psalm. 99. That Moses and Aaron were among the Priests:
Psalm. 99.6.
does this prove them therefore to be Priests, because they were among them?
Howbeit, the Hebrewe word, there used, is Cohanim, which signifies as well
Princes, 2. Sam. 8.18.
(as Priests,) or any that be in high, eminent, and honorable place: as in 2.
Sam. 8. The Sons of David, are said to be Cohanim, 1. Chron. 18.17.
that is, chief Rulers: For so it is also explained in 1. Chron. 18. Where it
is said of the Sons of David, That they were chief or principal men, about
the King. 2. Sam. 20.^^.
Again it is said in 2. Sam. 20. that Ira, the Iairite was, Cohen le David,
that is, a Prince, or chief Ruler about David: For it were absurd, and against
the Law of God, that then was, to suppose Ira to be a Priest, who was a mere
stranger, and not of the Tribe of Levi. Although then Aaron was a Priest, yet
when it is said of Moses and Aaron together, that they were Cohanim; It may
signify very well, that they were great Rulers, or men of high and eminent
place in Israel, the one in respect of the civil Magistracy, and the other
in respect of the Priesthood. But for any to say, and argue thus: Moses was a
Cohen, or reckoned amongst the Cohanim: Ergo he was a Priest by his proper
office and function, is a plain non sequitur, and no better, then if you
should likewise argue and say: Ira the Iairite was a Cohen, and the Sons of
David, were also Cohanim: E^go these were Priests by their proper office and
function.

If you further object, that Moses was of the Tribe of Levi, and Aarons
brother: yet neither does that prove him therefore to be a Priest: For every
one that was of the Tribe of Levi, was not a Priest. Yea, even the Priests, and
Levites, Numb. 3.6.7.8.9.10. 1 Chro 6 48 49 Numb. 18.3. and.
were distinguished: For, Aaron and his Sons, were appointed to the office:
But of the Levites it is said, they shall not come near to the Altar, least
they die. So that although the Levites, were of the Tribe of Levi, yet we see
they might not meddle with the Priests office, least they should die. And
therefore also, Moses, though he were Aarons brother, and of the Tribe of Levi,
yet was he not therefore a Priest, or to execute the Priests office. Neither
did he execute the office of a Levite, as the Levites used to do, in waiting
and tending upon the Priests, and as being in office inferior unto them and at
their command. Yea, it is before showed and apparent, that Moses, although he
were of the Tribe of Levi, yet was he so far exalted and advanced, as that
he was by place and office, as a King or Prince in Israel, and commanded both
Priests and Levites, and not only the Tribe of Levi, but all the other Tribes
of Israel also, as Joshua his successor likewise did.

Yet some to prove Moses to be a Priest, do allege, that he sacrificed, and
for this, do cite Exodus 24.5. Exodus 24.5.
But the words of that Text, be not, that Moses did sacrifice, but That he sent
young men to sacrifice: which were indeed the first borne of the children of
Israel, to whom the Priesthood did then belong, it being a thing done, before
the institution of the Leviticall priesthood. Other some again do allege,
that Moses did consecrate and annoint Aaron and his Sons, to the Priesthood:
And that therefore he was a Priest But this also follows not, especially in
the first erection of the Leviticall priesthood. For though Moses were a
Prince and a civil Magistrate; yet when God gave him a direct and special
commandment, to consecrate and annoint Aaron, and his Sons, he was bound to
do it. And that he was expressly so commanded, is apparent by the Text it
self, where God spoke thus to Moses: Thou shall bring Aaron and his Sons,
unto the door of the Tabernacle of the congregation, Exodus 40.12.13.14.15 16.
and wash them with water: And thou shall put upon Aaron the holy garments, and
shall annoint him, and sanctify him, that he may minister unto me in the
Priests office: Thou shall also bring his Sons, and cloth them with garments,
and shall annoint them, as thou did annoint their Father, that they may
minister unto me in the Priests office: For this annoyntment shall be asigne,
that the Priesthood shall be everlasting unto them, throughout their
generations. So Moses did according to all that the Lord commanded him: So did
he. This shows then, that Moses was duetifull and obedient, in performing
Gods commandment in this case: But it is no proof, that therefore he was a
Priest. For even a civil Magistrate, not only may, but ought to consecrate,
and annoint men to the office of Priesthood, if he be so required, and
commanded from God himself, as Moses was: wherefore it still remains firm,
that what reverence, subjection, and obedience, Aaron the high Priest performed
to Moses, he did it to him, not as being any Priest, or high Priest, but to him
as being as a Prince or King in Israel, that had the supreme commandment, and
rule both of the high Priest and of the rest of the Priests and of the Levites,
and of all the people within that Commonweal. So that now I trust you very
fully perceave, that Moses and Joshua, and the good and Godly Kings of Israel
and Judah, had Authority, as well over the high Priests, as all other Priests
and Levites, and in causes also Ecclesiastical, as well as civil and
Temporal. And that the Christian Emperors for the space of many hundred years
after CHRIST, had likewise the Supremacy over all persons, and in all causes
as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil, within their Empyres and Dominions.

3. (...) But my Adversary objecteth, that famous Hosius Cordubensis, Athan
Epist. ad solitarium vita agen^es.
reproving the Arrian Emperor Constantius, wishes him, (as Athanasius
testifies), not to meddle in Ecclesiastical matters. It is true, that Hosius
Cordubensis, did, and had just cause to reprove Constantius, and to wish and
advise him not to meddle in matters Ecclesiastical, in such sort, as he did:
he using, or rather abusing, all his authority in matters Ecclesiastical, to
the mantaynance of the Arrians and arrianisme, against the true Christian, and
Orthodoxe Bishops, and against the truth of the Godhead of CHRIST. For,
Athanasius in the same Epistle shows, that Paulinus, and other Bishops, being
called before the Emperor, the Emperor commanded them to subscribe against
Athanasius, Ibidem.
and to communicate with the Arrians. They mervayled at this, and answering
that the Ecclesiastical Canons would not suffer them to do so; He replied:
But, what I will, let that be taken for a Canon: The Bishops of Syria endure
this speech of mine. Either therefore do you, as I will you, or else go you
also into banishment. And when the Bishops held up their hands to God, and
proposed their reasons, showing him, That the kingdom was not his but Gods, of
whom he received it, and that it was to be feared, least he that gave it him,
would speedily take it from him: Setting also before his eyes the day of
judgment, and advising him, Not to subvert Ecclesiastical order, nor to bring
the Arrian heresy into the Church of God: He, would neither hear them, nor
permit them to speak, but grievously bending his brows for that they had
spoken, and shaking his Sword at them, commanded them to be taken away. Yea,
what cruelty, tyranny, and persesecution was used, and raised by Constantius,
in the behalf of the Arrians, against the Orthodoxe and right believing
Christians, is further declared by the same Athanasius: showing, Ibidem.
that even Pagans were set to invade the Churches of the right and true
Christians, and to beat the people with slaves and stones. The Bishops,
Priests, and Monks, were bound with chains, and scourged with r^ds. The (...)
were haled by the hair to the judgment seat, The virgins were tosted by the
fire, and whipped with prickles, others were banished, strangled, and trampled
under feet to death, and their limbs and joyntes rent and torn a sunder,
after they were dead. In so much that Athanasius cries out, saying: Who was not
amazed at these things? Who would yield them the name of heathen men, much
less the name of Christian men? Who would think them to have conditions of
men, and not rather of beasts? Yea, who perceived not the Arrians to be
crueller then beasts? The strangers standing by, yea the very Ethnickes,
detested the Arrians, as Antichrists, and Butchers of men. Oh newfound
heresy, (says he,) which in villainies and impieties, have put on the fullness
of the Devil, how great soever it be. Again, (he says,) Whom has not
Constantius banished, Ibidem.
that was accused by the Arrians? When did he not give them both audience, and
allowance? Whom did he ever admit to say any thing against them? Or what did
he not admit, which they spoke against others? He ever does that which the
Arrians would have, and they again say that which him likes. And Athanasius
says yet further of him: That whenever he called an Assembly, Judgment, or
Council of Bishops, it was but for a show: For he did nevertheless what
himself listed. What liberty for persuasion, or what place of advise, (says
he,) is there, when he that contradicts, shall for his labor, loose either
his life, or his country? Why has the Emperor gathered so great a number of
Bishops, partly terrified with threats, partly enticed with promises, to
condescend, that they will no longer communicate with Athanasius. This violent
oppressing of Bishops in their Synods or Counsels, and working them to his
own will, Hiler. lib. 1. contra Constant.
does S. Hilary also witness, saying thus unto him. Thou gatherest Synods or
Counsels, and when they be shut up together in one City, thou terrifiest them
with threats, thou pinest them with hunger, thou lamest them with cold, thou
depravest them with dissembling. Again, (he says, Ibidem.
) Oh thou wicked one, what a mockery do thou make of the Church? Only dogs
return to their vomit: and thou compellest the Priests of CHRIST, to suppe up
those things which they have spet forth, and command them in their
confessions, to allow that which before they condemned. What Bishops hand have
thou left innocent? What tongue have not thou forced to falsehood? Whose heart
have not thou brought to the condemning of his former opinion? Thou have
subjected all to thy will, yea to thy violence. Good cause therefore had Hosius
Cordubensis to say as he did unto that Emperor, Meddle not (Emperor) with
Ecclesiastical matters, (namely, in this sort, as thou do) for the
maintaynance of arrianisme, and making thy will to stand for a law, etc. For if
you will have these words, Ne te misceas Ecclesiasticis, Meddle not with
Ecclesiastical matters, to be taken absolutely and without restriction, to
debar Kings and Princes from all intermedling in Ecclesiastical causes, any
kind of way, such an exposition were not only contrary to the Acts of
Constantine, the Laws of Justinian, the Chapters, and doings of Charles the
Great, and the History of all the Christian Emperors, for the space of many
hundred years after CHRIST, but it were also contrary to the opinion and
practice even of Athanasius himself, who is the reporter of those words of
Hosius: For, it is evident, that Athanasius himself was never of that mind,
to exclude Christian Kings and Princes from all intermedling in causes
Ecclesiastical: Yea, he was a clear approver of that Authority in them: as
appears by this, That when he was commanded to confer with one Arius,
concerning matters of Faith: He answered, Who is so far out of his wits, that
he dare refuse the commandment of the Prince? Disput. Athan. cum A^^o Lao
dicea hab^ta. Athanas a^^l 2. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 21. 22. lat.
Yea the Emperors commandment made him to appear before the Council of
Tyrus, and finding that Council not to be indifferent, but partially affected,
he and the rest of the Orthodoxe Bishops that to^ke part with him, appealed to
the Emperor himself. He also in person fled to the Emperor, desiring him to
send for the Bishops of the Council of Tyrus, and to examine their doings,
which the Christian Emperor did accordingly. So that it is manifest, that
Athanasius did approve of the Authority of the Emperors in Ecclesiastical
causes, albeit he would not have them to use their authority cruelly or
tyrannically, to serve their own violent wills and pleasures, nor thereby to
do any thing whatsoever against CHRIST, and his Religion, as that Arrian
Emperor Constantius did. But when all this is granted, it makes nothing
against those Christian Emperors, Kings and Princes, which in good sort use
their authority, not against CHRIST, (as he did,) but for CHRIST, his truth,
and Religion. It is true, that the same Hosius Bishop of Corduba, spoke further
unto the Emperor in this sort: Athanas. ad so^tariam vitam agentes.
God, (says he), has committed the Empire to thee, to us the things of the
Church. And as he that envieth thy Empire, contradicts the ordinance of God:
So take thou heed, least drawing unto thy self, the things of the Church,
thou be guilty of great sin. It is written: give unto Caesar, that which is
Caesar's: and unto God, that which is Gods. It is therefore neither lawful for
us, (that be Bishops), to hold a kingdom on earth, neither host thou power (o
Prince) over sacrifices, and sacred things. Howbeit, these words do only
distinguish, and put a difference between the office and function of Priests,
and the office and function of Kings and Princes: showing, that the one may not
incroch, or intrude upon that, which r^ghtly, and properly belongs unto the
other, but that every one should keep himself within the bounds of his own
proper calling and office. And so teach the Protestants also: and therefore if
any King or Prince usurp, or intrude upon that which is proper and peculiar
unto the Priests office, (as King Vzziah entered into the Temple, to burn
Incense, 2 Chronicles. 26.16.17.18.
which pertayned to the Priests office only,) they utterly dislike and
condemn it. Now then let all this be granted, that Kings and Princes may not
do any thing that is proper and peculiar to the Priests office, nor may meddle
in Ecclesiastical causes, after a cruel and tyrannical manner, nor use their
authority in Ecclesiastical causes, for the maintenance of Arrianisme or of
any other heresy or error, nor do any thing against God, or his truth and
Religion: Yet what does all this, or any of this, make against those Godly and
Christian Kings, and Princes, that extend and use their authority in
Ecclesiastical causes, in a good sort, and for God, and for the maintenance of
his truth, Religion, and ordinances? It makes, as you see, just nothing at
all against them.

But it is further objected, that S. Ambrose, when Valentinian the Emperor
would have had a Church in Millan for the Arrian heretics, answers thus.
Neither is it lawful for me to yield unto it, Ambros. libr. 5. epist. 3^.
nor expedient for you o Emperor, to take it. The house of a private man, you
cannot by right invade: Do you think then, you may take away the house of
God? It is alleged, that the Emperor may do what he list: But I answer,
burden not your self, o Emperor, to think that you have any Imperial right
over those things, that be Gods. Exalt not your self so high, but if you will
reign long, be subject unto God. For it is written: give unto Caesar that
which is Caesar's, and to God, that which is Gods, Palaces belong to Emperors,
Churches to Priests. Epist. ^^.
The Church is Gods, it ought not to be yielded by me to Caesar. The Temple of
God cannot he Caesar's right. I cannot deliver that to Heretics, which I
received to keep on Gods behalf. I would to God, Epist. 32.
it were apparent to me, that my Church should not be delivered to the Arrians,
I would willingly offer my self to the judgment of your highness. I would to
God that it were decreed, Orat. on^ Auxen^.
that no Arrian should trouble my Churches, and of my person pronounce, what
sentence you will: With my consent, I will never forgo my right if I be
compelled, I have no way to resist: I can sorrow, I can weep, I can sigh:
Tears are my weapons: Priests have only these defenses: By other means I
neither ought, nor may resist. To fly and forsake my Church I use not, least
any should think it done, to avoyde some sorer punishment. Ibidem Epist. 33.
If my goods be sought for, take them: If my body, I will be ready: Will you
put me in Irons, or lead me to death? You shall do me a pleasure, I will not
guard my self with multitudes of people, but I will gladly he sacrificed for
the Altars of God. All this makes against the favorers and maintayners of
Arrianisme, but nothing against that authority in Ecclesiastical matters,
which Kings and Princes have to command, for God, and for the good of his
Church, and the advancement of his Religion against Arrianisme, and against all
other heresies, and errors whatsoever. My Adversary therefore objecteth
further, that S. Ambrose says: Ambros Epist. Lib. 5 cont. Aux.
That a good Emperor is within the Church, and not above the Church. Indeed,
seeing the Church is the mother of Christian Emperors, as well as of other
Christians, it becomes a Christian Emperor, as a good Child, and Son of
such a mother, to account ^t his greatest honor, to submit himself, as he
ought, to the word, rules, and ordinances, which God has set in the same his
Church, and not to exa^t himself above them, as Valentinian did, when he was
so forward for the advancement of Arrianisme and Arrian assemblies, against the
true Church of God, and the Orthodoxe Bishops therein. For, that, by the
Church, here, S. Ambrose means, the things of God in the Church, appears
not only by that Text, which he cites, of, Give unto Caesar, the things that
be Caesar's, and unto God, the things that be Gods, but by those other words of
his likewise, where he says plainly: Ambr. lib. 5. c. 33
Ea quae divina sa^t imperatoriae potestati non esse subjecta: The things that
be divine, be not subject to the Emperors power. And yet the same S. Ambrose
affirms nevertheles, That the Emperor had power over the persons of all men
within his Empire: Ambros de obien Theo^osij.
Here then you must learn of S. Ambrose, to distinguish between the things in
the Church, and the persons in the Church: For over all the persons, he
confesses, That the Emperor had power: but, not over the Divine things
therein. And this also do the Protestants hold, that a Christian King has
power over the persons of all Bishops, Pastors, and Ecclesiastical Ministers
in the Church, within his own Dominions: But not over the Divine things
therein, as namely, not over Gods Word, his Religion, Sacraments, and other his
Institutions and Ordinances in his Church.

Yet again it is objected by some, that S. Ambrose reproved the Emperor
Valentinian the younger, for that he would take upon him to be Judge in a
matter of Faith, and cause Ecclesiastical: but the reason of it must be
known. For Valentinian a young Prince, not yet baptized, and a novice in the
mysteries of Religion, would upon the persuasion and counsel of his Mother
Iustina, an Arrian, needs have Ambrose to come, and dispute with Auxentius the
Arrian, in his Palace or Consistory before him: Ambr ^. 5. Orat. co^r Auxent.
and Epist. 53.
and he would be the Judge, whether of their two Religions were truest.
Whereunto Ambrose made answer, and gave it in writing to Valentinian, showing
him, amongst other things, That he was young in years, a novice in Faith, not
yet baptized, and that he was as yet rather to learn, then to judge of
Bishops: That the Palace was no fit place for a Priest to dispute in, where the
hearers should be Jews, or Gentiles, and so scoff at CHRIST: and the Emperor
himself partial, as appeared by the law published before that time, against
the truth. Ibidem.
Auxentius, (says Ambrose,) being driven to his shifts, has recourse to the
craft of his forefathers, seeking to procure us envy by the Emperors name,
saying: That he ought to be Judge, though he be young, though he be not yet
baptized, though he be ignorant of the holy Scriptures: and that in the
Consistory. Jdem libr. 5. Epist 32.
And to the young Emperor himself, he spoke thus: Your Father, a man of riper
years, said, it is not for me to judge between Bishops: Does then your
clemency at these years say, I ought to judge? He a man baptized in CHRIST,
thought himself unable for the weight of so great a judgment. Does then your
Clemency that has not yet attained to the Sacrament of Baptism, challenge to
judge of matters of Faith, when as yet you know not the mysteries of Faith,
etc? In these words you see the reason, why S. Ambrose reproved Valentinian,
and disliked, that he should challenge, or take upon him to judge in a matter
of Faith, namely not for that he had not authority to deal in matters of
Faith, and causes Ecclesiastical, but in respect of other defects in him
(viz.) For that he was so young, and as yet unbaptised, a Novice in the Faith,
and ignorant in the Scriptures, etc. But then you will say, that even
Valentinian the elder, the Father of this young Valentinian, did himself
refuse, and dislike to judge in the same matter. But S. Ambrose likewise
shows you the reason of it, namely because Ambr. lib. 5. Epist. 32.
inhabilem se, etc. He then thought himself unable to judge in so weighty a
cause, The great question being, whether CHRIST was of the same substance with
the Father, yea, or no. Concerning which question, when Valentinian was
afterward better instructed: then did he judge of the truth of it, and
thereupon by his Imperial Authority, commanded it as a truth to be preached:
as appears evidently by the Epistle, which he, and Valens, and Gratian,
(being then the Emperors, Theodoret. lib. 4. cap. 7.8.
) wrote to the Bishops of Asia, Phrygia, Cyrophrygia, and Placatia: wherein the
Emperors write thus unto them: After great disputation had to and fro, in a
full Council held at Illyria about our Savior, those blessed Bishops have
demonstratively proved, That there is a consubstantiall Trinity, The Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost: from which they would not depart one jott, but
gave due reverence unto the Religion of the Almighty God: And we also, (say
they,) by our Authority, have commanded the same to be preached. So that
although Valentinian, at the first, and for a while, until he were better
instructed, would not. Yet afterward upon better instruction received, you see,
that he did take upon him, to judge, that is, to discern, of the truth of
that controversy, and by his Imperial authority, as well as the other
Emperors, commanded it as a truth to be preached. Theodosius also, that
Christian Emperor, (whom S. Ambrose himself so much commends,) judged of the
truth of the same controversy, between the Homousians, and the Arrians:
determining and appointing by a solemn Edict, which of them should be
accounted Catholics, Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 10.
and which Heretics. For seeing the divisions and dissentions that were then
in the Church, he willed every sect to put their Faith in writing. There was a
day prefixed: The Bishops being called, met at the Emperors Palace. There came
thither Nectarius, and Agelius for the Homousians, Demophilus for the Arrians,
Eunomius himself for his followers; and Eleusius for the Macedonians. When
they were come, the Prince admitted them to his presence: And taking the paper
of each man's opinion, earnestly besought GOD, to help him in choosing the
truth. Then reading their Confessions, he rejected all the rest, as deviding
and severing the Sacred TRINITY, and tore them in pieces, and only approved
and embraced the Homousian faith, and therewithal he made a law, Cod lib. 1.
tit. 1 de summa Trinitate, and fide catholica S. cunctos
that such as followed the Faith of the Homousians, that is, of such as
believed CHRIST, to be of the same substance with the Father, and that believed
one Godhead of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, of equal Majesty in the
sacred Trinity, should be held and taken for Christian Catholics, and the
rest to be held infamous Heretics. So likewise the Emperor Gratian, the Son
of Valentinian, after that the Empire came entirely to his hands, judged and
condemned the Arrian heresy, Theodor. li. 5. c. 2
and thereupon commanded the Preachers of that blasphemy, as wild and savage
beasts, to be driven from their Churches, and the good Pastors to be restored
to their Churches again: And the execution of this law he committed to
Sapores, a famous Captain of that time. Evagrius libr. 1. cap. 12.
In like manner, did Theodosius the younger also, judge and decree against the
Nestorian heresy, that they which followed the wicked faith of Nestorius, or
cleaved to his unlawful doctrine, if they were Bishops, or Clergy men, they
should be cast out of their Churches, and if they were Laymen, they should be
excommunicate. Sozomen. libr. 4 cap. 16.
And does not moreover Sozomen record in a certain case, That the Emperor
commanded, That ten Bishops of the East, and ten Bishops of the West, chosen by
the Council, should repair to the Court, and open unto him the Decrees of the
Council, that he might further determine and conclude what were best to be
done. Yea S. Augustine himself, Aug. cont. epist. Pavin. lib 1 c. 7.
expostulating this matter with the Donatists, says thus unto them: Is it not
lawful for the Emperor to give sentence in a matter of religion? Why then went
your messengers to the Emperor? Why made they him judge of their cause? By
these premises then it is very apparent, That although none may be judge of
Faith, and Religion, if you speak and mean, of an absolute, infallible,
sovereign, and supreme Judge, but God only: Yet if you take judging for
discerning, (as often, and usually it is,) then not only Christian Kings, and
Emperors, but even all Lay Christians also whatsoever, by the tenor of the
Scriptures, may and ought, so far forth as they shall be able, to judge, that
is, to discern, of the doctrines of men, whether they be true or false: as is
more at large declared in the Preface of my former Book. Shall any then be so
absurd, or unreasonable, as to deny this right of judging, that is, of
discerning of the truth in the doctrines of men, to Christian Emperors, Kings
and Princes, which is allowed to far inferior and meaner persons? Yea, these,
chiefly and principally, in regard of their high places and callings are to be
allowed this right.

Whereas therefore my Adversary says, that Bishops, and Clergy men, should
be Judges for determining of Dogmaticall questions, and Controversies of Faith
and Religion, and that Christian Emperors, Kings, and Princes, are to be
guided, directed, taught, and instructed by them: all this is granted: Yet,
withal, let Christian Kings and Princes have also, herein, their dues, and
that right which to them belongs: Which is, to search the Scriptures, thereby
to try and examine, whether the doctrine of their Teachers, be true or false:
For, Act 17.12. Basil. (...). d^f. 77. page 432.
it behooves the Hearers, (says S. Basil,) that be instructed in the
Scriptures, to try those things which are spoken by their Teachers, and
receiving that which agrees with the Scriptures, to reject the contrary; And
so S. Augustine likewise, Aug in Johan. tract 46.
Sua vero si velint docere, nolite audire, nolite facere, That if they will
teach their own devises, you must neither hear them, nor do as they teach
you. Although then, Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers Ecclesiastical, are first
of all to be consulted with, and to judge of matters of Faith, and
controversies in Religion, y^^ are they not absolute and infallible Judges, nor
absolute and infallible Teachers, or directors, but are themselves limited, and
to be directed, in all their Judgments, Doctrines, and Decrees, by that only
absolute and infallible rule of truth, the sacred and Canonical Scriptures.
So that if they shall judge, direct, decree, or teach any thing not according
to the Divine Scriptures, but contrary thereunto, (as the Arrian Bishops in
time past did, and as the Popish Bishops and Teachers, in these days do,) all
that is ^ustly worthy to be refused, by all Christian Emperors, Kings, and
Princes, as is very evident, both by all good reason, and by that which is
before delivered.

Now then although, these two points be granted to my Adversary, (viz.) That
the Regal and Priestly offices be things distinct: and that those that bear
Regal Authority, be also subordinate and subject, to that Authority,
message, and Ministry, which God has committed to Bishops, Pastors, and
Ministers Ecclesiastical: yet when there is further, a third point appearing,
which he must acknowledge, namely, that Bishops, Pastors, and Ecclesiastical
Ministers, be also subordinate and subject to the sword, and Authority of
Christian Kings, and Princes, and that in matters Ecclesiastical, and
concerning Religion, as well as in matters Civil and Temporal, (as is before
at large declared.) What benefit or advantage does he get thereby: Yea, is not
his cause thereby for ever overthrowen?

Thus far then you see, that the plea which he has put in for a demurrer,
or stay of men's judgments, is altogether insufficient for that purpose: and
therefore for any matter yet showed by him, or appearing to the contrary, all
men's judgments, may and ought to proceed, and to be given against him and his
cause, unless in that which follows, he can show better matter, then as yet
he has showed. Let us therefore now see, whether he has any better matter in
that, then he has found in those his two points before mentioned. For those
his two former points appear not worth a point, nor of any value, or validity
at all against the Kings SUPREMACY.

4 First, it is true, that I alleged that Text of 1. Pet. 2.13. To prove the
KINGS SUPREMACY over all persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, within his
own Dominions. And what can my Adversary say against it? Does not S. Peter
expressly require of all Christians that live within the Dominion of any King,
1. Pet. 2.13.
That they should submit themselves unto him (...), unto the Chief, or Supreme
person over them? He cavilleth at my argument, because it is thus propounded
interrogatively, and not affirmatively. A very childish exception, if it be
not more then childish: For, is he so silly and ignorant, that he knows not,
that an interrogative speech, does sometime carry the force of the greater,
and more Emphaticall affirmation? And yet if he had but read, and remembered
the very next words following that interrogative, he might have found a
redditive, and a direct affirmative answer thereunto. For the words next and
immediately following, be these: It is evident, (say I,) that he calls the
King Chief, or Supreme, not only in respect of Dukes, Earls, or other
Temporal governors, (as the Rhemists would have it), but in respect of all the
rest likewise, were they Bishops, Pastors, Clergy men, or whosoever. For he
writes that his Epistle, not to Heathens, but to Christians: and amongst them,
not to the Lay people only, but to such also as were Presbiters, and did
(...), 1. Pet 112.34 5. (...) 5 1.2.
do the office of Bishops amongst them, requiring even them, as well as the
rest, to yield their subjection and submission unto him. Now then seeing this
direct affirmative in my Book, (page 1. of that Chapter,) and that the words
of S. Peter, in the Text it self, be also direct affirmative, 1. Pet. 2.13.
(for these be his words, Be ye therefore subject, etc.) What does he, or can
he answer thereunto? He sti^l cavilleth, at the words of the Text, playing
with them ad libitum, and makes the reason of it to be, because he is a
Lawyer: as though it were lawful, or allowable for a man of that profession,
to be a wrangling Lawyer: or as though, because he is a Lawyer, it were as free
for him, to cavil, and sport himself, with Divine Texts and evidences, as
with humane: or as though he had never heard, nor learned, That Non est bonum
ludere cum Sanctis. Seeing I am a Lawyer, (says he,) let me article and make
my argument, or plea upon the Text: And then he goes on, and says, That
these words in the Text, (Be subject,) do no more specify the Christians,
then the Heathens, nor any more the Subjects, then the Princes. Be not these
strange asseverations? For when S. Peter writes that his Epistle, not to
Heathens, 1. Pet. 1.2 3.4. etc.
but to Christians, dispersed through Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, Asia, and
Bithinia, and says thus unto them, Subjecti estote, Be ye subject: Can these
words, thus directly, and purposely spoken to Christians, no more specify or
intend Christians, then Heathens? Where were the man's wits, I mervaile, when he
wrote thus absurdly? Yea, himself afterward confuteth himself: For mentioning
both this Text of S. Peter, and that also of S. Paul in Romans 13.1. etc. He
says, that in these two cited places, both these Apostles Exhort to obedience:
and the reason, (says he,) why the King is mentioned, Is, because in those
days, Christians were, by the malice of their Adversaries, accused of
sedition, and rebellion against Princes. Does he not by these words make it
very evident, that S. Peter, in saying, Subjecti estote, Be ye subject,
distinguishes the Christians, to whom he writes, from the rest that were
their adversaries, and were heathens, and Infidels? But why does he say again;
that these words, Subjecti estote, Be ye subject, do no more specify
Subjects, then Princes? For is it not a senseless thing, to say, or suppose,
when men are by express words exhorted, to be subject to their Kings and
Princes, that these words should require no more of Subjects, then they do of
Kings and Princes? Yea, when he requires Christians to be subject to every
humane creature, whether it be to the king, as being the chief, or, unto
governors, as unto them that are sent of him, 1. Pet. 2.13.14.
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well:
does he not, by this his distribution of the humane creature, apparently show,
that, he means thereby the King, as Chief or Supreme, and the other
Temporal Magistrates, Rulers, or Governors, that be appointed or allowed under
him? Little reason therefore had my Adversary to say, That by every humane
creature, in the Text, (thus distinguished by the Apostle himself, into the
King, as Chief or Supreme, and into others, that be Rulers, or Governors,
under him,) The King is no more compresed, then the Pope: For, you see, that
the King is directly comprised and intended, yea expressly named, and so is
not the Pope. And this is so evident, that even the Rhemists themselves, do
likewise so teach and expound it, namely, That by every humane creature in
this Text, S. Peter means the Temporal Magistrates. Rhem. Annot. 5. in 1.
Pet 2.13.
Howbeit, he calls not Kings and Princes, and other inferior Magistrates
under them, an humane creation, as though they were not also a Divine creation,
and of Gods institution, ( For there is no power but of God. Romans 13.1. 2. Ioh.
19.11.) But they are called an humane creation, in respect, that the external
form and manner of their creation, is usually such, as that God has been
pleased to allow men to ordain and appoint it, for the use, behoof and
benefit of men. For touching Kings and Princes, some are so by election; and
some by birth and descent of inheritance: and concerning inferior Magistrates,
under Kings and Princes, they be also created and made, some after one sort,
and some after another. But what form of creation soever they receave from
men, yet when they are once so appointed, 1. Pet. 2.13.
they are then to be obeyed, (...), Propter Dominu^, for the Lords sake, (as S.
Peter here teaches,) to show that they be also Gods ordinance, and of his
approbation. And therefore does S Paul likewise teach; That Christians must be
subject to them, Rom 13.1.2.3.4 5.
not only for fear, or for wrath, but also for conscience sake, as being also
Gods own institution. But my Adversary at last confesses, that this part of
the Text, Whether it be to the King, as excelling, or to Rulers as sent by him,
with a reference to the precedent words, does establish in the King, the
Regal and Temporal Supremacy. And this is enough if he would be constant,
and stand to his words. For no other Supremacy, or Authority, in matters
Ecclesiastical, does the King claim, but that which is Regal and Temporal.
In as much as he claymeth not to punish any offenders, in Ecclesiastical
causes, otherwise then by finings, imprisonments, and such like Civil, and
Temporal penalties, and punishments, which belong to that his Regal and
Temporal Authority to inflict: and in as much as he also meddleth not with
preaching the Word, Ministering the Sacraments, Excommunication, Absolution, or
whatsoever else that is proper and peculiar to the Bishops or Ministers
function. And seeing he is so equal and just, as to deny Clergy men,
nothing that of right belongs to them: Why should any Clergy men, or any
men whosoever, be so unequal and unjust, as to deny unto him any thing that
is his proper due, as namely a Regal and Temporal Power and Authority, to be
extended, and used against offenders, in matters Ecclesiastical, as well as in
Civil? For what? Shall offenders in causes Ecclesiastical, that be and
persist wilful, obstinate, and perpetual contemners of al Divine admonitions,
Church censures and Christian courses, be held, not fit to be restrained, or
punished Civilly, or by Temporal Authority? Would not such a liberty, and
impunitie, prove extremely and intollerably mischievous? And yet must such a
mischief be endured, or at least hazarded, where Ecclesiastical Authority is
contemned and set at naught, and that withal such contemners shall
nevertheless not be permitted to be restrained by the Civil Sword, and
Authority of Kings and Princes. This argument I alleged in the first Chapter
of my former Book, (page 6.) but my Adversary is of such an excellent skill,
as that he can tell how to pass it over, as he does many things more, without
making any answer thereunto. Wherefore that his evasion and distinction,
(which is likewise the common evasion and distinction of all the Papists,) viz,
that Kings and Princes, are to be obeyed, when they command for matters Civil
and Temporal, but not when they command for God, and his Religion, or in
matters Ecclesiastical, (...) appears to be a most false and most idle
distinction, being both in my former Book, and in this also, (much more
largely,) reselled and confuted. Yea, it is so gross and absurd, as that at
the very first hearing of it, in this sort produced, it shows it self to be
very senseless, and ridiculous. For, shall the King be obeyed, when he
commands for men? and shall he not be obeyed, when he commands for God? Is
not this to prefer Men before God, Earth before Heaven, the Body before the
Soul, the Commonweal before the Church, and things worldly, terrestrial,
and external, before things divine, celestial, and eternal? Rhem. Annot 6 in
1. Pet. 2.13.
As for that which the Rhemis^s say, That this Text gives no more to any
Prince, then may and ought to be done and granted to an heathen Magistrate: it
makes not for them, but against them. For if they will grant no more to
Christian Kings and Princes, then is due to heathen Princes, ye^, even so much
suffices, as touching this point, if it be well (...): Because, it is very
clear, that even heathen Kings and Princes, are and ought to be obeyed, Ezra.
1.1.2.3. etc.
when they command for God, his service and Religion: as is evident, by Cyrus,
King of Persia, who though he were an heathen King, gave commandment to build
the Temple in Jerusalem, Ez a. 61.23. etc.
and was therein obeyed: Darius also, another heathen King, gave commandment
for the continuing of the building of that Temple, and for the Sacrifices to be
offered in it, Ezra. 7.12.13. etc.
and was therein obeyed: In like sort, did Artaxerxes, though an heathen King,
give commandment for the reforming of the Church according to the law of God,
Dan. 3.29.
by the Ministry of Ezra, that learned Scribe. Nebuchadnezzar also, though an
heathen King, gave a commandment, and made a decree, that none should
blaspheme the GOD of Shadrach, Dan 6 25 26.
Meshach, and Abednego. King Darius likewise gave commandment and made a
decree, that in all the Dominions of his kingdom, men should tremble and fear
before the Lord God of Daniel, whose God was the true God. Some heathen
Emperors also gave commandment, that men should cease from persecuting the
Christians, and that Christians should have the free exercise of their
Religion, build Oratories, and places for their meetings and assemblies, Eusebius
li 7. cap. ^8 cap 12.
and quietly possess them, for the service of their God. Were not these and
such like commandments, good, lawful, and commendable, Eusebius. lib. 9 cap. 16.
cap. 8. lat.
though given by heathen Emperors, and in causes Ecclesiastical, and
concerning Religion? And were they not meet to be obeyed? If then heathen
Kings, and Princes, may, (as is manifest,) lawfully and laudably command for
God, his worship, service, and Religion, and are therein dutifully to be
obeyed; By what right or reason, can it be denied to Christian Kings, and
Princes, to have (at least) the like authority, to command in matters
Ecclesiastical, for God, his service, and Religion? For, shall Christian Kings
and Princes, be in worse case then heathen Kings? Or shall they fare the worse,
or have the less Regal power, and authority, because of their Religion of
Christianity? God forbid. This argument I likewise alleged in the first
Chapter of my former Book (page 7.) whereto my Adversary again, like a wise
man still knows, how to answer nothing. And yet he says, he will propose my
defused argument in a succinct form, the most for my advantage^^: But, I
neither desire, nor look for any advantage at his hands: Let him make his own
Arguments the best he can for his own advantage: As for mine, I would not
have him to frame them, unless he would do it more truly. He would
indeed, make my Argument defused, or rather confused, by his confused manner of
answering; jumbling things together which I had Methodically, and expressly
distinguished. For, first, my purpose was to prove his Majesty's SUPREMACY,
over all persons, within his own Dominions: and then afterward in the second
place, to show his Authority in respect of Causes Ecclesiastical, as well as
Civil. In the first Section of that Chapter, page 1.2.3.4. I handle the first
point, concerning his Supremacy, in respect of persons: and in the second
section page 5. and not before, it is, that I begin to handle his Authority in
respect of causes. This Text then of S. Peter, being alleged, (as it is), in
the first section, and page 1. was by me produced, to prove only his Majesty's
Supremacy over all persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, within his own
Dominions, and not for any such end, or purpose, as thereby to prove his
Majesty's Authority in causes Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil, as he
misconceaveth. But since he will needs have it so used, I am well content with
it: because that Text, does indeed serve very sufficiently, to prove both
those purposes. For the first, the argument is very apparent, and may be
framed thus. If all persons as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil, are to be
subject to their King, as to the Chief or Supreme within his own Dominions,
then has their King a clear Supremacy over them all: But all persons as well
Ecclesiastical, as Civil, are to be subject to their King, as to the Chief
or Supreme, within his own Dominions, (for so S. Peter directly teaches:)
Ergo their King has a clear Supremacy over them all. And for the second
point, the argument is also very open, and evident: For the King is not called
the Chief, or Supreme, in respect only of the excellency of his person above
all his subjects, but in respect also of his Authority, Rule, and Government,
he has over them: yea in this respect specially, he is so called, as appears
by this, That S. Peter distribu^es the humane creature, he there speaks of,
that is, the Temporal Magistrates, Rulers, or Governors, into the King, as
being the Chief or Supreme Governor, and into other that be governors under
him. So that here we find, the Kings Title of Supreme Governor, very
manifestly proved, and directly ratified, and confirmed. And that his
government, and authority extends also to all manner of causes, (and
consequently to causes Ecclesiastical as well, as Civil,) it is thus also made
very apparent, out of this Text. For S. Peter here shows, 1. Pet 2.13.14.
that the King as the Supreme Governor, and the other that be inferior
governors under him, be all constituted to this end, (viz.) For the punishment
of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. Now be there not, or
may there not be, evil doers, as well in the Church, as in the Commonweal, and
transgressors, and offenders, as well in matters Ecclesiastical, as Civil and
Temporal? Shall not then as well the one sort of these offenders, as the other,
be held punishable, by the Kings Civil, and Temporal Sword, especially when
they grow and continue obstinate, wilful, perverse, and unruly, and will not
otherwise be reclaymed? The Text makes no such difference, or distinction, (as
the Papists fondly do,) between offenders in causes Ecclesiastical, and
offenders in causes Civil, and Temporal, but generally or indefinitely, it
would have Evil doers, of what sort soever, without any distinction,
exception, or restriction, to be punished by this Civil sword. And ubi lex
non distinguit, ibi nec nos distinguere debemus. The Argument then for the
Kings Authority in matters Ecclesiastical, as well as in Civil, out of this
Text of S. Peter, is and may be framed thus. Whosoever has authority from
God, to punish Evil doers, by the Civil sword, without any distinction,
restriction, or exception of causes; has Authority in causes Ecclesiastical,
as well as Civil. But the King has Authority from God, to punish ^^^-^oers by
the Civil sword, without any distinction, restriction, or exception of causes:
Ergo, The King has Authority in causes Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil. The
Mato^ is evident in it self. The Miror is proved, and apparent by the Text:
and therefore the conclusion must be granted.

My Adversary nevertheless still urges, that as touching spiritual and
Ecclesiastical causes and matters, and concerning Religion, obedience must be
performed to the Supreme Pastor, and head of the Church. And who denies this?
Yea, this is granted unto him, so he take it rightly: For not the Pope, (as he
and other Papists strangely suppose) but CHRIST JESUS only, is the Chief
Shepherd, or Supreme Pastor, and head of the Church, as has been often
declared, and as is apparent. As for that he says, That the Militant Church,
must have some visible head in Earth to rule and govern it: 1. Pet. 5.4 Hebr.
13 20. Colos. 1.18. Ephesians. 1.2^.23.
He only says it, but does not prove it: and it is indeed, but an humane
devise and conceit, and such as is before confuted in my former Book, page
95.96 97. whereunto he full makes no answer. And yet it is there showed, that
the Company, both Militant, and Triumphant, make but one body, and one Church,
unto CHRIST JESUS, whereof he is the Head: and that though in his bodily
presence and humanity, he be in heaven; yet by his Deity, and power of his
Spirit, and word, he is in Earth with his Church, and can tell, how to rule,
govern, comfort, confirm, guide, and direct it, and to give all gifts and
graces requisite, and to do and perform all the offices of an Head unto it,
much better then the Pope of Rome, or any man mortal whosoever: Yea, himself
confuteth himself, when he says, that in these words of CHRIST; Reddite
quaesunt Caesaris, Caesari: and quaesunt Dei, Deo: By this word; Caesari, is
understood, (says he,) The Supreme Governor in Temporal affairs: and by the
word Deo, the Supreme Governor in Spiritual affairs. For, thereupon it
follows, that then is not the Pope of Rome, the supreme governor in those
spiritual and Ecclesiastical affairs, unless he will say, that the Pope is
God. But whereas he makes Caesar, or the Emperor, to be the supreme Governor
in Temporal affairs only, as though he had no Authority in spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical matters also, therein is still his error; because it is before
most manifestly proved, that even the heathen Emperors, (and much more those
that were Christian Emperors) lawfully might, and did command for God his
service, and Religion; and dealt in matters Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil
and Temporal. Yea, Rex est persona mixta, as our law also calls him, in
respect of that his interest and Authority in causes both Ecclesiastical, and
Civil. For which cause likewise, amongst Divines, he is said to be, Custos
utriusque Tabulae.

As for that his calumnious speech, against Luther and Calvine, which he here
also inserteth, Luther tom. 1. in Genes. cap. 9. and tom 3. Ann^t. in Deuteronomy. 6.
fol. 40. and tom 2. responed Ambr Catherinum fol 150. and 152. etc. Calvin
Inst. l b. 4 cap 20. and in Rom 13. etc.
as though they wrote against the obedience due to Princes and their laws; it
has been often answered by sundry Protestants, and the untruth of it, is so
notorious, as, that the works and writings of them both, do show, and openly
proclayme the contrary to the world: if men would please to read them, and not
to wrest their words, but to take them, every where, in a right sense. But
what means he by this, that he says: Kings and Princes, may more confidently
build the safety of their persons and estates, upon the loyalty of their
Catholic subjects, then upon any Protestant subjects? what, are Papists (whom
he calls Catholics) more loyal to Protestant Kings, and Princes, then
Protestants? Is there any likelihood of truth, in this? Or does he think,
that Protestant Kings and Princes, will or can be so persuaded? For is it
possible, that they, who for love or affection to the Pope, and Popish
Religion, deny and oppugn the Kings SUPREMACY, and the true Christian
RELIGION he professes and defends, can be more loyal or better subjects
unto him, then those that acknowledge his SUPREMACY, and RELIGION by his
Authority established? Thankefully, and joyfully embracing them both, praying
unto God for the continuance of them, and for all manner of happiness and
prosperity upon him and his, which is the defendor and maintayner of them both
amongst us, and think themselves bound in duty and conscience so to do?
Comparisons, they say, are odious, and therefore I could have wished that he
had forborne them, neither needed he to have used them: For, if we all, both
Protestants and Papists, be in all respects, and at all times, found,
faithful, true, and good Subjects to his Majesty, as of right and duty we
all ought, and as I hope, we all shall be; I doubt not but it will suffice,
although we strive not thus to provoke one another, by Comparative, or
Superlative terms. But what reason has he further, to call Calvine, (as he
does,) the sensual Libertine of this age, who wrote against the libertines,
and against all licentiousness, and all manner of ungodliness, and impiety
whatsoever: For so his many learned, laborious, godly, and worthy works, do
abundantly testify and declare to the world? Will Papists never cease their
malicious, and untrue accusations against Luther, Calvine, Beza, and other
Protestants?

5 The second Text I alleged, to prove the Kings Supremacy, over all persons,
Ecclesiastical as well as Civil, within his own Dominions, is taken out of S.
Paul, in Romans 13. where S. Paul says thus. Romans 13.1.2.3.4.5.6. etc.
Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of
God: and the powers that be, be ordained of God: Whosoever therefore resists
the power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive
to themselves condemnation. For Magistrates are not to be feared for good
works, but for evil. Will thou then be without fear of the power? Do well:
so, shall thou have praise for the same: For, he is the Minister of God unto
thee, for thy good: but if you do evil, fear; For he bears not the Sword
in vain; For he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him
that does evil. Wherefore ye must be subject, not only because of wrath, but
also for conscience sake: And for this cause, pay ye tribute also: For they
are Gods Ministers, employing themselves, for that very purpose. By the higher
powers, (in this Text), whereto subjection is required, and which bear the
sword, for the punishment of the evil doers, and for the praise of them that
do well, is meant, 1. Pet. 2.13.14.
(as S. Peter also has before showed), those that be Kings, Princes, and such
like Civil and Temporal Magistrates. And this is so evident, as that though
my Adversary does not, yet the Rhemists do ingeniously confess, Rhem. Annot.
in Romans 13. verse. 4.
and teach it. For, That the Apostle means here specially of Temporal
powers, we may see, (say they,) by the sword, tribute and external compulsion,
he here attributes to them. Neither was there then, (as they say,) any doubt
conceaved by Christian men, whether they should obey their Spiritual powers,
or Spiritual Governors, yea or no: which is another reason, they them give to
show, that this Text is not to be expounded of Spiritual, Origin. in hunc
locum.
but of Civil and temporal Rulers and Magistrates. Origin likewise declares
the same, affirming them to be, Non Antistites, and Principes Ecclesiarum; sed
Mundi judices, and seculi potestates, Not Bishops, and Prelates of Churches,
but worldly Judges, and secular Powers. In like sort S. Ambrose affirms them
to be Reges, Ambros. in hunc locum. Aug. de Catech. rudibus cap. 21.
and seculi rectores, Kings and secular Governors. S. Augustine also says,
that hereby is taught, Ecclesiam Christi in omnibus sanctis ejus, servituram
esse, sub Regibus seculi: That the Church of Christ in all his Saints, Lib. 2.
did. 44.
must serve under the Kings of this world. The M. of the Sentences likewise
says: that the Apostle speaks of Princes, and such like. Aquinas also does
interpret them, Aquinas in ^^lle locum.
to be, Potestates terrenas, and carnales Dominos, Terrestrial powers, and
temporal Governors. Aug contr. epist Parmen. li. 1. c. 7
S. Augustine again, in another place, yet more fully declares the same. What
credit then is to be given to mine Adversary, when contrary to the testimony
of all these, and contrary also to the testimony of the Rhemists, and
contrary also to the clear evidence of the Text it self, he says, That in
these higher Powers, is no more included the Temporal, then the Spiritual
Powers? Yea, S. Chrysostom also yet further shows, that Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists and such like Ecclesiastical Ministers, are to be reckoned in the
number of those Souls, that are to be subject to the higher powers; and
therefore can none of them; (no, not the Bishop of Rome himself,) be comprised
or intended under the name of the higher Powers, there mentioned. Chrysostom. in
Rom homi^ 23.
S. Chrysostomes words be these: Let every Soul be subject to the higher
Powers: Yea, though you be an Apostle, though an Evangelist, though a Prophet,
Sive quisquis tandem fueris, etc. Or whosoever you be. My Adversary is so
captious, as that because in my former Book, page 2. cap. 1. there is an, etc.
after these words in Latin, Quisquis tandem fueris: he would make his Reader
believe, that there is some abstruse meaning in that Enigmaticall ^^^se, (as he
calls it,) which if I would unfold, would declare, how little it made for my
purpose: But, why does not himself unfold that aenigma? Is it, because Davus
est, non Oedipus? For if himself had read the place in Chrysostom (as it
seems he did not), he might easily have unfolded the aenigma, and discovered
the fallacy or deceit, if any had lain enclosed, or hidden in it. But my self
did indeed sufficiently unfold it, in the very same place (page 2.), where,
after that (etc.) I added out of Chrysostom, that which I meant by that
(etc.), namely, these words, Neque enim pietate^ subvertit ista subjectio, For
neither does this subjection overthrow piety or godliness. The whole clause
and sentence then, (that being also added which was intended by the etc.), is
this: (viz.) Let every Soul be subject to the Higher powers: Yea, though you
be an Apostle, though an Evangelist, though a Prophet, or whosoever you be:
For neither does this subjection overthrow piety or godliness. Now he has it
wholly and entirely unfolded: What can he make of it, either to advantage
himself, or to disadvantage me? Yea, this unfolding and expressing of it,
rather makes for me; because it directly affirms, that this subjection (of
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and all other Ministers Ecclesiastical,) To
these Higher powers, stands well with Christian Religion, and does no way
subvert, or overthrow any part of piety or godliness. Wherefore, S.
Chrysostom says there yet further that, Omnibus ista praecipiuntur,
Sacerdotibus quoque a^ Monachis, and non solum secularibus: These things be
commanded to all, even to the Priests also, and to Monckes, and not to
secular-men only. I likewise alleged, (in that first Chapter of my Book, (
page 2. and 3.) Theodoret, Theodoret. Theophil. and Oecumenius in Rom 13.
Be^^ar Epist. 42 Greg. Epist. li. 2 Epist. 62. and 65. Paris 1605.
Theophila^^, Oecumenius, Aeneas Silvius, Gregory, and Bernard: who all
declare, (as well as Chrysostom), that even Bishops, Priests and Cleargie-men,
and not Secular or Laymen only, be in the number of those Souls, that are to
be subject to these higher Powers: In so much that Aeneas Silvius, Aene^^
Silvius lib. 1 de Ge^^^ Basil. Council.
(who was himself, sometime a Pope of Rome,) affirms, that S. Paul says:
Omnis anima potestatibus subli mioribus subdita fit: nec excipit animam Papae.
Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers: Neither, (says he,) does S.
Paul here except the soul of the Pope himself, but that he also ought to be
subject. And for further proof hereof, Ortat. contr. Parmen. lib 3.
I alleged also the testimony of Optatus, who says: that super Imperatorem
non est nisi solus Deus, qui fecit Imperatorem: Above the Emperor, is not any,
but God only that made the Emperor. I cited also the testimony of Tertullian,
Tertul ad S^apul cap. 2.
writing thus: Colimus Imperatorem, ut hominem a Deo secundum, and solo Deo
minorem. We Christians do honor the Emperor, as the man next unto God, and
inferior only unto God. Agreeably whereunto he says again of the Emperors,
Ters. Apolog. cap. ^0.
that they be under the power of God only, a quo sunt secundi, post quem
primi: from whom they be the second, after whom they be the first. And (page
30.) I alleged the testimony, Chrysostom. ad popul Antioch. homil. 2.
once more, of S. Chrysostom, who says of the Christian Emperor in his time:
that Non habet parem super terram: He has no peer or equal upon earth. Yea,
he says further of him, that he was, Summitas and caput omnium super terras
hominum, The head, and one that had the supremacy over all men upon earth. To
all which, my Adversary, according to his wonted, wise, and learned manner of
answering, thought it best to answer nothing. Thus far then have I proved
against him, that by the higher powers, in this Text of S. Paul, be meant
Emperors, Kings, Princes, and such like temporal Magistrates: and that by
every Soul in this Text, which is to be subject to the higher Powers, is
meant, all manner of persons whatsoever, Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil and
Temporal; and consequently, that the Bishop of Rome, was then clearly subject
to the Emperor of Rome, and so ought still to have continued. But my Adversary
at last grants, That Bishops, Priests, and Cleargie-men, be subject to the
King, and to his Laws; but with this distinction, namely, according to the
directive power of them, but not according to the coactive. And this
distinction he learned, Bellar. de Clericis cap 28.
not only of Suarez, but of Bellarmine also: For thus likewise writes
Bellarmine. Non sunt amplius Reges, Clericorum superiores, and proinde non
tenentur Iure divino, nec humano, eis parere, nisi quantu^ ad leges directivas.
Kings are not any longer Sovereigns or superiors to Cleargie-men, and
therefore are they not bound to obey them by Gods Law, or Man's law, unless it
be in respect of laws directive. What Bellarmine means by laws directive,
himself declares when he says, That Princes have no coactive power over the
Cleargie-men, but only power directive. This distinction was not known in the
Apostolic, Primitive, and ancient Church, nor so long as the Bishops of Rome
were subject to the Emperors; but when the Bishops of Rome, contrary to all
laws, both humane, and divine, had traitorously and wickedly subdued the
Emperors; and that it could be said of Emperors and Kings as Bellarmine
speaks, that; Non sunt amplius Clericoru^ superiores, They are no longer
Sovereigns or superiors to Cleargie-men: Then did this distinction arise or
grow, that the Kings might have a directive power, but no coactive power over
the^, that is, might direct them to what was good, but might not compel the^
to it. And so faith also mine Adversary, that coactive power imposes
penalties. Now this distinction is easily answered and confuted, yea he might
have perceaved it in my former Book (page 7.8.9.10.) to have been
sufficiently answered and confuted. For besides other proofs, Aug lib. 1 in
fine contr. Epist. Parmen.
it is there showed by diverse testimonies out of S. Augustine himself against
the Donatists; That Kings and Princes may not only direct or command, but may
also by Laws, penalties and punishments, compel their Subjects, (and
consequently Cleargie-men, asvvell as others,) to obedience, in that which is
good and godly. Yea, it is the proper and peculiar right of Kings and Princes,
externally to use a power coactive, by reason of the sword committed to them
from God: which, Ecclesiastical Ministers, by virtue of their Ecclesiastical
calling and office, cannot do. And seeing Parents have a power coactive over
their children, and Masters in a family over their servants: very strange it
were, if Kings should not be allowed to have a power coactive over their
subjects. But it is indeed very well known, that the Christian Emperors in
ancient time, did use a power coactive, even over Cleargie-men, as well as over
others, inflicting penalties and punishments upon them. As for example:
Constantine that Christian Emperor, exiled and banished Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia, Theoderes. lib. 1. cap. 20.
and Theognius Bishop of Nice: and he says further: That if any man (whether
Bishop, or other) were offended, at that his banishing of them, and would grow
malepart thereupon, Illius statim audacia, Ministri Dei, hoc est mea executione
coercebitur: His boldness shall forthwith be repressed, by the execution of
Gods minister, that is, of my self. Another Constantine also, (by whose
Imperial Authority, the sixth Council at Constantinople was held, in a Decree
inserted in that Council), Synod. 6. Act. 18 Conc. edit. ^in to ^. page 92.
says: Siquidem Episcopus est, vel Clericus, vel Monachico circundatus habitu,
deportationis paenam exsolvet: If he be a Bishop, or a Clearke, or a Moncke,
let him be punished with deportation or banishment. Charle-Mayne also in a
French Synod, Tom 2. Council.
decreed imprisonment: Si ordinatus Presbiter fuerit, duos annos in carcere
permaneat. Aug. lib. 1. in fine contr. epist. Par.
S. Augustine again declares, that there was a Law Imperial against those
that professed themselves Christians and true Catholics, and yet were not so,
but kept private Conventicles, (...) that he that ordained a Clearke for that
purpose, or the Clearke so ordained, should loose ten pounds of gold: and the
place also where such Conventicles were kept, should be forfeyted to the
Emperor. You see then (for the refelling and overthrowe of that foolish and
false distinction) that the Christian Emperors had power coactive, over
Bishops, and Cleargie-men, punishing them sometime with deportation, exile, or
banishment: sometime, with imprisonment: and sometime with penalties, and
losses of sums of money, and other forfeytures. And upon some kind of
offenders, you may read, that they inflicted the punishment of death. And
indeed to what end, has the King this Regal and Temporal Authority and
jurisdiction, and the power coactive in his hands, by reason of the Sword
committed to him from God, if he may not use it, and put it in execution? Yea
my Adversary himself confesses, and says, that Iurisdictio nullius
videretur esse momenti, si coertionem aliquam non haberet: Jurisdiction might
seem to be of no regard, if it had not some coertion, or power coactive joined
with it. Again, (he says:) Cui jurisdictio data est, ea quoque concessa
intelliguntur, sine quibus jurisdictio expleri non potest: To whom jurisdiction
is given, all those things be also understood to be granted, without which that
jurisdiction cannot be performed. Wherefore, even by those Maxims, which
himself cites and approves, it is manifest; that seeing the King has a
power, jurisdiction, and Authority, to direct and command Cleargie-men, he
has also a power coercitive, or coactive over them, to compel, correct, and
punish them, if otherwise they will not obey those his directions and
commandments. So that my Adversary needed to have no better confuter of this
his idle distinction then himself.

But page 5. in that first Chapter of my former Book, I alleged that Text of
Romans 13. to prove also the Kings Authority in matters Ecclesiastical, as well
as Civil or Temporal. And indeed this Text serves also very sufficiently
for that purpose. For as there is here no exception of any person, so is there
also no exception of any cause or matter: but whosoever does evil, be it in
what kind of cause soever, he is here made subject to this sword and Temporal
Authority of Emperors, Kings and Princes; For the Text says, That they are
the ordinance of God, and the Ministers of God, (attending, employed, and
constituted to this very end and purpose,) for the praise, countenancing, and
encouraging of the good and wel-doers, and for discountenancing, Aug. Epist. 50.
discouraging, and punishing of the bad, and such as be evill-doers. And
therefore does S. Augustine say: that Quicunque legibus Imperatorum, quae pro
Dei veritate f^runtur obtemperare non vult, grande acquirit supplicium:
Whosoever will not obey the Laws of the Emperor, which are made for the truth
of God, does purchase to himself a great punishment. Aug. Epist. 166.
For, (says he in another place,) Hoc jubent Imperatores, quod jubet and
Christus: quia cum jubent bonum, per illos non jubet nisi Christus: The
Emperors command that which Christ also commands: because when they command
that which is good, it is Christ himself that commands by them. Aug de
Civit. Dei lib. 5. cap. 24
Yea S. Agustine was so far from this point of Popery, to deny, or disallow
the Authority of Emperors, Kings and Princes in matters Ecclesiastical and
concerning Religion, as that he does evermore teach, and defend it, whenever
there was occasion to speak of it, in so much that he says: Imperatores
foelices dicimus, si suam potestatem ad Dei cultum maxim dilatandum, etc. We
affirm the Emperors to be happy, if they extend their Authority the most
they can, to do service unto God, in the spreading of his Religion. For, Aug.
Epist. ^0.
(as the same S. Augustine again says,) a King serves God one way, as he is
a man: and another way, as he is a King: As a Man he serves God by living well
and faithfully: But as he is a King, he serves God by setting forth Laws, to
command that which is good, and to remove the contrary. So that Kings, as
Kings, serve God, in doing that for his service, which none but Kings can do.
Wherefore my Argument to prove the Authority of Emperors, Kings, and Princes,
in both those points together, out of this Text of Romans 13. is this: whosoever
has Authority to punish evill-doers, without exception of any person, and
without exception of any cause, has Authority over all persons, and in all
causes as well Ecclesiastical as Civil: But the Emperor within his Empire, and
the King within his Kingdoms, has Authority to punish evill-doers without
exception of any person, and without exception of any cause, (as is apparent by
the Text it self, wherein no exception is to be found.) Ergo, the Emperor
within his Empire, and the King within his kingdoms, has authority over all
persons, and in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil.

6 But now from this Text of Romans 13. alleged in the 5. page of that first
Chapter in my Book, concerning the SUPREMACY: My Adversary comes next to
the point of Appeals, mentioned in the same first Chapter, page 24. So, that
he here skippeth over 9. whole leaves together at one leap: and I must follow
him in his course. It is true, that (in the page 24.) I said, that when
Caecilianus Bishop of Carthage, was accused by Donatus, and some other of that
saction, Constantine the Emperor commanded Caecilianus to come to Rome, with a
certain number of Bishops that accused him: and by his Commission, (extant in
Eusebius,) authorized and appointed Miltiad^s, the then Bishop of Rome and some
others with him, for the hearing and ending of that matter These Commissioners
condemned Donatus, who appealed from their sentence, to the Emperor: which
appeal also, the Emperor received. Where, beside that you see, that this
Christian Emperor made Commissioners in this Episcopal and Ecclesiastical
cause, observe withal, that Miltiades the then Bishop of Rome, was one of
those Commissoners, and there withal you may also note, that the Bishops of
Rome, were then very clearly subject and not superior to the Emperor. So that
a Christian King, or Prince, not only may make Commissioners in
Ecclesiastical causes, but may also have Appeals made unto him, as is here
apparent. To this my Adversary makes diverse answers. First, (he says,) that
this instance concerning Appeals, makes more against me, then for me, because
it was an Appeal made by Heretics, (viz.) the Donatists, unto the Emperor.
But this reason of his, makes more against him, then set him. For if it were
lawful for Heretics, who thought themselves wronged by the inferior Judges,
to appeal to the Emperor: no less (if not much more lawful was it) for the
Orthodoxe Bishops if they were wronged, to appeal to him. And if Constantine,
that Orthodoxe, godly and Christian Emperor, thought it lawful for him, (as
he did, for otherwise he would never have meddled with it,) to entertain,
and receave an appeal made to him from Heretics: much more would he have
thought it lawful and meet to receave Appeals from such as were Orthodoxe,
right and true Christians, and men, for Faith and Religion, like himself. But
that he may know, that not only heretics, but Orthodoxe Bishops also, Athan.
Apolog. 2 cap. Quum multas.
did appeal to the Emperor: Let him take for an evident proof of it, the
example of Athanasius, and of the other Bishops joined with him, who, (as is
before showed,) appealed from the Council of Tyrus, Socrat lib. 1. cap. 33.
and 34.
unto the same godly Emperor Constantine: which appeal the same Emperor
likewise received. Neither would Athanasius, nor any other good and godly
Bishops have appealed unto him, if they had not thought it lawful, both for
them so to do, and for the Emperor also to receive such appeals. Neither did
the Donatists appeal only from Miltiades the Bishop of Rome, and those that
were joined with him by Commission from the Emperor: But, they appealed also
from those other Bishops, that were afterward assembled at Arle in France, for
the hearing, and ending of the same cause. And both these Appeals did the
Emperor receive, and upon the last appeal, he sat himself in person, and
gave Judgment for Caecilianus, against the Donatists: whose proceedings and
Judgments, upon those appeals, S. Augustine disliked not, but well liked and
allowed: alleging them, as being substantial proofs for the Catholics, and
lawful, good, and effectual judgments against the Donatists. I grant that
Constantine was loath at the first, to be Judge in this Episcopal cause, in his
own person, Aug Epist. 166
and therefore S. Augustine says: Eam discutiendam atque finiendam, Episcopis
delegavit, He delegated, and appointed Bishops to discuss and determine it,
namely, Miltiades and his Colleagues. Ibidem.
And when Miltiades and his Colleagues had pronounced Caecilianus innocent, and
condemned Donatus, as Author of the schism raised at Carthage: Your side,
(says S. Augustine to the Donatists, Ibidem.
) came back to the Emperor, and complained of the judgment of the Bishops
against them. The most patient and mild Emperor, the second time gave them
other Judges, namely, the Bishops that met at Arle in France: And your men,
(says he, seaking still to the Donatists,) appealed from the Bishops of Arle
also to the Emperors own person; and never left, till the Emperor himself in
person took the hearing of the cause between them: which he did, and, upon
hearing it, pronounced Caecilianus innocent, and those his accusers, Idem
Epist. 162
to be malicious wranglers. Again, the same S. Angustine says: that the
Donatists appealed from Ecclesiastical judgment, to the end that Constantine
might hear the cause: Whither, when they came, both parties standing before
him, Caecilianus was adjudged to be innocent, and the Donatists overthrown. To
prove this I will further bring you, (says S. Augustine), the very words of
Constantine, where he witnesses, That upon judicial hearing of both sides, he
found Caecilianus to be clear. Yea, S. Augustine shows further, what
followed upon this judgment; Aug. Epist. 166.
Then did Constantine, (says he), make a sharp law, to punish the Donatists:
his sons continued the same. Read, what Valentinian, read when you will,
what Gratian, and Theodosius, Decreed, against you. Why vvonder you then, at
the Children of Theodosius, as if they had follovved any other president in
this cause, then the judgment of Constantine, which so many Christian
Emperors have kept inviolate? Though Constantine be dead, yet the judgment of
Constantine, given against you, lives. For, when Emperors command that which
is good, it is Christ and no man else, that commands by them. Thus you see
how much this judgment of Constantine upon this Appeal, made to him, (though
by Donatists), was not only justified and approved by S. Augustine, but
embraced also by other Christian Emperors, as Virtuous, and confirmed as
Religious, and honored of the whole Orthodoxe Church, in that time. So little
cause has mine Adversary, or any other Papists, to mislike of Constantine his
meddling therein, as if it were unlawful. But secondly, my Adversary
answers, that the then Emperor Constantine the Great, did remit Caecilianus
and the Donatists, for the decision and determining of their difference, unto
Miltiades Bishop of Rome, as to his proper and right Judge. It is true, that he
committed the hearing and determining of that cause unto Miltiades Bishop of
Rome, but not to him alone, as if he were the sole and only proper, and
rightful Judge, in the case, but to him together with others: For, Marcus,
Rheticius, Maternus, and Marinus, were interested with him in the same
Commission. The Commission is yet extant in Eusebius, to be seen in these
words. Constantine the Emperor, unto Miltiades Bishop of Rome, Eusebius. li. 10.
c. 5
and to Marcus, sends greeting: For as much as many such Epistles are brought
unto me from Anilinus Lieutenant of Afric, wherein it is said, that
Caecilianus Bishop of Carthage is reprehended in many things, by diverse of his
Colleagues abiding in Afric: and this seems unto me very grievous, that
there should be found in those Provinces, which the providence of God has
allotted peculiarly unto my government, a great multitude of people prone unto
the worse, and disagreeing: And that amongst Bishops, there should be such
variance. My pleasure therefore is, that Caecilianus with ten Bishops of his
accusers, and ten other of his favorers, do come to Rome, there to be heard
before you both, joining with you, Rheticius, Maternus, and Marinus, your
Colleagues, whom purposely for that matter I have commanded with speed to
repair thither unto you, etc. And S. Augustine likewise has before told you,
Aug Epist 166.
that the Emperor committed this cause, Non Episcopo sed Episcopis, Not to one
Bishop in the Singular number, but to Bishops in the Plural number: eam
discutiendam atque finiendam Episcopis delegavit. And again he says: Colla^.
3 diei cum Donatist^^ cap 5
Causam Caecilian injunxit eis audiendam, and elsewhere he also says,
Constantinum dedisse Iudices iterum, Idem Epist. 166
That Constantine gave them Judges a second time. And he further proves that
those Judges, both the first and second, might lawfully judge in that case,
Idem Epist. 162.
Eo quod Imperator illos Iudices dedisset, Because the Emperor had given those
Judges. So that it appears very fully and clearly, that not Miltiades alone,
as Bishop of Rome, and in his own right, but Miltiades associated and joined
with others, namely, with Marcus, Rheticius, Maternus and Marinus, were the
Judges, in this case, and that by Commission and Authority granted from the
Emperor. Yea, you see, there was afterward also an Appeal from their sentence,
to the Emperor, whereupon the Emperor, a second time, gave other Judges. From
these also (...) there a second Appeal, to the Emperor himself in person:
who, at the last, in his own person heard and judged the cause, and without
the Bishop of Rome, by his own authority, pronounced final sentence therein.
The least of these facts proves the Emperors Supremacy in those times, as well
over the Bishop of Rome, as over other Bishops: What force then have they, when
they be all united and joined together?

Yet, thirdly, my Adversary answers, that Constantine the Emperor did but
pronounce and declare, the justness of the sentence, given formerly against
the Donatists, by their competent Judge, Pope Miltiades. But first, why does he
still say, That the sentence against the Donatists, was given by Miltiades; as
though it had been given only by him? For it is manifest, that it was not
only his sentence and judgment, but the sentence and judgment of the rest of
his Colleagues and fellow Commissioners joined with him. Secondly, why does he
speak of Miltiades Bishop of Rome, as if he were the only competent Judge,
when he not only sees others to be joined, and made Judges with him, but an
Appeal also to be made and allowed from his and their sentence, and from other
Judges also afterward given, to Judge of the same cause. And thirdly, though
Constantine the Emperor, did by this sentence, upon hearing of the cause,
clear and acquit Caecilianus, and condemn the Donatists, and so approved the
first sentence, and judgment given by Miltiades and his Colleagues, and the
second sentence also that was given by the other Bishops assembled at Arle in
France: Yet does this approbation of his, or declaration of the Bishop of Romes
sentence in this case to be just and right, no more prove a supremacy in
Miltiades the Bishop of Rome, then it does in Marcus, Rheticius, Maternus, and
Marinus, or then it does in those other Bishops that were afterward assembled
at Arle, whose sentence he likewise approved, and declared to be just. Neither
does it any way impair or detract from Constantine his judgment, but that he
was also a Judge, and held the place and office of Judicature, all this
notwithstanding. For else may you say, that those Bishops assembled at Arle,
(whom S. Augustine expressly calls Iudices, Judges), were also no Judges,
because they likewise, as well as Constantine, acquitted Caecilianus, and
condemned the Donatists, and so approved the sentence of Miltiades, and his
Colleagues declaring it to be just. If a Writ of Error be brought in the Kings
bench, of a Judgment given in the Common Pleas, and upon hearing of the cause,
the Judges in the Kings Bench approve and confirm the judgment formerly given
in the Common pleas, and so declare it to be just and right: Does this any way
prove that therefore those in the Kings bench be no Judges, or does it in any
sort detract from their Authority? So upon the Appeal made to the Emperor,
when he in his own person, sat, as Judge therein, having power in himself,
either to affirm or disaffirme the former sentences and judgments given by
others, as he shall find the cause upon hearing to require: If he upon hearing
it, finding the former sentences and judgments given for Caecilianus against
the Donatists to be just and right, does by his final sentence pronounce and
declare them so to be: Does this therefore prove him to be no Judge, or does it
any way detract from his supremacy? Yea it does rather very strongly, and
most strongly prove the Emperor to be a Judge, and the Chiefest and highest
Judge under God, and to have the Supremacy over the Bishop of Rome, as well, as
over other Bishops within the precincts of the Empire. For, as Carerius also
confesses and teaches, Summum Imperium penes eum esse constat, ^arer. de
potest. Romans Pont. lib. 1. cap. 10.
ad cujus Tribunal provocatur: It is manifest that to him belongs the
Supremacy, to whose Tribunal the appeal is made.

But my Adversary faith yet further, that Appeals to Emperors and Kings, were
always in Temporal matters, but therein he is also much deceaved. For
Appeals were made to them sometimes in matters Ecclesiastical: as even this
very particular Appeal, here made to the Emperor in the cause between
Caecilianus, and the Donatists, does plainly declare. For Donatus and his
partakers objected, that Cacilianus could not be Bishop of Carthage, for many
crimes surmised against him, and especially, for that Felix which imposed hands
on him, had, (as they said), betrayed or burnt the Scriptures. Whereupon they
not only refused his Communion, but procured also his condemnation in a
Provincial Synod by IXX. African Bishops, and in a tumult erected another
Bishop. So that the great Question in this cause was, whether Caecilianus thus
accused and ordained by the imposition of hands of Felix, and condemned by that
Provincial Synod in Afric, were the right Bishop of Carthage, or he that was
erected by the Donatists: Which, what is it else, but a matter Ecclesiastical?
For, the parties accusing, and accused, were Ecclesiastical, namely, Bishops;
the crimes and faults objected, were objected as just impediments to the
Episcopal dignity; the things surmised, and to be tried, were the right
election of Bishops, the lawful deposing of them, the needful Communion with
them, the schismatic dissenting from them. What causes can be more
Ecclesiastical then these? And yet even in this Episcopal and Ecclesiastical
cause, was there (as before appears) an Appeal made to the Emperor, accepted
by him, approved by sundry Emperors, and allowed also by S. Augustine, and the
whole Orthodoxe Church in that time. That famous Appeal also from the Council
of Tyrus, to the Emperor, by Athanasius, and other Orthodoxe Bishops joining
with him, was it not likewise in a matter Ecclesiastical? For the crimes
objected against them, were these, (viz.) Overthrowing the Lords Table, dashing
in pieces the Mystical Cup, Socrat lib. 1. cap. 27. after the Greek, etc. 20.
in Latin. Act. 25.10.11.
burning the holy Bible, using a dead man's hand to sorcerie, etc. The appeal
also which S. Paul himself made from the high Priest and Council of the
Jews, unto Caesar, was it not also in a cause Ecclesiastical? For, were not
the matters for which S. Paul was accused, matters Ecclesiastical? Festus
himself witnesses, that Paul's accusers brought no crime against him of such
matters as he supposed, but had certain questions against him, of their own
superstition, Act. 25.18.19.
and of one JESUS, that was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive. And this,
even S. Paul also himself declares in his answer, when he says thus unto
them: Act. 26, 8.
Why should it be thought a thing incredible unto you, that God should raise
again the dead? And so also wrote Claudius Lysias unto Felix the governor,
Act. 23.28.29.
that when Paul was brought before the Council of the Jews, There I
perceaved, (says he), that Paul was accused of questions of their Law, but
had no crime against him worthy of death, or bonds. Yea, S. Paul says again
expressly thus: Of the resurrection of the dead it is, that I am accused of
you this day. It is therefore very apparent, Act. 24.20.21.
that S. Paul's appeal from them to the Emperor, was in and concerning a matter
Ecclesiastical. And if (which is a thing evident), S. Paul in a cause
Ecclesiastical and concerning Religion, thought it lawful and meet for him,
to appeal to the Emperor when he was an heathen, much more would he have
thought it lawful and meet to Appeal to the Emperor being a Christian. For
though an heathen Emperor has in him the power and authority to receave such
an appeale^ yet upon such an appeal in a cause Ecclesiastical and concerning
Religion, is he not so well able to judge of the cause in respect of skill and
knowledge, as he that is a Christian Emperor. And herein does also that
reverend and renowned Bishop, Athanasius, speak thus unto the Emperor of his
time. Athan. ad Constable. Apolog.
Si apud alios accusatus essem, ad tuam Majestatem provocarem: quemadmodum
Apostolus dixit, Caesarem appello, and cessatum est ab insidijs, contra eum.
Iam quum apud te calumniam mihi ausi sunt intentare, ad quem, (...) quaeso,
appellare potero, nisi ad patrem ejus qui dixit, ego sum veritas? If I were
accused before others, I would appeal to your Majesty, as the Apostle said, I
appeal to Caesar, and then was there no longer lying in wait for him: but now
that they are bold to calumniate me to your Majesty, to whom, I beseech you,
may I appeal from you, unless it be to the Father of him that said, I am the
truth? In which words, he shows, that this fact, and example of the Apostle
Paul, in the appealing to the Emperor, was to be imitated, and followed of
Christians in after times, and that beyond the Emperor, there was also in those
times of Athanasius, no appeal to be made but to God only.

But here now my Adversary goes about by alleging Appeals to have been
made to the Bishop of Rome, to infer a supremacy to belong unto him: and for
proof thereof, he cites some examples, as namely: First, that of Marcion, who
being excommunicate, Epiph. haeros. 42.
went to Rome to be absolved by the Bishop there, (as he alleges out of
Epiphanius.): Howbeit, Epiphanius does not say, that he desired this absolution
of the Bishop of Rome, but of diverse plurally, namely, a (...). Secondly,
Epiphanius shows, that these of the Church of Rome, in that time answered
him, That they might not receave or absolve him, without the consent or
permission of his Reverend Father, the Bishop, that had excommunicated him. And
thirdly against this course of running to Rome, it was afterward purposely
decreed in the Council of Nice, Conc. Nic. 1. c. ^.
That they that were excommunicate by one Bishop, should not be absolved of
another. Wherefore all this makes much against the supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome, but nothing for him. His second example is of Fortunatus and Felix, who
being wicked men and excommunicate in Afric, fled to Rome, to be absolved
there by Cornelius the Bishop of Rome. And for proof hereof, he cites S.
Cyprian: But does S. Cyprian allow of this their flying to Rome? No: Cyprian.
lib. 1. Epist. 3.
but clean contrariewise he utterly misliketh, and condemns it. For, writing
to the same Cornelius, he says, That certain persons condemned in Afric by
the Bishops there, Romam cum mendacioru^ suoru^ merce navigaverunt, Sailed to
Rome with their fraite of lies: And against this he adds further, That it is
a thing equal and right, that every man's cause should be there heard, where
the crime was committed. Again he says, That every Pastor, has a portion of
the Lords flock assigned unto him, which he must govern and rule, as he that
must give an account of his doings unto God, and therefore concludes, that
Oportet eos quibus praesumus, non circumcursare, etc. Those that be under our
rule and government, ought not to run thus about (to Rome) but ought there
to plead their cause, where they may find both accusers and witnesses: unless
perhaps, (says he), a few desperate and loose Companions, suppose the
authority of a Bishop of Afric, to be less then the authority of the
Bishop of Rome: which he speaks as accounting it absurd, for any man to
suppose, the Authority of the one, to be greater then the Authority of the
other.

His third example is of Athanasius, who being deposed from his Bishopric,
made his appeal, (says he) to Pope Julius, and was by him restored. It is
true, that Athanasius, the Patriarch of Alexandria, being oppressed, and
wrongfully thrust from his Bishopric, (as diverse other Bishops likewise were
in those days) fled to the Bishop of Rome, not to acknowledge any supremacy
in him over all other Bishops, as now he claymeth but as to a friend, and
Patron, at whose hands he expected and hoped, to find some help and defense
in that his distress. Sozomen. libr. 3. cap. 6. lat.
The Bishops throughout the East, that favored the Nicene Faith, were, (says
Sozomen) deposed, and the chiefest States invaded by the Arrians, as
Alexandria, in Egypt; Antioch in Syria; the Royal City of Constantinople,
Criminationem illi. obiectam in so ser^^uns.
in Hellespont. This the Bishop of Rome and the Priests of the West, took to
be their reproach, and therefore very freely entertained Athanasius at his
coming to them, and took upon them the defense of his cause. Where you see,
that Athanasius had aid and defense, not only of the Bishop of Rome, but of
the Priests of Rome also: wherefore, that his flying to Rome, and receiving
help and defense from them, does no more prove a supremacy in the Bishop of
Rome, then it does in the Priests of Rome. Yea, Athan. Apolog. contra Arrian.
the letters which Athanasius brought with him to Rome, from the Bishops of his
communion in the East, (witnessing the wrongs which he suffered, and earnestly
craving help therein), were not written to Julius alone, but Omnibus ubique
Ecclesiae Catholicae Episcopis, To all the Bishops of the Catholic Church
wheresoever. And accordingly was this matter heard and examined by a Synod, or
Council of Bishops: In which Synod (and not by Julius alone), it was, that
Athanasius was received and restored, as Bishop of Alexandria, notwithstanding
his former deposition. Neither did Julius the Bishop of Rome, Sozom. lib. 3. c
11 lat.

Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 20. in the greek and cap 16. in the latin.


call or summon this Council, but by the commandment of both the Emperors,
(says Socrates). (the one in the West, signifying the same by his letters, the
other which ruled in the East, willingly condescending thereunto), there was
proclaimed a general Council, that all should meet at Sardica a City of
Illiricum, etc. Yea so far was Julius, the Bishop of Rome in that time, from
having any supremacy over all the Bishops in Christendom, that when he wrote
to the Bishops of the East more freely and sharply, and as if he took some
authority upon him over them, (as they conceaved), these Eastern Bishops
assembled together in a Council at Antioch, formed an Epistle by uniforme
consent of them all, Socrat. lib 2. cap. 15. in the greek and cap 11. in the
latin. and Sozom. l^b. 3. cap. 7. lat.
wherein they inveigh bitterly against Julius, and tell him plainly, That if
any were banished the Church, and excommunicate by their decree and censure, it
belonged not to him to intermeddle with it, nor to sit in judgment upon their
Censure. So that howsoever the Bishops of the East, and of the West, might and
did give mutual help, counsel, comfort, and assistance one to another, yet
if the Bishop of Rome would at any time go beyond his bounds, and seem to
take authority over them; We see, that these Bishops of the East, would by no
means endure it, but gave it the repulse.

The fourth and last example which he cites, is that of S. John Chrysostom,
who being deposed from his Bishopric, Appealed, (as he says) to Pope
Innocentius the first. Bellarmine has also this example, as well as all the
rest: so that, my Adversary takes indeed, all his weapons and artillarie,
out of his storehouse. But both Bellarmine, and He, do but deceive their
Readers. For Chrysostom, in his Epistle does not pray aid and help only of
Innocentius the Bishop of Rome, Chrysos. Epist. 1. ad Innocent. Tom. C n^. 1.
edit Venet. 158^ page 799.
(as they suggest,) but of other Bishops likewise in the West, as well as of
him, speaking not in the Singular, but in the Plural number, thus. Domini
igitur maxim venerandi and pij, cum haec ita se habere didiceritis, studium
vestrum, and magnam diligentiam adhibete, quo retundatur haec, quae in
Ecclesias irrupit iniquitas. Therefore most religious and reverend Lords, since
you see, how things be carried, extend your diligence, and endeavor, that this
wickedness which is broken into the Churches, may be beaten back. Quippe, si
mos hic invaluerit, scitote, quod brevi transibunt omnia. Quapropter, ne
confusio haec, omnem, quae subcoelo est, nationem invadat, obsecro ut
scribatis, ut haec tam inique facta, robur non habeant: Nobis vero, literis
vestris and charitate vestra frui concedite. For if this grow to be a custom,
know ye, that all things will shortly come to naught, and therefore least this
confusion invade every nation under heaven, I beseech you write, that those
things so unjustly done, may bear no sway: And grant, that we the wronged
Bishops of the East, may e^^oy your letters and your favors. And so he goes
on, with Verbes of the Plural number, to the end: concluding his Epistle with
these words and in this manner. Haec omnia, cum ita se habere intellexeritis, a
Dominis meis prentissimis nostris Episcopis: obsecro, ut praestetis id quod
petent officij. All these things when ye shall perceave to be true, by these
my Lords and most godly brethren the Bishops, I beseech you to yield them,
that assistance they shall desire. All which clauses in that Epistle, I thus
the rather rehearse, to the end, you may the better judge, whether it be not
more fitly, and more cohaerently to be read, Obsecro ut scribatis, in the
Plural number, (as the Protestants say it ought to be read,) then Obsecro ut
scribas in the Singular number, as Bellarmine, and other Papists following the
faulty and vicious copies would have it. For when he speaks to his most
Reverend and Religious Lords, the Bishops in the West; were it not very absurd
to say thus unto them, Obsecro ut scribas, but to say, Obsecro ut scribatis is
very consonant, and most fit, and congruous. Again how can, Obsecro ut
scribas, well stand with these words. Literis vestris frui concedite? or with
didiceritis, adhibete, or, with Scitote, and intellexeritis, or with
praestetis, or with all the rest of the Verbes that be of the Plural number.
But let this be as it will; This is certain, and cannot be denied, that
Chrysostom prayed aid as well of the other Bishops of the West, as of
Innocentius Bishop of Rome, and of them all alike. So that this example, and
times of Chrysostom and Innocentius, make nothing for the Bishop of Rome his
supremacy, but much against it: For when Chrysostom was deposed from his
Bishopric, in a Council ^f Bishops at Calcedon, he appealed from them, not
to the Bishop of Rome, but to a general Council. This Socrates witnesses
saying: Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 15. in greek and cap. 14 in the lat
Johannes, eos a quibus vocabatur, tanquam inimicos exceptione recusabat, and
universalem Synodum appellabat: John Chrysostom refused those that called him
to that Council, upon this exception, that they were his enemies, and appealed
to a general Council. Secondly, those Bishops assembled in that Council, for
the deposing of Chrysostom, were so assembled, not by the commandment of the
Bishop of Rome, but by the Emperors commandment: Ibidem.
for so also does Socrates testify. Thirdly, when Innocentius saw, that the
matter could not be ended but in a general Council, he sent Legates to
Honorius and Arcadius Emperors, to beseech them to call a Council, and to
appoint the time and place for it: where also, his suite and supplication, was
so little regarded; That his Legates were sent away with reproach, Sozom. libr.
8. cap. 28.
as disturbers of the West Empire, as Sozomen witnesses. Now, if Innocentius
Bishop of Rome, had had the power and authority in those times to call
general Counsels, Why did he not call them? Yea, why did he, by his Legates
entreat and beseech the Emperors to do it, if it were a right belonging to
himself, or if it were not a right belonging to the Emperors in those days?
Or, if he were then the supreme commander of all the Christian world (as the
Popes now claim to be) how comes it to pass, that he was such an humble
suter to the Emperors for a Council, and yet could not obtain it? Do not all
these things, strongly and invincibly declare, that in those times, not the
Popes, but the Emperors, had clearly the supremacy?

Then afterward, though much out of his due time and place, and very
immethodically, (for the exception had been fitter in the next Chapter then in
this,) he takes this exception, that in the first part of my Book, Cap. 2.
and page 42. in the Margent, there is a misquotation in this sort (viz.) Bern.
de cons. ad Eug. lib. 6. cap. 3. and 8. where it should have been, Bern. de
cons. ad Eug. lib. 4 cap. 2. For, indeed in this place, it is that S. Bernard
calls the Popes doctrines and pastures, Daemonum potius, quam ovium pascua,
which be the words I cited S. Bernard for, and which are accordingly, there
expressly, to be found. What a poor exception then is this, to carpe at a
Quotation in the margent, when, the very words, and matter, are there to be
found, in the Author himself, whom I cited, namely, in S. Bernard? Is he not
far driven, that is, forced to this kind of exception? And yet if he had
been pleased to have looked into the Errata of my Book, he might have found
in the conclusion of them, that such like faults, as this, I desired the Reader
to correct with his Pen, which he might very easily have done, if he had so
pleased. But, as it seems, he is an hard man, that neither out of his own
courtesy, nor yet upon the entreaty of others, will be moved to show so small
a kindness. What? Is it, because better matter failed him, that he took this
silly exception and stands so much upon it? Or is it, because by this means,
he loves to declare himself to be as void of good humanity, as he is of
true and sound divinity? For my part: I may say, that he gives me herein
cause to joy and rejoice, that he can justly take no exception to the matter
contained in my Book, but only to a marginall Quotation, thus misprinted and
mistaken.

Howbeit, he seems yet further, very willing and forward, to carpe at these
words in my Book, Cap. 1 page 25. where I say, that in the time of King
William Rufus, Anselmus the Archbishop of Canterbury, would have appealed to
Rome, but not only the King, but the Bishops also of England, were therein
against him: but the truth of this, is very clear and apparent. For
Malmesbury, Malmesh. lib. 1. de ges^i, Pont. Angl.
(whom I there cite for proose hereof,) witnesses, That both the King,
disliked that his doing, and that therein also, Omnes Episcopi Angliae, Primati
suo suffragiu^negarunt, All the Bishops in England, denied their voices unto
their Primate. Yea Matthew Paris. further testifies, Matthew Paris. in Gulielm^
2 An. 1094.
that when Anselmus Archbishop of Canterbury, asked leave of King William Rufus
to go to Rome: The King replied, That no Archbishop nor Bishop of his Realm,
should be subject to the Pope, or Court of Rome: especially for that he had all
those rights in his kingdom, which the Emperor had in his Empire: And for this
cause, was Anselmus Convented by the King, as an offender against the State.
And to this accusation, did also the rest of the Bishops, Ibidem.
except the Bishop of Rochester, give their consents. And because he ventured
to go over the Seas to Rome without leave: All his goods were seized to the
Kings use, Ansel. Epist. 46. a^ Paschalem is. 3. Colon. 1612.
all his acts and proceedings in the Church of England reversed, and himself
constrained to live in banishment during the life of King William, whereof
Anselmus himself complained in his Epistle to Pope Paschalis. Yea afterward
also, Mat^^. Paris. in Hen. 1. An. 1104
in the time of King Henry the first, when the same Anselmus was returning home
from Rome, the Kings Attorney in his Masters name, forbad him to enter the
Land, unless he would faithfully promise to keep all the customs, both of
(William the Conqueror) his Father, and of William Rufus his brother: And when
the King perceaved the Pope and the Archbishop, to continue their former
purpose, against his Royal liberties, he seized the Bishopric into his
hands, and arrested all Anselmus goods, that were to be found.

To these and certain other liberties of the Crown, Did also King Henry the
second, not long after, cause all his Bishops and Nobles to be sworn: For, in
the year of our Lord God M.C.LXIIII. This King Henry the second, being at
Claredon in the presence of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Matthew. Paris. in
He^rico secundo, Anno 1164.
Pryors, Earls, Barons, and great Men of the Realm, there was made a
rehearsal of some part of the Customs and liberties of his Ancestors, as of
King Henry his Grandfather, and others, which ought to be kept in this Realm,
and observed of all, etc. Amongst which customs and liberties, being sixteen
in Number, these were some; namely: That no Archbishop, Bishop, nor any other
person of the Realm, may go out of the Land without the Kings leave. And as
touching appeals if any be made, they shall come from the Archdeacon to the
Bishop, and from the Bishop to the Archbishop: And if the Archbishop fail in
doing justice, it shall be lawful to come last of all to the King, that by his
commandment the matter may be ended in the Archbishops Court. So that no man
shall proceed to appeal any further without the Kings consent. These customs
and liberties of the Crown, the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Pryors, and
Clergy with the Earls, Barons, and all the Nobles swear, and by word of
mouth faithfully promised should be kept, and observed to the King, and his
heirs for ever, simply, without any fraud. Yea, Thomas Becket Archbishop of
Canterbury himself, condescended to them, Matthew Paris. ibidem.
and promised also with an Oath to keep them: although afterward he revolted,
and brake his Oath, and fled to Rome. But (says mine Adversary) The Pope of
Rome, Alexander the third, would not confirm these laws or liberties, though
the King requested it. What of this? The liberties, laws, and customs of the
kingdom, were good enough without his confirmation. Yet the King perceaving
his so just and reasonable a request, to be repelled by the Pope, was not a
little offended thereat, and therefore wrote Letters to all his Shiriffes and
Lieutenants in England, on this wise: I command you that if any Cleargie-man,
or Layman in your County, appeal to the Court of Rome you attach him, and
hold him in fast-ward, till our pleasures be known. And to his Judges also he
wrote in this sort. If any shall be found to bring letters or a mandate from
the Pope, or from Thomas the Archbishop, interdicting the Realm of England:
Let him be taken and kept in Prison, till I signify what shall be done with
him. They that wrote the life of the same Thomas Becket, do report it thus:
Let him be forthwith apprehended for a Traitor, In quadrilog. de ^ita Thom. Cant
and execution done upon him: which agrees with that which likewise, ( page
25. cap. 1. of my Book,) I cited out of Hoveden, where he says: that, Si quis
inventus fuerit, literas vel mandatum ferens Domini Papae, ^^veden. Henr. 2
etc. Capiatur, and de eo, sicut de Regis traditore, and regni, sine dilatione
fiat justitia. If any shall be found, bringing letters or a mandate from the
Pope, let him be apprehended, and let justice be done upon him, without delay,
as upon a traitor to the King and the kingdom. Where it is also further said,
that, Generaliter interdictum est, ne quis appellet ad Dominum Papam. It was
generally prohibited, that none should appeal to the Pope. Wherefore, you see,
that which I wrote, concerning Anselmus, and concerning Appeals, to be very
true. Yea, how earnest and vehement, this valiant and worthy Prince, King Henry
the second, was, against the Pope, for maintenance of his Regal rights,
appears further by an Epistle of his, written to the Archbishop of Colen,
Matthew. Paris. in Hen. 2 An. 1168
in these words. I have long desired, (says he), to find a just occasion to
depart from Pope Alexander, and his perfidious Cardinals, which presume to
maintain my Traitor, Thomas of Canterbury, against me. Whereupon, by the advice of my Barons, and Clergy, I mean to send the Archbishop of York, the
Bishop of London, the Archdeacon of Poictiers, etc. to Rome: which shall
publicly denounce, and plainly propose in my behalf, and in the behalf of
all the Dominions I have, to Pope Alexander, and his Cardinals, that they
maintain my Traitor no longer, but rid me of him, that I with the advice of my
Clergy may set another in the Church of Canterbury. They shall also require
them, to frustrate all that Becket has done, and exact an Oath of the Pope,
that he and his successors, as much as in them lies, shall keep and observe
inviolable to me and all mine for ever, the Royal customs of King Henry my
Grandfather: If they refuse any of these my demands, neither I nor my Barons,
nor my Clergy will yield them any kind of obedience any longer: Yea rather
we will openly oppugn the Pope, and all his: and whosoever in my land shall be
found hereafter, to adhere to the Pope, shall be banished my Realm. Here then
by the way, let me demand, why any Papists do call this Thomas Becket a
martyr, whom the King calls a traitor? The manner of his death, being done by
private violence, and not by public authority, nor in a legal sort, I
utterly dislike: But is not also his stout standing in that quarrel against
his King, and against his own oath also, and against the punishing of
murderers, thieves, and other malefactors by the Kings Laws, (if they were
Cleargie-men,) justly worthy to be condemned? Or can he that dies in and for
so bad a cause, deserve to be called a martyr? But such it seems, be the
martyrs of the Popish Church.

But not only these Kings of England before mentioned, namely, King William
Rufus, King Henry the first, and King Henry the second, and some others, thus
contended and opposed themselves against the Popes of Rome, Ex Lanfranc.
Epistolis M. S. in Biblioth. Cotton. and Baron. Anno. 1079.. 25.
for maintenance of their Regal rights, but King William the Conqueror also,
who was before all these, (...) the like Kingly opposition. For, when
Hildebrand, otherwise called, Pope Gregory the seventh, was bold to demand of
the King, an oath of fealty to be made to him, as if the King were to hold his
kingdom of him, as of his Sovereign Lord. This King would by no means yield
thereunto, but sent him a full negative answer, writing thus unto him:
Fidelitatem facere nolui, nec volo: quia nec ego promisi, nec antecessores
meos, antecessoribus tuis, id fecisse comperio. I neither would do, nor will
do fealty, because I neither promised it, nor do I find, that any of my
predecessors have done it to any of your predecessors. This answer of the
King, is extant in an Epistle of his, written to the same Pope, which you may
see set down more at large by that excellent antiquarie and learned and godly
divine, Doctor Usher, late Lord Bishop of Mead, and the now most Reverend and
worthy Lord Archbishop of Ardmagh, Primate and Metropolitan of all Ireland, in
his Book, De Christianarum Ecclesiarum successione and statu, page 182.
Neither need I to insist only upon these former Kings of England. For do but
read further, the Statutes of Provision, and Praemunire made in that kingdom,
See the Statutes of Provi^ion and Praemunire in Rastall fol. 354. etc.
and thereby you may see at full, that many and sundry other Kings of England
likewise, and the whole Realm also concurring and joining with them therein,
have in several Parliaments, made Laws and Statutes against the Popes
incrochments and usurpations, in maintenance and defense of their Regal
rights, freedoms, and liberties. And among many other good reasons they show
for those their doings, this is not the least, that they say expressly in one
of those Acts of Parliament, See this in the Statute of 16. Rub. 2 cap. 5.
That the Crown of England has been so free at all times, that it has been
in subjection to no Realm, but immediately subject to God, and to none other,
in all things touching the Regalitie of the same Crown. And therefore do they
there utterly dislike in plain terms, That it should be submitted to the
Bishop of Rome. Wherefore it is apparent, that even the ancient Kings of
England, long before the days of K. Henry the VIII. of famous memory, have
stood and contended, not only for the freedom of the Crown generally, (not
allowing it to be in subjection to any, but to God only), but also in a
particular sort, for diverse their particular Regal rights, and liberties.
Amongst which, you may perceave, this to be one, namely, that Appeals even in
Ecclesiastical causes, they would have to be determined within their own
kingdoms, and not to be made, transferred, or carried without their consent,
to the Pope or Sea of Rome.

8 But now what means mine Adversary to be so extremely audacious, as to
deny the first four general Counsels to have been called by the Emperors?
Let therefore the Ecclesiastical History show and decide it. Touching the
first general Council at Nice: Ruffin. li. 10. c. 1.
Ruffinus says expressly, that Constantinus apud urbem Nicenam Episcopale
Concilium convocavit: The Emperor Constantine, called the Council of Bishops
together at the City of Nice. Eusebius de vita Constable. l b. 3. c. 6 and lib. 1.
cap. 37
Eusebius that wrote the life of Constantine, says, of that Emperor, that
Generalem Synodum congregavit, He assembled the general Council. Socrates
says likewise, that Constantine, Socrat. lib 1. c. 8 in the greek. and cap.
5. in the lat.
Synodum Oecumenicam congregavit, and omnes qui fuerunt undique Episcopos in
Nicaeam confluere hortatus est, Assembled a general Council, and willed all
the Bishops every where to meet at Nice. Theodoret says, that the Emperor,
Theodoret. libr. 1 cap. 17.
celebre^ illa^ coegit Nicea Synodum, etc. Assembled that famous Council of
Nice, Sozomen says, that Constantine, Indixit Concilium Niceae, scripsitque ad
omnes Ecclesiarum praesides, Soz. lib. 1. ca. 16. lat.
ut ad diem praestitutum adessent. Summoned the Council of Nice, and wrote to
all the Prelates of the Churches, to be there, at the day prefixed, And the
same Sozomen says, That he sent his letters to the Apostolic Seas: To
Macarius, Bishop of Jerusalem, to Eustathius, Bishop of Antioch: To Alexander,
Bishop of Alexandria, and to Julius Bishop of Rome: Who being an old man, and
not able to come himself, he sent in his stead, Vitus and Vincentius. The
Nicene Fathers themselves, by their Synodall Epistle. Theodoret. lib. 1. cap 9.
(extant in Theodoret), which they wrote to the Church of Alexandria, do
restifie: That they were assembled by the authority of the Emperor
Constantine. And if the Bishop of Rome had had the power and authority, to
call the Council, he would no doubt, being an old man, and not able to
travel, have had it at Rome, or in some part of Italy, rather then at Nice in
Bithinia, so far remote from Rome. Nicephorus also says, that Imperator
Nicaenam Synodum promulgabat and literis locorum omnium Episcopos, Niceph. li.
8. c. 14
ad constitutum diem eo evocavit: The Emperor proclaimed the Council at Nice,
and by his letters called thither, the Bishops of all places to be there, at
the day appointed. Zonaras.
Zonaras says: that Imperator, provinciarum Episcopos, Niceae, Bithini^^
urbis, convenire jussit. The Emperor commanded the Bishops of the Provinces, to
meet together at Nice, Platina in vita Silvestri.
a City in Bithinia. And Platina also writes, that this general Council of
Nice, was summoned or called Constantini mandato, by the commandment of
Constantine the Emperor. It is therefore abundantly manifest, that this first
general Council of Nice, was called, not by the authority of any Pope, but
of the Emperor. How then, is it not an over great, if not a most intolerable
impudency, in Papists, to deny so manifest, and palpable a truth? As
touching that answer which Bellarmine and other Papists make, when they say,
That this Council was called or summoned by the advice and consent of the
Bishop of Rome. First, Ruffin. lib. 1. c. 1.
Ruffinus says, that it was assembled, or called, Ex sacerdotum sententia, by
the advice and consent of the Priests, and not of the Bishop of Rome alone.
Epiphan. lib 2. Tom 2. haeres. 68
Yea, Epiphanius says, That it was obtained of the Emperor, at the suite of
Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria. But secondly, it makes no matter, at whose
suite or request, or by whose advise or consent, the Council was summoned. For
the question is not, by whose persuasion or suite, or by whose advise or
consent, but by whose authority it was called. Now it is very apparent, that
it was called and assembled, by the authority and commandment, not of any
Bishop of Rome, but of the Emperor.

The second general Council, (which was the first Constantinopolitane,) was
also called, not by Damasus Bishop of Rome, but by the Emperor Theodosius the
elder. This is also evident: First, by Theodoret, who says: Theodor. li. 5. c.
7
Hujus rei gratia, Theodosius, Episcopas Constantinopoli congregari jussit: For
this cause Theodosius commanded the Bishops to be assembled at Constantinople.
Socrat. lib 5. ca. 8 Soz li. 7. c. 6. lat. Zonar. in Theod. In dedicatoria ad I
Theodosium.
Socrates and Sozomen likewise do both testify, that Theodosius summoned and
assembled this Council. Zonaras says, that this second general Council was
summoned Iussu Imperatoris, by the commandment of the Emperor: 150. godly
fathers being there assembled. And the very Council it self speaking to
Theodosius, do testify the same, and say thus. We being assembled at
Constantinople by the Letters of your Piety.

The third general Council, namely, the first Ephesine was also called, not
by the authority and commandment of Celestinus Bishop of Rome, but by the
Emperor Theodosius the younger. This is very manifest, Evagr lib. 1. c. 3.
for Evagrius says directly, That by the appointment, or command of Theodosius
the younger, the first Ephesine Council was assembled. Liberat. in hist. de
Council. Ephesians.
Liberatus likewise writes, That the Emperor wrote to all Bishops, that they
should assemble at Ephesus, to judge of the Books of Nestorius and Cyrillus:
Epist. Synod.
And in their Epistle to all the Bishops, thus writes the Council it self:
Cum essemus Ephesi, secundum pias Imperatoris literas congregati: When we were
at Ephesus assembled, according to the pious letters of the Emperor. Socrates
also says, that Imperatoris mandato, Episcopi ex omnibus locis Ephesum
convenient: Socrat. li. 7. c 33 in the lat. and ca. 34. in the greek
The Bishops of all places, came together to Ephesus, by the commandment of
the Emperor. Zonaras says: These things being known, Caelestinus Bishop of
Rome, Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria, John Bishop of Antioch, and Iuvenall
Bishop of Jerusalem, relate the matter to Theodosius the Emperor, and to
Pulcheria the Empress, desiring that he would summon a Council, Niceph. lib.
14. cap 34.
etc. Nicephorus also says: Theodosius Imperialibus literis, in Metropoli
Epheso, locorum omnium Episcopos, convenire jussit: That Theodosius by his
Imperial letters, commanded the Bishops of all places, to meet together at
Ephesus the Metropolitan City.

The fourth general Council, was the Council of Chalcedon, and this also was
summoned, not by authority and commandment of Leo, the first, Bishop of Rome,
as my Adversary affirms, but the Emperors Authority, and commandment. This
may appear even by Leo himself Epist. 43.53. and sundry other of his
Epistles. But we need not to cite other testimonies: For, the very Council
of Chalcedon it self, Conc. Chalcedon. Action prima
does testify, that it was summoned by the Emperors, and that the Bishop of
Rome was also called thither, who because he could not be there in person, sent
others in his stead. Yea, that Leo Bishop of Rome, did not summon this
Council, nor any other general Council in those days, but acknowledged it
to be a right belonging to the Emperors, is further very manifest by the
Epistle he writes to the Emperor, wherein he says thus unto him: Pietas
vestra suggestioni, ac supplicationi nostrae dignetur annuere, Leo Epist: 9
ut intra Italiam jubeatis haberi Episcopale Concilium: Let your piety
vouchsafe to yield to our suggestion and supplication, in this, that you command
a Council of Bishops to be held within Italy. Again he says thus. Leo
Epist. 24. Lovan. 1575.
Omnes partium nostrarum Ecclesiae, omnes mansuetudini vestrae cum gemitibus,
and lachrimus supplicant sacerdotes, ut generalem Synodum jubeatis infra
Italiam celebrari: All the Churches that take part with us, and all the
Priests, with sighs and tears do humbly beseech your mansuetude, that you
will command a general Council to be celebrated within Italy. He also
solicited the Princess Pulcheria, Leo Epist. 26. and 23.
and the Nobles, Clergy, and people of Constantinople, for a Council to be
held in Italy: But neither in his first suite, nor in this last did he
prevail, all this notwithstanding. For, as touching his former suite, which
was in the time of the Emperor Theodosius the younger, that Emperor (as before
appears) assembled the Council, not within Italy, (as Leo desired,) but at
Ephesus. And as touching the latter, it is also apparent, that by the Emperors
appointment and commandment, the Council was assembled, not in Italy, (as
the Pope would have had it,) but at Chalcedon.

I might proceed further, and show, that, beside these first four general
Counsels, other Counsels were likewise: summoned and assembled, by the
Authority and commandment of the Emperors, and not of the Bishops of Rome.
For there was also a fifth general Council summoned, or called, Mandato
Iustiniani, By the commandment of the Emperor Justinian, as Evagrius
witnesses. And so likewise says Nicephorus, that, Imperator Iustinianus,
Evagr. lib 4 c. 11. N^^ph libr. 17. cap. 27.
sanctam quiatam Oecumenicam Synodum, Episcopis omnium Ecclesiarum convocatis
coegit. The Emperor Justinian, assembled the fifth holy general Council, by
calling the Bishops of all Churches together. The Council of Sardica also,
Socrat. lib. 2 cap. 20 in the g^eek, and cap. ^6. in the ^a in.

Theo^oret l^b. 2. cap. ^. S^crat. lib. (...) greek, and cap. ^9 in the (...).
Cusa^. de (...), lib. 2. ^ap. 25.


was called by the Emperors Authority and commandment, as Socrates, and
Theodoret declare. And so were also those Counsels of Selencia, and A^imi^^^,
called by the Emperors Authority and commandment. Yea, what general Council
was there called in those ancient times, but by the Emperors? In so much, that
Cardinal Cusanus himself ingenuously confesses and affirms, that, The
first eight general Counsels were called by the Emperors. Is there then any
credit at all to be given to those Papists in these days, who do and dare
deny this so clear, manifest, and evident a truth? Wherefore it being a thing
most apparent, that in ancient times the Emperors by their Authority and
commandment, called the general Counsels: it follows necessarily
thereupon, that the Emperors thereby commanded as well the Bishop of Rome, as
the other Bishops, and consequently had the Supremacy, as well over the one, as
over the other.

9 But yet further to prove the Supremacy of the Emperors, I alleged, that
the Emperors in ancient time, banished, imprisoned, and otherwise also
punished, by their Authority, even some of the Bishops of Rome themselves,
as well as other Bishops. Whereunto mine Adversary answers, that, These
things they did, de facto, but not warrantable de jure. But why were they not
warrantable de jure? I grant, that a banishment or imprisonment may possibly be
sometimes wrongful and unjust, in respect of the man, and the matter, that
deserves it not: but this is no impeachment or argument therefore against the
lawfulness of the authority. As if an Emperor, or King do banish, or
commit a man to prison, for professing any point of true Religion, this
banishment and imprisonment is wrongful and unjust, in respect of the cause,
which deserves no punishment at all. Yet it cannot be denied, but he has
power and Authority good and lawful enough, both to banish, and to commit
to prison notwithstanding, when there is a just cause: For that which is but an
abuse of Authority, does not take away the lawful use of it. So that if any
Bishop of Rome, or any Bishop whosoever within the Dominions of the Empire, did
offend so far, as to deserve banishment, imprisonment, or other Temporal and
Civil punishment, it was a thing lawful and just for the Emperor, to inflict
those punishments upon them, as well as upon any other. For it is, indeed, to
these Higher Powers, namely, to Emperors, Romans 13.1.2.3.4
Kings and Princes, that God has committed the Civil and Temporal sword, for
the encouragement and praise of them that do well, and for the discouragement,
terror, and punishment of those that do evil: And these be Ministri Dei, The
Ministers of God, (as S. Paul also shows,) instituted for that very end and
purpose. Now none will deny, but banishment, and imprisonment, be punishments
Civil and Temporal, and not Ecclesiastical, and do rightly and properly
belong to the Authority of Emperors, Kings and Princes, and not to the function
and office of Bishops, and Ecclesiastical Ministers. And therefore the
banishment, and imprisonment, that any Emperors or Kings, used against any
Bishops, or others upon just cause, and when they deserved it, must needs be
granted to be things done by them, (both in respect of the authority, and in
respect of the cause also,) as well de jure, as de facto, that is, to be things
lawful, warrantable, and justifieable, in all respects. For, as for those
distinctions, that Emperors and Kings have Authority, over persons Temporal,
but not Ecclesiastical: and a Power directive, but not Coactive, and in causes
Civil and Temporal, but not in Ecclesiastical: The untruth, absurdity,
folly, and impiety of all these distinctions, has been before so
sufficiently discovered, that I shall not need to speak any more of them: And
by this time, I hope, that even the Papists themselves be ashamed of them:
Sure I am, they have good cause so to be, if they did duly ponder, and
consider them.

Seeing then it is confessed, that the Emperors did in ancient time by their
Authority, banish, imprison, and otherwise punish even Bishops of Rome, as well
as other Bishops, and that no reason can be showed against the doing hereof,
when they be such offenders, as that they justly deserve such punishment, it is
thereby undeniably apparent, that the Bishop of Rome in those days had not the
supremacy over the Emperors, but that clean contrariewise, the Emperors had
the Supremacy over him, as well, as over any others within their Empy^e.

Another Argument which I use, consists in this, that I say, even Kings of
Rome, did also sometimes send the Bishops of Rome, as their Ambassadors. By
this argument my Adversary says, That he supposes, that I meant, but to make
men merry. Why? In serious matters, I love not to be (as he is many times,)
ridiculous, but to be serious, and to deal seriously. First therefore, hereby
I prove that the Bishop of Rome, was not in those days, superior or greater
then the King, that sent him: For those words of Christ must ever be true,
where he says: The Servant is not greater then his Master, John. 13 16.
nor the messenger greater then he that sent him.

And secondly, I say further, that this is a very good and strong argument, to
prove the Supremacy to be, in those days, in the Kings of Rome, and not in
the Bishops of Rome. For, the King that sends any, as his Ambassador, is in
all common understanding, supposed, and to be supposed, superior unto him that
is his Ambassador. As when Hiram King of Tyrus sent messengers to King David,
2. Sam 5.11. 1. Chron. 14 1. 1. King ^^.2. 1. Chron. 19.2.
or when Ben^^adad King of Aram or Siria, sent messengers to Ahab King of
Israel; or when King David sent messengers unto the King of the Amm ^ites: In
all these cases, and every such like, (for, Nec in caeteris est contrarium
videre,) were those Kings superior or greater then the messengers, or
Ambassadors, whom they sent. And therefore when Theodorick sent John Bishop of
Rome, as his Ambassador unto the Emperor Iustine: and when King Theodatus sent
Agapetus Bishop of Rome, as his Ambassador to Justinian the Emperor: It must be
confessed; that these Kings were likewise superiors to the Bishops of Rome, and
had the command of them, and not contrariwise that those Bishops of Rome, had
the superiority, or command over those Kings. For amongst men, the Master is
wont to send the Servant, and the King his Subject, and the superior his
inferior. But where did you ever read, hear, or know, the Servant to send his
Master, or the Subject to send his King and Sovereign, or the inferior to send
his Superior on a message? I grant that an inferior, or equal may entreat a
Superior to do a business for him, and that a King, a Master, or Superior,
may go by his own consent, or of his own accord, somewhither, to do his
Subject, Servant, or inferior, a good turn. But it cannot be rightly, and
properly said, that any of these inferiors, have sent their Superiors upon
their errand, service, message, or embassage. Yea, it would be held very
absoneous and absurd so to speak. But my Adversary, I see, mistaketh the M^l^r
proposition of my argument: For it reaches not so high as heaven, much less
to the most glorious, incomprehensible, and ineffable Trinity, blessed for
ever, but only to men upon earth: and not to all men neither, but only to
Kings and Bishops. Neither had my Adversary any ust cause or reason, to streach
or extend it any further. For the question was only concerning them, whether
of them had the Superiority, or Supremacy, over the other, in that time,
namely, whether the Kings that then reigned over Rome, or, those that were the
Bishops thereof. I to prove the Superiority or Supremacy, to be in the Kings,
and not in the Bishops, alleged this for my reason, that the Kings of Rome,
did sometimes send the Bishops of Rome, as their Ambassadors, to other Princes:
So that my Argument upon the whole matter, appears to be this. What Kings
soever, (I speak of earthly Kings,) sent any at any time, as their
Ambassadors, to other Princes, those Kings were Superior and greater, then
those Ambassadors whom they sent: But the Kings of Rome, did send the Bishops
of Rome, as their Ambassadors, to other Princes: Ergo the Kings of Rome, were
Superior, and greater then the Bishops of Rome. The Mayor is apparent by
induction of particulars, and by ordinary and common experience in the world.
The Minor is manifest by Ecclesiastical history, which testifies, That King
Theodoricke, sent John Bishop of Rome, Lib Pontific. in Johan. 1. Et Anact. in
Agapeto Diaconus. Platina,
as his Ambassador to the Emperor Iustine: And that King Theodatus, sent
likewise Agapetus Bishop of Rome, as his Ambassador, to the Emperor Justinian:
And therefore the conclusion must needs follow, and cannot be gainsaid. By
this time then, mine Adversary sees, (I hope,) that such is the evident
strength of this Argument, as that he with all his wit and learning, will never
be able to make any good answer thereunto.

10 In my former Book, Cap. 1. page 13. 14. 15. I also showed, that against
the title and appellation of Universal Bishop, or head of the universal
Church, did two Bishops of Rome oppose themselves, namely, Pelagius and Gregory
the great, when it was first affected by John the Patriarch, and Bishop of
Constantinople: And that nevertheless afterward, a Bishop of Rome, namely,
Boniface the third, got, and obtained it of Phocas, the Emperor. Hereunto mine
Adversary answers, (as Bellarmine likewise does,) That this fact of Phocas
was but a declaration of that, which was ever before belonging to the Bishops
of Rome. What? Had the former Bishops of Rome, and all the predecessors to
Gregory, this title of universal Bishop peculiarized, and appropriated unto
them? Why then did Gregory himself say? Greg. lib. 4 Epist, 32.36 38.39.
None of my predecessors Bishops of Rome, ever consented to use this so ungodly
a name or why did he say? That no Bishop of Rome ever took upon him, this name
of singularity. Yea, he says: We the Bishops of Rome, will not receave this
honor being offered unto us. Wherefore, it is apparent, that neither before
the times of Gregory, nor in the times of this Gregory, any of the Bishops of
Rome, had this title. Yea, you see this title detested, and rejected, even by
and in the Bishops of Rome themselves, as well as in any other Bishops. So that
they did not only condemn it in John, the Patriarch of Constantinople, but
generally in all Bishops whatsoever, as being injurious not only to other
Bishops, but especially to CRIST JESUS, the only right and true Universal
Bishop, and the sole, and only Head of the Universal Church. Vniversa sibi
tentat ascribere, (says Gregory, Greg libr. 4. Epist 36.
) and omnia quae soli uni capiti cohaerent, videlicet, Christo, per elationem
pompatici sermonis, ejusdem Christi sibi studet membra subjugare. He goes
about to ascribe all to himself, (says he,) and endeavors by the loftiness
of his pompous title, to subjugate unto himself, all the members of Christ,
which of right are to cleave to one only head, which is Christ.

This title then of Universal Bishop, or head of the whole Church upon earth,
appears to be as wicked and as unlawful in Boniface the third, Bishop of
Rome, and his successors; as it was or would have been in John Bishop of
Constantinople, and his successors, if it had rested in them. For, that which
Boniface the third, obtained of Phocas the Emperor, is the very same thing,
which John Bishop of Constantinople, sought to get and obtain. This (if any
make a doubt of it), is apparent. For, first Paulus Diaconus, says, Hic
Phocas, rogante Papa Bonifacio, statuit, sedem Romanae Ecclesiae, ut caput
esset omnium Ecclesiarum, Paul warnefrid, Phoca.
quia Ecclesia Constantinopolitana primam se omnium Ecclesiarum scribebat. This
Emperor Phocas, at the suite of Pope Boniface ordained, that the Sea of Rome
should be the head of all Churches, because the Church of Constantinople wrote
her self the chief of all Churches. Vspergens Chronic.
In like sort speaks Abbas Vspergensis: Post Sabintanu^, Bonifacius eligitur
ad Pontificatum: cujus rogata, Phocas constituit sedem Romanae, and Apostolicae
Ecclesiae, caput esse ommium Ecclesiarum, nam antea, Constantinopolitana se
scribebat primam omnium. After Sabinian, (says he), was Boniface chosen to the
Popedom, at whose request, Phocas ordained, that the Sea of the Roman, and
Apostolic Church, should be the head of all Churches: for, formerly, the
Church of Constantinople had written her self the chief of all. Platin
Bonifac. 3
Pla^tina also says, that Bonifacius, a Phoca Imperatore, obtinuit, magna
tamen contentione: Boniface obtained this, of Phocas the Empe^^or, but with
great contending for it: quem quidem loct^m, Ecclesia Constantinopolitana sibi
vendicare conabatur: Which place, (says he,) the Church of Constantinople
endeavored to challenge to her self. Blondus.
Blondus also says. Ad hu^us Bonif^^^ petitionem, Phocas Antistitem Romanum,
principem Episcoporum omniu^ dixit: Nauclerus, vol 2 Generat. 21.
At the suite of this Boniface, did Phocas affirm the Bishop of Rome, to be
the Prince of all Bishops. And Nauclerus likewise says, that, Bonifacium
insolentiam Patriarchae Constantinopolitani, (...) appellantis, compes^^t:
Phocas cuim Pontificis suasione, publica, a^ ad unt^ersum orbem dimissa
sanctione, constituit, ut Romanae Ecclesiae, Romanoque Pontifici, omnes orbis
Ecclesiae obedirent. Boniface repressed the insolency of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, calling himself Oecumenicall, or universal Bishop: For,
Phoca^, by the persuasion of the Pope, ordained by a public Decree, sent to
the whole world, that all the Churches of the world, should be obedient to the
Church of Rome. By all these testimonies then, you perceave, that what John the
Bishop of Constantinople, did formerly desire, and seek after, that did
Boniface the third, Bishop of Rome, obtain of Phocas the Emperor: and
consequently, that title of universal Bishop, must needs be, as hateful and
damnable in Boniface the third, Bishop of Rome, and his successors, as it was,
or would have been, by the judgment of Pelagius and Gregory, in John the
Bishop of Constantinople, and his successors. As also I trust you now
sufficiently great, how fond and false an evasion, that is, which my
Adversary, and Bellarmine also uses. For, if this granting of the title of
the universal Bishop to Boniface the third, had been, (as they say,) nothing
else, but a declaration of the thing, ever before acknowledged to belong to the
Bishops of Rome: What cause, or need was there, for Boniface the third, Bishop
of Rome, to have been such an earnest, and importunate surer for the obtaining
of it, at this time? Or, why did those two Patriarchs, the one of
Constantinople, the other of Rome, strive and contend, at this time, so much
for it? Or why was Phocas himself so hardly, and not without much a do,
induced to yield it to Rome, rather then to Constantinople, which was then the
seat of the Emperors? Or if it were a thing ever before acknowledged, to be
due, to the Bishops of Rome, why did those two Bishops of Rome, so hotely and
eagerly oppose themselves, against it, utterly detesting and condemning it, not
only in John Bishop of Constantinople, but generally in all Bishops whosoever?
as their speeches, arguments, and reasons do declare. Yea, how can it be true,
that the Bishops of Rome had evermore this title, when Gregory the great,
Bishop of Rome, himself testifies the clean contrary: saying, (as you heard
before), that none of his predecessors, Bishops of Rome, did at any time
consent to use so ungodly a name: and that no Bishop of Rome at any time, took
upon him, this name of singularity: and, that they the Bishops of Rome, could
not take it, though it were offered to them. Is it not then a point of gross
impudency in Papists still to deny such apparent and manifest truths?

But afterward again in a scoffing manner, he says, that I give notice that
I am a Logician, by affirming in the 11. page of the first part of my Book,
that the effect of the negative clause in the Oath of Supremacy, is included
in the former affirmative clause of the same Oath. The affirmative clause,
(says he,) of the Oath, is that the King is the Supreme Governor in his own
Dominions: The negative clause is, that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
etc. And so he goes on, mispending his time, and confuting the imagination and
devise of his own brain. For, the affirmative clause in the Oath, is not, as
he imperfectly and lamely relates it, but it is this: That the King, is the
only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his Highness Dominions
and Countries, as well in all Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical things or causes,
as Temporal. The negative clause follows, and is this; That no foreign
Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has or ought to have, any
jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or authority Ecclesiastical,
or Spiritual, within this Realm. This word, (Only,) in the affirmative
clause, has he left out: which if he had added together with all the rest of
the words, that follow in that affirmative clause: he would very easily have
found that to be true, which I wrote, namely, that the effect of the negative
clause, is included in the former affirmative. For, he that affirms the King,
to be the only Supreme Governor within his own Dominions, and that in all
things, or causes Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, as well as temporal: does, in
that speech, exclude every foreign Prince, person, Prelate, State, or
Potentate, from having any supreme government, or any government at all,
without his leave and license, within his Dominions. Yea, it is very evident,
that the former affirmative clause includes the negative clause, and more. For
the negative clause excludes foreign Princes, persons, Prelates, States and
Pote^tates, only from Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual Authority: but the former
affirmative excludes them from authority in all things or causes both
temporal and spiritual. Again, you see that the negative clause extends
only to foreign persons: but the affirmative clause extends to any persons
whosoever, whether foreign, or domestical.

Thirdly, the negative clause excludes foreign persons, from having any
jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical,
or spiritual, within this Realm. But, the former affirmative clause,
extends not only to this Realm, or that Realm, in particular, but generally
to all his Majesty's Realms, Dominions, and Countries. So that the former
affirmative clause, in the Oath, appears to be much more general, and of a
far larger extent, then the negative is. And therefore, I hope, I spoke
truly, and within compass, when I said, (though in a parenthesis), that the
effect of the negative clause, was included in the former affirmative. I did
not say, (as mine Adversary supposes me to hold;) that the Regal power
includes the Sacerdotall, or Episcopal. This is but his own dream and
imagination: in the confutation whereof, he labors in vain. For, neither I,
nor any of the Protestants, do hold that opinion, but contrariewise do hold
them to be things distinct, as is before declared. But because he will needs
carpe at my Logic, when he has no cause: let other men judge, what a great
Logician he is, whilst he argues thus. The Regal power includes not the
Sacerdotall: Ergo the affirmative clause in the Oath of SUPREMACY, includes
not the negative clause in the same Oath.

Hitherto, then you see, that my Adversary, (notwithstanding all his
storishes, braggs, and bravadoes), has showed himself to be, not only a
punie Lawyer, (as he confesses himself to be,) but a punie Logician also, and
most of all, a punie Divine: and that he has not been able, to make any good
Answer, or to refell and confute any one Argument contained in this first
Chapter of my former Book, concerning the Supremacy: and yet has he also
left a great part of that Chapter unanswered. Neither has he made throughout
his whole discourse, and pleading, so much as one good argument, to prove his
Clients cause, that is, the Popes supremacy: though he purposed, and labored
to do it. Where, is it not a mervaile; that he being a Lawyer, and a Subject
to our Sovereign Lord, the KING, will date nevertheless admit of such a
Client, as the Pope is, and of his cause, which he knows before hand, to be
condemned, by the Laws, and Statutes of the Realm, and which he now may see,
(if he saw it not before,) to be also condemned by the Laws and Statutes of
God himself, and by all the most ancient Ecclesiastical Records. But, if he
be not ashamed of such a Client and his cause: his Client, (I suppose,) will be
ashamed of him, and entertain him no longer, to plead for him, unless he
could do it better. And yet indeed, when his Clients cause, is foul, and
naught, (as here it appears to be,) what Lawyer, be he never so learned, or
what Divine, be he never so profound, is able to justify it, or to make it
good? Notwithstanding his demurrer therefore, and notwithstanding that by this
his plea, his purpose was to arrest and stay men's judgments, I trust they will
all, now, (no cause appearing to the contrary,) proceed without any further
delay, to give their sentence against his Client, and for and in the behalf of
these two most worthy and Peerles Princes, who be the complaynants against him:
namely, for Christ JESUS, in their acknowledging, and publishing him, only to
be the only universal Bishop, supreme Pastor, and head of the whole Church
Militant upon Earth, as well as of the Triumphant in Heaven: and for the King,
in declaring and publishing him, under God, to be the only Supreme Governor,
over all manner of persons, and in all kind of causes, as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil, within his Dominions. Neither do I doubt, but all men's judgments,
whenever upon good and well advised deliberation they shall please to give
them, will pass accordingly. In the mean time, let us go one to the second
Chapter, and see if he have any better success in that, then he has found in
the former.

Concerning the second Chapter.
IN this second Chapter of my former Book, my Adversary supposes, that my
maine scope and purpose, was, to prove our Church, that is, the Church of the
Protestants, to have been, in the Apostles times: But never was there, (says
he,) poor Assertion so miserably mangled. And true it is indeed, that it is
miserably mangled, and cut in pieces. But, by whom? namely, by himself. For,
my Assertion is not so short, as he relates it, nor is to end where he makes
it to end, but is of a longer, and larger extent: and being produced not by
parts or pieces, but wholly and entirely, (as it ought,) it is this (viz.) That
our Church was in the Apostles days, and in all times and ages since,
howsoever, or, notwitstanding, that Popery did as an infection, or corruption
grow unto it: the meaning and true sense whereof, is no more, but, that the
growing of Popery, it being but as an infection or corruption to the Church,
is no impediment, or argument to the contrary, but that our Church had a being
in the Apostles days, and in all succeeding times and ages, that
notwithstanding. This will the better appear, if you take the whole
Proposition or assertion, and turn it into a Question. For, then the Question
will not be, as mine Adversary makes it: (viz.) whether our Church were in the
Apostles days: for that co^priseth not the whole Proposition, but is only a
part, or piece of it. Neither can that be any more the Question, then whether
it were in the succeeding and aftertimes, and ages. But the Question will be,
as I have signified before, viz. Whether the growth and coming in of Popery,
as an infection or corruption to the Church, did hinder, or was any such
obstacle, or impediment as that, by reason thereof, our Church had no being at
all, in the Apostles days, nor in the days, and times succeeding. It is true,
that if I had said, that our Church was, in the Apostles times, and had gone no
further: it had been an absolute and direct affirmation of our Church to have
been in those days. But when I go further, and say, that our Church was in
the Apostles days, notwithstanding that the seeds of Popery began then to be
sown: in this speech, I do not absolutely, and simply affirm, that our
Church was then, but that it was then, notwithstanding that the seeds of
Popery began then to be sown: that is, the beginning and growth of Popery,
was no obstacle, impediment, or argument against the being of our Church in
those days. As likewise if I say, that the conveyance made to John at Style is
good, notwithstanding that there was no liverie of seisin made upon it: this is
no direct affirmation, that his conveyance is simply good, to all intents and
purposes: but, that it is good, notwithstanding this exception, that there was
no liverie and seisin made: that is, the not making of liverie of seisin, is no
obstacle or impediment, to hinder the goodness of it. In like sort, if I say,
that K. Solomon was a saved soul, notwithstanding that by the enticement of
his wives, he became an Idolater: this is no absolute or direct affirmatio^,
that he was a saved soul. But that he was a saved soul, notwithstanding that
reason or allegation: that is to say, his committing of Idolatry, upon the
enticement of his wives, is no such obstacle, or proof to the contrary, but
that he might be a saved soul, that reason or objection notwithstanding. As
again, if I say, that my Adversary is a good Grecian, or a good Hebritian,
notwithstanding that he has not showed it in his Answer: this is no direct
affirmation, that he is either a good Grecian or a good Hebritian: but the
sense and meaning of that speech is, that his not showing of skill in Greek or
Hebrew in his Answer, is no obstacle, or argument to the contrary, but that
he may be a good Grecian, or a good Hebritian, that nothwithstanding. Wherefore
if mine Adversary would have opposed himself, against that proposition or
assertion of mine before mentioned, he should have showed and proved, (if he
had been able,) that the coming in, and growth of Popery, was such an
impediment or obstacle, as that by reason thereof our Church could have no
being in the Apostles days, or in the times, or ages that succeeded: which
because he has not done, he has spent his breath, and talked idly, and in
vain, and to no purpose. And yet he seems to glory and insult over me,
that my conclusion and assertion, being (as he says), that our Church was in
the Apostles times, I brought not so much as one argument, there to prove it:
how much more cause now have I, (if I were so disposed), to glory and insult
over him, who by his cutting, curtalling and mangling my assertion, and not
taking it wholly and entirely, (as of right he should,) has utterly mistaken
the Question, and not answered one word to that which was the Question indeed.
For the question to be deduced, out of this entier Proposition, not being (as
he has strangely mistaken), whether our Church was in the Apostles times: nor
yet, whether it were in the succeeding, and aftertimes. But, whether Popery
were such an obstacle, or impediment, as that it did cause that our Church
could not, by reason thereof, have any being at all, either in the Apostles
times, or in the times and ages that succeeded: To this it is that I answered
and adressed my speech in that second Chapter: and to this Question also it is,
that mine Adversary should have answered, and adressed his speech, if he would
have spoken materially and to the purpose.

And yet even this very assertion, that our Church (that is men believing and
professing the same Faith and Religion, that we do), was in the Apostles
times, and by them taught and approved, is a thing evidently declared, not in
one Chapter alone of my former Book, (for one Chapter alone, would not
suffice, for so many points, and positions, as did to such a matter belong) but
in all the several Chap^ers and whole Contents of my Book put together. And
the truth of it may summarily, and briefly thus appear, namely, by that
excellent rule, and fundamental ground, Tertul. prescript ^avers. haeret.
which Tertullian gives. For, he says, that even those Churches, quae licet
nullum ex Apostolis, vel Apostolicis authore^ suu^ profera^t, (ut multo
posteriores, quae denique quotidie instituu^tur,) tame^ in eade^ fide
co^spira^tes, no^ minus Apostolicae d^puta^tur, pro consanguinitate doctrinae:
which cannot bring any of the Apostles, or Apostolic men for their authors,
(as those that be much later, and such as are begun every day,) yet agreeing
with the^ in the same faith, are for this co^sanguinitie, or agreement in
doctrine, held to be no less Apostolic, then the rest. Again he says: Ipsa
doctrina eorum, Tertul. traescrip. advers. haeret. cap. 32,
cum Apostolica comparata, ex diversitate, and contrarietate sua, pronunciabit,
neque Apostoli alicujus authoris esse, neque Apostolici. Their very doctrine
it self being compared with the Apostolic, by the diversity and
contrariety that is between them, will pronounce, that it had for the Author,
neither any Apostle, nor any man that was Apo^tolicall. From this rule, and
fundamental ground, I deduce, and make two Arguments, (the one for our Church,
the other against the Church of Rome.) For our Church my Argument is this. That
Church which holds the same Faith, doctrine, and Religion, that the Apostles
taught in their days, is Apostolical: But our Church, that is the Church of
the Protestants, holds the same Faith, doctrine and Religion, that the
Apostles taught in their: Ergo our Church, that is, the Church of the
Protestants, is Apostolical. The Mayor is very evident of it self, and by
the testimony also of Tertullian, neither can it be denied. The Minor is also
evident by conferring, and comparing our Faith, doctrine, and Religion, with
the Apostolical writings, and the rest of the Canonical Scriptures. And it is
also manifest, by the whole Contents of my former Book, whether I refer you,
for the proof of it, (if any make doubt of it:) And therefore the conclusion
must be granted. On the other side, against the Church of Rome, from that
ground also, I thus frame my argument. That Church which holds a Religion,
Faith, and doctrine, differing or contrary to that which was taught by the
Apostles in their times, is not Apostolical: But the Popish Church, holds a
Religion, Faith, and doctrine, differing, or contrary to that, which was
taught by the Apostles in their times, (as is apparent, if you compare them
together, examining the several, and particular Positions, in these points of
Controversy, by the writings of the Apostles, and the rest of the Canonical
Scriptures, and as is also showed at large in my former book; whether I
likewise refer you, for the proof of this Minor Proposition:) And therefore
the Popish Church is not Apostolical. But mine Adversary takes here
exception to our Church, affirming it in three points to be heretical. First
in the point of Justification. For, he says, it was the heresy of the
Symonians and Eunomians, to hold Justification in Gods sight, by grace, and by
faith only, as the Protestants do. And, that S. Augustine also affirms it
to be an error, that sprung up even in the Apostles days. But touching the
Symonians, they held, Ir^n libr. 1. c. 20
(as Irenaeus declares,), That they were to be saved by the grace of Simon
Magus, their sect Master, whom they make their God and Savior. The Protestants
hold no such abominable thing, but contrariwise hold, that they are to be saved
by the grace of CHRIST. What? Is it all one with Papists, to be saved by Simons
grace, and by the grace of CHRIST? As for the Eunomians, such was their
doctrine of Faith, as that they rejected, or made no reckoning of good works
at all. Aug. hares. 54.
Yea, they held, (as S. Augustine shows,) Quod nihil homini obesset
quorumlibet perpetratio peccatorum. That the committing of any sins
whatsoever, did not hurt a man. The Protestants teach no such wicked, and
damnable doctrine, but clean contrariwise, do teach, that the Faith that
justifies, and saves a man, is not a dead but a lively Faith, that is, such
as is accompanied with good works, and with a godly conversation: although,
Ierem. 23.6. Ierem. 33.16. 2. Cor. 5.21. Romans 10 4. Romans 9.30.31 32 Romans 3.14.
Ioh 3.14 15 16. John. 1.12.
in the act of our justification in Gods sight and censure, it is Faith alone,
and not the works, that is, the hand or instrument, whereby we apprehend, or
receave CHRIST JESUS, who is indeed our righteousness. As the eye, in respect
of the rest of the members, wherewith it is accompanied, is not alone, yet in
respect of the power and faculty of seeing, it is sole and alone. And, as, in
fire likewise, there is both hear, and light, and the heat is not alone, but
accompanied with the light: and yet it is the heat only, and not the light,
that warmeth the body. So in a man justified, there is Faith, and good works
accompanying it, and in respect of the good works wherewith it is accompanied,
it is not sole, and alone, but yet, in the Act and point of Justification in
Gods sight, as it apprehends Christ our righteousness, it is sole and alone,
good works having no part with it, in that action. As for that which is
alleged out of S. Augustine, I answered it in my former Book, and now I
answer it once again, Aug. de fide, and oper. cap. 14.
or rather S. Augustine himself answers it, whilst he shows, That the
error which sprung up in the Apostles days, was of such, as held Faith only,
to be sufficient to salvation, although they did no good works at all, but
lived wickedly, dissolutely, lewdly: which is indeed, an error, and a gross
error, Galat. 5.6. Iam. 2 14. 1. Pet^ 29.11 12 2 Pet 1 10. 1. John 3.10.
and which the Protestants, with S. Augustine, with S. Paul, with S. James,
with S. Peter, with S. John, and with all the rest of the sacred Scriptures,
do likewise utterly condemn.

The second point wherein he supposes heresy in our Church, is concerning
their Popish Purgatory. It is true, that we deny it. Neither are the Papists
able to prove the denial of it to be either heresy or error: My Adversary
says, That Luther, Calvine, and others, did likewise deny it; and what of
that? was it therefore heresy? Or, in what Church was it censured and
condemned to be heresy. If by any, he must say, it was by his own, the Popish
Church, which condemns indeed, not only that, but all other doctrines and
Positions of the Protestants, wherein they differ from them, be they never so
true. But it is proved in my former Book, Col^s. 2.19
That Papal Rome, is the whore of Babylon, and that the Popish Church has not
Christ, but Antichrist to be the head, and to rule, and reign over it. Neither
is it mine opinion alone, that the Pope of Rome, the head, and ruler thereof,
is the grand Antichrist, (and consequently his Church, the false, and
Antichristian Church,) but it is the opinion, and position of all sound
Protestants likewise: as their many and sundry learned Works, written in
defense of that Protestant Position against the Papists, do plentifully, and
at large declare. Now then, is it any mervaile, or any matter, that the false,
adulterate, and Antichristian Church, condemns the right believing,
Orthodoxe, and true Christian Church, and her Positions? Yea, in this point,
against their Purgatory, did the Apostolic, Primitive, and most ancient
Church believe, as we do. For, S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 5.6 8. Thil. 1.23.
of all Gods people, That whilst they are in the body, they are absent from
the Lord: and that when they go out of the body, they are present with the
Lord. And so holds S. Cyprian, Cyprian. de mortalitat. sect. 2. ^d^t. 159^.
That the servants of God, then have peace, and then enjoy free and quiet rest:
And that being drawn out from the storms of this world, they arrive at the
haven of their everlasting habitation and security. Again he says, Ad
refrigerium justi vocantur, ad supplicium rapiuntur injusti. The righteous are
called to a refreshing: Ibidem. sect 11.
the unrighteous are haled to torment. Ibidem. sect. 14.
In so much that he says further, concerning godly persons, when they die,
that Nec accipiendas esse hic atras vestes, quando (...) ibi indumenta alba iam
sumpseriut: For them, black mourning garments are not to be worn here,
because they have there already put on white raiment. Justin. respons. ad
Orthodox. quaest. 75.
Iustine Martyr likewise says: That after the departure of the soul out of
the body, there is, presently, made a difference betwixt the just, and the
unjust. For, the souls of the just go to Paradise, where they have the
comerce and sight of Angels, and Archangels, etc: The souls of the unjust, to
the places in Hell. Hilar. in Psalm 2.
S. Hillarie also observes, out of that which is mentioned in the Gospel,
concerning the Rich-man and Lazarus, that as soon as this life is ended,
every one, (without delay), goes either to Abraham's bos^me, or to the place
of torment: and in this place, is reserved, till the day of judgment. S.
Ambrose also teachech, That death is a certain haven to them, Ambros de bono
mortis cap. 4.
who being tossed in the great sea of this world, desire the station of a safe
rest. And therefore he says further, That whereas fools do fear death as
the chief of evils: Wise men do desire it, as a rest after labors, and an
end of their evils. S Basil says, Basil. procem. in regular fusius disputat.
This present world, is the time of repentance, the other of retribution, this
of working, that of rewarding: this of patient suffering, that of receaving
comfort. Gregory Nazianzen also in his Funeral orations, has many sayings to
this purpose, Greg. N^z. Orat. 9. ad Iustanum, and orat 42 in Pasch. and orat
15 in ^lagam grandinis.
and was so far from supposing any Purgatory, or purging prepared for men
after their death, that he plainly denies, That after the night of this
present life, there is any purging to be expected. And therefore he gives us
all good counsel, telling us, That it is better to be corrected, and purged
now, then to be sent unto torments there, where the time of punishing is, and
not of purging. And concerning the third point, wherein he objecteth heresy:
It is true, that Popish Priests cannot forgive sins, because they be not the
Ministers of Christ, but of Antichrist: and therefore, for any to resort, or to
go unto them for absolution, or forgiveness of sins, must needs rather
increase their sins, then take away any. The authority nevertheless of
Christ his Ministers, to bind and loose, and to remitte, and retain sins,
we deny not, but affirm and maintain against the Novatians, or whatsoever
other heretics; and therefore most injurious is my Adversary, and other
Papists, in charging us with the heresy of the Novatians, Micah. 7.18. Esai.
43.^5. Mar. 2.7 Luke 5.21. Revel. 3.7.
in that point. Howbeit, it is not an absolute, but a Ministerial and limited
power, and authority, which the Ministers of Christ have herein received. For,
to forgive sins properly and absolutely, is a privilege and prerogative
proper unto God. And therefore did Gregory the great, Greg exposit. 2. Psalm.
Poenit.
(Bishop of Rome,) say: Quis enim potest peccata dimittere, nisi solus Deus?
For who can forgive sins, but God alone? The power of releasing sins, (says
also Radulphus Ardens, Radulph. Ard. homil Dominic. 1 post Pasch.
) belongs to God alone: But the Ministry, (which is also improperly called
a power,) he has granted to his substitutes, who after their manner, do
bind, and absolve, that is, do declare that men are bound or absolved. For
God does first inwardly absolve the sinner, by compunction: and then the Priest
outwardly, by giving the sentence, does declare, that he is absolved. Peter
Lombard also, Master of the Sentences, Pet. Lombard. lib. 4. Sentent. distinct.
18. E.F.
says, That God alone does forgive and retain sins, and yet has he given
power of binding and loosing unto his Church. But he binds and loses one
way, and the Church another. For, he only by himself forgiveth sins, who
both cleanses the soul, from inward blot, and loses it from the debt of
everlasting death, and this he has not granted unto Priests: to whom
notwithstanding, he has given the power of binding and loosing, that is to
say, of declaring men to be bound or loosed. Est ergo in universis
servientibus, non dominium, Optat. libr. 5.
sed ministerium. There is therefore, (says Optatus,) in all the officers or
servants, not a dominion, but a ministry. Behold, Ambr de Spir. Sanct. (...).
^. c. 10
(says S. Ambrose,) that, by the holy Ghost, sins are forgiven, and men, to
the forgiveness of sins, bring but their Ministry: they exercise not any
authority or power. The power of forgiving sins, (says S. Basil,) is not
given to Christ's Ministers absolutely: Basil. regul. Brevior. quast. 25.
but upon the obedience of the penitent, and his consent with him, that has
the care of his foul. Yea, (says S. Ambrose,) neither Angel, nor Archangell,
can, Ambros. Epist. 28 ad Theod. Imp.
nor the Lord himself, when we have sinned, does release us, unless we bring
repentance with us. Christ his Ministers therefore do not, nor ought to
declare, or pronounce remission and forgiveness of sins to any, but to such,
as Christ their Lord and Master, by the Tenor of his word, has warranted
remission of sins unto. For if they do otherwise, it is not ratified in
heaven, which they do upon earth. But all these three points, have I handled
in my former Book, where, as well as here, they appear to be Apostolical, and
Orthodoxe truths, and not heretical, or erroneous opinions. Now then let all
equal men judge, how well and wisely, this Quidam homo, or quoddam animal
Anomolon, and Pseudonymon, this Adversary of mine, deals with me, whilst he
terms me, as he pleases, and resembles me to a Phripiers Prentice, whose
office is, (says he, speaking like a man of skill in that art, or occupation,)
to go from one Corner unto another, searching old Rags to line new clothes.
For I have borrowed, (says he,) the shreds of my Religion from Simon Magus,
the Novatians, and other heretics. How much this man is deceaved, and
mistaken, does now, (I hope), more then sufficiently appear, by that which is
before spoken. Neither indeed is it ours, but his, the Popish Religion, that is
thus patched, and pieced of many and sundry errors and heresies, being therein
like a beggars cloak consisting of many rags and shreds sowed together: as
diverse Protestants, and amongst the rest, Doctor Willet in his Tetrastylon
Papismi, and that learned, and Reverend Bishop, Doctor Morton, in his
Catholic Appeal for the Protestants, being an Answer to Brerely the Priest,
have declared at large, and in the many and sundry particulars thereof.

Notwithstanding therefore whatsoever mine Adversary has said, or can say to
the contrary, it is apparent, by the consanguinitie and agreement in Faith and
doctrine, which our Church has with the Apostolical writings, that it was in
the Apostles times, and by them approved. And this being the undoubted true
Church, and builded upon that invincible and unruinable Rock, Christ Jesus,
against which the gates of Hell shall never prevail: must it not needs be
supposed to have also a continuance in all succeeding times and ages, even to
the worlds end, notwithstanding that Popery, or whatsoever other errors, or
heresies did grow up with it, like Tares among the good Corn? Yea, that our
Church, (that is, people believing and professing the Faith and Religion, that
we do,) was in the times, and ages succeeding the Apostles, even until the
days of the grand Antichrist, and during all the time also, even of the grand
antichrist his reign, is likewise declared in my former book, not only, in
this second Chapter of the first part, but chiefly and specially in the second
Chapter of the second part of it: where I have set down this Position, and
proved it, that the Church is not so visible, as to be always, and at all
times openly seen and known to the wicked and persecuting world. And for
proof hereof, Aug. in Psalm. 1^ De Baptis contr. Donat^st. lib. 6. cap 4.
I alleged S. Augustine, who therefore compares the Church to the M^one,
which is often obscured, and hid: yea he confesses and teaches, That the
Church may sometime be so hidden, as that the very members thereof shall not
know one another. It is true, that the men whereof the Church consists, are
always visible, and may be seen, as being men: but the Faith and Religion
they believe and hold, is not so visible, as to be always, seen, discovered,
and known to the wicked and malignant world, although sometime it be; which
point you may see there further declared. And therefore they be not Chymicall
arguments, (as my Adversary, in his Chymericall and Alchymisticall Divinity
surmiseth), but solid and sound proofs, that I bring to declare, that the
true Church is sometimes visible, and to be seen of this wicked world, and
sometimes invisible, Revel. 9.13. Revel. 10.1.2.10.11.
and not to be seen of it, that is to say, it is sometimes a Patent, and
sometimes a Latent Church: of which sort because the Papists, will not grant
their Church to be, but will have it always visible, and evermore splendently
appearing to the eyes of the world, it is a plain, and demonstrative argument
against them, that therefore theirs cannot be the true Church. I further showed
in this second Chapter, that the true Church, planted by the Apostles, was
afterward by little, and little, and by degrees to grow corrupted, and to
continue in those her errors, corruptions and deformities, for a long time,
even till after the sixth Angel had begun to blow the Trumpet, according to the
prediction and Prophecy thereof in the Revelation of S. John: which Prophecy
because it is found to agree with our Church, and that it cannot be made to
agree with theirs, which they will not grant to be, capable of any corruption,
or error: It thereupon also follows, that not theirs, but ours, must needs be
the true Church, planted by the Apostles. These arguments I here the rather
mention, that my adversary might see, That the blast of the sixth Angels
trumpet, did not blow away all the arguments, which I should have brought for
my purpose, as he scoffingly speaks, being not able otherwise, or in other
then a scoffing sort, to answer them. For what better argument can there be to
prove our Church, and to disprove and confute theirs, then this, that ours does
agree with the predictions and prophecies contained in the sacred and
Canonical Scriptures, and theirs neither does, nor can be made to agree with
them,

And here also falls to the ground, that Paradoxe, and untrue opinion, which
he holds, that one error in the Church, overthrows the whole Church: making
it to be no true Church, but only an imaginary Church. It is true, 1 Cor. 5.6.
that S. Paul says, That a little leaven, leaveneth the whole lump of dow.
But he does not say, that, it utterly overthrows, nullifieth, and
extinguisheth it yea even this Church of Corinth, wherein this leaven was, (by
reason of that wicked incestuous man permitted to remain, unseperated, 2. Cor.
1.2.
and unexcommunicated amongst them, to the indangering of others by his
example,) was nevertheless the Church of God: and so does S. Paul expressly
call it, notwithstanding that error amongst them. Again in the same Church of
Corinth there were also Contentions amongst them, 1. Cor. 15 12. 1. Cor. 1.11.
1. Cor. 3.3. 1. Cor. 11 18.19. 1. Corinthians. 1.2.
and envying, and strife, and divisions, yea, (...), schismata, and haereses,
schisms, and heresies: and yet was it a true Church of God, all these errors
and faults notwithstanding, as S. Paul declares. The Church of Ephesus, Rev.
1.2.2.^4 5
was likewise a true Church of God, and for sundry things much commended: yet
had God some thing against her, because she had left her first love, Remember
therefore, (says he,) from whence thou art fallen, and repent, Revel. ^2
12.13.14.15.
and do the first works, etc. The Church of Pergamus was also a true Church
of God: Yet I have, (says God,) a few things against thee, because thou have
there, them that maintain the doctrine of Balaam, etc. And them that maintain
the doctrine of the Nicolaytans, which thing I hate. The Church of Thiatyra,
Rev. 2.18.19.20
was likewise a true Church of God: and for many things also, much commended:
Notwithstanding (says God) I have a few things against thee, because thou
suffer the woman Iesabell, which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach
and deceave my servants, etc. By all which, you see, that one error, or one
fault in a Church, does not therefore prove it to be no Church, or no true
Church. Yea, it appears that a Church, and a true Church may be, though
diverse defaults, and errors, be in it, which be not fundamental. How much
then does mine Adversary abuse that Text of S. James: where he says: Qui
deficit in uno, factus est omnium reus: James. 2.10.11.
Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet fail in one point, he is guilty
of all. For he that said, thou shall not commit adultery, said also thou shall
not kill: now, though thou commit no adultery, yet if thou killest, thou art a
transgressor of the law. For, what S. James means by this, that he which
fails or offends in breaking though but one of Gods Commandments, Galat.
3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
is guilty of all: himself here shows, when he says, that he is thereby
become a transgressor of the law: and consequently guilty of the curse
inflicted, by the sentence of the Law, upon every one that continues not in
all things, that are written in the book of the Law to do them. So that he is
guilty of all, not that he has broken all the Commandments, by breaking only
of one, nor that he which breaks only one, shall be punished in hell,
as much, and with as great a measure of torments, as he that carelessly breaks
them all, but that by this breaking, but of one Commandment, he has offended
the Majesty of the Lawgiver, incurred his displeasure, and made himself
as well liable to the curse of the law, that is, has deserved to suffer
eternal torments, (though not in so great, and high a degree, and measure), as
if he had broken them all. He therefore much wrongeth this Text, when he
applies it to prove, that it cannot be a true Church, which has any error in
it, or that he that fayles in one point of Religion, has only an imaginary
Religion, and no true Religion in him. What? was the Church wherein S. Cyprian
lived, no true Church, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 5. in the greek, and cap. 5. latin.
or was S. Cyprian no true Christian, or had he no true Religion in him,
because he held the error of Rebaptization? Or were none of those, true
Churches, nor had any of them any true Religion in them, which held the
Chiliasticke error, or error of the Millenaries? Or were S. Augustine, S.
Jerome, or any of the rest of the ancient Fathers therefore no true Christians,
or had they only an imaginary, and no true Religion in them, because of some
error they held? Yea, he may as well conclude out of this Text, (if he make no
care, nor conscience, to abuse it,) that every one whosoever that erreth and
fails in any point, either of doctrine, 1. John. 1.8.
or manners, or that sins in any sort, by breaking any one of Gods
Commandments, is only an imaginary and no true Christian at all: Whereupon
would follow this gross absurdity, and untruth, that there were then no true
Christians at all in the whole world, because there be none but have some
sin, or other, in them. It is true, Ephesians. 4.3.4.5. etc.
that there is but one true Faith, and right Religion, and that we should all
endeavor to observe and keep it, as likewise we ought all to endeavor, so much
as is possible, to keep all and every one of Gods Commandments: but if by
reason of the frayltie, and imperfection, that is in all men, any Church do
err in some one thing; or any man do err,, sin, or offend, in some one
point, you see by the premises, that no such inference can be made, that
therefore it is no true Church, or therefore he is no true Christian, or has
no good, nor true Religion in him, because of that one sin, or error
committed. All which nevertheless I speak not, to justify, or defend any
errors, in any Church, or any sin, transgression, or fault in any person, nor
yet as though he could justly tax our true Christian Church with any error in
Faith, or doctrine: but only to show him his own error, and the fault of his
own idle, and brainesicke opinion. Whereunto also may be adjoined another
Paradoxe or strange opinion of his and not only his, for it is the opinion
also of the Rhemists, and other Papists, where they hold, that the blasphemy,
or sin against the holy Ghost, is remissible, and may be forgiven: which is
directly, and clean contratie to the express words of Christ Jesus himself,
declaring that the sin against the Father, and the Son, is remissible,
Math. 12 31.32 Luk 12.10 Mark. 3.28 29.
and may be forgiven: But the sin against the holy Ghost (says he) shall not
be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to come. And S. Mark
relates it thus, That he which commits that sin, shall never have
forgiveness, but is culpable of eternal damnation. Now then, let all men
judge, whether of these, we should believe? namely, whether Christ, or the
Papists, in this case? Lastly, he falls into a consideration, what sin it
is, that I committed, in making and setting forth my Book; and distinguishing
sin into three sorts, (viz.) some of Frailty, some of Ignorance, and some of
Malice: he freeth me of that of frailty, and of that of malice, and therefore
concludes, that it was a sin of ignorance. Thus out of his ignorance, (for I
hope there is no malice in him,) he argues ex non concessis. For how does he
prove it to be any sin at all, to pen such a Book, and to set it forth?
Ipse dixit, is all his proof. What? Is it a sin to speak or write, in
defense of Gods truth and religion? Yea is it not (clean contrariewise) a
sin, and a very great, and most fearful sin for my Adversary, to write (as
he does) against God, his truth, and religion, and against his Church, and
people, and against the King also in the point of his Supremacy, and against
the Laws, and Statutes of the Realm also, (which establish those two points,
for which I write and speak), and all for defense of the whore of Babylon, and
of that man of sin, the grand Antichrist? Is not this a sin meet for him
to repent of? This his great sin therefore, and all other wicked works, and
ways of blind Popery, I would wish him to forsake in time, Ephesians. 5 8.
and to become and walk As one of the children of light, which if he desire to
do, (as I trust he does,) he must then with the Psalmist, make not his own,
Psalm. 119.105.
or other men's pleasures, but Gods will, and word to be the Lantern unto his
feet, and the light unto his path, and thereby must he be directed, Esa. 8.20.
both for points of doctrine and for life and conversation also. For if any do
not, or speak not according to this word, 1. Io. 1.5.6.
it is because (as the Scriptures teach) they have not that light in the^,
which they should have. It is true, which he says, That Christ, the supreme
Judge of Heaven, and Earth, will most certainly come to judgment, and will
judge most justly. But it were good he would remember withal how, John. 12 48.
Romans 2.16.
and by what rule, he will judge? namely, that he will judge according to his
own word, and Gospel. For, according to that his Word, and Gospel, it is,
that he will judge us all, in the last day, as himself, and his true and
faithful Apostle S. Paul, do both assure us.

In the mean time then, can there be any better course taken, or any better
wisdom showed, then for both him, and me, and for us al, humbly and willingly
to submit our selves, our lives and conversations, and all our positions, and
opinions, to be controlled, reformed, overruled, and judged by that word and
Gospel, according whereunto, we shall all be judged in that last day? This
grace, and wisdom therefore God, of his mercy grant unto us all, (if it be
his will,) to his honor and glory, and to our own everlasting comforts,
through Jesus Christ, our whole and only Mediator, Savior, and Redeemer. Amen.

FINIS.
Post scriptum.
LEt none hereafter expect any more from me, touching these matters, until my
former Book, which by this my Adversary is promised to be answered, according
to the three conditions required by me) be first, accordingly answered: and
that this Reply be also therewithal Answered; and all this to be done in
Print, and not in Manuscripts, and with the Answerers right and true name also
thereunto subscribed.

ERRATA, CORRECTA.
IN the Epistle Dedicat. page 1. line 12 this word (first) blotte out. In the
Epist. to the Reader, page 1 l 2^. for satisfactory, satisfactorily p. 8. l 5.
for suffertus, suffenus, p 9. lin 33 for scripturiam, scripturam, p. 10. l. 14.
for ingeniosly, ingenuously. In the first Chapter of the Book, p 2 l. 5. for
will, soul p. 13 23. this word secondly, blotte out, and in stead thereof put
this figure 2 to note it to be the second section of that Chapter, and so read
on forward, thus: It being then a thing very demonstratively evident, etc p.
13. l. 32. for Ministers, Ministry, p. 15. l 6. for writes, cites, p. 17. l
6. for makinde, mankind p. 24. in the margent, for 2. Sam 20 17 put 2. Sam. 20
26. In p. 24 l. 31. and 32, read it thus: Aaron and his sons were appointed
to the office of priesthood p. 26. l. 31 this word Thirdly, blotte out, and in
lieu thereof put the figure of 3. to note it to be the Third section of that
Chap p 26. l. 33. for wishes, wished. p. 34 l. 10. for youg, young. p. 38. l
12. for divert direct p. 39. l. 19. read, as unto the chief p. 42. l 6. and
7. for John 9, 11, John 19, 11 p. 44 l. 17. for yea, yet. p. 44 l 18 for
construed, considered, p 45. l. 26 for advantagement, advantage, p. 51 l. 23
for ingeniously, ingenuously, p 52. l 10 for Aquinus, Aquinas, p. 52. 32. for
cause, clause, p. 13. l. 19. between, as, and other Bishops, put this word,
over, page 38. l 16. for worth, worthy, p 40 l. 5 for (...) read (...), p. 43.
l. 33. this word (as) blotte out, p 57, l. 3 this word (and) blotte out, p. 66.
l 2. for shall, should, p, 70, l 24, for States, seats, p. 79. l 24. for
under, made, p, 82, l, 18, for how, now, p, 83, l, 7, for Episcopus, Episcopos,
p, 84, l, 12, after, but, read by, page, 15, against l, 24, in the margent, for
Novel, constable, 123, Novel, constable, 133, p, 19, l, 22, for highness, highness,
page, 100, l, vlt, for proferant, vel Apo, page, 88, l, 26, for Airam Hira^^, and
in margin, for 1, Sam, 5, 1^, read 2, Sam, 5, 11 p, 88. l, 8, for use, used,
p, 94, l, 3, for could, would, p, 96, l, 19, between nevertheless, and admit,
put this word (to) p, 97, l, 16, for one, on, p, 97, ly, the first (only)
blotte out, page, 93, l, 9, for grant, read, perceave, p. 102 l, 22, after
their, read days, p, 102, l, 21, for make, made p. 82 l, 11, for Bithinijs,
Bithiniae.

And if any other faults have escaped in the Printing, I desire the Reader to
correct them with his pen.


