A FRIENDLY ADVERTISEMENT TO the pretended Catholics of IRELAND: Declaring,
for their satisfaction; That both the Kings SUPREMACY, and the FAITH whereof
his Majesty is the Defender, are consonant to the doctrine delivered in the
holy Scriptures, and writings of the ancient Fathers. AND CONSEQVENTLY, That
the Laws and Statutes enacted in that behalf, are dutifully to be observed by
all his Majesty's subjects within that Kingdom.

By CHRISTOPHER SIBTHORP, Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of His Court of
Chief Place in IRELAND.

IN THE END WHEREOF, IS ADDED An Epistle written to the Author, by the Reverend
Father in God, JAMES VSSHER Bishop of Mead: wherein it is further manifested,
that the Religion anciently professed in Ireland is, for substance, the same
with that, which at this day is by public Authority established therein.

DUBLIN, Printed by the Society of Stationers. 1622.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY KING, JAMES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF GREAT
Britanne, France, and Ireland, Defender of the FAITH, etc.
Civil Justice (most Gracious Sovereign) and External Peace, be, as all
confess, two things, in every Commonweal, much to be honored and highly
respected: but they are then, doubtless, of best and worthiest esteem, and
most blessed of GOD, when, together with them, Gods Religion flourishes, and
the Supremacy of Kings and Princes, Romans 13 1.2. Tit. 3.1. Matthew. ^2.21. Deuteronomy.
^8 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 etc. Levit. 26 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. Deuteronomy. 7.11, 12, 13, 14, etc.
1. King. 2.^, 4. 1 Chronicles. 8.7, 8, 9, 10.
within their own Dominions, is also, as one of his sacred ordinances, duly
reverenced and obeyed. For, in the diligent observance of Gods ordinances,
added to civil Justice and external Peace, it is (as your Majesty best
knows) that the solid, durable, and complete Happiness of every Kingdom,
especially that professes God and his word, consists. Howbeit, concerning
points of civil Justice, and, external Peace, I shall not need, here, to
speak any thing: because in those two points, and generally in all matters
Temporal (as they be called) the pretended Catholics of this your Majesty's
Kingdom, do already, of themselves, willingly profess and yield a very good
conformity, without any opposition or contradiction. I wish, they did also
show, (as of right they ought, and upon better information received, I trust
they will) the like good conformity, as touching the two other points (which
be, indeed, points of the greatest and highest importance) namely, concerning
your Majesty's Supremacy, and the Religion: in which two points, it is, that
their great defect, and unconformitie, appears.

The cause hereof, they allege to be their Conscience, and so I also conceive
it: But what manner of conscience it is, themselves should more seriously
consider. For if it be (as it is indeed) not a right, but a wrong and an erring
conscience, all men will grant, that such a conscience ought to be rectified
and reformed, and not persisted in. If then, matter sufficient to satisfy
their consciences, in these points, shall be showed unto them, it is as much as
they can desire: and from thenceforth, they must eythe^ be conformed, or else
be held utterly unexcusable, as having after that, nothing further left to
allege or plead for themselves in the case. This therefore is the thing that
I have here attempted and endeavored to do and perform, as I was able, and as
my other employments in the affairs of the Co^mon-weale, would permit me. I
confess, that it might have been much better done by sundry, and innumerable
others, that be far more learned, and have also much more leisure for these
things then I: and that much more might likewise have been spoken in every
several and particular point, then is here by me delivered: But as I could
not, nor desired to speak all, but so much as might suffice; so neither do I
doubt but there will here be found matter sufficient, (if not redundant) to
give contentment and satisfaction to the conscience of any, that will be
reasonable and equal, and not suffer himself to be transported or carried away
with prejudice, or with perverse or partial affection. The Work, is, I
grant, in respect of me, in no sort worthy your Majesty's view or patrocinie:
yet in respect of the matter therein handled, it being the cause of no less
then of God himself, and of his Church, and of all Christian Kings in general
(if they all knew, or would take notice, of that which of right belongs to
them) and it being your Majesty's own cause more specially and particularly: I
thought it meetest, and my bounden duty, to dedicate it (as here in all
humble submission I do) to your most excellent Majesty. The Almighty
evermore keep and preserve your Highness, to the great glory of his Name, the
further comfort of his Church, and of all your Majesty's Dominions, the most
ample propagating of his religion, and the confusion of all false and
Antichristian Doctrines, and to your own everliving honor in this world, and
everlasting felicity in the world to come, through Jesus Christ. AMEN.

Your Majesty's most humble subject, and servant, (though unworthy) Christopher
Sibthorp.

The Preface, TO THE HONORABLE, Worshipful, and the rest of the pretended
Catholics within the Realm of Ireland.
IT is clear, and out of all question (noble Lords, and worthy Gentlemen) that
the one side, namely, either the Protestants, or, the Papists, be, and must
needs be, mightily mistaken, and strongly deluded; whilst they be both so
confident, and yet so contradictorie and repugnant in their several Religions
and opinions: but where, and on which side, this strong Delusion is, 2 Thessalonians.
2.11. (...).
S. Paul has foretold long agon, and it will hereafter be more fully declared.
In the mean time, some peradventure will take exception to this Work, for that
it is not done by a professed Divine, but by one of another profession: Indeed,
I must confess, that in respect of learning, and all other abilities, and
conveniences, it might, by many degrees, have been much better performed by
such a one, then by me, who am the meanest of many thousands. For which cause
it was, that I solicited, and that very earnestly, a learned professed Divine
of my acquaintance, to have undertaken the Work; but He whom I thus
requested, finding himself to be otherwise much busied and employed, had no
leisure to intend it: by reason whereof, the burden of it then returned and
rested upon my weak self. Howbeit, as I presume nothing of my self (for
neither is there any cause I should) so neither do I distrust or despair of
the strength of the Almighty: whose direction and assistance I therefore most
humbly implore to enable me, in this so weighty a business, wherein I am,
otherwise, of my self, utterly unable, and altogether defective.

Now then, howsoever it is granted, that it might have been much better done
by a learned professed Divine: yet thereupon it follows not, that therefore
it is either unlawful or unbeseeming Me, or a man of another profession, to
intermeddle in it. For, first, it is well known that many (with whom
nevertheless I neither do, nor is it meet I should, compare my self) have
written, and that very commendably, even concerning Divinity, who were
themselves no professed Divines. Secondly, I must crave leave to say, that I
find not Popery, how subtle or sophistical soever it be, to be of any such
puissance, but that a man of mean learning, armed with the strength of the
divine Scriptures, may easily ruinate and overturne it. Thirdly, those that
oppugn the Religion, and His Majesty's Supremacy, what do they else but
oppugn therewithal (as they must needs, at least inclusively) the Laws and
Statutes of the Kingdom, whereby they are both established? And what reason
then, can be showed, why he that is a Lawyer by profession, may not defend
and maintain the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, in those two great points
especially, wherein they be so unjustly and causelessely oppugned? But when I
consider my self further to be a servant (though unworthy) to his most
excellent Majesty, and that in so high and eminent a Court as His Majesty's
Bench is; beside my profession, the duty of my place also tyeth me to defend
his Majesty's Supremacy, as being a thing properly app^rtayning to his very
Crown and Regal dignity. And does not, moreover, the Oath of Supremacy to
His Majesty, which I have taken, necessarily bind me hereunto? Yea even for
this very cause, that I am a subject to his Majesty, though there were no
other reason, do I hold my self in duty, tied, to my power, to uphold and
maintain that his Regal Supremacy. For if every good child will maintain
the right and Authority of his Father, and every good servant the right and
Authority of his Lord and Master, ought not every good subject to maintain
the right and Authority of his Sovereign Lord and King? And as touching the
Religion, if there were no other reason but this, that I am a Christian by
profession (though no professed Divine) do I hold it for that very cause, not
only well beseeming me, but my duty likewise, according to such measure of
knowledge and ability as God has given me, to defend and maintain the true
and Christian Religion I profess, against that which is untruly called the
Christian and Catholic, and is, indeed the false, erroneous, and
Antichristian. For whereas some have a conceit, that not Lay men at all, but
Clergy men only, and such as be of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, should
meddle with the Scriptures, and matters of Religion, it appears to be a very
vain conceit, and an untrue opinion: because S. Paul directly requires, even
of Lay Christians (as well as of others) that the Word of Christ should Dwell
in them, Coloss. 3.16.
and that not poorly, or in a small or slender measure, but (...), that is,
richly, plentifully, Primas. in hunc locum. Heb. 5.12. Heb. 3.13. Romans 15.14.
1 Thessalonians. 5 11.
or abundantly. Whereupon Primasius says, that, Hence we learn, that the Lay
people ought to have the knowledge of the Scriptures, and to teach one another,
not only sufficiently, but also abundantly. And therefore are they further
expressly charged, to admonish, exhort, and edify one another: Jude verse. 3.
yea, to contend, and not only to contend, but (...), earnestly to contend for
that faith which was once given unto the Saints. And does not God himself also
command thus? Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, Levit. 19.17.
but Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin to be
upon him. Agreeably whereunto, would not S. James likewise have all Christians
to labor the conversion of such as be in error, and go astray? telling them
for their better encouragement in this matter, that, if any do err from the
truth, Iam. 5.19, 20.
and another convert him, let such a one know, that he which converteth a
sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and cover a
multitude of sins. You see then what duties, in respect of the good of
others, as well as of himself, be required even of a lay person, in matters
concerning God and his religion. And indeed, very strange it were, if lay
Christians should be tied in charity to take care of men's bodies, and yet
should in no sort be permitted to have any care, or to show any Christian
charity or affection, in respect of their souls, and the good and safety of
them. It is true, that no man may take upon him the office and function of
Bishops, Pastors, or other Ministers of the Word, without a lawful calling or
ordination first had and obtained: but although a lay man may not therefore
preach, minister the sacraments, nor do any such acts as be proper and
peculiar to those that be Ecclesiastical Ministers, yet in such things as be
not proper and peculiar unto them, but be acts and duties common with them, to
other Christians, a Lay man may lawfully intermeddle. It is likewise true, that
the knowledge of Gods Word (and consequently of Divinity) does in a more
exact, and more plentiful, and fuller manner and measure, and chiefly, belong to
those that be professed Divines and of the Ecclesiastical Ministry: but
thereupon it follows not, that therefore it belongs only to them. As also,
although those of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, are to teach and instruct the
Lay people out of the Scriptures, and that the Lay people are to learn what
they rightly teach from thence: yet neither does it thereupon follow, nor is
that any argument, or impediment, but that the Lay people may nevertheless
read, and get knowledge in the Scriptures, and thereout learn what good they
can also, even by their own industry, diligence, and endeavor. We read of
Aquila, and Priscilla his wife, that they were by their Trade, Tentmakers: and
that Apollos was a man eloquent and mighty in the Scripture^* yet so skillful,
learned and expert were those two, Act. 18.2, 3.24, 25, 26.
name^ly, not only Aquila, but Priscilla also his wife, in the Word of God, as
that they took unto them the same Apollos, and expounded unto him The Way of
God more perfectly. All men know, that Kings, Princes, and such like civil
Magistrates, be none of that Order of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, and yet of
them it is specially required, that they read the Scriptures and Book of God,
and that they be very diligent and conversant in it. For God expressly
requires of a King, Deuteronomy. 17, 18, 19, 20.
that, When he shall sit upon the Throne of his Kingdom, He get him the Book
of his Law, and charge him to read therein, all the Days of his Life, that
he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to Keep All his Words and
ordinances, not turning from them, either to the right hand or to the left:
That so he may prolong his Days in his Kingdom, He and his Sons after him.
And to Iosuah, a civil Magi^^^ate, he likewise gives this charge and
commandment, saying: Let not This Book of the Law, depart out of thy mouth,
but Meditate therein Day and Night, that thou may Observe and Do according
to All that is written therein: Josh. 1.8.
for then shall thou make thy Way prosperous, and then shall thou have good
success. Was not the Treasurer to Candace (Queen of the Ethiopians) also a
Lay man, Act. 8.27, 28, 29, 30. etc.
and not of the Order of the Ecclesiastical Ministry? and yet did he read
Esaias the Prophet, (which is a part of the holy Scriptures) as he was
returning homeward, and sitting in his Chariot, and was in no sort reproved for
the same, but well allowed therein, and had a blessing thereupon sent unto him
from God. Is it not likewise recorded of those noble Christians at Berea, to
their great honor, that they received the Word of God with all readiness of
mind, Act. 17.11.
quotidie scrutantes Scripturas, searching the Scriptures Daily? And were not
Lay persons also comprised amongst those to whom Christ Jesus himself said
thus? Scrutamini Scripturas: Ioh. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures. Yea, does not God himself further give a direct
commandment that the Book of his Law, and of the Religion and ordinances
therein contained, Deu. 31.11, 12.^3. Et Josh. 8.34, 35.
should be read, published and made known to All, even to Men, Women, and
Children? And does he not moreover say, of that his Word, commandments, and
ordinances, in this sort? They shall be in thy heart: Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children: and shall talk of
them, when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Yea, is he not pronounced
blessed, Psalm. 1.2.
that has his delight in the Law of the Lord, and that does meditate therein
Day and Night? Timothy, even whilst he was a child, was conversant in this
Book of God, the holy Scriptures: for so S. Paul expressly testifies of him, 2.
Tim 3 14, 15, 16, 17.
that he knew the holy Scriptures of a child, and for his further
encouragement therein, says, that those holy Scriptures be able to make him
Wise unto Salvation. S. John also writes one of his Epistles (which is a part
of the sacred and canonical Scriptures) expressly and by name, The second
Epistle of S. John, verse. 1.
to an elect Lady and her children: which he would never have done, if it had
not been both lawful and laudable, even for women and children also that be
of capacity, as well as for others, to read the Scriptures, and to know them.
How shall a young man cleanse his Way? Psalm. 119 9.
even by taking heed thereunto according to Gods Word, says the Psalmist.
According whereunto, it is again required of all, Eccles. 12.1.
that they remember their Creator in the days of their youth. Origin also,
from his childehood was taught in the Scriptures, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 3.
and learned them without Book, and questioned with his father, Leonides, an
holy Martyr (who ioyed therein) about the difficult sentences of the same.
Macrina, S. Basils Nurse, likewise taught him the Scriptures, Basil. epist. 74*
of a child. And S. Hierome writes of Paula a Gentlewoman, how she set her
maids to learn the Scriptures. Yea, many of his writings be directed to
women, commending their diligence and labor in the Scriptures, and encouraging
them therein, as namely to Paula, Eustochium, Salvina, Celantia, etc. Theodoret
also testifies of the Christians that lived in those ancient times, thus:
Theodor. de curand. Graecorum affect. lib 5.
You shall every where see (says he) these points of our faith to be known
and understood, not only by such as be Teachers in the Church, but even by
Cobblers, and Smiths, and Websters, and all kind of Artificers. Yea, all our
women, not only they which are Booke-learned, but they also that get their
living with their Needle: yea, ^^^id-servants, and waiting women, and not
citizens only, but husbandmen also of the country, be very skilful in these
things. Yea, you may hear amongst us, Ditchers, and Neatheards, and
Wood-setters, discoursing of the Trinity, and of the creation etc. S.
Chrysostom likewise exhorts all sorts of men, Chrysostom in Genesis hom 7.
to read the Scriptures, and to call their neighbors to the hearing of them.
He also takes away the vain pretenses and excuses of them, In Gen hom. 21
who alleged that they were secular and Lay men, and had wife, children, and
family to look to, and desires them that they would not so deceive
themselves, saying: that They which be entangled with such cares, have the more
need to seek remedy by reading the holy Scriptures. Comment* in Matthew hom. 2.
In Epist. ad Heb Hom. 17.
Again, he says: It is no excuse, but a fault, to say, I have not read what
S. Paul says. And therefore he says further: Audite, obsecro, seculares
omnes etc. Hear, I beseech you, all ye that be secular or laymen: provide
you Bibles, In Epist. ad Coloss. Hom. 9.
which be medicines of the soul: if you will nothing else, yet, at least wise,
get the New Testament, the Apostle, the Acts, the Gospels, which be continual
and diligent Teachers. It is then more then manifest, that the reading,
searching, and knowledge of the Divine Scriptures, is permitted and belongs
not only to those that be of the Order of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, but
even to those also that be not of that Order: as namely, to Kings, Princes,
civil Magistrates, to old, to young, Coloss 3.16. Hebr 5.12. Heb, 3.13. Rom
15.14. 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. Levit. 19.17. Iam. 5.19, 20.
to men, to women, to children, and generally to all sorts of people, and that
to this end, to benefit others, as well as themselves, as they shall be able.
For, as God gives not worldly wealth or earthly blessings and gifts, to any
man for his own private use and behoof only, but that he should communicate
and distribute of the same unto others: so neither does he give his spiritual
gifts or graces to any, to hide or keep the^ only to himself, but to extend
and impart them to the profit also of others. Luke 8.16.
As likewise no man lights a candle, to put it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick, that it may give light to others that be in the house, as well as
to himself. Yea, the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one, to
this very end, 1. Cor 12.7.
to profit others withal as well as himself, as S. Paul again directly
teaches. Although then every man cannot be a professed Divine, yet it is
evident, that eveey man ought to be a professed Christian. Yea, Whosoever shall
be ashamed of me and of my words (says Christ) of him shall the Son of man
be ashamed, when he shall come in his own glory, Luke 9 26.
and in the glory of his Father, and of the holy Angels. And S. Paul says
likewise, that, With the heart man believes unto righteousness, Romans 10.10.
and with the mouth confesses unto salvation. So that we must not only
believe in Christ with our heart, but we must also confess or profess him
and his religion, with our mouth, and (which is yet more) we must practice
Christianity in our lives and conversations, and endeavor also so much as in
us lies, to have the same observed and practiced by others. Wherein there is
no cause to fear those proverbes, of, Ne suitor ultra crepidam, and, Tractant
fabrilia fabri, and such like, which cannot here be rightly used or applied:
because the knowledge of God, and of his Word and Religion, is not like the
case of other arts, sciences, trades, and occupations in the world, but is a
thing to be learned and professed by all sorts of people, of what worldly
calling or profession soever they be, as now I trust you sufficiently perceive.

But consider yet further, by the controversies that are between the
Protestants and the Papists, how much even the learned professed Divines
themselves, be divided in opinions: In this case, what shall we do that be
Laymen? shall we be of no religion, until these be agreed? But when will
that be? or, what if in the interim, any of us in such a case should die? were
it not extremely perilous? or, shall a man at all adventures, betake himself
to one of the two Religions, not caring, or, not knowing whether it be right or
wrong which he betaketh himself unto? were not that overgreat levitie, a
blind resolution, and a strange inconsiderate rashness? Yea, do we not all
say and hold, that extra veram Ecclesiam non est salus, out of the true Church
there is no salvation? There is then (so far as I perceive) a direct
necessity laid upon as many of us as be able to make search, not only to
search, but to find out also, whether of these be the true Teachers, and which
is the right faith, and the true Church, and to join our selves thereunto. For
which purpose, ought we not studiously and diligently to read and revolve the
Scriptures? For is there any other sure rule of truth, beside them? or, any
other infallible or better Judge, for the deciding of these controversies, then
God himself, speaking unto us in those his sacred and divine Writings? But to
take away all doubts, let it be examined; Would any then have the Church to be
the Judge? Why the Church it self is the thing that is chiefly in question:
the grand and principal Question between the Protestants and the Papists,
being, Whether of them is the true Church: and when the Church it self is in
question, she is not to judge, but to be judged, as even Bellarmine also
himself declares. Bellar. de no^. Eccl. cap. 2.
Or, would any have Councils to be this Judge? Godly Councils that be
assembled in the name of Christ, and aim only at truth, and that have the
Word of God only for their rule and direction, be, I confess, much to be
honored and respected: but Councils, at all times follow not, nor do
according to that rule; whereupon it comes to pass, that they sometimes err
and go astray, and consequently cannot be infallible Judges. For, first, it is
granted as well by Papists, as by Protestants, that Provincial Councils may
err, even in matters of faith: and why then may not general Councils also
possibly err in matters of faith sometimes? For is not the holy Ghost, the
spirit of truth, (if he so please) as well able to keep a Provincial Council
at all times, from erring, as a general? What then is the difference? or
wherein does it consist? Will any say, it consists in this, that in a
general Council there is a greater number or multitude, then is in a
Provincial? But truth goes not always by multitudes, or the greatest number,
but is sometimes found in the lesser number, and in few against many, as in
times past it was found in one Michaiah, against four hundredth. For which
cause it is also written: 1. King. 22.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, nor agree in a controversy,
to decline after many, Exodus 23.2.
to overthrow the truth. Neither indeed do the Popish Teachers themselves hold,
the reason of their supposed non-errabilitie of general Councils, to be,
because of the greater number or multitude, but because of the promise of the
holy Ghost made unto them: which holy Ghost they nevertheless cannot deny to
be promised as well to a Provincial as to a general Council: yea, Where but
Two or Three be gathered together in my Name (says Christ) there am I in the
midst of them. Matt. 18 20.
Seeing then it is granted that a Provincial Council may err,
notwithstanding this promise of the holy Ghost, it must be granted, that a
general Council may sometime also err, by the same reason that a Provincial
may, notwithstanding that promise. For as touching the reason that some bring,
that if a general Council may err then the whole Church may err and fail in
faith; it is no consequent: inasmuch as all the Bishops and Pastors within
Christendom (without exception) be not always present at a general Council,
much less be all the faithful throughout the whole world there present: and
therefore also does even Panormitan himself reject that reason and inference,
as frivolous; For (says he) though a general Council represent the whole
universal Church, yet, to speak truth, the universal Church is not there
precisely, Panor de elect. and electi potestate significasti.
but by representation: because the universal Church consists of All the
Faithful; and this (says he) is the Church which cannot err. Whereby, it is
not un-possible that the true faith of Christ may abide in one person only:
therefore the Church is said, not to fail, or, not to err, if the true faith
remain in any one. And thus says Pighius also, Pigh hierar. Ecclesiast lib.
6. cap 5. and 4.
though an Arch-Papist; Certum est, Concilia non esse universalem Ecclesiam: it
is a thing certain, that Councils be not the whole, or, universal Church.
Lib. 6. cap. 7.
Where he further affirms those two Councils of Constance and Basil, to have
erred, notwithstanding they were general Councils. Yea this is so clear a
case with him, that General Councills may err, even in matter of Faith, that
he says again most directly and expressly, thus: Lib. 6. cap. 13.
In fidei definitionibus, errasse etiam universalia sanctorum Patrum Concilia
comperimus. Testimonio sunt de universalibus Concilijs, imprimis Ariminense,
Universal haud dubie, etc. Insuper Ephesinum secundum, and ipsum Universal,
etc. Testimonio, inquam, haec sunt, errare posse etiam universalia Concilia,
etiam legitime congregata. We find that even general Councils, of holy
Fathers, have erred in their decrees or determinations of matters of faith.
Witness hereof concerning general Councils, is especially the Council of
Arimine, a general Council without doubt, etc. And moreover, the second
Ephesine Council, which was likewise a general Council, etc. These, I say be
Witnesses, that even general Councils may err, though they be never so
lawfully assembled. For, although most true it is, that the holy Ghost cannot
possibly err, and that the same holy Ghost is promised and given to godly
Councills, as likewise he is to every godly man and faithful member of
Christ: yet it pleases the holy Ghost, not to extend and show forth his vigor,
force, and power at all times, but sometimes to withhold it, and so to leave
men to themselves: in which case it is then, a very easy matter, for Councils
either General or Provincial, as also for any other godly man, or particular
member of Christ, to err, sin, or go astray; neither is it Gods Spirit
which does disagree from his Word. And consequently, whosoever teaches any
thing concerning Faith and Religion, not according to Gods Word, but out of his
own brain and fancy, must be supposed, to speak, not by Gods spirit
(whatsoever he pretends) but by his own, Chrysostom de sancto and adorando
Spiritu.
as S. Chrysostom also informs us. Wherefore, in vain it is, for men, or,
Councils, to say, they be undoubtedly guided by the holy Ghost, the spirit of
truth, unless they have the Word of truth, for their rule and direction, and
can so prove the spirit, whereby they speak and decree, to be Gods Spirit, and
not their own. But again, ye know, that in Councills (as well General as
Provincial) things be carried and overruled by the most Voices: and where
things be so carried and ruled by the greater number of voices, there it is
experimentally found to be a thing very easily possible, for the most voices
or greater number, sometimes to overruled the better part, being the lesser.
and consequently, Councils, whether general or particular, because they may
sometime possibly err, can not be held for any absolute and infallible Judge,
or, infallible rule of truth, in these controversies.

Or, would any think the Bish. and Pope of Rome to be an infallible Judge? Why
in the gloss upon the Popes own Law, that opinion also is rejected, saying
thus: Quaero de qua Ecclesia, Cause 24. quest. 1. a recta in gloss, Novitatibus.
intelligas, quod hic dicitur, quod non possit errare? Si de ipso Papa, certum
est quod Papa errare potest. Respondeo: Ipsa congregatio Fidelium, hic dicitur
Ecclesia. I demand of what Church it is meant, when it is said, as here, That
the Church cannot err? If of the Pope himself, it is certain he may err. I
therefore answer, that the whole company of the Faithful is here meant by the
Church. Where, beside that you see what Church it is that cannot err, you see
it directly affirmed, that certum est quod Papa errare potest: Gers in tract.
an liceat in causa fidei, a Pontifice appellare.
it is a thing certain, that the Pope may err. Gerson also, the Chancellor of
Paris, tells us, that, tam Papa quam Episcopus, deviabiles a fide, as well the
Pope as any other Bishop, may go out of the way of Faith. Alfonsus, that wrote
so earnestly against Luther, yet touching this point, said thus: Non credo
aliquem esse adeo impudentem Papae assentatorem, Alfons. advers. haeres lib. 1
c. 4. Sul. praelo Ascentiano, An. Dom. 1534.
ut ei tribuere hoc velit, ut nec errare possit. I do not believe that any man
is such an impudent flatterer of the Pope, as to attribute this unto him, that
he cannot err. Which words were in his first edition, but are not now in the
last: but yet even in his new copies, although he qualify his terms, he
holds the same opinion, very directly, saying: Omnis homo errare potest in
fide, Alfons lib. 1. cap. 4.
etiamsi Papa sit: Every man may err in faith, yea even the Pope himself. And
again he says: that, Papa in fide errare potest, ut melius sentientes tenent,
Alfons. lib. 1. cap. 2.
etiam ex hijs qui Papatui plurimum favent: inter quos est Innocentius ejus
nominis quartus, in cap. 1. de Summa Trinitate: The Pope may err in matter of
faith, as the better opinion is, even of them that favor the Papacy most of
all: amongst whom is Pope Innocentius the fourth of that name, writing upon the
first chapter De Summa Trinitate. Well therefore does Erasmus also, confute
this new conceit and strange opinion. For, If it be true (says he) which some
say, Erasm. annot. in 1. Cor. ex cap. 7.
that the Bishop of Rome can never err, Iudicially: what need is there then
of General Councils? Why are men skillful in the Laws, and learned in
Divinity; sent for to Councils, if he, in his speakings, cannot err? To what
purpose be so many Universities troubled with handling Questions of faith,
when thc truth may be had from his mouth? Yea, how comes it to pass, that
the Decrees of one Pope be repugnant to the Decrees of another? What Wresters
of Scripture then, do some Papists in these later times, here appear to be,
that abuse it to give an infallibility of judgment, and an immunitie or
privilege from error, to the Pope of Rome? Arboreus, a Doctor of Paris, and
one not of the meanest Sorbonists, confesses likewise and teaches this truth,
saying: Papa in fide errare potest: Arboreus, in Theosoph. li. 4. cap. 32.
Et tota mihi aberrare via videtur qui aliter sentit. Assentantur sane Romano
Pontifici, qui faciunt eum immunem a lapsu haereseos and schismatis. The Pope
may err in faith: And he seems to me to be in an extreme error that
thinks otherwise. Surely, they do but flatter the Bishop of Rome, that make
him free from falling into heresy and schism. And how can it in reason be
otherwise? For if Provincial Councils (wherein be many Bishops) may err in
matter of Faith (which is a thing that the Popish Writers themselves do grant):
yea, if General Councils may possibly err in matter of Faith (which is also a
thing confessed by some of the Popish Divines, and cannot justly be denied by
any) is there any likelihood that any one Bishop, singly considered by
himself, should be so privileged, as that he could not possibly err? Yea,
even a general Council, namely the Council of Basil, says: Saepe experti
sumus and legimus Papam errasse: We have often found it by experience, Council.
Basil. epist. Synodal. 3. de authorit. Consil. supra Papam.
and know it also by reading, that the Pope has erred. And again they say:
Cum certum sit Papam errare posse. Forasmuch as it is a thing certain, that
the Pope may err. Whereupon it must be concluded, that therefore the Pope also
cannot be held for an unerrable, or infallible Judge.

Shall then the ancient Fathers, be this Judge? They are, I grant, in all
respects, to have that due reverence that belongs to them: but themselves
will by no means assume that high honor to themselves, to be infallible
Judges, or such as cannot possibly err. Yea, they acknowledge that they may
err, and therefore would have no man further to believe them, then there is
warrant for what they write and speak, in the Canonical Scriptures. I cannot
deny (says S. Augustine) but that there be many things in my Works, Did 9.
negare. Aug ad Vinc. Vict.
as there be also in the Writings of my predecessors, which justly and without
any rashness may be reproved. And when S. Cyprian was objected against him,
he answered thus: I am not bound by his Authority: For I do not account
Cyprians Writings as Canonical, Aug cont. Crescon. lib. 2. c 32.
but weigh them by the Canonical Scriptures: and that, in them, which agrees
with the Canonical Scriptures, I allow to his praise; but that which agrees
not, by his favor I refuse. Again he says: Aug Epist. 112. ^d Paulin.
If any thing be proved by the manifest Authority of the divine Scriptures,
which in the Church be called canonical, it must be believed without any
doubting: but as for other testimonies, thou may believe them, or not believe
them, according as thou shall see cause to trust them. And therefore he gives
this prerogative to the sacred and canonical Scriptures, that, August. cont.
Faust. Manich. lib. 11. cap. 5.
amongst all the Writings in the world, they only cannot err; and that all
other may err. For which cause he says again thus: Solis eis Scripturarum
libris, qui jam canonici appellantur, Aug Epist. 119.
didici hunc timorem, honoremque defer, ut nullum eorum Authorem scribendo
aliquid errasse firmissime credam. I have learned to yield this reverence and
honor to the canonical Scriptures Only, that I most firmly believe, no
Author of them to have erred any thing in their Writing. Yea, the Writings of
all others, he says, are to be read, non cum credendi necessitate, sed cum
judicandi liberate, August cont. Faust. li. 11. c. 5. Epist. 48. Depecca.
merit and remiss li 1 ca. 22. cont. Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 31.
not with a necessity to believe them, but with a liberty to judge of them.
For, The Authority of the sacred Scriptures cannot deceive. And by those
Books (says he) de caeteris literis fidelium, vel Infidelium libere
judicemus. We may freely judge of the Writings of all other men, whether they
be Christians or Infidels. And this freedom or liberty S. Augustine again
challenges to himself, in quorumlibet hominum Scriptis, Aug. de not. and gra.
cont. Pelag. cap. 61.
in the Writings of all men whosoever, and adds this reason once more, Quia
solis canonicis debeo sine ulla recusatione consensum: because I owe my consent
without any refusal (says he) to the canonical Scriptures only. Yea, it is
manifest, that not only singly or severally, Eusebius lib. 7. cap. 5.
but jointly also with one consent, many ancient Fathers together, have erred.
For example, with S. Cyprian, in his error of rebaptization, many of the
ancient Fathers then living, yea even great Councils also took part. Again,
did not all these, Iustine, Irenaeus, Papias, Tertullian, Victorinus,
Lactantius, Severus, Apollinaris, and others, hold the Chiliastick error,
otherwise called the Error of the Millenarians? In the Question also concerning
Antichrist, although very many ancient Fathers, with one joint consent, held,
he should come of the Tribe of Dan, yet does Bellarmine himself, Bellarm. de
Antichristo cap. 12.
for all that, hold this to be an opinion not certain, because it is not well
and sufficiently proved by the Scriptures: for, the texts of Scripture which
are wont to be alleged for maintenance of that opinion, himself answers,
and shows that they prove no such matter. And therefore Turrecremata also
says thus: Turrcer. in C. Sanct Romans d. 15. n 12.
The Writings of the Doctors are to be received with reverence; yet they bind
us not to believe them in all their opinions, but we may lawfully contradict
them, where by good reason it appears that they speak against the
Scripture, or the truth. And thus also speaks Marsilius: Marsil. Defens. p.
413.
that he will receive whatsoever they bring consonant to the Scripture; but
what they bring dissonant from it, he will reject, with reverence, upon the
Authority of Scripture, whereunto he will lean. Yea, whereas some suppose,
that the ancient Fathers (because they lived much nearer to the times of the
Apostles, then the late Writers) did therefore see more and further into truth
then the late Writers: Andradius holds the contrary, saying; Andrad Defens.
Trid. l. 2.
God has revealed many things to us that they never saw. Agreeably whereunto,
Dominicus Bannes, another learned Popish Writer, likewise says thus: It is not
necessary, that by how much the more the Church is remote from the Apostles
times, Do^^. Ba^n. 22. page 58. and 59.
by so much there should be the less perfect knowledge of the mysteries of
faith therein: because after the Apostles time, there were not the most learned
men in the Church, which had dexterity in understanding and expounding the
matters of faith. We are not therefore involved in the more darkness, by how
much the more, in respect of time, we be distant from them: but rather the
Doctors of these later times, being godly and insisting in the steps of the
ancient Fathers, have attained more express understanding in some things then
they had: for, these, be like children standing on the shoulders of Giants,
who being lifted up by the tallnesse of the Giants, no marvel though they
see further then they. Seeing then the ancient Fathers have erred, and may
err, even in the opinion of Papists as well as of Protestants, it must be
concluded, that therefore they also cannot be this infallible Judge.

What then? May-Traditions not written, or not specified in the sacred
Scriptures, alleged to be Apostolical, be held to be any infallible Judge,
or any infallible rule of Faith? I answer, no. For, first, how can a man be
assured that those Traditions be Apostolical, which be alleged and affirmed so
to be, when he sees no proof or evidence for them, in any of the Writings of
the Apostles, or in any of the sacred and canonical Scriptures? If you say,
that some of the ancient Fathers do testify them to be Apostolical: That is
no sufficient proof, that therefore they came originally, and assuredly from
the Apostles: because even those ancient Fathers themselves, taking them upon
report of others, might possibly be deceived: And so precious is men's faith,
and so dear unto them, is, and ought to be, the salvation of their souls, as
that, in those regards, no Authority or testimony of men, without the
Authority and testimony of God therewith concurring, can give them an
undoubted or assured satisfaction. For our Faith is not to be builded upon the
credit, Authority, or testimony of men, but upon the testimony and
Authority of God himself. Irenaeus, in Eusebius, Eusebius lib. 5. cap. 20.
declares what manner of Traditions, those were which Polycarpus delivered, and
said, he had heard and received, from the Apostles, and testifies of them,
that they were (...), all consonant to the Scriptures. Traditions of this sort,
namely which be consonant and agreeable to the holy Scriptures, we refuse not,
but willingly embrace: but such Traditions as be dissonant and repugnant to
those holy Scriptures, there is ever just reason to refuse: or, if they be not
thereby warranted, none is necessarily tied or bound to believe them to be
undoubtedly divine and Apostolical. It was not therefore without good cause,
Coloss. 2.8. 2 Thessalonians. 2.1, 2, 3.
that S. Paul himself gave caveats even touching Traditions, and matters
delivered as coming originally from the Apostles: because sometimes some
things were reported to come originally from them, which indeed did not so
come. A clear example whereof, Eusebius lib 3. cap. 19.33 39.
Eusebius shows in Papias, who was himself so deceived, under the name and
supposition of Apostolical Traditions, and thereby also occasioned others to
be deceived. This Papias was scholar to John the Apostle, and schoole-fellow
to Polycarpus before mentioned, and for the credit of his Traditions, said
thus: I am not delighted with them that make mention of strange precepts and
commandments, but in them that teach those things that be true, and bring such
things as are delivered by the Lord to our fidelity, and came from the truth
it self. So when any came that was a Disciple of the Elders, I enquired the
words of the Elders; What, Andrew, What, Philip, What, Thomas, or any other
of the Disciples of the Lord said: and he says moreover, that he laid up all
those things well in his remembrance. Howbeit (notwithstanding all this his
care, diligence, and vigilancie about Apostolical Traditions) he brought in
(as Eusebius says) sundry paradoxes, and strange opinions, and such as were
full of fables, amongst which was the Chiliastick opinion. Yea, this great
liking and affection to unwritten Traditions, deceived not only Papias, but
(as Eusebius witnesses) it gave occasion of the Chiliastick error unto diverse
Ecclesiastical persons also after him. And he adds the reason: because,
says he, they pretended the antiquity of that man. Clemens Alexandrinus also
was much addicted to unwritten Traditions, and therewith likewise much
deceived: affirming and teaching, by reason thereof, very erroneous, strange,
and untrue opinions: as namely, Clem. Strom. lib. 1. and 6.
that Philosophy did in times past, justify or save the Greeks: that Christ
preached only one year: Clem Strom. lib. 2.
that the Apostles after their death preached unto the dead, which with the
Apostles descended into the water, and being made alive, Lib. 7.
ascended thence again: that Christians may not contendin judgment, neither
before the Gentiles, nor yet before the Saints: and sundry other errors. Yea he
there further mentions a certain kind of Gnostici, of whom he delivers
this description, Lib. 6.
saying: that the knowledge which makes a true Gnostick, is that which comes
by succession unto few from the Apostles, and is delivered without vvriting
etc. Where may appear, whence the heresy of the Gnostics (which was
afterward condemned by the Church) did spring and had his original, namely out
of unwritten Traditions supposed to be Apostolical. Yea, sundry other
Heretics also, boasted of their doctrines and opinions, Clem. Strom. lib. 7.
as if they had received them by tradition from the Apostles. For Valentinus
alleged himself to be scholar to Theodatus, who was familiarly acquainted
with S. Paul: The Marcionites boasted, that they had the Disciples of Matthias,
to their Master, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 28.
and taught the doctrine by them delivered. Artemon likewise boasted of his
doctrine, as if it had come unto him undoubtedly by tradition Apostolical: But
Eusebius, for all that, shows that it was not so. Excellent therefore, and
ever memorable, is that speech of Irenaeus touching this point, where he
grants, that The Apostles did, indeed, at the first, preach the Gospel, Iren.
lib. 3. ca. 1.
by word of mouth, but afterward (says he) by the will of God, they
delivered it in vvriting, that so being committed to writing, it might be for
ever after that, the foundation and pillar of our faith. So that now, and ever
since that time, Hieronym. in Matthew. 23.
we must hold as S. Hierome also teaches and holds, saying thus: That which
has no Authority of the holy Scriptures, is as easily contemned as allowed.
And again he says directly, that such things as men invent and devise of
themselves, Hieronym. in Agg. cap. 1.
without the Authority and testimony of the Scriptures, as it were by
Tradition Apostolical, the Sword of God strikes down. Yea some Traditions
mentioned in ancient Fathers to be Apostolical, even the Papists themselves
do not observe: as namely, Tertull. de c^rona Militis nu. 3.
the temper of Milk and Honey given to them that be newly baptized: abstayning
from washing an whole week after: oblations for the Birthday, yearly: not
to fast, nor kneel (in prayer, or worshipping of God) on the Lords day, nor
between Easter and Whitsontide. All which be mentioned in Tertullian. S. Basil
likewise mentions it, as an Apostolical tradition, for Christians, Basil. de
Spiritu sancto. c. 29.
between Easter and Whitsontide, to pray standing: S. Hierome also mentions
it, as an Apostolical Tradition, Hieronym. in Dialog. cont. Lucif. c. 4.
the Temper of Milk and Honey, as also on the Lord's Day, and throughout every
Pentecost, neither to pray on the knees, nor to fast. If then some Traditions
affirmed by ancient Fathers to be Apostolical, be nevertheless not observed
in the Popish Church it self, which is a thing very manifest: why should any
Traditions be urged or obtruded upon the Protestants, under the name of
Apostolical, and by them necessarily to be held and believed, which be not
found specified in the undoubted Word of God, the sacred and canonical
Scriptures, but have only the Authority of some men, without the Authority
of Gods word to testify the same? Yea as touching all points necessary to
salvation, the holy Scriptures themselves be abundantly sufficient: so that,
for that purpose, there is no need of any unwritten Traditions, as even the
ancient Fathers themselves do also testify. Athan. contra gentes. Chrysostom.
hom. 1. ad Tit. and oper. imperf. in Matt. hom. 41.
The holy Scriptures inspired from heaven (says Athanasius) be sufficient for
all instruction of truth. Whatsoever is requisite to salvation (says
Chrysostom) all that is fully laid down in the Scriptures. In the two
Testaments (says Cyril) every word (or thing) that pertains to God, Cyril.
in Levit. lib. 5.
may be required and discussed. There were chosen to be written (says
Augustine) such things as were thought sufficient for the salvation of the
faithful. Aug. in Ioh. tract. 44.
The Canon of the Scriptures (says Vincentius Lirinensis) is sufficient,
Vincent. adver. haeret.
and more then sufficient for all matters. What need then is there of any more
speech in a matter so clear and evident? Concerning this point therefore,
Inasmuch as it is very apparent, that some errors and heresies have arisen out
of Traditions, said and supposed to be Apostolical, and that under that
pretense and name, sundry men in ancient and former times have been deceived,
and may now, much more, by that means, in these later times (so far remote
from the times of the Apostles) possibly be deceived: it must be concluded,
that Traditions Apostolical (as they be called) not warranted nor specified in
the divine Scriptures, cannot be held for any infallible Judge, or, infallible
rule of truth, in this case.

Seeing then, the Church, who is her self in question, may not be the Judge,
but must be judged of, and that by the Scriptures: for in such a case where the
Church it self is in question, even by Bellarmines own acknowledgement,
Bellarm. de no^is Eccl. cap. 2.
the Scripture is better known then the Church, and therefore must be the
Judge of it: and seeing also, that, not Councils (whether General or
Provincial) nor Popes of Rome, nor ancient Fathers, nor unwritten Traditions
said to be Apostolical, can be this infallible Judge; what remains, but that
God himself, speaking unto us in his sacred and canonical Scriptures, is, and
must be held to be the only infallible Judge, in this case? Or (which comes
all to one effect) if we will have visible and mortal men to be the Judges,
The infallible Rule, whereby they are to judge, and to be directed, appears
to be the very same sacred and canonical Scriptures, wherein God speaks.
And this also do the ancient Fathers themselves, yet further directly teach
and affirm: For S. Augustine says; The Scripture pitcheth down the Rule of
our Faith. De Bono Viduit. c. 1. tom. 4. Tertull. cont. Hermog. Chrysostom hom.
13. in 2. cor. Gre^. Nyss. Orat. de iis qui adeunt Hieros.
Tertullian likewise calls the Scriptures, the Rule of faith. S. Chrysostom
calls them, a most exquisite Rule, and exact Square and Balance to try all
things by. And Gregory Nyssen also, calls them, (...), a strait and
inflexible Rule. By this Rule of the Scripture then it is, that not only
Bishops, Pastors, and Clergymen, but even every man else that is able to
make search and trial, is to try and examine these differing and
contradictorie doctrines and positions, between the Protestants and the
Papists. For how otherwise shall we certainly know, what is right, and what is
wrong in them? or how otherwise shall we be able to discern the true Teachers
(which we are to reverence, honor, and embrace) from the false Teachers,
(which we are to renounce and detest)? Neither is this any disorderly,
immodest, or unseemely course (whatsoever Rhemists or other Papists say to the
contrary) but very requisite and necessary, as you see, in this case
especially, where the learned professed Divines themselves be at such variance:
Yea, it is a thing not only permitted and allowed, but commended and commanded
also in Gods own Book. For, when Christ Jesus bids as well lay persons, as
others, for trial and finding out the truth, in a doubtful matter, to Search
the Scriptures, is not that a sufficient commandment? Ioh. 5.39.
And when those noble-Christians at Berea, Act. 17.11.
did (...), search the Scriptures, (and that daily) thereby to try and judge,
whether those things were so or no, which their Preachers and Teachers had
taught and delivered unto them, and be, for the same, so highly commended by
the holy Ghost; Shall any be so unadvised, rash, or presumptuous, as to say or
think it to be, either unlawful or unlaudable for them that be learners and
hearers, so to do? Is not all the immodestie, pride, and arrogancy in them
rather, which will not suffer or allow their Doctrines to be thus tried and
examined by the Scriptures, but (as if they were Lords over men's faith) will
have men to believe them, 2. Cor. 1.24. and 4.5.
whatsoever they teach (be it right or wrong) without any further search,
inquiry, or examination? May not men most easily be thus deluded and deceived?
Against which, Matthew. 24.4.
does not Christ himself say? Take heed that no man deceive you. Again does
he not say? Take heed and beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees,
Mat. 16.6.12.
that is, of their Doctrine, as it is expounded in the same chapter. And does
not S. Paul likewise bid the people, to Try or examine all things, 1 Thessalonians.
5.21.
touching men's doctrines, and to hold fast that which is good? Does not S. John
again say thus unto them in plain terms? 1. Ioh. 4.1.
Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God or no:
for many false Prophets be gone out into this world* Chrysostom in his days,
answering the objection of such as said, they could not tell what religion to
be of, because there were so many differing opinions of it, says: that seeing
they have the Scriptures which be so true and plain, Chrysostom. in Act. Hom.
33.
it will be an easy matter, thereby for them to judge: for, tell me (says he)
have thou any understanding or judgment? for it is not a man's part barely to
receive whatsoever he hears. Say not then, I am a learner, and may be no
Judge: for that is but a shift. And this also S. Basil teaches. Basil. Ethic.
de sin 72 page 432. Orig. in Jesus Nave, Hom 21.
Origin likewise teaches the same, saying: Me dicente quod sentio, Vos
discernite and examinate si quid rectum est, aut minus rectum. Whilst I speak
what I think, Do you judge and examine, what is right, and what is not
right in it. Ambr. de Virgin. lib. 3 cap. 1.
S. Ambrose likewise says thus: We justly condemn all new things which
Christ has not taught: for, Christ is the Way to the faithful: If therefore
we our selves preach any thing which Christ has not taught, Do you (says
he) judge that abominable. In like sort speaks S. Cyril, saying: Concerning
the holy and heavenly mysteries of faith, Cy^^l. catech. 4.
we must not deliver any thing, though never so small, without the holy
Scriptures: neither may we be led away with probabilities, and show of words:
nor yet believe me (says he) barely saying these things unto you, unless you
also receive the demonstration thereof from the Scripture. For, the security
of our faith arises from the demonstration of the holy Scripture. Here then
you plentifully perceive, that even lay persons are to judge and discern of
the Doctrines of men, although not by any private spirit of their own, yet by
that divine Spirit that speaks in the holy Scriptures, the only infallible
rule of true Religion: the voice and judgment of which divine Spirit there
speaking, we ought to obey and yield unto. Let not therefore any reason drawn
from possibility of errors or heresies, which men may fall into, by
misunderstanding of the Scriptures, and taking them in a wrong sense, alienate
you from reading of them: for if this should pass current, and be held for a
good and sufficient reason, then neither should Clergymen, or,
Ecclesiastical Ministers be permitted to read the Scriptures, because there
is a possibility for them also, in the reading of them, to misunderstand them,
and to take them in a wrong sense, and so to fall into errors or heresies, as
we see indeed, that some of them heretofore have done, and still do. And as
for the objection of difficulty or obscurity in the Scriptures, Chrysostom Hom.
3. in Laz.
S. Chrysostom has answered it long agone, saying: that therefore God penned
the Scriptures, by the hands of Publicanes, Fishermen, Tentmakers, Sheepheards,
Neatheards, and unlearned men, that none of the simple people might have any
excuse to keep them from reading them: and that so they might be easy to be
understood of all men; the Artificer, the householder, the vviddow-woman, and
him that is most unlearned. And further he says: that, the Scripture when it
speaks any thing obscurely, Chrysostom Hom. 9. in 2. cor.
expounds it self in another place. And so also says S. Augustine: that*
there is almost nothing in these Obscurities, Aug de doct. christ. lib. 2. cap.
6.
but in other places a man may find it plainly delivered. In like sort
speaks S. Hierome, Hieronym. com in Esai^ c. 19.
saying: It is the manner of the Scripture, after things obscure, to set down
things manifest, and that which they have first spoken in parables, to deliver
afterward in plainer terms. And so testifies S. Basil also: Basil. Regul.
contract. qu. 167.
that, the things that be doubtful, and in some places of Scripture seem to
be spoken obscurely, be made plain by those things which be evident in other
places. And therefore none of us that be laymen, upon any pretenses of
difficulty or obscurity whatsoever, must be deterred or discouraged from the
diligent reading and searching of these sacred, divine and canonical
scriptures, that so we may at last, thereby find out the certain and undoubted
truth in these Controversies that so deeply concern us, and be of so great
and high importance. But these things be more fully handled afterward, and
therefore I here forbear to speak any further of them. In the mean time, you
see that which I cannot conceal or deny, namely, that in these Controversies
I hold with the Protestants against the Papists* which nevertheless I hope ye
will conceive that I do, not in any partial, worldly, or sinister regards,
but for that upon trial and examination of these matters by the rule of the
divine and canonical Scriptures, I find the truth to be on their side: and so
I rest assured, that even your selves also will find it, if all partiality
and preiudicate conceits being laid aside, ye will be pleased to judge of them
(as of right ye ought, and in reason I hope ye will be moved to do) by that
only infallible rule I grant, Sl^id commentat.
that the name of Protestants is not very ancient, as being given of later
times to those Christians that have protested against the errors and abuses in
Popery: yet that hinders not, but that the Faith and Religion by them
professed, may be nevertheless (as it is) the most ancient, Apostolic,
Catholic, Christian, and Divine. As likewise the name of Papists is not very
ancient, as being also of later times given by their adversaries unto them (for
that they depend so much upon the Pope* and his doctrine, decrees, and
designs): yet do the Papists nevertheless hold, the faith and religion which
they profess to be very ancient, yea the most ancient, and the Apostolic,
Catholic, and Christian. Howbeit, both these Religions (they being so
repugnant and contradictorie one to the other) cannot be right, but one of them
must needs be wrong, and that is Popery, as this Book declares: That which
we mean and comprehend under the name of Popery, being nothing else but the
errors, heresies, and corruptions which the Church of Rome holds, and be
accrued and grown unto it, since the first institution and planting of it by
the Apostles. For what the Church of Rome rightly holds or believes, the
Protestants impugn not, nor have cause to impugn, but they only impugn her
errors, heresies, and corruptions. As for the term of Catholics, which
Papists have put upon themselves, their calling themselves so, does not
therefore prove them to be so: for the Arrians in times past, likewise called
themselves Catholics, who were nevertheless not so, but Heretics in very
deed. But as we dislike not, but well approve of that name of Catholics, when
it is rightly used and applied, and given to those to whom it properly
belongs: so do we prefer the name of Christians, Act. 11.26.
before it, as being indeed the more ancient, and the more honorable name, it
being derived from Christ himself, the Head of his Church, and the Author of
the Christian religion. Who be the right Catholics, and the true-Christians,
and who not, yea, which be the Christian, and which be the un-Christian, and
which be the Antichristian people, does afterward appear, that so every man
may know, what name does rightly and properly belong unto him, and may rank
himself in his due place. For whosoever knows Antichrist well, will abhor
and detest him, and will love, honor, and adhere unto Christ and the purity
of his religion, so much the more. If then the Pope of Rome shall here appear
unto you to be (as he is) the grand Antichrist foretold in the Scriptures, I
doubt not but you will speedily renounce him, and his Antichristian Supremacy,
and his Antichristian Religion, together with all his seducing and
Antichristian Teachers, and wicked and Antichristian courses against the Church
of God. For no true-Christians ought, nor will, give any better respect to
Antichrist, especially after that they once know him and have him discovered
and manifested unto them. God therefore open and reveal his truth, more and
more unto us all, and incline all our hearts and affections to embrace it, and
evermore to walk in the ways of it. AMEN.

An Alphabeticall Table of the principal matters handled in this Work,
following.
A
ANtichristianisme, a mystery of iniquity, and not any open hostility, or
professed enmity against Christ and Christianity, page 208. page 39. and p.
61.62. pa. 285.286. page 394 395. etc. Antichristianisme, began in the Apostles
days* page 280.321. What manner of adversary, the special and grand
Antichrist is, page 285.286. and page 394, 395.396. page 334.335 Antichrist is
the false^Prophet amongst Christians, and not amongst the Turks, and other
Infidels of the world. page 341. etc Miracles, signs and wonders, done in the
Antichristian Church, to seduce and deceive people with all. page 280.281 What
manner of miracles or wonders they be, that be done in the Antichristian
Church. page 280.281.282. page 306.307. page 341. page 98.99 A difference
between Christian, un-Christian, and Antichristian people. page 286 Antichrist
is not one singular or particular man, that shall continue just three years
and an half: but is a State or succession of men, that is to have continuance
for many hundredth years in the world page 312.313.314*
315.316.317.318.319.320.321. etc. Antichrist is to sit in the Temple of God,
that is, in the Church, and amongst those that profess Christ and
Christianity* p. 283.284 The special and particular place where the grand
Antichrist is to sit, is not Constantinople, nor Jerusalem, nor any other
City, but Rome. page 283.284.285. page 246.247.248. p. 377. etc That the Pope
of Rome is the grand Antichrist, showed out of 2. These. 2. page 279.280.281.
etc The Pope of Rome further showed to be Antichrist, out of Rev. 13. page
325.326.327.328.329.330.331.332 etc Again, the Pope showed to be Antichrist,
and the Popish Church to be the Antichristian, out of 1. Tim. 4. verses 1, 2,
3, 4, 5. pa. 353 354.355. etc Sundry objections of the Papists, concerning
Antichrist, answered. page 377.378.379* 380, 381.382, etc. That Papal or
Popish Rome is the whore of Babylon, showed out of Revel. 17, page
244.245.246. etc The Roman Empire, standing in the height and glory, was the
let or impediment, that Antichrist could not show himself in his height until
that impediment was removed, page 304.305. page 391.392 393 That Antichrist is
come long sithence, page 391.392.393, 394. page 43.44 etc. page 61.62
Antichrist, the man of sin, the son of perdition, page 396.397.398* 399.400
etc. The reason why men are so seduced and misled by Antichrist. page 307.308
The most fearful and woeful estate of those who receiving many admonitions
to the contrary, will nevertheless live and dye in obedience to Antichrist,
and his religion, page 309* and p. 397, etc. Assurance of salvation in this
life, and how it is (...), and may be obtained. page 158.159* 160.161. etc
B
IN what sense some ancient Fathers call Peter Bishop of Rome, and whether he
were properly so to be called. page 90, 91, 92 How unlike the Bishop of Rome
is to S. Peter. page 92 93, 94* etc Who that Beast is, that is mentioned in
Rev. 13* and in diverse other places of the Revelation. page 308.309. page 325,
326, 327 328, etc. and page 249.250.251.252.253
C
WHere our Church was during the reign of Popery, page 36.37, 38 Councels,
as well general, as Provincial, may err in matter of Faith, as well as in
matter of fact. page 50, 51, 52, 54 etc. See also the Preface. What Church
that is whereof it is said, that it cannot err: and when, and how far it
may err, and how far not. page 81 82. See also the Preface. Concerning
universalitie, antiquity, perpetuity, visibilitie unity, succession of
Bishops, and doing of miracles: whether all these be in the Popish Church, and
whether they be inseparable marks of the true Church. page 83.84 85. etc. to
the end of that chapter. Chastisements and afflictions in this life, be sent of
God upon his children, out of his love toward them, for other good ends and
purposes, and not to satisfy the severity of his Justice by that means, for
their sins and the punishment thereto belonging. p. 125. etc There is no just
cause to be showed, why the pretended Catholics should refuse to take the
oath of Supremacy, or refuse to come to our Churches. Their objections and
reasons answered, p. 1, 2, etc p. 407, etc. See also throughout the whole
book for this purpose. Concerning auricular Confession, and to whom
confession of sins is to be made, and that it ought to be free and
voluntary, and not forced or compelled. page 302, 303, etc. page 253, 254
D
FOr whom Christ Dyed, and to whom he is a Redeemer. page 187, 188, 189, etc
Every sin Deadly in his own nature, although all sins be also venial and
remissible in respect of Gods mercy, grace, and bounty, except the sin
against the holy Ghost. page 114, 115
E
THe Emperor in ancient time, had the Supremacy, and not the Pope. page 30 The
Emperor in times past, had power to place and displace Popes. page 27 The
Emperor in ancient time, banished, imprisoned, and otherwise punished, as well
Bishops of Rome, as other Bishops. page 22 He did make Laws concerning
Ecclesiastical causes, and religion. page 24 As also Commissioners in an
Ecclesiastical cause, and the B. of Rome himself was one of those
Commissioners. page ibid. An appeal to the Emperor in an Ecclesiastical
cause, page 24 General Councils in ancient times, called by the Emperor and his
Authority. page 24 The Christian Emperor did, and was to meddle in matters of
the Church, and concerning Religion, page 25 The Christian Emperor in ancient
time, did nominate and appoint Bishops of Diocesses and Provinces, and even the
Bishop of Rome himself. page 25 Emperors in ancient time, did ratify the
decrees of Councils, before they were put in execution. page 28 Miltiades, Leo,
and Gregory, all Bishops of Rome, in their several times, subject to the
Emperor, and at his command. page 24.26 Ancient Fathers, Popes of Rome, and
Councils (as well general as provincial) may err, even in matter of faith,
as well as in matter of fact. page 49, 50, 51, 52. etc See also the Preface for
this point. The Roman Empire, dissolved, ever since the Emperors have ceased
to have the sovereign command and rule of Rome, and that the Popes have gotten
to be the heads and supreme Rulers of that City, and to be above the Emperors.
pa. 331.332, and page 391.392.393 The Pope of Rome has no power or authority
from Christ, to Excommunicate any. page 299 etc Excommunications (be they never
so just and lawful) be, by Gods law and appointment, of no force to depose
from Earthly kingdoms, or to dissolve the duty and allegiance of subjects.
page 299, 300, 301, etc
F
Our Forefathers and ancestors, not to be followed in any vices or errors they
held. page 34 35 Foretold, in the Book of God, that an apostacy from the right
faith, and a mystery of iniquity (otherwise called an Antichristianisme)
should come upon the Church: and that so the Church by degrees, should grow
corrupted and deformed. page 35, 36* 280 Foretold also how long the Church
should lie in those her corruptions and errors, and when she should begin to
be cleansed and reformed. page 35, 36 What is to be thought of our Forefathers
that lived and dyed in the time of Popery. page 39.40 41, 42 Foretold that a
strong delusion to believe lies should possess them of the Antichristian
Church, because they received not the love of the truth, extant in the divine
Scriptures. page 307, 308 Men are justified in Gods sight and before his
tribunal, by Faith only; and good works be the fruits and declarations of
that faith page 99, 100, 101, etc. to the end of that chapter, and page 116,
117, 118, etc. to the end also of that chapter.
G
God is not the author of sin, page 168, 169, etc.
H
NOt Protestants, but Papists, be the Heretics, page 72. and Schismatics.
page 37, 38. page 413.414, etc Not the Pope, but Christ only, is the Head of
the universal militant Church, as well as of the triumphant. page 94 95, 96,
97, 98
I
Who is to be the infallible Judge of controversies in religion: or (which
comes all to one effect in the conclusion) what is the infallible Rule,
whereby men must judge, and be directed for the finding out of truth in those
controversies. page 49, 50, 51, etc. See also the Preface for this matter. The
Implicita fides of Papists reproved. page 78 79, 80
K
KIngs have the Supremacy over all manner of persons, as well Ecclesiastical as
Civil, within their own Dominions. pa. 1. to p. 5 Their Supremacy in all
kind of causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil. page 5, etc Kings and
Princes, although they have the Supremacy, yet thereby claim not, nor can
claim, to preach, to minister the Sacraments, to excommunicate, absolve, or to
consecrate Bishops, or to do any other act proper to the function of the
Ecclesiastical ministers, page 32 etc Kings and Princes be, notwithstanding
their Supremacies, under God, and subject to him and his word. page 33 Even
heathen Kings may command and make Edicts and Proclamations, for God and his
service. page 7. etc Christian Kings and Queens are by Gods appointment to be
nursing fathers, and nursing mothers to his Church and Religion. p. 7. The
authority of a Christian King in respect of contemptuous, disorderly, and
unruly persons, requisite and necessary in the Church as well as in the
Commonweal. page 6, etc Kings and Princes may command and compel their
subjects to external obedience, for God. page 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 Christian Kings
may make laws about matters Ecclesiast. p. 7, 8.24 He may make Commissioners
in Ecclesiastical causes. page 24 He may have Appeals made unto him in a
cause Ecclesiastical ib. He may nominate and appoint Bishops of Diocesses and
Provinces, page 27. Councels and Convocations to be assembled by his
authority, and the decrees thereof, by him to be ratified and confirmed,
before they be put in execution. page 26, 27, 28 Christian Kings do punish
offenders in Ecclesiastical causes, not Ecclesiastically, but Civilly. page 6
7.32 Subjects ought not to rebel against their Kings and Princes, though they
be adversaries to the Christian Religion, and though subjects have power and
force enough to do it. pa. 20, 21, 22.299, 300 Kings of Rome did sometimes send
the Bishops of Rome, as their Ambassadors. page 22 How thankful subjects
ought to be unto God, for Christian Kings and Princes. page 33 The power of the
Keys most grossly abused by the B of Rome, to work his own exaltation
above Kings and Princes page 299, 300, 301, etc The Keys of the kingdom of
heaven no more given to S. Peter, then to the rest of the Apostles. page 292,
293, 294, 295
L
NO Licentiousness or impiety in the doctrine of Justification by faith, or in
the doctrine of predestination, or assurance of salvation, or in the doctrine
of redemption, or in any point of the religion of the Protestants, but the
clean contrary, page 99, 100, etc page 153, 154. etc. page 125, etc page 404,
etc Lay persons may and ought to read the Scriptures, and thereby to examine
and try the doctrines of men, whether they be right or no page 73, 74, 75, 76.
etc. See also the Preface. It is impossible for mere men, by and in their own
persons, perfectly to fulfill the Law of the ten Commandments, and so to be
justified: yea, the Law was given to other uses and ends. page 108, etc No
such place as Limbus Patrum. page 130, 131, 132
M
MIracles, signs, or wonders done in the antichristian Church page 98, 99 page
306, 307, page 280, 281 Men's Merits deserve not salvation, but damnation, p.
110, 111, 112 113, etc. page 366, 367
N
THe Name of Christians, the most ancient and the most honorable. See the
Preface, toward the end. The Name of Catholics, to whom it rightly and
properly belongs. page 63, 64
O
THe Oath of Supremacy to the King, explaned and declared to be just and
lawful. page 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. to the end of that chapter.
P
THe Pope got his supremacy over Emperors and Kings, partly by fraud, and
partly by force. page 27, 28 The Ecclesiastical supremacy, when it was
first affected by a Bishop, was oppugned even by some of the B. of Rome
themselves, p. 13, 14, 15. Diverse general Councils also against it. p 16, 17
The Popes Supremacy, what a wicked founder it had, and how wickedly it is
still maintained and upheld. page 12 Three Texts of Scripture usually alleged,
for maintenance of the Popes supremacy, abused, and answered. p. 11, 12, p.
291, 292, etc Excommunication, and the power of the K^yes, abused by the Pope,
for establishing and maintenance of his supremacy. p. 299, 300, 301 Diverse
vvritings forged under the names of Clemens, Anacletus, Evaristus, and other
ancients, for the upholding of the Popes new Supremacy. page 12 The Donation
of Constantine also forged for that purpose. ibid. Miracles, signs, or wonders
also done for that end. p. 341, 342, etc Popery is a corruption of the most
ancient and Christian Religion, and is to the Church, as an infection or
disease is to the body of a man, or as a plague or pestilence is to a City.
page 38 Pope and Popery exclaymed against long before Luther or Calvin were
borne. page 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, etc The Popes excommunications and curses to be
contemned. page 44, 45 299 Popes of Rome have erred and may err, even in
matter of faith and iudicially. page 51, 52, 53, 54. See the Preface also. No
such place as Popish Purgatory. page 125, 126, etc. to the end of that
chapter. That there is a Predestination is confessed both by Protestants and
Papists: the doctrine whereof being rightly understood, is very sweet and
comfortable, and is so far from introducing any inconvenience,
licentiousness, or impiety, as that it infers the clean contrary. page
153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158 Predestination depends not upon the will of
men, but upon the will of God. page 178.179, 180, etc Vocation, justification,
sanctification, and all saving graces, be consequents and effects of Election
or Predestination to life everlasting. page 154, etc page 198, etc
Predestination depends upon Gods foreknowledge: and what that foreknowledge
is. page 194, 195, 196, etc Faith foreseen, and good works foreseen, be not
the cause of Predestination, but the effect and a consequent thereunto. ibid.
The doctrine of Predestination teaches no dissoluten^sse or carelessness, but
the clean contrary. page 154, 155, etc. p. 199, 200, etc Predestination
teaches no man utterly to despair, though he be exceedingly wicked and
impious for the present (inasmuch as there is a possibility to be converted,
so long as life lasts) as likewise it teaches no man rashly or unadvisedly
to presume. p. 157, 158, 198, 200, etc The Popish Mass, and Popish Priesthood
thereto belonging, both abominable. page 217, 218, 219, etc What manner of
Primacie it was, that Peter had amongst the Apostles. page 295, 296, etc
Popish Priests be not the Ministers of Christ, but of Antichrist, and therefore
to resort to them, as if they had commission or authority from Christ to give
absolution or forgiveness of sins, is wicked and in vain. page 302. etc.
Q
ALl Questions and controversies concerning faith and religion, to be decided
and determined by the sacred and canonical Scriptures, page 49, 50, etc. See
also the Preface, throughout.
R
THat there is a Reprobation, as well as an Election, and what it is. page 165,
etc Reprobation and Election, both at one time: and the cause why this man in
particular vvus chosen, and that man refused, is Gods own mere will and
pleasure. page 196, 197, 198 None can certainly determine of himself
beforehand, that he is a reprobate, though he be for the present exceedingly
wicked and ungodly, because God may possibly call and convert him, before he
dye. p. 157.158. p 199, 200 Rome apparently proved to be the whore of Babylon.
p. 246, ando. Bellarmine himself and other Papists, confess Rome to be the
whore of Babylon. page 247 The evasion they make, that only heathen Rome is
there intended, is showed to be very vain and false. page 247, 248, 249, etc
Some special spiritual whoredoms, that is, Idolatries of the Romish Church.
p^g. 258, 259, 260, etc Who is the Rock and foundation, vvhereupon the Church
is builded page 292, 293. etc.
S
THe Spirit that speaks in the sacred Scriptures, is not a private or humane
spirit, but a divine spirit, even the Spirit of God. And by this Spirit
speaking in those Scriptures, is every spirit speaking in men, to be tried.
page 53, 54 Exposition of one place of Scripture, must be such as agrees with
the rest of the Scriptures. page 58 59 A rule to k^ow, when a man speaks by
a private Spirit of his own, and when not. page 53.54 The true Church to be
tried and known by the sacred and canonical Scriptures. page 59, 60, 61, 62
Some books held by the Papists to be canonical Scriptures which the ancient
Church held not to be so. page 65 66 The public prayers and Service in the
Church, should be in such a tongue as the people might understand. page 67 The
originals of the Scripture incorrupt, and to be preferred before that which is
called S Hieromes Translation, and all other Translations whatsoever. page 67
68 69.70 The English Translation of the Scripture is rightly justified, against
the unjust exceptions of Papists. page 71 Not any humane learning, or private
spirit of any man, but God only and his Spirit, is the opener and unfolder of
the true sense of the divine Scriptures. page 73, 74 Lay people may and ought
to read the Scriptures. page 73, 74, 75 76, 77. See also the Preface. That
there be but two Sacraments of the new Testament properly so called: and that
Confirmation, Penance, Marriage, Orders, and Extreme unction* be not Sacraments,
properly. page 204, 205, 206, 207 208, 209, 210, etc That the Sacraments do
not give grace ex opere operato, by the very work or action done by the
Minister, but grace comes and is given another way. page 215, 216
T
TRaditions not specified in the Scriptures, affirmed to be Apostolical, there
being no assured proof that they came undoubtedly and originally from the
Apostles, be not to be urged or imposed upon the faith of men. page 57, 58, etc
How men in ancient time were deceived by Traditions, said and supposed to be
Apostolical. See the Preface. That these Traditions be needless, because the
sacred and canonical Scriptures, without them, be perfectly and completely
sufficient for all instruction of truth, concerning divine and heavenly
matters. pa. 57, 58.64, etc. See also the Preface.
V
THat the Bishop of Rome, if he were a good and orthodoxe Bishop, is no more
the Vicar of Christ then other Bishops are. page 97 To what Use and end God
gave his Law of the Ten Commandments, page 151.152. it being impossible to be
exactly and perfectly fulfi^led by men, by reason of the vve^kenesse that is in
all flesh: and that God therein is neither cruel, tyrannical, or unjust. p.
151, 152. and page 108, 109, etc
W
GOod Works, be the effect and fruit of a justifying faith, and do not
justify in Gods sight. page 101, etc. p 112 etc There is a reward belonging to
good Works, but it is a reward of bounty and grace, and not of merit or due
desert by men, page 113, 114, etc. Good Works be the way that men must walk
in, toward the kingdom of God, but they be not the cause of their coming
thither. page 105, etc. Good Works, and a good life, and godly conversation
must be observed, but not to purchase or merit heaven thereby (for it cost a
greater price) but for other godly uses and ends. page 110.111. 112, etc. page
121.122.123, 124* page 151.152 ^o good Works in Gods sight and censure before
faith received. page, 147 ^^od Works done after faith received, do not merit at
Gods hands, ^or justify in his sight. page 148.149.150 ^orkes of
supererogation most abominable. page 151.152 ^orkes of men's own invention and
devising done for and in the ^way of Gods service and religion, not commanded
by him, nor warranted by his Word, whatsoever good intention is pretended, ^e
nevertheless not good nor approved in his sight and censure. pa. 145.146
FINIS TABULAE.
ERRATA.
Page 1 in marg. 1. Pet. 5.12. for 1. Pet. 5.1, 2. page 3. l. 1. audiens, for
erudiens. p. 10. l. 6. kno^ for knew. p. 11. l. 17. otger for other, p. 27. l.
25. Grantzius, for Crantzius. p. 74. l. 10. hirdly for thirdly. p. 96. l. 19.
(always) to be blotted out. p. 109 l. 22. Clesiphontem, for Ctesipho^^^^ p.
111. l. 29 manifested, for magnified p. 116. l 18. read, in this sense p. 128.
l. 28. able to dye, (...) able to do it p. 130. l. 31. highest, for highest.
p. 139. l. 37. (himself) to be blotted out. p. 148. ^ marg. Psalm 3.12 for Phil
3.12. and ib. Gal. 5.1^. for Gal. 5.17. p. 159 l 4. sim, for sum. p. 177. l ^
h^^gh, for though p. 190. l. 28. blood, for beloved p. 193 l. 1. sins, for
sin. p. 200. l. 14 (of) to (...) blotted. p. 207. l. 13. outward, for inward.
p. 211. l 31. end, for and p. 212. l. 25 popist, for ^^^pish. p. 216. l. 1. in
marg. Graces, for Grace. p 222. l. 7 member, for members. p. 231. l. 25.
Tra^^substation, for Transubstantiation. p. 232. l. 6. as well sense, for as well
as sense. and l. 7. Transubsta^^tiation, for Transubstantiation. p 239. l. 30.
manet, for manent. p 43. l 13. of, for of. p. 184. ^ marg* Io^. 4.10. for 1.
Ioh. 4.10. and Ioh. 4.19. for 1. Ioh. 4.19. p. 253. l. 8. it, for is and l. 26.
and ^ (in good measure) to be blotted p 254. l. 26. Espencaelus, for
Espencaeus. p. 256 l. 6. continua^^^ for c^^ntenance. p 263. in marg. Exodus
23.8. for Exodus 32.8 p. 271 l. 28 due, for done. p. 283. l. ^ read, Titus
Vespasian and the rest, etc p. 296. l. 1* althought, for although and l. 25.
Legal, (...) Regal. p. 318. l. 3. fable, for fables. p. 331. l. 31. Imperio,
for l.'imperio. and l 37. had led, for han^^ p. 332 l 1. for, for so p. 341. l.
6 no, for not. p. 343 l. 11. redigerint, for redegerint. and l. 9, and ^
qurdringentos, for quadringentos, and l. 23 Empires, for Empire. p. 361 l 9
Doranus, for Dor^^nus p. 380. l. 15 and 21. et, for est p 387. l. 25. (...),
for (...) p. 39^. l 5. Apostles, for Ap^^stle. p. 393 l. 26. or three) to be
blotted p. 395. l. 1, 2. (in the Church, relation to Antichrist, (...) whose
spirit they speak, as S. John affirms) to be blotted. p. 400. l. 20.
true-Christians, (...) true-Christian. p. 410. l 22. bni* for bin. p. 243. l 4.
heree, for here p. 296 in marg l 6. petrus ^^^spondet, for unus respondit. p.
380. l. 20. Theodorum. for medorum. p 48 Finis libri primi* (...) Finis primae
partis hujus libri p. 63 l 26. that, for the. and l. 5. uphold, for hold. p.
64. l. 37. pr^^structae, for praestructa p. 27. l. 21. Minister, for Ministers.
p. 69. l. 1. perish, for pass. p. 119. l ^ for not p 16 l. 15. by them, for to
them. p. 88. l. 4. strange, for strange p. 100. l. 5 truth, for trut^^ p. 113.
l. 26. (to) superfluous. p. 38^. l. 34. odoravit, for adoravit. p 345. l 19.
velunt, for velut (...) 358. l 24. Apostolici, for Apostoli. p. 365. l. 3.
after peace, add, and joy. p 375. l. 32. of prohibi^^^on, for of a prohibition
p. 40. in marg. for, Cyprian in psalmo, ad quid Iustificationes meas (...)
assumis Testamentum meum per os tuum. read, Cyprian lib. 2. Epist. 3. ad
Caecilium. p. 3^^ l. 1. (hours) to be blotted. p. 401. l 26. licentiousnes,
for, covetousnes.

Other faults may also escape in the printing, which I desire the Reader to
correct wit^ his pen.

THE FIRST PART of the BOOK.
CAP. I.
Concerning the Kings Supremacy, and the Oath in that behalf to be taken.

HIS MAJESTY'S Supremacy is chiefly considerable in two respects: namely, in
respect of Persons, and in respect of Things or Causes. First then concerning
his Supremacy in respect of Persons ( Ecclesiastical as well as Civil) within
his own Dominions, who can justly deny it him? Does not S. Peter expressly
require of all Christians that live within the Dominion of any King, 1. Pet.
2.13.
that they should submit themselves unto him, (...), The Kings Supremacy over
persons Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil, declared.
as unto the chief, or supreme person, over them? It is evident, that he
calls the King chief or supreme, not only in respect of Dukes, Earls, or
other temporal Governors (as the Rhemists would have it) but in respect of all
the rest likewise, were they Bishops, Pastors, Clergy men, or whosoever: for,
he writes that his Epistle, not to Heathens, but to Christians; 1. Pet. 1,
2.3. etc.
and amongst them, not to the Lay people only, but to such also as were
Presbyters* and did (...), 1. Pet. 5.12. etc.
Do the office of Bishops amongst them; requiring even them, as well as the
rest, to yield their subjection and submission unto him. And does not S. Paul
also require the same subjection and obedience to be performed, by all manner of
persons, to their King* and Princes? For thus he says: Let every soul be
subject to the higher Powers; for there is no power but of God: and, the powers
that be, Rom 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
be ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to themselves Judgment,
or, Condemnation. And again he says: Wherefore ye must be subject, not
only because of wrath, but also for Conscience sake. Now then, if every one
must be subject to Kings, Princes, and these higher Powers, which thus bear
the civil sword (as both these Apostles of Christ do here clearly testify)
it is apparent, that Kings and Princes, and these higher powers, be, and must
needs be granted to be supreme, to whom all the rest, within their Dominions,
be thus required to be subject. Yea, S. Paul writing that his Epistle to the
Church of Rome, and requiring every Soul therein, to be subject to these
higher Powers, Romans 1 7.
shows, that not only Lay people, but all within the Ecclesiastical order
also, even as many as have souls, Romans 13.1.
should be subject to these higher powers. And therefore S. Chrysostom, upon
this place, says directly: Sive Apostolus, Chrysostom. in Romans 13. Hom. 23.
sive Evangelista, sive Propheta, sive quisquis tandem fueris, etc. Every
soul must be subject to the higher powers, yea, though you be an Apostle, or
an Evangelist, or a Prophet, or whosoever you be. And he further adds,
saying; Neque enim pietatem subvertit ista subiectio: For neither does this
subjection overthrow piety or godliness. And so says Theodoret likewise upon
this Text: Theodor. in Romans 13.
Sive est Sacerdo^ aliquis, sive Antistes, sive Monasticam vitam professus, us
cedat quibus sunt mandati Magistratus; whether he be a Priest or a Prelate, or
profess a Monastical life, he must submit himself to those, to whom
Magistracy is committed. Theophilact upon the same Text, Theoph in Romans 13.
speaks in like sort; Vniversos erudit, sive Sacerdos sit ille, sive
Monachus, sive Apostolus, ut se principibus subdant, cuiusmodi subiectio nil
prorsus est Dei sublatura cognitionem: S. Paul instructs all (says he)
whether he be a Priest, or a Monk, or an Apostle, that they should subject
themselves to Princes; which kind of subjection will in no sort take away the
knowledge of God. Likewise speaks Oecumenius: Instruens omnem animam, and
audiens, ut licet Sacerdos quispiam sit, licet Monachus, licet Apostolus,
potestatibus subijciatur; Oecumenius in Romans 13.
That S. Paul teaches and instructs every soul, that though he be a
Priest, though a Monk, though an Apostle, he must be subject to these higher
Powers. Bernard also, writing to the Archbishop of Senona, alleges this Text,
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: and adds further, Bernard.
Ep. 42.
Si omnis anima, and vestra: Quic vos excepit ab universitate? If every soul
must be subject, then must your soul also: for who has excepted you from this
universalitie? Yea Aeneas Silvius (who was himself afterward a Pope of Rome,
called Pope Pius the second) alleging this Text, says, Aen^s Silvius lib. 1.
de gestis Basil. Council.
Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit; nec excipit animam Papae:
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; neither (says he) does he
except herein, the soul of the Pope himself. And Gregory (who was also
himself a Pope of Rome) in an Epistle to the Emperor Mauritius, in the person
of Christ, Gregor. epist. li. ^. C. 100.103.
says thus unto him, Sacerdotes meos manui tuae commisi; I have committed my
Priests to thy hand. And in another Epistle he says, that Dominari non solum
militibus; sed etiam sacerdotibus concessit: God has made the Emperor, ruler,
not only over Soldiers, but over Priests also. He further calls the
Emperors, his Lords, and says, that Potestas super omnes homines, dominorum
meorum pietati, coelitus data est: Power over all men, is given from heaven, to
the piety of my Lords. And this supremacy does also Optatus expressly
acknowledge, saying, Super Imperatorem non est, nisi solus Deus, qui fecit
Imperatorem: Optat. contra Parm lib. 3.
Above the Emperor is not any but God only, that made the Emperor. And this
again did all the ancient Christian Church acknowledge in Tertullians time,
saying thus, Tert. ad Scapul.
Colimus Imperatorem, ut hominem a Deo secundum, and solo Deo minorem: We
Christians honor our Emperor, as the man next unto God, and inferior only to
God. Again he says, that they held their Emperors to be under the power of
God only: a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi, from whom they be the second,
Tert. Apolog. cap 30.
and after whom they be the first. Kings therefore, who have the like
preeminence and authority within their kingdoms, that the Emperors had within
their Empire, must, of all that will be right and Orthodox Christians be
acknowledged to have the Supremacy, or (which is all one) the supreme
government, over all persons, within their own kingdoms and dominions, of what
sort soever, whether they be Lay or Ecclesiastical. And this is further
confirmed by the sixth Toletan Council, which speaking of Chintillanus the King,
says thus; Council. Tolet. 6. cap. 14.
Nefas est in dubium deducere eius potestatem, cui omnium gubernatio superno
constat delegata Iudicio: It is an heinous offense to call his power into
doubt, to whom it is apparent that the government of all is committed by Gods
appointment. How intollerably injurious then, is the Popish Clergy, which will
not acknowledge this subjection? but if it so fall out that any of them be
Robbers, Traitors, Rebels, Murderers, or how great offenders soever in a
Commonweal, yet hold themselves nevertheless free, by reason of their Order,
from ^riall, for those offenses, in Kings Courts. This, you see, is directly
repugnant to the Institution and word of God, and to the opinion and practice
of the Primitive and ancient Church, and was moreover long sithence condemned
(as it was well worthy) by Marsilius of Padua* as a new devise, and not so new
as pestiferous, Defensor. pacis part. 2. ca. 23.
occasioning the ruin of States, and inducing a plurality of Soveraignties in
one kingdom: yea, from hence all scandals grow, and which standing (says he)
civil discord shall never have an end. Is not then the position of such
Priests and Jesuits as Emanuel Sa is, justly to be condemned; Ema. Sa. Aphor.
who, in his Aphorisms, at the word Clericus, affirms, that, Clerici
rebellio in Regem non est Crimen loesae Maiestatis, quia non est subditus
Regis: The Rebellion of a Clergy man against the king, is no Treason, because
he is not the kings subject. And so likewise says Bellarmine; Non sunt amplius
Reges Clericorum Superiores: Bellarm. de Cler. cap 28.
Kings be no longer Sovereigns or superiors to Clergy men. Do not these
appear to be most gross, disloyal, and detestable opinions? But thus a New
King is raised over the Popes Clergy, that the Scripture might be fulfilled,
which says, They have a King over them, which is the Angel of the bottomless
pit, who in Hebrew is called Abaddon, Rev. 9.11.
and in Greek Apollyon, that is in English, a Destroyer: namely, the
degenerate Bishop of Rome, (that grand (...), as (...) proved) who has thus
bereaved and robbed King^ of (...) natural borne subjects, and of their
ancient Supremacy, and most rightful authority over them.

2 That the King is a Governor within his own kingdoms and dominions, is a
matter so evident, as that it needs no proof: for he is called Rex a
Regendo, ^ King in respect of his rule and government. 1. Pet. 2.13, 14.
And S. Peter (agreeing hereunto) teaches, that not only the King, but even
other Magistrates also that be under the King, be Governors* and instituted
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well: S.
Paul also speaks the like of Princes or Governors that bear the sword,
that, They are not to be feared for good works, but for evil: Romans 13.3, 4.
vvilt thou then be without fear of the power? Do well (says he) so shall
thou have praise of the same: for he is the minister of God for thy good: But,
if thou do evil, then fear, for he bears not the sword in vain: for he is
the minister of God, to take vengeance on him that does evil. You here then
clearly perceive, that Kings and Princes be Governors: and (...) before that
they be supreme; which being put together, necessarily concludes them to be,
under God, the supreme Governors, within their own Dominions. Now that their
government and authority extends to causes Ecclesiastical as well as
(...)* is a thing likewise very manifest: for as there is here no exception of
any person, The authority of Kings in matters Ecclesiastical, declared.
so is there also no exception or difference put, of any cause; but whosoever
transgresses or offends, or does evil, be it in what kind of cause soever,
he is here made subject to this sword, power, and authority of Kings and
Princes, Romans 13.4.
and punishable by it. And does not very reason it self also persuade this?
For even in Christian States, it is possible for Bishop^ and other
Ecclesiastical ministers, to transgress and offend, as touching the execution
and administration of their Ecclesiastical offices and functions, as well as
other men may in their offices and places. As for example, If they or any of
them would not suffer a child, or any other, to be baptized which were not
to be denied baptism; or if they should excommunicate any, upon mere spleen
and malice, without any just cause; or if after a just excommunication, the
person excommunicate should afterward publicly testify his repentance, and
thereupon desire to be reconciled and received again into the Church, and yet
for all that, should most uniustly be held out, and be denied absolution or
reconciliation: Do not these and such like offenses, though committed by
Ecclesiastical persons, and in causes Ecclesiastical, deserve punishment by
the Civil Sword, and authority of a Christian King? If you say, That such an
offender may be censured by such as be Clergy men, and have Ecclesiastical
authority over him: That hinders not, but that a King may nevertheless
punish him also civilly, especially where the Laws of the kingdom do so
permit or appoint: For in such cases, without any wrong or injury, may one
and the self same offense be punished both ways, viz. both Civilly, and
Ecclesiastically. Your selves do know, that Bishops and Clergy men cannot (by
virtue of that their Ecclesiastical office and authority) punish any
offenders civilly, but only Ecclesiastically, as namely, by deprivation, or
excommunication, or such like censures of the Church: But Kings and Princes
punish offenders in ecclesiastical causes, after another sort, namely, not
ecclesiastically, (as Bishops do) but Civilly, as by corporal imprisonment,
pecuniarie punishment, and such like temporal pains belonging to their
authority. So that both Civil and Ecclesiastical authority, do and may
well stand together, without doing any wrong, yea, as friends and helpers the
one to the other. But to illustrate this matter yet further; Admit Clergy men
have excommunicated a man, or sentenced him to be deprived, or pronounced him
to be an Heretic, or done all they can, against him, by the power of the
keys, and of the Church censures, and that nevertheless he still, and
evermore, persisteth a scorner and contemner of all that they can do against
him: Is it not meet and requisite (think you) that such a one should be
punished civilly, and by the Kings authority? For what other remedy is there
left in such a case? You see then, how expedient and necessary the government
and authority of a Christian King is, even in respect of the Church, and
Church affairs; as well as of the Commonweal, and Commonweal causes: and
that in respect of offend^rs in Ecclesiastical causes that be unruly, wilful,
obstinate, and contemptuous, the Church has as much need of him, as the
Commonweal. Whilst therefore the king punishes offenders in Ecclesiastical
causes, not ecclesiastically and by Church censures (as Clergy men do) but
civilly, and by a regal power and authority, it is such a clear and evident
a right, Even Heathen and Pagan Kings have the authority to co^m^nd, and to
make laws and proclamations for God and his service: albeit they do not
always extend it* and use it accordingly. Esra 7.1.21.23.26.27. Dan. 3.29.
Dan. 6.26. Eusebius lib 8. c. 19 and lib. 9. c. 9. etc.
as none can with any color of reason gainsay or disallow. Yea, even Heathen
and Pagan Kings have this power and authority, to make laws and proclamations
for the worship and service of the true GOD, and to inflict punishment upon the
breakers and violaters of those their laws and proclamations; although they
do not always put that their power and authority in execution for God, as
they ought, but most commonly abuse it against him: And yet sometime, we see,
they do extend it, and put it in execution for God, as it is evident in the
examples of Artashast King of Persia, Nebuchadnezar King of Babell, and Darius
King of the M^des; as also by some other Heathen Emperors mentioned in
Eusebius. If then (as is manifest) Heathen and Pagan kings have this power and
authority (albeit they do no^ always extend it, and put it in execution for
God): by what right or reason can it be denied to Christian Kings and Princes,
so to do? Yea, by Gods own most gracious providence, Christian Kings and
Queens are to be nursing fathers and nursing mothers to his Church and
Religion: Esaias 49.23.
for so the Prophet Esaias directly witnesses. And therefore is it, that they
not only may make Laws for Christ (for so S. Augustine likewise says, that,
Serviunt reges Christo, leges ferendo pro Christo, Aug. epist. 50.
Kings serve Christ, by making laws for Christ) but they may also command, and
externally compel, their subjects, if they stubbornly be Re^^sants and
wilful, 2. Chro. 14.4.2.
to become obedient in that behalf. For so did the godly and religious Kings
of Judah: 2. Chr 33.16.
as for example, King Asa, King Manasseth* and king Josiah. 2. Chr 34.33.
The Donatists, were the first, that denied this authority of Kings in matters
Ecclesiastical: Aug. in li. 1. ca. 6. cont. Epist. Parmenian.
Against whom therefore S. Augustine disputes at large in sundry places. Why
do the Donatists (says he) acknowledge the force of the laws to be justly
executed against other malefactors, and deny the same to be done against
heretics and schismatics; seeing that by the authority of the Apostle, they
be alike reckoned with the same fruits of iniquity? yea if a King should not
regard such things, why then (says he) does he bear the sword? Aug. in Evang.
Joan. tract. 2.
Again he says: Mirantur quia commoventur potestates Christianae adversus
detestandos dissipatores Ecclesiae: Si non ergo moverentur, quo modo redderent
rationem de Imperio su^ Deo? They marvel that these Christian Powers be moved
against the detestable wasters of the Church: If they should not be moved
against such, how should they render an account to God of their rule or
government? Think thou (says he to Vincentius) that no man ought to be
forced to righteousness, Aug. epist. 48.
when as thou read, that the Master said unto his servant, Luke 14.23.
Compel all that you find to come in* etc. Where is now (says he to
Bonifacius) that which these Donatists harp at so much, Aug. epist. 50.
viz. That it is free for a man to believe* or not to believe? what violence
did Christ use? whom did he compel? Behold Paul for an example: Act. 9.4.19.
Let them mark in him, first, Christ compelling, and afterward teaching; Acts
22.7. etc.
first striking, and then comforting. Let them not mislike that they be forced,
but examine whereto they be sorted* And cyting that part of the second Psalm
(Be wise ye kings, understand ye that judge the earth, Psalm. 2.10, 11*
Serve the Lord in fear) he says thus: How do kings serve the Lord in
fear, but when they forbid and punish with a religious severitie, those
things which be done against the commandments of God? 2. Kin. 18 4.
As Ezechias did serve him, 2. Kin. 23.3, 4, 5, 6. etc.
by destroying the groves and Temples, builded against the precept of God: As
Josiah did in like manner: As the king of Nineveh also did, Ion. 3.6, 7, 8, 9.
Dan. 3.28.29.
forcing the whole City to please God: As Nebuchadnezar likewise did,
restraining all his subjects from blaspheming God, Dan. 6.26. etc.
with a dreadful law.

3 As for the reason of Gaudentius: that the peace of Christ invited such as
were willing, but forced no man unwilling* the same S. Augustine again
answers it, August. cont. 2 Gaudent. epist. lib. 2. cap. 17.
and speaks on this manner* Where you think (says he) that none must be
forced to truth against their wills, you be deceived, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God; which makes them willing afterward, which
were unwilling at the first. Ion. 3.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Did the Ninivites repent against their will, because they did it at the
compulsion of their king? What needed the kings express commandment that all
should humbly submit themselves to God, but that there were some amongst them,
which never would have regarded nor believed Gods message, had they not been
terrified by the kings Edict? This princely power and authority, gives many
men occasion to be saved, which though they were violently brought to the
feast of the great Householder, yet being once compelled to come in, Luke 1^.^3.
they find there good cause to rejoice, that they did enter, though at first
against their wills. And when Petilian also objected that no man ought to be
forced by laws, to godliness, S. Augustine still answers, and says,
Preposterous were discipline, to revenge your ill living, August. contra
litera^ Petiliani lib. 2 cap. 38.
but when you first contemn the doctrine that teaches you to live well: And
even those that make laws to bridle your headiness, are they not they that
bear the sword (as Paul speaks) not in vain, being Gods ministers and
executors of wrath on him that does ill? Yea S. Augustine teaches further
directly, that it is the office and duty of Kings and Princes, to compel
their subjects, Aug. ad Vincen. Epist. 48. Retract 2.5.
although not to faith, yet to the outward means of faith; which is coming to
the Churches and assemblies of Gods people, there to hear the word of God read
and preached, and to do other Christian duties there used: For howsoever, it
be granted that God only works faith in men's souls, and not Men, nor the
power of Kings; Christian kings may compel their subjects, though not to
faith, yet to the outward means of faith. And it is the body only, and not the
soul or conscience, that they command and compel.
yet thereupon it follows not, but that Kings may nevertheless command and
compel them to external obedience, and cause them to present their bodies, in
those Churches and assemblies where the ordinary means of faith and salvation
is to be had. And as for Gods inward working upon their souls, and his
blessing upon that outward means, when they be in those Assemblies, Kings and
Princes do, and must, leave those things unto God alone, as being things not
included within their power to give, nor within the power of any earthly
creature whosoever. Some of the Donatists, in ancient time, rather then they
would be forced from their fancies, were so wilful, unnatural, and impious, as
that they slew themselves: August. in Epist. 50. and 204.
yet did this nothing hinder the Church of God, but that Donatists for all
that, were compelled, by virtue of Princes laws, to their due obedience,
without any respect, or regard had, to such their wicked and desperate doings.
I was once so minded (says S. Augustine) that I thought no man ought to be
forced to Christian unity, August. Epist. 48. and Retract. lib. 2. cap. 5.
but that we should deal by persuasion, strive by disputing, and conquer by
reasoning, lest they proved dissembling Catholics whom we know to be
professed Heretics: But afterward, as himself shows, he altered this
opinion, upon better advisement; teaching, That as it is fit, that men that be
in error touching Religion, should be admonished, instructed, and dealt withal
by persuasion: so, if they neglect, scorn, or contemn admonitions, and
instructions, or do grow wilful, stubborn, perverse, and obstinate, upon no
ground of reason, they are justly worthy to be punished according to the
laws. For, what a vain and idle thing is it for any to say. It is against
their conscience to come to our Churches, there to hear Gods word read and
preached, to pray unto God with us, to thank him for all his benefits, to be
present and partakers of his Sacraments, and of other godly and religious
exercises there used; and yet can show no reason at all for this their doing? A
blind conscience (such as this, and every other is, that has not any good
reason to show for it self) is to be corrected and reformed, and not to be
followed. And therefore does S. Augustine yet further, say expressly, touching
this matter: That it is enjoined Kings from God, ut in Regno suo bona iubeant,
August contra Crescon. lib. 3. cap. 51.
mala prohibeant, non solum quae ad humanam societatem pertinent, verum etiam
quae ad Divinam Religionem: that in their Kingdoms, they should command good
things, and forbid evil things; not only such things as belong to humane
society, but such things also as belong to Gods Religion. Can any thing be
more plainly, or more directly spoken for this purpose?

4 It is true, that the Oath of Supremacy, conteyneth in it, not only an
affirmative clause* that The King is the only supreme Governor of this Realm,
and of all other his Highness Dominions and countries, etc. but a negative
clause also, viz. that No foreign Prince, person, Prelate, State, or Potentate
has, or or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, power, superiority, preeminence,
or authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this Realm etc. And why
should we not all frankely and freely acknowledge this? For (beside that the
effect of this negative clause, is included in the former affirmative) what
has any foreign Prince or Prelate to do, within any the Kings Dominions,
without his leave and license? For, as touching the Bishop of Rome (otherwise
called the Pope) concerning whom all the scruple is made: his authority is by
Act of Parliament directly banished and abolished out of all his Majesty's
Dominions. So that by any humane Law, or constitution, of force in this
kingdom, he neither has, nor can challenge any authority at all; much less
a supremacy, amongst us. How then does he claim it? Or which way can he have
it? Is it by any Divine Institution? That has been often pretended (I know)
but could never yet be proved, nor ever will be. For as for those three Texts
of Scripture which be usually alleged, namely, the one in Matthew. 16* Tu es
Petrus and super hanc Pet^^^ etc. and Luke 22. Ora^i pro te Petre, Se^ these
Texts fully answered in the third part of this book, Cap. 2. sect. 5.
etc. and Ioh. 21. Pasce oves meas etc. They have been often heretofore, as
they be again afterward, examined, and clearly showed, to make nothing for
him, in respect of any supremacy, either Civil or Ecclesiastical. In the
mean time, will you be pleased to hear, what some great learned men, even of
former times (when Popery was not altogether so gross and bad as it is in
these days) have written of this matter? Cusanus a Cardinal did himself
dispute in his time, against them that thought the Pope to have more power and
authority then otger Bishops; Oportet primum, si hoc verum foret, Cusanus de
Cath. Concord. lib. 2. cap. 13.
Petrum aliquid a Christ^ singularitatis recepisse, and Papam in hoc
successorem esse; sed scimus quod Petrus nihil plus potestatis a Christo
accepit, alijs Apostolis: First, if this were true, then must Peter have
received something singular from Christ, and that the Pope be his successor
therein: but we know (says he) that Peter received from Christ no more power
or authority, then the rest of the Apostles. Aeneas Silvia^ likewise, who was
afterward himself a Pope of Rome, Aeneas Sil. li. 1. de gestis Basil. Council.
has written a Book of the Acts and proceedings of the Council of Basil: and
first handling that Text, Tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram, etc. he says
thus; A quibus verbis ideo placuit e^ordiri, quod aliqui verba haec ad
extollendam Romani Pontificis authoritatem, solen^ (...) sed, ut statim
patebit, alius est verborum Christi sensus: Of which words, it therefore
pleased me to begin, for that some are wont to allege these words for the
extolling of the authority of the Pope of Rome: but, as shall by and by
appear, there is (says he) another sense or meaning of those words of Christ.
John Gerson also, Chancellor of the University of Paris, Gerson Sermon. pro
viagi^ Reg. Romans direct. 1.
inveighing against flattery and flatterers of the Pope, says, That this
offense was given by such, as would prove his Jurisdiction from certain Texts
of Scripture; as, Tu es Petrus, super hanc Petram, etc. and, Oravi pro te
Petre, etc. and such like: which Texts (says he) be taken by these
flatterers, gross, and non secundum regulam Evangelicam, grossly, and not
according to the rule of the Gospel. Observe well these speeches; for they
tell you, how much these Texts of Scripture, both heretofore have been, and
still be, herein abused: it being indeed a thing certain, that neither to the
civil Supremacy, nor yet to the ecclesiastical, the Pope can make any good
title. In times past he claimed the one, or, at least a great part of the
Empire, by a pretended gift or donation of Constantine the Emperor. But that
supposed donation and conveyance, Valla. Cont. Don. Constant. Volateran. in
vita Constable. Antonin. 1. part l. 8. c. 2. Ser. iniquit. Catal. in practic.
cancel. Apostol. Balbus de Coron. ad Carol. 5. Council. Carthag. 6. c. 3.
Council. Aff^is. c. 101. and 105. and 92. Council. Milevit. c. 22. Bellarm de
Romans pont. lib. 2. cap. 14.
has been long since showed to be a forged and counterfeit thing, and that,
not only by Protestants, but by Papists also: as namely, by Valla, by
Volateran, by Antoninus, Catalanus: by Canus also, loc. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 5.
and by Pope Pius the second, as Balbus witnesses, and by sundry others. In
like manner he claimed, in ancient time, an ecclesiastical supremacy, by a
supposed Canon of the Council of Nice: but that was also, upon examination,
found to be a forged and counterfeit Canon; and so discovered and made evident
to the world, by the sundry Bishops of those times, assembled in Councels. And
diverse other forged Authors, they likewise allege for this purpose: as for
example, certain Decretall Epistles under the name^ of Clemens, Anacletus,
Evaristus, Sixtus, Tele^phorus, Higi^s, Pius, Anicetus, Victor, etc. of which
Epistles, Bellarmine himself speaking, says, Nec indubitatas esse affirmare
audeam, that neither durst he affirm them to be undoubted or uncounterfeit.
Such forged, suspicious, and counterfeit writings therefore can make no good or
sure title to the Pope, but, contrariwise, do make the matter the more evident
and the more odious against him. Yea, even the title and appellation of
universal Bishop (wherein consists the sum and substance of the
ecclesiastical Supremacy he claims) did two Bishops of Rome themselves in
ancient time, oppugn and stand against, when it was first affected by John,
the Bishop and Patriarch of Constantinople: for, first, Pelagius, and then
Gregory the great (both Bishops of Rome) withstood it. Let no Patriarch (says
Pelagius) use so profane a Title. Again (he says) God forbid that it should
ever fall into the heart of a Christian, to assume any thing unto himself, 2.
Tom. Council. in Decret. Pelag: 2.
whereby the honor of his brethren may be debased: for this cause, I, in my
Epistles, never call any by that name, for fear lest by giving him more then
is his due, I might seem to take away even that which of right belongs to
him. For (says he) The Devil our adversary goes about like a roaring Lion,
exercising his rage upon the humble and meek hearted, and seeking to devour,
not now the sheepe-coats, but even the principal members of the Church. Tom. 2
Council. edit. Bin. pa. 693.
And again (he says) Consider (my brethren) what is like to ensue, etc. For
he comes near unto him, of whom it is written, This is he which is King over
all the children of Pride: which words I speak, with grief of mind, in that I
see our brother and fellow Bishop, John, in despite of the commandment of our
Savior, the precepts of the Apostles, and Canons of the Church, by this
haughty name, to make himself his forerunner, that is, the forerunner of the
King of Pride, (namely, of Antichrist.) And he further adds, that hereby John
went about to attribute to himself, those things, which properly belong to the
head himself, that is, to Christ, and by the usurpation of this Pompous Title,
to bring under his subjection* all the members of Christ. And therefore (he
says) They must beware that this Tentation of Satan prevail not over them,
either to give, or to take this title of universal Bishop. Gregory the great,
was likewise very vehement and earnest against it. Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 34.
By this Arrogance and Pride, (says he) what else is portended, but that the
time of Antichrist is now at hand? in that he imitateth him, who making light
of that happiness which he possessed in common with the whole army of Angels,
would needs aspire to a singularity above all the rest. Again he says, All
those that have read the Gospel, know well, what the Lord said unto Peter,
^pist. 32.
etc howbeit, he is not called the universal Apostle: and yet behold, my
fellow Priest, John, seeks to be called the universal Bishop. I am now
forced to cry out, O the times, and o the manners of men. Europe is now exposed
for a prey to the Barbarians: and yet, the Priests, who should lie along in
the dust, upon the Pavement, weeping and rolling themselves in ashes, seek
after names of vanity, and boast themselves of their new found profane Ti^les.
And again he says: What vvilt thou answer unto Christ, Epist. 36.
who is the true head of the universal Church, in that day of Judgment,
seeing that by this name of universal Bishop thou seek to bring under, all
the members of his body, unto thy self? whom do thou imitate herein, save
only him, who in contempt of those legions of Angels, which were his
fellows sought to mount aloft to the Top of Singularity, Epist. 34. and 38.
where he might be subject to none, and all others subject unto him? Again,
he says, The king of Pride is at hand, and (which I dread to speak) an army
of Priests stands ready to receive him: For they that were appointed to
chalk out the way of meekness, and of humbleness, do now become soldiers
unto that ne^ke of Pride, which lifts it self up. And again, he says,
Epist. 24. Observe well this reason, amongst the rest. Lib. 6. Ep. 30.
Not to speak of the vvrong, which he hereby does unto other Bishops; If
there be one called universal Bishop* then must the universal Church go to
the ground, if he which is universal happen to fall: but never may such
foolery befall us, never may this weakness come unto my ears. And again,
he says, I speak ^t confidently, that whosoever calls himself, or
des^reth to be called universal Priest is, in that his elation of mind, the
forerunner of Antichrist. And, a great deal more does he write to this effect,
against it. But notwithstanding that both these Bishops of Rome, were herein
thus earnest and vehement, yet nevertheless after the death of this Gregory
the great, Sabinianus succeeded, Paul. Diacon. lib 4. de gestis Longobard cap.
37. Ab. Vsperg. Chronic. Platin. Boniface 3. Otho: Frising. li. 5. c. 8. Chron.
etc.
who was Bishop but for a very little space; and then came in Boniface the
third, to be Pope of Rome, who obtained of Phocas the Emperor (who was a
Traitor and murderer of his predecessor, and liege Lord, the Emperor
Mauritius) that new and proud title of universal Bishop, or headship, over the
whole Church: For so also testifies Paulus Diaconus, Abbas Vspergensis,
Platina, Otho Frisingensis, Marianus Scotus, Sabellicus, Blondus, and other
Historians. So that this appears to be, then and in those times, a very new
device, and a new matter, not heard of before in the Church, and consequently
could not be a declaration of a thing ever before acknowledged, Bellarm. de
pont. Romans cap. 17. Justinian. in Epist. ad Ioh. 2.
as Bellarmine would most strangely persuade. Howbeit, he alleges, that
before that time, Justinian called the Church of Rome, the head of all the
Churches: And this is true, but, in that sense in which he called also that
other, namely, the Church of Constantinople, Idem Co: de sacros. Ecc.
by the same name, saying likewise, that Constantinople is the head of all
other Churches* both which he so calls, in respect they were Patriarchall
Sees, and consequently every of them, Head of all the other Churches that were
under them, in those their several Patriarchships. But (says Bellarmine) the
Patriarch and Bishop of Rome, was called Universal or Oecumenicall Bishop,
before Phocas his time: whereunto is answered, that so were also the other
Patriarchs, as well as he: Justin. Co: de summa Trinit. lib. 7. De Episcop.
audientia 2. certissime and Novel. 3.5.7. Idem Novel 2. and sequent. Council
Calced. Council Nic. 2. Act. 2.
for so did Justinian, call Epiphanius (the Bishop of Constantinople) sometimes
oecumenicall, and sometimes (which is all one) universal Patriarch. So does he
also call Anthemius, and Menna, in his Novels. And the Council of Calcedon
likewise, in sundry places, calls Menna, oecumenicall Patriarch: And so were
other of the Patriarchs also, called, in respect of the general charge which
jointly together they had over all the Churches, and in respect also of all
those particular Churches which were severally belonging to each of them, in
right of those their several Patriarchships. Wherefore the taking of this
Title from the rest of the Patriarchs, within their several Patriarchships,
and the peculiarizing and appropriating of it to one Bishop or Patriarch alone,
as namely to the Bishop of Rome, thereby to give him the headship, and
supremacy over all the Bishops in the world, does still appear to be, not
until this time of that abominable Traitor and murderer, Phocas, who
bestowed it upon him, about the year of our Lord 606. Such a wicked Founder,
and Author of it, has the Popes Ecclesiastical Supremacy: which as it had his
original from a Traitor; so is it still continued, upheld, and maintained (if
ye well observe it) by Treason and Rebellion.

But to make this yet more manifest, ye may remember, that the Christian
Churches were, Conc. Nic. ca. 6.7 Conc. Constant. 1. can. 5. Conc. Chalced.
Actio. 16.

The Decrees of ancient general Councels, against the Popes Supremacy.


in ancient times, divided amongst four or five Patriarchs: as, of Rome,
Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem: who, in those ancient
times, were all of equal authority amongst themselves, and had every one
their several bounds and limits, beyond which they might not go. This is
evident, even by diverse general Councels: and first, by the first general
Council of Nice, holden anno 325. wherein were 318. Bishops. The words of that
Council ( Can. 6.) be these: Let the ancient customs continue in force, that
are in Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis, That the Bishop of Alexandria have the
government of all these: for as much as, the Bishop of Rome also has the like
custom. And so likewise throughout Antioch, and in other Provinces, let the
Churches have their Prerogatives upholden by them. Where, we see, that the
several Patriarchs, and by name, the Bishop of Alexandria, and the Bishop of
Rome, had their limits and bounds set them, which they might not exceed: for,
the ancient rights and customs, touching the bounds and limits of Alexandria,
be there confirmed, because the Bishop of Rome (who was another of the
Patriarchs) had the like custom, as touching bounds and limits set and
appointed to him, within his Patriarchship. This then shows, That the Bishop
of Rome his government, in those times, extended but to the precincts of his
own Province likewise, and no further: For had it stretched over all the
world, then could not from thence any good pattern have been drawn to
confirm and fortify the like at Alexandria; which was not to extend it self,
over all the world, but to keep it self within certain limits and bounds
only. Yea, what resemblance or parilitie, was there, or could there be,
between him that is an universal Bishop, and a Provincial? So that, if you
will make the Bishop of Rome at that time to have an universal government
over all the Christian world: you must conclude the same also for the Bishop of
Alexandria, that he had so likewise; for there was parilis mos, the like
usage, in both, as the very words of the Canon it self affirm. But if you
will say (as you must needs) that by this Council of Nice, the Bishop of
Alexandria had his limits and bounds confirmed to him, by the pattern and
example of the Bishop of Rome (for, that, is the pattern there proposed, for
Alexandria): then must you also grant (according to right and truth,) that the
Bishop of Rome, as well as the Bishop of Alexandria, and the rest of the
Patriarchall Bishops in those times, had likewise every one of them their
several limits, bounds, and precincts, set them, beyond which they might not
pass, nor extend their authority. And this you may yet further see by
Ruffinus, lib. 1. cap. 6. and by the Council of Africa, cap. 92. and 105. etc.
very clearly, for your better satisfaction.

Again, the first general Council of Constantinople, held about anno 381.
and consisting of 150. Bishops ( Can. 2. and 3.) And the Council of Ephesus
also, held about ann 431. ( Ca. 8.) do both show, that the Provinces of the
world were in those times distinguished and distributed, and the Bishops and
Patriarchs so restrained to their own several precincts and limits, ut
nullus Episcoporum alienam invadat provinciam, that no Bishop or Patriarch
might invade or intrude upon another Province or precinct. It is true that the
Bishop of Rome had the honor of the first place: Council. Constantinopol. 1.
canon. 5. and Council. Constantinopol. 6. canon. 36.
the Bishop of Constantinople had the second place: the Bishop of Alexandria
the third: the Bishop of Antioch, the fourth: and the Bishop of Jerusalem, the
fifth. But this precedencie or prioritie of place (all men know) is such, as may
be among those that be otherwise Equals amongst themselves, and proves only a
prioritie of order, but no prioritie of Dominion, or of a Princely power, or
Monarchical authority, in any one of them, over the rest. Yea, the general
Council of Calcedon also, held about ann. 451, wherein were 630 Bishops (Act.
16.) has these words: Following the Decrees of the holy Fathers, and of those
150 Bishops assembled under Theodosius the elder, of blessed memory, in the
royal City of Constantinople, and acknowledging the same: We also Decree
and ordain the same things, concerning the privileges or preeminences of the
said Church of Constantinople, which is new Rome. For our fathers gave those
preeminences to the seat of Elder Rome, because that City had the Empire: And
the 150 Bishops, moved with the same consideration, gave the same preeminences
to the most sacred seat of New Rome; thinking it reason, that the city which
is honored with the Empire and Senate, should have equal preeminences with
Elder Rome, and in Ecclesiastical matters, should be advanced Equally with
her, being (in place) the next unto her. It is true, that the then Pope of
Rome, by his Legates or Vicegerents, did what he could, to withstand and hinder
this Decree: but, for all that, it prevayled and was of force, as even Cardinal
Cusanus himself affirms; thereby proving a General Council to be above the
Pope, Cusan. Concord. li. 2. c. 34. and 20.
and the Decrees thereof to be good and avayleable, though the Pope never give
his consent unto them. Yea, the sixth general Council of Constantinople (Can.
36.) did also long after, confirm and ratify this Decree, and accordingly
made another Decree to the same effect, saying thus: Renewing the Decrees of the
150 Fathers, that met in this royal City of Constantinople, and of the 630
Bishops assembled at Chalcedon: we likewise decree that the Sea of
Constantinople, have equal Privileges with the seat of Elder Rome, and in
Ecclesiastical matters, be advanced equally with Rome* being the next unto
it. By all which, it is apparent, that the Bishop or Patriarch of
Constantinople, was, within his Patriarchship, to have as great privileges,
preeminences, and authorities, as touching Church affairs, as the Bishop of
Rome was to have within his Patriarchship.

And as you may observe by these Councels, that the Primacie, which the Bishop
of Rome at the first had and obtained, was only a Primacie of honor, or of
Order, or, of place; and not any Primacie of Princely or Regal power over the
rest of his fellow Patriarchs: so you may also perceive, that even that
Primacy was not given him, as belonging to him in any right from S. Peter, (as
he now strangely claims) but by reason only of the City or place whereof
he was Bishop; namely, for that Rome was then the Imperial City, or, seat of
the Emperors. But the Bishop of Rome contented not himself with this Primacie
of honor, or of order, or precedencie of place, but afterward clymbed higher,
even to a Primacie of Princely power and Monarchical authority, and that not
only over his fellow-Patriarches and Bishops, but over all Emperors also, and
Kings and Princes which be his Superiors: and over all General Councels
likewise (his Pride, The Popes Supremacy over Councels, is of a very late
standing, condemned by Councels.
and ambition, having no mean, nor measure, in it). And yet is this his
claymed Supremacy over Councels also, but a new devise, and of a very late
standing in the world. For, Councels, until of very late times, were held,
both for opinion and practice, to be above the Pope, and the Popes authority:
as is apparent by the Council assembled at Pisa, about the year of our Lord
1408. two striving at that time, Naucl. gener. 47
for the Popedom, viz. Gregory the 12, and Benedict the 13. This Council
proceeded against both these Popes, deposed them, condemned them both for
heretics and schismatics, and required all Christians, not to take them for
Popes, or to yield obedience to them: which Council is also by Io: Gerson much
commended. Gerson de Au: Papae. C^^^il. Constan. Sess. 5.
Likewise in the Council of Constance (which was called about Ann. 1414.) was
Pope John the 23th deposed: and for confirmation thereof, it declares the
right and authority of a Council, to be above the Pope. The Council of Basil
likewise deposed another Pope, namely, Eugenius the fourth, Council. Basil.
Sess. 38. and 33.
where again the authority and power of a Council above the Pope, is
expressly ratified and confirmed, and he affirmed to be an heretic, that shall
say to the contrary. How then can Jesuits, and others, avoid the note and
name of heretics, which, in these latter times, contrary to the practice and
decrees of these former general Councels, dare and do affirm, the Pope to be
above all general Councels, to be supreme Judge over all, and not subject to
the judgment of any, upon earth? Is not this intolerable pride, and most
abominable licentiousness and lawlesnesse in the Pope of Rome? and most
gross, notorious, and palpable flattery, in his followers? The Popes
Supremacy ecclesiastical then, which he claims over all Bishops and
Councels, and the civil Supremacy, which he likewise claims over all Kings
and Emperors, appears to be not only a mere Noveltie, but a thing also
extremely injurious to all Bishops and Councels, and to all Kings, Princes,
and Emperors also; and is therefore justly worthy of all to be detested and
rejected.

6 For, must not the Supremacy civil, which he also claims over Emperors,
Kings, and Princes, to depose them from their Crowns and Kingdoms, The Popes
Supremacy over Kings and Princes, most abominable. Prove. 8.15.
and to assoile their subjects of their allegiance, be a most strange and a
most damnable impiety? when God himself says thus: By me, Kings reign, and
not by the commission or permission of any Pope: and when, in Daniel, a voice
from heaven, proclaims, That it is not the Pope, but, The most high, that
bears rule over the kingdom of men, Dan. 4.29.
and gives it to vvhomsoever he will: and when moreover, not the Pope, but
God himself, is he, that is entitled, Revel. 19.16.
King of kings, and Lord of lords? Besides, it is a thing clearly out of the
commission of the Apostles, and consequently out of the commission of all
Bishops, and other Ministers of the Gospel; for they be the Keys of the
kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 16.19.
(and not of earthly kingdoms) that be committed unto them: And therefore it
is not within the compass of this their Divine and Ecclesiastical commission,
to meddle with any earthly matters; much less, with earthly kingdoms, or to
depose any Kings from their Thrones, or to give away their kingdoms, or to
disanull the duty and allegiance of subjects, which by the law of God and
Nature they owe unto their Sovereigns. Did any Apostle, yea or all the
Apostles together, in ancient time, take upon them, to depose Nero, or any
other Emperor, were he never so great a persecutor, or were he never so
wicked? Or did any Bishops in the ancient Church, take upon them, to depose
any of them that were heretical Arrian Emperors in their times, and
persecuters of the Oxthodox and right believing Christians? Yea, did any
Bishop, or all the Bishops in the world together, take upon them to depose the
Emperor Julian, though an Apostata, though a man Anathematized, though a most
impious person, and a scorner of Christ, and of all Christian Religion? By this
one president then of Julian the Apostata, (if there were no other) you may
easily perceive, that no excommunication, or, Anathematization, nor any power
of the Keys whatsoever (committed by Christ to Bishops and Ministers of the
Gospel) have any force included in them to depose Emperors, Kings, and
Princes, be they never so wicked, or adverse to Christ or Christianity: yea,
that Bishops in no sort, neither directly, nor indirectly, or, in ordine ad
Spiritualia (as they speak) or for advancement of any pretended, or Revera
Catholic cause, have any such authority. For Julian still remained an
Emperor, and his Christian soldiers and subjects (notwithstanding that he was
so great an enemy to their Religion) were nevertheless obedient, dutiful,
and serviceable unto him, Aug in Psa. 124.
as S. Augustine also shows and affirms. So far off were they from
rebelling, or withdrawing their allegiance from him: and so far off also were
the Bishops of those times, from persuading, abetting, or counselling any such
wicked matter unto them Yea, whereas Bellarmine, and some other Papists,
affirm, Bellarm lib 5. ca. 7. de R^m. Pont.
that the Christians in the primitive and those ancient Churches, were
therefore obedient, because they wanted sufficient power and force to
withstand, their wicked Emperors: do they not herein speak, more like
politic Atheists, then Christian Divines? Where is Obedience for conscience
sake, (which God requires of all Christians, R^m. 13.5.
as S. Paul witnesses) if such Popish doctrine as this, were true? But
besides, Tertull. in Apolog. cap. 37.
Tertullian expressly confuteth it, witnessing, that such was the affection
and disposition of the Christians in those times, being led thereunto by
duty and conscience, as that they neither taught nor put in practice, any
course of disloyalty or disobedience, or bare arms against their Emperor,
albeit they had (as he there shows) sufficient force to have done it. Yea,
the Christians in those times, notwithstanding all their great number and
strength, and their sufficient power to rebel (if they had bin so ill disposed)
were nevertheless so far from rebelling, or procuring rebellions to be made,
against the Emperor of their times, that contrariwise, they were quiet, and
suffered all things patiently, and prayed for him, that Almighty God would
grant unto him* A long life, a secure reign, safety in his Court, valiant
Soldiers, a faithful Counsel, dutiful subjects, Tertull. Apolog. cap. 30.
a quiet kingdom, and all those blessings and comforts, that his heart could
desire. Sigebert, Sigebert. Chron. An. Dom. 1088.
mentioning the Popes proceedings against Henry the Emperor, diverse hundred
years since, says thus: Be it spoken with the leave of all good men; This
novelty, that I say not, heresy, had not as yet sprung up in the world, that
Gods Priests should teach the people, that they owe no subjection to evil
Princes: New and Traiterous opinions.
and, though they have sworn allegiance to him, yet they owe him no fidelity;
nor shall be counted perjured, that devise against the King: yea, That he that
obeys him, shall be counted for excommunicate; and he that does against the
King, shall be absolved from the guilt of vvrong and perjury. Vincent. in
spec. Histor. lib. 15. cap. 84.
Vincentius likewise testifies the same matter. Where you see, how directly
they both condemn these traiterous and rebellious positions of Popery, which
be, at this day, by too many amongst them, cherished and maintained for points
of Catholic doctrine: and that, notwithstanding the pretense of the Popes
authority, and of a Catholic cause, they be long since condemned, and
accounted and recorded to be mere Novelties, if not Heresies. Now then you
perceive, I trust, that as the Pope has no Supremacy lawful, in
Ecclesiasticis; so, much less has he any Supremacy lawful, in
Temporalibus, within the Kings Dominions, or elsewhere, within the Dominions of
any other King. And I assure my self, that such are your loyalties, Gre.
Vesper. haeretico polit. page 159. Marian. de rege and regis Institut. cap. 6.
etc.
and such the odiousness and apparent untruth of the traiterous and rebellious
positions, delivered in these later times by Jesuits and such like Popish
Teachers, against Kings, for maintenance of the Popes pride; that ye
unfainedly and utterly abhor and detest those positions of theirs, together
with their practices, as they are indeed justly worthy: I would ye did also
detest the rest of their false doctrines, as I hope, upon better information,
ye will, even for truths sake, and the safety of your own souls.

7 But to proceed: what cleerer or greater argument can there be against the
Popes Supremacy, and to declare the Supremacy of the Emperor, then this, that
the Emperor, in ancient time, exiled, banished, imprisoned, and otherwise also
by his Authority, Theod. hist. lib 2. ca. 16. Niceph. lib. 26. ca. 17.
Platina. Sige^ertus andt. Theodor. lib. 1. cap. 19. Romans 13.4.
punished, even some of the Bishops of Rome themselves, as well as other
Bishops? and when the Emperor said moreover thus: that, If any did grow
tumultuous or unruly, Illius statim audacia, Ministri Dei, hoc est mea
executione coercebitur, his boldness shall forthwith be repressed by the sword
or execution of Gods Minister, that is, of my self. For, as S. Paul says, the
Emperor, King, or Prince, or any of those higher powers that bear the civil
sword, is Gods Minister, and a revenger unto Wrath, to him that does evil,
whosoever he be. Yea, such was the demeanor and loyalty, which even Gregory
the Great, Bishop of Rome, performed to the Emperor, that when the Emperor had
commanded a law to be published, which Gregory himself misliked, yet
nevertheless he obeyed the Emperors commandment, Grego Ep. lib. 2. cap. 100.
and 10^
as a good subject unto him: Ego quidem iussioni tuae subiectus, eandem legem
per diversas Terrarum parts transmitti feci: Gregory the great, Bishop of
Rome, subject to the Emperor, and at his command.
I being subject to your command, (says he) have caused the same law to be
transmitted through diverse parts of the earth. By which one example of Gregory
(if there were no more spoken) you may perceive, that for the space of many
hundred years after Christ, even unto his time, and in his time, the Bishops
of Rome themselves were subject to the Emperors, and at their commands. Which
does yet further appear by this, tha^ even Kings of Rome did also sometimes
send the Bishops of Rome, as their Ambassadors: as for example, Anastatius.
Platina. Lib. pontif. Diaconus.
King Theodorick sent John Bishop of Rome, Ambassador to the Emperor Justinian.
And King Theodatus, about the year 537, sent Pope Agapetus, as his Ambassador,
likewise to the Emperor, about a Treaty of peace. But yet, together with the
Supremacy of Emperors, let me show unto you more fully, their Authority in
Ecclesiastical things or causes (for, of their Authority in civil or
temporal causes, there is no question made).

8 When the Donatists therefore alleged, that Emperors were to meddle only
with civil causes, and not with Ecclesiastical, or concerning Gods Religion:
Optat. contra Parm. l^b 3. It is a point of madness to say or hold, that a
Christian King may not deal in matters Ecclesiastical, by the testimony of
Optatus.
Optatus held this to be a point of madness, in Donatus, and those his
followers; Ille solito furore accensus, in haec verba prorupit: Quid Imperatori
cum Ecclesia? Donatus, inflamed with his accustomed fury or Madness, (says
he) brake forth into these words; What has the Emperor to do with the Church?
Where you see, he calls it expressly, a Madness, to hold that opinion. And
this S. Augustine likewise censureth and condemns, accounting it an absurd
thing, for any to say thus, unto kings: Take ye no care in your kingdoms,
who oppugneth the Church, and who defends it: who is religious, August.
Ep. 50.
and who sacrilegious, etc. For if the King be to regard and punish by civil
punishment, the offenses done against the second Table, as disobedience to
parents, murder, theft, trespasses, wrongs and injuries done by one man against
another; is he not much more to regard and punish by civil punishment, the
greater offenses, namely, those that be done immediately against God, being
breaches of the first Table, as Atheism Idolatry, false worship, vvrong
religion, heresy, schism, blasphemy, breach of the Sabbath, and such like?
For is there any comparison or proportion between Man and God? But to declare
this matter yet further by some particulars: A Christian King man make Laws
concerning matters Ecclesiastical.
The Christian Emperors, in ancient time, made laws for God and his Religion,
and caused them to be executed, and so dealt in matters Ecclesiastical as well
as civil; as, beside that which is before spoken, is further evident, even by
the Titles of the Civil law it self: viz. De summa Trinitate and fide
Catholica: De sacrosanctis Ecclesijs: A Christian King may make Commisioners
in Ecclesiastical causes Optat. lib. 1. August. Ep. 162. and 16^. Eusebius. lib.
10. cap. 5.

A Christian King may have Appeals made unto him in a cause Ecclesiastical.
Miltiades, a Bishop of Rome, subject to the Emperor, and at his command.


De Episcopis and Clericis: De Haereticis, etc. They likewise made
Commissioners in Ecclesiastical causes. For when Caecilianus, Bishop of
Carthage, was accused by Donatus and some other of that faction, Constantine
the Emperor commanded Caecilianus to come to Rome, with a certain number of
Bishops that accused him: And by his Commission (extant in Eusebius) authorized
and appointed Miltiades, the then Bishop of Rome, and some others with him, for
the hearing and ending of that matter. These Commissioners condemned Donatus,
who appealed from their sentence, to the Emperor himself: which Appeal also,
the Emperor, at last, received. Where, beside that you see, that this Christian
Emperor made Commissioners in this Episcopal and Ecclesiastical cause,
observe withal, that Miltiades, the then Bishop of Rome, was one of those
Commissioners, (and therewithal you may note, that the Bishops of Rome, were
then very clearly subject, and not superior, to the Emperor). So that a
Christian King or Prince, not only may make Commissioners in Ecclesiastical
causes, but may also have Appeals made unto him, as is here apparent. Yea,
even S. Paul himself Appealed, Act. 25.11, 12.
not unto Peter, (which no doubt, he would have done, if Peter had then had
the Supremacy) but unto Caesar. The Council also of Afric would allow of no
Appeals to the Pope of Rome, or beyond the Sea, but made a Decree directly
against it, appointing Presbyters, Deacons, or other inferior Clerks, if they
were grieved with the sentence of their own Bishop, to resort to the next
Bishops: Quod si and ab^ijs provocandum putaverint, Council. Affrican. cap. 92.
non provocent nisi ad Affricana Concilia; vel ad Primates Provinciarum suarum?
Ad Transmarina autem, qui putaverit appellandum, a nullo intra Affricam in
Communionem suscipiatur; Appeals in ancient time, not allowed to be made to
the Bish. of Rome.
And if they shall think fit to Appeal from them, let them not appeal but to
Councels within Afric, or to the Primates of their own Provinces: But he
that shall think it fit to appeal beyond the Sea, let him be admitted to the
Communion by none within Afric. This Canon, which was thus established in the
Affrican Council, purposely for the defeating and disanulling of the ambitious
courses and claims of the Bishops of Rome* is again repeated and confirmed in
the Milevitane Council. Council. Milevit. cap. 22. Malmesbury lib. 1 de gest.
pont. Angliae.
In the time likewise of King William Rufus, Anselmus the Archbishop of
Canterbury, would have appealed to Rome: But not only the King, but the
Bishops of England also, were therein against him. And afterward in the days
of Henry the second, King of England, this Law was made: Hoveden. Hen. 2.
Si quis inventus fuerit, etc. If any shall be found bringing letters or a
mandate from the Pope etc. Let him be apprehended, Theod. lib. 5. c. 7. Sozom.
lib. 7. c. 7. Theod. li. 1. c. 7. General Councels called in ancient time, by
the Christian Emperors, and not by the Popes.

Evagr. l. 1. c. 3. Conc. Calc. Act. 1. zon. tom. 3. page 39. Cusan. de Concor.
lib 2. cap. 25. Socrat. lib* 5. in Prooemio.


and let Justice be done upon him without delay, as upon a Traitor to the Law
and kingdom. Again, it is there said, Generaliter interdictum est ne quis
appellet ad Dominum Papam: That it was generally given in charge, that none
should Appeal to the Pope. Moreover, the Christian Emperors in ancient time
had the authority of summoning and calling Councels: as for example, the first
general Council of Nice, was assembled by Constantine: the second at
Constantinople, was called by Theodosius the elder: the third at Ephesus, by
Theodosius the younger: the fourth at Calcedon, by Valentinian and Martian. And
this is so manifest a truth, that Cardinal Cusanus, confesses, and affirms,
that the first eight general Counsels, were called by the Emperors. And so
also witnesses Socrates: that, Since Emperors became Christians, the
businesses of the Church have seemed to depend upon their will: and therefore
the greatest Councels (says he) have been, and still are, called, by their
appointment. But here Bellarmine steppeth in, and would persuade, Bellar. de
Council. lib. 1. cap. 13.
that howsoever Emperors did call Councels, yet it was done authoritate Papae,
by authority of the Pope. A very strange assertion, Leo Epist. 9.
and untrue: for even Leo himself, Bishop of Rome, in his time, made
supplication to the then Emperor ( Theodosius the younger): Supplicationi
nostrae dignetur a^nuere, That he would be pleased to yield to his
Supplication, for the calling of a Council in Italy. But the Emperor, for all
that, contrary to the Popes will and desire, and notwithstanding that his
humble petition, caused the Council to be called and assembled, not in Italy,
as the Pope desired, but at Ephesus. Leo Epist. 24.
Afterward again the same Leo Bishop of Rome, made a second supplication,
alleging withal, the sighs and tears of all the Clergy, Epist. 26.
for the obtaining of a Council in Italy: He solicited the Princess
Pulcheria, to further his supplication to the Emperor: Epist. 23.
He wrote to the Nobles, Clergy and people of Constantinople, to make the like
supplication to the Emperor: and yet, for all this, he could not obtain it
this second time neither; For although then a Council were granted, yet it was
not in Italy, as the Pope would have had it, but at Calcedon. It is then more
then manifest, by this example of Leo, that Councels in those times were
assembled and convocated, not by the commandment and authority of the Popes,
but of Emperors. Yea, by the subscription also to those constitutions, you may
further discern, that the Pope in those times, had no authority to command
the Emperor, but contrariwise the Emperor had to command the Pope: for thus
says the same Leo to the then Emperor; Because (says he) I must by all means
obey your sacred and religious will, Leo Epist. 59.
I have set down my consent in writing to those Constitutions. If then there
were no other evidences or proofs, Leo a Bishop of Rome subject to the
Emperor, and at his command.
do not these three former examples, viz. of Miltiades, Leo, and Gregory, (all
Bishops of Rome in their several times) make plain demonstration, and openly
proclaim to the world, that in those days, the Bishops of Rome, were, without
all question or contradiction, inferior, obedient, and subject to the Emperors,
and not superior to them? But yet further, ye know, that King Solomon removed
the high Priest Abiathar, 1. Kin 2.27.35.
and put Zadoc in his place. The Emperor, Theodosius the elder, Zozom. l. 7. c.
8. Plat. Sigeb. A Christian King may nominate and appoint Bishops of Diocesses
and Provinces.
did likewise nominate and appoint Nectarius, to be Bishop of Constantinople.
Honorius also appointed Boniface, to be Bishop of Rome. And other Emperors did
the like. Is it not then lawful for King JAMES, our Sovereign Lord, likewise
to nominate and appoint a Bishop of a Diocese or Province, and upon just cause
again to remove and displace him? For as touching the sacration or
consecration of Bishops, or other Minister ecclesiastical, otherwise called,
the ordination of them by imposition of hands, the King medleth not, but
leaves those kind of Acts, to be done by Bishops, and such to whom they
belong. Yea, Malmesbur. de gestu Pont. Angl. lib. 1. page 205.
King William Rufus likewise in his days, nominated and appointed Anselmus to
be Archbishop of Canterbury. And before him, King William the Conqueror used
the like authority, nominating and appointing Lanfrancus to be the Archbishop,
Ibidem lib. 1. page 205.
as is also testified by the same Author. And even before the Conquest, King
Edward the Confessor, appointed one Robert, Lib. 1. page 204.
first Bishop of London, and afterward an Archbishop. And before that, King
Alfred, Malmesb. de gest. Reg. Angl. lib. 2. page 45.
nominated and appointed Asserio Bishop of Sherborne: and Denewulfus, Bishop of
Winchester. And more then 200. years before that, De gestis Pont. Angl. lib. 2.
page 242. and p. 257. Metrop. Grantz. lib. 2. cap. 29. The Christian Emperors,
in ancient time, had power to place and displace Popes.
Edelwalk King of the South Saxons, appointed VVilfred to an Episcopal Sea.
Grantzius speaking of the ancient times, says thus: The Emperor placed a
Bishop in Monster. And mervaile not (says he) that a Bishop was appointed by
the Emperor: for this was the Custom of those times, when Emperors had power
to place and displace Popes. And further, he says: That vvhomsoever the Prince
did nominate, that man was to be consecrated a Bishop by the next adjoining
Bishops. And he adds further: That concerning this Jurisdiction, there was a
long contention between the Papacy, and the Empire: This was the Jurisdiction
which the Two Henry's, the father and the son, and which the Two Fredericks
likewise, the grandfather and the grandchilde, sought long to Defend and
maintain: but the sword of the Church (says he) prevayled, and forced the
Emperors, to relinquish their right to the Church. Thus you see how, namely,
That partly by fraud, and partly by force, the Popes, after much striving and
contending, prevayled at last against the Emperors, and made them to loose
their rights. And therefore, worthily, is that Statute, which gives these
rights again, The Act is of 1. Eliz cap. 1 in England, and of 2. Eliz. cap. 1.
in Ireland.
to our Kings and Princes, entitled, An Act restoring to the Crown, the
ancient Jurisdiction over the state Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and
abolishing all foreign power repugnant to the same. The premises then well
and advisedly considered, what is there in all the authority concerning
Ecclesiastical causes, attributed or belonging to the King, that can justly
offend any of you? For, I doubt not, but such authorities in Ecclesiastical
causes, as were, in ancient time, yielded to the godly Kings of Judah, or unto
the godly and Christian Emperors, ye will well allow (as in all right and
reason ye ought) unto Christian kings and Princes, within their dominions. And
amongst the rest of their rights and authorities, this also was one, that the
Emperors approved, ratified, and confirmed even the Constitutions and Decrees
of Councels, before they were promulged or put in execution. For so did
Constantine, that Christian Emperor, Eusebius. in vitae Constable. lib. 3.
confirm (...), the Decrees of the Council. Again, Rogamus clementiam tuam
(says the Council to the Emperor Theodosius) ut per Literas tuae pietatis
ratum esse Iubeas confirmesque Concilij Decretum: Conc. Constable. 5.
Conc. Chalced. Actio. 3.

Emperors, and consequently Kings within their Dominions, are to ratify and
confirm the Decrees of Councels before they be put in execution.


We beseech your clemency, that by your Letters you will ratify and confirm
the Decree of the Council. Sacro nostrae Serenitatis Edicto (says also
Martian the Emperor) venerandam Synodam confirmamus: We by the sacred Edict of
our Serenity, do confirm the reverend Synod. This then is a right which must
likewise be acknowledged due, and to belong to King JAMES our Sovereign Lord.
What objection then, or exception, can be taken against his Majesty's
Supremacy in any point? or why should not all his subjects most readily and
willingly acknowledge it, and in testimony thereof take the Oath concerning
the same, whenever they be thereunto lawfully required? For, if any suppose
(as some have done) that the King is therein called Supreme head of the Church,
they are deceived: The words of the Oath at this day (to take away all offense
that any might conceive in that point) being not supreme HEAD, but supreme
GOVERNOR. And as touching this Title of Governor, within his own Dominions,
none can, with any reason, gainesay it: inasmuch as, beside that which is
before spoken, King Alfred, reigning long sithence, was likewise called, Aser.
Menevensis praefat* ad Alfred.
Omnium Britanniae Insulae Christianorum Rector: The Governor of all the
Christians within the Isle of Britanny. The Council also held at Mentz in
Germany, the year 814, in the time of the Emperor Charles the great, Council.
Mogunt. in praefat. Bin. t. 3. p 462.
and Pope Leo the third, calls likewise the Christian Emperor, (Carolus
Augustus) Governor of the True Religion, and Defendor of the holy Church of
God, etc. And a little after they say thus: We give thanks to God the Father
almighty, because he has granted unto his holy Church, a Governor so godly,
etc. In the year 847. there was also held another Council at Mentz in the time
of Leo the fourth, and Lotharius the Emperor: Bin. t. 3. p. 631.
where they again call the Emperor, Verae Religionis strenuissimum rectorem, a
most puissant Governor of the true Religion. The like was ascribed to King
Reccesumthius, Council. Emerit. ex Garsia Louisa sect. 23. Bin. t. 2. page 1183.
in a Council held at Emerita, in Portugale, about the year 705, in these
words: Whose vigilancie does govern both secular things with very great
piety, and ecclesiastical by his wisdom plentifully given him of God. Where
you see it expressly acknowledged that the King is a Governor, both in causes
secular, and ecclesiastical. And this Council of Emerita had also good
allowance of Pope Innocent the third, in his Epistle to Peter, Archbishop of
Compostella, as Garsias witnesses. Gars. in not in Council. Emer.
So that the Title of Governor, even as touching matters ecclesiastical, as
well as civil or secular, attributed to the King (he governing in them, after
a Regal manner, and not in that Ecclesiastical manner which Bishops and
Clergy men use) can no way justly be misliked, but must, in all reason, be
well approved and allowed. Howbeit, I grant, that King Henry the eight, and
King Edward the sixth, had that Title of (Head) in their times given unto them,
but not, of the universal Church upon earth (as the Pope has) but of the
Church only within their own Dominions: and not within their own Dominions
neither, in such sort and sense as the Pope takes upon him to be Head over all
the Churches in the world; that is, to rule and govern them at his own
pleasure, and as he lift himself. Indeed Stephen Gardner, Bishop of
Winchester, when he was in Germany, upon the Kings affairs, was there a very
ill Interpretor of that Title (Supreme head of the Church, within his own
Dominions) given to King Henry the eight: reporting that the King might
thereby, prescribe and appoint new ordinances in the Church, concerning faith
and doctrine, as namely, forbid the marriage of Priests; and take away the use
of the Cup in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and in things concerning
Religion, might do what he listed. This manner of declaring the Kings power and
authority under that Title, did so much offend the reformed Churches, Calvin.
in Amos 7.13. Praefat. in Centur.
that Calvin, and the writers of the Centuries, did complain of it (and that
justly and worthily) bearing that sense, but in no other sort or sense, did
they dislike it. Yea, even that Title of Supreme head, being rightly
understood, needed not to have offended any: for they had i^ in no other sort
or sense, then the King of Israel likewise had the title, of Head, 1* Sam.
15.17.
of the Tribes of Israel; of which Tribes, the Leviticall Tribe, was one. Or,
then Theodosius, that Christian Emperor, had the like within his Empire* of
whom Saint Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. hom. 2.
that, non habet parem super terram, He has no peer or equal upon earth: and
affirms moreover of him, that he was summitas and Caput omnium super terram
hominum, the Head, and one that had the Supremacy, over all men, upon earth.
Yea, by the Title of supreme Head, attributed to King Henry the eight, and King
Edward the sixth, was no more meant, but the very same, that was afterward
meant to the late Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, or to King James our now
Sovereign Lord, under the title of Supreme Governor: for that they are both to
be taken and intended in one and the self same sense, is very manifest, even
by a direct clause in an Act of Parliament, viz. the Statute of 5. Eliz. cap.
1. in which also, is declared, Statute of 5. Eliz cap 1. Ract. Crown 8.
how the Oath of Supremacy, is to be expounded. And the words of that Statute,
be these: Provided also, that the Oath (viz of Supremacy) expressed in the
said Act made in the said first year (of her reign) shall be taken and
expounded in such form, as is set forth in an Admonition annexed to the
Queens Majesty's Injunctions, published in the same first year of her
Majesty's reign: that is to say, to confess and acknowledge in her Majesty,
her heirs and successors, none other authority, then that which was
challenged and lately used by the noble king Henry the eight, and king Edward
the sixth, as in the said Admonition more plainly may appear. Where first, you
may observe, the Authority attributed to King Henry the eight, and to King
Edward the sixth, and to Queen Elizabeth, as touching this point, intended and
declared, to be all one. And secondly, you see it enacted, how the Oath of
Supremacy, is to be expounded, namely, that it is to be taken and expounded,
in such form as is set forth in an Admonition annexed to the Queens Majesty's
Injunctions, published in the same first year of her Reign: The words of
which Admonition therefore, as more amply containing the explanation of the
same Oath, I have here thought good to add, for your better and most full
satisfaction in this matter. The Title whereof, is this:

An Admonition to simple men, deceived by the malicious.
HEr Majesty forbids all her subjects, to give ear or credit to such
perverse and malicious persons, which most sinisterly and maliciously labor
to notify to her loving subjects, how by the words of the Oath of Supremacy,
it may be collected, that the Kings or Queens of this Realm, possessioners of
the Crown, may challenge authority and power of Ministry of Divine offices,
in the Church; wherein, her said subjects be much abused, by such evil
disposed persons: for certainly, her Majesty neither does, nor ever will
challenge, any other authority, then that which was, of ancient time, due to
the Imperial Crown of this Realm: that is to say, under God, to have the
Soveraignety and rule over all manner of Persons borne within these her
Majesty's Dominions and Countries, of what estate either Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, soever they be: So as no foreign Power, shall or ought to have any
superiority over them. And if any person that has conceived any other sense
of the form of the said Oath, shall accept of the same Oath with this
interpretation, sense or meaning; her Majesty is well pleased to accept every
such, in that behalf, as her good and obedient subjects, and shall acquit
them of all manner penalties contained in the said All, against such as shall
peremptorily or obstinately refuse to take the same Oath.

The words of that Admonition, being thus set down, I shall need to say no
more. For hereby you see, I trust, very fully, the true, certain, and
undoubted sense, scope, meaning, and interpretation of the Oath. Why therefore
should any be so contentious, or malicious, as to wrest, or wring it, to a
contrary meaning, or such as it never intended? For hereby appears, that,
although the king be supreme Governor within his own Dominions, yet it is
explained, That he is supreme Governor, under God: so that by reason thereof,
the King neither does, nor can take upon him, any authority over Gods word or
ordinances, to devise, alter, or frame religion as he list, as some very
odiously and no less strangely, have inferred. Such thoughts be far from his
godly mind. Neither when it is said at any time, That the King has
Authority or Jurisdiction ecclesiastical, is any other thing meant thereby,
but his Jurisdiction or Authority in Ecclesiastical causes, and over
ecclesiastical persons: and thereby is not meant or intended, (as some again
very absurdly and malignantly have imagined) That the King has any such
authority as is merely Ecclesiastical, and proper to Bishops, Pastors, and
such like Ministers of the Church, (as namely, to preach, to minister the
Sacraments, to excommunicate, to absolve, to consecrate Bishops, or such like):
for the exposition of the Oath (which is before delivered in the Admonition,
and ratified by an express Act of Parliament) directly declares the contrary
to that conceit. And therefore his Majesty's authority in Ecclesiastical
causes, must not be conceived to be any such, as is properly Sacerdotall or
Episcopal; but such as is, rightly and properly, Regal and Imperial. Which
Regal and Imperial Authority, ought no more to be denied unto him, then that
which is merely and properly Sacerdotal or Episcopal, may be denied to Priests
or Bishops. What should hinder then, but that ye all may (as ye ought) utterly
renounce and forsake for ever, the Papal, and all foreign Jurisdictions
whatsoever, and further also promise (according to the tenor of the Oath), to
your power, to assist and defend all jurisdictions, privileges, preeminences,
and authorities, granted or belonging to the King, his heirs, and successors,
or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm: considering that
there is no Authority in these matters ecclesiastical, granted or belonging
to the King, or united or annexed to his Crown, but such as appears to be
lawful, and is rightly Regal and Imperial; and which, withal, in no sort
wrongeth the authority of any other Church governors of Gods institution
whosoever. Yea, the King is so far from encroching, or intruding upon, or
impugning, or hindering any of the offices or authorities granted or belonging
unto them from God, that contrariwise, he leaves all those rights and
authorities wholly and entirely unto them to be executed: and (which is more)
such is his most godly and Christian disposition, that to that their divine
Calling, Ambas^age, and Ministry, 1 Thessalonians. 5 12.
enjoined them from God, and by them sincerely and faithfully administered,
himself, in his ow^^ person, most readily, Heb 13.17.
and willingly, yields both reverence, and, obedience; 2. Cor 5.20.
as well knowing, that in respect of God (whose Ambassadors, Matthew. 28.20.
and Ministers they be, and whose word and will only, they are to teach and
deliver) the greatest King is but a subject: Howbeit, nevertheless, otherwise,
and in respect of their own persons, it must be confessed, that they be
subject unto him, and owe him obedience, and are in all duty and humility, to
perform the same unto him. So that, I hope you now sufficiently perceive, that
his Majesty's Supremacy under God, and his government and authority as
touching causes and persons ecclesiastical (being such as is only Regal and
Imperial, and no way derogatorie, prejudicial, or injurious, to any Bishops,
Pastors, or Ministers that be of divine Institution, or to their offices and
functions, but rather very much helpful to them in their places) is so far
from being to be disliked, that contrariwise being rightly understood, it is
ever to be allowed, and that with much praise and thanks unto God for the same,
whose gracious ordinance it is, for the further good, and greater comfort and
benefit, of his Church and Religion.

CAP. II.
Wherein is showed; That our Church was in the Apostles days, and in all times
and ages since: howsoever, that which we call Popery, did as an Infection, or,
Corruption, grow unto it, whereof, it was again to be purged, and so to become
(as we call it) a reformed Church: and that all these things came thus to
pass, in the Church, according to the Prophecies thereof formerly delivered in
Gods own Book. AND, What is to be thought of those forefathers of ours, that
lived and dyed in the time of Popery: AS ALSO, That long before the Days of
King HENRY the eight, and long before LUTHER or CALVIN were borne, the Pope of
Rome was complained of, and exclaymed against, and affirmed and published to be
Antichrist: as also Popish Rome affirmed to be the whore of Babylon, mentioned
in the Revelation of S. John.

BEfore I enter to speak of the other particular points hereafter mentioned,
it will not be amiss here to speak something, in a general sort, concerning
Gods Church and his Religion. For how confident and resolute soever, some take
upon them to be, in that Popish Religion they hold and profess; yet is that no
proof, that therefore they be right: for not only those of a right Religion,
but those also of a wrong, be very resolute and confident, as appears by all
Sectaries, Heretics, and Schismatickes, who be very pertinacious and
resolute for the maintenance of their several errors and opinions. Neither is
it a reason sufficient for them, to say, they follow the ways of their
forefathers and ancestors, except they be sure that they went the right way:
for we are not to follow our forefathers and ancestors, in any vices or
errors they held, be they otherwise never so dear unto us. Walk not ye
(says God) in the ordinances of your fathers, Ezech. 20.18, 19.
nor observe ye their manners, nor defile your selves with their Idols: I am
the Lord your God: walk ye in my statutes, and keep my Judgments, and do
them. Yea, ye may remember, that it is written thus of some people (who are
therefore much reproved): So did their children, and their childrens children:
As did their fathers, 2. Kin. 18.40, 41.
so do they unto this day. Where further it is said: that notwithstanding this
following of their forefathers, and doing after their old custom, yet they
obeyed not God. Nor is it sufficient for them to say, they follow the doctrine
or direction of their Priests, Teachers, and Leaders, unless they be sure that
they direct, and teach aright: Matthew. 7.15. 1 Ioh. 4.1. Matthew. 15.14.
for there be false Teachers as well as true Teachers, and some that be blind
leaders of the blind, who cannot therein excuse the People, because, They both
(as Christ himself affirms in that case) do fall into the Ditch. Neither is
it a sure or sufficient ground for any of them to build upon, to say, that
their Religion of Popery, is of a great and long continuance in the world. For,
Paganism, and Mahometisme, have been likewise of very great and long
continuance in the world, and yet are they never the truer, for all that. A
Custom therefore* or Prescription, or Continuance, though it be for many
hundredth years in the world, nor any Antiquity ye can allege, though you
could allege it never so truly, is not sufficient in this case, unless it be
the most ancient antiquity, extant in the days of the Apostles, and from
their times deduced, and in the sacred and Canonical Scriptures to be seen,
and there approved. For there is an Antiquity in Error, and wickedness, as
well as in Piety and right Religion: and a Mystery of Iniquity, 2 Thessalonians.
2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1. Tim. 3.16.
as well as a Mystery of Godliness: and, an Antichristianisme, as well as a
Christianisme; and a growth, succession, and proceeding in them both: they both
growing together, as Wheat and Tares do in a field, until they be separated.
Matthew. 13.30. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
Which Mystery of Iniquity, otherwise called Antichristianisme (that ye may
know of what Antiquity it is) S. Paul tells you, that it began to work in
the Apostles days, even in his time: 1. Ioh. 2.18. 1. Ioh. 4.3. 2. Ioh. 7.
And so also does S. John expressly testify, although it then climbed not to
that great growth and height, that afterward, by little and little, and by
degrees, it ascended unto. So that Mystical Iniquity, or (which is all one)
Antichristian Errors and heresies, began (as you see) very early, and went on
forward, endevoring to corrupt and infect Gods Church, and his Religion; and in
continuance of time so increased and prevailed, as that at last, like a
Leprosy, it overspread the whole Body: miserably defiling, polluting, and
deforming it, and that for sundry Ages; even until the time appointed of God,
came, wherein Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
and that mystery of Iniquity, were to be discovered, and that the Church and
Religion thereupon were to be reformed by the Book of the Holy Scriptures
opened, Revel. 10.2.8, 9, 10, 11.
and the true doctrine thereout, once again, preached and delivered to the
world: which was not to come to pass, until the Sixth Angel had begun to blow
his Trumpet (as is showed in the Revelation of S. John); Rev. 9.13. etc. Rev.
10.2.8, 9, 10, 11.
that is, not till toward the latter end of the world. For under the blowing of
the Trumpet, by the seventh Angel, the world is to end, (as appears in the
same Revelation). Rev. 10.7. Rev. 11.15, 16, 17, 18.
Now then, what cause has any, (knowing and considering these Prophesies in
the Book of God, concerning the state of the Church) to marvel or wonder,
that the Church and religion had such corruptions, and so many errors, by
degrees, accrued unto it, and continued so long in them: or, where, our Church
and Religion was, all that while? For this Prophecy and foretelling of these
things, thus to come to pass, (namely, that the Church was to have these
corruptions to grow upon it, and to be continued therein, for so long a time,
and that, it was not to begin to be reformed or purged of them, until the
blowing of the Trumpet by the sixth Angel) gives a full answer, solution, and
satisfaction, to all those demands, and requires every one to cease
questioning, marvailing, or wondering any longer in that behalf. Would any
then know, where our Church was all that while, and until they made an actual
separation from the Popish Assemblies? The answer is very easy and apparent,
namely, that it was, where those corruptions were, and even where the Papacy
and Antichristianisme was. For Gods people do sometimes dwell and be, even
where Satan's Throne is: yea, Antichrist himself, being, at length, mounted
aloft, and placed in his Throne, Revel. 2.13.
did then (as was foretold he should do) sit in the Temple of God, domineering
over it. So that Protestancie and Popery, that is, 2. These. 2.4.
true Christianity and Antichristianisme, were then mingled together, with
much grief and sorrow to the true Christians, until they, afterward, through
the cruelty and persecution of their enemies, and in detestation of their
abominations, were forced to make, and did make an actual separation from
them. Which thing also was foretold, that so it should come to pass: for a
voice sounding from heaven, commanded them to, Come from them, to a more pure
and heavenly-minded Church, and to Go out from amongst them, Revel. 11.12.
lest being partakers of their sins, they should also receive of their
plagues. When they were thus commanded to depart, Rev. 18.4.
and to separate themselves, and to go out from amongst them, it is evident,
that, before, and until this their departure, and going out from them, they
were amongst them, and intermingled with them. Yea even in those times, namely,
under the blowing of the Trumpet by the sixth Angel, when the Temple came to be
measured, it is apparent, Rev. 11.12. etc.
that the false Christians (there noted under the name of Gentiles) were the
most and greatest number, and did tread the rest that were the true Christians,
under foot: so that, even then, (as there appears) there were some that were
right and true worshippers of God, in that Temple. Yea, even during the time
that they were thus intermingled together, did God, nevertheless distinguish,
and put a difference between them: for he would have one part, namely Atrium,
that is, The Court, or, outer part, (under which those false Christians, that
is, the Antichristian people, are comprehended, which outwardly pretended to
worship God aright, and yet were not the right and true worshippers of him
indeed) to be excluded, and not to be measured, or reckoned as any part of the
holy City, or holy Temple, that is, of the true Christian Church. Rev. 11.2.
Which I here observe, the rather, because some* upon this, That Antichrist was
to sit in the Temple of God, very inconsequently, and no less untruely,
infer, that therefore the Popish or Antichristian Church or people, be the
true Church. For you see them here, directly excluded, from being any part of
the holy City, or true Church. Albeit therefore both Protestants and Papists
were in those times, thus, intermingled together, yet was not the Papacy the
true Church, as is here apparent. For, indeed, Popery, to the Church is but as
a corruption, contagion, or disease, is, to the body of a man, or as a plague
or pestilence is to a City: and therefore they that made a separation from
Popery, separated themselves, not from the Church of God, but from the
disease, corruption, and contagion of the Church, and from the plague and
pestilence in that City; and consequently cannot, but most uniustly, be termed
Schismatickes: especially considering, that they also made this their
separation, by the warrant of Gods own voice, and commandment from heaven,
enioyning them thereunto, as is before declared. Neither would they have
departed or gone out from them, that is, from the Papists, but that they,
namely the Papists, had first departed, and gone, from the soundness, truth,
and sincerity of the most ancient, primitive, and Apostolic Churches. Well
therefore does one use this similitude, M White, in his his Book, called, The
way to the true Church.
that as when a fair poole of water, becomes, in time, corrupted, weeds do
grow, mudde increases, and Frogs be engendered in it, the owner thereof cutteth
a channel, and leaving the corruption, draws the water to another place, and
so uses it, without danger; and the Frogs remaining, can take no just
exception for this departure and separation of the water from them, nor can
claim the water to be theirs: so neither can the Papacy accuse us for our
departure or going out of their defiled and deformed Church, since God (the Lord
and owner of his Church) would have us so to do, and so long as we left
nothing behind us, but the mudde, frogs, and weeds; and that which was the
clear and pure water, before their coming, we still possess, hold and
retain. You now see then, I hope, where our Church was, in all times and ages,
even during all the time of the reign of the Papacy, and until we made an
actual separation from it: And much more, I trust, you perceive it, since our
separation. For the Protestants reformed Churches, have ever sithence that
time, been very visible, and still be (thanks be to God) very splendent, even
to the eyes of the most malignant world.

2 If any do further ask, as they are sometime wont to do, what is become
of our forefathers and ancestors, that lived and died in the time of Popery:
As we do and must leave them unto God, whose secret counsels and judgments,
it is not fit for us to search into, or to determine of; yet this we say, That
we hope well, and make no doubt of the salvation of many of them. First,
because, for a long time, there were in the Papacy, both true Christians and
false Christians, right worshippers of God and false worshippers, intermingled
together, namely, until that time aforesaid of an actual separation: yea, the
holy Scriptures, and Sacraments, (the public Ensigns of Gods Church) were
there, though much corrupted, and abused* Which Ensigns being displayed in the
Popish Church* and nothing but Christianity there pretended (though indeed
there was also direct Antichristianisme intermingled) it was an easy matter*
for many simple souls, that were not able to judge and discern of these
things, thereby to be deceived. For (as Chrysostom, or, whosoever was the
Author of the imperfect work, says) Antichrist sitting in the holy places of
the Church, and possessing the Churches, In opere imperf. in Matthew. 49.
was to have all that in show, which the Church of Christ has in Truth: viz.
Churches, Scriptures, Bishops, Clerks, Baptism, Eucharist, etc. So that
many, no doubt, in those days, under color of those Ensigns and shows,
were (as they be also at this day) deceived; and, thinking all to be well,
followed the Pope and Papacy: like those two hundredth, who in simplicity of
heart, followed Absolon from Jerusalem, 2. Sam. 16.11.
knowing nothing of his treason and rebellion intended. Or, like as if a close
and hidden Traitor, being once, and of a long time formerly, in good grace and
esteem with his King, should under color and pretense of the King his
Masters service, summon all his true subjects to follow him* pretending a
Commission from him, for that purpose, which nevertheless included no such
matter in it, as he pretended: In this case, even some good subjects, not
knowing of his treason, and believing his Commission to be true, and to import
as much as he divulged it for, and the pretender of it to be a right honest and
loyal man, and to be still in good grace and esteem with his King; receiving
no advertisement to the contrary, might possibly so far be deceived, as to
follow him for a while, until the Treason were discovered, and therein might,
so far forth, in some sort be held pardonable. So concerning such, as in
those times followed the Bishop of Rome (who was once a good Bishop) pretending
himself to be made Head, Ruler, and Monarch of the whole and universal Church
upon earth, and that by warrant and Commission from Christ; when indeed,
whatsoever he pretended, he had no such Commission from him: In this case, so
long as they followed him, 1. Tim. 1.13.
but in ignorance and simplicity, thinking all things to be right and well,
and as they ought to be, and receiving no advertisement to the contrary; God
might, and we hope he did, receive many of those to mercy. But such as knew
the Pope to be an usurper, and a traitor to Christ, the only and true King and
Head of the universal Church, or being advertised thereof, would nevertheless
make no regard of any such advertisement or admonitions, but would, maugre all
admonitions, wilfully persist and adhere unto him, and to his false and
Antichristian doctrine, and designs; be not so excusable. And this kind of
difference S. Cyprian makes, when he says thus: Cyprian in Psalmo, Ad quid
justificationes meas, and assumis testamentu^ meum per os^ tuum etc.
If any of our predecessors or Ancestors, either of ignorance or of a
simplicity, have not held and kept that which our Lord taught them by his
authority and example, him the mercy of our Lord might have pardoned and
forgiven: But we (says he) for our parts may not hope for the like favor,
because we are now admonished and instructed by him. But secondly we answer,
That though this mystery of Iniquity, did cast into the doctrine and Religion
of Christ, a great deal of Poison, so that it has infected with his venom,
the most dainty meats, that God has given for the spiritual nourishment of
his people; yet did God give grace to some to abstain from it, to some others
to cast it up again, to others to dissever it from the sound meat, to others
to overcome it: (...) that many escaped the danger of it. For example, how
many of the common people were, in those times, never acquainted with those
pestiferous distinctions of Merits, de Congruo, and de Condigno: or, with that
distinction of Doulia, and latria, and huper doulia, etc: or understood them
not, or else believed them not? For even at this day, they understand not these
distinctions. Yea many of the common people will at this day say, that they
serve God only, and not Images in any sort, howsoever their great Rabbis and
Masters (in these distinctions) do otherwise teach: As likewise many of them
at this day, will say, that they do not believe to be saved by any merits of
their own, but by Gods mercy only; whatsoever Friars, Monks, Priests, or
Jesuits, teach or write to the contrary. Yea, even amongst the learned
themselves also, as well as amongst the vulgar and common people, there were
some that held that fundamental point of their salvation, to be only of Gods
mere mercy, and through faith in Christ, and not of their own inherent
righteousness, or through their own merits or works in any sort. An example
whereof we have in S. Bernard himself, who though he lived in the times of
Popery, and was himself an Abbot, yet in the extremity of his sickness,
and the end of his days, this was his refuge: I confess (says he) I am not
worthy, In vita Bernard.
neither can I obtain the kingdom of heaven by mine own merits: But my Lord
obtaining it by a double right; by inheritance from the father, and by the
merit of his Passion: he being content with the one, gives me the other; and
clayming it by the gift which he has made me thereof, I shall not be
confounded. Again he says: My merit, Bern. in Cantic. Card Contaren. Tract.
de Iustificatione. Pig^. de fide and Iustificatione. Colon. in Antidag. 1. Cor.
3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Aug. lib. 1. cont. Julian. Pelag. cap. 6. Greg Niss.
de hom. opific. ca. ult.
is the Lords mercy: I am not poor in merits, because he is rich in mercies:
I have greatly sinned, but I will remember the vvounds of my Lord, etc.
Contarenus a Cardinal, did also in that time, hold justification by faith in
Christ: and so did sundry others in those days. Now so long as a man holds
the foundation, though he err in other points that be not fundamental, he may
be saved* as S. Paul shows, and S. Augustine, and Gregory Nyssen, do also
declare. But thirdly, if it were so, that some of our forefathers and ancestors
were in their life time, (as likely enough it is, that too many of them were)
horribly polluted and defiled with the corruptions of those times, yet who can
tell how they dyed? For sundry live wickedly, who nevertheless may dye very
godly and penitently, as did that good Thief at Christ his Crucifixion. Luke
23.40, 41, 42, 43.
It is therefore no good argument, to say, They lived in the profession of
Popery: Ergo they died so: for diverse, we see, die otherwise then they lived*
and God was as well able to give them a right faith, and repentance, and to
convert them unto himself before their death, or at the instant of their
death; as any others. Yea, I think, that few or none that be well advised or
considerate persons, whatsoever they profess at other times, will dare to dye
Papists, that is, in a belief and confidence to be saved by their own works
and merits, or by a righteousness inherent in their own persons, but that
they will then, at that time of their death, rely, wholly and altogether, upon
Gods mercy, and Christ his merits, renouncing utterly their own, as S.
Bernard did. For even Bellarmine himself also, Bellar. de Iustificat. lib. 5.
c. 7.
writing in these late times, notwithstanding whatsoever he had said before in
defense of merits, yet concludes against them, and teaches, that, Tutissimum
est, fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate reponere: It is
the safest way, to put our whole confidence, only in the mercy of God and
his bounty. But, fourthly, many and sundry, living in those times, and being
much grieved, and groaning under the Popes tyranny, made hold to utter their
complaints, and to cry out as loud as they could, or at least, as they durst,
against both Pope and Popery: Amongst whom was the forenamed, S. Bernard,
Bern. de cons. ad Eugen. lib. 2. cap. 2 and lib. 6. cap. 3* and cap. 8.
who calls the Popes doctrines or pastures, Daemonum potius quam ovium
pascua, Pastures rather for Devils then for sheep: where he further
inveigheth against the Pope and his Clergy, saying, Omiserandam sponsam
talibus creditam paranymphis: O miserable spouse, which art committed to such
Leaders or such Overseers. And again he says: O good Jesus, Epist 42 ad Hen.
Archiepisc. Se^onensis* and apud Hugon. in postill super Johan. cap. 1.
all Christendom seems to have conspired against thee: they are chief in
persecuting of thee, which seem to hold the Primacy, and to bear
principality in the Church. Iniquity is come from thy Vicars, even from those
that seem* to govern thy people: They have possessed the Fort of Sion, seized
upon the munitions, and they burn with all their power the whole City:
Miserable is their conversation, and miserable is the subversion of thy people,
etc. They do wickedly against Christ, and there be many Antichrists in our
times. A stinking infection this day creeps over all the body of the Church:
and, the Deeper it is, so much the more desperate: and the more Inward that it
is, so much the more perilous: for if it were an open Enemy, he might be cast
out, and he would wither: or, if it were a violent Enemy, a man might hide
himself from him: But what is now to be done? vvhither shall the Church drive
him? or where shall she hide her self from him? All friends, and yet all
enemies: all kinsfolks, and yet all adversaries: They are (in pretense) the
Ministers of Christ, and yet they serve Antichrist: VVoe (says he) to this
generation, because of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy: If
yet it be to be Termed Hypocrisy, which is not able to hide is self, it is
so abundant: nor yet seeks to conceal it self, it is so impudent. And in
another place he says further: That the Beast spoken of in the Revelation
(cap. 13.) to which a mouth is given to speak blasphemies, Epist. 125.
and to make war with the Saints of God, is now gotten into Saint Peter's
chair, as a Lion prepared to his prey.

4 You see then, that many hundredth years before the days of King Henry the
eight, and before Luther or Calvin were borne, the Pope of Rome and his
Clergy, were complained of, and exclaimed against. But this shall yet further
appear, for your better satisfaction. For under the reign of Hugh Capet in
France, about the year of our Lord 1000, there was held a National Council
at Rhemes, Council. Rhemens. sub Capeto, and eius filio.
wherein was President, Arnold, that famous Bishop of Orleance: It was there
handled and proved by the Canons of former Councels, That the Bishop of Rome
had nothing to do in France: That a Council was more to be respected then his
Sea: That the time was when Rome brought forth good or tolerable Bishops, but
now alas (says this Arnold) in place of these, she brings forth naught else
but Monsters. And there reckoning up diverse wicked Bishops of Rome, and among
the rest, one Boniface, a Monster, exceeding in wickedness, and having his
hands imbrued in his predecessors blood: (he adds): And must so many the good
servants of God over all the world, needs be subject to such Monsters? and then
concludes: Reverend Fathers, whom do you think this man to be which sits
upon the high Throne, glittering in gold and scarlet? For whom do you take
him? Verily, if he be without the love of God, and be puffed up and extolled
for his knowledge only, he is Antichrist sitting in the Temple of God, showing
himself as if he were God: But if he be neither founded in love, nor set up
for knowledge, he is an Image, and as an Idol, in Gods Temple, and to go to
him to ask counsel or for answers, is to ask counsel of a stone. And
therefore he cries out: O Lugenda Roma, O Rome to be lamented. Again, about
the year of our Lord, 1100, Epist. Leodiensis Ecclesiae. ad Paschalem. 2. in
2. volumine Conciliorum.
the whole Church of Liege, uttered the like voice: For where Pope Paschall the
second, would have war made upon the Emperor, promising to give remission of
sins and assurance of everlasting life, to all that would do it, and on the
other side, to excommunicate all those that would show obedience to him, They
say thus: Because We keep the Law of God, they object against us, that we
transgress their new Traditions. But God says unto them, why do you
transgress the commandments of God by your Traditions? God commands to give
unto Caesar, the things which are Cesars, and to God that which is Gods: which
S. Peter and S. Paul do l^kewise teach* honor the King: let every soul be
subject to the h^gher powers. He that commands every soul to do this, whom
does he exempt from this earthly power? Because therefore we honor the King,
and serve our Lords and Masters, in the simplicity of our hearts, are we
therefore excommunicated, etc? who can reprehend a Bishop for keeping his
faith and loyalty to his Prince? and yet they that tear in sunder the
kingdom and Priesthood, with new Schisms, and new Traditions, promise to
absolve them from the sin of perjury, that break their faith to their king.
Suppose (say they) our Emperor were an heretic: yet is he not to be repelled
as such a one, by us, by taking arms against him: yea, they allege that the
Prophet Jeremy prayed for Nebuchadnezzar; and S. Paul for Nero: and add
further; Which of the Popes of Rome has by his Decrees, given authority,
that a Bishop should use the sword of war against any offenders? All from
Gregory the first, used the spiritual sword alone, unto the last Gregory, who
was the first that armed himself (and by his example, others) with the sword
of war, against the Emperor, etc, You say, that if a man be excommunicate,
for what cause soever, if he dye in that estaete, he is damned: But the
Authority of the Church of Rome (say they) helps us in this point, who
teach, that the Bishop of Rome has power to absolve any that is uniustly
excommunicated by others: If then the Bishop of Rome may do this, who will
say, that God cannot absolve, whomsoever the Pope has uniustly excommunicated?
yea, the Popes curse of Excommunication, they make no reckoning of, but
contemn and despise it: but above all (say they) we fear that which the
spirit of God by the mouth of the Psalmist has said, viz. Cursed are all they
that decline from his commandments. That Curse of excommunication, which Pope
Hildebrand, Odoardus, and this Third, have by a new Tradition indiscreetely
brought in, we wholy reject: and we hold and reverence those first holy
Fathers, unto this day, who by the motion of Gods spirit, not carried with
their own affections, have otherwise ordained, etc. forasmuch therefore, as
we stick to the Ancient rule, and are not carried away with every wind of
Doctrine: we are called Excommunicates, false Clerks, etc. Howbeit, let Pope
Paschall, lay aside his spirit of presumption, and let him advisedly consider
with his Counsaylors, how from Silvester, to Hildebrand, the Popes have
obtained the chair at Rome: what, and how many outrages have been committed
by the Ambition of that Sea, etc. As for those Legates a latere, who run
through the world, to fill their purses, we (say they) wholly reject them,
according to those Councels of Affricke, held in the times of Zozimus,
Caelestinus, and Boniface: for, that we may know theraby their fruits, there
proceeeds from their legations, no correction of manners or amendment of life,
but the slaughters of men, and the spoil of Gods Church, etc. That there
should be such desolation of the Church, such oppression of the poor and
widows, such cruelty, such rapine, and (which is worse) such effusion of
blood, without respect of good and evil, and all this, and worse then all
this, Done, by the Commandment of the Pope, who would believe it, if his own
mouth had not spoken it? We remain astonished at the novelty of these
things, and we enquire from whence this new Example should come: That, the
Preacher of peace with his own mouth, and the hand of another man, should make
war against the Church of God, etc. Where further they directly affirm Rome
to be Babylon, and say, that the Apostle so calls it, as foreseeing by a
Prophetical spirit, The confusion of that dissension wherewith the Church at
this day, is torn in pieces etc. And a great deal more is spoken in that
Epistle of theirs, which though it be long and large, is worthy the reading
over. And this, no doubt, moved the Bishop of Florence also, in the year 1106,
Acta vita Paschalis.
publicly to preach, that Antichrist was borne, and then in Esse: which Pope
Paschall understanding of, and being much grieved therewith, took the pains
to go himself in person, to Florence, to stop the mouth of this Bishop: And
(fearing, as it seems, to stir in the matter, too much) contented himself
only to admonish him, to desist from this bold enterprise, Sigon lib. 9. de
regno It^l.
lest otherwise, indeed, the truth of that matter, should more strongly break
out. But yet further, about the year 1150. The letters of the Emperor,
Frederick Barbarossa, to the Princes of Germany, be sufficiently known:
wherein he shows unto them, that the Pope had no other drift, but to set his
foot upon the Emperors head, that so he might the more easily overcome the
members: And upon this it was, Radevie. in Appendice Frisingensis.
(says Radevicus) That the Pope was not ashamed to maintain, that the
Emperor was his man, and held the Empire of him. Yea, the Popes are gone so
far (says Aventinus) that they affect both domination and deity: Avent. in
Boi^rum histor.
so that they will be feared of all, as God, yea, more then God: pretending
that they are not bound to give account of their Actions to any: That amongst
them be many Antichrists, and that indeed there be none more pernicious to the
Christian Religion, then the Popes. The same Emperor, in his letters to King
VVencislaus, says, that the high Bishops of Babylon, that is, of Rome, do sit
long over the Temple of God, and seize upon the divinity: that to please the
desire of these false Christ's, the Princes do ruinate one another, and all
states be in a combustion: That they be blind which see not, that they be
cruel wolves, which under sheep clothing, spoil the flock of Christ. And
that this was the Judgment also even of sundry of the Germane Church, as well
as of the Emperor, appears by the oration of an Archbishop to the States of
the Empire: In oratione Archimistae ad Proceres Imperij.
for (says he) He that is the servant of servants, as if he were God,
coveteth to be the Lord of Lords: he disclaymeth the counsel of his brethren,
or rather of his Lords: He fears lest he should be forced to give account of
that which he does, and usurpeth every day, over the laws: He utters great
things, as if he were God: He coyneth new devises in his mind, to
appropriate the Empire to himself; he changes the good laws, and
establishes his own: he prophaneth, he raveneth: he spoyleth, he defraudeth,
he massacreth: even that man of perdition does this, whom they are wont to
call Antichrist: in whose forehead, this name of blasphemy is written; I am a
God, I cannot err. He sits in the Temple of God, and Rules far and wide,
etc. Petrus Blessensis, Petrus Blessens. in Epist. ad que^dam officialem.
likewise, very earnestly advises all good men to depart from Rome, as from
the midst of Babylon: And Sigebertus also, witnesses, that for the most part,
all that were good, just, open hearted, ingenuous, and plaine-dealing men,
Sigeb. ^onach. Gemblacens. apud Aventin. de Tyran Pontifici^.
held, That the kingdom of Antichrist was then, and in those days. About
which time also the Waldensis and Albigenses in France, did openly sequester
themselves from the Romish Church, holding and maintayning amongst other
articles (as the books of their adversaries themselves do witness) That
Popish Rome is the Babylon mentioned in the Revelation, and that the Pope is
the very Antichrist, foretold in the Scriptures. And about the year 1230, one
William Bishop of Paris, Guilielm. Episc. Paris. lib. de Collat. Benefic.
likewise feared not to call Rome, Babylon, Egypt, Sodom: and her Prelates,
Profaners and spoylers of the True Spouse of Christ, that established Lucifer
again in the heaven of Christ's Church* Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln,
Sebaldus Archbishop of York, and Probus Bishop of Thoul, did in their times
also, mightily inveigh against the Pope. One Haiabalus, a Franciscan, Henric.
de Erphordia, de Haiabal^ circa Ann. 1345.
preached openly in Avinian, That the Pope and his Cardinals were Antichrist,
and that the Popish Church was the Whore of Babylon, mentioned in the
Revelation: And being sent for by Pope Clement the sixth, he affirmed, that he
was commanded from God to publish it, and that he could not otherwise do.
Francis Petrarch (Archdeacon of Parma, and a Chanon of Padua) who lived about
the year 1350, Petrarch. lib. Epist. 14 epist. 17. epist. 19.
and who for all kind of learning might be called the light of his age, not
only in his Sonnets, but even in his Epistles also, exclaimeth against the
Pope, his Court, and Church, saying: That the Popes Chair, is the Chair of
lying; that it is a Defection, a Revolt, an Apostasy of a people, that under
the Standard of Christ, rebel against Christ, and fight for Satan: That the
Papacy, and no other, is the Babylon, the mother of all the vvhoredomes of the
earth, etc. Nicholaus Oresmus also, Nicho. Oresmus in Orat. habit coram Papa:
Urban. 5.
(who lived about the year 1364.) feared not to say, before Pope Urban the
fifth, That the Church of Rome was worse, then vvhilom was the Jewish
Synagogue: That the Time of Antichrist (spoken of in 2 Thessalonians. 2,) was come,
seeing the Roman Empire was desolated: and that between the desolation
thereof, and the coming of Antichrist, there was no middle time: thereby
signifying plainly enough, that Antichrist then was in being, and had his
seat in Rome. Which thing also, Johan. de rup. sciss. in lib. prophetico cui
Titulus, Vade mecu^.
Johannes de Rupe scissa, a Franciscan Friar, was bold to affirm, before Pope
Urban the sixth: for which, he was prisoner a long time in Avinion. These (to
pretermit sundry other Authorities and Testimonies, which might be further
cited, if need were) sufficiently declare, that many hundredth years before
King HENRY the Eight, or LUTHER, or CALVIN were borne, the Pope of Rome was
held and published to be Antichrist, and the Beast spoken of in the Revelation;
and that Popish Rome, was the Whore of Babylon: as also, they show, where our
Church was all that while, until they made an actual separation from the Pope
and Popery. And where it has been ever since, is a thing so well known, and
apparent, that it needs not to be showed. And thus much may suffice to have
spoken generally. Now let us proceed to other matters.

FINIS LIBRI PRIMI.
THE SECOND PART of the BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Wherein that point, concerning the infallible Judge of these controversies, is
amplified, and further debated and declared. And, what Scriptures be Canonical,
and what not: Of the perfection and sufficiency of the Scriptures, without
Traditions: That the Church, is to be tried and decided by the Scriptures. And
who be the right Catholics: That the Scriptures in their originals be
incorrupt, and to be preferred before that which is called S. Hieromes
Translation, and before all other Translations, whatsoever: That the public
Service should be in such a Tongue as the people* may understand: That
Lay People may and ought to read the Scriptures: And whence all right
exposition of them is to be had.

AS we are all under one God, and under one King; and the same a most worthy,
learned, virtuous, and Christian King: so were it very consonant and convenient
(if by any good means it might be brought to pass) that we did all hold and
profess one and the self same true faith and Christian Religion. For, indeed,
not any unity or agreement in falsehood or errors, but an unity or agreement
in the truth and true Religion, is the thing that ought of all to be sought
after and desired. But now which is that one true Christian Religion, which all
ought to embrace, is that which is made the great Question: namely, whether it
be Protestancy, or Papistry, inasmuch as both these, lay claim unto it.
Wherein, if God, speaking in his own sacred and Canonical Scriptures, may be
(as is most fit he should be) allowed to be the Judge, then is this which is
made so great a question, soon decided and at an end: it being by him there
clearly resolved, that not that which is called Papistry, but that which is
called Protestancy, is the right and true Christian Religion. For what be
Protestants (as they be in this Controversy distinguished against Papists) but
such as profess to build their Faith and Religion wholly and altogether upon
that undoubted word of God, the sacred and Canonical Scriptures? And what is
Papistry on the other side, but a profession of such a Faith and Religion as is
not so grounded, but relieth partly upon unwritten Traditions, partly upon the
determination of the Popes, and partly upon the Decrees of their Councels and
voice of their own Church and Teachers, and upon such like strengthes and
stays, as whereby they may easily be deceived. Howbeit, what cause is there,
why the pretended Catholics should not allow God, speaking in his divine and
Canonical Scriptures, to be the Judge, in these Controversies? For is there, or
can there be any higher, better, juster, or surer Judge to trust unto, then
he? or is there any equal to him, or comparable with him? What mean they
herein? Would they have their own Church, Clergy, Councels, and Pope to be
the Judge? That were not fit, nor equal, ye know, that such as be parties,
should also be the Judges in their own cause. Yea if their Council of
Constance, and Council of Trent, or any other of their Councels, were much
better then they be, (as they be, indeed, none of the best sort) yet were they
not to be held for sure or infallible Judges in this case, for any to build
his faith upon, or to trust unto them, without further search and examination.
For all their Counsels, be they never so general, consist of men, and of
such men, as may possibly fall into error, and be themselves deceived, either
through ignorance and want of sufficient knowledge, or through corruption,
partiality, or through some one means, or other. Their Councels, I am sure,
are not better then those that were in Gregory Nazianzens time, nor altogether
so good: and yet he says, out of his own observation, Nazianzen* ad Procop.
of the Councels of his time; that, The lust of strife, and desire to bear
rule, did reign there, many times. And Eusebius says likewise of those times,
that, Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 1. cap. 8.
The chief Rulers of the Church* forgetting Gods commandments, were enflamed
one against another, with contention, emulation, pride, malice, and hatred.
And therefore, it appears to be a thing possible enough, even for general
Councels, (as well as for Provincial) sometime to err and go astray. For
example, They remember the general Councels wherein the Arrian heresy was
established, whereof that of Arimine was one: as also the second Ephesine
Council, which decreed for the Nestorians: Did not these general Councels
err, and that even in matters of Faith? I am sure, R^em. Annotat. upon Act.
15.7.
they will grant that they did: for so the Rhemists and other Papists
themselves confess. Why then may not their general Councels likewise err
which make decrees in maintenance of their Popery, as those other did which
decreed in maintenance of their Arrianisme, and Nestorianisme? The Rhemists
answer, That those Councels wanted the Popes assent, assistance, or
confirmation, and therefore they erred: howbeit, that is not the reason why
they erred; but the true reason and cause of their error was, because they
decreed not according to the holy and Canonical Scriptures, but contrary
thereunto: For even Councels also which had the Bishop of Romes assent, were
not therefore privileged from error; as appears by the second Council of
Nice, which decreed, that Angels, 2 Council. Nice. Actio. 5.
and men's souls also, be corporeal: for this the Papists themselves cannot
deny to be an error. Yea how is it possible, that by the Popes assent or
confirmation any Council should or can be ever the more privileged from
error, when even the Popes themselves have no such privilege in that behalf?
For it is well known, that Pope Liberius erred, and that not only personally,
but iudicially also, and defin^tively, and in a matter of Faith, when he
subscribed to the Arrian heresy: as testifies Athanasius Apolog. 2. ad
solitary vitam agentes, S. Hierome in Catalogo, Damasus in Pontificali,
Marianus Scotus, Petrus Damianus, epist. 5. cap. 16. etc. Honorius also (Pope
of Rome) was a Monotbelite, and did not only fall into that heresy, but in a
Decretal Epistle, did also publish and confirm the same; as is proved by the
Council of Constantinople the sixth, where he was condemned, Constant. 6. act.
13. Pope Innocentius likewise erred in a matter of Faith, when he held, that
Infants could not be saved, unless they received the Communion: for this, the
Papists themselves confess to be an error: and yet Pope Innocentius held it,
as S. Augustine witnesses, cyting the Decretal Epistle of the same Pope, to
the Bishops of Numidia, for proof thereof; cont. duas epistol. Pel. ad
Bonifac. lib. 2. cap. 4 and cont. Iul. lib. 1. cap. 2. If Popes then may err,
and become Heretics, as both here, and before, and afterward also, is very
evident: it is thereby manifest, that their assenting, subscribing, or
confirming of Councels, can give the same Councels, no more privilege from
error, then formerly they had. But they then allege, that the Holy Ghost is
promised to Councels, and therefore they cannot err: I demand of them, whether
the Holy Ghost is not promised to Provincial Councels, as well as to General?
They cannot deny, but he is: And yet the Rhemists and other Popish Teachers
grant, that a Provincial Council may err in matter of Faith, notwithstanding
this promise of the Holy Ghost: whence, is rightly inferred, that a General
Council may, by the same reason, likewise err in matter of Faith, as well as
a Provincial, notwithstanding that promise. For you must ever remember, that it
is not, in respect of a greater Number or Multitude, but in respect of the
promise of the Holy Ghost, that this privilege from Error is pretended and
supposed. But yet further, observe, that the holy Ghost, the spirit of truth,
is promised and given to every particular godly Pastor, Ioh. 14.16, 17. Ioh.
16.13. Luke 11.13. Romans 8.9.14.15.27. etc.
Doctor, and Minister of Christ, as well as to Councels: yea every true
Christian, and faithful member of Christ, has also the holy Ghost to guide
and direct him, as the Scriptures do plainly testify. By virtue then of this
reason drawn from the promise or giving of the holy Ghost, I may as well
conclude, that no godly particular Pastor, or Doctor, or other Minister of
Christ, can possibly err in a matter of Faith: yea, inasmuch as the holy
Ghost, the spirit of sanctification, is also promised and given to every godly
man, I may as well conclude that no godly man therefore can possibly err, at
any time, as touching life and conversation: for the holy Ghost is as well able
to guide a man continually in a good and not erring life, as in a right and not
erring faith. But touching this matter, S. August. says: Aug. contra Donatist.
lib. 2. cap. 3.
That eve^ general Councels which are gathered out of all the Christian world
be oftentimes corrected, the former by the latter, when by any trial of
things, that is opened which before was shut, and that is known which before
lay hidden. And therefore also was it appointed, that even in a general Council
it self, they should pray unto God, that he would Ignorantiae ipsorum
parcere, and errori indulgere, spare their ignorance, and pardon their error.
Council. Tom. 1. de ord* Celeb. Council.
Does not this clearly declare, that even a General Council may also possibly
err, as well as a Provincial. Yea, your selves do grant, that a General
Council may err in matters of fact notwithstanding this promise: and why then
will you not grant, that it may, by the same reason, possibly err also in a
matter of faith? For is not the holy Ghost (promised to a General Council) as
powerful to preserve and keep from error, in the one case as in the other? No
question but he is. Concerning this point therefore, ye must not forget that
which I said before: namely, that although most true it is, that the Holy Ghost
cannot possibly err, nor any men, or Councels, so long as he guides them,
and that they follow his directions: yet because Men and Councels, be not
always guided and directed by him, but be suffered sometime to follow their
own concei^s, fancies, and affections, (for the Holy Ghost may at his own
good pleasure, and does sometimes leave men to themselves, not extending nor
showing forth his strength, virtue, force, and efficacy at all times): In such
cases, and at such times, it is a most easy matter* for men, and Councels, to
err, sin, and go astray. Chrysostom. de sancto and adorando spiritu.
Wherefor S. Chrysostom herein gives us an excellent rule, saying: Si quem
videritis dicentem, spiritum sanctum habeo, and non loquentem evangelica, sed
propria, is a seipso loquitur, and non est spiritus sanctus, in ipso: If (says
he) ye shall see any man, A rule whereby to know, who they be that speak by
the direction of the Holy Ghost, and who not.
that says, I have the holy Ghost, and does not speak things agreeable to the
Gospel, but his own, that man speaks of himself, and the holy Ghost is not
in him. And again he says; Si quis eorum, qui dicuntur habere spiritum, dicat
aliquid de seipso, and non ex Evangelio, ne credit: If any of them which are
said to have the spirit, speak any thing of himself, and not forth of the
Gospel, believe him not. So that, it still appears that the Gospel of Christ,
and divine Scriptures, is the thing whereby men are to try and examine all
spirits, and their doctrines, and decrees, and to determine, who they be that
speak and decree by the guidance and direction of the holy Ghost, and who not.
And therefore does S. Augustine also take it, August. contra Maximin. lib. 3.
cap. 4.
that, no man, is absolutely bound by the authority of Councels, though they
be general: for thus he says to one that objected a general Council
against him; Neither ought I to allege the Council of Nice, nor thou the
Council of Arimine, as thereby to preiudicate one another: for neither am I
bound by the authority of this or thou of that: but let matter with matter,
cause with cause, and reason with reason, make the Trial, by the authority
of Scriptures, not proper vvitnesses to any of us, but indifferent to us both.
And concerning the Pope: that he may err, as well as any other Bishop, in
matter of Faith; beside that which is before spoken, it further appears even
by Gratian himself, did. 40. where it is taken for granted, Did. 40. C si
Papa.
that the Pope may be, a fide Devius, a goer out of the way of faith. Lyra
affirms expressly; that many Popes have been found, Lyra. in Mat. 16
Apostotasse a Fide, To have been Apostotates, or departers from the faith.
Council. Constant. Sess. 37.
The Council of Constance calls Pope Benedict, a Schismaticke, and an
Heretic, and a departer from the faith. The like is said of Pope John the 23.
Catharinus says directly; Cat^ar. C^ment. in Gal. 2.
Nihil prohibet Papam errare, etiam in fide, and deficere, etiamsi quidam
novitij Scriptores ausi sint oppositum defendere, praeter communem sensum
Doctorum: Nothing withstandeth, but that the Pope may err, even in faith, and
fail; albeit some late writers have dared to defend the contrary, against the
common opinion of the Doctors. And so likewise testifies Alphonsus de Castro;
Papam posse in ijs, quae ad fidem spectant, errare: immo aliquos Pontifices
summos, errasse in fide, Alphons. cont* Here Is. lib. 1. cap 2.
compertum est: That the Pope may err even in matters of faith: yea it is
found (says he) that some Popes have erred in faith. And again he says;
Omnis homo errare in fide potest, etiamsi Papa sit: Nam de Liberio Papa, refert
Platina, Cap. 4.
eum sens^sse cum Arrianis: Every man may err, in point of faith, though he
be a Pope: For of Pope Liberius, Platina reports, that he held the Arrian
heresy. Yea Panormitan says, that a Council may depose the Pope for Heresy,
Panorm. de election. Section. significasti.
ut in cap Si Papa* did. 40. where it is likewise said, That the Pope may be
an Heretic, and judged of Heresy. Yea, In concernentibus fidem, etiam dictum
unius privati esset praeferendum dicto Papae, si ille moveretur melioribus
Authoritatibus novi and veteris Testamenti quam Papa: In things concerning
faith (says he) the saying even of one private man is to be preferred before
the saying of the Pope* if he be moved by better authority of the old and new
Testament, then the Pope. It is therefore evident, that neither the Pope by
himself, nor yet joined in Council with others, is, or, can be held to be an
unerrable or infallible Judge, in this case. What then? Would any have the old
Doctors, and ancient Fathers to be this Judge? But they also may err, and do
sometimes tax one another for errors. Yea themselves (as before is showed) do
humbly and reverently submit, all their doctrines, positions, and opinions, to
the judgment of the Canonical Scriptures; not desiring to be further
credited, or, believed, then there is warrant, for what they speak, or write,
within those sacred writings. Whereby they sufficiently give us to understand,
that God only, speaking in these his Scriptures, is to be held for the only
Infallible Judge, for the determining and deciding of every controversy in
Religion. Ista controversia Iudicem inquirit. Iudicet ergo Christus: Aug. de
Nuptijs and Concupisc. lib. 2. cap. 33.
This controversy enquireth after a Judge: Let Christ then be Judge, says S.
Augustine. Iudicet cum illo and Apostolus, quia in Apostolo ipse loquitur
Christus: Let also (says he) the Apostle judge with him, because in the
Apostle, Christ himself speaks. And again he says; August. de gra. and
liber* arbit. cap. 18.
Sedeat inter nos Iudex Apostolus Johannes: Let the Apostle John, sit Judge
between us. In like sort speaks Optatus: Quaerendi sunt Iudices: In terris,
de hac re, Optat. contra Par. lib. 5.
nullum poterit reperiri Iudicium: de coelo quaerendus est Iudex; sed ut quid
pulsamus ad coelum, cum habeamus hic in Evangelio Testamentum, etc. Judges are
to be sought for: In earth (says he) none can be found for this matter: from
heaven therefore, is the Judge to be sought; but why do we knock at heaven,
when we have here upon earth, a Testament in the Gospel? An earthly father,
when he feels himself near death, fearing lest after his death, the
brethren, breaking peace, should fall at variance, calling witnesses unto him,
out of his breast ready to dye puts his will into a written Testament,
that shall long continue: And if variance grow amongst the brethren, they go
not to the grave, but the Testament, or last will is demanded: and he which
rests in the grave, speaks out of that his speechless Testament, with a
lively voice. (viz. that voice, which he uttered, whilst he lived) He whose
Testament it is, is in heaven: therefore as in a Testament, so in the Gospel,
let his will be enquired. To the same effect S. Augustine says: Who is he
that knows not that the Canonical Scripture is so contained within his
certain bounds of the old and new Testament, August. de baptis. con. Dona^.
lib. 2. cap. 3.
and is so to be preferred, before all other vvritings of Bishops, that a man
may not at all either doubt or dispute, whether any thing be right or true,
that he is sure, is written in it: but the vvritings of all other Bishops,
which either are, or hereafter shall be written (beside the Canonical
Scriptures already confirmed) may be reproved, either by more grave authority
of other Bishops, or learned men, or by the words of any man that is better
seen in the matter. Again he says thus: Gather not (my Brother) against so
many, so clear, and so undoubted, August. ad Vincent. Epist. 48.
testimonies of the Scriptures, sentences misunderstood, out of the vvritings
of Bishops, either of ours, or of Hillary, or of Cyprian Bishop and Martyr of
the Church: for, we must put a difference betwixt this kind of vvriting, and
the Canonical Scriptures: for these are not so to be read, as though a
Testimony might be alleged out of them, in such sort, as that no man might
think otherwise, if they happen to judge otherwise, then the truth requires.
And again he says: August. ad fortunat. Ep. 198.
We ought not to allow the reasonings of any men, whatsoever they be, be they
never so Catholic and Prayseworthy, as the Canonical Scriptures, so that it
shall not be lawful for us, (saving the reverence that is due to those men) to
reprove and refuse any thing in their writings, if it fall out that they have
judged otherwise, then the truth is, the same Truth being by Gods help, The
ancient Fathers are to be reverenced in their places: as likewise all other
godly men are; but yet so, as we may lawfully dissent from the^, whereinsoever
they speak not according to the Canonical Scriptures. August. cont. lit. Pe^^l
lib. 3. cap. 6. Ambr. in Gal. 1.
understood either of other men, or of us. For I am even such a one in other
men's vvritings, as I would men should be in mine. And again he speaks thus:
If any question be either concerning Christ, or concerning his Church, or
concerning any other matter whatsoever, which belongs to our faith, and
life: I will not say (If we) but that which the Apostle further adds (in
Gal. 1. 8.9.) If an Angel from heaven* should preach unto you any other thing,
praeterquam quod in scripturis legalibus and Evangelicis accepistis, Anathema
sit; Beside that which ye have received in the scriptures of the Law and the
Gospel, let him be accursed. Ambrose likewise upon that Text before mentioned
(of Gal. 1.8.9.) gives this observation: The Apostle (says he) does not say,
If they preach contrary, but, if they preach any thing beside that which we
have preached, that is, if they add any thing to it at all, hold him accursed
And therefore, Si quid dicatur absque Scriptura, Chrysostom. in Psalm. 95.
Auditorum cogita^io claudicat: If any thing be spoken without the Scripture,
the cogitation of the Hearer halteth, says Chrysostom. Yea, To lean to the
Divine Scriptures (which is the certain and undoubted Truth) is (says
Irenaeus) to build a man's house, upon a sure and strong Rock: But to leave
them, and to lean to any other Doctrines whatsoever they be, Irenaeus lib.
2. cap. 42.
is to build a ruinous house upon the shattering gravel, whereof the
overthrow is easy. Here then you may prrceive, that even those unwritten
Traditions also (which ye obtrude unto us under the name of Apostolical) that
be not specified nor found written in Gods book, the sacred and Canonical
Scriptures, All such Traditions as be not warranted in the Canonical
Scriptures, be refusable. Hierom. in Psalm. 98
are justly refusable, as being unassured, uncertain, and unwarranted stuff.
For so also does S. Jerome say, All that ever we speak we ought to prove it
by the Scriptures. And so also speaks Chrysostom, saying, Therefore neither
are they to be believed at all, except they speak those things which be
agreeable to the Scriptures. Chrysostom. in 2. Tim. 3.
To that which Faustus put forth upon the birth of Mary, that she had a
certain Priest to her father, named Ioachim. S. Augustine answers: Aug.
cont. Faust. lib. 23. cap. 9.
Because it is not Canonical (says he) it does not bind me. The like answer
gives Tertullian to Appelles, which said, that the Angels had a bodily
substance, which they took of the Stars: Tertul. de Carne Christi.
There is no certainty (says he) in this matter, because the Scripture
declares it not. And indeed, who can assure such Traditions to be undoubtedly
Divine, or to be originally and infalibly Apostolical, which have only Men
for the witnessing of them, and whereof there is no testimony in the Apostles
writings, or in Gods book to be found? For if they be not there specified, who
(as S. Augustine speaks) can say, August. in Ioh. 16. verse 12. There is no
need of Traditions. 2. Tim. 3.15.16 17. Ioh. 20 31 Ioh. 20.31. Iosuah 1.8
Deuteronomy. 4.5.6. Tertul. con^. Hermog. Basil. tract. de fide.
That these and these they are? Or if he dare be bold to say so, how will he
prove it? But moreover, we need none of those Traditions, as I said before;
inasmuch as the Scriptures themselves be fully sufficient, for us and for our
direction and instruction in all things necessary, and expedient for us. For,
beside the Scriptures which declare so much, Tertullian likewise says, Adoro
scripturae plenitudinem: I adore the compleatnes or the fulness of the
Scriptures. And S. Basil also says, Manifestum est infidelitatis and
arrogantiae crimen, vel reijcere aliquid quod scriptum est, vel addere aliquid
quod non est scriptum, That it is a manifest fault of infidelity and
arrogancy, either to reject any thing of that which is written, or to bring
in any thing of that which is not written. Yea, such is the sufficiency,
fullness, perfection, and compleatness of the Scriptures in all points and
respects, that as you heard before, S. Augustine denounces him accursed that
shall preach or teach any thing beside them, Aug. cont. lit. Peti^ian. lib. 3.
cap. 6. Scot. in praefat. Lomb.
or which is not therein contained, or thereby warranted. And therefore also
does Scotus himself say: Patet quod scriptura sufficienter continet doctrinam
necessariam viatori; It is evident the Scripture sufficiently contains all
doctrine necessary for a wayfaring man: that is, for a man whilst he lives
and travelleth in this world.

2 But moreover, even expositions also of Scripture, are to be framed and
warranted by the Scriptures, All right exposition of Scripture is framed by and
according to the Scriptures. 2. Pet. 1.20, 21.
and to be found consonant with them, or otherwise they are likewise refusable:
For it is not any humane or private spirit (as S* Peter shows) but it must be
a divine spirit, even the Spirit of God (the holy Ghost) from whence all true
sense and right interpretation of the Scriptures is to be derived. And this S.
Paul also declares, saying; that As no man knovveth the things of a man, but
the spirit of man which is in him: 1 Cor. 2.11
so no man knows the things of God but the Spirit of God. If therefore we
would know who they be that have this only right interpreting Spirit, that is,
the holy Ghost for their guide in that behalf: we may know it by this, If
their expositions be such as be suitable and agreeable to the Canonical
Scriptures, without repugnancie of any one place to another. Therefore also
does Origin speak thus: Orig. in Ier. hom. 1
We must needs (says he) call the holy Scriptures to witness, because our
senses and expositions vv^thout those vvitnesses, have no credit. And so says
Irenaeus: Secundum scripturas expositio, legitima, et diligeus, Irenaeus lib.
4. ca. 63. and lib. 2. ca. 46 and 47.
and sine periculo and sine blasphemia est. That is the right and legitimate
exposition, and the diligent, and without danger, and without blasphemy,
which is according to the Scriptures. Chrysostom likewise says: Scriptura
seipsam exponit, and auditorem errare non sinit: Chrysostom. homil. 13. in Genes.
The Scripture expounds it self, and suffers not the learner to err. And
this rule, namely to expound Scripture by Scripture, and by conferring one
place with another, gives also S. Augustine: August. de doct. christiana lib.
3 cap. 26.
Dark places' are to be expounded by plainer places: This is (says he) the
sure way to expound one scripture by another. The same does S. Augustine
again teach in other places: as namely, De doctrina lib. 2. cap. 6. and
26.27.28. etc, And Clemens Epist. 5. and Did. 37.6. Relatum; where it is said,
Non enim sensum extrinsecus alienum and extraneum, debetis quaerere: Sed ex
ipsis Scripturis, sensum capere veritatis oportet: For ye ought not to seek
for a strange and foreign sense from without, but out of the very Scriptures
themselves, ye must take the sense of the truth. So that although the Church
of Christ, and the Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers therein be to expound the
Scriptures, yet we see by what rule they are to be directed, namely, by the
Scriptures themselves (and not to expound it at random, or as they list) If
they will have their expositions to be right and sound, and such as shall be
deemed to come from the holy Ghost.

3 Yea the very Church it self is also thus to be tried and decided, namely,
by the Scriptures: For so S. Augustine holds directly, saying thus: Let us
not hear, I say, A^g. de unitat. Eccle. cap. 3.
and thou say: but let us hear, Thus says the Lord. There are verily the
Lords books, to the authority whereof we both consent, we both believe,
we both serve: There let us search the Church, there let us discuss our
cause. The Church is to be tried and known by the Scriptures. Aug. de unitat.
Eccles. cap. 3.
And again he says, That all that should be remooved, whatsoever is alleged
on either side against other, saving that which comes out of the Canonical
Scriptures. And again he says: Let them show their Church, if they can, not
in the sayings and fame of the Affricanes, nor in the determinations of their
Bishops, nor in any man's reasonings, nor in false signs and wonders, (for
against all these we be warned and armed by Gods Word) but in the things
appointed in the Law, spoken before by the Prophets in the Songs of the
Psalms, in the voice of the Shepherd himself, and in the preachings and
painfulness of the Evangelists, that is, in the authority of the books
Canonical. And a little after he says again thus: To that eternal salvation
comes no man, but he that has the head Christ: and no man can have the head
Christ, which is not in his body, the Church: which Church, as also the head
it self, we must know by the Canonical Scriptures, and not seek it in
diverse rumors and opinions of men, nor in facts, reports, and visions etc. Let
all this sort of them be chafe, and not give sentence before hand against the
wheat, that they be the Church. But this point (viz. whether they be the
Church or no) Let them show no other way but by the Cononicall bo^kes of the
holy Scriptures. For neither do we say that men ought to believe us, because
we are in the Catholic Church of Christ: or because Optatus Bishop of
Millevet* or Ambrose Bishop of Millain, or innumerable other Bishops of our
Communion, do all^w this doctrine that we hold: or beca^se in Churches of
our Companions, it is preached: or, because that through the whole world, in
those holy places, where our Congregations resorted, so many wonders, either
of hearings, or of healing, be done: whatsoever such things be done in the
Catholic Church, the Church is not therefore proved Catholic, because these
things be done in it. The Lord Jesus himself, when he was risen from death,
and offered his own body to be seen with the eyes, and handled with the
hands of his Apostles, least, they should for all that, think themselves to
be deceaved, he rather judged, that they ought to be established by the
testimony of the law, Prophets, and Psalms: shevving those things to be
fulfilled in him, Luke 24.27.44, 45.
that were there spoken so long before of him. And hereupon a little after he
says again: These are the doctrines, these are the stays of our cause: we
read in the Acts of the Apostles, of some faithful men, that they searched the
Scriptures, whether the things were so or no, Acts 17 11.
which they had heard preached: what scriptures, I pray, did they search, but
the Canonical of the Law, and of the Prophets? To these are joined the
Gospels, the Epistles of the Apostles, the Acts of the Apostles, The Revelation
of S. John. Search all these, bring forth some plain thing, out of them,
whereby you may declare that the Church has remained only in Affricke. So
far Augustine. Chrysostom. in Mat 24. homil. 49
Chrysostom also speaks to the same effect, saying: When you shall see the
abominable desolation stand in the holy place; that is (as he expounds it)
When you shall see ungodly Heresy (which is the army of Antichrist) stand in
the holy places of the Church: in that time, let them which are in Jury, fly
unto the hills: that is (says he) Let them, that are in Christendom, resort
unto the Scriptures: for like as the true Jew, is a Christian, (as the Apostle
says, he is not a Jew, which is one outvvard) in like manner, Romans 2.28, 29.
the very Ievvrie is Christianity, the hills are the Scriptures of the
Apostles and Prophets. But why does he command all Christians at that time to
resort to the Scriptures? Because in this time, sithence Heresy has prevailed
in the Church, there can be (says he) no proof, nor other refuge for
Christian men, (desirous to know the truth of the right Faith) but only by
the Scriptures. And the reason hereof he further shows: For (says he) such
things as pertain to Christ, the Heretics also have in their schism: They
have likewise Churches, likewise the Scriptures of God; Bishops also, and
other orders of Clerks, and likewise Baptism, and the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, and to conclude, Christ himself: wherefore, he that will know
which is the true Church of Christ in this so great confusion of things, being
so like, how shall he know it, but only by the Scriptures? And afterward
again he says thus: For if they shall look upon any other thing, but only
the Scriptures, they shall stumble and perish, not perceiving which is the
true Church: and so fall into the abominable desolation, which stands in
the holy places of the Church. So far he. Now then, these being times of
Schism, and heresy, and of much contention, and variance between the
Protestants and the Papists, and the great question between them being,
Whether of them is the true Church: Yea, these being the times, wherein the
very grand Antichrist himself, with his army of Bishops, Priests, and
Clerks, has place in the world (as before in some sort, but afterward is
more fully declared) It follows necessarily by this rule of his, as also by
the former Rule and direction of S. Augustine likewise, that all people that
be desirous to know the truth in these times, and which is the true Church,
must resort and betake themselves for the true trial, discerning and deciding
hereof, unto the holy Scriptures only, for all other ways and courses be,
uncertain and unsure, and such as whereby a man may possibly and easily be
deceived, as those ancient Fathers do there expressly teach and affirm. And to
give you some little taste here also that these be the times of Antichrist, and
that Antichrist is long sithence come* and that the Pope of Rome is he: besides
that which is before spoken, do but consider what the Abbot Ioachim long
sithence told King Richard the first, Rog. Hoveden. lib. 2. Anno^ 1190. Ioachim
Alba^ in Reve. lib. 10. part. 5.
King of England, namely, that Antichrist was then already borne, and had his
seat at Rome, and was to be advanced in that Apostolical Sea. And he further
says: Non nulli sub specie sedis Dei, id est^, universalis Ecclesiae, Facti
sunt sed^s Bestiae, quae est regnum Antichristi, regnantis ubique in membris
suis etc. Sundry (says he) under pretense of Gods seat, that is, of the
universal Church, are become the seat of the Beast, which is the Kingdom of
Antichrist, reigning every where in his members: consisting (as he there
further says) in the Clergy men, and in the Monks, and Monasteries. Again
he says, that: Rome est in spiritu Babylon: Rome is the spiritual Babylon.
And again he says: Negotiatores terrae, sunt ipsi sacerdotes, qui vendunt
orationes and missas pro Denarijs, facientes domum orationis, Apothecam
Negotiationis: The Merchants of the earth be the Priests themselves, who sell
Prayers and Masses for money, making the house of Prayer a shop of Merchandise:
Yea sundry both Princes, and Bishops, Aventin. annal. lib. 5. and 7.
of Germany long agon, have affirmed and published the Pope, to be Antichrist,
as appears in Aventinus. But I leave this to be as I said more fully handled
afterward. In the mean time, Who be the right Catholics.
if any would know who be the right Catholics (as Papists very boldly, but
very uniustly, take upon them that title) let him consider these two sentences
of Vincentius, and confer and join them together: The first is this: Id
teneamus quod VBIQVE, quod SEMPER, Vincen. cont. Herg c. 3.
quod ab OMNIBVS, creditum: hoc est enim vere proprieque Catholicum: Let us
uphold that which has been believed every where, and at all times, and of
all persons, for this is rightly and properly Catholic. The second is this,
where he says: Ille est verus and Germanus Catholicus, Cap. 25
qui quidquid universaliter ANTIQVITVS* ecclesiam Catholicam tenuisse
cognoverit, id solum sibi tenendum creder dumque decernit: He is the true and
right Catholic, who judges that he is to hold and believe, only that which
he knows the Catholic Church to have formerly held universally, in the old
time. This Vincentius lived above 1200. years sithence: so that, this
Antiquitus, this old time whereto he refers every man, that will be a right
Catholic, cannot be intended the age and time, wherein himself lived (much
less can it he supposed, any of those many hundredth years, that came after
him, and are sithence his time gone and past) but it must needs be intended of
an old time, passed long before the time, wherein he lived and wrote these
things; which old time therefore, which he so called, what can it be, but the
Primitive and Apostolic times? If then ye will prove your selves to be
Catholics, and your Church to be the Catholic Church, by this rule and
definition of Catholics, out of Vincentius, then must you not take your
pattern and proof, from that Council of Trent, nor from the late Council of
Constance, nor any of the times after Vincentius, but you must transcend, and
go to the times that were in the old Time long before the days of this
Vincentius, even to the primitive and Apostolic times (which were indeed, the
best and purest times) and from thence must you take the pattern of your
Church and Religion. For that, which always formerly, and every where, and of
all Christians, in That Old Time, was held and believed, is the thing that he
accounts and defines to be Catholic; and such to be Catholics; which
hold and believe only so much, and no more. Which faith, doctrine, and religion
of those old, Primitive, and Apostolic times, was at first delivered by word
of mouth by the Apostles, but was afterward (as Irenaeus has before informed
us) committed to VVriting, Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 1.
that so it might be for ever that, The foundation and pillar of our Faith.
Yea, this, even Vincentius also himself teaches, Vincent. cap. 41.
saying: Scripturarum canon sufficit ad omnia satis superque; the canon of the
Scriptures, does suffice for all matters, sufficiently and more then
sufficiently, that is, abundantly and overflowingly. By this rule then and
definition of a Catholic, given so long agon by Vincentius, it is evident,
that, not ye, but we, are to be held for the right and true Catholics:
inasmuch as not ye, but we, do believe and hold that faith, doctrine, and
Religion, which those old and first Christians universally held in those
ancient, primitive, and Apostolic times, and which was afterward written, and
is omni-sufficiently contained in that written word of God, the sacred and
canonical Scriptures: Yea that, and only that, we hold and believe, as
Vincentius says, right and true Catholics ought to do, and so do not you:
therefore, whether ye, or we, be the right Catholics, is a very easy and
apparent matter to be decided. Aufer Haereticis, Tertull. lib. de resurr.
carnis.
quae cum Ethnicis sapiunt, ut de scripturis solis Quaestiones suas sistant,
and stare non poterunt: Take from the Heretics (says Tertullian) those
things, wherein they savor of Heathen wisdom, so as that they bring their
Controversies to be decided only by the Scriptures, and they be not able to
stand. In which words, men that will not suffer their Controversies to be
decided only by the Scriptures, may see themselves ranged within the compass
of Heretics and so termed and entitled by him: so far are they off from
being the right and true Catholics. And yet, Papists have, I grant, for some
of their errors, a kind of Antiquity; but it is an Antiquity of a later
date, and it is not that most ancient Antiquity, which Vincentius, and the
rest of the ancient Fathers direct you unto, and which should be in request:
For that is the True, whatsoever is the first: and that which is later or,
Tertull. ad Praxeam.
comes in after the first, is the adulterate or corrupted, as Tertullian
again expressly affirms. Yea, he says further: Hoc mihi proficit
Antiquitas, praestructae divinae Literaturae: Herein does Antiquity avail me,
Tertull. Apolog. in fine.
if it be builded upon the divine Scripture. Wherefore, if ye will be good and
right Catholics, ye must go and take the pattern and president of your Faith
and Religion, from those most ancient, primitive, and Apostolic times, as we
do: because (as Eusebius, also, out of Egesippus, notes) the Church so long
as the Apostles lived, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 32.
remained a pure Virgin: for that if any went about to corrupt the holy rule
which was preached, they did it in the Dark, and as it were underneath the
earth: But after the death of the Apostles, and that generation was past, which
God vouchsafed to hear the divine wisdom with their own ears, the placing
of wicked error (says he) began to come into the Church. For which purpose,
and to show that corruption grew in those after and succeeding times, Cleme^s
also alleges the proverb, That there were few sons like their fathers.
Clemens lib. stromat. ca. 11.


4 And here whilst I am speaking of the Canonical Scriptures, I must crave
leave to tell you, that the Popish Church holds diverse Books to be Canonical
Scripture, which the old and ancient Church, held not to be Canonical: as
namely, Tobias, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, (otherwise called, Jesus the
son of Sirach), the Maccabees, and the rest, which the Protestants, with that
old and ancient Church, hold, not to be Canonical: for so does Athanasius
affirm of them, that non sunt Canonici; they be not Canonical. Athanas. in
Synops.
Cyrill calls them Apocryphal, and bids men read those XXII. books of
the old Testament; Cyrill Hieros. cateches. 4.
Cum Apocryphis vero nihil habeas negotij: But with the Apocryphal books
(says he) have nothing to do. Cyprian, or, if you will have it so, Ruffinus,
Cyprian. sive Ruff. inexph. Symboli.
after he had rehearsed the Canonical Books of the old Testament, says: Haec
sunt quae* Patres inim Canonem concluserunt: ex quibus fidei nostrae
assertiones constare voluerunt. S^^on^dunt tamen est, quod and alij libri sunt
qui non sunt Canonici, sed ecclesiastici a maioribus appellati sunt, ut est
sapientia Solomonis, and alia sapientia quae dicitur filij Sirach: Eiusdem
ordinis est liber Tobiae, and Judith and Macchabeorum libri -- Quae omnia legi
quidem in Ecclesus voluerum, non tamen proferri ad authoritate (...) fidei
confirmandam: These be they (says he) which our Fathers have included within
the Canon: out of which they would have the assertions of our faith to appear:
But yet we must know, that there be also other Books which be not Canonical,
but be called of our Ancestors, Ecclesiastical; as is, the wisdom of
Solomon, and the other wisdom which is called the son of Sirach (otherwise
termed Ecclesiasticus) -- of the same sort is the Book of Tobias, and Judith,
and the Books of the Maccabees: All which, they will indeed have to be read in
the Church, but not to be alleged to confirm out of them the authority of
Faith. Epiphanius likewise of the Book of Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus, says:
that, Howsoever they have use and profit in them, Epiphan. lib. de men's. and
pond.
yet in numerum receptorum non referuntur: they are not reckoned in the number
of the received books. S. Hierome likewise says; that the books of Wisdom,
Judith, Hieronym. in Prologo Galeat. in lib. Reg.
Ihesus the son of Sirach, and Tobias, non sunt in Canone, be not Canonical.
And, again, in another place, he says thus: Sicut ergo Judith, and T^biae,
and Maccabaeorum libr^s, legit Ecclesia, sed eos inter Canonicas Scripturas non
recipit: Hieronym in praefat. in li^ros Solomonis.
sic and haec duo volumina (sapientiae Solomonis, and Syrach) legit ad
aedificationem plebis, non ad authoritatem Ecclesiasticorum Dogmatum
confirmandam: As therefore the Church reads Judith and Tobias, and the books
of the Maccabees, but receives them not for canonical Scriptures: so these
two Books likewise, namely, the Wisdom of Solomon, and Ihesus the son of
Syrach, does the Church also read, for the edification of the people, but not
to confirm thereby the authority of any Doctrines or positions in the
Church. And so also does Lyranus, and Hugo the Cardinal, affirm. Yea, and
Gregory the great also, of the Books of Macchabees, Lyran. prolog. in
Apocrypha. Hugo Card. prolog. in Iosuam. Gregor. in Job. lib. 19. cap. 17.
Conc. Laodicens. cap. 59.
says, That they be not canonical. And these books does likewise the
Council of Laodicea, repel, and reject, from being canonical. Whereby
observe, that when you, or any of your Church, allege any saying, or
sentence out of Tobias, Ecclesiasticus, or the Maccabees, or out of any other
Apocryphal writing, which is not Canonical, to confirm thereby any point of
Faith or Doctrine that is in question, ye do that which the old and ancient
Church allows not, but utterly disalloweth you to do, as is apparent. But
moreover, the primitive and ancient Church would have the common Prayers, and
public Service, and Liturgy, not in such a tongue as the people understood
no^, but in such a tongue as they might and did understand. For, Origin says:
Graeci Graecis, Romani Romany, singulique precantur in propria lingua, Deumque
celebrant pro viribus: Origin contrae Celsum lib. 8.
The Grecians use Greek words, and the Romans Roman words, and men of
every Nation pray, and praise God with all their might, in their own mother
tongue. Yea, it was the doctrine of that heretic Elxay, to teach prayer, in
such words, or, in such a tongue, as was not understood: Epiphan. haeres. 14.
Nemo quaerat interpretationem, sed solum in oratione haec dicat etc. Let no
man (says he) seek for the interpretation or understanding of the words, but
only in his prayer let him say these words, etc. Chrysostom also says;
Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 14.
that unless the unlearned understand what thou prayest, he is not edified,
nor can give consent to thy prayer. But herein I shall not need to spend more
time: for Lyran himself acknowledges this point, saying; In primitiva
Ecclesia, Lyr^. in 1. Cor. 14.
benedictiones and ^aetera communia fiebant in vulgari lingua: In the primitive
Church, blessings, and the rest of the common or public Services, were done
in the vulgar tongue. And, accordingly, we all know that it is the rule of the
Apostle Saint Paul, that all things in the Church, should be done to the
instruction and edification of the people: But in prayers, 1. Cor. 14.4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11. etc.
or Service, said or celebrated in Latin, to such as understand not Latin, or
in Greek to such as understand not Greek, or in any tongue to such as
understand not the tongue, is no profit, instruction, or edification at all to
the people, unless it be afterward interpreted unto them in such a tongue as
they understand. And yet whenever it is so interpreted, being so done, it is
but double labor, and needless expense of time, which might better be done,
and easily remedied, by having at first (as were fittest) the Prayers and
Service, as well as the Sermons, in such a tongue as the people might understand.

5 But why does your Church of late times further proceed and accuse the holy,
divine, and canonical Scriptures themselves, (whereby all questions and
controversies in Religion, are to be decided and determined) of falsehood, or,
corruption in the Originals, and therefore prefers the Latin translations,
which ye call S. Hieromes, before those Originals of the Hebrew and the
Greek? Be not these strange accusations? And do they not lay a foundation and
groundworke, for Atheism, Nullifidianisme, and all irreligion? For if the
Originals be corrupted, false, and untrue, what certainty is there then left
for men* on earth to build their faith upon? Or can either your Translation
which you call S. Ieromes, or any other Translation of the Scriptures, be then
assured to be right and sound? For if the Fountain de defiled, and poisoned,
how shall clear, pure, and sound water, run and be found in the rivers that
issue and stream from thence? If you will say, as Gregory Martin, and other of
your Teachers say, that the Greek Heretics have corrupted the Greek text,
and the Hebrew Heretics, the Hebrew text: we may as well say unto you, that
the Latin Heretics have corrupted the Latin text; and so by such kind of
reasoning, no Scripture should be found pure, sound, and sincere. But thanks
be to God (who so preserved them) the Scriptures in their originals, remained
pure amongst the Jews, unto the very time of Christ, and were not corrupted
by any of those Hebrew Heretics, as some Papists affirm of them: for
otherwise it had been in vain, for Esaias, or any other of the Prophets of
God, to bid the people go, for their assured direction, To the Law, Esa. 8.20.
and to the Testimony: or, for Christ himself to bid the people, as he did,
To search the Scriptures, for their assured guidance in the truth. Ioh. 5.39.
Yea S. Peter would then never have said, as he did; We have a most sure
word of the Prophets: to the which, 2. Pet. 1.19.
ye do well, that ye take heed, as to a Light that shines in a dark
place. For, if it had been corrupted, and falsified, Ar. Mont. in praefat.
Tom. 1.
it had not been a sure word to trust unto. Arias Montanus himself affirms
and maintains the purity and incorruption of the Hebrew originals: saying
further, that there was no word, nor letter, nor point, but it was reserved in
that Treasory, which they call Mazzoreth; and therefore he calls that
Treasorie, fidam custodiam, a faithful or sure keeper of them. Ioh Isaac
against Lyndanus. Franc. Luc Burg Annot. in sacra Biblia.
John Isaac likewise, and Franciscus Lucas Burgensis, as well as Arias
Montanus, do also uphold, maintain, and defend, even unto their times, the
purity and incorruption of those Hebrew Originals: always preferring them
before all Latin Translations whatsoever. And must it not needs be so, Matthew.
5.18. Luke 16.17.
when as Christ Jesus himself says, that, Till heaven and earth perish, one
Jot, or one Tittle of the Law shall not perish, till all things be fulfilled?
Yea, what does Christ Jesus else, Mat. 24.35. Mar. 13.31.
but further show the purity and incorruption of the Hebrew originals unto his
time, when it is written of him thus: that, He began at Moses, and at all the
Prophets, and interpreted unto them, in all the Scriptures, the things that
were written of him? Luke 24.27.
And when again after his resurrection* likewise he says in the same
Chapter, thus: These are the words that I spoke, unto you, whilst I was yet
with you, that all must be fulfilled which are written of me in the law of
Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms? Verse. 44.
Yea, the originals in the old Testament, be and remain pure and incorrupt, to
this day: and so do also the originals of the new Testament: insomuch that S.
Hierome, as in one place, he derideth them, which said the Hebrew books were
falsified, In cap. 6. Isaiae.
so does he in another place pronounce them to be impudent and foolish people,
that affirm the same of the Greek originals: For thus he writes unto one;
Tibi stultissime persuasisti, Graecos codices esse falsa^os: Thou have most
foolishly persuaded thy self, that the Greek books be falsified. And again
he says: Jeronym. ad Helvid.
Tu mira impudentia haec in Graecis cod cibus falsata esse dicis: Thou with
vvonderfull impudency affirmest, that th^se thin^s be fals^fied in the Greek
Books. And as this was the error of Helvidius, against whom S. Hierome
writes; so was it also the error of the Manichees, against whom S. Augustine
writes: August. 1 de moribus. cap. 29.
And is it not now g^owne to be the error or heresy of Papists? But what
reason have you to prefer that Latin Translation which ye call Saint
Hieromes, before the Originals of the Hebrew and Greek? For first y^e cannot
prove that Translation to be S. Hieroms, which ye so boldly affirm to be
his: And secondly, what likelihood is there it should be his? considering that
in diverse and sundry places, S. Hierome reads otherwise then that
Translation is* yea sometimes he finds fault with that Translation, and
reproves it* as for example, the word, ^say, that is found in that translation
in Mark the 1. verse 2. he thinks to be added by the negligence of the
Library keepers: and, Hieron. comment. in Matt. 13.
upon Math. 6* he corrects the word ( exterminant) which nevertheless is
also in that vulgar translation. And diverse other such faults S. Hierome
espieth, and finds in that which you call his Translation; Hierony in
Comment. in Mat. 6* verse. 16.
wherefore there is no likelihood it should be his. And that it is not S.
Hieroms translation, may further appear by the discourse which Munster has
set upon it. Munster ad Convers. vet. Test. Erasm. epist. N* amico ex animo
dilecto and in alijs in epist* Hieronym. a^ Pamach. lib. 1. ad Iovinian.
Yea, Erasmus also does flatly affirm, that this translation is neither
Cyprians, nor Hillaries, nor Augustines, nor yet Hieroms, seeing his reading is
diverse from it; and that it is much less that which he corrected, seeing there
be found in this, things that he condemns, not only as touching the words,
but as touching the sense also. But admit it were S. Hieroms translation
(whereof nevertheless there is no likelihood) yet thereupon it follows not,
that therefore it is to be preferred before the originals of the Greek and
Hebrew. For as there were many translations in S. Hieroms time, which were not
so well liked, so even of that translation which S. Hierome himself made, and
was the Author of, himself speaks thus: I do not think (says he) that the
Lords words are to be corrected* but I go about to correct the falsenesse of
the Latin books (which is plainly proved by the diversity of them) and to
bring them to the original of the Greek, (...). ad Marcel. Tom. 2. epist. ult.
from which they do not deny, but they were translated: who if they mislike
the water of the most pure fountain, they may drink of the myrie puddles.
Hieron. ad Livi^m epist. ad Lucra^um de optimo gener. interpret. in c. 3.
Malach. epist. ad Aug. 89. praefat. in 4. Evang. Did. 9 ad veter. Aug. de
civitat. dei. lib. 15. c 13. ^t epist. 108. and in Ioh. tract. 3. de doct.
christian. lib. 2. cap. 11. Ambros lib. 2. ca. 6. de spirit. sanct.
And again he says; That, as the books of the old Testament are to be
examined by the Hebrew, so the books of the new Testament require the trial
of the Greek. And in diverse other places* he likewise prefers the originals
of the Hebrew and Greek, before all Latin translations whatsoever. And to
this effect does Gratian also cite a sentence, as ^f it were S. Augustines: And
indeed, S. Augustine speaks to that very purpose, saying directly: that We
ought rather to believe, that tongue, from which it is by Interpretors
translated into another. And Lodovicus Vives also, upon this place declares
the same. And agreeably hereunto, speaks also S. Ambrose, saying expressly:
That the authority of the Greek books is to be preferred. Be not those men
then much deluded which, contrary to the direction and judgment of the old
Church, and ancient fathers, and also of all right reason, do prefer that
Latin translation before the originals of the Greek and Hebrew? Yea, even
Lyndanus, a popish Bishop, writes of that latin translation, Lyndan. de opt.
genesis interpret. lib. 3. cap. 1.2.3, 4.
that it has many and sundry corruptions in it, and therefore it cannot be
the best and safest way to trust unto it.

6 But when they must needs yield (if they will be reasonable) to the
preferring of the originals of the Hebrew and Greek, before all latin
translations, yea and before all translations whatsoever: Then they fall to
another course, accusing our English translations to be false, and untrue, and
not according to these originals. And herein, Gregory Martin, and the
Rhemists, have chiefly showed their skill; but Doctor Fulke, that great
Linguist, and excellent Scholar in all kind of learning, especially in
Theology, has fully and sufficiently answered them both, in his defense of
the English Translations against Gregory Martin, as also in his Answer to the
Rhemists, and their Annotations. We defend not any translations in any
point, wherein they can be showed to be wrong, and not according to those
originals: (For we abhor such wilful and wicked perverseness) but wherein
soever, our translations be right and true and according to those originals, we
have ever good reason, so far forth, to defend and maintain them against the
frivolous and vain exceptions, either of Gregory Martin, the Rhemists, or of
any other whosoever. And I could wish, and do indeed, wish, and earnestly
desire you, that as ye read the Rhemes Testament, so ye would also read the
Answer unto it, and to the several Annotations of it: And as ye read any
Popish Writer in any point of controversy whatsoever, you would likewise
search and see, what Answer the Protestants make unto it: that so seeing and
hearing both sides, without partiality, and without prejudice, ye may be the
better able to judge justly and rightly in the cause, and to give both to your
selves and others, a sufficient and sound satisfaction: For so long as ye
hear and read but one side only, and will not hear and read the other side,
to understand what answer is made thereunto, it is impossible ye should be held
for good, indifferent or equal Judges or Censurers, or that you can give,
either to your selves or others, any sufficient resolution, or sound
satisfaction in that case.

7 But you will say peradventure that your Church allows you not to read the
Books of Protestants, whom therefore they call and account to be Heretics.
As for their accounting and reckoning us Heretics, we regard it not: For we
know how far their judgments are blinded, and, that they mightily mistake, and
misreckon; because not we, but they, in very deed be the Heretics, if they
had eyes to see it. But it is no marvel, that the true, most ancient,
Catholic, and Apostolic faith and religion, contained in the sacred and
Canonical Scriptures, (which we profess and hold) should be by them termed.
Heresy: for we find that it was so likewise reputed and termed, Acts 24.24.
Heresy, even in Saint Paul's time: Such has ever been the wickedness both
of unchristian and Antichristian Spirits against it. But whilst your Church is
so politic, and wily, for her self, and her own safety, as to forbid you
the reading of Protestant Books, (lest ye thereby discerning her errors, and
heresies, should be moved to turn from her, unto us): have ye not good cause
at the least to suspect and mistrust such a Church? For if their cause were the
truth truth is ever able to stand against all encounters, and needs not to
fear the opposition of any adversaries. But, indeed, their cause appears to
be naught: For, what is Popery (if it be well considered) but an Hotchpot, or
Bundle of errors, and heresies, aggregate and patched together, to make one
body of that profession? Yea, what is their whole Church, and religion, if ye
rightly consider it all together, but, revera the Antichristian, as this Book,
amongst others, does sufficiently declare. And will any then be so unwise as
to subiugate hin self, and to yield his obedience to the voice, decrees,
statutes, and commandments of such a Church? I would wish you to be more
considerate, and better advised, then to be so far deceived. For the
difference between a Protestant and a Papist, is not small, being no less then
this: that, the one holds of Christ wholly and altogether; and the other of
Antichrist: which being a difference so great, and of such importance, it
stands upon the salvation of Souls, for all persons duly to consider it.
But yet further, why will not your Church permit the lay people to read the
holy Scripturs themselves, without a special license from their Priests, or
Bishops: For, is not Gods license sufficient for them in this case? Chysostome
exhorts all people, Chysost. ad Collos. hom. 9. and in Matthew. hom. 2. and
Concion. 3. de Lazaro. Hieron. in Psalm. 133. and in Psalm. 86. August. de tempo.
sern. 55.
and even secular men (by name) to get them Bibles, and at least the new
Testament. And S. Hierome likewise says: that Married men, Monks, and silly
Women, in his time, used to strive and contend, who should learn most
Scripture without book. S. Augustine also exhorts all men in their private
houses, either to read the Bible themselves, or to get some other to read it
for them. Is not your Church then herein, directly contrary to the ancient
Church? Yea, wherefore is it, that God has given unto men, that precious
Pearl, and inestimable Jewel of his will and word in the Scriptures contained,
but to the end they should take notice of it, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Deuteronomy. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9.
and be directed by it? so that it is to be (as the Psalmist speaks) a
Lantern unto their feet, and a light unto their paths. Psalm. 119.105.
Does not S. Peter speak, even to the lay people, as well as to others,
telling them, 2. Pet. 1.19.
that they do well to take heed to the most sure word of God, as unto a light
that shines in a dark place. Will any earthly King, forbid his Subjects, the
reading of his laws and Statutes, whereby they are to be ruled and governed?
Doubtless, if ever it were necessary for men to read, search, study, and often,
and again, and again, to revolue the Scriptures, and book of God, now is the
time in the midst of so many errors: and diversities of opinions, as be in
the world, to be most diligent in that behalf. For, amongst them all, there
can be but one right religion, and how shall we, ye, or any other know, for
certain, which is that one right religion, which God has instituted, and
allowed of, but by the Scriptures? Let no man therefore forestall, or
preiudicate himself, with supposing that he cannot understa^d the Scripturs:
For first, how can he tell, whether he can understand them, or no, until he
have made trial? Secondly, it is well known, that God helps forward a
willing and industrious mind, that is earnestly desirous to know his will, and
religion therein delivered, and seeks it out in his fear, and with an humble
affection, and a sincere purpose to observe it, and to walk in the ways of
it. For so the Psalmist witnesses: That them that be meek, Psalm. 25.9.
God will guide in judgment, and teach the humble his way. And again, he
says: What man is he that fears the Lord, Verse 12.
him shall he teach, the way that he shall choose. And again, he says: The
secret of the Lord, is revealed to them that fear him, Verse 14.
and his covenant to give them understanding. And again it is said: that, God
resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. Iam. 4.6. 1. Pet. 5.5.
And again: To him will I look (says God) even to him that is poor, and of
a contrite spirit, and that trembles at my words. Esaias 66.2.
But thirdly, be not Laymen of the Church of God, as well as those that be
Church-Ministers? And may not these be Theodidactoi, that is, taught of God,
and instructed by his spirit, Ioh. 6.45.
as well as others, for the right understanding of the Scriptures, especially in
all points necessary to salvation? Yea, do we not see, and find
experimentally, that many great Scholars, and learned men, do,
notwithstanding all their learning, err very much in the exposition and
understanding of the Scriptures? (for why else do they differ so much, and
hold contrary opinions?) All which, what else does it show, but that, indeed,
not any humane spirit (how learned soever) but a divine spirit only, is the
opener, and the right expositor and understander of those sacred and divine
writings. Luke 24.45.
And this, S. Paul also has before assured us, that the things of God, 1. Cor.
2.11.
no man knows, but the spirit of God. Now this Spirit of God, none can deny
to be grantable, as well to laymen, Luke 11.13.
as to those that be of the Ecclesiastical Ministry. Yea, every child of
God has Gods Spirit given unto him, For if any man has not the Spirit of
Christ, the same is none of his, Romans 8.9.
as S. Paul witnesses. Inasmuch therefore, as lay persons have received, or
may receive the spirit of GOD, (whereby it is that the Scriptures be rightly
understood), and are of the number of Gods Church and people: no reason can be
showed, why they should be debarred by others, or why they should debar
themselves, from the reading and searching of those Scriptures, which they may
possibly understand by the grace and power of Gods Spirit within them, as well
as others; especially if they read and search them (as I said before) in the
fear of God, and with all humble reverence, and with often and earnest prayers
unto God, for the right understanding of them, and with a godly purpose of
mind, to believe, follow, and do thereafter. For as S. Paul says again: The
spirit of God, searches all things, 1. Cor. 2.10.
even the deep things of God. If any find difficulty and hardness in some
places of the Scriptures, he must not thereby be discouraged, but provoked
rather to use so much the more diligence in them. For, that which is difficult
and hard in one place, is (as the ancient Fathers themselves have told us) made
more plain and easy by another. And touching such places of difficulty,
beside prayer unto God, and conference of Scriptures together; it will be good
also to read Interpreters, and to consult with godly and learned Pastors and
Teachers, and use all such good means for the understanding of them, as God
has allowed. For the godly, and learned Pastors and Teachers, be Gods own
ordinance in his Church, and to them, Ephesians 4.8.11, 1^*
usually above others, does he give more special gifts, for the edifying and
instruction of his people, and for the opening and unfolding of those harder
and difficulter places of the Scripture: so that they are not to be neglected,
but to be resorted unto, and to be evermore much honored, and reverently
esteemed. If peradventure, by all means used, a layman, or an ecclesiastical
Minister, shall not understand some hard and obscure Scripture, yet let him
reverence (as becomes him) that which he understands not, and therein
suspend his judgment and opinion, until it please God further to enlighten
him, For whereas some allege, that lay persons should not read the
Scriptures, lest through misunderstanding of them, they might possibly fall
into some errors, or heresies: it has been before answered, that such a
reason, is very feeble, and of no weight; inasmuch as it may as well serve to
dissuade Pastors, Doctors, and Ministers of the Church, from reading the
Scriptures, because there is, also, a possibility for them as well as for lay
persons, in the reading of them, to misunderstand them, and so to fall into
errors and heresies, as we find experimentally, that sundry of them,
heretofore have done, and still do. And whereas some, again, imagine, and
fear not to say, that the permitting of the Scriptures to be read of the lay
people in the vulgar tongue, is the cause of all the schisms, sects, errors,
and heresies, that now flow in the world: they are herein mightily deceived,
(by mistaking the cause); for, not the reading of the Scriptures, either by lay
persons, or ecclesiastical Ministers, but the misunderstanding, and
misapplying of them, through the frailty and corruption that is in men's minds,
wresting and forcing them, to serve their own humors, fancies, and conceits,
is the cause of all those schisms, sects, heresies, and errors: and this is
not the right using, but abusing of the Scriptures. Now, even Reason and
Philosophy do teach, as well as Divinity, that, Of what things there may be
an use, of the same things there may be also an abuse: and it is a Ma^^ime with
all, that abusus rei, non tollit usum, an abuse of a thing, does not take away
the lawful use of it. Many men (you know) do abuse meat, and drink, to
surfeiting, gluttony, and drunkenness; shall that be therefore made an
argument, to persuade any from all eating, or drinking? or is therefore eating
and drinking the cause of men's gluttony and drunkenness? or is not their own
excess, and intemperate humor the cause of it? So albeit many abuse the
Scriptures, wresting and wringing them to a wrong sense, and to their own
humors, and fantasies (as do Papists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, and
Heretics) yet must that be no argument therefore to dissuade any from the
reading of them, or from taking that lawful use, comfort, profit, and benefit
that may be had out of them, Romans 15.4. 2. Tim. 3.15, 16, 17.
and for which they were ordained. Yea the true cause, both of the beginning
and continuance of all the schisms, sects, errors, and heresies that now be in
the world, is in very deed, for that men will not suffer themselves to be
overruled by the Scriptures, but will, contrary to the Scriptures and to the
true sense of them follow their own ways, conceits, and inventions, or the
devises of other men. Let none therefore pretend, or allege excuses for their
own sloth or negligence in this case but with all alacrity* betake your
selves, even ye that be lay persons, as well as the rest, to the reading of the
Scriptures, with reverence, humility, prayer, and a right inclined mind and
affection, to believe, live, and do thereafter: And then shall ye not need to
make any doubt of Gods blessing, or good success and profit unto you, by the
reading of them: yea then shall ye see and discern the errors, heresies,
Idolatries, filthiness, and other abominations of the Popish Church and
Religion, which otherwise ye will not be able to discern. This is the
condemnation (says Christ) that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness, rather then light, Ioh. ^.19, 20, 21.
because their deeds were evil: for every one that evil does, hates the
light, neither comes he to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved:
But he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds might be made
manifest, that they are wrought according to God. Yea, most lamentable is his
estate, that will neither read, nor hear, the Word of God: for Christ
himself says thus; He that is of God, hears the words of God: Ioh. 8.47.
ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. Observe well those
words. But again, he says: My sheep hear my voice; Ioh. 10.27.
and I know them, and they follow me. And yet further he says: He that
refuses me, and receives not my words, Ioh. 12.48.
has one that judges him: The word that I have spoken, that shall judge him
in the last day. Together with the rest, let this last alleged saying of
Christ, be ever remembered: Christ will judge according to his own word in the
last day, and not according to the word of the Pope, or of the Priests, or of
other men.
For if Christ will judge men in the last day, according to his own word, (as
is here expressly evident,) and not according to the word, doctrine, decrees,
canons and constitutions of the Pope, or of any men mortal whosoever; is it
not good reason, and a point of wisdom, in the mean time, for every one,
willingly, desirously, and earnestly, to read, search, and study the
Scriptures, and to suffer himself, and his opinions, to be overruled, and
judged by that word, which must judge him at the last day.

CHAP. II.
Of Fides Implicita, that is, of the Infolded says, of Papists: What Church
may err, and when, and how far: Of those which the Papists commonly call the
marks of the Church; and that it is not so visible, as to be always openly
seen, and known, to the wicked world: That Peter was not a Bishop of Rome in
that sense the Papists make him: That the Pope is nothing like S. Peter: That
the Pope is not the head of the universal militant Church, but Christ only.

THe Premises considered, do you not perceive, of what little avail: the
Papists Implicita fides, infolded faith is? which consists only in assenting
to the Churches Faith, though it know not what the Churches faith is, nor what
it believes, nor be able to distinguish the right Church from the wrong. Is it
sufficient for the salvation of a man, to say, he believes as the Church
believes, without knowing what it is the Church believes? Can such a sottish
and blind kind of believing, which has reference only to the faith of
others, bring a man to everlasting happiness? Abac. 2.4. Romans 1.17.
Is not every man to live by his own faith? or shall any man be saved by the
faith of another? or shall knowledge be excluded from the nature of Religion?
or Religion be placed only, in an ignorant assenting to that which others
believe? Gal. 3.11.
Is not this a devise, notoriously tending to the maintenance of ignorance,
blindenes, idleness, sloth, and negligence in the people? It were a most easy
way for all lay people to come to heaven, if such a blind, sluggish, idle,
imaginary, and absurd faith as this were sufficient: They shall need to take
no great pains for it, by this doctrine. Matthew. 13.44, 45, 46. Mat. 7.13, 14.
Luke 13.24. Ioh. 6.27. Jude, verse. 3.
But Christ teaches, that it is not such a broad and easy way, to come to
heaven; but that it is a narrow way, and requires much diligence, labor,
striving, and contending to attain unto it. Yea, he shows directly, that
Ignorance will not excuse a man in the day of Judgment, or free him from
punishment: and that it is so far from being the mother of any good
Devotion, that, contrariwise, Luke 12.47, 48. 2 Thessalonians. 1.18.
he declares it to be the mother of Error, saying: Erratis nescientes
scripturas; ye err, because ye know not the Scriptures. Matt 22.29. Coloss.
2.2. 2. Cor. 8.7. Coloss 1.9, 10. Coloss. 3.16.
S. Paul also requires, not only some knowledge, but even plenty, or,
abundance of knowledge, in the people. And therefore he says unto them: Let
the word of Christ dwell in you plentifully, or, abundantly. And, indeed, how
shall any of us, be able, certainly to know the doctrine of our Teachers,
whether it be true or false, or to discern true Teachers from false, or the
true Church from the false, unless we grow acquainted with the Scriptures, and
be diligent and conversant in them? The blind man (they say) eats many a
fly: and no marvel then is it, if poor ignorant souls, that be so
hoodwinked, and kept blind in Popery, receive and swallow down any doctrine
and opinion of their Teachers, be it never so gross, false, or erroneous:
especially when they are withal taught, as Bellarmine teaches them, that they
must reverence the doctrine of their Teachers, but not examine it. In this
case, I would demand of him, or of any other, What if the blind lead the
blind? do they not both fall into the ditch? Or what if they be false
Teachers, or false Prophets? Matthew. 15.14. Luke 6.39. 1. Ioh. 4.1. 1 Thessalonians.
5.21.
must their hearers reverence, and receive their doctrine, whatsoever it be?
Christ bids the people to beware of the doctrine of the Pharisees and
Saducees of those times. Matthew. 16.6.1^.
And again he says to all Christians: Beware of false Prophets, which come
to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Matt. 7 15,
16.
How shall they beware of them, if they may not examine their Doctrines? It is
true, that Christ says; Ye shall know them by their fruits. But, by what
fruits? For false doctrines, be chiefly the fruits of false Teachers: inasmuch
as they be properly called false-Prophets, in respect of their false doctrine.
For as touching their life and conversation, we see that Christ himself here
tells us, that, how wicked soever they be inwardly, yet outwardly, they will
put on sheepes-clothing, and so make fair shows, externally, of innocence,
sanctity, and piety, to entangle and deceive people withal. Not without good
cause therefore, did S. Basil say: that, Ethic. defin 72. page 432.
It behooves the hearers that be learned in the Scriptures, to try those things
with are said by their Teachers, and receiving that which agrees with the
Scriptures, to reject the contrary. And this also Gerson affirms, saying: De
exand. Doct. part. 1. confess. 5.
that the examination and trial of doctrines concerning faith, belongs not
only to a Council, and to the Pope, but to every one also that is sufficiently
learned in the Scriptures: because every man is a sufficient Judge of that he
knows. Neither ought any Teacher to be hereat offended: for was not Saint
Paul himself, though an Apostle, content to have his doctrine, thus tried and
examined by his hearers? Acts 17.11.
And are not they much commended that made that search, and examination of it,
by the Scriptures? Yea, (which is more) was not even Christ Jesus himself (who
is incomparably greater then any Apostle, or then all the Apostles put
together, yea then the whole world, and consequently far greater then all
that be the Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors in the same) content nevertheless,
to have himself tried by the Scriptures, whether he were the Messiah or no?
Ioh. ^.39.
Seeing then, Christ, the Head of his Church, was thus content to be tried,
shall the Church, or any Bishops, Pastors, or Doctors, which be his servants,
yea servants to the Church, scorn, or, disdain it, or take it ill? For when
men's Doctrines be thus brought to be tried and examined by the sacred and
canonical Scriptures: this is not (as Papists affirm) to make a private
spirit, or any private man, but a Divine spirit, even God himself speaking in
those his sacred and canonical Scriptures, to be the Judge in the matter: To
whose voice, and judgment, all Churches, Men, Angels, and all creatures, must
stoop and obey. And therefore (as I said before) all the insolency, and most
intolerable pride and arrogancy, that is in this case, is not in those who
for their own safety and security, make search and examination, but in such
Bishops, Pastors, and Teachers as will not endure this trial, and examination
of their doctrines by those Scriptures. Pure and uncounterfeit gold, will
endure the Touchstone: but no marvel though the drossie, corrupt* and
unsound doctrine of Popery, will not admit of such a course.

2 But you say, the Church cannot err, and that therefore you may boldly and
confidently rely and build thereupon, without any further search or
examination: Howbeit, you should first find out and know, which is the Church
that cannot err, before you rely so confidently upon it. For you will easily
and readily grant, that the false Church may err. And indeed the Text that you
allege, where S. Paul calls the Church, Columnam and firmamentum veritatis,
the Pillar and ground of Truth, shows, that he speaks not of any false,
but of the True Church, namely, (as himself expresses) of that which is the
Church of the living God. His words put all together, be thus: These things I
write unto thee, (says he to Timothy) trusting to come shortly unto thee:
But if I tarry long, 1. Tim. 3.14, 15
that thou may yet know how thou ought to behave thy self in the house
of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of Truth.
In these words, thus rehearsed by me, that ye might the better observe them,
consider, that Timothy, who was the Teacher and overseer of this Church at
Ephesus, had his direction and instruction, from the writings of S. Paul the
Apostle: for so he says; These things I write unto thee, etc. The Church
then, which is the ground and Pillar of Truth, appears even by this very
Text, to be such a one as receives her instructions and directions from the
sacred and canonical Scriptures: whereof those Apostolical writings of S.
Paul to Timothy, be a part. From whence, therefore, you may rightly conclude
this, which we hold, namely, that so long as any Church follows and is
guided by these holy and canonical Scriptures, it is the pillar and ground of
Truth, and does not err or go astray: but if it decline from them, and go
another way, it does and must then needs fall into error. Howbeit, if when you
say (The Church cannot err) you mean it of the whole universal Church of
Christ, that is, of all and every one of the faithful members thereof, it is
true, that cannot err, totally, nor fundamentally; that is to say, All and
every one of those faithful members of Christ, Panormitan. de elect. pot.
significasti. cause. 24. quaest. 1.. a recta in Gloss. novitatib.
(as Panormitan, and the Gloss also upon the Canon Law, have before told us)
cannot err, in such points as be necessarily required to salvation: for Gods
Church shall never utterly perish or be extinguished, but that in some or
other, it shall continue to the worlds end; and consequently so must the saving
faith thereto belonging. But if you mean it of any visible particular Church
(such as is the church of Rome, the Church of Ephesus, the Church of Corinth,
or any such like) it is as clear, that may err, and go astray, yea and fall
from God to Idolatry, and false worship. Were not the people of Israel, in
times past, the true Church of God? and yet did even that Church, err and fall
very grievously, even unto Idolatry and false worship, when they and Aaron
also the high Priest with them, made the Golden Calfe, and did worship before
it. Exodus 32 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc.
And many such declinings and falls from God to Idolatry and false worship,
in that people, are sundry other times likewise to be found in the old
Testament. But besides, what is now become of the seven Churches in Asia,
mentioned in the Revelation of S. John, which were once the true Churches of
Christ? Has not Turcisme and Paganism overflowed and drowned many that in
former times were famous Christian Churches? Yea did not God himself also
sometime complain, even of that Church and City of Jerusalem, Esa. 1.21.
saying thus: How is the faithful City, become an Harlot? No marvel then is
it, though Rome, which was once a faithful City, and a true spouse of Christ,
be now long since, fallen away, and become an Harlot, even the whore of
Babylon: Reve. 17.9.18.
as was long agon prophesied and foretold of her, that she should be. For
neither was it any more impossible, for her to degenerate into
Antichristianisme, then it was for sundry other Christian Churches and cities,
to degenerate, and to be turned into Turcisme or Paganism. Yea S. Paul also,
has long since prophesied, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
and foretold of this great Apostasy or departure from the right faith and
religion, which has now of a long time so amply prevailed in the world, under
the head of that Apostaticall and Antichristian kingdom, the Pope of Rome: and
therefore this ought not now, to seem any new or strange thing unto any
Christian.

3 Howbeit, ye usually allege these, namely, universalitie, antiquity,
perpetuity, unity, succession of Bishops, and doing of Miracles or wonders
amongst you, to be marks of the true Church. But first, if by universalitie,
ye mean that faith, doctrine, and religion, which was taught universally in
the world, by the Apostles of Christ, and at his appointment: Mat. 28.19, 20.
We tell you, that ye are far from that universalitie: For that faith,
doctrine, and religion, which was taught universally in the world by the
Apostles, is comprised in the sacred and canonical Scriptures, and is the same
that we hold, and not you: as appears by conferring and comparing both the
religions with those Scriptures. But moreover, remember that the great Whore of
Babylon (as she is called) sat upon many waters, that is, ruled over many
people, and multitudes, Rev. 17.1.1^.
and nations, and tongues, as the text it self expounds it. And it is
further said; that, with that Whore, Rev. 11.^.
the Kings of the earth have committed fornication, and that the Inhabitants of
the earth were drunken with the wine of her fornication. Yea, it is again said,
Rev. 18.^.
That all Nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication,
and the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with her. Behold here
the universalitie belonging to your Church, which being thus foretold, and the
event being correspondent, none should with such universality be any longer
deluded. As for Antiquity, unless truth and true religion be joined with it
(which is not in the Popish Church) it is but Vetustas erroris, Antiquity of
errors, as S Cyprian rightly calls it. Yea, Antiquity of the ancientest date,
our religion has, Cyprian ad Pompei.
and not yours: for ye cannot so much as show the points of your religion
wherein ye differ from us (by the testimony of the sacred and Canonical
Scriptures) to have been in the Apostles times, and taught or approved by them
as we can do ours. And as touching Perpetuity, your Church has it not, but
ours very clearly has it, as having been, not only in the times of the
Apostles: but in all succeeding ages also, and posterities, as is before
sufficiently and plainly declared in the first part of this book, Chap. 2.
For the true Church is builded upon so strong and invincible a Rock (namely
upon Christ Jesus himself, whom Peter confessed) as that the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it. 1. Cor. 3.11. 1. Cor. 10.4. Matthew. 16.18.
If all the power of hell and devils (as is here manifest) cannot prevail
against the Church of God, that is, the company of Gods Elect, and the number
of his true and right Worshippers: It is evident, that this Church, that is, a
company of right and true worshippers of him, must be granted to be
perpetual, and to have continued throughout all ages and generations:
especially considering what God himself further speaks, saying thus: I will
mak^ this my covenant with them: my spirit that is upon thee, and my words
which I have put in thy mouth, (...). 59.21.
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor out
of the mouth of thy Seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth even for
ever. Yea, that our Church was in Esse, and had continuance even during the
hottest rage of the reign of that Romish Antichrist, besides all other
arguments, this is a manifest one, namely, because the Popish Church still
molested, pursued, and persecuted our Church, under the names of Berengarians,
Waldensis, Albigenses, VVick^evists, Lutherans, Calvinists, Lollards,
Heretics, Scismatickes, and such like. And yet very true it is that such may
be sometime, in some place, the state of the Church, by reason of rageing
persecution against it, as that even a right godly man, and true worshipper of
God, may think himself to be left alone, without any followers or
copartners with him, there, in the right service of God: As for example, Elias
complained in his time, and of that place where he then lived, that he was
left alone, and That they sought to take away his life also: And yet for all
that was not Elias left alone, ^. Kin. 19 10* 14.18. Romans 11.3, 4
although he so supposed and spoke; for God told him, that he had even there,
namely in Israel, where Elias then was, reserved unto himself, Seven thousand
right worshippers of him, which had not bowed their knee to Baal. If the
Company of Gods chosen Church, and elect people, and right Worshippers of him,
be (as is here evident) sometime, in some place, unknown, even to a right
godly man and Prophet of God: no marvel is it, though they sometimes lie hid,
and be unknown to their enemies and persecutors, to whose devowring paws and
bloody hands (without urgent cause) they had no reason to show themselves. It
is therefore no good argument which Papists make, when they say, that at some
times during the reign of Popery, they neither saw, nor knew, nor could hear
of any Protestants: for if it were so as they say, that they could find none,
nor knew of any, at sometimes, yet even then might there be, and were there
also, some such true and right worshippers of God, albeit they lay hid from
them, and kept themselves (as they had reason) from their knowledge and
merciless cruelty. The reason then which they make against the continuance
and perpetuity of our Church, because it was not (as they say) at all times
seen of the world, nor had their exercises of Religion at all and singular
times publicly known to the world, appears to be very idle, and of no
force. As for the answer which the Rhemists make to the former complaint of
E^ias, that the faithful in his time, were forced to keep close, Rhem. Annot.
upon Romans 11.
by reason of the persecution of Achab and Iesabel, which was only in the
Kingdom of the ten Tribes, that is, in Israel: and yet nevertheless, that at
the very same time, in Jerusalem, and in all the Kingdom of Judah, the
external worship and profession of faith, was openly observed, and well known
even to Elias himself. Admit all this were true (which is not proved) yet what
will they then say to this, that the Church at other times, has been so
hidden, that there was no open or public exercise of Religion to be s^ene, no
not in Judah, or Jerusalem it self, no more then in those ten Tribes of
Israel* as namely in the days of Ahas, the son of Iotham, King ^f Judah, of
whom it is said, 2, King 16.2, 3, 4.10. etc.
that he walked in the way of the Kings of Isra^ll, yea and made his Son to
go through the fire, after the abominations of the Heathen, and in whose time
the Altar of God was removed, and an Idolatrous altar, by the high Priests
consent, (...) Yea, in the days also of Hoseah, King of Israel, it is
testified, that not only Israel, but Judah also, kept not the Commandments of
the Lord their God, but walked according to the fashion of Israel which they
used How was the Church then visible in that sort and sense that we speak of?
that is to say, 2. King. 17.19.
was it such a Church as had public exercises of Gods religion splendently
seen, and openly apparent to the world? Again, in the days of Manasseth. 2.
King. 21.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. etc.
King of Judah: when He did evil in the sight of the Lord, after the
abomination of the Heathen, and erected altars for Baall, and worshipped all
the host of heaven, and served them: and when he also built Idolatrous altars
in the house of the Lord: yea, when it was recorded, that this King Manasseh,
led the people out of the way to do more wickedly, then did the heathen: and
made Judah also sin, with his Idols: I say, when Judah became thus corrupted
and Idolatrous, as well as Israel, Had then the Church her outward practice of
Religion, according to Gods commandment and appointment, to be openly seen
of the world* And was it not so likewise in the days of Amon, King of Judah,
Son and successor to Manasseh? who did evil in the sight of the Lord, 2.
King. 21.19, 20, 21, 22.
as his father Manasseh did: for he walked in all the ways his father walked
in, and served the Idols that his father served, and worshipped them. Thus you
see, that the Church of God, was sometimes not openly seen, but lay hidden,
and that as well in Judah and Jerusalem, as in the ten Tribes. But perceiving
this Church of Judah, and Israel, to make against them, then they fly to
another devise, and say, that the Christian Church has better promises then
the Church of the Jews. Howbeit, they can show none, as touching this point,
better for the one then for the other: Yea, for the Church of the Jews, to
continue until the first coming of Christ, there be as strong and as good
promises to be seen, as for the Church of the Gentiles to continue until the
second coming of Christ. It is true, that the Church of Christ shall never be
extinguished. But is there any such promise, that the Church of Christ shall
never be hidden? For persecutions even of the Christian Church, have sometimes
been so great and cruel, as that the Christians, by reason thereof, have
been enforced to lie hid and to be unseene and unknown to the wicked world:
Inscriptio salman tuae in monte Bartholomaei. Inscriptio in ruinis Pagi
Macanezac.
as in the days of Dioclesian and Maximian, persecuting Emperors: who
impiously boasted, that they had utterly abolished the superstition of Christ,
and name of Christians. The like divelish boasting, also made Nero in his time
Yea, it is indeed, expressly foretold in the Scriptures, that such should be the
state of the church sometime, as that she should be enforced to fly into the
desert or wilderness, where she should have a place prepared of God, Rev.
12.6.14.
to cherish, hide, and keep her from all her persecutors. And therefore the
church is not always conspicuous, and openly shining and showing her self to
the malignant world. Neither does that Text which ye allege, of Dic
Ecclesiae, tell it to the Church, prove the church to be always openly
conspicuous to the ungodly world: It only shows an order of Ecclesiastical
discipline, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17.
for sins and offenses* how they should be proceeded in, amongst brethren,
and such as profess one and the self same religion of Christ: which order of
discipline may well be observed even in a Christian church, and among
themselves, though the wicked world neither see them, nor the exercises of
their religion, nor know where they are. But you say, that if they make
profession of their faith and religion (as all Christians ought) then the world
cannot choose but take notice of them: It is true, that they are to make
profession of their faith with their Mouth, when cause so requires, as well as
to believe with their heart, Romans 10.10.
yea and to answer every one in authority, before whom they shall be
convented and called, and that with mildness and reverence, concerning the
same their faith and hope, as S. Peter declares. 1. Pet. 3.15.^^
But it does not continually and evermore so fall out, that Christians be
brought before Kings, Princes, and Magistrates of the earth, to be examined,
and to make answer of their faith: but at sometimes it so falls out, and at
some other times again, it suffices that they make profession of their faith
among themselves. Neither were it indeed safe, or a point of christian wisdom
in them (whom Christ wills, To be as wise as Serpents, Mat. 10.16, 17.
though as innocent as Doves, and to whom he gives an express caveat, to
take heed of men) rashly, or unadvisedly, or without good and urgent cause, to
manifest and lay open themselves unto the view, rage, and fury of the
malicious and persecuting world. But you allege further, that Christ said to
his Disciples: Ye are the light of the world: A City that is set on a hill
cannot be hid. Mat. 5.14, 15.
Neither do men light a candle and put it under a Bushel, but on a
candlestick, and it gives light to all that are in the house. But none of
these words do prove the Church to be always and evermore apparent to the
eyes of the wicked world, though sometimes it be. For first, though it be
called the Light of the world, yet thereupon it follows not, that therefore
it is always, and at all times to be seen: Inasmuch as the Sun and the
Moon, which be the great lights of the World, and so appointed of GOD in the
beginning, be not always brightshining and appearing unto us, but are sometimes
unseene, and covered with clouds, and darkened, and suffer strange Eclipses. And
therefore does S. Augustine compare the Church to the Moon, August. in Psalm.
10. de Baptis. cont. Donatist. lib. 6. cap. 4.
which is often obscured and hid: yea he acknowledges, that the Church may be
so hid and secret, as that the very members thereof shall not know one another.
And whereas ye further allege, that it is like a City set upon a hill,
neither does it thereupon follow, that it is always to be seen: For in a
great Mist, or a dark night, an Hill or Mountain, be it never so great, will
not be seen: So if men be stricken with blindness, it cannot be seen of
them, as the Aramites were, that could not see the mountain, 2. Kin. 6.17, 18,
19, 20.
that was full of horses and chariots of fire, round about Elisha, nor knew
that they were in the midst of Samaria, till God opened their eyes. Likewise,
though a Candle be set on a Candlestick, and gives light to all that are in
that house: yet neither does it give light to them that be in another house,
nor to any that be blind, or shut their eyes against it. And yet the
candlelight it self also will sometimes be much dimmed and darkened with
sundry occurrents and accidents that do befall it. When therefore the world,
either by reason of their own blindness, or by reason of fierce and terrible
persecutions, or by reason of clowdie, smoakie, and mistie errors, raised up,
be not able to see and discern the Church of Christ: Is that any just cause
for any to quarrel against her, as if therefore she had no being at all? Yea,
when the fifth Angel blew the Trumpet, and the Bishop of Rome* being in that
time, as a Star fallen from heaven to the earth, had no longer the keys of
heaven in his custody, but the keys of hell, even of the bottomless pit, and
that the smoke of the pit arose as the smoke of a great furnace, Rev. 9.12.
etc.
so that the Sun and the air were darkened by reason of the smoke: Is it
any marvel that the Church was then obscured? Your selves do grant, that in
the days and times of the grand Antichrist, foretold by S. Paul, ^. These. 2,
3, 4. etc.
the church should lie obscured, and be hidden: And we say, and prove unto
you, that those days and times be come long since, and therefore this ought
not to seem any new or strange thing unto any in these days. Yea, in the
Revelation of S. John, you further read, that the Temple of God, that is, his
Church, (which is there said to be in heaven, because from thence she is
descended, and has her mind, treasure, and affection there, with Christ her
head, Reve. 11.19.
Phil. 3.20. Coloss. 3.1.2.) was sometime shut, and sometime opened. For in
that it is there said, sometime to be opened, therein is included that it was
at other sometimes shut and closed, and not open to the view of the world. So
that the Church of God is not always openly and splendently seen to the
persecuting World, but is sometimes patent, and sometimes latent as I trust you
now sufficiently perceive: and withal, I trust you perceive, that the Church
was then in esse, and had a continuance, even when it was most latent. For,
unless they even then had been in esse, and in being, they could not have
been, a latent, oppressed, or persecuted Church. Now as touching unity, I
must tell you* that unless you join verity, and the truth of Gods Religion
with it, Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3, 4* Unity without verity, is not to be regarded, but
to be detested.
(which is not in the Popish Church) it is no better then a wicked and plain
conspiracy against the Truth: which kind of unity, being amongst them, is
indeed a mark, not of the true, but of the false, erring, and Antichristian
Church. For so is it accordingly recorded of those that followed the Beast:
Reve. 17.17.
That they were of one mind, or of one consent.

4 And as for the Succession, ye talk so much of, That Succession in place, to
so many good Bishops of Rome, which were Orthodoxe and of the right Religion,
can no way serve to justify and defend those degenerate and Apostaticall
Bishops of Rome, which have sithence that time for the space of many hundredth
years succeeded: no more then the Succession of many wicked and Idolatrous
Kings in a kingdom, unto diverse godly, virtuous, and rightly religious Kings,
which were their predecessors, is able to justify and defend those ungodly and
degenerate successors. Those high Priests which conspired and consented to put
Christ to death, were never the less wicked, nor any jot the more to be
commended or allowed, because they succeeded diverse godly Priests which were
their predecessors. The virtue then, and right religion of any predecessors,
can, no way, serve to countenance and defend the vice and false religion of the
successors. Non locus sanctificat hominem nec Cathedra facit Sacerdotem: The
place sanctifies not the man, Crysost. Did 40.
nor does the Chair make the Priest, says Chrysostom. Neque sanctorum filij
existimandi sunt, quicunque tenent loca sanctorum, sed qui exercent opera
eorum: Neither are they to be esteemed the children of the Saints, Hieronym. ad
Helvid. Did. 40.
whosoever hold the places of the Saints, but they which exercise their
works, says Hierome. Qui praesunt ecclesijs, non ex loci, aut generis
dignitate, sed morum nobilitate* non ex urbium claritate, sed fidei puritate,
debent innotescere: They which be rulers of the Churches, Did. 4. non est
facile ibidem nos qui.
ought to be known, not by the dignity of their place or ancestors, but by
the nobleness of their manners, not by the famousnesse of their Cities, but by
the purity of their faith, says Gregory. Albeit therefore, the Pope,
otherwise called the Bishop of Rome, succeeds in place, to many godly and
virtuous Bishops that were his predecessors in former and ancient times: yet
what does all this make for him, except he were like unto them, and did succeed
them in verity, piety, humility, right faith and true religion, as well as in
place? The local succession, without the other is nothing worth, but serves
rather to shame, reprove, and condemn the successors, then any way to commend
or allow of them, when they be so exceedingly degenerate, and unlike to those
their good and godly predecessors.

5 And here they are wont to allege, that Peter was Bishop of Rome, and that
the Pope is his Successor: But first, it is not true that Peter was Bishop of
Rome in that sense they speak of, that is to say, He was not tied, limited,
and restrained to that city of Rome as to his particular Diocese or Province,
as Bishops in these days be: for it is clear that S. Peter was, Luke 6.13.14.
etc. Matthew. 10.2. Mark 3.14, 15, 16, 17 etc.
by his proper office and function, one of the Apostles of Christ, who by their
office of Apostleship, were not restrained to any particular place, as a
Bishop is to his Diocese or Province, but were permitted to go into any part
of the world, and to preach the Gospel, as the very commission given unto them
from Christ Jesus himself, Mark. 16.15.
does plainly declare. Again, Mat. 28.19, 20,
it is well known, that ancient Writers do also call S. Paul, Bishop of Rome,
as well as S. Peter* and therefore Peter, is in no other sense to be accounted
Bishop of Rome, then S. Paul was. Yea S. Ambrose calls all the Apostles,
Episcopos, that is, Bishops. And Judas the Apostle, Ambr. in Ephesians. 4.
is also said in the very Scripture it self, to have, (...), Episcopatum,
Acts 1.20.
that is, a Bishopric. You see then, that whosoever, either in the Scripture,
or in the ancient Fathers, is said to be a Bishop, is not by and by to be
supposed, Apostles be, and may rightly be called Bishops in the general and
large acception of the word.
a Bishop restrained to a particular place, as a Bishop of a Diocese or
Province is. For this word, (...), in Greek, and, Episcopus, in Latin,
(commonly Englished, a Bishop) signifies in the original, nothing else but an
Overseer, or one that has any charge to look to: in which ample and general
signification, it is rightly attributed, to any of the Apostles whosoever; and
consequently well might S. Peter (though he were, by his proper office and
function, an Apostle) be called by some of the ancient Fathers a Bishop, in
respect of that his Apostolical charge and Ministry, which he performed. But
thereupon to infer, that he was Bishop of Rome, in this sense, namely, as a
Bishop affixed and restrained to that place, as to his proper and peculiar
Diocese or Province, and as though he might not go from thence, into other
parts of the world, to perform the Office of an Apostle, as well as thither,
is, besides the inconsequencie of it, very absurd. Whatsoever stay or abode
then, either S. Peter, or S. Paul, made at Rome, or elsewhere, or wheresoever
they lived or died, it is manifest that they were Apostles, and executed every
where, that their Apostolical office and function, and lived and died
Apostles, and therefore are not (in proper and strict appellation) to be
termed, and deemed, Bishops of Diocesses and Provinces. For neither can he that
is by Christ (his Lord and Master) designed and appointed to be an Apostle,
lawfully forsake that his office and calling of Apostleship, and at his own,
or other men's pleasure, become of another, and that an inferior degree and
calling, as namely to be a Bishop tied and restrained to a Diocese or
Province. But, admit, Peter had been Bishop of Rome in that strict
signification of the word, yet then secondly was he far from being Bishop of
the whole world: for, to be Bishop of one City in the world, or of one
particular Diocese, or Province in the world, is not all one with this, namely
to be Bishop of the whole world, or to be universal Bishop over all the
Churches in the world: for Episcopus orbis and urbis, do far differ. Yea,
thirdly, let us admit, if you will, that S. Peter was Bishop of Rome, and that
by being Bishop of Rome, he was also Bishop of the whole world, or of all the
Christian Churches in the whole world, (which nevertheless is very absurd to
be admitted) yet what would all this advantage the Bish. of Rome that now is,
or any other of the Bishops of Rome, that have been in these later times, for
the space of diverse hundredth years, that they be successors to him, in place,
whom they are nothing like unto in conditions and virtues, humility, faith,
and religion? For how unlike the Pope is to S. Peter, judge ye. First, it is
well known, Peter and the Pope be nothing alike as is apparent by co^paring
them together. Acts 3.6.
that S. Peter was a contemner of the pomp and pride of the world, and a
disregarder of the wealth and riches thereof, insomuch that he said to one
that asked alms of him, that he had neither silver nor gold: but the Pope of
Rome is not so, but (contrariwise) has the pomp, pride, glory* and riches of
the world, in very high and chief esteem, and abounds with them. Again,
Peter was subject to Emperors, 1. Pet. 2.13, 14.
Kings, and Princes, and taught all Christians to be likewise subject to them:
but the Pope is so far from being subject to them, that contrariwise he
claims soveraignetie and supremacy over them all, and takes upon him to
depose Kings, Princes and Emperors at his pleasure, and to disannull and
dissolve the allegiance of subjects, when and as often as he lists. Peter
would not allow Cornelius, though but a Captain of the Italian band, Act.
10.26.
to fall down at his feet, but bad him arise: but the Pope of Rome does well
allow, not only Captains, but Kings, Princes, and Emperors, to fall down and
kiss his feet. Yea he has not been ashamed, with his feet, to tread upon
the neck of some of the Emperors. Peter was a godly, earnest, and diligent
Preacher of the Gospel in his own person, according to that commandment of
Christ, so often repeated, and saying unto him: Pasce, Pasce, Ioh. 21.15, 16,
17.
Pasce, feed my lambs feed my sheep* feed my sheep. But the Pope of Rome,
like an idle, pompous, and slothful man, in his own person, seldom or never
Preaches. Peter was content, Gal 2.11.
and well endured to be reproved at the hands of S. Paul when there was cause:
He also patiently suffered himself to be accused and contended against, Act.
11.^, 3, 4.
by certain Christians and mildely* and modestly answered to those their
exceptions against him, for their satisfaction. Part. 1. did 4. Ca. Si Papa.
But the Pope of Rome, though he be never so worthy of reproof, will
nevertheless not suffer himself to be reproved, nor accused, or contended
against, nor will have his doings examined, Extravag* de concess pr^^end. Tit.
4. cap. 2. ad Apostol in gloss.
questioned, censured, or judged by any men: such is his unmeasurable pride,
and unmatchable loftiness. Again, S. Peter did acknowledge S. Paul, S.
Matthew, S. Andrew, S. James, and the rest of the twelve, to be Apostles,
as well as himself; Luke 6.13, 14, 15, 16.
albeit they had no ordination or calling, to that their Office of Apostleship,
from him: (for that they all had an immediate calling to that their
Apostleship, from Christ Jesus himself, Matthew 4.18, 19, 20, 21, 22* Gal. ^.1.
and not from Peter, is a thing undeniably manifest.) But the Pope
(contrariwise) acknowledges none to be a Bishop, except he be ordained and
made a Bishop by him, or by his authority. Moreover, Act. 14.28.
they were accounted and held to be Presbyters, and Ministers of the Church,
which were made and ordained by other Apostles, though they were not made or
ordained by Peter, nor by any authority derived from him: But the Pope of
Rome acknowledges none to be Presbyters or Ministers of the Church, which be
made by other Bishops, Ioh. 21.15, 16, 17.
except they be made and ordained by him, or by authority originally derived
from him. Yea S. Peter did acknowledge the rest of the Apostles to be his
fellows or Equals, as, Luke 22.14, 25, 26. Matt. 20.25, 26. Mar. 10.42, 4^.
well knowing that Christ Jesus himself did directly forbid them to bear
Princely authority one over another: insomuch that Peter, as well as John, was
content to be sent by the rest of the Apostles into Samaria, Act. 8.14^
and did go thither at their sending: But the Bishop of Rome acknowledges not
other Bishops to be his fellows or Equals, nor will be content to be sent, as
their Messenger, to any place, but most proudly challenges a Princely
Primacie, and king-like superiority over them all. If the Pope will needs be
Peter's successor, it were reason and a thing equal and just, that he should
claim no more authority over other Bishops, then Peter had over the rest of
the Apostles: yea if he will make Peter, his pattern and president to follow,
(as it were a happy thing for him, if he were in very deed, so well affected)
he must then utterly give over his triple Crown, and all his Papal worldly
pomp and pride, and be clean reformed, and become altogether another man, in
all respects wherein he is so exceedingly degenerated and unlike unto him. And
then, together with the relinquishing of his most proud Popedom, he must also,
forsake, renounce, and detest his Popery, and Popish Religion: for S. Peter
clearly was such a one, as we call a Protestant, S Peter a Protestant, (...)
not a Papist.
that is to say, one that both held and taught that Religion that we hold,
namely that, which is contained in the Book of GOD, the sacred and canonical
Scriptures. Yea S. Peter died a Martyr for the testimony of this faith and
religion: and the Pope of Rome is, contrariwise, a persecutor of those that
profess this faith and religion. For that the Papists be the clear and
undoubted persecutors of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, is afterward
manifested by a direct and most evident testimony thereof, Reve. 17.^.
in the Revelation of S. John; to the end ye should not hereafter be mistaken
in that point (as usually ye be) nor deceive your selves any longer therein.
1. Cor. 12.12, 13, 14. etc.
Furthermore, S. Peter was content, and held it honor enough, to be a member
of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 1.22* 23. Col. 1 18. Col. 2.10.
which is his Church, acknowledging with S. Paul and the rest of the Apostles,
that Christ only was, and is, the head thereof: But the Pope of Rome, is not
content, unless he intrude himself into this his very royal prerogative,
taking upon him to be the very head of the whole militant church. We know that
the Church of Christ is but one body (as the Scripture speaks and witnesses)
though there be many members of it; 1. Cor. 12.12, 13.14.17.
and one body is to have but one head: why then, or by what right or reason,
do they make this body of Christ (which is his Church) to have two heads,
namely one in heaven, which is Christ Jesus, and another on earth, which, they
say, is the Pope? They confess that of the Church in heaven which is to us
invisible, Christ is indeed the head; but of the visible Church on earth, the
Pope (say they) is the head, and that such a visible head, for the visible
church, is requisite and necessary: And here they have a distinction, that
Christ is indeed, Caput vitale, the vital head, from whence all his members
have and derive their life, but that the Pope is Caput ministeriale, and
visibile, the ministerial and visible head: And thus they boldly speak,
frame, and devise matters and distinctions, according to the fancy of their
own brains* But first, what Patent, conveyance, warrant, or commission from
God, can the Pope of Rome show, whereby he is thus authorized to be either
Christ his special or only Vicar, Deputy, or Lieutenant, over his whole
universal church here upon earth, or to be this special and only visible and
ministerial head? Just none at all, do they, or can they show for it. And is
it not then a shame for him (if he had any shame in him) thus to intrude
himself into such an high, and sovereign Authority, without any commission
or warrant from Christ, the King of his church? Besides, themselves
acknowledge, and that rightly* that the company of the glorious, and invisible
Saints in heaven, and the company also of the visible Saints on earth, do all
make but one church, and one Body to Christ Jesus, though their states be
differing, that is to say, though the one sort be triumphant, and the other
militant: Inasmuch then, as they all make but one church, and one body unto
Christ Jesus, how can it be shifted or avoided, but that Christ Jesus must be
the head, as well of the saints on earth, as of the saints in heaven, and as well
of the visible and militant company, as of the invisible and triumphant? Yea,
Bellarmine himself will not allow any Christian, to be termed or called a
member of the Pope: How then can the Pope rightly be the head of the church?
for if all true Christians upon earth, be, and be to be termed, the members of
Christ, and not of the Pope, it must be granted, that not the Pope, but Christ
only, is their head; for the head and the members be relatives. And whereas in
this matter, they talk of a ministerial head, which is not vital, it is also
but a fantastical and vain distinction: For there can be no head, in true
and proper appellation to this one body of Christ (which is his Church) but
that which is vital. The Pope (as appears, even by this their own
distinction) is but a dead head, and has no life in him, to give to any of
the members of Christ, or whereby virtue, grouth, nourishment, or increase may
distill or be derived from him, as from the head, to any of the members: What
then should the body of Christ do with such a livelesse and dead head? or
what good, profit, or benefit, can any reap or receive from thence? A dead
body is fittest for such a dead head, but the living and mystical body of
Christ, has, and requires, another manner of head, namely that which is
vital, which is Christ Jesus only, of whose fullness they have all received,
as S. John speaks. Neither is there any such necessity, Ephesians 4.15, 16.
Ioh. 1* 16.
as they also vainly fancy, for the visible and militant Church, to have such
a visible head: for albeit Christ Jesus be absent from his church militant here
upon earth, in respect of his bodily presence, which he has carried with him
into heaven; yet in his Deity, and by the power of his spirit, is he always
present with the same his church: For so himself witnesses saying, I am with
you always unto the end of the world. Mat. 28.20.
And therefore always does S. John testify, that notwithstanding the manhood
and bodily presence of Christ be in heaven, and there remaining, yet
nevertheless by his almighty power and spirit, he walks, Rev. 1.11, 12, 13.
etc.
and is in the midst of the seven golden Candlestickes, that is, In the midst
of the seven Churches: for so the text it self expounds the Candlestickes
saying thus: The seven Candlestickes, Rev. 1.20.
be the seven Churches. Under the name of which seven churches, be also all
other churches upon earth shadowed out unto us, as Augustine, Primasius, Haymo,
Beda, Thomas Aquinas, and others affirm. Seeing then that Christ Jesus,
notwithstanding his bodily presence remaining in heaven, is nevertheless by
his almighty power and spirit, present with all the true Christian churches in
the world, and walks in the midst of them, to guide, govern, comfort, teach,
order, rule, sustain, uphold, and direct them, and give all gifts and graces
requisite: It is manifest, that he is sufficiently present with them in the
church militant, to do all the offices of an head unto them, so that they need
not in any sort, the Pope to become an head unto them, for any of those uses
or ends. Yea, is it not a very great absurdity, for any to suppose or
imagine, that the Pope, or any one man mortal whosoever, being on earth, can
better rule, order, guide, and govern the whole militant church, then Christ
Jesus himself can do, being in heaven, by his wisdom, almightinesse, and
power of his Spirit? But yet further, when Christ in his manhood was to ascend
up into heaven, he promised neither the Pope, nor any one Bishop over all the
rest, to be his Vicar on earth, or to supply his room and absence, but the
holy Ghost only: For thus he says, I tell you the truth, Ioh. 16.7.
It is expedient for you, that I go away: for if I go not away, that
Comforter will not come unto you. Verse. 13.
And this comforter is the Holy Ghost, the spirit of truth, as is there
expressly affirmed. And again he says: that, After his departure they shall
have another Comforter that shall abide with them for ever, Ioh. 14.16, 17.
even the spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees
him not, neither knows him. Do not these texts very plainly show, that the
holy Ghost, is, and is to be accounted Christ's Vicar upon earth, ever since his
departure into heaven? that is to say, is in his stead and place unto the
militant Church, and to abide with it for ever? And therefore does Tertullian
say accordingly, that Christus misit Vicariam vim spiritus sancti, qui
credentes agat: Christ sent the power of the holy Ghost to be his Vicar, or in
his steed, to lead and direct the believers. Howbeit, 2. Cor. ^.20.
if some Bishop will needs be so entitled* namely Christ's Vicar, as being an
Ambassador for Christ, and in Christ's stead, Cypr. l. 4. and 3. and l 3. ep.
13. and de simpli. praelat. Ambr. in 1. Tim. 5. and in 1. Cor. 11. Chrysostom.
ho. 17. in Mat. etc. Ephesians. 1.22. Heb. 5.5.
yet let him then know, that he is not so alone, but that all godly and
faithful Bishops and Ministers be so likewise: For which cause it is, that the
ancient Fathers do call them all alike, Vicarios Christi, the Vicars of
Christ: But S. Paul yet further shows, that not Christ himself took upon
him this honor, to be head of the church, without his fathers appointment and
constitution. If therefore the Pope will take it upon him, it is good reason he
should likewise show, where God has so constituted and appointed him; which he
is not able to do. Yea S. Paul shows again, That only he is head of the
Church, which is far above all principality, Ep. 1.21, 22, 23. Coloss. 1.18.
and power, and dominion, and might, and every name that is named, not only
in this world, but in the world to come: And therefore this is such a high,
peerless, and supereminent an honor and prerogative, as that it is proper to
Christ Jesus only, and not communicable to any creature. Lastly, you may
perceive by S. Paul, that Christ is so the head of the Church, as the husband
is the head of his wife: Ephesians. 5.23.
And is there any honest wife, that will be content to have two heads, that
is, two husbands; though (for distinction sake) you should term the one a
ministerial head, or howsoever else you would please to call him?

6 Now touching Miracles, signs, or wonders: we say, that, Mar. 1^.20.
those which were done by Christ and his Apostles, and in those ancient and
primitive Churches, be sufficient for the confirmation of that most ancient
primitive, Christian, and Apostolic faith and religion (contained in the
book of God) which we profess. Chrysostom in Mat. 24. hom. 49.
Yea, now in these days (says S. Chrysostom) the vvorking of miracles is
ceased, and they be rather counterfeit miracles (says he) which be found
amongst them that be false Christians. Again he says, There be some that
ask, why men work not miracles now, In Ioh. ca. 2. hom. 22 in fine 1. Cor.
14.22.
in these days: If thou be believing (says he) as thou ought to be, and
if thou love Christ, as he should be loved, thou need no miracles: for
signs be given to unbeleevers, Cyril in Joh. lib. ^. cap. 13.
and not to believers. Again, S. Cyrill says: that, to work miracles,
makes not a man one jot the more holy, seeing it is common to evil men, and to
such as he objects, or reprobates: For so the Lord himself witnesses, saying:
Many shall say unto me in that day; Mat. 7.22.23.
Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out
devils, and in thy name done many great works? And yet will he nevertheless
profess unto them: I never knevv you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity.
And on the other side, working of no miracles hinders not a man's holiness:
Ioh. 10.41. Matthew. 11.11.
for John wrought neither sign nor miracle, and yet was this no derogation to
his holiness: for amongst them that are borne of women, arose there not a
greater then he, as Christ himself testifies. Yea, that miracles, signs, or
wonders may be done by false Prophets, and false teachers, is further manifest,
for even Christ himself says: that, There shall arise false Christ's, Matthew.
24.24^
and false Prophets, and they shall show great signs and wonders, so that,
if is were possible, they should deceive the very Elect. S. Paul also
directly testifies: that, in the Antichristian Church there shall be, the
vvorking of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying Wonders. 2 Thessalonians.
29.
Which (says S. Augustine) be called lying signs and Wonders, for this
cause; that either men's senses be deceived, August. de civ^^ Dei lib. 20. ca.
19.
thinking that to be done which revera is not done: or else, because, if they
be done in deed, they draw men to believe that they could not be done but by
the power of God, whereas they know not the power of the Devil. For S. John in
the Revelation, mentions spirits of Devils, vvorking Miracles, Rev. 16.14.
Rev. 13.13, 14.
to deceive those that be of the Antichristian Church. By all this then, you
see, that the Miracles wrought in Popery, be no argument or proof, that
therefore it is the right or true Church, or that the Teachers therein, be the
right and true Teachers: for they may be false Prophets, and false Teachers,
and the Popish Church may be (as indeed it is) the false and Antichristian
Church, all these their Miracles notwithstanding. But hereof I shall have
occasion to speak more fully afterward, when I come to speak of Antichrist
and his Miracles. In the mean time, concerning this point, thus much may
suffice.

CAP. III.
Of Justification by Faith only: The right sense and meaning of that position;
and of the truth of it: And that being rightly understood, it excludes not
good works, nor imports any licentiousness at all in it, but the clean
contrary.

IT is a thing well known, how busy, and earnest, Popish Teachers be, not
only by word of mouth, but by their books and writings also, to persuade you
(all that ever they can) against ours, the most ancient, most pure, and only
right Religion: and amongst other their bad devises (which they plot and
contrive for their own advantage and behoof) this is not the least, that they
accuse our Religion to be a doctrine and religion of much licentiousness, and
that in sundry points, which therefore must be answered. And many there be
also that be too hasty, and over credulous to believe them, as if all that
they speak and write, were to be held for undoubted truth and oracles without
further inquiry or examination. But howsoever they thus boldly presume, they,
for all that, be not able to take any just exception against our Religion, or
to show or prove it, in any point whatsoever, to be an allower of any the
least impiety, or licentiousness, if it be rightly understood. It is true,
that sundry that profess Protestancie, live licentiously, and wickedly: and
so do many also, that profess Popery, likewise live wickedly and
licentiously. If therefore they allow not this for an argument sufficient to
convince their religion of wickedness and licentiousness, which is taken from
the wicked lives, manners, and conversations of men: Why will they be so
unequal, as to make it of any force against our religion? Wise men can easily
distinguish inter vitium rei, and personae, between that which is the fault of
the thing, and the fault of men's persons: For the religion may be good, though
some persons that profess it, live not answerably thereunto: yea the
Protestant (that is, the Christian) Religion which we profess, is so good,
godly, divine, holy, and pure, as that it neither allows nor tolerateth the
filthy Stews, nor any other impuritie, nor any treasons, or rebellions, nor
perjuries, nor lying, or deceitful equivocations, nor any other wickedness
or impiety whatsoever, but utterly condemns them all. So that for true
piety, purity, integrity, and all manner of good life and godly
conversation, the religion of Popery comes far short of it, and is in no
sort to be compared with it. If then any professing our religion live wickedly
or licentiously, (as too many do) it is the fault of the men that live so
dissolutely, and not of the religion, which requires and commands the clean
contrary, at their hands. But, for all that, they persist and say, that even
the Protestants religion it self, is licentious, because it teaches and
holds, that men are justified in Gods sight, and before his Tribunal, only
by faith in Jesus Christ: which doctrine (say they) makes men licentious, and
careless of doing good works. Howbeit, both they and you must understand,
that when the Protestants do say, or have said at any time, that Faith only
justifies in Gods sight: it is and ever was meant and intended (howsoever some
seem purposely to mistake it) not of any dead faith, (which has no life in
it, to bring forth any good works), but of a true and lively faith, which is
accompanied with good works, and is fruitful and working by love, (as S. Paul,
Tit. 3.8. Gal. 5.6. Iam 2.14. 2. Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8
and S. James, and S. Peter, and the rest of the holy Scriptures, clearly
declare). Whilst therefore they teach both in their Sermons, and writings, with
S. James, and the rest of the Scriptures, That the faith that is without
works, is dead, and that such a faith cannot save or justify a man, but that
it must be a true and lively faith, that is, such a faith as produces and
brings forth good works: I hope you sufficiently perceive, that the doctrine
of the Protestants concerning justification by this lively faith, and not by
any dead faith, is such, as you can no way dislike; and that it is so far from
making any careless of doing good works that contrariwise, it urges,
abetteth, persuades, and provokes men unto them, if they mean, or desire to
have such a faith, as whereby they may be saved. But now although the
Protestants do thus rightly teach, that this faith and good works go
together, and be inseparable in respect of the person, so that he that has
this faith, has also good works: yet in the point of our Justification in
Gods sight, and before his Tribunal, Romans 9 30. Romans 10.3, 4. Romans 1.17. Gal.
3.11. Gal. 2.19, 20. Iere. 23.6. and 33.16. 1. Cor. 1.30. 2. Cor. 5.21. Romans
5.19. Ioh. 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Romans 5.1. Gal 3.26. Romans 3.20.28.
they are to be distinguished, and to be considered apart, and not confusedly:
because it is Faith only, and not Works, whereby we apprehend and apply
Christ Jesus unto us, as our Righteousness. To understand this the better, you
must ever remember, that Christ Jesus, is, in very deed, our Righteousness; for
so the scriptures do plentifully teach and proclaim: Our faith is, but the
hand or instrument, whereby we apprehend and apply that righteousness unto
us: and our good works be the fruits, testimonies, and declarations, both to
our selves, and other men, of that faith in Christ, which justifies us before
God. And therefore it is not enough, for a man to say, he has faith, but if
he have that true, livelie, and justifying faith, Iam. 2.18.20.26. etc.
which he pretends, he must declare and show it by his works: for so S.
James says; Ostende mihi fidem tuam ex operibus tuis: show me thy faith by thy
works. And agreeablie hereunto, Iam. 2.18.
S Paul calls good works, and a sanctified course of life, fructus
Iustitiae, the fruits of righteousness. So that we are first righteous by
faith in Christ, Phil. 1.11.
before we do or can bring forth these fruits of righteousness. And so S.
August. likewise teaches: August. de fide and oper. ca. 14.
affirming directly, that, Opera sequuntur Iustificatum, non praecedunt
Iustificandum: Good works do follow him that is formerly justified, and do
not go before him that is afterward to be justified. Matthew. ^ 33.
And this, even Christ Jesus also himself declares, namely, that, the tree
must first be good, before it can bring forth good fruit. Luke 6.43, 44.
By all which it is very manifest, that good works, be not causes, but fruits,
effects, and consequents, of that faith which justifies us before God. But
this is yet further evident, because S. Paul says expresselie, that we are
Justified by faith, Rom 5.1.
and so have peace with God: He further, excludes Works very directly,
and by name, from having any thing to do, in that act of our Justification.
Therefore we conclude, (says he) that a man is Justified by faith, Romans 3.28.
without the works of the Law. Romans 4.6.
And again he says: that, God imputes, righteousness, without works. Again
he says: It is by grace, and not of works, Romans 11.6. Romans 11.6.
And again he says: It is not of works, Romans 9.11. And again he says:
Rom 9 11.
By grace are ye saved through faith, (and that not of your selves, for it is
the gift of God) and not of works, lest any man should boast himself. Ephe.
2.8, 9, 10.
In all which places, ye may perceive, that how requisite or commendable
soever good works be, and what good use soever they have, yet they be
directly excluded from being any cause of our Justification and salvation in
Gods sight and censure. And with this also agrees that saying of S. Paul, in
his Epistle to the Galathians, where he gives this conclusion, Gal. 3.26.
saying: Ye are all the sons of God, by faith in Christ Jesus. And so also
testifies S. John, saying: Ioh. 1.12.
That as many as received Christ, to them he gave this prerogative, to be the
sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. Where, you may observe,
that belief, or, faith, is reckoned as the hand or instrument whereby Christ
is apprehended, or received. Again he says: That God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, Ioh.
3.16.
should not perish, but have everlasting life: In which words, you may observe
again, the first and original cause of our salvation, to be the mere grace
and love of God. Secondly, the material cause, to be, Christ the Son of God,
with his obedience and righteousness: And thirdly, the isntrumental cause,
to be, faith, or belief, in that his Son and our Savior Jesus. For he
(says the text) was sent into the world to this end, that whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. But consider, that he
says yet further: Ioh. 3.14, 15.
That, as Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of
man be lift up, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
eternal life. Some of you, no doubt, remember the story of the Serpent there
mentioned, which is in the book of Numbers: for after that the people of
Israel had wickedly spoken and murmured against God, and against Moses: Number
21.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
The Lord sent fiery Serpents among the people, which stung the people, so
that many of the people of Israel died: Therefore the people came to Moses and
said: We have sinned, for we have spoken against the Lord, and against thee:
pray to the Lord, that he take away the Serpents from us. And Moses prayed for
the people, And the Lord said unto Moses: make thee a fiery Serpent, and set
it up for a sign, that as many as are bitten, may look upon it and live: So
Moses made a Serpent of brass, and set it up for a sign: and when a Serpent
had bitten a man, then he looked to the Serpent of brass, and lived. As
therefore Moses lift up this brazen Serpent in the wilderness, to the end, that
whosoever was stung by those fiery Serpents, and did look upon that brazen
Serpent, might be cured* and live, and was cured, and did live accordingly: So
was also the Son of man, Christ Jesus, lift up upon the Cross, where he was
crucified, to the end, that whosoever is stung with the deadly stings of sin,
or of that old Serpent, the Devil, and does, with the eyes of his faith
applying him, look upon Christ Jesus, so lifted up, and crucified for him,
should be healed, and have eternal life. Where you may again perceive, that
as Christ is compared to that brazen Serpent: so is our belief, or, faith in
him, compared to their looking upon the brazen Serpent: so that still it
appears, that, faith, is as the eye, or instrument, whereby we behold,
apprehend, and apply Christ crucified, as a salve unto us, for all our sores.
For in him is comprehended, whatsoever is necessary or fit to cure us. When
therefore we say and speak in this sort, that, Sola fides iustificat, Faith
only justifies, we mean not that this faith is so sole or alone, as that it
is without good works, but that in the act of our justification, before God,
and in his sight, and as it respects and apprehends Christ the object of
it, it is sole and alone, works having no part with it in that apprehensive
faculty. Where also you may understand, how S. James, and S. Paul be clearly
reconciled (between whom nevertheless, there neither is, nor ever was, any
variance, being rightly understood) namely, even by that evident, common, and
known distinction: that, CHRISTVS iustificat effective: Fides
instrumentaliter, sive apprehensive: Opera declarative, CHRIST is he that
justifies in very deed effectually, Faith justifies instrumentally or
apprehensively: and works justify declaratively, that is, they do declare or
show forth unto men, the goodness and liveliness of that faith, whereby, as
by an instrument, apprehending Christ our righteousness, we are justified in
the sight of God. And this is the reason that S. James spoke in that sort
before mentioned, (viz) Declare, or, Show me thy faith by thy works, Iam.
2.18.
and I will show thee my faith by my works. In which sense also, he further
says: that, Abraham was justified, (that is) was showed or declared to be
just, by his works, when he offered Isaac his son upon the Altar. Likewise
he says, that Rahab, the harlot, was justified, (that is, was showed, or
declared to be just) through works, when she received the messengers and sent
them out another way. So that to be justified by works, in S. James, is
nothing else, but thereby to be showed or declared to be just. Iam. 2.14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19.20. etc.
For all S. James his dispute, in that place (if you well observe it) is,
directly and expressly against a Dead faith, which has no good works with it,
and against that vain man, that shall say or think, that he has a faith good
enough to save him, when as, being without works, it was indeed, but an idle
brag and conceit, and not a lively, or saving faith, but like a body without
a soul (as he there resembles it) for that it has not the action of a living
thing appearing in it. The justification therefore by faith, without works,
(whereof S. Paul speaks) and the justification by works, and not by faith
only: that is, when faith only is pretended, or alleged, which is destitute
of good works, James 2.24.
(whereof S. James speaks) appear to have no contradiction, or contrariety
at all, but a very plain, evident, and clear consent, and agreement. For
both those Apostles do teach alike, and concur in this, that the justifying
and saving faith, is not an idle or dead faith, but such a one as is livelie
and operative, working by love, Gal. 5.6.22, 23, 24.
and bringing forth the fruits of good works. And therefore does also S. Paul
as well as S. James, require of all believers in Christ, that they be careful
to show forth good works: Tit. 3.8.
and of as many as be redeemed by him, and justified by faith in him, that
They should be zealous of good works. Yea, T^^. 2.14.
although he teaches, that we are justified in Gods sight, and saved by
grace through faith, and not by works: yet he further adds and says
nevertheless: that, We are his vvorkemanship, Ephesians. 2.8, 9.10
created in Christ Jesus unto good works: and that God has before ordained
those good works, that we should walk in them. So that good works, be,
as S. Bernard also witnesses of them: Via regni, non causa regnandi: The way,
Bernard de gra. and liber. arbis.
vvherin men must walk toward Gods kingdom, but they be not the cause of
their raigneing, or, of their coming thither. As for that they object,
touching the Heresy of faith only justifying or saving, which S. Augustine
says, was held by some in the Apostles time; the same S. Augustine himself
there plainly declares, August. de fide and operib. cap. 14
that the heresy was of them, that thought they might be justified or saved by
such a faith as was void of good works: which is indeed, an heretical or
erroneous opinion, which nothing touches us: yea, which we likewise condemn
and detest as much as any: ever holding with the same S^ August. and with S.
Paul, and S. James, and the rest of the Scriptures, that a justifying, or
saving faith, will produce good works, and a care to live well, and in
obedience to all Gods commandments. Here then you may see, the unsoundness of
that distinction which the Rhemists and other Papists, use, viz. that works
done before Faith received, that is, whilst men be Infidels, and unbeleevers,
do not (indeed) Justify: but works done after faith received, that is, after
that men be believers, do (say they) justify in Gods sight. For, does not S.
Paul in that his dispute concerning Justification, expressly mention the
example of Abraham, Romans 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. etc.
as being the father of the faithful in that case? And does he not say of that
believing and godly man, Abraham, that his Faith was imputed to him, for
righteousness before God, and not his Works? And does he not further say; that
David likewise describes the blessedness of a man, to consist, not in any
works, or inherent righteousness of his own, but in remission of his sins,
Verse. 6, 7, 8.
and in Gods not imputing sin unto him: yea, unto whom, God imputes
righteousness, without works, as he there directly speaks. Was not S. Paul
also, a godly and faithful man, and one that had received grace from God, and
done many good works, after that faith and grace received? and yet he says
thus of himself: Doubtless, I think all things but loss for the excellent
knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord: Phil. 3.8, 9.
for whom I have counted all things l^sse, and do judge them to be dung, that I
might win Christ, and might be found in him, that is, not having mine own
righteo^snes, vvh^ch is of the Law, but that righteousness, which is through the
faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through faith In which
words ye see, that S. Paul* though a godly man, yet disclaimeth all his own
works and inherent righteousness whatsoever, accounting it as Dung, and
altogether unmeet, to stand in Gods presence, and before his Judgment seat,
to claim Justification by; and that all his joy, delight and desire was to go
out of himself, and to be found In him: that is, in Christ, and so to have his
righteousness, and not his own, imputed to him: For in Christ it is, Matthew.
3.17.
that the Father is well pleased: and in Christ it is, and for his sake* and
not for our own, that we are accepted As he likewise says again: Ephesians.
1.6. Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them that be in Christ Jesus. And again he says:
God has made him to be sin for us, 2. Cor. 5.21.
which knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God, in
him. Where you also see, that Christ Jesus, our most kind Suertie, and most
loving Savior, though he had not any the least speck or spot of sin, but
was most holy, most pure, and in all complete fullness and perfection,
righteous in himself, had nevertheless our sins imputed to him, that we
might be made the righteousness of God, In him, (as this Text speaks,) and
not in our selves. As Christ then, became sin, in respect of the imputation
of our sins unto him: so are we judged righteous in Gods sight, not by any
righteousness of our own, or inherent in our own persons, but by that
immaculate and spotless righteousness of his, imputed unto us. So that, In
him it is (as this Text most plainly shows) and not in our selves, that we
are deemed righteous in Gods sight. Yea, here consider further, what
righteousness also it is that God approves, and will have to stand for the
Justification of sinful men in his sight: for it must be a righteousness
transcendent, and going far beyond the righteousness of any sinful
creatures; namely, it must be that, which S. Paul here calls the
righteousness of God, that is, a most pure, perfect, and complete
righteousness, wherein must not be, any the least spot, speck, or stain to be
found, as S. Chrysostom also declares: Chrysostom. in 2. Cor. 5.
Which kind of most pure and spotless righteousness, because no other man
has but Jesus Christ only, the second Adam (who is both God and Man),
therefore in his person only, and not in ours, it is to be both sought and
found. For which cause also it is, that the Church and people of God,
(considered, not in themselves, but in Christ) are by the Apostle, S. Paul,
said to have not so much, as a spot or vvrinckle, or any such thing in them.
Ephe. 5.27.
Well therefore does S. Augustine make this double observation upon this Text
(of 2. Cor. 5.21.) saying: Vide^e duo: Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 6.
Iustitiam Dei, and non nostram; In ipso, non in nobis: Behold and consider two
things (says he): first, That we are made the righteousness of God, and not
our own righteousness; and secondly, In him, and not in our selves. The same
observation, likewise gives S. Hierome, upon the same Text, saying: Hieronym.
in 2. Cor. 5.
Christus pro peccatis nostris oblatus, peccati nomen accepit, ut nos
efficeremu^ Iustitia Dei, in ipso: non nostra, nec in nobis: Christ being
offered for our sins, took the name of sin, that we might be made, the
righteousness of God, in him: not our own righteousness, nor in us. And
therefore does S. Paul again, not only for himself, but in the behalf of
other Christians also, speak in this sort (even after faith and grace
received): We which are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles,
Gal. 2.15, 16.
do know, that a man is not Justified by the works of the Law, but by the
faith of Jesus Christ: even we I say, have believed in Jesus Christ, that we
might be Justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law,
because that by the works of the Law, no flesh shall be justified. Be not these
words very direct for this purpose, showing, that even those that be
Christians, and believers in Christ, do nevertheless expect Justification by
Faith in Christ, and not by the Works of the Law? Yea, what man ever yet
(Christ Jesus only excepted) did fully and perfectly keep the whole Law, and
commandments of God, in his own person? For which cause it is, that none can
be Justified in Gods sight by any works or observance of the Law, which he by
and in his own person can do or perform. If the^e had been a Law given,
which could have given life, then indeed, righteousness should have been by
the Law, Gal. 3.21, 22.
as S. Paul affirms: But the Scripture (says he) has concluded all under
sin, that the prom^se by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them
that believe* In which words you see, he shows it very significantlie, to be
a thing Impossible for any that be but mere men, to keep the Law of God, in
that full measure and perfection, which the Law re^uireth; and therefore that
they must seek to be Justified in Gods sight, and to have eternal life,
another way, namely, by Faith in Jesus Christ. Again, he says thus: Be it
known unto you, men and Brethren, Acts 13.38, 39.
that through this man (Jesus) is preached unto you the forgivenes of sins:
and by him, every one, that believes is Justified from all those things from
which ye could not be Justified b^ the Law of Moses. Here also observe, that
he says, they could not be Justified by the Law, as noting it likewise, to
be a thing Impossible. But he speaks yet further, saying: That which was
Impossible to the Law, Romans 8 3, 4. (...). Impossible.
inasmuch as it was vveake, because of the flesh; God sent his own Son in
^he similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh,
that the righteousaesse of the Law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit. Where you may again perceive, that he
teaches it constantly, and expressly, to be a thing impossible, by reason of
the weakness that is in all flesh, for the most godly person upon earth,
being but a mere man, fully and exactly to keep and perform the law, and
that therefore the Son of God, Christ Jesus himself, was sent into the world,
and became Man, for our sakes, that so the righteousness of the Law, which he
in his humane nature, in all points and perfection, fully performed, might by
our faith apprehending and applying it, be made ours, and so be fulfilled in
us, namely, by imputation, and application, and not by any inherent and
actual performance of it, by and in our own persons (for this, he, before,
affirmed to be impossible). And this also do the ancient Fathers themselves
affirm and teach. S. Ambrose says: Ambr. in Gal. 3.
That the commandments of God be so great, vt impossible sit servare ea, as
that it is impossible to keep them. S. Chrysostom, speaking of the Law, and
performance of it, says: Id vero nemini possibile est: Chrysostom. homil. in
epist. ad Romans Hierom in Gal 3 Bernar. sermon. 50. in Cantic.
That it is poss^ble to no man. S. Hierome says: That no man can perform the
Law, S. Bernard says: that, God commanding things impossible, made not men
transgressors, but made them thereby humble. Yea, it was the heresy of the
Pelagians (as S. Hierome shows, ad Clesiphontem) to hold (as the Papists also
hold) that Mandata dei sunt possibilia: The Commandments of God are possible.
Hironym lib. 2.
And they went about to prove it (as the Papists likewise do) by these Texts,
viz. My yoke is easy, and my burden light. in Mat. 11.30. And his
commandments be not burdenous, in 1. Ioh. 5.3. whereas they did not rightly
understand those speeches, no more then the Papists, their followers, do. For
it is true, that none of the commandments of God be grievous, heavy, or
burdensome, to a regenerate, godly, and sanctified mind, which is ever
desirous, endeavoring, and delighting to keep them, and to walk in the
obedience of them, though he shall never be able, during this mortal life,
fully and perfectly to keep and perform them. And therefore, thus says S.
Hierome to the Pelagian (and we also say the same to the Papists) ^acilia dicis
dei mandata, and tamen nullum proferre potes, qui universa compleverit, Thou
say, the commandments of God be easy, and yet thou can bring forth none,
that has kept them all. Again he says: Hironym. lib. 1. cap. 3. cont. Pel^.
Tunc ergo iusti sumus, quando nos peccatores fatentur: and iustitia nostra non
ex proprio constat merito, sed ex dei misericordia: dicente scriptura, Iustus
est accusator sui. Then therefore are we just, when we confess our selves
sinners, and that our righteousness, consists not upon our own merits, but
upon Gods mercy: the Scripture affirming, that the Just man is the accuser of
himself. The like whereunto S. Augustine also speaks, saying in this wise:
Omnia mandata dei facta deputantur, quando quicquid non fit, ignoscitur. All
the commandments of God be then accounted to be done, when what soever is
not done, is pardoned. Yea, this is so clear a truth, that Thomas Aquinas also
says: that, Implere totam legem est impossible: Tho. Aqui. in Gal. 3. Cusan.
excit. li. 10
To perform the whole law, is a thing impossible. And Cusanus likewise says:
Nemo unquam ad implevit legem, quae in dilectione consistit, nisi Christus, qui
nonvenit solvere legem, sed implere: No man ever yet performed the law, which
consists in love, but only Christ, which came, not to break the law, but
to fulfill it. And therefore is it further said by S. Paul in another place:
Romans 10.3.4. (...)
That Christ is the end, accomplishment, or fulfilling of the law, for
righteousness, unto every one that believes. S. Chrysostom likewise says:
Quid lex vult* hominem iustum facere? sed non potest: nemo siquidem illam
implevit: What means the law? does it mean to make a man Just? but it
cannot do that: for no man has fulfilled it. Yea the law was not given (as S.
Paul also teaches us) to any such end, Gal. 3.18, 19.21 22. Romans 3.20, 21,
22. Romans 4.14, 15, 16. Gal 3.9, 10.11, 12, 13, 14.24. Act. 13.38, 39. Act.
10.43. Romans 10.3, 4. Romans 3.31. Psalm. 1.1, 2. Psalm. 119.136.
as thereby to justify us in Gods sight, but to show us our weakness, our
sins and transgressions, and our guiltiness, and the wrath and curse of God,
due unto us for the same, and so to drive us unto Christ our Savior: by whose
obedience, and fulfilling of the law for us, applied unto us by faith, it is
that we are justified, and completely righteous even before the Throne of God.
Howbeit, as touching the law; it is true, nevertheless, that we must all
endeavor to walk in the ways of it, and in obedience to all Gods
commandments, to show our subjection to God, and to declare the duty, tokens,
and fruits of Gods children, in us, but not to the end, to obtain
righteousness and justification thereby in Gods sight, and censure. Yea, S.
Paul tells you directly, that as many as are of the works of the law,
thinking thereby to be justified, they are under the curse. Gal. 3 10.
So far are they of from obtaining righteousness or blessedness, by that
means. Will you have the reason of it? himself delivers it in the next
words, by a sentence and testimony out of the law it self. Gal 3.10. Deuteronomy.
27.26. Iam. 2.10.
For it is vvritten^ (says he) Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things, which are written in the book of the law to do them. And so
likewise speaks S. James: That whosoever keeps the whole law, and yet
fails in one point, he is guilty of all: because he offends the Majesty
of the Lavv-giver, and by committing, though it be, but one offense, or sin,
during his whole life, he has made himself subject to the curse of the law.
By the sentence then of the law, ye see* that every man is accursed; and
lies inthralled and subject, unto all manner of punishment, and even to
everlasting horror, and eternal condemnation. What then shall a man do, that
is by the law, thus sentenced, and brought to this woeful estate and
perplexity? and what course shall he take? or what mean is there to be freed,
and delivered from this direful sentence, the Curse of the Law? The Apostle
answers, and shows, that there is no other way but one, namely, Christ
Jesus, who has for us, and in our steed, borne the wrath of God, and curse
due unto us for our sins: for so he says in the same Chapter: Ga.l 3.13.
Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the law, being made a Curse for us.
O the unspeakeable love of Christ! who was thus content to be made a Curse for
us, to the end to free us from that Curse, and to purchase unto us, Eternal
blessedness and felicity: His love toward us, can never be sufficiently
manifested. For it is he, that with his most bitter passion, and sufferings,
has satisfied Gods wrath, and justice, in our behalf; Act. 10 43. Act. 13.38,
39. 1. Cor. 1.30. Romans 10.3. 2 Cor. 5.21. Iere. 23.6. Ier. 33.10.
and by whom it is, that we have remission and forgivenes of all our sins:
and he it is that is made of God to be our righteousness. Wherefore, being by him
freed from the guiltiness of sin, and the punishment of it, and having
withal, his most pure, clear, complete, and spotless righteousness,
imputed to us by faith, what is it that we need to fear? Or how can we
choose, but joy, and rejoice, again, and again, in the sense and feeling of
so great and incomparable a benefit. Yea, even this very point, namely, that
faith only does justify us in Gods sight (as being the only instrument to
apprehend and apply Christ, with his satisfaction and righteousness unto us) and
not works, though done after grace received, the ancient Fathers also
themselves do again clearly testify. S. Augustine says: Quantaelibet
iustitiae, sancti praedicentur, vel novi, vel veteris Testimenti, August. con.
1. ep. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 21.
tamen, non eos salvos fecit nisi fides Mediatoris, qui in remissione^
peccatorum sanguinem fudit: Of how great righteousness soever, the holy men
either of the old or new Testament are said to be, yet nothing saved them but
the faith of the Mediator, which shed his blood for the remission of their
sins. S. Basil says: Hoc est in domino gloriari, Basil. sermon. de humilit.
quando quis non effertur sua iustitia, sed agnoscit se destitutum vera
iustitia, and sola fide in Christum iustificari: This is to glory in the Lord,
when a man is not lifted up with his own righteousness, but acknowledges
himself destitute of true righteousness, and that he is justified only by
faith in Christ. In like sore, speaks S. Hillarie, saying: that, Sola fides
iustificat: Hillar. in Mat. 8.
Faith only justifies. S. Ambrose also says: Hoc constitutum est a deo, ut
qui credit in Christum, salvus sit, sine opere, sola fide gratis accipiens
remissionem peccatorum: Ambr. in 1. Cor. 1.
This is determined with God, that he that believes in Christ* should be
saved, without works, by faith only, freely receiving remission of sins.
S. Chrysostom likewise says: Sed unum illud a severarim, quod sola fides per
se salvum fecerit: Chrysostom homil. de fide and lege naturae.
This one thing I will affirm, that faith only by it self saves. Therefore
also it is, that the Church and people of God, do ever disclaim their own
merits, and their own righteousness, so often as they duly consider
themselves, and come into Gods presence: saying in Esaias: that, All their
righteousness is as filthy clovvtes: for the best righteousness, Esaias 64.6.
that is inherent in earthly Saints, has some defect, stain, or imperfection
in it. And so likewise does the Church and people of God in Daniels time,
disclaim all merit, and conceit of inherent righteousness in themselves, as
appears by their prayer, which they make unto God, saying: Dan. 9.18, 19.
We do not present our supplications before thee, for our own
righteousness, but for thy great tender mercies: O Lord, hear: O Lord,
forgive, O Lord, consider, and do it. That holy man Job, likewise, speaks to
the same effect: If man (says he) dispute with God, he cannot answer him
one thing of a Thousand. Job 9.3.
And again he says: If I would Justify my self, Verse 20.
mine own mouth shall condemn me: and, If I would be perfect, he shall
Judge me wicked. But now although the Protestants do thus, rightly teach,
Justification by Faith only, and not by Works, or by any Inherent
righteousness in men, and therewithal condemn the doctrine of men's merits
most justly: yet do they confess, Matthew 5.4 18. Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9 Heb 11.6
etc.
that there is a reward in Scripture promised to them that do good works* But
Reward and Merit do differ, and be not all one: For it is a Reward, not of
merit or desert of men's behalf, but of mere grace, favor, Reward and Merit
differ, and be not all one.
and bounty, in God, far above the merits and deserts of any men, and
performed, given, and bestowed, for Gods promise sake, and for the merits only
and mediation of Jesus Christ. There is Merces ex gratia, a Reward counted by
favor, as well as ex debito, of Debt, or Due desert, Romans 4.4.
as S. Paul himself distinguishes even in this very case. Yea Saint Paul
says again, that though Christ paid a price, and ransom for us, yet in
respect of our selves, we are Iustificati gratis, Justified frankely and
freely, Romans 3.24.
without our paying or performing any thing toward it, or in that behalf.
What could be spoken more plainly, or more forcibly, to quell the swelling
pride of men, and to dash all conceit of their merit, at GODS hand? It is true,
which is written in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where it is said thus: To do
good, and to to Distribute forgett not: for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased. Heb. 13.16.
The Papists translate it (for maintenance of their meritts) that with such
Hosts or Sacrifices, God is promerited: for so is their Latin Translation,
Promeretur Deus: Which word, in Latin, as it is not used passively, as the
Rhemists in their English have translated it; so neither is that Latin
translation, which they follow, right in that point, being not answerable to
the original in Greek, according whereunto, the ancient Fathers would have
all translations to be reformed, and framed, as before is declared: for the
Greek word, in that Text, is (...), which signifies (as our Translation has
it) is well pleased, or, is delighted: but it imports no such thing, as matter
of merit in it. And therefore you must hereby learn to take heed of your false
translations. Yea the Parable in the Gospel, of the Servant, that did the
commandment of his Master, plainly and purposelie shows, that we deserve
no thanks, or recompense, at Gods hand, for any duty or obedience, we
perform to him: For (says Christ) does the Master thank that servant, Luke
17.7, 8, 9, 10.
because he did that which was commanded him? I trow, not. So likewise ye,
when ye have done all those things that are commanded you, yet say, We are
unprofitable servants: we have done no more but that which was our duty to
do. It is here then very manifest, that no men by any duty or obedience
they perform to God, can possibly merit or deserve any benefit at Gods
hand, much less Eternal Heavenly happiness. And yet you have a conceit,
that so long as ye acknowledge those virtues and good works, to come, not
from your selves, but from God, and from his gift, ye may repose confidence in
them, and matter of merit: but what is this (if ye well consider it) but
plain Pharisaisme for all that? Luke 18.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
For did not the Pharisee in the Gospel say, O God I thank thee, etc.?
acknowledging therein the virtues and works which he had, to come from God and
to be of his gift, and therefore gave him thanks; and yet for reposing
confidence therein, and for being proud of Gods gifts, he is disliked and
reproved. Bern. Sermon. 61. in Cant.
Bernard says: Meritum meum, miseratio Domini: The merit I rely upon, is the
Lords mercy. Again he says: Non est quo gratia intret, ubi meritum occupavit:
There is no place for grace to enter, Bern. Sermon. 67. in Cant.
where merit has taken possession. Again he shows; That men can by no
manner of means, Bern. Sermon. 1. de Anx. Ansel. de men's. Crucis. Cusan. lib. 9.
excis.
possibly deserve or merit eternal life and salvation. And so teaches
Anselmus likewise: and Cusanus. Yea both we, and ye, be so far from
meriting and deserving salvaon, that contrariwise we all, in respect of our
own merits, must confess, that we deserve damnation. For ye, for your parts,
as well as we, cannot deny, but ye sometimes sin and go astray: and if you
did sin but once in all your life time, yet were that sufficient in the
sentence of Gods Law, and the severitie of his Justice, to make you subject to
his curse, and to throw you down to hell, and eternal torments. Never
therefore sooth nor flatter your selves, with that your distinction, of some
Venial, and some, deadly sins. For although it be true that some sins be
greater, then other some are, and that all sins be, in respect of Gods
mercy, venial, that is, remissible, and may be forgiven, (except the sin
against the Holy Ghost, of which it is directly said, that it shall never be
forgiven) yet is it also as true, that every sin, even the least that can be
named, is, in his own nature, Gal. 3.10. Iam. 2.10. Romans 6 23. Ezekiel 18.20.
Every sin (even the ^east that can be named) is deadly in his own nature.
deadly, and makes a breach and transgression of Gods Law, and consequently
deserves his curse and condemnation: for so have S. Paul and S. James, before
instructed us; whereunto the rest of the Scriptures do accord. So that even
those which you call small and venial sins, if they should be laid to your
charge, and should not be forgiven you through Christ the Savior and Redeemer,
they be of weight sufficient, to press you down to hell, there to be
everlastinglie tormented. And yet, it is true, that in respect of the quantity
and quality of sins committed by reprobates, and according to the difference
of them, shall be the diversity of their punishments in hell; some being there
to be tormented more, and some less. Do ye not then, all this while,
perceive, in what a woeful and damnable estate, they all be, that stand upon
their own deservings, merits, and works, and look to be Justified before
Gods tribunal by a righteousness inherent in their own persons, and not by
the righteousness only of Jesus Christ apprehended and applied by faith? Well
therefore did S. Bernard say; that, Assignata est homini aliena Iustitia, quia
caruit sua: There is assigned to a man, Bern. Epist. 190.
another man's righteousness, because he vvanted his own. Pigghius likewise
speaks, teaching, Pigghius de fide and Iustifi^.
that we are Justified by the righteousness of Christ imputed to us by faith.
And so also do the Divines of Coleyn teach, Colon. in Antidag.
that we are Justified by the righteousness of Christ, not as it is without
us, abiding in him, but as the same being apprehended by faith, is imputed to
us.

CHAP. IV.
Certain objections of the Adversaries, answered, concerning this matter of
Justification.

FIrst, the ambiguitie of this word, Iustificare, seems much to misleade you
in this point: for you will have it to signify and import, to make a man just
(who before was unjust) by a quality of Justice inherent in his own person:
And true it is, That whosoever is Justified, is also sanctified; so that he
has in some sort, a Sanctity, or, Justice inherent in his own person, by the
operation of Gods spirit within him. This then which you call Inherent Justice
in a man, is the same that we call Sanctification, and is not all one with
Justification, but is a fruit, effect, and consequent of it. Neither does the
word, Iustificare, (to Justify) evermore so signify, but sometimes it
signifies, to declare or approve one to be Just: as in Psalm. 51.4. and Romans
3.4. where it is thus said, to God himself; That thou may be justified in
thy sayings: meaning, that thou may be declared, or, approved to be Just.
And so in the first of Tim. 3.16. Christ is said, to be Justified that is,
declared, or approved to be just. And this sense also does S. James in his
second Chapter of his Epistle, say, That a man is Justified by works, that
is, declared or approved to be Just by them, as being the fruits and
declarations of his faith. And sometimes again, it signifies, by a Judgment,
or, sentence to absolve, and acquit a man of faults and crimes laid to his
charge, and of all punishments to the same belonging: as in Pro. 17.15. it is
said, He that Justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the Just, even
they both are an abomination unto the Lord: that is, he that absolveth, or
acquiteth a wicked man in Judgment, when contrariwise, he should be condemned;
and he that condemns a Just and innocent person, who should of right be
acquitted. both these are abominable in Gods sight. Where you see, that, to
Justify the wicked, is not by alteration of qualities, actuallie to make a man
Just, who before was unjust, but it signifies, by sentence and Judgment, to
acquit and free him that is accused. And thus, is the word, Justify, taken in
S. Paul's discourse touching this matter: as, to omit all other places, is
manifest by that one place of Romans 8.33, 34 where it is said thus: Who shall
lay anything to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that Justifies, who is he
that condemns? Where you see, that the word, Justify, is set as opposite to
the word, Condemn, and consequently signifies, an acquiting, clearing,
freeing, or discharging* of whatsoever may be laid to the charge of any of
Gods elect, and chosen children.

2 Neither can any rightly conclude, because this righteousness of Christ is
thus said to be imputed by faith, that therefore it is only an imaginary and
fantastical Justice, and no Justice or righteousness indeed: yea, such
blasphemies must be detested. For the word, Imputed, does not diminish or
detract, from the truth of the Justice, as though it were imputed or reputed
for Justice, which were none revera: but it signifies, that as it is in it
self, a most pure, full, perfect, and complete righteousness, (being far,
above the best righteousness, that is to be found in any earthly Saints, or
such as be mere men) so does God, accordingly reckon and esteem of it. So
that although we be most unjust, in respect of our selves, yet by having
Christ's righteousness imputed to us, we are, in him, really and truly Just
and righteous, and without all spot, stain, or imperfection: For Christ, with
all his merits, righteousness, satisfaction, and obedience, is, not by way of
fancy, opinion, conceit, or imagination, but revera, actuallie, and verily,
bestowed and given of God, to all his faithful and beloved children. Unto us,
a child is borne: unto us, a son is given, says Esaias the Prophet. Esa. 9.6.
And again it is said; That God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son etc. And it is said again, that, Ioh. 3.16.
He was given of God his Father to the Elect: Ioh. 17.6.12.24. Ioh 6.37.39.
and that those Elect were likewise given of God, to him. Agreeably whereunto
speaks also S. Paul, saying: that, Christ is made unto us, of God, wisdom,
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: that as it is written,
1. Cor. 1.30.31.
whosoever glories, should glory in the Lord. Seeing therefore Christ, with
all his obedience and righteousness, is given unto us of God, and that we
take and receive him by faith, there can be no doubt, but that he is as verily
and reallie become ours, as any man's lands, possessions, or goods become his,
which he has by lawful conveyance or gift, from another man.

3 But when we say, that Faith only Justifies in Gods sight, you further
object, that this word, Only, is more then is in the Scripture to be found:
Howbeit, you may observe, that in the Gospel of S. Mark, Mark. 5.36.
Christ said thus to one; Be not afraid, only believe. But neither are these
words, Trinity, Consubsta^tiall* etc. expressly found in the Scripture, but so
long as the effect and equivalencie of them, is there found, it suffices. In
like sort, if words equipollent, or, equivalent to this word, Only, be found
in the Scripture, it suffices. What is then the sense of this word, only, in
this position, Faith only justifies? it is added, to exclude works, and
their merit, from being any cause of that our Justification in the sight of
God. Now then, Rom 3.28. Gal 2.16^ Romans 11.6. Ephe. 2.8, 9, 10. Romans 4.1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. Rom 3.24, 25, 26, 27. Romans 4.14, 15, 16.
when the Scriptures expressly and plentifully affirm, that, we are Justified
by faith, without works; and, by faith, and not by works: is it not as
much, as if they had said in plain terms, that we are Justified by faith
only? Again, when the Scriptures say, and teach: that we are Iustificati
gratis, and ex gratia, and per gratiam; Justified franckely and freely, (that
is, for nothing paid or performed, on our parts) and of grace, and by grace:
Do not these words fully import, and clearly show, that we are Justified,
without any merits, or works of our own deserving it? Can any thing be more
plainly declared?

4 Nevertheless, they still seek refuges, and therefore sometimes say, that,
When S. Paul speaks of the Works of the Law (excluding them from Justifying
in Gods sight), he means only the works of the Ceremonial Law, and not the
works of the Moral Law. But indeed S. Paul, speaking of the Works of the
Law, very apparently means, as well the Works of the Moral law, as of the
Ceremonial: for when he says, that, Not the hearers of the Law, but the doers
of the Law shall be Justified: can this be intended only of the Ceremonial
law, without any regard at all had to the Moral? Or when he speaks of the
whole Book of the Law, saying that It is written; Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that be written in the
book of the Law, to do them: does not this extend to the Moral Law? or can
these words be restrained only to the Ceremonial? Yea, when he further says
thus: I had not known sin, but by the Law: for I had not known lust, or
concupiscence to be sin, except the Law had said, Romans 7.7.
Non concupisces, Thou shall not covet, or, Thou shall no lust: does not every
one hereby most plainly perceive, of what Law it is, that he chiefly speaks
and means? namely, that it is principally of the Moral Law, that is, of the
Decalogue, or Law of the Ten Commandments: For to what other end else, is it,
that he there expressly, and by name, rehearses and brings in, one of those
ten Commandments? But yet further, he shows, that there be but two ways of
righteousness (namely the righteousness that is of the Law, and the
righteousness which is of faith) and says: that, Romans 10.2, 3, ^* 5, 6, 7, etc.
Moses describes the righteousness which is of the Law, in this sort, viz.
That the man which does those things, shall live by them: But the
righteousness which is of faith, speaks after another manner: and he
shows it, to consist, not in any doubtful questioning, but in a firm
believing in Christ; who is the end of the Law for righteousness, to every
one that believes. When therefore he here again, says, touching the works
of the Law, and the righteousness compassable that way; That the man that does
those things, shall live by them: is it his meaning, think you, that he that
observes the works of the Ceremonial Law only, without observing or doing
any of the works of the Moral Law, shall live thereby, and enjoy everlasting
happiness? I presume, none can be so absurd, or unwise, as to think it. It is
then a thing very manifest, that he speaks not only of the works of the
Ceremonial Law, but of the works also of the Moral Law, and of these chiefly,
excluding as well the works of the one, as of the other, Romans 3 9.20, 21, 22,
23, 24.29, 30. Romans 4.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.16.
from being any cause of our Justification in Gods sight. And this is so much
the more evident, because S. Paul yet further, in that his dispute of
Justification, excludes not only the Jews, but the Gentiles also, from all
hope of Justification by the Law: teaching, that they both, are to expect
justification in Gods sight, Not by the works of the law, Gal. 2.15.16.
but by faith in Jesus Christ. Now ye know, that the Gentiles be not bound to
the observation of the ceremonial law, as the Jews were: Romans 3.31. Ephesians. 2.8,
9, 10.
but the Gentiles (as well as the Jews) be bound to the observation of the
moral law, of the ten Commandments. When therefore S. Paul teaches, that
as well the Gentiles as the Jews are to expect Justification, not by the works
of the law, but by faith in Christ: it is apparent, that he must needs mean
to exclude herein, as well the works of the Moral law, whereto the Gentiles are
bound, as the works of the Ceremonial law, whereto the Jews only were
bound, and not the Gentiles: for otherwise, you will make him a very vain and
idle disputer, in this point, as in respect of the Gentiles.

5 Howbeit, being thus repulsed from this hold, they then retire, and return
to their old, wonted, and ordinary nold, wherein they seem to repose their
greatest strength: and that is the same which is before mentioned; namely, that
S. Paul. when he excludes works, from being any cause of Justification in
Gods sight, means it, of works done before faith received, and whilst a man
is an unbeleever, and not of works done after faith received: Which works done
by a believing person, do, as they suppose, Justify before God, and in his
sight. This has been before sufficiently answered, yet because they so often
and usuallie urge it, I hope it will not be offensive, that I also here, once
again, make answer unto it. First therefore it might suffice, to call to your
remembrance, that which has been spoken, concerning those two faithful and
godly men, Abraham, and David: who albeit they had, after faith and grace
received from God, lived well, and done sundry good works, (for which they
might deserve praise and glory amongst men) yet, Romans 4.2, 3, 4, 5.
for all that, they deserved no praise, nor glory, with God (as S. Paul
witnesses) nor were thereby justified in his sight. Yea, as touching Abraham,
he says: that notwithstanding all that he did, not his works, but his Faith
was imputed to him for righteousness before God. Romans 4.6, 7, 8.
And as touching David, though he were a man likewise, very faithful, and
godly, and did many good works; yet by his godly life, and good works, he
never thought to be justified before Gods tribunal, but found all the
godliness, and goodness that was in him, to be too defective, and to come too
short for that purpose; and therefore also he cries out thus, unto God,
saying: Enter not into judgment with thy servant, Psalm. 143.2.
for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. Yea, Romans 4.6, 7, 8.
he discribeth the blessedness of every man, even of the holiest man that
lives, to consist, not in his own sanctity or righteousness, but in this,
that, Psalm. 32.1.2.
His sins be forgiven, or, not imputed to him. And so does S. Paul infer,
and teach, out of this example of David: Romans 4.6.
That God imputes righteousness, without works. So that neither the works
which David did, nor the works which Abraham did, nor consequently the works,
that any other godly or holy man does, after grace and faith received, be
sufficient to Justify in Gods presence: For, I know nothing by my self
(says S. Paul) yet am I not thereby justified. 1. Cor. 4.4.
I might here further desire you, to call to your remembrance, that holy man
Job, and that holy Prophet of God, Daniel; Job 9 3 20. Dan 9 18, 19. Esaias 64 6.
yea all that godly company and Church of God, in Daniels time, and Esaies
time: who all did (as themselves testify) renounce all their own inherent
righteousness, as too insufficient, and unmeet to stand before Gods most pure
eyes, to claim Justification thereby, in his sight. Yea, if God should look
narrowly, to see what is said, and done amiss, and to recompense it, in the
rigor and severitie of his Justice, according to men's merits and deserts: Psalm.
130.^.
Who (as the Psalmist speaks) should be able to stand, or to abide it. Yea,
I might here moreover desire you, to remember, whatsoever is contained in the
former Chapter, touching this matter. For not the works, even of a just man,
do justify in Gods sight: as S. Paul prooveth by an express testimony out
of the Prophet Abacuk, where he says, Abac. 2.4. Rom 1.17.
even of the just man: that, He lives by his faith, (and not by his Works).
And this he urges and enforces again, in his Epistle to the Galathians,
saying thus: Gal. 3.11.
But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is evident:
for (says he) The just shall live by faith. And thus himself, being otherwise
dead, Gal. 2.19, 20,
did live, or had life in him, namely, by faith in the Son of God, and not by
the works of the law. Yea, he further excludes, even the works of
righteousness, in express terms, saying thus: Tit 3.5.
Not by the works of righteousness which we have done, but according to
his mercy he has saved us. Observe that he here directly affirms, of
himself, and of all the rest that shall be saved, that they are saved, not,
(...), by works done by them in righteousness, but of Gods mere mercy and
grace, through Christ Jesus. And again observe, that speaking not to
unbeleevers, Ephesians. 1.1. Ephesians. 2.8, 9.10.
but to believers, Saints, and sanctified people, living in Ephesus, he says
thus: By grace are ye saved through faith, (and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God) not of works, lest any man should glory: for we are his
vvorkemanship, created in Christ Jesus, unto good works, which God has
before ordained that we should walk in them. Here also you see
infalliblie, that works, though done by such as be sanctified and regenerate
persons, be nevertheless excluded from being any cause of their salvation:
yea, by the very words themselves of the text, you perceive, that he speaks
expressly, and by name of good works, which God has before ordained, that
we should walk in them: denying them nevertheless to be any cause of
salvation But here, why do they speak of any good works done by Infidels,
or before faith received? For to speak properly and truly, none do, or can
do good works (so allowed to be in Gods censure) but believing persons only:
Heb. 11.6. Romans 14.23. Tit. 1.15.
inasmuch as the best works of Infidels, and before a man has received faith,
be not allowed for good in Gods sight, but be, as S. Augustine affirms of
them: August. con. Julian. lib. 4. cap 3. cont. dua^ ep. Pelag ad Bonif. lib.
3. cap. 5.
Splendida peccata: Glittering sins. Howbeit, here remember, that although
those which be Saints upon earth, that is, which be regenerate and sanctified
people, be thus expressly affirmed to be saved by their faith, and not by their
good works: yet have they nevertheless, these good works appointed for them
to walk in, so long as they live in this world (for so this text to the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10
directly shows) to the end, their faith should not be idle, but working
through love, Gal 5.6.
as S. Paul speaks in another place, and that so, it might appear to be,
not a vain and a dead faith, but a sound and a lively faith, and such as will
save a man, as S. James, Iam. 2.14, 15, 16, 17. etc.
and the rest of the Scriptures have also before declared. Yea, this point*
even Christ Jesus also himself, by his last Judgment, in the end of the world
does declare, namely, that the justifying and saving faith is not void of good
works, but furnished with them; and yet that Gods people do not rely upon
them: For thus will he say to his faithful and elect ones: Come ye blessed of
my father, inherit ye the kingdom, prepared for you, from the foundation of
the world: Mat. 25.34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. etc.
for I was hungry, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and ye clothed me: I
was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. But
now observe, that although these elect and righteous persons had these good
works, yet do not they so much as take notice of them, much less stand upon
the merit of them; and therefore do they answer, and say: Lord, when savv
we thee hungry, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? when saw
we thee a stranger, and took thee in? Verses 41, 42, 43, 44. etc.
or naked, and clothed thee? sick, or in prison, and came unto thee? Read
further the rest of the Chapter, to the end of it: And by all of it, considered
together, ye may very easily perceive; first, that they be not the elect and
righteous people, but the reprobates, that stand upon their works, They be not
the elect, but the reprobates, that stand up on their works, as appears by
the final Judgment.
and object their works to plead for them: And secondly, that Christ their
Lord, takes notice of the good works of the elect, although themselves take no
notice of them, nor do so much as once mention or allege them. Where Christ,
by alleging their good works, would have the world also to take notice, and to
be advertised, that it was not a vain, idle, or dead faith, but a justifying,
and saving faith, which these men had. For their good works be there
mentioned, as testimonies, fruits, and declarations of their faith, and as
being, Via regni, non causa regnandi: Bern. d. (...) lib. (...).
The way wherein they walked toward this kingdom, but not as being the cause
of their enjoying of that kingdom, as S. Bernard also himself has before
taught and affirmed. Yea, in very deed, the primarie and original cause of
their enjoying of that most happy kingdom, is there delivered in the former
words, where Christ calls them, the Blessed of his father; and tells them
moreover directly, that they are to possess this kingdom, not by any
purchase or desert of their own, but, by way of Inheritance: (for the word is,
(...), that is, Inherit ye, or possess ye it by way of Inheritance). Mat.
25.34,
And further, he there tells them, that this kingdom was prepared for them,
long before they were borne, or had done any good works at all, namely, even
from the foundation of the world. So that this glorious and heavenly kingdom,
is given them of Gods mere bounty, and grace, and is unto them, Romans 64 ^3.
Ephesians. 2.8, 9.10. Romans 11.6. Romans 2.6. Mat. 16.27.
a Revvard according to their works, (as the Scripture speaks), but not for
their works, as though their works deserved it, or were the meritorious cause
of their salvation. Yea, it is a reward of grace and favor, and not of debt or
due desert (as S. Paul has also before testified) and a revvard of
Inheritance, Romans 4.4*
Coloss. 3.24.
(as the same S. Paul, again expressly affirms it). In vain therefore also,
is that your distinction, of the first Justification, which you make to be by
faith without works, and of the second Justification* which, you say, is by
works, and by living an holy and godly life: for the Scriptures speak but
of one Justification in Gods sight, Romans 5.1. Romans 8.30.
availeable to salvation. As for that which you call the second Justification,
consisting in doing good works, and in holiness of life and conversation, it
is (as I said before) more properly and rightly, to be termed (as the
Scripture calls it) Sanctification; Romans 6.22. Phil. 1.11. 1. Cor. 6.11. Iam.
2.18. Gal. 5.6.
it being an effect, declaration, fruit, and consequent of that Justification,
we have before by faith, as S. James, and S. Paul, and the rest of the
Scriptures, do manifestly teach.

CHAP. V.
That Christ is our only and all-sufficient Redeemer, and has fully satisfied
Gods Justice for our sins, and the punishment thereto belonging: against men's
merits and satisfactions, in that behalf; and against Popish Purgatory. And
that there is no licentiousness in this doctrine, but the clean contrary.

But they further accuse our Religion to be licentious, because, relying wholly
upon Christ, our Redeemer, and his satisfaction, we make no satisfaction our
selves, for our sins, to the Justice of GOD. Howbeit, ye are, first of all,
to know, that this doctrine and faith of ours, concerning Christ his redemption
and satisfaction all-sufficient, made to Gods Justice, for our sins,
infers no such matter as licentiousness, but the clean contrary. For, we
are redeemed, not to the end to live dissolutely or carelessly, but to the end
we should, for so great and unspeakeable a benefit, Luc. 1.74, 75. 1. Pet.
2.24. Romans 6.22.
obey and serve God in holiness and righteousness before him, and that, all
the days of our life, as the Scr^ptures teach. And secondly, as touching the
truth of this matter, Saint Peter tells us, that, 1. Pet. 2.24.
Christ his own self, bare our sins, in his body, on the tree. Again,
Ioh. 1.7.9.
S. John says: that, the blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, does purge
us from all sin: and, cleanse us, from all iniquity. S. Paul also says:
Ephesians. 1.7. Heb. 9.12. Matthew. 20.28. 1. Tim. 2.5, 6. Col 2.13, 14, 15. 1. Ioh.
2.1, 2. Col. 1.14. Acts 13.38. Acts 10.43.
We have redemption through, his blood, even the remission of sins. Yea, this
the Scriptures do almost every where teach and testify. How then can your
conceit of men's satisfactions to Gods Justice for sins, be otherwise
accounted of, then as a thing apparently injurious to that satisfaction, and
redemption, and (consequently) to that free and full discharge, and remission
of all our sins, and of the guiltiness and punishment thereto belonging,
which we have in Christ? For, guiltiness being taken away, the punishment also
is taken away, Tertull de Bapt.
says Tertullian. And so also says S. Augustine; that, Christ by taking upon
him the punishment, and not the fault, Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 37.
has done away both the fault and the punishment. And in all reason it must be
so, that when a fault or sin is forgiven, the punishment thereto belonging,
is forgiven also: for to what other end else is the fault or sin forgiven and
remitted? But against this, they allege the example of King David, and of
other the children of God, who notwithstanding that they had their sins
forgiven them, had nevertheless, afflictions and chastisements sent them from
God, even in this life. Whereunto they have been often answered, that God
sends not these chastisements and afflictions upon his children, to that end,
thereby to satisfy his wrath and justice for their sins (for his wrath is
appeased, and his Justice satisfied in their behalf another way, Rom 5.^. Romans
3.24, 25. 1 Ioh. 2.1, 2. Col. 1.19, 20, 21.
namely in the passion and obedience of Jesus Christ) but by that means, to
put them in remembrance of their sins formerly committed, and to bring them
to repentance for the same, and to make them stand in more fear and awe of
God, for the time to come, and to walk more warily, and circumspectly, Psalm.
119 67.71.
and with better obedience before him, as the Psalmist declares. So that these
be sent of God for other ends and purposes, and come from him, not as from an
angry and revengefull Judge, but out of his kind provident care, and fatherly
affection, and love, toward them. Which thing S. Paul also witnesses; showing,
that these corrections and chastisements, 1. Cor. 11.31.32.
be sent upon them to the end, they might thereby be advertised to call
themselves, and their sins, to a better remembrance, even so far as to
Judge and condemn themselves for the same, and so be admonished not to run
any longer a riotous and wicked course, with the damnable world. The same is
further testified in the Epistle to the Hebrews: Heb. 12.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
for there it is said thus; Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges
every son that he receives. And he says again, If ye endure chastening,
God offers himself unto you, as unto sons: for, what son is it, whom
the father chasteneth not? And again he says; If therefore ye be without
correction, whereof all (sons) are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not
sons. Moreover (says he) we have had the fathers of our flesh, which
corrected us, and we gave them reverence: should we not much more be in
subjection, unto the father of spirits, that we might live? for they verily,
for a few days, chastened us, after their own pleasure: but he chasteneth us*
for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness. The like speaks
S. Augustine, August. de Trinit. lib. 13. ca. 15.
saying; Prosunt ista mala quae fideles pie perferunt, etc. These evils or
afflictions which faithful people in godly wise suffer, do profit either to
the amendment of their sins, or for the exercise and trial of their
righteousness, or to show the misery of this life: That, that life where
there shall be true and perpetual blessedness indeed, both may more ardently
be desired, and more instantly be sought after. It appears then, that
chastisements and afflictions, be sent of God, in this life, upon his children,
out of his Love, and not out of his fury and unappeased displeasure: so that
they serve not to any such end as to have the severitie of his wrath and
Justice, to be, by such means, satisfied and appeased; yea how can the
greatest afflictions or miseries that be, or can be imagined, in sinful men,
during this life, satisfy Gods heavy and infinite wrath and justice, for
sins? Or, how can they merit heaven and heavenly glory? when S. Paul
himself says expressly, thus: I suppose, Romans 8.18.
that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory that
shall be showed unto us. But yet for all this, (such is the strength of error)
they strangely suppose, that they do Christ no wrong, because it is through
his merits, (as they say,) that they be enabled to merit and to make this
satisfaction to Gods justice, for their sins: Howbeit, this is but a mere
conceit and imagination. For there is no word of God, to warrant or prove it:
nay, the Scripture teaches, that Christ died, not for our good works, to make
them able to merit at Gods hand, but for our sins, that they might be
pardoned. Again, it is said, that Christ has by himself (and not by us, or,
in our persons) purged our sins. 1. Ioh. 2.2.
He is, our (...), and, (...) platamentum, and, propitiatio, Romans 3.25.
reconciliation, and, propitiation. Ye are bought with a price (says S.
Paul) therefore glorify ye God, both in your body, 1. Cor. 6.20. 1. Pet.
1.18, 19. Matthew. 20.28.
and in your spirit: for they are Gods. Christ is he that paid this price,
for them, as S. Peter also shows. And therefore, not We, but He, is
affirmed to be our (...), and, (...), price, and, 1. Tim. 2.6.
the price of Redemption, paid for us: and that we are for our parts,
Justified, gratis, that is, franckly and freely, Romans 3.24.
and for nothing by us paid, (...), by the redemption which is in Christ
Jesus, and not in us, or, in our persons. Yea, in that Christ was to come down
from heaven, and to be incarnate for this purpose, and to suffer, and so to
satisfy Gods wrath and Justice, in our behalf, he sufficiently shows, that
none of us were able, in our own persons, to perform so great a work. Yea
they may by as good right and reason say, that he by the virtue and merit of
his death and passion, has enabled men, to be The Savior and Redeemer of the
World, in their own persons, or to be the Mediator betwixt God and them, or
challenge any other right or prerogative whatsoever, that properly belongs
to Christ Jesus. For, what may not men frame, fancy, or devise, out of this,
if they be so disposed, and care not to imagine things at their own pleasure,
without any warrant from God, or his word? Is it not then a most intolerable
boldness, for any mere mortal and sinful men, to be so presumptuous, as to
dare to stand in Christ his place, or to challenge to themselves, any part of
that high, incomparable, and peculiar honor, that properly belongs to him,
who is both God and man, and our whole, only, Heb. 10.14.
and perfect Redeemer? I pray tell me, what imperfection do you find, in his
satisfaction, that it should not content you? Are your selves better able to
make satisfaction to Gods Justice for sins, then he? or is his most precious
blood, passion, and obedience, able to satisfy for eternal pains and
punishments, and not for temporal? Shall he be able to satisfy the greater,
and not be able to satisfy the less? or if ye grant him to be able to die,
do ye doubt of his willingness, in that behalf? And if he were both
willing and able (neither of which ye can deny) what question then should be
made in this matter? It is true, that, as touching the ungodly reprobates, that
be without Christ, all calamities, afflictions, miseries and punishments of
this life, and even the bodily death it self, remain to them, in their own
nature, and be to them, tokens of Gods wrath, and of his curse and unappeased
displeasure, and forerunners of their future certain and undoubted damnation:
Romans 5.1. Coloss. 2.^0. Romans 8.1.
But to the godly Elect, that be in Christ Jesus, and that have peace with God,
and with whom he is reconciled through Christ, no afflictions, of this life,
have in them any token, at all, 1. These. 5.9.10.
of his irefull and revengefull displeasure, or of his unsatisfied Justice, but
they are, contrariwise, tokens of his great love, and fatherly affection toward
them, (as is before showed), and are to them forerunners of their future
certain and undoubted salvation. For toward Gods children, the nature of these
things is changed, Romans 8.28. Heb. 12 6 9, 10, 11. 2. Cor. 4.17. Gal. 3.13, 14.
through Christ, having no Curse at all, but blessedness, in them: Insomuch
that, even death it self also, which to flesh and blood seems most bitter,
to them nevertheless, is a most welcome and blessed thing, Phil 1.21.23. Reve.
14 13. 1. Cor. 15.56, 57.
as having the sting of it (which is sin) taken away in Christ their Savior,
and as being the door that opens an immediate passage and entrance to an
everlasting life, in eternal happiness. For we know (says S. Paul, in the
person of all Gods children) that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be
destroyed, 2. Cor. 5.1, 2.
we have a building given of God, that is, an house not made with hands but
eternal in the heavens: for therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with
our house which is from heaven. And Christ Jesus himself speaks likewise
thus: Verily, verily, I say unto you; Ioh. 5.24.
He that hears my word, and believes him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and comes not into Judgment, but is passed from death into life. If
then (which is a thing here evident) as soon as this earthly Tabernacle of
their bodies is dissolved, all Gods children, go to an eternal heavenly
habitation: and again, if the godly and faithful man after the death of the
body, does in his soul immediately pass to an eternal life: which you
likewise here see to be very manifest (for, the word is, (...) in the
preterperfect tense) what is then become of your supposed Purgatory? Do you
not, by these Texts, perceive, that even that also, is to be utterly banished
and abolished, as a thing fabulous, impious, and untrue, and not to be believed?

2 But your Church, for all that, striveth and strugleth to uphold it: as being
indeed, one of the best fires, that ever the Pope and his Clergy have had for
the heating of their Kitchins, and which, in respect of the people who are
miserably abused with it, is, not unfitly, called Purgatory-Pickepurse,
inasmuch as it robs them of their wealth and substance. But let us see, what
texts of Scripture, they chiefelie allege, and rely upon, for this purpose.
First, they allege, Mat. 5.25, 26, where Christ says thus: Agree with thine
adversary quickl^e, whilst thou art in the way with him: lest at any time
thine adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the
officer, and then thou be cast into prison: verily I say unto thee, thou shall
not come out from thence, until thou have paid the uttermost farthing. Howbeit,
this text is an exhortation and persuasion to peace, reconciliation, concord,
and agreement, betwixt man and man, in this life: least for not observing of
this concord, and agreement, it so fall out (as often it does in the world)
that the debtor be cast into Prison, and depart not from thence, until he have
paid the utmost farthing. But, if by this Prison be meant (as they would have
it) a place of punishment after death: yet then, is there no necessity, for
all that, to expound it of their Purgatory: for well may it then be taken for
Hell, the place of the damned: yea, then it must needs be so taken: inasmuch as
there be but two sorts of people, namely, Elect, and Reprobate: and answerably
to them, there be but two places, after death, viz. Heaven and Hell* for, that
the souls of Gods Elect, go immediately after their death, not into any such
tormenting place, as your supposed Purgatory, but into Heaven, is, beside the
former texts, evident, even by the president, of the good Thief, that was
crucified with Christ: to whom Christ said thus: This day shall thou be with me
in Paradise, Luke 23.43.
that is, in Heaven, the place of blessedness for all Gods Saints and people.
That this Theefes soul, went that very day into Paradise, is a thing
expreslie apparent in the Text: and that Paradise is Heaven, even the Third and
higest Heaven, (the place of glory) is also very manifest, 2. Cor. 12.2, 3, 4
because S. Paul himself, so declares and expounds it. What doubt then can
there be in this matter? But it is yet further evident, by the example of the
Rich man and Lazarus: For when the Rich man died, he went to Hell, the place
of Torments for the Reprobate, and when poor Lazarus dyed, he was carried by
Angels, into Abraham's Bosom, Luke 16 22, 23, 24, 25.
that is, into Heaven, the place of comfort, joy, and happiness, for all God
elect. For that Abraham's bosom, must be taken for Heaven (and not for that
fained place of Limbus Patrum, Rhem. Annot. in Luk 16* ^2. Gregor^ Martin
against the English translations, upon Purgatory.
which Papists make to be a part of hell) is manifest by this, that, beside the
solace, joy, and comfort that is showed to be in it, it is further mentioned,
and set in the Text it self, as directly opposite to Hell. Now, what is so
directly opposite to Hell, as Heaven is? and consequently, what must Abraham's
bosom be, but Heaven, and no part of Hell, against which, in the Text it
self, it is so directly opposed? S. Augustine says plainly, it is no part
of Hell: I could never find in the Scriptures (says he) that Hell is taken
for good: And if it be never so read in the Divine authority, verily, Aug.
epist. ^9. Evodio.
that bosom of Abraham (that is, an habitation of a certain secret rest) is
not to be believed to be any part of Hell. To the same effect, he speaks
in another place, where he affirms, Abraham's bosom, expressly, to be
Paradise, that is, Heaven: Quanto magis etc. How much more (says he) may the
bosom of Abraham, de genesis ad lit. lib. 1^. cap. 33. and 34
which is after this life, be called Paradise? S. Crysostome also (against
the conceit of such as supposed it to be Hell, or a part of it,) says: that,
the Bosom of Abraham was the poor man's Paradise, yea, I say this, that the
Bosom of Abraham, Chrysostom. in Luc. hom. de divite.
is the truth of Paradise; yea, I confess it to be the most holy Paradise.
But moreover, considering that Christ is the slain Lamb, Revel. 13.8. 1. Ioh.
2.2. Heb. 13.8. John 8.56. 1. Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4.
from the beginning of the world: and that, He was yesterday, and to day, and
is the same for ever: (as the Scripture speaks) The force and virtue of that
his death, must needs extend unto all times, as touching the elect, to redeem
and save them: And consequently, what doubt can there be, but that Abraham,
Isaac, Act. 4.12. Heb 9.15.
Jacob; and all the rest of Gods people, that lived and died, before Christ his
Incarnation, and Passion, went after their death, as directly into Heaven, as
those godly and faithful people do, that have died since his Incarnation,
Passion, and Ascension? for as for that Text, which ye allege of Heb. 9.8.
where it is said: that, The way of the Holies, Heb. 9. verse. 8.
was not yet manifested, or opened, whilst as yet the first Tabernacle was
standing. The meaning and scope of that place, is no more, but that the way to
Heaven was not opened, by virtue of any sacrifices of the first Tabernacle
under the Law, but by virtue of the Sacrifice and passion of Christ, which
those old sacrifices did prefigure: the virtue of which Sacrifice, and
sufferings of Christ, extending it self, from the beginning of the world, to
the end thereof, as touching all the faithful (to take away all their sins,
Heb. 13.8. Rev* 13.8. 1. Cor 10.1, 2, 3, 4. Heb. 9 15.
and to work their full redemption) is ever sufficient to give those old
godly Fathers, rest and felicity in Heaven, in their souls, after their
bodily death. Yea, where else does Christ himself, place Abraham, Mat. 8.11.
Isaac, and Jacob (even before his Passion) but in the kingdom of Heaven? Your
supposed Limbus Patrum therefore has no ground to rely upon, nor your
supposed Purgatory neither, but are both to vanish as smoke, being not only
fantastical, but untrue, and ungodlie conceits. But to answer yet further, to
the text alleged for your imagined purgatory: Why should that Prison, before
mentioned (being admitted to be a place of punishment for sin, after death)
be supposed your Purgatory, rather then Hell, the place of the Damned? For,
do ye allow him to be sent to Purgatory, that is never reconciled to a man,
but dies out of Charity? does not such a one live and die in deadly sin,
and consequently deserve hell fire and damnation? Ye say, that the words of the
Text affirm, that after he is committed to the prison, there mentioned, he is
not to come out from thence, until he has paid the utmost farthing: This
word, until, say you, imports; that after payment once fully made by him,
he is to come out again: and therefore that it is to be intended, not a
perpetual and everlasting prison, such as Hell is, but a Temporary prison,
such as you suppose your Purgatory to be. But deceive not your selves with an
argument, drawn from this word (until) in the Text: for it necessarily
enforces no such matter, as you would deduce out of it. For example, in Matthew.
1. verse. 25. it is said: Mat. 1.2^.
that, Joseph knevv not Marie, until she had brought forth her first borne
Son, and called his name Jesus: will you therefore, with Helvidius, because
of this word ( until) infer, that therefore afterward Joseph knew her? I am
sure ye will not: and yet by force of that word, if ye were so disposed, might
ye infer, as well the one as the other. But, as that word ( until) in the
last alleged place, infers no such consequent, but rather, that he never
knew her: so in the other place, where it is said, That he shall not go out of
that Prison, until he has paid the utmost farthing, is likewise meant, that
he shall never come out. And so, in very deed, Ferus in hunc locum.
does Ferus, the Jesuit, expound it. And the reason for it, is very good, and
apparent: for, seeing he is there to continue, until he pay the utmost
farthing; and that he, for his part, after he is dead, and committed to this
Prison, is never able to make payment; how can it be shifted, but that he must
lie there perpetually? For, the conceit, that one man may make payment and
satisfaction for the sins of another* when he cannot so much as make payment
and satisfaction to Gods Justice, for his own sins, is a most vain and idle
conceit. Yea, thus also does S. Augustine expound this Prison, of the place of
the Damned, namely of Hell, and eternal pains: Sermon. Dom. in monte. And so
does S. Hierome also expound it, in Lamen. lib. 1. cap. 1. and Eusebius
Emissenus in Domi 6 p^st. Pent. saying: Carcer iste, infernus est: This prison
is Hell. And so Theophilus Antiochenus: in Carcerem, id est, in Gehennam: Into
Prison, that is, Into Hell, the place of the damned. And Cromatius likewise
upon this place, and diverse others. But lastly, what reason have they to
suppose, that any faithful godly soul should, after death, be cast into
any Prison, for any debt, or sin whatsoever, there to continue for any
time at all, when as all their debts, or sins, be fully paid, satisfied for,
and discharged by Jesus Christ, their suertie, Savior, and Redeemer, in their
behalf? How often must they be told of these things?

3 The next place they allege, to prove their Purgatory, is Matthew. 12. verse.
32. where because it is said, that the Blasphemy, or sin against the holy
Ghost, shall not be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to
come. Ergo, say they, some sins be forgiven in the world to come. But, first:
this is a non sequitur, and follows not by the rules of Logic, as even
Bellarmine himself confesses. And secondly, Bellarm. de purg. lib. 1. cap. 4.
admit that some sins be forgiven in the world to come; yet does it not
follow, that your Purgatory is thereby proved: for your Purgatory, is such a
place and prison (by your own teaching) not where any forgiveness of sins
is to be obtained, but where perfect satisfaction, even to the utmost
farthing, is to be paid, and that for sins, which were (as your doctrine
teaches) committed by the offender in this life, and forgiven before he came
into that place: for so you say, that the sin is forgiven, but the Temporal
punishment notwithstanding, is to be satisfied for, and to be endured and
performed for it, in Purgatory. If the sin be forgiven before he come there,
(as your selves do hold) Ergo, say I, it remains not to be forgiven, or to
receive any forgiveness in that place: for what is once forgiven, needs not
any second forgiveness. Again, if it be a place only to endure punishment
for sins, until Gods Justice be there fully satisfied, (as ye likewise
affirm) then must it follow also, that it is no such place, as wherein any
forgiveness of the sin is granted, or obtained, or so much as to be
expected. But moreover, when God has received satisfaction to his Justice, for
the sins of all his people, and for the punishment due unto the same, in the
Person of his Son Jesus, their Redeemer, Surety, and Savior: should any
be so injurious, either to God, or himself: or so unwise in his thoughts, as
to imagine, that God would exact, or require, a second payment, or another
satisfaction to be made unto him? yea, when he has not only received
satisfaction in his Son, but has moreover thereupon given, a full release,
remission, Coloss. 1.14. Ephesians. 1.7. Ier. 31.34. Heb. 8.12.
and discharge for all their sins, and that, for ever; Can he after that, in
Justice, call them to a new reckoning, for them, to make another payment* or
another satisfaction, in their own persons? It is true, that Christ their
suertie and redeemer, Gal. 3.13. Romans 3.24. Ephesians 1.6, 7. 1. Cor 6.20. 1. Pet.
1.18, 19.
paid dearly for them, enduring the most bitter wrath and curse of God, for
their sakes: but yet in respect of themselves, they are gratis, that is,
frankelie and freely remitted, and forgiven, as I have often said; they paying
nothing in their own persons of this price and satisfaction. Yea, as S. Paul,
speaking of Christ, says directly: that, In him, Coloss. 1.14. Heb. 9.12.
Ier. 31.34.
we have redemption through his blood, even the remission of sins. So in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, is this expressly affirmed to be, an Eternal
redemption, and consequently an, eternal remission of sins. And therefore,
Gods children have (as you see) their sins forgiven them, both in this world,
and in the world to come. But reprobate sinners, (of which sort be such as
sin against the holy Ghost, and of whom it is, that Christ speaks in that
place by you alleged) shall not have forgiveness, neither in this world,
where remission of sins is preached, and pronounced to the faithful and
repentant people; nor yet in the world to come, when Christ himself shall
personally sit in Judgment upon them. You perceive then, that sins may be
granted to be forgiven, both in this world, and in the world to come; that is
to say, to have an Eternal forgivenes: And again, that some sins be not
forgiven, but remain liable to Gods wrath, to be punished, either in this
world, or in the world to come, or in both: and yet your Purgatory is thereby in
no sort proved, or can be concluded. But yet further, when Christ says of this
Blasphemy, and Sin against the holy Ghost, that it shall not be forgiven,
neither in this world, nor in the world to come: it is but an earnest,
vehement, or an emphaticall kind of speech, thereby to declare, that such is
the heinousness of that sin, and the implacable vengeance and wrath of God
against it, as that the committer of it, shall never have forgiveness, but is
liable to an everlasting punishment, or an everlasting condemnation. And for
assurance, that this is the very and true meaning of those words, S. Mark does
manifestly so expound and declare them: Mark. 3.29.
for in stead of those words of S. Matthew, S. Mark recites it thus: that
he that commits that sin against the holy Ghost, shall never have
forgivenes, but is guilty of eternal condemnation. Would you have a better
expositor of S. Matthews words, then S. Mark, who wrote after him? He shows
you plainly, that the meaning of those words is no more but this, viz. to
declare, that it shall never be forgiven, and therefore therewith (if there were
no more spoken) ye ought to rest fully satisfied and contented.

4 But yet a third Text they allege, 1^ Cor. 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
in 1. Cor. 3. where S. Paul says thus: According to the grace of God given
me, as a skillful master builder, I have laid the foundation, and another
builds thereupon: But let every man take heed how he builds upon it: for
other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid already, which is
Jesus Christ: And if any man build on this foundation, gold, silver, precious
stones, vvood, hay, or stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest: for
the day shall declare it because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire
shall try every man's work of what sort it is. If any man's work that he
has built thereupon abide, he shall receive a revvard: If any man's work
burn, he shall suffer loss, but himself shall be saved; yet as it were by
the fire. Here is fire mentioned, and what fire should it be, say they, Greg.
lib. 4. Dial. ca. 39.
but Purgatory fire? S. Gregory himself answers and tells you, that
there is no necessity to expound it of Purgatory fire: for he says, it may
be understood of the fire of tribulation, left unto us in this life. S.
Augustine thinks, that not only it may, but ought to be understood of the
fire of tribulation in this life: and he gives his reason for it, saying thus:
Enchirid ad Laurentium ^ p. 68.
The fire, whereof the Apostle speaks in this place, must be understood to
be such, that both do pass through it, that is, both he which builds upon
this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones; and he also that builds wood,
hay, stubble: for when he had said thus, he added: The fire shall try every
man's work, of what sort it is: If any man's work shall remain, which he
has built upon that foundation, he shall receive revvard: If any man's work
shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss; but he himself shall be saved, yet
as it were by fire: Therefore this fire shall try, not the work of one of
them, but of them both: And this fire verily, is the tentation of Tribulation,
of which in another place it is written plainly: The furnace does prove the
potters vessel, and tentation of Tribulation, just men etc. Remigius, who
lived after Gregory, in Psalm. 5.
understands this fire to be God himself; inasmuch as God himself, is, in
Scripture called a Consuming fire. Heb. 12.29. Ambrose upon this Text.
S. Ambrose interprets this Text, of Doctrine and Teachers in the Church; and
so do diverse others also: And indeed, the scope and circumstances of the text,
being well considered, do show, that it is most rightly and fitly so to be
expounded; because S. Paul had before, affirmed Gods Church and people, to be
this building: and that he, as an excellent Master Builder, 1. Cor 3.9, 10,
11, 12. etc.
had laid for a foundation in this work and building, him that is the only
foundation, namely Jesus Christ. And he there proceeds in that similitude,
showing, that all the rest of the building, should be suitable and correspondent
to this foundation, whosoever were the builders or workmen in that work: and
therefore he bids every workman and builder, in this work, that is,
every Teacher and Minister of the Gospel, to take heed bovv he builds upon
that foundation: for if any of them build upon it, gold, silver, or precious
stones; that is pure and sound doctrine, sincerely delivered, he shall receive
a reward at Gods hand: But if any of them build wood, hay, stubble, (all which
be combustible matter, and upon trial by fire, will soon be burnt up, and
consumed (whereby unsound doctrine, or such as is not soundly and sincerely
delivered, is understood) This man, in respect of his unsound combustible
stuff, is therein to suffer loss, yet himself shall be saved, because he
holds the foundation, namely, Jesus Christ, and the justifying faith in him:
Yet as it were through the fire; because, though himself be saved, holding
the foundation, yet the frothie, unfound, and vanishing stuff, which he
builded thereupon, must perish and be lost, as wood, hay, and stubble perish,
and be consumed, when they come once to the fire. Gods word is in the
Scripture resembled to fire: and when men's doctrines, Ier. 5.14. and Ier. 23.29.
both for matter and manner, shall be brought to be examined and tried by this
fire; then, as in a clear day (the darkness of the night being dispelled)
things appear evident and manifest: so will it also by that trial, clearly
appear and be manifested (howsoever before they lay hid, and obscure) what
doctrines be sound, and what unsound, what be firm, substantial, and
permanent, and will (like gold and silver) endure trial by the fire, and what
be like wood, hay, stubble, and such combustible matter, as when it comes to
be tried by fire, ^s found vanishing stuff, and soon consumed and abolished.
You see then, the true sense and meaning of this Text, and that it no way
enforces or infers your Purgatory fire: Yea it speaks not one word of
purgeing by fire, but of trying by the fire and that also, not of men's persons,
(as you suppose) but of their works. For all which causes, it neither does,
nor can possibly make any proof at all, for your so much fancied and
imagined Purgatory.

5 These which be your chief Texts, being answered, let me now desire you to
consider further, the fourteenth chapter of the Revelation of S. John, where it
is written thus: Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, Rev. 14 13.
forthwith: Even so ^aith the spirit, that they rest from their labors, and
their works follow them: which words are not only to be understood of
Martyrs, but of all other also that die in the faith of Christ: for as all the
godly are said, to live in Christ (2. Tim. 3..12.) so are they likewise said
to die in Christ, or to be the dead in Christ, (1 Thessalonians. 4.16.). All godly
and faithful people then (and not Martyrs only) be such as die in the Lord,
and consequently be here affirmed and pronounced, to be blessed forthwith, even
presently after their death and departure out of this world, for the Text
says they be Beati a modo, blessed forthwith, or immediately after their
death: (...) (as it is in the Greek) that is, from that very present time,
forward. Seeing then, they be in the state of blessedness, forthwith, and have
rest from all pains and labors, and have also the reward of their works
accompanying them, and bestowed upon them: it must needs be granted, that they
come into no such painful, terrible, and tormenting place, as your supposed
Purgatory is. The Rhemists hereunto answer, that, being in Purgatory, they
are blessed, and rest in peace, in respect they be discharged of the labors
and afflictions of this life, and (which is more) from the daily dangers of
sin and damnation, and be put into infallible security of eternal joy, with
unspeakable comfort of conscience. But, first a poor blessedness, and miserable
comfort, must it be, to be freed from the miseries and calamities of this life,
and to be cast into much greater miseries and calamities afterward, namely
into those hot burning and fiery flames of Purgatory, there to be tormented,
for I know not how many hundreds or thousands of years. For, ye say, That
such and so great be the pains of Purgatory, that there is no difference
between them, and the very pains of Hell it self, but only in respect of the
continuance of the time; viz. that Purgatory pains be temporary and not
lasting ever, whereas Hell torments, be everlasting. Which being so, I would
feign learn, how the Souls departed, that suffer pain after this life ended,
can certainly tell whether, for the present, they be in Hell, or in Purgatory?
for the pain and torment being alike in both, and no difference between them,
in respect of the degree of pain, but of the continuance only, those that
after their death suppose themselves to be in Purgatory, may possibly be in
Hell (the place of the damned) for ought they, for the present, there know,
find, or feel to the contrary. But secondly, it is but a mere fancy and
imagination, when they say, that they have there, unspeakeable comfort of
conscience: for how can they have such unspeakeable comfort of mind, where
they have such intolerable torments, as be equal, for the time they be there,
to the very pains and torments, which the damned souls suffer in Hell? And
where they say, that being in Purgatory, they have infallible security of
eternal Joy, this is likewise another mere imagination and dream: for what
proof or warrant from God, or his Scriptures, can they show for these things?
None at all do they, or can they show, but their own, or other men's conceits
and supposals. Themselves do say, that none in this life can be infalliblie
assured of his salvation, without a special revelation from God: which way, I
pray you, come those souls to be so assured which be in Purgatory? Have they
any revelation of this matter, there given them from God? Or if ye say they
have, How do ye prove it? for the wiser sort of people will no longer be fed
with bare words, opinions, conceits, or imaginations of your deceived Church.
But yet further, what need any of Gods children go to this your Purgatory,
there to be put in infallible security of eternal Ioies, when as they may
have that benefit, even in this life? Yea they actuallie have that
unspeakeable solace and benefit, namely an infallible assurance of their
salvation in this ve^ie life, (as afterward in his due place is declared)
L^ying therein with a joy that is unspeakeable and glorious, as S. Peter also
himself speaks, 1. Pet. 1.8.
and himself witnesses. Howbeit, I grant, that in S. Augustines time, some
opinion of such a kind of matter appeared, insomuch that S. Augustine himself
sometime speaks Doubtfully of it, and, with a peradventure, there is some
such thing: But at other sometimes again, he is very confident, and resolute,
that there is no such third place: and therefore in one place, he affirms it
expresselie to be the faith of the Catholics in that time, Hipognost. cont.
Pelag. lib. 5.
to believe only these two places, namely, Heaven, and Hell. But a third
place (says he) we are utterly ignorant of: Neither do we find it to be
in the holy Scriptures. And again he says: De verb. Apost. Sermon. 14. and 18.
Duae quippe habitationes: una in igne ^terno, alia in regno aeterno: For there
be two habitations or dwelling places, the one in everlasting fire, the other
in an everlasting kingdom. Agreeablie whereunto, the scripture that speaks of
fire for the punishment of people after their death, expreslie affirms it, to
be, an everlasting fire, and, unquenchable fire: which is sufficient to take
away all conceit of your temporary and quenchable fire, Matt 25 41. Mat. 3.12.
in your vainelie supposed Purgatory. Yea, S. Augustine says further: D*
Civitat. Dei lib. 13. cap. 7.
In requie sunt animae piorum a corpore separatae, etc. The souls of the godly
separated from their bodies, be in rest, or quietness, and the souls of the
ungodly suffer punishments, until the bodies of those do rise again unto
life everlasting, and the bodies of these unto eternal death, which is called
the second death. And so speaks also S. Cyprian, Cyprian. cont. Demetrian.
saying: Quando isthinc excessum fuerit, nullus iam poenitentiae locus, nul^us
satisfactionis effectus: Hic vita aut amittitur, aut tenetur: Hic sa^uti
aeternae, cultu Dei and fructu fidei providetur: When men be once departed
out of this life, there is no more place for repentance, there is no more
work or effect of any satisfaction: Here in this world, (says he) life is
either lost or got: Here it is that provision is made for eternal salvation,
by the worshipping of God, and the fruits of faith. And again he there says:
Then shall be without fruit of repentance, all grief of pain, and inanis
ploratio, and inefficax deprecatio: and in vain shall weeping be then, and
prayers shall then be also, uneffectuall, and of no force.

6 To what end then, is also your prayer for the dead, or the Popes pardons and
indulgences, or singing or saying of Masses, Trentals, Requiems, or any other
your works satisfactorie or helpefull (as you call them) for the souls of the
dead? Eccles. 11.13.
for in the place where the Tree falls, there it lies, whether it be toward
the South, or toward the North, says Ecclesiastes: appointing likewise, as
here you see, but two places in that behalf. Agreeably whereunto he says
again, that when a man dies, his body, as Dust returns to the earth, from
whence it came: and his soul or spirit, Eccles. 12.7^
returns to God that gave it. And again he says: after that men are dead,
They have no more portion for ever, in all that is done under the Sun.
Eccles. 9.15.
What part or portion then can they have in your prayers, or in any other
works done by men that be living in this world? We know and believe, there is
a communion of Saints, and that the charity and love of the Saints, one
toward another, is very great: but ye see, that the Saints, and godly
Elect, go not after their death, to any place of Torment, but into a place of
blessedness and heavenly happiness, where they stand not in need of any
mortal men's prayers, or other their works whatsoever. On the other side, the
souls of the ungodlie reprobates go to Hell, the place of the damned, so that
no prayers or other works whatsoever, can do them any good, for their ease or
deliverance from thence. And as for any third sort of people, that be neither
Elect nor Reprobates, such are not to be found. It is true, that in this life
we may bear one another burden, and one may pay a debt for another, and the
abundance of one man's wealth may supply the defect or want of another: But as
touching the next world, it is not so: for the Scripture says; that, The Just
man shall live, not by any other man's, but by his own faith. Again, Abac.
2.4. Romans 1.17.
it says: The soul that sins, that shall dye. And again: The
righteousness of the righteous shall be upon himself, Ezech. 18.20.
and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself: So that, neither
the righteousness, nor the wickedness of one, shall be imparted to another,
to save or condemn him. Yea though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job,
were amongst them, they should deliver but their own souls by their
righteousness, Ezech. 14.14.
says the Lord God. And again the Psalmist says: A man can by no means
redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him: Psalm. 49.7, 8.
It cost more, to redeem souls, and therefore he must let that alone for
ever. Neither has any that is but a mere man, any such abundance of
holiness, or righteousness in him, as to be therewith able to supply the
defects or wants of others in that behalf. Matt. 25.8, 9.
Yea all is little enough for himself, when he once comes to stand in Gods
presence, and before his tribunal. For even the holiest and iustest man that
is, must then say with King David, Enter not, O Lord, into judgment with thy
servant: Psalm. 143.2.
for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. Yea, even the blessed
Virgin Mary her self, though a most godly and holy woman, yet had not such
abundance of holiness in her, as to be able thereby to be her own Savior,
much less to be able to merit the salvation of others: for that she was, in
respect of her self, a Sinner, and consequently had need of Christ Jesus to
be her Savior, as well as other people, her self plainly declared, when
she said: My soul does magnify the Lord, Luke 1.46.
and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. If she had had no sin at all in
her, (as some Papists affirm) what need had she of a Savior, or how could
Christ Jesus have been her Savior, as she calls and affirms him? For he
is in no other respect, called, Jesus, that is, a Savior, but because he shall
save his people from their sins, Matt. 1.21.
as the Angel testifies. Again, does not the Scripture say expressly, that,
All have sinned, and that whosoever be justified, be justified freely, by the
grace of God, Romans 3.23, 24.
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus? The Papists also talk much of
the virtues and sufferings of S. Paul, Romans 8.18. Romans 7.14, 15.19 23, 24, 25.
1. Cor. 4.4. Phil 3.8, 9. Gal. 2.19, 20.
as though they were meritorious and satisfactorie, as well for others, as for
himself: when as nevertheles himself shows, they were not sufficient for
his own salvation. It is true that he says in his Epistle to the Colossians,
that He rejoiced in his sufferings, for them, that is, for their sakes, who
thereby were to be encouraged, strengthened, and confirmed, in the faith of
Christ: and that He did fill up, or accomplish that which was yet behind of
the afflictions of Christ, in his flesh, for Christ's bodies sake, Colos. 1.24.
which is the Church: that is, whatsoever yet wanted or remained for him to
suffer, (in whose sufferings or afflictions, Christ himself is said to suffer,
and to be afflicted and persecuted, Act 9 4, 5.
(for what affliction, or persecution, is done to any of his members, he
accounts it as done to himself) all those sufferings, and afflictions
whatsoever they were, 2. Tim 2 10.
that yet remained for him to bear, he was ready willingly to undergo, for
Christ's body sake, which is the Church: that is, for the profit and
edification of the Church, 2. Cor. 1.5, 6, 7. etc.
that it might thereby receive encouragement, comfort, confirmation, strength,
and boldness, in the profession of the Gospel. I say, all this being thus to
be intended and understood: how injurious and impious be the Rhemists, and
other Papists, which wrest this Text of S. Paul, to prove that one man may
merit and satisfy for the sins of another, and supply his defects, in that
point? As though the sufferings of Christ in his own person for our sins,
had any want, defect, or imperfection in them: or, as though the sufferings of
S. Paul, or of S. Peter, or of any other Saints, or Martyrs, and their
bloodshed, could or did do that which the blood and sufferings of Christ could
not, or did not do. Is it not a shame, and a most monstrous shame, for any so
to speak, think or teach?

7 But they here allege, that prayer for the dead, is mentioned in the book
of Macchabees; and consequently, 2. Macc. 12.44*
that they be tormented in Purgatory: for why else should they be prayed for?
I answer first, that praying for the dead, is there mentioned, as the fact of
one particular man only, namely, of Judas, which can make no general law or
rule in this case: And secondly, there is likewise mentioned, as by way of
approbation, in the same book of the Macchabees, 2. Macc. 14.41.
the fact of one Razis, that killed himself; and yet for all that, it is not
of any godly man to be followed or imitated. And therefore as the one is
disallowable, so likewise may the other be disallowable notwithstanding the
Approbation of it in that book. Thirdly, Judas himself did not there pray for
the dead, as thinking their souls to be punished and tormented in Purgatory
(there is no such thing mentioned, or appearing in the text): but to show, that
he had hope, 2. Macc. 12.^^*
that they which were slain and dead, should rise again; for to that end it
was, as the Text it self declares. But fourthly I answer, that the book of
the Macchabees is not canonical Scripture, and therefore is not of authority
sufficient, to prove a point of faith necessarily to be believed, because that
book speaks it. That it is not canonical, appears before by the
testimony of the old Church: and it does also appear by the testimony even
of the Author himself that wrote the Book; 2. Macc. 15.38.
in that, in the end of it, he excuses himself, and as it were craveth
pardon, if he have written slenderly and meanly. Which apparently shows,
that he wrote by an humane, and not by an undoubtedly divine spirit. For the
spirit of God is not wont, nor needs to crave pardon, nor to excuse himself,
as though he wrote slenderly or meanly. Lastly, against that your conceit, of
torme^ting Purgatory, grounded out of that Book, I may and do oppose the
Book of Wisdom, Wisd. 3.1.
where it is said directly: The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God,
and no torment shall touch them: If no torment shall touch them, then do they
not come into any of your supposed Purgatory torments. Yea although S.
Augustine prayed for his mother, and some other also for their friends
departed: it is no proof of your Purgatory; inasmuch as such prayers do many
times proceed out of natural and humane affection only, and be used as a token
of love and wel-wishing to friends departed, without any such belief of
Purgatory. Which may and does appear even by S. Augustine himself: who,
though he prayed for his mother, believed nevertheless that she was in peace,
and rest, free from all pain and torment. Ambr. in Orat. de obit. Theo. and de
obit. Valent.
S. Ambrose likewise prayed for Theodosius, Valentinian, and Gratian, whom
nevertheless he believed to be in peace and rest, and in heavenly happiness.
You see then, that praying for the dead, is no proo^e for your Purgatory.
Howbeit, this praying for the dead, has also no commandment, example, or
warrant for it, in any of the canonical Scriptures: and besides, it appears
by the premises, that it can do the dead no good; and therefore it is in
vain, in respect of any good, thereby to be done to the dead. As for the
apparitions of souls, which they likewise sometimes allege, to prove their
Purgatory, it is a very Toy, and a fable. For, S. Chrysostom says:
Chrysostom. in Mat. cap. 8. hom. 29.
it is not the soul of any dead person, but a Devil, which faineth himself
to be the soul of such a one, to deceive those to whom he appears; and he
calls them, Vetularum verba, August. lib. 2. quaest. 3. ad Simplician.
and P^erorum ludibria, Old women's Tales, and Childrens toys. And so S.
Augustine likewise tells you, that it was not Samuel in very deed, but a
Devil in his likeness, which appeared to the witch in King Saul's time: And
therefore he pronounces of these things, that they be either the Cousenages of
Deluding men, or wonders of Deceitful Devils, with which therefore, Aug. de
Unit. eccl. ca. 16.
none ought any longer to be bewitched or deluded,

CAP. VI.
Of works, done upon a good Intention (as they be called) without a
commandment or warrant from God, or his word: Of works, de Congruo; and de
Condigno: And, of works of Supererogation: and how unpleasing they all be in
Gods sight and censure; howsoever in respect of men, that have use and profit
by them, they be, and may be called, good, and beneficial works.

Sundry there be, who think any work of their own Invention, or of others
devising, to be a good work, acceptable to God, and a point of good service
performed to him, so long as they have a good meaning, or a good intention in
it; though the work be not commanded from God, nor warranted by his word. But
God will not have every man to do, what seems to himself good, or right in
his own Eyes: But whatsoever I command you, that (says he) observe to do.
Yea, that, Deuteronomy. 12.8.32.
and That only, must ye do, (as your own latin Translation is.) Again, he
says: I am the Lord your God, walk ye in my statutes, and k^epe my
judgments, and do them. Ezech. 20.19. Levit. 18.4.
And nothing does he more dislike or condemn, in his service, or worship, then
when men will be so presumptuous, as out of their own imaginations, to
suppose, and devise, what shall be well pleasing to him. For, what is this
else, but for people to go a whoring with their own inventions, Psalm
106.39.
as the Scripture speaks? My thoughts, are not your thoughts: nor your
vvayes, my ways, says the Lord: Esai 55.8.9.
for as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my vvayes higher then
your ways, and my thoughts, then your thoughts. Yea, what are they else, but
superstitious works, which are done by the will and pleasure of men, without
the Commandment of God, or his rule and direction, for so Isidorus gives the
Etymology of that word, Isidor. orig. lib. 8. cap. 3.
superstition, to be a thing done, supra-statut^m, more then is appointed by
the law of God, upon men's pleasures and devisings. May not God say in these
cases, as sometime he spoke, Quis requisivit haec de vobis, Who has required
these things of you? A good Intention therefore is not sufficient to prove,
Esai. 1.12.
or make the work to be good in Gods sight, unless it be a work or action
commanded from God, or by his word approoved. For, King Saul had a good
intention, or meaning, when being sent against the Amal^kites, and commanded
from God to kill, both man and woman, infant and suckling; ox and sheep,
camel and ass; he, nevertheless spared some of the Cattle, suffering the
people to take Sheep, and Oxen, 1. Sam. 15.2 ^. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
to this intent, to sacrifice to the Lord. But notwithstanding this his good
intention, the fact was odious in Gods sight, and because he had thus rejected
the word of the Lord, not suffering his actions to be thereby squared and
ruled, therefore also did the Lord reject him from being King over Israel. So
likewise had Vzzah a good meaning, or a good intention, when driving the Cart
wherein the Ark of God was, 2. Sam. 6 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
and the Arc being shaken, and in danger of falling, he put forth his hand to
the Arc, and took hold of it to keep it, from falling: yet because it
belonged not unto him, so to do with the Arc, and that he therein did an
action not commanded, nor warranted unto him from God, or his word* therefore,
notwithstanding this his good intention, God was offended with him, and he
smote Vzzah there for his error, and there he died by the Ark of God. The
works then which men do of their own heads and devisings, without Gods
commandment, or approbation by his word, be not to be accounted amongst the
number of good works, in Gods censure, what fair show soever they make
amongst men, or what good meaning or intention soever they have. For, that,
which is highly esteemed amongst men, is oftentimes abomination in the sight
of God, as Christ himself also teaches and affirms. Luke 16.15.


2 But ye have further in the Papacy, works preparative, or works, or
merits de Congruo, as ye call them, such as be done by a man before faith
received; which ye also account good works But, first, How can a man that is
not himself as yet made good, bring forth any good works? for, The tree must
first be good, before it can bring forth good fruit, Mat. 12.13.
as Christ himself teaches. Yea, good works, and a sanctified course of
life, be the fruits of righteousness, as S. Paul declares: and therefore,
before that a man be made righteous, and justified by faith, he cannot
possibly bring forth these fruits of righteousness. Again, the Scripture
witnesses expressly: that, Phil. 1.11.
Without faith, it is impossible to please God: How then can the works of
any man, before faith received, please God* Heb. 11.6.
be accepted of him, or merit any grace or favor at his hands? The Heart is
the fountain of all men's actions: and by faith it is* that men's hearts be
purified, and cleansed, as S. Peter witnesses. Until such time therefore,
Act. 1^.9.
that men's hearts be thus cleansed and purified by faith in Christ, they can
bring forth no good, clean, or pure works, but works like themselves, that
is, most impure, and unclean. For, to them that be uncleansed, and
unbeleevers, nothing is pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled,
as S. Paul also directly affirms. Tit. 1.15.
And so he says again of all the corrupt natural men in the world, until
they be regenerated, converted, and justified in Gods sight by faith, they be
such as have all gone out of the way, they are all become unprofitable, there
is none that does good, no not one. Romans 3.12.
Not without good cause therefore, has S. Augustine before told us, that all
the works of Infidels, and Heathens, Aug. cont. Julian li. 4. c 3. and cont.
2. Epist. Pelag. ad Bonif. li. 3. ca. 5.
and even the Moral virtues of the Philosophers, as they were done, and
performed by them that had no belief in Christ, were no good works in Gods
sight, but Splendida peccata, glittering sins: Yea, he has told us
expreslie: that, Good works do follow him that is before justified, and do
not go before him that is afterward to be justified. And again he says:
that, August. de fide and oper. cap. 14.
faith goes before, that good works may follow: neither are there (says he)
any good works, but those that follovv faith going before. And therefore
touching Cornelius the Centurion, August. in Psalm. 67. Act. 10.1, 2. etc
whose prayers to God, and Almesde^des, be much commended, before he was
baptized, (whose example, the Rhemists, and other Papists, August. de praed.
Sanct. lib. 1. c. 7. Introducis hominum genus, quod placere Deo possit sine
fide Christi, lege naturae: Hoc est unde vos maxim Christiana detestatur
Ecclesia August. cont. Julian.
allege in this case) the same S. Augustine gives a sufficient answer
thereunto, saying: That he did not give Alms and Pray, without some faith. So
likewise testifies Beda, and that out of Gregory: that, Non virtutibus ad
fidem, sed fide pertingitur ad virtutes etc. Men attain not to faith by
virtues, but to virtues by faith, as S. Gregory expounds it: For Cornelius
(says he) whose alms before baptism (as the Angel witnesses) be praised,
came not by works to says, but by faith to works. And again he says: He
had faith, whose prayers and almesdeeds could please God. So that at this
very time of his Prayers and Almesdeedes, he believed in the Messiah, albeit,
most true it is, that he did not then so well know Christ, or so firmly
believe in him, as he did afterward by the ministry of Peter.

3 The merits also de Candigno (as the Popish Church calls them) be not to be
reckoned in the number of good works: yea, this conceit and opinion of Merit,
is it that poysoneth and marreth the works, so that they are not reputed in
Gods sight and censure to be good, but bad and odious works, that be done with
that affection, and to that end. For, even those good works that be done,
after grace and faith received, and by a man regenerate and Justified, do not
merit or deserve salvation, Gal. 5 19. Romans 7.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Psalm 3.12.
or eternal life: because in the best works, that men regenerate, or
sanctified persons do, is some humane frailty, defect, or imperfection
intermingled; for which defects, they are to crave pardon at Gods hand, and not
to stand upon the merit of them. We are all (says Esaias) as an unclean
thing, Esa 64 6.
and all our righteousness is as filthy rags. If thou, O Lord, should
straitely mark iniquity (says the Psalmist) O Lord, Psalm. 130.3.4.
who shall stand? But there is mercy with thee that thou may be feared.
Iam. 3.2.
In many things we all offend. (says S. James) And therefore well says S.
Augustine; Vae universae iustitiae nostrae si remota misericordia Iudicetur:
Agust. lib. 6. conf.
VVoe to all our righteousness, if it be judged, mercy being laid aside. The
wages of sin (says S. Paul) is death: But the gift of God is eternal life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 6.23.
Note that he calls Eternal l^fe, not the wages, or merit of Men, but
(...), that is, The free gift of God, bestowed gratis, without any purchase,
merit, or desert of ours: albeit* Jesus Christ our Lord, purchased it for us,
and paid a great price for it in our behalf: through whom, Act. 20 28. 1. Cor
6.20.
and whose merits it is, that we obtain it. Hearing (says S. Augustine) that
death is the wages of sin, why go thou about, O Thou, not Justice of man,
but plain pride, under the name of Justice, why go thou about to lift up
thy self, and to demand Eternal life (which is contrary to death) as a
wages due? Chrysostom also upon this place speaks thus: He says not
eternal life is the revvard of your good works* but eternal life is the
gift of God: That he might show, that they are delivered, not by their own
strength or virtues, and that it is not a debt, or wages, or a retribution of
labors, but that they have received all those things freely of the gift of
God. Theodoret likewise, upon this place observes, that the Apostle says not
here, revvard, but, gift, or grace: for eternal life is the gift of God: for
although a man could perform the highest and absolute Justice, yet eternal
joys, being weighed with temporal labors, there is no proportion. And so
says S. Paul himself, that, The afflictions of this life, Romans 8.1^.
non sunt Condignae, are not worthy the glory that shall be shevved unto us.
It is true, that (...), merces, a revvard, is promised to those that do good
works, but it is (as before is showed) merces ex gratia non ex debito, a
revvard of grace or favor, Romans 4.^.
and not of debt or desert, as even S. Paul himself distinguishes. So that
God gives the Crown of righteousness, not to the merit or worthiness of our
works, but to the Merit or Worthiness of Christ, and as due to us by his
promise only freely made unto us in Christ. The Crown therefore of eternal
life, is of mercy and favor in respect of us, but of Justice and desert, in
respect of Christ, who has purchased it for us by his merits and worthiness.
Wherefore S. Augustine says well: August. in Psalm. 83
that fidelis dominus, qui se nobis debitorem fecit, non aliquid a nobis
accipiendo, sed omnia nobis promittendo: The Lord is faithful, who has made
himself a debtor unto us, not by receiving any thing of us, but by promising
all things unto us. Again he says: Non dicimus Deo, Domine read quod
accepisti: sed read quod promisisti: Aug. in Psalm. 32.
We say not to God, Render that, O Lord, which thou have received of us, but
render or give that which thou have promised, Again he says: That God
crovvneth his own gifts, not our merits, when he crovvneth us. August. in
Psalm. 101.
What worthiness soever then is in us, it is by Gods acceptance, and his
accounting of us to be such, in, and through Christ, and not by reason, or in
respect of any of our own personal merits, or worthiness. For, what have
thou (says S. Paul) that thou have not received? and if thou have received it,
1. Cor. 4.7.
why do thou glory, as though thou had not received it? The gifts and
graces of God in a man, should make him humble, and thankful; and not make
him proud, as though he deserved them, and a great deal more, by reason of
them. If a man give another 100. l. which he uses well; does he thereby
deserve, or can he therefore claim, as of merit or duty, to have at that
man's hand, 100000. l.? Men, for good works and benefits done, may deserve
praise and thanks amongst men: but what man, by doing of his duty, deserves
praise or thanks at Gods hand? Luke 17.7, 8, 9, 10*
or, What Servant, for doing his Masters service and commandment, can
thereupon claim to be his Masters heir? Whosoever glories, should glory in
the Lord: 1. Cor. 1.31.
as S. Paul teaches. But if men do merit, then have they somewhat of their
own, wherein to glory: But God allows no matter of glory in men, Rom 4.3.
with him, or in his sight: neither have they, indeed, any matter of glory in
them: because, whatsoever graces, or goodness men have, they have received it of
God, to whom they ought to be thankful, and for which they stand bound to
perform all manner of duty unto him. So that how much merit men take to
themselves, so much do they detract from the merits of Christ, and so much
praise, glory, and thanks do they pull from God, to whom all praise, glory,
honor, and thanks rightly and properly belong, Rev. 4.11. Rev. 5.12.13, 14
Rev. 19.1.3.
and are to be rendered. Yea, the Kingdom of heaven is a reward, infinitely
above the value of all men's works, and therefore must needs be given of
grace, and cannot be merited by men. But against men's merits, and their works
of satisfaction, whereby they intend to satisfy Gods wrath and Justice for
sins (which is only satisfiable by the death and sufferings of that
Immaculate Lamb, Christ Jesus) enough has been before spoken, and therefore
I here forbear to speak any further of them.

4 But in this matter of works, this is not to be passed over, or omitted,
that they also hold works of Supererogation, (as they call them) whereby they
say, Men do more then they are bound unto by Gods Commandments, and so do
merit, not only their own salvation, but the salvation also of others, or
something toward it. Can these be accounted good works, or that be held for a
good and right religion, wherein such monstrous things be taught and maintained?
It is more then any mere man is able to do, perfectly and exactly to keep
and perform the whole law and Commandments of God: for so S. Paul himself
expreslie affirms it, to be a thing impossible, Romans 8.3. Act. 13.38.39.
because of the weakness that is in all sinful flesh: and so have the
ancient Fathers likewise before testified and taught. Why then do these men
talk of doing all, and more then all the Commandments of God? Indeed, if
any think to come to heaven by Doing (as he in the Gospel did) the Answer
which Christ gave in that case is right and fit for him: that, Mat. 19.16. etc.
Mar. 10.17. etc. Luk 10.25 26, 27, 28. Luke 18.18. etc.
He must keep the Commandments: for Moses describing the righteousness
which is of the Law, says: That the man which Does those things shall live
by them: But the righteousness which is of faith, speaks (as S. Paul
shows) on another fashion, Romans 10.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
and consists in a firm believing in Christ: For Christ, who performed the
law for us (it being a thing impossible for us to do) is the End, or
accomplishment of the Law, Rom, 10.4*
for righteousness to every one that believes, as he there again
affirms. And yet must none therefore hereupon conclude God to be Cruel,
Tyrannical, or unjust, in giveing such a Law as is impossible for men to
keep: for at the first, before the fall and transgression of Adam, it was
possible, and the Impossibility that is now of it, is not through any default
of the Law, or of God, the giver of it, but through the imbecillitie and
weakness, which men have brought upon themselves, by means of that
Transgression. Neither was the law afterward given to any such end, that men
should be able exactly and perfectly to fulfill it: and by such fulfilling of
it, to have eternal life: but to show us how far we are fallen from that
ability and purity we received in our first Creation, Gal. 3.19.21.24. Romans
5.20.21.
and to discover and make known our sins and transgressions, both original
and actual, Romans 7.13.24, 25.
and the wrath and curse of God due unto us for the same; Romans 7.7, 8. Romans 4
15, 16. Gal 3.11, 12 14 15, 16, 17, 18. 22.24. Romans 3.31. Matthew. 5.17. Psalm.
1.1, 2. Psalm. 119.165.
and so to drive and bring us unto Christ the Savior and Redeemer. This is one
chief use of the Law, as S. Paul has before declared. Another use of the Law,
as touching the ten Commandments, is, that we should walk in the obedience
of it, to the uttermost of our power; although we shall never be able, during
this life, fully and absolutely to keep and perform it, by, and in our own
persons. In all this, I am sure, there is no cruelty, tyranny, or injustice.
Yet, we must, as I said before, endeavor to the uttermost of our powers* The
reasons why men should do good works and walk in Gods law and commandem^nts.
Ephe 2 8, 9, 10
to walk in it, and to do all manner of good works, although not to that
end, to expect Justification or salvation, by that means, yet to other ends
and purposes: as namely, first, to show our obedience, duty, and
thankfulness to God, for all his favors and benefits bestowed upon us: For
as S. Paul says: God has ordained good works, that we should walk in
them. Secondly, that by those good works, 2. Pet. 1.10.
and a Godly conversation, We may make our calling and election sure to our
selves, as S. Peter teaches. Thirdly, that, Other men, seeing our good works,
may thereby be also occasioned and moved, Mat. 5 16.
to glorify God our heavenly father, as Christ himself declares. So that
there be, as you see, other good ends, why men should observe (so much as is
possible) Gods Law and Commandments, and why they should do all manner of
good works, though they repose no confidence of merit, or hope of
Justification or salvation therein. Howbeit, the Rhemists endeavor to prove
works of Supererogation: First, by that which was laid out, over and beside
the two pence, for the recovery of the vvounded man (in Luke 10.35.) but the
doing of that was clearly a work and duty of Charity, Luke 10.35.
and therefore commanded, and consequently, could not be a work of
Supererogation. And as touching the other Text of 1. Cor. 9 (which the Rhemists
likewise allege) where S. Paul would not be burdensome or chargeable to the
Church of Corinth, for preaching the Gospel unto them, 1. Cor. 9.12.16.18. etc.
which nevertheless he might have charged: himself shows the reason why he
did forbear, and abridge himself of the use of that power and liberty
amongst them: namely, because he would not give any hindrance to the Gospel
of Christ. Verse. 12. and because he would not abuse his power in the
Gospel, verse. 18. and because a necessity was also put upon him to preach
the Gospel, (verse. 16.) whether he had allowance of the Church, or no
allowance. This therefore was also a duty in S. Paul the Apostle, in this
case, to preach the Gospel thus frankely and freely, rather then it should not
be preached at all: or, rather then the Gospel should be hindered, or receive
obloquy any way: and consequently, they appear to be intolerable, and
superarrogant works, of Supererogation, which be maintained in the Papacy.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning Predestination, and assurance of Salvation: and that being rightly
understood, they Infer no manner of Licentiousness, or Impiety, but the
clean contrary.

But they proceed, challenging our Religion further, to be a religion tending
to licentiousness, for that it teaches Predestination, and assurance of
Salvation in some persons: which they also call, Presumptuous Doctrine. But,
first, even the Papists themselves, as well as the Protestants, do teach, that
there is a Predestination Secondly, in the Doctrine of Predestination, it being
rightly and discreetely delivered, there is no danger, or inconvenience, but
much conveniencie, Deuteronomy. 29.^^ Act. 28.27. Mat. 28.20.
sweetness, comfort, and profit comprised. Yea, why has God revealed, and
published it in his word, but to the end it should be known? And (that no man
might carpe against it) S. Paul shows, that which all reason, as well as
Religion allows: namely, that God, the maker of us all, has (at least) as
much authority and power, over all men, his Creatures, to do, dispose, and
ordain of them, at his pleasure, as the Potter has over his Pots, Romans
9.21.22.
or over the clay, whereout he frames or makes them, especially after that
the whole lump of mankind was fallen in the transgression of Adam. Has not the
Potter (says he) power of the clay, to make of the same lump, one vessel to
honor, and another to dishonor? And he further adds, Romans 9.22.23.
saying: What if God vvilling to show his wrath, and to make his power
known, suffer with long patience the vessels of wrath, fitted to
destruction? and that he might declare the riches of his glory, upon the
vessels of mercy which he had before prepared unto glory? In which words ye
see, that some, upon the fall of Adam were left in their sins, and so be
vessels of wrath, fitted to destruction, through their own sin and
corruption: and that other some be vessels of mercy, and such as God,
notwithstanding their fall and corruption, has prepared to glory. But to show
this matter further, and withal to clear it of all licentiousnes, and
impiety: does not S. Paul say thus? Romans 8.30.
Whom God has predestined, them also he called: and whom he called, them
also he justified: and whom he justified, them also he glorified. Here you see
express mention made of Predestination of some unto glory: and withal you
see that those which be thus predestined unto glory, be the men, that be
afterward at some one time or other of their life, effectually called and
Justified (and consequently sanct^fied) and at last, come to be glorified: and
therefore they be, and must needs be, such as live, not a wicked, dissolute,
and licentious, but a good, godly, and holy life, after that they be once so
effectually called. But yet further, S. Paul speaks thus to the chosen people
of God: Ye are all the children of light, 1. These. 5.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
and the children of the day: we are not of the night, neither of darkness:
Therefore let us not sleep, as do other, but let us vvatch and be sober: for
they that sleep, sleep in the night, and they that be drunken, be drunken in
the night: but let us that are of the day be sober, putting on the brestplate
of faith, and love; and the hope of salvation for an helmet: For (says he)
God has not appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain salvation, by the means
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which died for us. In which words you see, that
although some be appointed to wrath, yet othersome be appointed to obtain
salvation, by the means of their Lord Jesus Christ, which died for them: and
these which were thus predestined, and appointed, not to wrath, but to
Salvation, he shows, that even for this very cause, they should be the more
vigilant, wary, and circumspect, (as touching their lives and conversations)
to walk as Children of the light, and of the day, and not to be like unto
those that be appointed to wrath, and be of the night, and of darkness.
Again, S. Paul in his second Epistle to the Thessalonians, speaking of some,
To whom God sent strong delusion to believe lies (that they might all be damned
which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousnes)
distinguishing those that were of the Elect number from them, he says thus: 2.
These. 2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
But we ought to give thanks always for you, brethren, beloved of the Lord,
because that God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation: And there he
shows further, how after this their election, they be brought to salvation,
namely, through sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth. So that
you here still perceive, that all be not elect to salvation, but some only:
and that those that be thus elected, be such as be afterward sanctified by
the spirit of God, and believe the Gospel and word of truth, and so come in
the end to the salvation appointed for them. S. Paul again, to the same
effect, in his Epistle to the Ephesians, says thus: Blessed be God, even the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings, in heavenly things in Christ: as he has chosen us in him, before
the foundations of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame before
him, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. etc.
in love. In which words you likewise see, that not all in a generality, but
some only be elected: and that those which be thus ordained, and elected to
life and salvation, were (in Gods purpose and decree) so ordained, and elected,
antequam iacerentur fundamenta mundi: The end of Predestination is, that men
should live godly and holy lives: and not that they should live licentiously or
as they list.
before the foundations of the world were laid: But then here observe withal,
that those which be thus elected, and predestined of God to Salvation, be
not so predestinate, and elected, to the end, they should live licentiously,
wickedly, or carelessly; but to the end, They should be holy, and without blame
before him, in love: for so be the very direct words of the Apostle. Wherefore
it is apparent, that S. Paul, from this matter and doctrine of Predestination,
and electing of men to salvation, gathers, not any argument of
Licentiousness (for neither can such argument from thence be rightly deduced,
what soever Atheists, Papists, or others thereupon untruly infer) but clean
contrariwise, from hence, he gathers (as likewise all the rest of Gods
children do) matter to bless, praise, and thank God, for ever, and ever* and
thereby provokes men, to show forth the fruits of that their thankfulness,
by a continual godly life, and an holy conversation. For, indeed, what will
move a man to thankfulness, and to show his obedience toward God, both in his
thoughts and affections, and in his words, and in his works, and every manner
of way, if his election to salvation, decreed and purposed with God before the
foundations of the world were laid, will not moove him unto it? seeing he was
then in Gods hand, to have disposed of him, as of a vessel, either to honor,
or dishonor, at his own good and free pleasure? there being then no matter of
merit or desert in him, why God should cho^se him more then another? yea, at
that time of his ordaining and appointing of him to salvation, he might, if
he had so pleased, have otherwise disposed of him, and might have left and
refuse^ him (as he did others) to go with them to everlasting wrath, and
eternal horror and damnation. Infinite and unspeakeable therefore must such a
one needs conceive the love of God to be toward him, in this case, and such
as can never be suficiently magnified. Yea, thus again from this
predestination and election of God, does S Paul in his Epistle to the
Colossians likewise infer, (as it is indeed most forcible thereunto) matter
of argument to persuade to all Christian virtues, and to all godliness and
holiness of life: for thus he says: Now therefore as ^he elect of God: holy,
and beloved, put on tender mercy, Colos. 3.12, 13.
kindenes, humblenes of mind, meekenes, long suffering, forbearing one
another, and forgiveing one another, if any man have a quarrel to another:
even ^s Christ forgave you, even so do ye etc. Mark here also, how from this
that they were the Elect of God, he gathers this Argument to persuade to all
goodness, godliness, and Christian virtues. And so likewise does S. Peter also
frame an Argument from thence to persuade to all holiness of life. Ye (says
he) are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar
people, that ye should show forth the virtues of him, that has called you out
of darkness, into his marveilous light. By all which you see, I hope,
sufficiently, 1. Pet. 2.9.
that out of this doctrine of Predestination, can no Argument for
licentiousnes, or carelesnes of life, be rightly deduced, but the clean
contrary. For although God has predestined and foreordained, what shall
become of all men, as he has likewise of all things else, we are not
therefore to grow careless and dissolute, but, all our chief care, study,
and endeavor should be this, namly to examine our selves, our hearts and ways,
affections and works, and thereby see, whether we be of the number of those
that be elected and predestined to salvation, yea, Luke 10.20.
or no: And if we find that we are, therein to rejoice, with pouring forth
everlasting praise and, thanks unto God, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6. and^*
for so special, ineffable and incomparable a favor, and during all our life,
to show forth the fruits of that thankefulnes, by a continual endeavor to
walk in the ways of God, and godliness. And if any, upon examination of
himself, do not yet find the marks and tokens of Gods children within him,
and of such a one as is predestined to salvation, The right use of the
doctrine of predestination.
he is not therefore to be discouraged utterly, or to despair, but to know,
that he may be for all that, of the number of Gods Children (if he neglect not
to use the means, which God has appointed in that case) inasmuch, as, God may
hereafter, at some one time or other, before his death, call him to faith, and
repentance, and regenerate and sanctify him by his spirit, and so testify and
make known the same unto him. For as it is true, that Whom God has
predestined, Romans 8.30.
them also he calls: so no less true is it, that God has also set his
appointed times and means, when and how he will call them unto himself, whom
he has so predestined: which thing, Christ Jesus also himself shows, in
the Parable, namely, that some were called very soon, and at the third hour,
some at the sixth hour, some at the ninth, and some at the eleventh hour: and
some are called, even at the last hour, as was the Thief, crucified with
Christ. Mat. 20.1.2, 3.4 5, 6, 7.
So that God calls some early and betimes in their youth, and some in their
riper, The doctrine of predestination teaches no man to despair so long as
life lasts, but to use the means which God has appointed to bring men to
salvation.
and elder years, and some not till their old age, and latter days of their
life, and some not till the very last hour of their days: and consequently,
so long as life remains, there is a possibility for men to be called: and
therefore no reason is there why any should despair, (as likewise, none ought
rashly, or unadvisedly to presume) upon this doctrine.

2 Now then to show unto you the truth of that other point (as being an
appendant hereunto, namely, that even in this life, a man may come to be
assured, that he is one of the number of those that be elected and
predestined to eternal life and salvation: Touching assurance of salvation.
consider first, what S. Peter writes, saying: Brethren, give diligence to
make your calling and election sure: for if ye do these things, 2. Pet. 1.10.
ye shall never fall. Here you see it precisely and directly taught by S.
Peter, that men not only may, but ought so far to endeavor, namely, to make
their calling and election sure to themselves: And he there further shows
them, 2. Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8 9, 10.
how they may attain unto this assurance, namely, by having, doing, and using
of those excellent christian virtues, and courses he there mentions. Again,
does not S. Paul speak thus in plain terms? Try your selves, whether ye
be in the faith or no: Examine your selves, Know ye not that Christ Jesus is
in you except ye he reprobates? 2. Cor. 13.5.
Where he likewise declares, that all that be sound Christians may, by good
trial and examination of themselves, find, perceive, and Know, that Christ
Jesus is in them, and that they belong unto him. This confidence, knowledge,
and assurance had that holy man Job, for thus he says: I am sure that my
redeemer lives etc. and though, after my skin, worms destroy this body,
Job. 19.25, 26, 27.
yet shall I see God in my flesh: whom I my self shall see, and mine own
eyes shall behold, and none other for me. Yea, this persuasion, and assurance
had also S. Paul, and not only He, but all the rest of Gods Children have
likewise this confidence and assurance: for thus he speaks in the name of
them all: Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation,
Romans 8 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.
or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? as it
is written; For thy sake are we killed all the day long: we are counted as
sheep for the slaughter: nevertheless, in all these things, we are more then
Conquerors, Data sunt signa quaedam and Indicia manifesta s^lutis, ut
indubitabile sit cum esse de numero Electorum, in quo ea signa per manserint
Bernard* in Septuag. Sermon. 1.
through him that loved us: For, I am persuaded (the words of your Translation,
declaring the same thing, be, Certus sim, I am sure, or I am assured) that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us, from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord. In these words you see, that S. Paul speaks not only in the
singular, but in the plural number, and consequently, of others as well as of
himself, even of all the elect people of God, that they all, as well as he, at
some one time or other of their life, have this strong confidence, and
unremoveable assurance, that nothing shall be able to separate Them from Gods
love toward them in Christ. Rom* 8.14.
For he says again, that as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are
the sons of God. And again he says: Rom 8 14.
That spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of
God. Romans 8.16.
Who then having that spirit within him for a Witness, can make any doubt of
it? Likewise speaks S. John, saying, 1. Ioh. 4.13.
Hereby know we, that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has
given us of his spirit. For by that spirit it is, that We know (as S. Paul
again witnesses) the Things that be given to us of God. But S. John says
again thus: Dearly beloved, 1. Cor. 2.12.
Now are we the sons of God, but yet it does not appear, what we shall be:
1. Ioh 3.2, 3.
But we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him: for we
shall see him, as he is: and every man that has this hope in him, purges
himself, even as He is pure. Mark here still, that he says, they Know it:
and therefore it is no uncertain opinion, or doubtful hope, but an assured
hope, or hope with assurance. Which assured hope, or knowledge of their own
salvation, whosoever have by the testimony of Gods spirit within them, we see
here by this express testimony of S. John, that they are not idle, negligent,
careless, and licentious persons, but such as continually labor and strive
against their own corruptions, and defilements, and so to be purged more and
more from them. Far therefore from carelessness, and licentiousness, does
also this doctrine touching assurance of salvation, appear to be. For not
every one that says he is assured of it, is, by and by assured, but this is a
matter, as you see, that requires a great trial and examination of a man's
self, and is joined with a continual care, desire, striving, and endeavoring,
to walk in the commandments, and ways of God: it being in very deed, the
most comfortable* ioyfullest, and highest step of Christianity, and the Summum
bonum, or chiefest felicity, that any man can reach to, in this life: For,
this causes a Joy, 1. Pet. 1.8.
even a True Joy to the heart and soul of a man, and such a Joy as cannot be
expressed. But then you ask, how he is sure of continuing and persevering in
the way of godliness, unto the end: for you object, that the godliest man that
is, often sins, and may fall. Whereto, I answer, that most true it is, he
often sins and falls, but God still rais^th him up after his falls,
Concerning Perseverance unto the end.
by a godly sorrow and a true Christian repentance for those sins, and by
amendment of life afterward: so that such a one neither does, nor can finally
fall, Psalm. 37.24.
or perish: for as it is written in the Psalm, Though he fall, he shall not be
cast off: for the Lord puts under his hand. to raise him up again. Pro.
24.16.
And so says Solomon also, that the lust man falls seven times, but, he
rises again. And these things be spoken of him that is a lust and righteous
person indeed, and not of an Hypocritical and counterfeit person, or of such
a one, as only in his own opinion, or in the opinion of others, is a
righteous person, and not so in very deed, nor in the sight of God. For he
that is a righteous person, only in his own opinion, or in the opinion of
other men, and not so in very deed, may fall utterly and finally away, and
then shall not all his former righteousness, that he had in his own
supposall, or the supposall of others, be mentioned or regarded, as the Prophet
Ezechiel shows. And so also does Christ himself speak of some, Ezech. 18.24.
which when they have heard the word of God, receive it, at the first, with a
kind of Joy, and for a while believe, Luke 8.13.
but in time ostentation, they go away, because the word of God was sown in
them, Mat. 13.20, 21.
as in stony ground, which, for want of sufficient moisture, and deep rooting,
withered, Man. 4.5.^6* ^7^
and in fine utterly decayed. But this temporary faith which lasts but for a
while, is not the faith of Gods elect, nor the true, lively, iustify^ng faith,
heretofore mentioned. For this true, lively, justifying faith, never utterly
fades, nor falls away, but the man that has it, Psalm. 1.3.
is like a Tree planted by the rivers of waters, that will bring forth her
fruit in due season, whose leaf shall not fade, as it is said in the Psalm:
and he is the good ground, Luke 8.15.
into which the seed of Gods word is not only sown, and received with Joy,
but kept also, and which having moisture sufficient, and being deeply rooted,
Matthew 13.23.
persevereth and continues unto the end, bringing forth fruit with patience.
Mark 4.8.20
And therefore also does S. Paul say, that, Coloss. 1.23.
Men continue or persevere, that be grounded and stablished in the faith: which
kind of grounded, stablished, and justifying faith, whosoever have, most
certain it is, that they shall be glorified and saved; (for so S. Paul has
before expressly told us, that whom God justifies, he also glorifieth) and
consequently, Romans 8.30.
they must needs have perseverance unto the end. This is also further
witnessed, where S. Paul says again expressly of them: 1. Cor. 1.8.
that Jesus Christ shall confirm them unto the end. And again he says: 1*
These. 5.24.
Faithful is he that has called you, which will also do it. And so
likewise testifies S. Peter, that all Gods elect, are kept by the power of
God, through faith, unto salvation. 1. Pet. 1.5.
They then having so strong a Keeper, as the power of God, to support, uphold,
and preserve them, until they arrive at the Haven of all happiness, namely
everlasting salvation: what doubt can be made of their perseverance and
continuance to the end? for none can pull them out of his hand, Ioh. 10.28, ^9.
as Christ himself witnesses. And therefore does S. Paul speak confidently
in the person of all Gods elect, being justified and sanctified persons, in
this sort: We know, 2. Cor. 5.1.
that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building from God, that is an house not made with hands, but eternal in the
heavens. Mark that he says, they Know it. And thus again it is said in the
Epistle to the Hebrews: Call to remembrance, Heb. 10.32, 33, 34.
the days that are passed, in which after that ye had been enlightened, ye
endured a great fight in afflictions, partly vvhilest ye were made a gazing
stock, both by rep^^ches and afflictions, and partly, vvhilest ye became
companions of (...) which were so tossed too and fro: For both ye sorrowed
with me for my bonds, and suffered with Joy the spoiling of your goods:
knowing in your selves, that ye have in Heaven, a better and an enduring
substance. Observe here still, that he says, they Knew by a testimony within
themselves, (namely by the testimony of Gods spirit within them, Rom 8.16.
(which is therefore called the Earnest of that their Inheritance) that the
same heavenly Inheritance, Ephe. 1.13, 14.
and ever enduring substance* did belong unto them. And so again testifies S.
John, saying thus: These things have I written unto you, th^^ believe in the
name of the Son of God: 1. Ioh 5.13.
that ye may know, that ye have eternal life. Note that he here again
says, that Gods people are to Know, that they shall have Eternal life. And he
further says: that, If we receive the witness of men* the witness of God is
greater: 1. Ioh. 5.9, 10, 11, 12.
For this is the witness of God* which he testifies of his Son: He that
believes in the Son of God, has the witness in himself: He that believes
not God, has made him a liar, because he believed not the record, that God
witnessed of his Son. And this is the record, that God has given unto us
eternal life, and this life is in his Son: He that has the Son, has
life, and he that has not the Son of God, has not life. And again it is
written: Ioh 3.36.
that, He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life: and he that
obeys not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
him. And again, Christ Jesus himself says: Verily, verily, I say unto you:
He that believes in me, Ioh. 6.47.
has everlasting life. And sundry other such promises there be. That man then
which considers these promises of Eternal life, to as many as be Believers
in Jesus Christ, and that withal by good examination finds himself firmly
to believe in him, Deus tibi de hoc mundo recedenti immortalitatem pollicetur:
and tu dubitas and fluctuas: hoc est Christum credentium magistru^ peccato
incredulitatis offendere etc. Cyp^. de mor^al. Heb. 6.17, 18, 19.
and to have that true, lively, and justifying faith, can no way doubt of his
everlasting salvation, except (which were most impious and detestable) he will
doubt of the truth of that which God has spoken, and promised, and that so
often, and so earnestly, yea, as with an Oath, and with so vehement an
asseveration. For, (as it is further written, in the Epistle to the Hebrews)
God vvilling more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the
stablenesse of his Counsel, bound himself by an oath: that by two immutable
things (wherein it is impossible that God should lie) we mig^^^ have strong
consolation, who have our refuge to hold fast the hope that is set before us,
which we have as an Anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast. Where, beside
all the former testimonies, you perceive very plainly, that the hope of Gods
elect, in this life, Regnu^ coeloru^ vult Dominus sine aliqua incertae
voluntatis ambiguitate sperari: Alioquin Iustificatio ex fide nulla erit, si
fides ipsa sit Ambigua. Hillar. in Matthew. cap. 5.
is not an uncertain or doubtful manner of hope, (as the Rhemists and other
Papists would make it), but an assurance, or hope without any doubting or
fear of being frustrated: for it is here called, Animae Anchora tuta, ac
firma: The Anchor of the soul, and such and Anchor, as is Sure and steadfast:
so that there is no fear or doubt to be had of it. Yea what fear, or doubt,
can there be of this matter, when it here appears, that, GOD, both by
promise, and, oath (two immutable things, in either of which it is impossible
that he should lie) has tied and bound himself unto us, to the end we should
have this assured and strong consolation. Iam. 1.6, 7.
And therefore would S. James also have the faith of a Christian, to be without
any doubting, or, wavering at all. And likewise the Epistle to the Hebrews,
Heb. 10.22.
and to the Romans, requires in every true Christian, (...)* an Assurance of
faith, and such a strong faith, as is without any doubting, staggering,
distrust, or wavering: Romans 4.18, ^9, 20, 21 etc.
for so S. Paul shows by the example of Abraham. I grant that if a man look
but upon himself, and go no further then to himself, and his own demerits,
Presumere non de operatione tua sed de Christi gratia etc. bona presumptio.
Ambr. de Sacram. lib. 5. cap. 4.

Tota presumptio tua, Deus sit Aug^st. in Psalm. 85. Psalm. 42.5.11. Psalm. 43.5.
Romans 7.24, 25. Gal. 5.17. 2. Cor 4* 8, 9, 10 etc. Ps 46.1, 2, 3. etc Psalm
27.14. Matthew. 16.18.


he shall therein find matter sufficient and abundant, to condemn himself:
but if, renouncing all confidence in himself (as he ought) he find himself
to be a firm believer in Christ, and so consider himself as he is in Christ
Jesus, the Savior, and remembers withal, Gods immutable promise of eternal
life, to as many as have that firm, true, and lively faith, in him; he
cannot (as I said before) but rest assured of his salvation, except (which were
most abominable) he will make God a liar. It is true, that even Gods children,
sometimes, are cast into Dumps, and very great perplexities, and have not their
consolation and faith, at all times strong alike: but yet as God still raises
them after their falls, so does he also, in his good time, remove again, all
those doubtful perplexities, distrusts, and dismayes, and makes their faith,
at last, so strong and eminent, as that the power and gates of Hell it self,
be not able to prevail against it. For, Gods children (which not only hear
the word of God, but be careful also to do it) be, by Christ Jesus himself,
likened to the wise man, that built his house upon a Rock, Matt. 7.24, 25.
and the rain fell, and the floods came, and the vvindes blew, and beat upon
the house, but it fell not, because it was builded (not upon the sands, but)
upon a sure Rock. Whereby we see, that whatsoever storms do arise, or winds
and tempests do come upon Gods children, yet God supporteth them, and makes
them to stand, for all that, invincible. Yea, they are, in the end, more then
Conquerors (as S. Paul speaks) through him that loved them. Romans 8.37.
Howbeit, it is a good Caveat and admonition against rash Presumption, and
arrogant and deceitful confidence, which S. Paul gives, saying; Let him that
thinks he stands, 1. Cor. ^0.12.
take heed lest he fall: for a man may think himself to stand, when he
stands not, and so may easily deceive himself, if he take not very good
heed. And therefore do both those Apostles, 2. Cor. 13.5. 2. Pet. 1.5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10.
S. Paul, and S. Peter, require a great search, trial, and examination,
diligence, and endeavor, to be used in this matter, that so, men, through an
overweening conceit, or false persuasion, deceive not themselves. It is true
likewise, that Gods elect and sanctified people, are to work out, that is, to
proceed, or, to go on forward, in the race of their salvation, with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2.12.
(as S. Paul admonishes) to make them the more careful and watchful over
themselves: but this trembling in the presence of Gods great, powerful, and
incomparable Majesty, and this awful fear, which they bear, and are to
bear unto him, does not hinder, but does rather affirm, and confirm, this
assurance of salvation before spoken of, within themselves. For the fear
toward God, which all Gods children have, and are to have, is not a slavish or
servile fear, such as Reprobates and Devils have, which is only in respect of
punishment, torments, and of condemnation ^nor any such fear, as is joined
with a continual distrust, and doubting of Gods love: but it is a filial
fear, such as kind, well natured, and dutiful children bear to their
fathers, and such a fear as is mingled with faith, and with a sense and
feeling of the love, even of the everlasting love of God toward them, in Christ
Jesus. For which cause, S. Paul says expressly: Romans 8.15.
that, They have not received the spirit of Bondage, to fear any more, but the
spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry, Abba, Father. So that such is the fear
(joined with faith and love) that is in Gods Children, as that they have
nevertheless in the end, Boldness, 1. Ioh. 4.17.
even in the day of Judgment, as S. John expreslie testifies: for, if God be
on their side, who can be against them? And since God has justified them, Romans
8.31, 32, 33, 34. etc.
who can condemn them? Yea, who can lay any thing to their charge, as S. Paul
speaks* and in an holy and heavenly sort, exulteth and triumphs? But all
this while, do you not perceive how miserable the popish Church is, wherein no
such faith or confidence is to be found, but at the most, no better but
doubtful or uncertain hopes, which yield a very poor, or no comfort to the
soul of a man?

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning Reprobation: wherein Gods doings, and the Doctrine of the
Protestants, be justified, against Objections, Cavills, and Calumnies of
Adversaries.

THat there is a Reprobation, as well as an Election, is a thing manifest: for,
S. Paul says of some: that, God has delivered them up unto a Reprobate mind,
to do those things which are not convenient, being full of all
unrighteousnes, fornication, wickedness, covetousnes, Rom 1.28* 29. etc.
malitiousnes etc. He says again of some: that they be abominable, and
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. Tit. 1.16. 2. Tim. 3.8.
And again he says of some, that they be men of corrupt minds, and reprobate
concerning the faith. Yea (if there were nothing else) the very term of
Electing some unto salvation, imports that there is a Reprobation, or refusal
of the rest that were not Elected. For what is Election (if you well observe
the force and nature of the word) but the choosing or singling out of some from
the rest? so that Reprobation, is the opposite or contrary to Election, as
Damnation is the opposite or contrary to Salvation. To be a Reprobate then is
nothing else, but to be refused or rejected as touching salvation, or not to
be elected thereunto. For the better understanding whereof, we must know,
that God made Adam, good and righteous, Ge^* 1.26* 31.
in the beginning; but he afterward, through the temptation of the Devil,
Ecclesiastes 7.31.
and his own consent thereunto, fell from that his Integrity and purity, and
so all Mankind, being enclosed in his loins, Genesis 3.1, 2, 3, 4. etc.
fell togethet with him and in him: for, In him all sinned, Romans 5.12.
as S. Paul expreslie affirms, and were all by nature (thus corrupted) become
the Children of wrath, as he likewise speaks in another place. Ephesians. 2.3.
God beholding this fallen Lump of Mankind, who by this their sin and
transgression, had, Romans 9.15, 16, 17, 18. Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6. Rev. 20.1^.
all alike, deserved condemnation, was pleased nevertheless, to take and elect
some of them to salvation in Christ, and to relinquish the rest, leaving them
in that their sinful estate to go to condemnation. And therefore be the Elect
(upon whom God was thus pleased to show mercy) called Vasa misericordiae, The
vessels of mercy: as contrariwise, the rest, which were not so Elected, Romans
9.22, 23.
but relinquished and rejected, that is to say, the Reprobates be called, Vasa
Irae, the vessels of wrath, fitted (as S. Paul speaks: through their own
sin and corruption) to destruction. So true is it, that their perdition or
destruction is of themselves: Hos 1^.9. Lam. 3.22. Ephesians. 1.4. Ioh 17.6.9. Ioh
6.37.39. Romans 5* 9. Gal. 3.13. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
and that the salvation of the rest, namely of the Elect, is of God, and of his
mere grace and bounty. For, as the Elect, be elected in Christ, and given to
him, to be redeemed and to be saved from Wrath, and the curse of the Law: and
be therefore in the times appointed of God, quickened, renewed, regenerated,
justified and sanctified, and so come in the end to be glorified: So on the
other side, those that be the Reprobates do, after their transgression in
Adam, lie dead in their sins* without being quickened, 2. Cor. 4.3* 4. Rom
11.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
renewed, or, regenerated, and without having any Savior or Redeemer
appointed for them, and be blinded in their errors, and hardened in their
transgressions, until they come at last (through their own default) to their
due and deserved just Condemnation. For, as touching saving graces, Romans 11.7.
the Elect only have obtained them, but, the rest have been hardened, as S.
Paul expressly affirms. There is then a Remnant (as he again speaks)
according to the election of grace. Rom 11.5.
And consequently, not all in a generality be chosen, Mat. 20.16.
but some only. Yea, Many be called (externally, and by the outward
preaching and ministry of the word) but for all that, few be chosen, as
Christ himself also witnesses. And for further proof hereof, it is expressly
said of some kind of sinners, namely, of Reprobate sinners, that, it is a
thing impossible that such should be renewed by repentance: Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
Romans 2.5. Heb. 12.17.
for which cause, it is also said of Esau, that, He found no place for
repentance, though he sought the blessing with tears: And again it is said of
some: that they did not believe: yea, that, non poterant credere, they could
not believe: Ioh. 12.37.39.40.
And the reason is there yielded: Deuteronomy. 29.4. Ezech. 36 26.27.
because God had blinded their eyes (by his not giving them light) and hardened
their hearts (by his not mollifying of them) so that by reason of their own
natural blindness and corruption (attracted to themselves by the fall of
Adam) remaining unaltered, they could neither see with their eyes, nor
understand with their hearts, nor be Converted, that he might heal them.
Wherefore, not of Reprobate sinners, but of such as be unfeigned, true, and
sound converts unto God and godliness, (which none be, but the Elect) is that
sentence in the Prophecy of Ezechiel meant, and to be intended, which says:
that, God wills not the death of a sinner. Ezech. 18 23. Ezech 33.11.
For if he be not such a true convert, but a counterfeit, or one that
continues to the end in his wickedness, and unrighteousnes, Ezech. 18.13. Ezech
33.9. etc.
shall he live? he shall not live, since he has done all these abominations,
but he shall die the death, and his blood shall be upon him, says God
himself, by the same Prophet Ezechiel, in the very same Chapters. In those
two Chapters then of Ezechiel (if you well consider them) you may readily and
easily find two sorts of sinners to be comprised and mentioned: namely, the
one sort, such as turned from their righteousness, that is, from that course of
righteousness and godliness, which they seemed at first to hold, to a course
of unrighteousness, and ungodliness, continuing in that wicked course unto
the end: such sinners, says God in those places, shall surely die: and the
other sort of sinners, such as repent and return by a sound conversion unto
God, and unto the ways of righteousness persevering in those good and godly
ways, unto the end, (which none do, but such as be the Elect) such sinners
shall not die the death, but such shall surely live, as is likewise said in the
same Chapters. So that even by those two Chapters, it appears, that God does
will the death and destruction of some kind of sinners. But this is yet
further evident, by those wicked and ungodly sons of Eli the Priest: who,
when their father gave them good counsel, and godly admonition, 1. Sam. 2.25.
they nevertheless, obeyed not the voice of that their Father: because (says
the Text) the Lord would Destroy them. Observe well those words. Agreeably
whereunto, S. Peter also, 1. Pet. 2.8.
speaking of certain, which stumbled at the word, and were disobedient,
says: that, they were thereunto even ordained* Again, speaking of certain
godless men, he says: they were as brute beasts led with sensuality, 2.
Pet. 2.12.
and made to be taken, and to be destroyed. Wherewith agrees that of Solomon
also, in his Proverbs, Pro. 16.4.
saying: The Lord has made all things for his own sake, yea even the wicked
for the day of evil. And so likewise testifies S. Jude: Jude, verse. 4.
for, speaking of certain ungodly men, that turned the grace of God into
wantonness, he says: that, they were before of old ordained (...), to this
Judgment, or, to this condemnation. By all which, it is infallibly manifest,
that God seeing all men to have sinned in the transgression of Adam, has
ordained and decreed, to permit and suffer, some of them to run on in the
course of wickedness and ungodliness, until they come, in the end, to their
justly deserved destruction and perdition.

2 In vain then, and most untruly is it objected against the Protestants, that
they make God the Author of sins and high time it is, for all to cease their
slandering of them in that behalf. For the Protestants in their doctrine,
clean contrariwise, God is not the Author of sin.
do teach, that although God decreed to permit sin, to come into the world,
yet he never made it, nor was the Author or worker of it: yea God made man good
at the first; Genesis 1 31.
yea, all things that he made, were in their creation, very good, as is
expressly written in Genesis. The corruption of man, and the sin that came
unto him, was brought in, and procured another way, namely, after his creation,
by the persuasion and temptation of the Devil, that subtle Serpent, and by
man's will consenting thereunto, as is likewise declared in Genesis: Gen 3.1, 2,
3, etc.
so that, not God, but the Devil, and man together, consenting to that
temptation and persuasion of the Devil, were the Author and efficient cause of
sin in man, at the first, and so continue Authors and workers of sin in men
unto this day. And therefore is it said: that, Satan entered into Judas
Iscariot, to stir him up, to betray Jesus. Ioh. 13.27.
And likewise does S. James write thus: Iam. 1.1^.
Let no man say when he is tempted; I am tempted of God, for God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man, etc. Yea it is the Devil,
even that wicked Spirit, That works in the children of disobedience, Ephe.
2.2. 2 Timothy 2.26. God withholdeth his grace from some, but infus^^h not
wickedness into any. Iam. 1.^4. Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 17. Non f^cit voluntates
malas, sed utitur iis, ut voluerit. Aug. (...) Julian. lib ^ cap. 3.2. Cor 46.
Gen 1.2, ^, 4. Divinae sapientiae virtutis, and potenti^e, est, non solum been
facere, quae natura Dei est, -sed etiam illud maxim, ut id quod per malos
excogitatum est, ad bonum alique^ fine^, and utilum, de ducat and utiliter iis
quae videntur mala, utatur. Clemens Alexand. strom. lib. 1.
as S. Paul witnesses. And again he says: that, Men are ensnared by the
Devil, and held captive by him, to do his will, until such time as God set
them free, and do deliver them by his grace and power. For God does not put,
instill, or infuse wickedness into any, but withholdeth his graces from
Reprobates, and so they not only sin by reason of their own concupiscence,
and nature corrupted and depraved thorough the transgression of Adam, but do
further, by degrees, grow obdurate in their sins, and so in the end come to
their just condemnation. Wherefore, God appears to be, in sins committed,
not a cause efficient, but deficient, or, wanting, in that he leaves some men
to themselves, and gives not unto them, those sanctifying and saving graces
which he gives to his elect: For neither indeed is he bound or compellable to
give those graces to any, but to whom he pleases, nor do they properly, or,
by his appointment, belong to any but to the elect. It is true nevertheless*
that God orders, disposes and uses, (as lawfully he may*) all men's sins
to serve his own glory, and good pleasure* And herein is his power and
wisdom highly to be admired, who can thus one of the sins of men, and
Devils, draw matter serving for his own glory: as likewise most admirably he
made the light to shine forth out of darkness. How great glory did God get
to himself, by that proud and mighty King* Pharao, whose heart was so much
and so long hardened against the people of God? Insomuch, that himself says
thus of him: For this cause, have I appointed thee, to show my power in thee,
and to declare my Name throughout all the world, Exodus 9.16. Romans 9.17. In
like sort may it be said, that for this cause, God has appointed Devils, and
reprobate men, to show his glory by their destruction, and in the mean time,
to use their wickedness to serve his own ordinance. Si peccaveris ne putes
hominem fecisse quod voluit, and Deo accidisse quod noluit. August. in Psalm.
110.2.
Sometimes, therefore, (as the Schoolmen themselves do also say) Deus vult
peccatum, n^n quatenus est peccatum, sed quatenus est poena peccati: God will
have sin to be done by men, not simply for the sins sake, but as it is to
be a punishment for another sin, formerly committed. Which point, namely,
that God will sometime have one sin punished with another, is very evident:
for God punished the Adultery of King David, 2. Sam 12.9, 10, 11, 12.
with another like sin of Absolon his son, who lay openly with his fathers
Concubines, and in the sight of Israel: And the Text witnesses that God
himself would raise up this Evil against King David; 2. Sam ^6.21, 22.
for David did this wickedness secretly, but I (says God) will do this
thing, before all Israel, and before the Sun. In which Act of Absolon
therefore, Quis non ista iudicia contremiscat, in quious agit Deus in cordibus
malorum hominu^, quicquid vult: reddens eis secundum merita illoru^. Et:
manifestu^ est Deum operari in cordibus hominum, adinclinandas, illorum
voluntates, quocunque voluerit, si^e ad bona pro misericordia, sive ad mala,
pro, meritis, illorum: Iudicio utique suo, aliquando aperto, aliquando occulto,
semper autem Iusto. Aug. de gra. and lib. arb. ca 21. Romans 1 20, 21, 22, 23,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Intelligendum est. Omnia vel adjuvante Domino
perfici, vel deserente permitti: ut intelligas tamen, Nolente Deo, nihil
prorsus admitti. August. de praedestinatione and gra. cap. 15.
it is apparent, that God had to do, though not simply for the sin sake, yet
so far forth, as it served for a requital, or, punishment, of the sin and
adultery committed formerly by King David, with Vriahs wife. S. Paul says
likewise, that the Gentiles when they knew God by the creation of heaven and of
earth, and of all the things which they saw visibly before their eyes: yet they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
Imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened: when they professed
themselves to be wise, they became fools for they turned the glory of the
incorruptible God, to the similitude of the Image of a corruptible man, and of
birds and foure-footed beasts, and of creeping things* Wherefore God gave them
up to their own hearts lusts, unto uncleanenesse, to defile their own bodies,
between themselves. And he further says: For this cause God gave them up to
vile affections; for even their women did change the natural use into that
which is against nature: and likewise also the men left the natural use of
the women, and burned in their lust one toward another, and man with man
wrought filthiness, and received in themselves such recompense of their
error, as was meet: For, as they regarded not to acknowledge God, even so God
delivered them up into a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not
convenient, being full of all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness,
covetousnes, maliciousnes, full of Envy, of Murder, of Debate, of Deceit,
etc. Where you plainly perceive, how even amongst the Gentiles, their not
glorifying of the Creator of heaven and earth, as God, (according to such
knowledge of him, as by the creation of all things, they had received) was
punished by diverse and sundry other sins, into which they fell and wherein
God himself had an hand, Romans 1.2^. (...).
so far forth as they served for recompenses, requitals, or punishments, for
former sins committed: for it is said in the Text; For this cause, Ver^^ 24.
God gave them up to their own hearts lusts etc. And again: For this cause,
God gave them up to vile affections, etc. And again: Verse 26.
As they regarded not to acknowledge God, so God delivered them up into a
reprobate mind, Verse 28.
to do th^se things which are not convenient, etc. In like sort it is said of
some living in the days of Antichrist, that, 2. Tess. 2 10, 11, 12.
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved,
therefore God sent them strong Delusion, that they should believe lies, that
they all might be damned which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. Where you see again, that he punishes one sin with
another, in that he will have them, to have this strong delusion to believe
lies, and false doctrines: For it is expressly said, that God sent this strong
delusion upon them; namely, as a punishment (as it is indeed a most just, and
grievous one) for their contempt of his Gospel, and neglect of his word and
truth. Sometimes again, God permits a sin to be done, for the trial and
proof of his own servants and children: as was the sin of the Shabaeans, and
Chaldaeans, in the violent taking away of Jobs goods* Job 1.13.17.
for the further trial and proof of Jobs faith, virtue, and patience: and as
is the sin of persecution, of Gods servants, Iam. 5.11.
for their better trial and proof likewise; for so S. Peter declares, and
withal shows, 1 Pet. 4.12.19. 1. Pet. 3.17.
that, Ita vult Dei voluntas: Gods will, will have it so. And sometimes
again, God permits sins to be done and multiplied by men, Romans 2.5.
thereby to heap up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and against
the day of the declaration of the just judgment of God, and thereby to procure
to themselves the greater damnation, as the Scriptures speak: and thus (...)
all Reprobates commit their sins. Matt. 23.14.33, 34, 35. Iam 3.1.
But sometime again, did God permit a sin, to the end, there might be a way
made and opened, for declaration both of his Justice, and Mercy, toward
mankind: and thus he permitted the sin and fall of Adam, our first father.
For, if Adam had not sinned, but had always remained in his estate of purity
and innocence wherein he was created, neither could Gods mercy toward any,
nor yet his justice toward any, have appeared in the race of mankind:
inasmuch as, where no sin, no^ sinner is, there can be no condemnation for
sin in justice; neither can any mercy be showed or exercised, but toward
the miserable, and such as s^and in need of it, and have transgressed.
Although therefore God made Adam good in the creation of him, yet he made him
mutably good, that is, in such an estate, as that he might possibly fall. For
which cause, he gave him free will, either to stand or to fall, at his own
election. So that, there was in him a possibility to fall; as also a
possibility to have stood, if he had would: but the Devil tempting him, and he
yielding and consenting to the temptation, he then fell, thorough his own
default, as appears. Whereupon S. Augustine says: August. in Enchir. C. 30.
de verb. Apost. ser. 2. degra. and lib. arbit. Retract. lib. 2. cap. 8. etc. De
perfect. Iustie. ^at. 9. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 1.
that, Homo libero arb^trio male us^^, and se, and illud perdidit: Man having
ill used his free will, destroyed both himself, and it. So that now since the
fall of Adam, liberum arbitrium captivatum, non nisi (...) peccandum valet:
free will being captivated, i^ of no force but to sin, as the same S.
Augustine affirms. Again he says: Quia peccavit voluntas, secu^a est
peccantem, peccatum habendi dura necessitas; Because the will had offended,
there followed the sinner, an hard necessity of having sin. And again, he
says: that, Naturae nostrae dura necessitas, merito praecedentis iniquitatis
ex^rta est: The hard necessity of our nature, arose out of the merit or desert
of the before going transgression. Since the fall of Adam then (as the same S.
Augustine further says) Voluntas in tantum est libera, in quantum est
liberata: Man's will is so far forth free, as it is made free by God: For as
he says again; Hominis, non libera, sed a Deo liberata, voluntas,
obsequitur: Man's will, not free of it self, but so far forth as it is made
free by God, does yield obedience. But yet howsoever man's Will is now become
thus thrall, and captive unto sin: yet is it free from constraint. And of
this freedom in respect of constraint, it is, that S. Augustine is ever to be
intended, wheresoever he acknowledges men to have free Will: and therefore
do not mistake or misunderstand him in this point. For, indeed, it is not by
forcing, violence, constraint, or compulsion, but by his sweet internal
motions and persuasions, that God, ex nolentibus facit volentes, of unwilling
makes men willing, Aug. cont. 2. ^p. Pel. l. 1. c. 19.
as S. Augustine himself teaches and affirms. Now, that out of the fallen
Lump of mankind, it was, that God showed his Mercy to some, in Electing them
to salvation, and his Justice to othersome, in not Electing them: this is
apparent; because S. Paul says directly, that Election is neither of the
vviller, Rom ^.16.
nor of the Runner, sed miserentis Dei, but of God that shows mercy. For
which cause also, the Elect, upon whom GOD thus showed Mercy, be called the
vessels of mercy: and the rest upon whom he showed not this mercy, Rom 9.22,
23*
but left them (as he then saw them) in their sin and transgression, be said
to be the vessels of wrath. But as nothing comes to pass in this world, but
what God, before the world was made, decreed and determined with himself,
either to do, Iere 10.23. Pro. 21.1. Ephe. 1.11. Lam. 2.17. Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8* 9, 10, 11. etc.
or to permit to be done: so accordingly he decreed and determined before the
foundations of the world, to permit this sin and fall of Adam, and thereout
to make this his Election of some unto glory and salvation, in and through
Christ, and to leave the rest in their sin unto condemnation. For, that, God
did decree, or, purpose to permit Adam to fall, Psalm. 115.3. Psalm 135.6. Ephesians.
3.4, 5.9 11 Romans 16.25.26. Col. 1.26, 27. Tit 1.2, 3. 1. Ioh 4.9. 1. Pet 1.1,
2. 1. Pet. 1.18, 19. 1. Pet. 1.20. 2. Tim. 1.9, 10.
beside the event of it, (which does sufficiently declare it,) it is further
evident, because S. Peter also, writing to the Elect, says: that they were
redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled and without
spot: and that he, namely Christ, was ordained before the foundation of the
world, but was manifested in the last times, for their sakes. S. Paul likewise
testifies the same, in his Epistle to Timothy. Inasmuch then, as both these
Apostles do thus clearly affirm, that Christ was ordained before the
foundation of the world, to be, as he is, a Redeemer and Savior, of all the
elect, from their sins: (for, for this cause it was, that he had the name of
Jesus, which signifies a Savior, given unto him, because he was to save his
people from their sins, Matt. 1.21.
as the Angel himself witnesses): I say, seeing Christ, was thus ordained,
before the world was made, to be a Redeemer and Savior of people from their
sins; it must of necessity be granted, that the fall of Adam was also
decreed to be permitted, Romans 5.11,
whereby men might become sinners: for by the fall of Adam it was, and not
otherwise, that sin entered and was to enter into all mankind. Neither,
indeed, needed there, nor possibly could there have been any Redeemer,
Savior, or deliverer from sin* unless sin had first been, and had made
an entrance into the world. And therefore well does S. Gregory say: Greg
exposit. in 1. Reg. cap. 4.
Et quidem nisi Adam peccasset, Redemptorem, nostrum carnem suscipere nostram
non oportuisset -- Dum pro peccat^ribus. Deus homo, nasciturus erat: That
verily if Adam had not sinned, our Redeemer should not h^ve taken our flesh
upon him -- Since that for sinners it was, that God was to be become man. And
to the same effect speaks also Saint Augustine, saying: Aug Enchir. cap. 27.
that, Melius Iudicavit de malis benefacere, quam mala nulla esse permittere:
God judged it better, out of evil, to work good, then to suffer no evil at
all to be. And this is further declared: Gal 3.22.
for Saint Paul says expressly; That the Scripture has concluded all under
sin: that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ, Rom 3.9* etc. Romans 3.19.
should be given to them that believe. Again he says: That, ^ll, both Jews
and Gentiles, be under sin etc. that every mouth may be stopped, and that
all the world might be made subject to the judgment of God. And again, he
says: There is no difference* Rom 3.23, 24, 25, 26.
for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God: being Justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: whom God
has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness. Again he says: that, God has shut up all in unbeleefe, that
he might have mercy on all, Romans 11 32.
even upon all those, whether they were Jews or Gentiles, whom he so purposed
to take to mercy, in and through CHRIST. By all which, you may perceive, that
GOD did purpose, or, decree to permit, the sin and fall of Adam, and for what
cause and reason it was so permitted, as likewise that he permits other
sins also; in which permission of his, his will is always included: for
against his will he permits nothing, Prove. 21.1. Ier. ^0.23. Act. 17.28.
Psalm. 135.6.
neither can any thing come to pass against his will, that is, whether he
will, or no: But he it is that rules, orders, and governs the whole world;
and all things therein, and does, both in heaven and in earth, whatsoever he
pleases. Yea, Bonum est ut mala sint: alioquin non s^^eret deus, ut mala sint:
Non sinit autem nolens utique sed volens: August. in Enchirid. c. 98. and in
Psalm. 110.2.
It is good (says S. Augustine) that there should be evil or sin: otherwise
God would not suffer or permit it to be: And verily, he permits it (says
he) not against his will, but with his will. Again, he says: August.
Enchir. c. 95.
Non fit aliquid, nisi omnipotens fieri VELIT, vel sinendo ut fiat, vel ipse
faciendo: There is nothing done, unless God WILL have it to be done, either
by suffering it to be done, or by doing of it himself. In like sort says
Hugo: that when God does good, Hugo de Sacr. lib. 1. c. 12. par. 4.
and permits evil, his will appears in both: Quoniam esse vult quod
facit, aut permittit: Because he will have that to be: Deus est vitiorum
nostrorum ^on Author sed Ordinator^ August. in Ench^rid. cap. 99.
which he either does, or permits to be done. Deus vult esse malum, and in
eo, non nisi bonum vult: God does will evil to be, and therein he wills
not but what is good, says the same Hugo. For what is ill done as it comes
from men, is well done so far forth as God has to do in it, he being the
orderer and ruler of it, and the disposer of it to good uses, and ends in his
purpose. And therefore does S. Augustine say again: that Deus quas^ dam
voluntates suas, utique bonas, implet per malorum hominum voluntates malas: God
does accomplish his own will, August. Enchir. ad Lam. c. 101.
being verily good, by the evil wills of evil men. Although then, God moves
and rules all men, and their wills, affections, and actions (because in him it
is, that all do live, move, Act. 17.28.
and have their being) yet is he not for all that, the Author of the pravi^ie,
or wickedness that is in those men, or in their wills, affections, or actions:
no more then he that moves, stirs, or rides upon a Lame Horse, or that
rules and governs him, can be therefore said to be the cause, or Author of
his lamenesse, or of any other his defects As touching the fall of Adam then*
and original sin, you see how it was caused without any coaction, or
compulsion from God: and as touching actual sins, they flow and come from
that corruption of men's nature, accrued unto them by reason of that first
transgression. If therefore any here object, in defense or excuse of
Reprobates, that since the transgression of Adam, they sin necessarily, and
cannot but sin by reason of their Nature corrupted, and remaining in them,
unaltered, and uncleansed. I answer, first, that they have drawn upon
themselves, this Corruption, and necessity of sinning, Rom 5.12. 2. Tim. 2.26.
^phes. 2.3.
by that their fall and transgression in Adam. And secondly, although God does
not cleanse, purge, sanctify, or purify them, nor does give those saving
graces to them, which he does to the Elect: yet he is not therefore to be taxed,
or quarrelled against: because, God is debtor to no man: but may at his own
most free pleasure, out of that fallen lump of mankind, choose whom he would
to salvation, and refuse whom he would, and accordingly, give, or withhold his
saving graces. Thirdly, consider, that there be also Elect Angels, as well as
Elect Men: and consequently, Reprobate Angels, ^. Tim. 5*^1. Mat. 25.41. 2. Pet
2.4. Jude verse. 6. Ioh. 8.44.
as well as reprobate men: Now the Angels, that fell from their first estate,
and are become Devils, do sin (as all men know) necessarily, and cannot but
sin: and yet are they not therefore excused. If then a necessity of sinning,
in Devils, will not serve to excuse them: how can it serve to excuse reprobate
men? wherein, the difference is ever to be remenbred, between necessity, and
coaction. For howsoever reprobate men, as well as D^vels, do sin necessarily,
yet does not God force or compel them to sin, but as they have brought sin
upon themselves, through their own default: so by reason of their depraved
natures, they still sin, and that willingly, and readily, and of their own
accords, without any enforcing, coaction, or compulsion from God. Yea,
fourthly, a necessity of a thing to be done, in respect of Gods purpose,
will, and decree, does not excuse him that does it to an other end and purpose,
as namely, to satisfy his own lewd mind and wicked will and affection. This
appears, and that very specially and particularly, in Judas Iscariot: who,
together with his Accomplices, did nothing in that his sinful and detestable
act, of betraying Jesus, but what the hand and counsel of God had before
ordained to be done: Act 2.23. Act. 4.27* 28.
(for so the Scripture expressly and directly witnesses): and yet did not this
counsel, purpose, or decree of God, excuse the sinner. For Christ Jesus
himself says: that, A vvoe, Mat. 26.2^.
nevertheless belonged, to that man by whom the Son of man was betrayed: and
that, it had been better for that man, if he had never been borne. Christ
Jesus again says thus: It must needs be that offense; come: Mat. 18.7.
but woe to that man by whom the offense comes. Where you likewise see, a
necessity of sinning and of offenses, and yet that this will not excuse the
sinner or offendour for all that. God says again, Ier. 10.5, 6, 7. etc.
he would send proud Ashur (the rod of his wrath) against his people, the
Jews: so that it was Gods decree and purpose, which Ashur therein executed:
yet because he executed this will and decree of God, with another meaning, and
to another end, and purpose, namely, to satisfy his own cruel, proud, Genesis
45.4, 5, 6, 7, 8 etc* Genesis 50.15, 16* 17, 18, 19, 20, ^ 21.
and ungodly mind, therefore he, for his part, sinned and deserved punishment.
The Brethren of Joseph also, sold Joseph into Egypt, and it was Gods will,
providence, and purpose, that it should be so: But God had one purpose and
meaning in it, Act 7.^.
and they another: for God thereby meant to provide for his Church and people,
and for the good of Joseph: and they on the otherside, did it, as being moved
with envy, and of an evil meaning toward him, and therefore were guilty of
sin, even in their own consciences, notwithstanding that Gods dscree and
purpose was therein also executed, Shimei likewise rayled upon King David, and
cursed him, 2. Sam. 16.5, 6, 7, 8. etc.
and it was Gods decree and purpose that it should be so: for the Lord had
bidden him to curse David, as David himself confessed: yet hough he therein
executed the will and decree of God, was not he therefore for his part excused;
because God had one meaning in it, and he another: For God meant so to put
David in remembrance of some sin, 1. King. 2.44 45 46.
and thereby to check and humble him: but Shimei did it, so to satisfy his
own wicked and malicious mind, and therefore was guilty of sin, for which
also he was afterward punished. Thus you see, I hope, that Gods decreeing, and
purposing (in his own hidden counsel and secret will) to permit sins to be
committed, will not serve to excuse sinners, since they commit their sins, not
to any such end, or, with any such mind or purpose, as thereby to do and
perform Gods will, or any of his secret, and sacred decrees, (which be things,
for that present, unknown unto them) but to another end and purpose, namely,
to satisfy their own lewd, licentious, and wicked wills: which is always
matter sufficient to make them inexcusable. Bernard. in Can. Sermon. 81.
And therefore, well may that saying of S. Bernard, be applied to a reprobate
man: that, Voluntas inexcusabilem, and incorrigibilem necessitas facit: His
will does make him Inexcusable, and a necessity of sinning Incorrigible.

3 But against this matter of Gods reprobating, or refusal of any, as
touching salvation, is objected that place of S. Paul to Timothy, 1. Tim. 2^
1, 2, 3, 4.
where he says thus: I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men, for Kings,
and all that are in authority etc. for God will have all men to be saved. But
the meaning of these words is evident, that he will have of all sorts and
degrees of men that shall be saved, even Kings and Princes, as well as of any
other sort: for of them, you see, he specially speaks. August. Enchir. cap.
103. Greg. in 1. Reg. lib. 5. c. 4.
And so does S. Augustine and Gregory also expound those words. And indeed,
what other sense (all circumstances of the Text being well considered) can be
set upon them? For to set this sense upon them, namely, that God will have all
to be saved in a generality, without any exception, were directly contrary
to the rest of the Scriptures, Mat. 24.40. Mat. 25.41.
which witness directly, that God will have some to be damned. Yea, if God
would have all to be saved, in a generality, what should, or can hinder, but
that all, without exception, should be saved accordingly? For, who was ever
able to resist his will, or to hinder the execution thereof, that it should not
come to pass? Romans 9.19.
Howbeit, they say, That God would, and men will not, and that this is the
reason why some are damned, because themselves will not be saved. But what is
this else, but to make Gods will subject to men's will, and to be as it were, a
waiting servant, and attendant upon their pleasures? so that he shall will
their salvation, when they will it themselves; and shall also nill it, when they
nill it: which, beside that it makes Gods will, as variable and mutable as
men's wills, Iam. 1.17. Mal. 3.6.
(a thing dishonorable unto him, and untrue) it makes also men's salvation,
and damnation, to consist in their own power and pleasures: which is as
absurd, as if you should say, it is in the power and will of the lump of Clay,
to choose of what sort and fashion it shall be, and to what use it shall be
applied, and what part thereof shall be a vessel to honor, and what to
dishonor. For a Potter has not more full, or more absolute power, over the
Clay, and the Pots which he makes thereout, then God has over all Men, and
Angels, and over all other his creatures, to do, ordain, and dispose of
them, Rom 9.20, 21. Ier. 18.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Esaias 45.9.
and every of them, at his own most free and uncontrollable pleasure: as the
Scriptures do clearly testify, often using, and as it were delighting
themselves with this comparison, and resemblance. It is true, that no father
has such an high and absolute power over his Children, nor King over his
Subjects, nor Master over his Servants: the reason is apparent, because these
be not the makers of their Children, nor of their Subjects, nor of their
Servants, but God was the maker of them all, as of all things else: and
therefore as touching this point, the cases be not like. And yet, if Children
offend, it is in the power and pleasure of the father, to correct which of them
he will: or if Subjects offend, the King may punish, or pardon whom soever of
them he pleases: and if Servants offend, it is also in the power and pleasure
of the Master, to punish, or to spare whom he list. Does it not then consist
much more in the will and pleasure of God, the Creator and maker of all men,
especially, after that all mankind was fallen in the transgression of Adam, to
choose, or refuse whom he pleased? If then you do but observe this comparison
and similitude of the Potter, which the Scripture so often uses, or some such
like, wherein there is a Maker, considered, with such power and authority, as
he has over the thing, made by him, being the work of his own hands: This
matter will then be so plain and evident unto you, as that even by light and
force of reason, you will be compelled to confess, that the thing made, is
ever subject to the will, ordering and disposing of him that is the maker, and
not the maker, to the will of the thing made. And even this does also S. Paul
himself acknowledge and teach in this very particular matter, and thereupon he
further says expressly of God: that He has mercy upon whomsoever he will,
Romans 9.21. etc. Romans 9.18.
and whomsoever he will he hardens. And again he says, that God spoke
thus: I will have mercy, on whomsoever my pleasure is to have mercy: and I
will have compassion on whomsoever my pleasure is to have compassion. Verse. 15.
So then (says he again) it is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs, Verse. 16.
but in God that shows mercy. By all which is most manifest, that this
great matter concerning the salvation and damnation of men, consists not in
the will and pleasure of men, but in the will and pleasure of God, and in his
ordering and disposing. Would you have this matter yet further declared? then
call to your remembrance what is written of Esau: namlie, that he would have
inherited the blessing, Heb. 12.17.
and yet was rejected, for he found no place to repentance, Men's salvation
depends not upon the will of men, but upon the will and pleasure of God. Number.
23.10.
though he sought the blessing with tears. Here you see, that Esau would feign
have inherited, and fought it even with tears, and yet was rejected, and had
this special grace of a true repentance not yielded unto him. Again, did not
wicked Balaam desire to die the death of the righteous, and that his last end
might be like his? Moreover, did not the foolish Virgins, as well as the wise,
desire to enter in, unto the Wedding, Mat. 25.11.12.
and say: Lord, Lord, open to us, and yet were excluded? Again, does not
Christ Jesus himself say to some: Ye shall se^ke me, Ioh. 8 21.
and yet ye shall dye in your sins, and whether I go, thither can ye not
come? And again, does he not say thus? Luke 13.24. It is a most manifest
truth, that many cannot be saved, not because themselves will not: but because
God will not, says Augustine, Epist. 107. ad Vital. Rom 11.7. Ioh. 10.26. Act.
13.48.
Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I say unto you, shall seek
to enter in, and shall not be able. You see then, that many and sundry
persons, would attain to the everlasting felicity of Gods people, and to a
most blessed happiness, and salvation, and yet cannot, because God will not,
as having otherwise ordained of them: And so again witnesses S. Paul, saying
thus: Israel has not obtained that he sought: but the Election has obtained
it, and the rest have been hardened. Again, Ye believe not (says Christ to
some) because ye are not of my sheep. And again it is written Crediderunt
quotquot erant ordinati ad vitam aeternam: Only so many believed as were
ordained to eternal life. And therefore also is this faith called, fides
Electorum Dei, the faith of Gods Elect, as being proper and peculiar unto them.
Again, it is written of some people: Tit. 1.1.
that, To them it is given, to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven,
but to others it is not given. Matt. 13.11.
Yea and Christ Jesus himself speaks thus unto God his Father, saying:
Voluntas Dei omnium, quae sunt ipsa est causa. Aug. de genesis cont. Manich. lib
1. cap. 2. Mat. 11.25. Heb. 4.2.
I give thee thanks, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid
th^se things from the wise, and men of understanding, and have opened them,
unto Babes: It is so, O Father, because such was thy good pleasure. Again, it
is written of some: that, The Gospel and word of God preached unto them, and
which they heard, profited them not: why? because it was not mixed with faith
in them that heard it. Which faith is Gods gift, and bestowed where he
pleases. Again it is written: that at the word and preaching of Christ Jesus,
and most wonderful and mighty Miracles, which he did, many believed, Ioh.
12.37.39.
yet some believed not: yea, They could not believe, says the Text. Again, it
is written of some men: that they have such hardness of heart, that it is a
thing impossible for them to be renewed by repentance. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. Romans 2.5.
And what is the great and supreme reason of all this difference amongst men,
but this, that some are Elect, and some Reprobate, some are ordained to
salvation, and some to damnation, and according to that diversity of men, God
either gives or withholdeth his saving graces?

4 It is a thing well known to all true Christians, that none can be saved,
unless they have an unfeigned and hearty repentance, and a true and lively
faith in Christ Jesus (which is always accompanied with a care to walk in
Gods ways, and in obedience to his commandments). Now, this repentance, and
faith, be both the gift of God, and be not in men's powers to have them at their
own commands, or at their own wills and pleasures, and consequently it must
be granted, that Men's salvation does consist, not in their own wills and
pleasures, but in Gods will and pleasure. That, Repentance, is the gift of God,
S. Peter and the rest of the Apostles expressly witness, Acts 5.31.
affirming that it is God that gave repentance to Israel, and remission of
sins. And so again does S. Paul expressly declare: that, Repentance is the
gift of God. 2. Tim. 2.2^.
Therefore is it said also in the Lamentations of Jeremy: Lam. 5.21.
Turn thou us, O Lord, unto thee, and we shall be turned: And likewise in the
prophecy of Jeremy, Iere. 31.8.
thus: Convert thou me, and I shall be converted. And that, Faith also, is the
gift of God, the Scriptures do clearly witness. 1. Cor. 12.9.
For which cause, S. Paul says expressly: that, Not by works, but by grace,
men are saved, through faith: Ephesians. 2.8, 9
and that they have this faith, not of themselves: for it is (says he) the
gift of God. Seeing then that none can be saved without this faith, and,
repentance: and that faith, and repentance, Against the free will of men, in
things belonging to Gods ki^gdom.
be both the gift of God, and that men have them not of themselves, nor within
their own power, it must of necessity be granted, that men's salvation
consists not in the power and will of men, but in the power and will of God,
who is the giver of those saving graces. Where, withal, you may perceive, how
erroneous and false, that doctrine and conceit of men's free will is, as
touching things celestial and divine. For, what freedom of will, in things
appertaining to Gods service and kingdom, can he have, that is ensnared by the
Devil, and held captive by him, to do his will, (as Saint Paul speaks), 2.
Tim 2.26. Ioh. 8.36.
until it please God to deliver, and set him free? Or, what freedom or
forwardness has any man (since the fall of Adam, and man's nature corrupted
and depraved by that means) to come unto God, or godliness, of his own
natural powers, and abilities, especially when Christ Jesus himself also
says thus; No man can come unto me, except the father which sent me, Ioh.
6.44.
do draw him? For, if he must be drawn before he can come (as here it
appears that he must) it shows that he has backwardness enough, Deus
facit, ut velimus: Ille facit utfaciamus: It is God that makes us to will, and
it is he that makes us to do, says S. Aug. de gra. ^t lib. arb. ca. 16
but no forwardness, at all, of himself to come unto God. And this again the
Scripture witnesses, in Genesis 6.5. and Genesis 8.21. that (until God work in a
man) the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart, be only evil continually.
And so also witnesses S. Paul, saying (in 2. Cor. 3.5.) that we are not
sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God. Yea S. Paul says further expressly: that, The
natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God: 1. Cor. 2.14.
for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. If the corrupt natural man cannot so much as perceive
or understand the things of God, until he be enlightened by Gods Spirit, and
have received from him supernatural grace, how can he possibly will, or affect
those things, which he understands not? Col. 3.9, 10. Ioh 3 6, 7, 8. Gal.
6.15. Heb. 6.4. Romans 12.2. Iam. 1.5, 6.
For the understanding power or faculty, must go before, as being the
directer of the will and affections. Again, do not the Scriptures require,
the old man to be put off, and the new man to be put on? and men to be
regenerate and borne anew? to become new creatures? to be enlightened? to be
changed by the renewing of their minds? and such like? What do all these
phrases and manner of speeches, declare, but that man's nature, since the
transgression of Adam, is horribly polluted, defiled, and corrupted, and that
they have, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Gal. 5.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 23, 24. Iam. 1.17, 18. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
now none of these supernatural qualities, within them, by virtue of their own
natural powers and abilities? S. Paul again, directly shows, that these and
all other good graces and Christian virtues, whatsoever, be wrought in a man by
Gods spirit, and be the fruits of the same his spirit. And S. James also
teaches the same, as likewise all the rest of the Scriptures do* Yea, S. Paul
says expressly: that Men are dead, through their sins and corruptions, Quid
tantum de Naturae possibilitate praesumitur? vulnerata, sauciata, vexata,
perdita est: vera confessione non falsa defensione opus habet. August. de not.
and gra. cap. 53. We have Will in our selves: but to will well, or to will
that which is good and godly, is of God, says Bernard de gra. and liber.
arbi^. Phil. 2.13.
until they be quickened and made alive by the operation and working of God,
within them. If then since the fall of Adam, we be all Dead men, in respect of
our own selves, until God by his spirit, work in us, to quicken us: it is
clear, that in respect of our own natural abilities, we have no more power
to come unto God, then a dead man has power in himself, to rise again, or to
walk, stir, move, go, or to do any action of life: for which cause also,
Regeneration, is called The first resurrection, Rev. 20.6. It is true, that men
have an understanding, and a will: but to understand well and rightly, the word
of God, and things perteyning to Gods kingdom, or to will and affect the same
divine things, comes not from men, but from God, who enlightneth that their
understanding which was before dark, and makes their will and affections
inclined and to consent unto godliness, which were before perverse, and
enclining another way. And therefore does S. Paul say again, most plainly,
thus: It is God, which works in you, both the will, and the deed, even of
his own good pleasure. Agreeably whereunto, God himself also speaks thus:
Ezec. 36.26, 27.
A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I
will take away the stony heart out of your body, God must cause and make men
to c^nsent to his ways, and to walk therein, before they can do it.
and I will give you an heart of flesh, that is, a soft and mollified heart,
and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes,
and ye shall keep my Judgments, and do them. Where, likewise you see, that
Gods working, and grace, does frame and make men's wills and affections good,
before they have any goodness in them, or readiness to obey him, and before
that they can give consent to his motions or walk in his ways. And thus is it
a thing evident, that Gods Love, and good Will, toward us, is antecedent, and
goes before our love and good affection toward him: for so Christ Jesus
himself also witnesses, saying; Ioh. 15.16.
Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. And so also witnesses S.
John, saying expressly: Herein is love, not that we loved God, Ioh. 4.10.
but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a reconciliation for our
sins. Ioh. 4.19.
And again he says expressly: We love him, because he loved us first. Now
then seeing it is manifest throughout the whole course of men's salvation, that
Gods love, and his good will, and working, is first, precedent, and goes
before all good wills and loves of men, toward him again: and that men's good
wills, consents, loves, and affections, toward him, are caused, wrought, and
procured, by himself, and come in the second place, as a thing following
after: it must needs be granted, that Gods will, does not depend upon men's
will, as an attendant thereupon, to follow it; but contrariwise, that men's will
does depend upon Gods will, for him to order, frame, and dispose it, as
pleases him. And therefore you now perceive, Pro. 21.1. Iere. 10.23.
I trust, that this great matter of Salvation* depends not upon the will of
men (for if it did, who would be damned?) but upon the will of God, who gives
those his saving graces of a lively faith, and of a true Christian repentance
and conversion, to whom he pleases. For as S. Paul says again expressly:
Ephe. 1.11.
He does all things according to the counsel of his own will. Howsoever
then men are bidden in the Scripture to repent, convert, return, to walk in
Gods ways, and to keep his commandments, and such like; yet thereupon it
follows not, that men have free will and power of themselves, to do these
things: for it is before proved unto you, that it is God, that by his grace,
and spirit, working in men, makes them both willing, and able, to do these
things, and to consent to his divine motions, Deus facit volentem, hoc est
voluntati suae consentientem: Bernard de gra. and lib. arb. Deuteronomy. 30.19. Psalm.
25.4, 5.
before they can do it. Yea, albeit they are bidden to choose life: yet it is
God that must teach and direct them, before they can make a right choice in
that case: And therefore does the Psalmist say, Show me thy ways, O Lord,
and teach me thy pa^hes: Lead me forth in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art
the God of my salvation: And again he says: What man is he that fears the
Lord? Him will he teach the way that he shall choose. Verse. 1^.
But to conclude, How can men's salvation depend upon their own wills, when as
long before they were borne, or had any being in the world, or any will at
all, Ephesians. 1 4. 2. Tim 1.9, 10. 1. Pet. 1^19, 20. Mat. 25.34.
they were (with GOD, and in his counsel, determination, and purpose) elected
thereunto, namely, even before the foundations of the world: as the Scriptures
do clearly and directly testify?

5 But then they further object, that S. Paul says thus: Whom God foreknew,
them he did predestinate etc. moreover, whom he predestined, them also he
called: and whom he called, Romans 8.29, 30.
them also he justified: and whom he justified, them also he glorified. Here
Gods foreknowledge is mentioned, as going in order, Touching the foreknowledg
of God.
before his predestination: and this his foreknowledge (say they) shows, that
God did foresee, and foreknowe, what men would be, and what works and merits
they would do, when they should be living in this world, and that according
thereunto he made his predestination: and so they make, not Gods will and
pleasure, but men's future wills, works, and merits, so long before foreseen,
and foreknown, the Cause of Gods predestinating them to salvation. It is true
in very deed, that God did foresee, and foreknow, what men would and should
be, as likewise he foresaw, and foreknewe whatsoever was afterward to happen
or be in the world: but thereupon it follows not, Act. 15.18.
that the good works of men which he so foresaw, and foreknew, were the
original and antecedent cause of his Predestination of them to eternali life:
for they might be a consequent, and an effect of his predestination of them,
for all that, (as indeed they were) and not the Cause. For Christ himself
says: They were ordained, to this end, to bring forth fruit, and that their
fruit should remain. Ioh. 15.16.
And so also testifies S. Paul: that they be Gods vvorkemanship, created in
Christ Jesus, unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10.
which God had before ordained, that they should walk in them. Neither could
God foresee, or foreknow, any merit of salvation to be in men's works, whereto
no such merit belongs: Neither could he foresee, or foreknowe, any free or
foreward Will in men, after the fall of Adam, of their own natural abilities,
for the walking in the ways of God, as is also before declared. But this he
might, and did, indeed, foresee, and foreknow, namely, the fall of Adam,
whereby all mankind was (in respect of themselves) most miserable wretches,
liable to the wrath of God, and eternal condemnation: He did also foresee,
and foreknow, Christ Jesus his Incarnation, Passion, Satisfaction,
Righteousness, and Obedience, and that he should be the Savior and Redeemer
of all his Elect, For which cause it is said by S. Paul: That they which be
Elected, were elected in him, that is, in Christ, the mediator, Ephesians. 1.4. 1
Cor 15.45. Heb 7.22. 1. Tim. 2.5. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
and their head, and appointed Savior, and Redeemer: who being the second
Adam, did interpose himself, and as their suertie, did undertake for them, to
answer whatsoever Gods Justice, would demand to be performed by him, in their
behalf. And as for the rest which were not Elected to salvation, but refused,
they being not so beheld, nor considered in Christ, but as being out of him,
(and consequently, as they were, in, and after the transgression of the first
Adam) they lie still in that their most woeful estate, as* having no Suertie to
undertake for them, nor Savior, appointed to deliver them from the wrath and
curse of God, to them, for their sins, in his Justice belonging. And
therefore does the Scripture speak in this sort of them: namely, that, The
wrath of God abides upon them, as being never taken away in Christ. Ioh. 3.36.
And as they were borne in sin, and live in sin, so Christ Jesus himself
says: that they die in their sins. So that they never had, nor shall have
remission of their sins, Ioh. 8.21.24.
nor deliverance from the curse and wrath of God, through the death and
satisfaction of Christ Jesus.

6 For whereas some here object, that Christ died for all, in a generally, the
Schoolmen answer it with a distinction, namely, that Christ died for all,
sufficienter, but not efficienter, that is, sufficiently, but not efficiently,
that is to say, his death, (in respect of the greatness, vvorth, and value of
it, he being the Son of God, as well as Man) was sufficient for all in a
generality, and is therefore propounded as a salve to all if all can take hold
of him, and apply him unto themselves as a Savior, by a true and lively faith:
But because all cannot do this, (for none have this true, lively, and
justifying faith, but Gods elect only) therefore he died efficiently, that is,
his death was effectual and beneficial only to Gods Elect. Wherefore also well
does he distinguish, whether it were Augustine or Prosper: Qui magnitudinem
pretii, Ad artic sibi falio impositos art. 1.
distinguit a proprietate redemptionis: which distinguishes the greatness or
sufficiency of the price, from the propriety of redemption. Agreably
whereunto S. Ambrose likewise says: that, Etsi Christus pro omnibus passus
est: specialiter tamen pro nobis passus est, Ambros. in Luc. cap. 7. lib. 6.
quia pro Ecclesia passus est: Although Christ suffered for all, (excluding
none from the benefit of his death, if they believe in him) yet specially, or
in a special manner, he suffered for us that do believe in him, because for
his Church it was that he suffered. And so likewise testifies S. Hierome:
that Christ gave his life, a redemption, not for all, but for many, that is,
(says he) for them that believe. In like manner does S. Paul say: that, God
gave him to death for us all: that is, for all Gods elect, whereof he was one:
Hironym. in Matthew. 20.28.
For so also S. Augustine interprets it ( in Ioh. tract. 45.) Pro nohis
omnibus tradidit illum, Sed pro quibus nobis praescitis, Praedestinatis,
Iustificatis, Glorificatis: He gave him to death, for us All: But for which
Us? namely, Romans 8.3^.
for them (says he) which are the foreknovvne, the Predestinate, the
Justified, and the Glorified persons. Again, Heb. 2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. etc.
in the Epistle to the Hebrews, it is said, that, Christ, Tasted death for
all: but in the verses that follow, he shows the special meaning of those
words, viz. that those All, were sanctified persons, the brethren of Christ,
the Children which God had given him, and the Children which he, by that his
death, and passion, was to bring unto glory: For which cause, he is also there
called, the Prince of their salvation. In like sort it is said in the second
Epistle to the Corinths* that Christ dyed for all: but in the words following,
2. Cor. 5.14, 15.
he explaineth the matter, and shows, that he died for all such, as finding
themselves dead in themselves, should afterward live, not unto themselves,
any longer, but unto him that died for them, and rose again: which kind of
godly and new life, none do live, but the elect only. Again, in his Epistle
to the Thessalonians, he speaks thus: God has not appointed us unto wrath,
1. These. 5.9, 10.
but to obtain salvation, by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ, which dyed
for us. Observe here likewise, that he makes Christ Jesus, in a special and
peculiar manner, to die only for those which be appointed to obtain
salvation, by the means of him, and not for the rest, which were appointed
unto Wrath: for he there manifestly distinguishes between those two sorts of
people. Again, S. Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians, speaks thus:
Husbands love your wives, ^phes. 5.^^.
even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. Where you see also,
that he appropriateth the benefit of the death of Christ, to his Church, which
he so entirely loved. Yea, Christ Jesus himself affirms the same, saying:
Ioh. 10.11, 12.
that, He is that good Shepherd, which gives his life for his Sheep. And
again he says: Greater love has no man then this: that a man bestovv his
life for his friends: ye are my friends, Ioh. 15.13.14.
if ye do whatsoever I command you. By all which appears, that Christ, in
respect of the propriety of redemption, gave his life, and died only for his
Church, for his Sheep, for his Friends, that would obey him: which is as much
to say, as that he died specially and properly for the Elect. Yea, he was, in
Gods purpose, intended, and ordained to come into the world, for the redemption
of the Elect. So S. Peter likewise testifies directly: for writing his Epistle
to the Elect of God (1. Pet. 1.2.) he says: 1. Pet. 18, 19, 20.
that, They were redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
undefiled, and without spot: and he there further says expressly: that, Christ
was ordained before the foundation of the world, but was declared in the last
times for their sakes. Where you see it precisely affirmed, that Christ was
ordained to come, and did come into the world, for the Elect sake. And so also
does S. Paul declare, in his Epistle to Timothy. And this likewise does Esaias
show, in his Prophecy, saying; 2. Tim. 1.9, 10.
Unto us a Child is borne, and unto us a Son is given, that is, unto the
Church and people of God, of which number the Prophet was one, Esaias 9.6.
that so speaks. Again, S. Paul, writing to the Church and people of God,
distinguishing them from the rest, says thus unto them: Ye are not your own,
for ye are bought with a price: Therefore glorify ye God, in your body, and
in your spirit, 1. Cor. 6.19 ^^.
for they are Gods. Again, in the Acts of the Apostles, it is said to be, The
Church of God, Act. 20.28.
which Christ has purchased with that his blood. Yea, this is so evident, that
by the All, for whom Christ died, is, in respect of redemption and remission of
sins, meant all the elect only, that for the clearer illustrating of it to
be so, the Scripture it self often uses in stead thereof, this word, Many:
As in the Gospel according to S. Matthew, Christ Jesus himself says thus:
This is my blood of the new Testament, that is shed for many, Mat. 26.28.
for the remission of their sins. Again he says: The son of man came not
to be served, but to serve, Mat. 20.28.
and to give his life a redemption for many. Mark that in both those places,
he says, That he gave his life to be a ransom or redemption, not of all in a
generality, but of Many, that is, as I said before, of the Elect only. Heb.
9.28*
So likewise it is said in the Epistle to the Hebrews: Christ was once
offered, to take away the sins of many. And again it is said by S. Paul:
that, Romans 5.19.
By the ^bedience of one (namely of Christ) many shall be made righteous. And
so again it is said in Daniel: that, The Messiah should be slain, Dan.
9.26.27.
and that he should confirm the covenant with many. But beside all this, S.
Paul speaks yet further, very plainly, thus: Romans 5.8.^*
God sets out his love tovvard us, seeing that whilst we were yet
sinners. Christ died for us: much more then being now justified by his blood,
we shall be saved from wrath, through him. Observe here, first, that he
says, Christ died for us, that is, for us that be of Gods Church and people,
for he speaks in the person of them, and in their behalf: and secondly,
observe, that he makes this an argument (as it is indeed) of Gods great and
special love toward them, that he sent his son to die for them: what can be
more plain to show, that, in Gods purpose and intention, Christ dyed, not for
the redemption of all in a generality, but of the Elect only, whom he so
especially and entirely loved? In like sort testifies S. John, saying: In this
appeared the love of God toward us (mark still that word, Ioh. 4.9.
Us) that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might
live through him. And again he says: Herein is love, Verse 10.
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a
reconciliation for our sins. Here you likewise see, that the sending of his
son is an effect and argument of his most dear and special love toward his
Church and people. If then this be (as indeed it is) an argument of such high,
special, and incomparable love, in Christ, to give himself to death, and
likewise in God his Father, to send him into the world to that end, and that
this special and incomparable love belongs only to the Elect, it must needs
be granted, that Christ his death, being an argument of such unspeakeable and
especial love, was only for the Elect, in Gods intention and purpose: for those
only be the men whom he so entirely and unspeakeably loved, and not the other.
But consider what Saint Paul yet further writes, saying thus: Blessed be God
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephe. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
which has blessed us with all spiritual blessings, in heavenly things, in
Christ, as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world: that
we should be holy and without blame before him in love. Who has
predestined us to be adopted through Jesus Christ, in himself, according to
the good pleasure, of his own will, to the praise of the glory of his grace,
whereby he has made us accepted in his blood: by whom, we have redemption,
through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, according to his rich
grace, whereby he has been abounding toward us. In which words you may
again perceive, that those only that were Elect before the foundation of the
world, be the men that be there said to have redemption through Christ's blood,
even the forgiveness of sins: and that for these two incomparable benefits,
namely of their Election before the foundations of the world, and of their
Redemption through the blood of Christ, they can never bless God sufficiently,
nor yield him sufficient thanks. Yea, the Redemption, which Christ by his
blood has purchased for any, is an Eternal Redemption, as the Epistle to the
Hebrews expressly affirms it: Heb 9.1^.
and therefore if all in a generality, as well bad, as good, and Reproprobate
as well as Elect, should have redemption by the death of Christ, it should be an
Eternal redemption, (as here you see) even an everlasting discharge and
forgiveness of all their sins, and so then should none be damned at all, but
all, as well one sort as another, should be saved: which if it be gross and
absurd, false and untrue; that also must be held gross, absurd, and untrue,
whereupon this follows. But consider yet further, that the blood of Christ
Jesus, the Son of God, is not dumb, dead, vain, idle, or ineffectual blood,
but it is ever powerful and effectual, to all those for whose benefit it was
intended to be shed: and therefore, beside that, it is called by S. Peter,
precious blood, or the blood of price, and value, 1. Pet. 1*19.
whereby Gods Church and people were bought and purchased, it is further said
in the Epistle to the Hebrews, to be speaking blood, Heb. 2.24.
and that it speaks better things then that of Abel. For, indeed, the blood
of Abel, spoke and cried for revenge against a Malefactor: but contrariwise,
the blood of Christ, speaks for mercy, peace, love, reconciliation, and
atonement, toward sinners, and malefactors. 1. Ioh. 1.7. Coloss. 1.20. Romans
5.9. Heb. 10.10. 1. Tim. 1*15.
Yea the blood of Christ has these virtues, attributed unto it, namely to
cleanse from all sin, to reconcile, to justify, to sanctify, and to save
sinners. Seeing then the blood of Christ is of that great force, virtue, and
efficacy, and that none are cleansed, from their sins, reconciled,
justified, sanctified, and saved, but the elect only, it is apparent, that,
that so precious, prevalent, powerful, and saving blood of his, was shed for
the redemption of the Elect only, and not of the Reprobate. And therefore do
the Saints and elect people of God, in the Revelation, sing this Song, unto
that Immaculate Lamb, Christ Jesus, saying thus: Thou art worthy to take the
Book, and to open the seals thereof, Rev. 5.^.
because thou vvast killed, and have redeemed us, to God, by thy blood, out of
every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. Yea, by the efficacy and
virtue of Christ his death, his burial, and his resurrection, it is, Romans 6.3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.11. Col 3.1, 2, 3. Phil. 3.9, 10.
that Gods elect dye to sin, and bury sin, and be quickened, and rise to
newness of life: which thing Reprobates cannot do. Again, it appears, that
Christ in his death, suffering, and satisfaction, which he made to the law,
and to Gods wrath and justice, bare the person only of the Elect, to clear and
set them free: insomuch that of them only, it is said, that they be In Christ,
Romans 8.1. 1 Cor. 1.30. Phil. 3.8, 9. Col. 2.10, 11, 12, 13. Romans 6.3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8. Col 3.1. Ephesians. 2.5, 6.
and that they were circumcised ^n him, or in his circumcision: that they dyed
together with him in his death: that they rose together with him in his
resurrection: that they ascended with him into heaven, and there sit with him
in heavenly places. By all which manner of speeches, it is evident, that the
Elect, and Elect only, be accounted his members, and knit, and conioined unto
him. Yea such is this near conjunction and union, between Christ the head,
and the Elect his members, that considered together, they be called, 1. Cor.
12.12.
very Christ, by S. Paul. And therefore it is apparent, that the Reprobates,
which are to be damned, were never In Christ Jesus, nor made satisfaction to
Gods Justice in him, for their sins, nor died with him, nor rose again with
him, nor ascended with him into heaven, nor have any union or communion with
him. And this is further yet more evident by this, that Christ Jesus himself
does directly disclaim all Reprobates, in the prayer which he makes in the
behalf of all the Elect, Ioh. 17.9.
which his Father gave him, saying thus: I pray for them: I pray not for the
world: but for them which thou have given me, for they are thine. Observe
this well: for here you see that Christ prays and makes intercession only
for the elect, and utterly disclaymeth to pray for the world, that is, for the
Reprobates of the world. Since then the Reprobates have no part nor portion in
the prayer and intercession of Christ: by what right shall they have any part
or portion, in his death or sacrificing himself, upon the Cross? For the
Priesthood of Christ, consists, chiefly, in these two points: namely, in his
oblation or sacrificing of himself upon the Cross, and in his prayer or
intercession: and seeing the Reprobates never had nor have any interest in the
one, neither can they have in the other. And therefore also, is Christ recorded
to be an High Priest, Heb. 10.21.
only to the house of God.

7 But against this is objected, that of S. John, where he says thus, Ioh.
1.29.
of Christ: Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world. Howbeit, you are to understand, that the word, world, as it is
sometimes taken, Reconciliatus mundus, ex Inimico liberabitur mundo. Aug Tract.
in Ioh. 1 ^1.

Mundus igitur odit mundu^: Inimicus, Reconciliatum: Damnatus, salvatum:
Inquinatus mundatum. August. Tract. 87. in Ioh. and Epist. 48. Ioh. 3 16, 17.
Sed iste mundus que^ Deus in Christo reconciliat sibi, and qui per Christum
salvatur, and cui per Christum omne peccatu^ donatur, De mundo electus est
inimico, Damnato, contaminato. August. Tract. 87. in Ioh.

August. colla^ 3. Carthag. cum Donat. cap. 265. ibidem cap. 273. 2. Cor. 5.19.
Rom 4*6, 7, 8. Matt. 25.41. Ioh. 4.13, 14. There is Mundus salvandorum: and
Mundus Damnandorum. August. in Ioh. Tract. 87. and epist 48. Matthew. 1.21. 1.
Ioh. 1.2.


for the Reprobates in the world, as in that speech of Christ before going,
where he says: I pray not for the world: (and in other places likewise): so
it is sometimes also taken in the Scriptures, to signify Gods elect in the
world. As for example, in the Gospel according to S. John, it is said thus: God
so loved the world (namely, the Gentiles as well as the Jews,) that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever, (whether Jew, or Gentile,) believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life: for God sent not his
Son into the world, that he should condemn the world, but that the world
through him should be saved. Here, by the World which is to be saved* cannot be
understood any Reprobates, but Gods elect only; for they only be those that
are to be saved, through him. For as for such as be Reprobates, all men know
that they are to be damned, and not to be saved. And therefore also does S.
Augustine so expound that place. Again, S. Paul says: that, God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto him* not imputing their sins unto them,
and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation. Where likewise by this
word (World) are meant only Gods elect in the world: inasmuch as they only be
those blessed ones, which be reconciled unto God, and which have not their
sins imputed to them: For, as for the Reprobates, they are the accursed ones,
and were never reconciled unto God, but have their sins imputed unto them,
and charged upon them, and for which therefore they are condemned in the end,
to everlasting torments. And so does S. Augustine expound that place also.
Again, S. John says thus: Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in
us, because he has given us of his spirit, and we have seen and do
testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world. Here
likewise, by the World that is to be saved, cannot be understood Reprobates,
but Gods Elect only: because to these only is Christ a Savior, and to these
only does salvation belong. And so again S. John says: that, Christ is the
Reconciliation for our sins, and not for our sins only, but for the sins
also of the whole world: that is, not only for the sins of Gods people,
which then lived in the days of S John, whereof himself was one, but for the
sins of all Gods elect, wheresoever, or whenever living, from the beginning
of the world, to the end thereof. And so does S. Augustine again expound that
place likewise: August. in Tract. 87. in Ioh.

Christus passus est pro salute mundi salvandorum.

Eusebius. hist lib. 4. c. 15. Romans 9.15.16.


And in this sense, it is, that the word, world, is used by S. John, in the
place before objected, where he says: that, Christ is the Lamb of God, that
takes away the sin of the world, that is to say, of all Gods Elect in the
world, at what time or age soever they lived, from the beginning of it, to the
end. Neither in this case can the reprobates complain of any injustice
offered them, from God: because, Mankind being fallen from that integrity
wherein he was created, it was in Gods power and pleasure, to provide a suertie
and Savior, for whom he would, and to show mercy to whom he would, and to
withhould his mercy also from whom he would. As likewise, if diverse have
committed treason or rebellion in a kingdom against their King, it is in the
power of the King, to show mercy, and to give a pardon to whom he will, and to
withhold his mercy and pardon from such as he pleases, and to leave them in
their offenses unto condemnation, and to be executed.

8 Now then (the former point being cleared) let me return, and come to
answer more succinctly, to that text before alleged, where S. Paul says:
Whom God foreknevv, them he predestined etc. Romans 8.29.30.
First, it is evident, that he with approbation foreknevv the Elect in Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 1 4.
their appointed Savior, but the reprobate, he never knew in that manner, but
as being extra Christum, out of Christ, and consequently, as they were in their
transgression, by, and after the fall of Adam (wherein they be liable to
condemnation) having no suertie, or Savior for them prepared or appointed.
Secondly, when he there teaches, that Men were predestined according to Gods
foreknowledge: The same S. Paul* to declare and expound those words, says in
another place: that they were predestinate according to his purpose: Ephesians.
1.11.
by conferring of which places together, you may easily perceive, that by Gods
foreknovvledge, his purposing to predestinate those whom he did predestinate,
is understood. For (says he in this place to the Ephesians) Men were
predestinate according to the purpose of him, that does all things by the
counsel of his own will. Ephesians. 1. ver. 11.
And again he there says: that they were predestinate, according to the good
pleasure of his own WILL. Ephesians. 1.5.
Gods foreknowing of them then in this case, appears to be, his
fore-purposing to approove of them, and to account of them, as of his Elect and
predestinate people to eternal salvation. Which may yet further appear by the
contrary, namely, by the Reprobates, whom he never so foreknew* or knew at
all, with that approbation; and therefore will he say unto them in the last
day: Nunquam novi vos etc. I never knevv you. Mat. 7.23. Mat. 25.12.
Sicut enim quos reprobat Dominus, nescire dicitur: Ita, quos ad salutem
praedestinavit and praeordinat cognoscere recte dicitur: For as the Lord, whom
he reprobateth, is said, not to know: so those, Cyril. expos. in Joh. 7. c. 6.
whom he has predestined, and preordained to salvation, he is rightly
said, to know, says S. Cyril. And so says Thomas Aquinas, that, Thom. in
Romans 8.
Quos praescivit scientia approbationis, hos and praedestinavit: Whom God
foreknevve, with his knowledge of Approbation: Justin. Mar^. cont. Triph^n.
them he did also predestinate. To come then to the point: Sunt praesciti, ut
crederent: Men were foreknovvne that they might believe: says Justin Martyr.
Non eliguntur, qui^ credituri: sed eliguntur ut credant: Men were not elected,
Aug. de prad. ca. 5. and 17.
because they did afterward believe, but they were elected that they might
believe, says S. Augustine. And so says S. Paul also expressly: that they were
predestinate, (...)* to the adoption of Sons: which adoption, or, being made
the Sons of God, Ephesians. 1.5.
is by faith in Jesus Christ, as himself in another place directly witnesses.
Gal 3.26. 1. Pet. 1.1.2.
And so S. Peter also says: that men were elected (...), etc. unto obedience,
and unto the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. Again, S. Paul has
before told us: That God has chosen or elected us in Christ, before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame before
him in love: Non quia futuros tales, August. Enchir. cap. 19 and. cap. 98. and
de prad. cap. 8.
nos esse pr^scivit, sed ut essemus tales, per ipsam* Electionem gratiae: Not
because he foreknevv that we should be such, but that we might be such, by
the very election of grace, says S. Augustine. By all which you clearly may
perceive, that, not foreseen, or foreknowne faith in Christ, not any
foreseen good works, (the fruits of the same faith) nor any sanctity, or
obedience that men have, or perform unto God, be the cause of their
predestination to eternal life, but a consequent, and an effect of it. And
this, S. Paul also, yet further and fully shows, where he makes men's
effectual Calling and Justification (and consequently, Sanctification) and
Glorification also it self, to depend all upon this, that, God has
predestined them. Romans 8.30.
And even this predestination likewise, he makes to depend upon his
fore-knovvledge, that is, upon his fore-purposing of them, Ephesians. 1 11. Romans 8.^8
29.
to this eternal glory in his own secret approbation of them, and Counsel had
with himself, before the world was made. And again S. Paul yet further
declares it, 2. Tim. 1.9.
saying: that, God has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to h^s own purpose and grace, which
was given to us through Christ Jesus, before the world was. Be not these
words, most plain, direct, and express, for this purpose? But yet again he
says: There is a remnant, through the election of grace: and if it be of
grace, it it is no more of works: Romans 11.5.6.
o^hervvise, grace were no more grace: But if it be of works, then is it no
more grace, otherwise work were no more work. Yea, again, speaking of
the two Children of Rebecca, Jacob, and Esau* he says, that, the one was
loved, and the other hated, and that before they were borne, and when they
had done neither good, nor evil: That the purpose of God according to
election, Romans 9.11.12.13
might stand, and not of works etc. What would you have more? For by all these
Texts (and sundry other, which might be cited if need were) it is abundantly
manifest, that not future faith, or future good works, but the mere good
pleasure and will of GOD, and his own most free purpose, and Counsel, had
with himself, (otherwise termed, his fore-knovvledge) was, and is the first
primarie, and original cause of men's predestination to eternal life. And
consequently, you may withal perceive, that not future unbeleefe, or future
bad works, but Gods own mere pleasure, will, and purpose, was, and is
likewise, the original cause of the Reprobation, or refusal of them, that were
refused, or not elected. For the Election of the one sort from the rest* and
the reprobation, that is, the preterition, or refusal of the rest, that were
not elected, being done, both at one time, must needs both have one and the
self same primarie and original cause, namely, the free and uncontrollable
will, purpose, and pleasure of the Almighty.

9 For, indeed, beside the will of God (which is ever Just, and the highest and
supreme cause of all things) what cause or reason can be showed on men's
behalf, Dei voluntas, rerum est necessitas. August. de civit. Dei. lib. 5. c.
8.9.10. and de genesis ad let. lib 5. cap. 5.
why God should Elect and choose that particular man to salvation, and refuse
this? why he should choose Jacob, and refuse Esau? or why he should choose
Paul, and refuse Judas Iscariot? If you answer and say, that original sin
was, and is the cause of that difference: Do you not consider, that Jacob had
original sin, as well as Esau? and that Paul had it as well as Judas? and that
all the Elect have it, as well as the Reprobate. So that if Original sin
(wherewith, all, are infected alike) had been the cause of Reprobation, then
should all have been reprobated, one as well as another. And this even
Bellarmme himself saw, Bellarm de gr^. and lib. arbit. lib. 2. cap. 16.
affirming that the cause why God hated Esau before he was borne, was not
original sin: for if that had been the cause, he should for that cause
(says he) as well have hated Jacob* as Esau. Yea, Gods electing of some, (and
consequently, his reprobating or refusing of the rest, whom he did not elect)
was (in respect of the purpose and decree of it) before the foundations of the
world were laid: Ephesians 14. 2. Tim. 1.9. 1. Pet. 1.20.
howsoever in respect of the manifestation of it, it was not til after the
Creation, and fall of Adam: How then could any sin, Romans 16.25 26. Colos
1.26, 27^ Ephesians. 3.8, 9, 10, 11. Tit. 1.2, 3.
either Or^g^nal, or Actual, be the cause, when at the time of the purposing,
of this reprobation, as also of Election, neither men, nor Angels, nor world
was made, nor any sin committed? If you answer, that although sin were not
then committed, yet God foresaw it should afterward be committed, and that
sin thus foreseen, was the cause of the decree or purpose of reprobation:
you know that God did foresee sin, as well in the Elect, as in the Reprobate:
and therefore, if sin foreseen, should be che cause, of the purpose or
decree of reprobation, then again should all have been purposed or decreed to
be reprobated, in as much as, sin was foreseen, to be in all the people of
the world. If you reply, and say, that although sin was foreseen in all, yet
it was with a difference: because some, namely (the Elect) were foreseen to
be believing, and repentant sinners, new Creatures, mortified, regenerated,
justified, and sanctified persons; Act. 13.48. Ephesians. 1.4.5. Ioh. 15.16. Ephesians.
2.10. Mat. 25.34.35.36. Romans 8.30.
and so were not reprobates: I answer, that this faith, repentance, effectual
calling, mortification, regeneration, justification, sanctification, and all
saving graces whatsoever, were so foreseen in the Elect, not as antecedent
causes, but as consequents and effects of that their predestination, and
election, and as dependants thereupon: for so is it before proved, and
apparent, and therefore the Reprobats, on the otherside must be deemed to have
their occecation, and obduration in their sins, and their unregeneration,
unmortification, unsanctification, uneffectual calling, and the absence,
defect, or want of saving graces, not as Antecedents, but as Consequents
likewise, and Events following that Decree of their not Election, otherwise
called their Reprobation. And this will be yet the more evident, if we enquire
and search whence this difference of sinners arises, namely, that some be
mollified, repentant, regenerate, justified, and sanctified persons, and that
some others be not so: Is it not because God does bestow those his saving
graces upon the one sort, and not upon the other? And why does he bestow them
upon the one sort, and not upon the other? Is it not because the one sort be
Elect, and the other Reprobate? And why be the one sort Elect, and the other
Reprobate? can any other reason be yielded for it, but Gods own mere will
and pleasure? You see then, that in the conclusion, you must be forced in this
case, to have recourse, to the mere pleasure and will of God, Mat. 11.25, 26.
Ephe 1.5.9.
and to make that (as indeed it is) the true, highest, and supreme cause, why
God chooses this man, and refuses that man, and accordingly gives his
sanctifying, and saving graces, to the one, and not to the other. It is true
nevertheless, that Reprobation has an eye, relation, or respect unto sin
(for no man is damned, or decreed, or intended to be damned, but in respect of
sin) but thereupon it no more follows, that sin, was the cause of the
reprobation of the one, then of the election of the other: For Election,
(as well as Reprobation) was made with an eye, relation, or respect unto sin,
it being made in mercy, Romans 9.16.
and mercy evermore presupposes misery: and misery, evermore presupposes
sin, and transgression, beginning and arising, by, and in the fall of Adam:
whose fall, God then beheld, when he made this his decree. Sin then gave the
occasion, but was not the cause of the decree, either of election, or
reprobation. Wherefore, mankind, considered as he was fallen, was indeed,
Subiectum circa quod, the subject matter, about which, Gods predestination, or
preordination of men (either to salvation, or damnation) wrought, and was
employed: but it neither was, nor could be, Causa propter quam: the cause, why
amongst men so fallen, this particular man was chosen, and that particular man
was refused, but it was Gods mere will and pleasure only, that made that
difference: For which therefore, the Elect are everlastingly to praise,
magnify, and thank God: and the Reprobate, who through their own default,
have procured their own deserved perdition, and damnation, have no cause to
complain of any but of themselves, Ephesians. 1.4.5.6. Hoseah. 13.9.
in respect of that their fall in Adam, and other their transgressions, since
that time added thereunto.

10 But there yet remain some to be answered, who upon this doctrine of
Predestination, reason thus: That if they be ordained to salvation, they shall
be saved whatsoever they do: and if they be ordained to damnation, they shall
be damned, whatsoever they do: and therefore they will be careless of all
Religion, and without regard of any thing that is good, or godly. But whilst
these men talk thus licentiously, and dissolutely, and seem by such speeches,
to have as yet little or no fear of God, or care of his religion: yet do they
not know, for all that, whether they belong to the number of Gods elect, or to
the number of the reprobate, and so long it will be good for them, in the
mean time, to use the means which God has in that case provided, to bring
men unto salvation, and to eschew those ways that lead to damnation: For
howsoever as yet, any have not the marks and tokens of Gods children,
appearing in them, (that is, faith in Jesus Christ, repentance, godliness,
regeneration, and sanctification) yet for all that, possibly they may have
them, hereafter, before they die, if they neglect not the means, which God
has appointed in that behalf. If a man lie sick, and good wholesome physic,
and meats, and drinks, should be proffered unto him, for preserving of his
life, and he should refuse all and answer thus: if God have ordained me to
live, I shall live, though I take neither physic, nor meat, nor drink: and if
he has ordained me to die, I shall die, what physic, meat, or drink,
soever, I take: and therefore I will be careless of all, and take nothing.
Would not every man, that has his right wits, hold this for a very foolish
speech, and an absurd manner of inference? And is not then the other of speech,
and inference, touching Predestination, as ridiculous, foolish, and absurd?
Questionless it is, as every man of understanding, easily perceives. These
kind of senseless, wicked, and licentious inferences, therefore the
Protestants, in their doctrine of Predestination, abhor, and detest, as they
are, indeed, justly worthy. For as God has ordained men to salvation, so he
has ordained ways and means, that bring thereunto, which must not be
neglected. Some man, again, is so blasphemous, and bold, as that he dare bark
and rail against God, and his doings in this matter, as though he were unjust,
or partial, for that he is reprobated, and not ordained to salvation, as well
as another: since at the time of that his reprobation, or refusal, he no more
deserved to be refused, then others, whom nevertheless it pleased him to elect
and ordeine to salvation. To whom I answer, first, that he which thus speaks,
knows not, (as I said bsfore) nor can tell for certain, as yet, whether he
be of the reprobate number, yea, or no: for he may be, for all that, of the
number of Gods elect, for ought that, as yet, he knows to the contrary: for
so long as a man lives in this world, God has his times, to call men, unto
himself, and to repentance, and to a true lively faith in Jesus Christ, the
Savior. So that none, during this life, ought to prejudice himself, with
despairefull conceits, or to give a final sentence of condemnation, before
hand, against himself: for it is a thing which lies not in his power, so to
do, nor in his knowledge, so to determine of himself, before the time. But,
secondly, I answer, that there is no partiality or injustice in this case.
Indeed there might be partiality and injustice, if both believing well, and
rightly, and living good and godly lives alike, the one should nevertheless be
saved, and the other damned: but in this case, where both after the fall of
Adam, be sinners alike, and no more merit in the one, then in the other, there
it was a most free thing in God, to give mercy and pardon to the one, and not
to the other. And herein is no more partiality or injustice, then when two
have committed felony or treason alike, the King pardons the one, rnd not
the other: or when a man has two debtors, that be alike bound unto him in
several bonds, he forgiveth his debt to the one, and challenges it of the
other. Is there any injustice in this? If you go higher, and say, that God
decreed to permit the fall of Adam, you have been before answered, that his
decree or purpose to permit him to fall, did not compel or enforce him to
fall, but left him still to his own free will he received in the creation,
whereby he was enabled to stand if he had would. It therefore still appears,
that the fault is to be ascribed, and to rest wholly and altogether upon
themselves, in respect of their fall in Adam and other their sins, since that
time, added thereunto. Can any then, accuse God of any injustice? For shall
not the Judge of all the world do right? Or, Romans 3.4, 5, 6.
can he do wrong or injustice to any man, or in any thing he does? Or do
not they justly deserve their damnation, which are damned for their sins and
due deserts? Or was it not a most free thing in God, to do, and determine of
all his creatures, which way soever it pleased him? especially of men, after
their fall? For all being fallen in the transgression of Adam all might justly
have been condemned: and it was of his mere mercy, that he was pleased to
save any. But, again, shall men challenge, this authority over all the
things themselves do make, and whatsoever is the work of their own hands, to
do, ordeine, and dispose of it, at their own will? Romans 9.20. Esa 45.9. Ier.
18.6.
And shall not God the maker and creator of all things, be allowed the like
authority, over all and singular men, to do, decree, purpose, ordeine, and
dispose of them, and every of them (being his creatures) even as pleases
himself? What a gross, strange, injurious, and unreasonable dealing were
this, in men, not to allow that in God, which they allow in themselves? Does
not Christ Jesus himself, yet further give a full and sufficient answer in
this case, saying thus: Is it not lawful for me to do as I will with mine
own? Matt. 20.15.
is thine eye evil, because I am good? Consider well these words: for they
show plainly, that God may do with all his creatures as pleases himself:
and, that, if God bestow, mercy, kindness, love, and favor, toward one,
which he bestows not upon another; for this goodness and liberality of God,
no other should have an evil eye, or envious heart, or a murmuring or
blasphemous tongue. Besides, God is Debtor to no man. Romans 11.35.
Why then should any exclaim against God, for that he was not elected to
salvation, nor had saving graces given unto him whilst he lived? For is God
compellable, or stands he tied and bound to give any men salvation, and
saving graces, whether he will or no? or otherwise then at his own pleasure?
Again, Who has been his Counsailer, Romans 11.34.
says the Apostle? Was it fit, or meet, think you, that God, the creator of
all, should not do and determine of all his works and creatures which he
made, without calling silly men, or other the work of his hands, to counsel?
Do or will men hold it reasonable, to ask counsel or advise of the things
themselves do make, what use it shall serve for, or what shall become of it?
or do not men first purpose and determine of every thing they make, before it
be made, to what use it shall serve, and to what end it shall be? And if these
things be thus amongst men, shall not the like be allowed unto God? O the
intolerable audaciousnesse of men, that dare thus stand in contention, against
God their maker! Although therefore it be true, that by the transgression of
Adam, the Elect and the Reprobate were both sinners alike, and in respect of
themselves, both worthy of condemnation alike; yet it pleased God (who has
full and free power in himself, to do whatsoever he will) to put a
difference betwneene them, and to show mercy to the one sort and not to the
other. Yea in very deed, how could it be otherwise, seeing both Justice and
Mercy were thus determined of God, to be showed among the children of men,
upon their fall? For if all had been saved, where had been his Justice? And
again, If all had been damned, where had been his Mercy? To the end
therefore, that both his Justice and Mercy, might appear to sinful men, it
is, that some men, Rom 11 22. Romans 9.18.22, 23.
upon the fall of Adam, be thus to go to damnation, and other some to
salvation. If as yet any man conceive not the depth of this high point of Gods
predestination, let him not reject, nor monster-like blaspheme, that, which he
understands not, but let him, in all humility, reverence and justify God,
in all his words and works; admiring and wondering at the height and depth of
that wisdom, which he is not able to reach unto: And let him, in this
matter, do as S. Paul did, crying out thus: O the depth of the riches, both of
the wisdom, and the knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments,
Ro^. 11.33.
and his vvayes past finding out? And let him also stay with patience, until
the day of the declaration of the just judgment of God: for such a day there
is, as S. Paul expressly affirms. So that, Romans 2.5.
howsoever wicked, blasphemous, and ungodly men, do sometimes speak most
impiously, of God and of his doings herein: yet at that day of the declaration
of the just Judgment of God (if not sooner) it will be manifested, that all
the Judgments, decrees, and doings of God, are just, and such as no exception
can be taken against. And let men learn in the mean time, to accuse and
condemn themselves, and their own ways, as unjust, and unequal, and ever
justify God, and acknowledge his ways and works, to be (as they are) most
holy, most just, and most equal, Ezech. 18.25.29.30.
as God himself also declares by his Prophet Ezechiel. And let us all
confess, that according to his own will he works, in the army of Heaven,
Dan. 4.32.
and in the Inhabitants of the earth: and that none can stay his hand, nor may
say unto him, what do thou? as it is written in the Prophecy of Daniel. And
let us likewise say, as the Saints speak in the Revelation, saying thus: Thou
art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou have
created all things, and, Rev. 4.11.
for thy wills sake, they are, and have been, created.

CAP. IX.
Concerning the Sacraments: and that there be but two Sacraments of the New
Testament, properly so called, namely Baptism and the Lords Supper: and that,
Confirmation, Penance, Marriage, Orders, and Extreme unction, be no
Sacraments, properly. And that the Sacraments administered* do not give grace
ex opere operato, by the work or action wrought or done, but grace comes
and is given another way.

THe word, SACRAMENT, is sometimes taken in a general or large sense: and so
it may comprehend all manner of Signs, which God gave men, at any time, to
assure them of the undoubted truth of his promise, in any matter whatsoever:
In which sense, the Tree of life in the Garden, may be said to be, to Adam, a
Sacrament, or, sign, of his life received from God, and that he should not
die, so long as he continued in his obedience. The Rainebow also, in this
sense, might be termed a Sacrament, that is, a sign to Noah, and his
posterity, that the world shall never more be destroyed with a flood of
waters: and sundry such like. But we here speak not of Sacraments in such a
general signification, or large acception of the word, but as it is strictly
and properly taken: viz. of such Sacraments as God has left to be usual and
ordinary in the New Testament, and appointed to be signs and scales of our
communion with Christ, and of that righteousness we have by faith in him. In
this sense, a Sacrament being taken, is a visible sign and seal, ordained of
God, whereby Christ, and all his saving graces, by certain outward rites are
signified, exhibited, and sealed up unto all the faithful: of which sort there
be two, namely Baptism and the Lords Supper. Baptism succeeds in the place
of Circumcision, Genesis 17.11. Romans 4.11. Act. 2.38. Gal. 3.27.
and the Lords Supper, in the place of the Passover: And as Circumcision was
not only a visible sign, but also a seal, to Abraham, of the righteousness
he had by faith in Christ: so is Baptism likewise, and the other Sacrament
also of the Lords Supper, not only a sign, but a seal also, Mat. 26.26, 27,
28.
to every several and particular faithful man, of the full and free remission
of all his sins, and of that immaculat, perfect, and complete righteousness,
which he has by and in Christ Jesus. Where, therefore, you may note by the
way, that the Doctrine, of Assurance of Salvation, is a most certain, true,
and undoubted doctrine, inasmuch as these very Sacraments themselves, do
assuredly testify, and seal up the same, even to every several and
particular faithful, and godly person, that receives them. S. Augustine,
sometimes, uses the word, in the large sense and acception: but when he
speaks of Sacraments in the more proper and strict sense, he reckons them,
as we do, saying: Aug. de Symb. ad Cathe^a.
Haec sunt Ecclesiae gemina Sacramenta: These be the two Sacraments of the
Church. And again he says: that, Christ and his Apostles, have delivered unto
us, a few Sacraments, in stead of many: Baptism, and, the Lords Supper. Aug.
de doctrine. Christi lib. 3. cap. 9.
So S. Ambrose likewise, treating purposely of the Sacraments, speaks of two,
as the reformed Churches do. Yea* Innocentius the third, speaking of them,
Ambr. lib. 1. de Sacram. cap. 1.
makes mention of these two which we receive, not of the rest which we refuse.
And even Cardinal, Bessarion, also, says: Haec duo sola Sacramenta, in
Evangelijs manifest tradita legimus: Bessar. de Sacr. Eucharist.
We read these two^Sacraments only, to be manifestly delivered in the
Gospel. It is true, that Bellarmine proves the word (Sacrament) to be sometime
given in some writers, to the other five: but that is, as I said before, when
the word is taken in a general or large signification (for any Sign or token)
in which case it may indeed more properly be called a Sign, then a Sacrament.
These five therefore, namely, Confirmation, Penance, Matrimony, Orders, and
Extreme unction, we reject from being Sacraments, properly, and strictly, so
called: the other two, (namely Baptism and the Lords Supper) we embrace, as
being altogether perfect and sufficient, not only to enter and plant a man
into the Church, but also to cherish, increase, confirm, strengthen, and
maintain, him in it, unto the end; and therefore no need is there of any more,
to be Sacraments, for any of those uses, ends, or purposes.

2 First then touching Confirmation. It is granted that the Christians in the
ancient Church, caused their Children, after that they came to years of
discretion, to come before the Bishop, who examined them in the principles and
fundamental points of Religion, and instructed them further, for their
confirmation therein: and that this action might have the more reverence and
esteem, he laid his hands upon them, and prayed unto God for them, that he
would increase and continue the good things, that he had begun in them. But
howsoever this was a laudable usage, yet does it not follow, that therefore it
was a Sacrament. Yea, your manner of Confirmation, with Chrisme, or, Oil, (for
you make, this Oil, to be the outward sign of this your supposed sacrament)
has no institution or commandment from Christ, and therefore it can be no
Sacrament: for it is well known, that every sacrament must have an outward
visible sign, or element, ordained and appointed of God, for that purpose: as
in Baptism, the outward visible sign, or element, is water: and in the Lords
Supper, the outward visible signs or elements, be bread and wine: and all
these, of Gods own instituting, and appointing. But what institution or
appointment from God, can be showed, for this your Chrisme, or, oil, to be
used, as a visible sign, in Confirmation? Just none at all in Gods book.
Inasmuch therefore as this outward visible sign of Chrisme, or Oil, used in
Popish Confirmation, is none of Gods instituting, it can be no sacrament. It is
true, that we, find in the Scripture, that the Apostles, sometimes used
Imposition, Act. 8.17. Act. 19.6.
or, laying on of hands: but, therein we read of no Oil, or, Chrisme, they
used. Yea moreover, by that their imposition or laying on of hands, the
miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost were given (as appears in the same places
of Act. 8.17.18.19. etc. Act. 19.6.) which power of giving the miraculous gifts
of the Holy Ghost by that means, is now ceased, and is not to be found in the
Popish Church at this day, nor in any other Church, and therefore should not
be attempted. Howbeit, as touching another kind of Imposition of hands, used
in the ordination of Ministers, shall be afterward spoken.

3 Concerning Penance. The Papists call it Penance, which the Greeks call
(...), and the Latins, Poenitentia, or rather Resipiscentia, and we call it,
Repentance: which consists properly in the change of the mind and affections,
and, not so much, in the outward afflicting and punishing of the body. Yea,
the outward afflicting and punishing of the body any manner of way howsoever,
is to no purpose, if there be not, inwardly, a true change of the mind and
affections. You may call it Penance, if you will, externally so to punish the
body: but allowable or good Christian repentance, it will never be, without a
change of the mind, and alteration of affections, and becoming a new man.
For, Repentance, is an outward, true, godly sorrow for sins committed, joined
with fervent prayer unto God, for the forgiveness of them, and has in it, an
earnest desire, purpose, and endeavor, not to commit them any more: and is
indeed, a dying to sin, and a walking in newness of life: and is testified,
by fasting, weeping, and mourning, and by such outward tokens, and declarations
of it, as we read of in holy Scripture to be approved. Now that this which
we call Repentance, and the Papists call Penitencie or Penance, is no
Sacrament proper to the New Testament, is hereby manifest: First, because it
was in the time of the Old Testament, and ever since the time of man's fall and
transgression, required in all ages, and of all persons, that they should
repent for their sins committed. Secondly, it wants a visible sign
instituted of God, for this purpose, to make it a Sacrament: such as water is
in Baptism, and such as bread and wine is in the Lords Supper: and for want of
this outward sign also, it can therefore be no Sacrament. But Bellarmine
says that Christ instituted the Sacrament of Penance, when after his
resurrection, he said to his Apostles: Whose sins ye remit, Ioh. 20.2^.
they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained: and he
says further, that the words of absolution, Bellar de Poenit. lib. 1. cap. 10.
be the outward sign, and that the remission of sins, is the grace thereby
signified. This is far fetched to prove it a Sacrament. But first, I demand of
Bellarmine, or of any other, How words of Absolution, or any words
whatsoever, uttered and spoken, can be an outward and visible sign? Words be
audible, I know, when they be uttered and spoken, but how are they visible,
when they cannot be seen? for not audible, but visible signs, be required to
a Sacrament. Yea, if words uttered by a Pastor or Minister, be, a sufficient
outward sign, to make a sacrament, then should the preaching of the Gospel,
and ministry of the word, be also a sacrament, which has that outward sign,
and the grace also of reconciliation, unto God, (wherein absolution and
remission of sins is included) thereunto belonging. 2. Cor 5.18, 19, 20. Romans
1.16. 1. Cor. 1.21.
And by such reckoning, would there be no difference, between the ministry
of the Word, and the ministry of Sacraments. But, as I said before, not an
audible voice uttered, but a visible sign, and that of Gods own instituting
and appointing, is required to make a Sacrament. Yea, although Christ in Ioh.
20.23. gave authority to his Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel, to declare
and pronounce absolution, and remission of sins to believing and repentant
persons; yet thereupon it follows not, that therefore Repentance should be a
Sacrament: for every good, godly, and allowable thing, is not, by and by, to
be called a Sacrament, in that sense of the word, that we here speak of. Yea
you may by as good reason, as well make faith, and belief, a Sacrament, as
repentance: for, Faith, is also necessary and requisite for the remission of
sins, as well as Repentance. But there is, indeed, no cause, or, necessity,
that Repentance, or, Penance (as ye call it) should be made a Sacrament, for
this purpose: because Christ has appointed other to be Sacraments, serving to
this use and end, namely, to testify and seal up, remission of sins, to
every faithful and repentant sinner, viz. Baptism, and the Lords Supper.
For, Baptism, is expressly affirmed to be the Baptism, of repentance, for
remission of sins, Mark. 1.4.
Mark 1.4. And so says S. Peter also: Repent, and let every one of you be
baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins. Act. 2.^8.
So that Baptism is a Sacrament and seal unto us of the remission of all our
sins, as well actual, as original, upon our faith and repentance And so is
also the Lords Supper, another Sacrament, given for the same use, end, and
purpose, viz. to signify, testify, assure, and seal up unto us, the
remission of all our sins, whatsoever, or whenever committed, upon our
repentance, and faith in Christ: Which thing, Christ himself also declares,
when he teaches it to be a Sacrament of that blood of his, which was shed for
many, for remission of sins. Mat. 26.28.


4 And that Marriage, or Matrimony, is also no Sacrament, proper to the new
Testament, and the Christian Church, is a thing very evident: First, because
it was a thing instituted in Paradise, and was before the Law, and under the
Law; and in the times of the old Testament, used and observed, as well as under
the new Testament. Secondly, because Marriage, may be (as it is) amongst
Infidels, and unbeleevers, and such as be out of the Church and society of the
faithful. For the Matrimony of Infidels is lawful, God instituting it for
all mankind: and therefore it cannot be a Sacrament, proper to the Christian
Church, ^. Co^ ^7.7.
and to the members of Christ only. Thirdly, because it is not common, and
commanded to all Christians: For it is not required, nor of necessity, that
all in the Church should be married: for every one has his proper gift of
God, some one way, some another. Mat. 19.10, 11, 12.
Fourthly, it has no promise of remission of sins, or of salvation annexed
unto it, as Sacraments ought to have, being strictly, and properly taken.
Fifthly, it has no outward visible sign nor word of Institution from Christ,
to make it a Sacrament, and therefore it can be none. For whereas Bellarmine
says; that the word of Institution, is: I take thee etc. and the external
sign, Bellarm. de matr. lib. 1. cap. 6.
be the persons that be married. These be strange conceits: For, first,
these words, I take thee etc, be words devised of men, and not of Christ his
institution, and be words only expressing the mutual consent of the parties
that are to be married. Again, the outward visible sign in a Sacrament, must
be material, and real (and not personal) as water is in Baptism, and bread
and wine in the Lords Supper: and therefore the persons married, cannot be the
outward visible sign. Besides, the married persons, be the receivers of this
pretended and supposed Sacrament, so that they cannot be also the sign: For
the sign, and the receiver, in every Sacrament, must needs be diverse, and
distinguished. If any object, and say, that Marriage is the sign of an holy
thing, namely, of the spiritual conjunction between Christ and his Church: I
demand, who instituted it to be so? Yea, it was not instituted to that end, to
be a Sacrament of our conjunction with Christ (howsoever it may resemble it)
but for other ends and purposes, as namely, to avoid fornication, and
adultery etc. 1. Cor. 7.2.
But further, all signs, comparisons, or resemblances of holy things, must not
be counted Sacraments, in that sense of the word we speak of: For then, how
many Parables, comparisons, or similitudes there be of holy and heavenly
things, in Scripture, so many Sacraments should we have: and then the
Rainebow, the Sabbath, a grain of Mustard-seede, Leaven, a Draw-net, a Vine, a
Door, and sundry such other things, should we make Sacraments. But the
greatest reason, whereof they are most confident, is out of Ephesians. 5.32. which
their vulgar translation, Ephesians 5.32.
and the Rhemists read thus: This is a great Sacrament. Howbeit, in the
Original (which is ever to be followed) the words be these: (...): This is a
great mystery. Now every thing that is a mystery, is not, by and by, to be
concluded to be a Sacrament; for then godliness should be a sacrament, because it
is said to be a mystery. 1. Tim. 3.16. Gods will is also said to be a mystery.
Ephesians. 1.9. The obstinate unbeleefe of the Jews, until the fulness of the
Gentiles be come in, is likewise called a mystery. Romans 11.28. That all shall
not die, but that some shall be changed at the coming of Christ to Judgment, is
also affirmed to be a mystery. 1. Cor. 15.51. Yea, Iniquity is also called a
mystery. 2. These. 2.7. And yet none, I think, will be so unwise as to
conclude all these to be therefore sacraments. But the Apostle himself
preventeth and answers this objection, affirming* that this great mystery he
speaks of, consists, not in carnal Matrimony, but in the spiritual
conjunction between Christ and his Church: This is a great mystery, but I
speak (says he) concerning Christ and his Church. So that the marriage
between Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5.32.
and the conjunction and knitting of them together (which is not natural, and
carnal, as that of the husband and the wife is, but spiritual) is the great
mystery, or secret, he there expresses himself, to mean and speak of. And
therefore does Cardinal Caietane ingenuously confess, Caietan. in Ephesians. 5.
(upon this text of Ephesians. 5.32.) that these words prove not Matrimony to be a
Sacrament. And indeed, it is very evident to all that duly consider that text,
and the circumcumstances of it, that the Apostle brings not marriage in that
place, as a similitude, to represent the near conjunction between Christ and
his Church: but contrariwise, he brings, and mentions the great love of
Christ, and the near, and mistical conjunction between him and his Church, as
a similitude and argument, to declare and enforce the love that should be of the
husband toward his wife: For that is the maine matter, scope, and point of
exhortation, the Apostle there aymeth at, as is express and apparent by the
25. Verse. and so from thence to the end of that Chapter.

5 Now concerning Orders. By Orders, we understand, the ordination of
Ecclesiastical Ministers to their ministry, by Imposition, or laying on of
hands. Here then I would be glad to know, why, or for what reason they should
hold this to be a Sacrament? Is it, because it is a good work, and an holy
action? But it is answered before, that every good work, and godly, and holy
action, is not to be reckoned for a Sacrament: Or, do they make it a
Sacrament, because it has in it an outward sign of an holy thing, accounting
the ordination, or, consecration to the ministry, to be the holy thing, and
the imposition, or laying on of hands, in that action, and for that purpose, to
be the outward sign? But hereunto is answered, that every outward sign of
an holy thing, or of an holy action, is not sufficient to make a Sacrament: for
then Prayer, with lifting up of hands, 1. Tim. 2.8.
should be likewise a Sacrament; end sundry such like. But it must be an
outward sign of this particular holy thing, namely, of the remission of our
sins, and of our conjunction, 1. Cor. 10.16*
and communion with Christ, or otherwise, it is no Sacrament, in that sense of
a Sacrament which we speak of. Yea, it must be not only a sign, Romans 4.11.
but a seal also of that our uniting and conjunction with Christ, as is before
declared: which thing, because the act of Ordination of Ministers, by
imposition of hands, is not, therefore it can be no Sacrament. Again, the
Sacraments be such as be common, and belong to all sorts and degrees of
Christians; as well to the lay sort, as to Ecclesiastical Ministers: as
appears by the example of these two confessed and undoubted Sacraments, viz
of Baptism, and the Lords Supper: but these orders be proper and peculiar unto
those only that be of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, and extend no further;
and therefore they can be no Sacraments in that sense of Sacraments that we
speak of.

6 The last supposed Sacrament in the Popish Church, is, Extreme unction, or
last anointing, or annealing, as they call it. But how do they prove this to be
a sacrament? We read indeed, in Mark 6.13. that the Apostles of Christ being
sent abroad, did cast out Devils, Mar 6.13.
and anointed many that were sick, with oil, and healed them: But we see
this reckoned amongst the rest of the miracles, which those Apostles had power
given them to do, in those times of the first preaching and planting of the
Gospel, to win the greater credit unto it. Agreeably whereunto it is said:
that, They went forth and preached every where, Mar. 16.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs following.
But, beside, that it is thus reckoned among the rest of the miracles, the
effect, or event did also declare it to be miraculous: because, as many as
were in those days anointed by them, were healed, as the Text it self
affirms. Mar. 6.13.
Now, can, or do Popist Priests in like sort, in these days, by their
anointing with oil, cure and heal the sick and diseased, as they in the
Primitive and Apostolic Church, miraculously did? All men know, they neither
do, nor can. S. James likewise says to the Christians of those Primitive and
Apostolic times, in this sort: Is any sick among you, let him call for the
Presbyters (or, Elders) of the Church, Iam. 5.14, 15, 16.
and let them pray for him, and anoint him with oil, in the name of the Lord:
and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up:
and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him: For Sins,
commonly, be the cause of men's sicknesses and diseases. And because God
pardons such as repentantly acknowledge and confess their sins, and
faults, and not such as hide them, and will justify themselves therein; he
adds further, saying thus: Acknowledge your faults, one to another, and pray
one for another, that ye may be healed: for the prayer of a righteous man
avails much, if it be fervent: teaching them hereby, that they ought freely
to confer one with another, touching their diseases and sicknesses, and to
confess the sins which be the cause of them, one to another, that so they
might help one another with their prayers unto God for their recoverie: for S.
James does not say, that it was the bare anointing with oil, that did heal or
save a man from death, or raise him up from that his sickness, wherewith he
was visited, but it was, Anointing with oil, in the name of the Lord, that
is, such as had prayer, invocation, and calling upon the name of the Lord,
joined with it: And therefore in the next words he shows, that prayer was
added, and that it was the prayer of faith, that did preserve or save the
sick, and that recovered, and raised him up again. What then is there in all
this, to prove this Unction, or, the anointing with oil to be a Sacrament?
Is it because in this healing, there was used, an external ceremony, or an
outward visible sign* but it is before showed, that, that is not sufficient to
make a Sacrament: yea, then might the curing of the diseased by the water of
the Poole of Bethesda (Ioh: 5.2, 3, 4. etc.) be called a sacrament: and the
anointing of the blind man's eyes, with clay, made with spittle, together with
his washing in the Poole of Siloam (Ioh. 9.6.7.) might also, by as good reason,
be termed a Sacrament: and sundry other such actions, wherein outward visible
signs were used, should become Sacraments; which it were absurd to affirm, in
that sense of the Sacraments we here speak of. But this Unction, or annoynting
with oil, in the Apostles times, can be no Sacrament, in that sense of a
Sacrament, that we speak of, for sundry reasons. First, because it served,
only for the healing and curing of the body: For, as for the forgiveness of
sins, there mentioned, and prayer used for that purpose, they tended all, in
this case, to this end, to work the effect of healing: for the cause of the
sickness, (which was sins) being remooved by the prayers of the faithful,
the effect (which was the sickness, 1. Cor. 12.30. Mar. 6.1^.
or disease, caused by those sins) was also remooved. Secondly, it was a gift
of healing, that was in those days miraculous, to cure and heal the sick in
that manner: which miraculous, and extraordinary power of healing, is now long
since ceased: and because it was a thing miraculous, and extraordinary, and is
not ordinary and perpetual, it therefore can be no Sacrament. For, who is he,
at this day, that has this miraculous gift of healing the sick, by anointing
them with oil? I Popish Priests had it, it would appear in their extreme
unctions, and annointings, but no such thing appears: For what sick man do
they recover, or restore to health, by that means? Yea, they use not this
their unction, and annoyling, but when the sick party lies in extreamitie of
sickness and is no way likely to recover, and indeed, most usually dies,
notwithstanding these their annointings, and whatsoever else they do. Thirdly,
the Sacraments whereof we speak, be such as be common, and appliable to all
the members of Christ, as well when they be well and in health, as at other
times: But this their extreme Unction, belongs, and is applied only to
those that be sick, and at such times as they be in their extremest
sickness, and therefore it can be no Sacrament. Fourthly, they use this form
of words in it: By this anointing, and his most holy mercy, God does forgive
thee whatsoever thou have offended, by seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and
touching. Whereby appears, that they make this their extreme Unction, to
extend, but only to such sins, as the man has committed, by seeing,
hearing, smelling, tasting, and touching, that is to say, by those his exterior
five senses: But those that be true Sacraments indeed (as is evident by
Baptism, and the Lords Supper) be not so particularly limited, or restrained,
but be Sacraments to a faithful and godly man, of the full remission and
forgiveness of all sins, committed not only, by those his five outward
senses, but any other way else whatsoever, either by thought, word, or deed.
And therefore, this their extreme Unction, can be no Sacrament, rightly and
properly so called.

7 Now remains to be showed, that even those that be the very true
Sacraments indeed, do not give grace, ex opere operato: For they very
erroneously, attribute remission of sins, to the Sacraments administered, as
namely, to Baptism, and the Lords Supper, ex opere operato, even by the very
work done and performed: whereas it is not, in very deed, the external water
in Baptism administered, that has this power and virtue in it, to take away
sins, or to cleanse and purge them: neither is it the consecrated bread and
wine, in the Lords Supper, that has this power and virtue in it: For so to
suppose and imagine, were to ^ttribute that to the outward signs or
Sacraments, which rightly and properly belongs to Christ Jesus: Ioh. 1.29.
Ioh. 1.17. Heb. 9.28. Heb 1.3.
inasmuch as he only is the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the
world: and, it is his blood only, that cleanses us from all sin, as S. John
expressly witnesses, and all the rest of the Scripturs accord. For which cause
it is again said in the Revel. of S. John: that it is Christ, Rev. 1.5.
that has washed us from our sins in his blood. Seeing then it is Christ and
his blood only, that washes, purges, and cleanses, in very deed, and
materially, from all sins: the water in Baptism administered, must not have
this power and virtue attributed unto it, nor also the consecrated bread and
wine, in the Lords Supper, received. You will then demand, why, or in what
sense it is, that in the scripture, the water in Baptism, is said, to cleanse,
to sanctify, to regenerate: I answer, that it is said so to do, not that it
has these virtues enclosed in it, Ephesians 5.26. Tit. 3.5.
or did these things efficiently, or materially, but for that it does them
sacramentally, and significatively,: that is to say in plainer terms, because
the water in Baptism, is a Sacrament, sign, and seal unto us, of that
regeneration, sanctification, and cleansing, which we have through Christ: 1.
Cor. 12.11. Ioh. 3.6, 7, 8. Gal. 5.22.23, 24 25, 26.
For it is Gods spirit, that efficiently works faith, repentance,
regeneration, sanctification, or whatsoever other supernatural grace in a man,
and not the element of water. And therefore also did S. John Baptist, say to
those whom he baptized, thus: Mat. 3.11. Man gives water: but God gives the
holy Ghost: says H^erome upon Esaias 14.
I Baptize you with water unto repentance: but he that comes after me, is
mightier then I, whose shoes, I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you
with the holy Ghost. Where you plainly see, that S. John Baptist
acknowledges, that he, in his Baptism administered by him, gave but water, and
that it was Christ that gave the holy Ghost: Graces is not from the nature of
the water, but from the presence of the spirit, says Basil. lib. de spiritu
sanct. ca. 15. 1. Pet. 3 21. There is one water of the Sacrament an other of
the Spirit: The water of the Sacrament, is visible: the water of the S^irit is
invisible: That washes the body, and signifies what is done in the soul: By
this, the soul is cleansed and healed, says Aug. Tract. 6. in Epist Ioh.
and consequently that in the elemental water the holy Ghost was not contained,
nor included; but was to come another way. Saint Peter has a like speech,
saying: That, Baptism does save us: not that it is the material cause of our
salvation (for Christ Jesus only, is our Savior in that sort) but for that it
is a sacrament, sign and seal, of that salvation which we have by Jesus
Christ. And thus you see, how all the scriptures stand well together, and be
rightly reconciled: whereas, otherwise, according to their sense, there would
be a confusion and repugnancie. Yea, if it were true, that the very external
act of Baptism performed, did, ipso facto, regenerate, cleanse, sanctify, and
save: then should all without exception, that be baptized, be also regenerated,
cleansed sanctified, and saved souls: But this you neither do, nor will
affirm, and therefore no reason have you to affirm the other, whereupon this
must necessarily follow. In like sort* if consecrated bread and wine,
externally distributed and received in the Lords Supper, did, ipso facto, give
grace and remission of sins, then might Judas that Traitor, or any other the
most wicked and ungodly reprobate, that externally receives that bread and
wine, receive also grace and remission of sins thereby: which it were very
gross and absurd for any to affirm. Yea S. Paul himself shows, that there
be some unworthy receivers, that be so far from receiving grace and remission
of sins by it, that contrariwise, They eat and drink Judgment, 1. Cor.
11.29.
or condemnation, to themselves, as he speaks and directly witnesses.

CHAP. X.
Concerning the Popish Mass, and the Popish Priesthood thereto belonging.

NOw give me leave to tell you how detestable a thing your Popish Mass is,
which ye nevertheless so much and so highly reverence, being misled by the
doctrine of your Teachers: For ye say, that your Priests do therein, offer up
Christ Jesus, every day, or often, to his Father, and that in a bodily manner,
and affirm it moreover, to be a sacrifice propitiatory for the sins of men.
What? can any that profess Christ, or Christianity, be so absurd as to
believe, that Christ is often, or daily, offered up, in a bodily manner, to his
Father, for the sins of men? Do not the Scriptures themselves proclaim,
that Christ Jesus was, in that his bodily sacrifice, to be offered but Once,
and not often? Heb. 9 25, 26.28. Heb. 10.14.
and do they not withal expressly testify, that with that one Oblation or
offering, He has consecrated for ever, them that are sanctified? What needs
then, or how can there be any more bodily offerings of him, then that one,
whereby he offered himself, once, upon the Cross? Your selves (again) do
say, that this bodily offering up of Christ in your Mass, is unbloudie, and
consequently, has in it no effusion of blood: whereupon it must needs be
granted, that therefore it cannot possibly be a propitiatory sacrifice, or
take away the sins of men: For, the Scripture says expressly, that without
effusion of blood, Heb. 9.22.
there is no remission of sins. But beside all this, there is also no other
Priest appointed of God, for the offering up of Christ Jesus in a bodily
sacrifice, but Christ Jesus himself only: who therefore did perform it, in
his own most sacred person, and is also the only Priest according to the order
of Melchisedech. For, Heb. 5.5, 6*9, 10.
ye must be put in mind, that the Scripture mentions not, Priests,
plurally, according to the order of Melchisedech, as though there were, or
might be many or sundry, according to that order, but it mentions only One
according to that Order; Heb. 5.5, 6.10.
affirming this one, to be Jesus Christ, as the Epistle to the Hebrews,
manifestly declares. Yea, very plainly, Heb. 7.15, 16, 17.
does that Epistle show, that though there were in the Old Testament, under the
Levitical and Aronical Priesthood, many, that were Priests in succession, one
after another, the death of the one, causing the other so to succeed: yet is
it not so, in the New Testament, under that Priesthood which is according to
the Order of Melchisedech: where is showed, that Christ Jesus, Heb 7.23.24.
who is the only Priest according to that Order, has neither Vicars, nor
successors, in that his Priesthood, nor possibly can have; because himself
never dies, but lives and continues a Priest for ever according to that
order. For which cause, it is there further said directly, Heb. 7.20, 21, 22,
23. Ver. 24.
that he has (...), that is, such a Priesthood, as does not pass* go, or, is
convaied from him, to any other. Seeing then there neither be, nor ought to be
any more Priests according to the Order of Melchisedech, but only One, which is
Christ Jesus: and that this Christ Jesus, was in bodily sacrifice to be offered
also but Once, and not oftener: and that himself is also the sole and only
Priest allowed and appointed of God to make that bodily oblation: which bodily
oblation of his, is also only propitiatory. How intolerably blasphemous, and
abominable, be and must needs be, those Popish Priests, that dare arrogate to
themselves that particular honor, office, place, and person of Jesus Christ,
and say, that they offer him up, in a bodily manner, and that often, and that
their sacrifice of the Mass, is a propitiatory sacrifice? We know, that Christ
instituted a Sacrament, in bread and wine, in commemoration and remembrance of
his body crucified and his blood shed for our sins: But that bodily
sacrifice of his was not performed by any but by himsefe, nor was it done at
this time of his instituting of this Sacrament, but afterward, when actually,
and in very deed, he made that sacrifice of himself upon the Cross, and said
Co^summatum est, It was then finished. And therefore when Christ said at his
last Supper, to his Apostles, and consequently to the rest of his Ministers,
their successors, Hoc facite etc. Do this in remembrance of me, he bad them
to administer that Sacrament in such manner and sort as he did it, but he did
not thereby make them Priests to offer him up in a bodily and propitiatory
sacrifice, Vocatur Sacrificium and oblatio, quia memoria est and represen^atio
very Sacrificii and sanctae Immolationis factae in ara Crucis. Lomb. lib 4.
did. 12.
as is by Popish Priests most impiously and absurdly suggested and surmised.
And yet it is granted, that ancient Fathers do call this supper of the Lord, a
sacrifice: but they so call it a sacrifice, in respect it is a memorial of that
bodily sacrifice of Christ performed upon the Cross, as even Peter Lombard
himself expressly tells you. As also, it may be called a sacrifice, in
respect of the sacrifice of praise and thankesgiving, and other spiritual
sacrifices, which at these times, the godly offer up unto God. For which cause,
those ancient Fathers do also call it, an Eucharist, that is, a Thanksgiving:
noting it, even thereby also, to be, not a Propitiatory, but an Eucharistical
sacrifice. A memory of this sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, we have
received (says Eusebius), to celebrate at the Lords Table, Eusebius. Demonstr.
Evang. lib. 1. cap. 10.
by the signs of his body, and of his healthful blood, according the divine
Laws of the New Testament. Christ (says S. Augustine) is our Priest for ever,
according to the order of Melchisedech, August. octog. trium quaest. 61.
who offered himself a sacrifice for our sins, and has commended the
similitude of that sacrifice to be celebrated in the remembrance of his
passion. We keep (says Theophilact) a remembrance of the Lords death.
Theoph. in Heb. ^^.
And again: We keep a memory of that Oblation wherein he offered himself.
Our high Priest (says Chrysostom) is he which offered the sacrifice that
purges us, etc. But this which we do, Chrys^st. hom. 17. ad Hebr.
is done in remembrance of that which was done by him: for do ye this (says
Christ) in remembrance of me. And again he says: We celebrate the
remembrance of a sacrifice. By all which, and sundry, other sayings which
might be cited (if need were) out of ancient Fathers, you may easily perceive,
that howsoever they call this Sacrament a sacrifice, they mean it not to be
any Propitiatory or Bodily sacrifice, but that (in the proper appellation),
it is rather to be termed (as themselves here declare) a similitude, memorial,
or remembrance, of that sacrifice of Christ, which himself performed upon the
Cross.

2 And yet the Rhemists, and other Popish Teachers say, that Christ is called a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech, specially in this respect of
the sacrifice of his body and blood instituted at his last supper, in the
forms of bread and wine: in which things, they say, Melchisedech did
sacrifice. But first, they cannot prove, that Christ instituted this sacrament
of his last supper, to be his very bodily sacrificing of himself: yea it is
before apparently disproved: for his very bodily sacrifice was done only by
himself, upon the Cross, and that but once, and that sacrifice only is
propitiatory, and no other. And how is it possible, that that which is a
representation, similitude, remembrance, and sacrament of that sacrifice,
should be the very sacrifice it self? But secondly, why do they or any
other, talk of fo^^es of bread and wine? for ye know, that they were not the
forms, or accidents of bread and wine, Genesis 14.18.
but very substantial bread and wine, which Melchisedech brought forth to
Abraham, and his people, for their refreshing after their battle and slaughter
of the kings. Yea if they had been bare forms and accidents of bread and
wine, and not very bread and wine in truth and in substance, they would have
given Abraham and his company, but very small and slender refreshing. This
example therefore of Melchisedech* in giving, not the forms or accidents of
bread and wine, without the substance, but very bread and wine substantially,
to Abraham and his soldiers, for their refreshing, does prove strongly,
against them, that in this sacrament of the Lords Supper, not the bare forms
or accidents of bread and wine, but the very substance it self of bread and
wine, does remain. But thirdly, why do they say, that Melchisedech sacrificed
in bread and wine, when there is no such thing in the Text? He offered no
sacrifice of bread and wine, but brought forth bread and wine, for the
refreshing of Abraham, and his Army. Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 1. cap. 10.
And so says Josephus: Melch^sedech gave liberal entertainment to the
Soldiers of Abraham, and suffered them to want nothing for the sustenance of
their life. This another writer likewise approves, Petrus Come. hist. Shil.
in Genesis 45.
saying: Melchisedech, king of Salem, offered unto him, bread and wine: which
Josephus, as it were expounding, says: he ministered to his Army the duties
of hospitaliti^, and gave him great plenty of things necessary: and, besides,
he blessed God, which had subdued to Abraham, his enemies: for He was a
Priest of the highest God. Yea, even the Hebrew word also, (which signifies
not, obtulit, or, sacrificavit, but protulit or eduxit) declares the same: for
the word is, (...), hotsi, quod perinde sonat ac si dicas, exire fecit, hoc
est, eduxit, seu, protulit: which is as much, as that Melchisedech caused bread
and wine to come forth, or to be brought out to Abraham and his company: but
it has no such sense in it, as that he sacrificed bread and wine. Whereupon,
the Greeks have also translated it, (...), protulit, he brought forth. But
yet further to show unto you, that Christ, is the only Priest according to the
order of Melchisedech, and in what sense he is so, that Epistle to the
Hebrews, Heb. 7.1, 2, 3.
thus compares Christ, and Melchisedech, together: That as Melchisedech was
both a King and a Priest, so likewise is Christ; And as Melchisedech was a King
of righteousness and of peace, so is Christ: for he brought in everlasting
righteousness (as it is said in Dan. 9.24.) and is also the true King of
peace, as having by his mediation, made peace between God and Us. Yea, as
Melchisedech was not only a King, but a Priest also of the most high God: so is
Christ, who with the sacrifice of himself upon the Cross, has redeemed all
his people, and blesses them, and makes intercession for them. Again
Melchisedech, is said to be without father, without mother, without kindred,
having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, (which things be thus
affirmed of Melchisedech, because in the Scriptures, neither his father, nor
his mother, nor his ancestors, nor his death, are recorded): And such a one is
Christ, the son of God, without a father as he is Man, and without mother as
he is God, being Eternal, without beginning of days, or end of life. And as
Melchisedech is said to be and continue a Priest for Ever: so is Christ, who
lives and continues ever, a Priest, by reason of that his everlasting and
unremoveable Priesthood, perpetually resident, and inherent in his own person.
Thus, Melchisedech, (a Type and figure of Christ) and Christ himself, be
resembled and compared together. By all which, you may infallibly perceive,
that Christ only, and none but he, is or can be, a Priest according to the
order of Melchisedech, and consequently, that Popish Priests be extremely
audacious and impudently impious, that dare and do challenge to themselves, to
be Priests according to that order.

3 Howbeit, there be Priests, nevertheless, under the New Testament: for, all
true Christians whosoever, be Priests, and are expressly so entitled in the
holy Scriptures; not, that any of them, are to offer up Christ in a bodily
sacrifice, but that they are to sacrifice their own bodies (as S. Paul
declares, Romans 12.1.
) by killing and mortifying their own lusts and concupiscences, and other
their vile affections, and consecrating themselves wholly unto God and his
service. Christ has made us (says S. John) Kings and Priests, even to God his
Father. S. Peter likewise says thus: Ye are a chosen generation, Rev. 1.6. 1.
Pet. 2.9.
a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, set at liberty, that
ye should show forth the virtues of him, that has called you out of
Darkness, 1. Pet. 2 5.
into his marveylous light. And again, he says: Ye, as lively stones, be made
a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. In which places, you see, that All generally
whosoever, that be the member of Christ, are, and be termed Priests: and
withal you see the reason, why they are so entitled; namely, not because they
are to offer any bodily sacrifice of Christ, but in respect of spiritual
sacrifices (as S. Peter here expressly calls them) which they are to offer
up unto God. Of which sort is the sacrificing of their own bodies, before
mentioned by S. Paul, Romans 17.1. Heb. 13.15. Psalm. 141.2. Psalm. 4.5. Heb.
13.16. Romans 12.1^*
and the sacrifices likewise of praises, and thankesgivings, and of prayer
which ascends up like incense unto God, the sacrifice also of righteousness,
of doing good, and giving alms, and distributing to those that be in
necessity, and such like: for, all these be called sacrifices. And hereby also
is verified the Prophecy in Malachy, Mal. 1.11.
where God says thus: From the rising of the Sun unto the going down ^f the
same, my Name is great among the Gentiles, and in every place, Incense shall be
offered to my Name, and a pure offering: for my Name is great among the
Gentiles, says the Lord of Hosts. I say, this Prophecy is verified, not by
any supposed carnal or bodily sacrificing of Christ, in the Popish Mass
(which is a most ungodly and impure thing) but by those spiritual sacrifices
before mentioned, which All Christians every where are to offer up unto God.
Rev. 1.6.
Neither ought it to seem strange to any, that all the Members of Christ
generally, be they men, or women, be thus termed (...), 1. Pet. 2.5.9.
Sacerdotes, that is, Priests: for ye see it is by the Scriptures clear, and
evident, and therefore must be confessed. Wherefore also Tertullian says:
Nonne and Laici, Sacerdotes? Exhort. ad Castitatem.
Be not Lay people also Priests? As for those that bear Ecclesiastical office
in the Christian Church, they have no where throughout all the New Testament,
this term, (...), Sacerdotes, that is, Priests, specially, or properly, given
unto them, but they are, there, evermore called by other names: as, Bishops,
Pastors, Doctors, Presbyters, Deacons, Ministers, and such like: so carefully
does the whole New Testament, shun that word, Sacerdotes, that is, Priests,
from being attributed to the Ministers of the Gospel, specially, or
peculiarly, Let a man so esteem of us (says S. Paul) as of the Ministers of
Christ. 1. Cor. 4.^. So that the term of a Minister of Christ, or of the
Gospel, is to be reverenced, and not to be scornfully, or skoffingly mentioned,
as it is by sundry in the Papacy*
but uses it as a name general, and common to all Christians. It is true
nevertheless, that in the ancient Fathers they be sometimes called
Sacerdotes, and the Lords ^able also is sutably, in the same ancient Fathers,
sometimes called an Altar: Howbeit, these be not proper, but alluding and
tropical speeches, signifying that as in the Jewish Church they had an Altar,
and Priests to offer sacrifices thereupon; so in the Christian Church they have
a Communion Table, and Christian Ministers, and Christian people, who are there
to celebrate the memory of Christ's bodily sacrifice, and to offer up the
sacrifice of prayer, praise, and thankesgiving, and such other spiritual
sacrifices, as belong to Christian Ministers and Christian people, to offer.
But none of these things do prove any bodily sacrifice of Christ, to be
actuallie and reallie performed in the Sacrament: yea, if, that, in the
Sacrament, were his very bodily sacrifice, what was, or needed that, which
was performed on the Cross, the next day? or what name will you give unto it?
Was not that which was performed on the Cross, the very true Propitiatory
bodily sacrifice? You cannot deny but it was. What other thing then can this
Sacrament be, but a Sacrament, that is, a similitude, representation, and
remembrance of that propitiatory bodily sacrifice of Christ, once done and
performed in his own person, upon the Cross, for all the Elect?

4 But you allege, that Christ having taken the bread, said; This is my Body:
Howbeit you should consider withal, that after that he had taken the Cup, he
said likewise* Mat. 26.27, 28. Mar. 14.23, 24.
This is my blood: and yet, for all that, was not the very Cup, his very
blood. If then in these words, ye admit (as ye do) a figure or figurative
speech; why should ye not likewise in the other words, (of, This is my body)
admit a figure or figurative speech? Yea, if by reason of these words, This is
my Body, you will infer, that the very substance of the bread is changed
into the very substance of the natural body of Christ (which change, ye
therefore call Transubstantiation): then may I by force of these words uttered
of the Cup, This is my blood, infer likewise, that the very substance of the
Cup is changed into the very substance of the natural blood of Christ: or, if
you will take the words as they be recited by S. Paul, and S. Luke, Luke 22.20.
1. Cor. 11.25.
namely thus: This Cup is the new Testament in my blood: I may as well conclude,
that the very substance of the Cup is turned and changed into the very new
Testament, or new Covenant, which were very absurd. We grant, that the bread
is Christ's body, and the wine is his blood, in a Sacramental phrase, and
sacramentally, but not literally, and substantially, or, by way of
Transubstantiation, as ye most strangely imagine. So that the Argument
appears to be fond and vain, when men reason thus: Christ said of the
consecrated Bread, that it is his body: Ergo, it is his Body, naturally,
substantiallie, and by way of Transubstantiation: For this is more then ever
CHRIST spoke: and it may be (as indeed it is) his Body otherwise, namely,
Sacramentally, Figurativelie, and Significatively. And so also do the ancient
Fathers themselves expressly declare, Tertul cont. Mar. lib. 4
and expound it: as namely, Tertullian says thus: Hoc est corpus meum, id est
figura corporis mei: This is my body, that is (says he) a figure of my body.
And S. Augustine says likewise: Non dubitabit Dominus dicere, August. in Psalm.
3. and cont. Adimantum manichaeum cap. 12.
hoc est corpus meum, cum daret signum corporis sui: The Lord doubted not to
say, this is my body, when he gave a sign of his body. And yet we grant,
that after consecration, there is a change (as the ancient Fathers also
affirm) but that is as touching the use, and end, and not as touching the
substance: For, that which was before common bread, and common wine, is now,
after consecration, become sacramental bread, and sacramental wine, signifying,
and figuring out unto us, another thing: namely, the bread does then signify,
and figure out unto us, the body of Christ, which was broken and crucified for
us: and the wine signifies and figureth out unto us, the blood of Christ,
which was powered out and shed for us. So that, the Bread, and the Wine, which
in common and ordinary use, serve only for sustenance of the body, now,
after consecrasion, signify, and represent unto us, that which is the very
true food of our souls, and the sustenance of them to eternal life: and do
import unto us, that as verily as we receive the Bread, and Wine, outwardly,
with our bodily mouth: so verily, and certainly do we also receive Christ
Jesus, and the benefit of his death and passion, inwardly, by our faith, which
is the mouth of the soul. For, as bodily meat, must have a bodily mouth, to
receive it: so that which is spiritual meat, and sustenance for the soul, must
have a spiritual mouth to receive it by. And this is that eating of Christ's
flesh, and drinking of his blood, which is spoken of in S. John's Gospel, when
he is thus received and applied, not by a carnal, or corporal, but by a
spiritual mouth, namely, by faith. For, whereas some, in that sixth Chapter of
S. John's Gospel, hearing Christ speaking of eating of his flesh, Ioh. 6 53,
54* 55.56.
and drinking of his blood, said, it was an hard speech, and grew offended at
it: Christ, to remove all that conceited hardness, and offense, taken at those
his words, answered, and said: that, It is the spirit that quickens; the
flesh profits nothing: the words that I speak unto you, are spirit and
life: So that ye must take the words which Christ there spoke unto them,
concerning the eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood, not literally,
grossly, and carnally, as the Capernaits did, but in a spiritual sense, and
meaning. And so does S. Augustine, in diverse places tell you, that they are to
be expounded. For he says expreslie: August. de doct. Christ. lib. 3. c. 16.
in Ioh. 6. tract. 26. and tract. 25.
that, Credere in eum, est manducare, To believe in Jesus Christ, is, in that
place of S. John, to eat his flesh. Yea, to show that the words be not to be
taken litterallie, or carnally, but figuratively, the same S. Augustine gives
this reason, saying: that otherwise by commanding, to Eat the flesh of a man,
August de doct. Christ. lib 3. c. 16
and to drink his blood, he should seem to command an heinous or wicked
thing: Figura est ergo, praecipiens passioni dominica esse communicandum, and
suaviter atque utiliter recondendum in memoria, quod pro nobis caro eius
crucifixa, and vulnerata sit. It is therefore (says he) a figure, or
figurative speech, commanding that we must communicate with the Lords passion,
and sweetly, and profitably keep in memory that His flesh was crucified and
wounded for us. When he says expreslie, that it is a figure, or figurative
speech, what doubt should ye make of it? But yet further, upon the 98. Psalm,
he brings in Christ, speaking thus to his Disciples; Aug. in Psalm 98.
Spiritualiter intelligite quod locutus sum: non, hoc corpus quod videtis,
manducaturi estis, and ^ibituri illum sanguinem, quem fus^ri su^t, qui me
crucifigent: Sacramentum aliquod vobis commendavi: Spiritualiter intellectum,
vivificabit vos. Understand ye spiritually that which I have spoken: ye are
not to eat this very body which ye see, and to drink that blood which they
shall shed, which shall crucify me: It is a Sacrament that I have commended
unto you: it being spiritually understood, shall quicken you. What can be
spoken more plainly? yea, this point, Christ himself clears yet further in
the 51. Verse of that Chapter, saying: The Bread that I will give, Ioh. 6.5^.
is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. Where we must of
necessity understand, not the bread in the Sacrament, but himself, and his
flesh and Body crucified, and sacrificed upon the Cross, to be that Bread he
there speaks of. So that to apply Christ crucified by faith, Ioh. 6.33.35.48
5^, 51.58*
unto a man, as his Savior and Redeemer (whether it be in the Sacrament, or
at any other time, without receiving the sacrament) is to eat his flesh, and
to drink his blood, as S. Augustine again expounds and declares it, De
Doct. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 21. and de Civit. lib. 21. cap. 21. And this is yet
further manifest, by conferring the 54. Verse of that Chapter, with the 40
Verse: For whereas Christ in the 54. Verse, speaks thus: Whosoever eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, Ioh. 6.54.
has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day: to declare the
true meaning of those words, he speaks after this sort, in the 40. Verse,
producing the same thing in effect, and saying thus: Every man which sees the
Son, and believes in him, Ioh. 6.40.
shall have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day. By
comparing of which two verses together, it appears, that, to eat the flesh
of Christ, and to drink his blood, is in that place, nothing else, but for a
man to believe in him, and so to apply him as a Redeemer and Savior, to
himself in particular, for eternal life. Which thing he again declares in
the 47. Verse, saying thus: Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ioh. 6.47.
he that believes in me, has everlasting life. But he yet further
explicateth the matter, in the 56. Verse. and says thus: Ioh. 6.56.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in
him. Whereby appears, that, to eat Christ's flesh, and to drink his blood,
is all one with this, to have Christ dwelling in us, and us in him. Now then,
how does Christ dwell in us? S. Paul answers, and tells us directly: that
He dwells in us by faith. It is then still undeniably manifest, that, the
eating of Christ's flesh, and drinking of his blood, Ephesians 3.17.
is nothing else, but, as I said before, to believe in Christ, or, to have a
true and livelie faith in him, whereby we apprehend and apply him as a Redeemer
and Savior unto our selves, in particular, and whereby it is, that he
dwells in us, and we in him, and so are united unto him, not by a carnal,
but by a spiritual mean and union. And so S. Paul again shows, that the
union or conjunction which we have with Christ, is not by any bodily, but by
a spiritual mean, and manner: for, he that is joined unto the Lord, is one
spirit, says he: and therefore also does S. Paul, call Christ, spiritual
meat, 1. Cor* 6.17.
and spiritual drink, and says, that even those Ancestors of the Jews,
which lived in Moses time, long before the Incarnation of Christ, did all eat
the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink, 1.
Cor. 10.1, ^, ^ 4.
for they drank of the spiritual Rock that follovved them, and that Rock
was Christ. These Ancestors of the Jews, that thus did eat Christ, and
drink Christ, so long before his Incarnation, as well as we, could not possibly
eat him in a bodily manner, or carnal fashion (for Christ as yet, in their
times, had not taken his humanity, or manhood, nor was incarnate) it remains
then, that they did eat him, and drink him by their faith, and after a
spiritual manner: for in a carnal, or bodily sort, (as is apparent) they could
not possibly eat or drink him. And seeing that they did eat the same
spiritual meat, and did drink the same spiritual drink that we do, it
must be granted, that we likewise do not otherwise eat Christ, or drink
Christ, but in the same manner, namely, spiritually, and by faith. But again,
if those words of Christ in that sixth Chapter of S. John's Gospel, were to be
understood as ye suppose, then it would also follow, that Judas, that traitor,
or any other Reprobate whosoever, that did receive that sacramental Bread and
Wine, should also be saved, and have eternal life: for in that Chapter, Christ
says expreslie, thus: Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has
eternal life. Ioh. 6.54.
But whosoever externally eats the Sacramental bread, and drinks the
Sacramental wine, has not eternal life (for as S. Paul shows, There be some
that eat of that bread, and drink of that Cup unworthily, 1. Cor 11.27.
and so eat and drink Judgment to themselves) and therefore the external
eating of the sacramental bread, and drinking of the sacramental wine, is not
the eating of the flesh of Christ, nor the drinking of his blood, which is
spoken of, and intended in that place. Yea, at that time when these words were
spoken, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not yet instituted, as Lyra also
well observes. These reasons then may suffice to satisfy reasonable men,
Lyra. in Psalm. 110.
for answer to that sixth Chapter of S. John, which ye so often urge in vain,
because by this time, I trust, you perceive, how that your supposed bodily
presence of Christ in the Sacrament, by way of Transubstantiation, cannot
thereout possibly be forced, or concluded. But yet further, to the end it may
not seem strange unto you, that Christ should call the bread his body, when
it was not in very deed, his body naturally and substantially, but a sign,
remembrance, and figure of that his body: you are to understand, that it is an
usual and ordinary phrase, and speech in Sacraments, and namely, as well in
Sacraments of the old Testament, as of the new, to call the sign by the name
of the thing signified. As for example; Circumcision was one of the Sacraments
among the Jews: and the Paschal Lamb was another, under the old Testament.
Now, Circumcision, was directly called the Covenant: Genesis 17.13.
which nevertheless, was not the very Covenant it self, but a sign of the
Covenant: For, the Covenant it self was this: Gen 12.13. Genesis 17.1, 2, 3, 4.
etc.
that, In Abraham's seed, all nations should be blessed, and that God would be
their God, and they his people. So again, the Paschall Lamb, was directly
called the Passover: when as nevertheless, it was not the very Passover it
self, but a sign and token of the Passover: For the very Passover it
self, Exodus 12.11. Mat. 26.17.
was this: that an Angel passed over the houses of the Israelits, sparing
them, and smote the Egyptians, their enemies: and this is also called, eating
the Passover, Mat. 26 17.
when as, but the sign of the Passover only, namely, the Paschall Lamb was
eaten. In steed of Circumcision, Baptism succeeds amongst Christians: and
in the place of the Passover, succeeds the Lords Supper: What marvel then
can it be, or should it be, to any Christian, that Baptism should be
termed Regeneration: Tit. 3.^.
which is not the very Regeneration it self, but a sign and token of
regeneration: for the Regeneration it self, is the renewing of the man, to the
Image of God, wherein he was at first created, which is a thing, begun to be
wrought in him in this life, not by the very external act of Baptism,
performed and administered, but inwardly, by the operation of the holy Ghost.
And likewise, it ought for the same cause, to seem nothing strange to any,
that the Bread, in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is called his body, when
as nevertheless, it is not his very natural and substantial body, but a
figure, sign, and token of that his body. As for the reason which ye draw
from the omnipotency, or almightinesse of Christ, whereby he is able, as ye
say, to make his very essential, and natural body, out of bread: you must
first prove, that it is his will to have it so made, before ye dispute of his
power, or omnipotency. For, no man doubts, but that he can do many things,
which nevertheless he does not do, nor will do. It is an Axiom in the Art
and rule of reasoning, that a Posse ad Esse, non valet argumentum: and
therefore that God can do such a thing, and such a thing, ergo, he has done
it, is no good argument. But that you may the better conceive, the weakness
of this your argument, grounded upon Gods omnipotency in this matter, take
another like unto it in this sort: Christ says of the Cup: This is my blood:
And he by his omnipotency, Mat. 22.27.28. Mar. 14.23, 24.
is as well able to make the very Cup, his very essential and natural blood,
as the bread his body: ergo, the very Cup is his very essential and natural
blood. Again, Christ says, that he is a Vine, Ioh. 15.1. Ioh. 6.58.
and that he is also Bread: and by his omnipotency, he is as well able to
make himself, a very Material Vine, or, very material Bread, as he is to
make bread his natural body, ergo, he is a very Material Vine, or, very
Material Bread. These arguments be like yours, when you say thus: Christ
says, the Bread is his body: and he is by his omnipotency able to make it his
very essential and natural body; Ergo, it is his very essential and natural
body. I hope, by this time, ye see the vanity and absurdity of this manner
of reasoning. But you still urge the words of Christ, and say, that he says;
It is his body: and we must not (say you) make him a Liar, and therefore it
is his very essential and natural body. God forbid, that any of us should
go about to make Christ a liar, who is all Truth, and the teacher of all
Truth, neither does any of us go about it: but we say, that Christ is true in
those his words, but men speak more then is true, when out of those words of
his, they teach and affirm, that the bread is become (by way of
Transubstantiation) his very essential and natural body: For Christ does not
say so, that it is his very essential and natural body by way of
Transubstantiation (as they infer) but his words are only, that it is his
body. And it may be and is his body, as I said before, though it be not his
body by way of Transubstantiation. For if it be (as it is) his body
figuratively, sacramentally, and significatively, I trust his words are found
true enough, without any such Popish gross supposition. Because Christ says,
the Cup is his blood; shall he therefore be supposed, a liar, or, untrue,
except the very material Cup, be believed, in very deed, to be his very
essential and natural blood by way of Transubstantiation? or because Christ
says that he is a Vine, shall he by and by be concluded to be false or untrue,
unless it be believed that therefore he is turned and transubstantiated into a
very natural and substantial Vine? But moreover, if it be Christ's natural and
substantial body in very deed (as you say it is) show us some way, how we may
be induced to believe it, or how it may be proved or appear to be so: you
answer, that Christ his body, is there, miraculously. But I reply again, that
if it be there miraculouslie, it must be there visibly, and so appear to the
outward senses: for it is of the property of every miracle, to be visible,
and to appear to be so, to the eye, and to the rest of the outward senses: as
when Christ turned water into wine, Ioh. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Exodus 4.1, 2, 3.
it did appear to be no longer water, but wine to the outward senses. So
likewise when Moses rod was turned into a serpent, it appeared to the eye and
outward senses, to be no longer a Rod, but a Serpent. If therefore the bread be
turned (as ye say) miraculouslie, into the very natural body of Christ, it
must likewise appear visiblie to the eye, and to the outward senses, so to be:
namely, no appearance of bread must any longer be there, and on the other
side, only the very natural body of Jesus Christ must appear to the eye,
and the outward senses of the Receiver: but clean contrariwise, there is no
natural body of Christ Jesus, appearing to the eye and outward senses of the
receiver, after consecration, but bread only: ergo the very natural body of
Jesus Christ is not there miraculouslie, as Papists most absurdly affirm. But
although they cannot show Christ his very natural body to be there by way of
transubstantiation, yet (say they) they do believe it to be so: and they say
withal, that it is as well to be believed, as the creation of the world, the
resurrection of the dead, a virgin to bear a child* namely Christ Jesus, and
such like. But whilst they speak thus, I pray let them tell me, can their
supposed real bodily presence of Christ in the Sacrament, by way of
Transubstantiation, be as well proved by the Scriptures, as the creation of the
world, the resurrection of the dead, the bearing of a child by a virgin, or as
the rest of the things which they mean, and are directly found in the
Scriptures? I am sure it cannot: for all that can be said, for your
Transubstation, has been examined again and again, but no such matter can
be proved or appear. Why then do they match those things together, which be
nothing like? Yea, why be any so unwiselie confident, as to say, they believe,
and verily believe, this real bodily presence of Christ in the Sacrament, by
way of transubstantiation, when they can no way show it by any manner of
proof, or probability? What? will men believe, and unremoveably believe,
things without wit, sense, reason or religion, and for which they have no manner
of color or warrant at all in Scripture, from God, or his word* If they be
such credulous people, they may believe, if they will, any thing whatsoever,
be it never so incredible, or absurd: for if their will and fancy, shall be
held for a sufficient r^^son, who shall be able to diswade them? Howbeit, I
would desire you to be better advised, and though it be to the utter
overthrowing of your fancies and wills, to yield to that puissant, and
unvanquishable truth, which not only reason, but all right faith and religion
also, requires at your hands: for even faith and religion, as well sense and
reason, persuades, against that monstrous conceit of Transubstatiation, and
of the natural body of Christ to be eaten with the bodily mouth. For further
declaration whereof, do but consider some absurdities and inconveniences,
wherewith it is accompanied. First, you thereby make the Lords Supper to be no
Sacrament: for if it be a Sacrament, it must of necessity have as well an
outward visible sign, of an holy thing, as the holy thing it self. The
outward visible sign in this point, is the bread, and the holy thing whereof
it is a sign, is the very natural body of Christ, which was crucified for
us. Now, you s^y, That after consecration, there is no bread at all remaining,
but only the very natural body of Jesus Christ, and so making no bread at
all to be there, you also make no outward visible sign to be there, and
consequently make it no Sacrament. Secondly, if there be no bread remaining,
but only the Accidents of bread, that is, whiteness, roundnesse, and such
like, without a substance, as ye hold* then, beside that it is most absurd by
the rules of reason, to hold that any accidents can be without their substance
I pray further tell me, what it is that the communicant receives and eats?
for we think every man should be ashamed to say, that he eats bare
accidents, and not the substance of bread: But for clear proof, S. Paul
affirms it expreslie to be still bread (after consecration) and that
accordingly the communicant eats bread: 1. Cor. 11.26, 27, 28.
neither will the bare accidents of bread, without the substance, nourish any
man Thirdly, how absurd and unseemlie a thing is it, for one man to eat up
another? as if it became Christians to be Caniballs, or Anthropophagi, that is,
such as were eaters of men: and yet if this Popish opinion were true, should
Christians be eaters even of the body of a man, and of the best m^n that ever
lived, even of their own Savior and Redeemer, Jesus Christ, both God and man,
and that in a most gross and carnal manner, which is a most impious, and most
inhumane barbarous conceit. Fourthlie, it is well known, that Christ Jesus is
true man, and has all the properties of one, that is a true man, being like
unto man in all things (sin only excepted) as the Scripture witnesses: Heb 2
17.
And therefore as he is a true man, and has a true humane body, like other
men (sin only excepted), that his humane body cannot possibly be in two,
or many places at once, Au^ust. in Ioh. Tra^t. 3^. and Ep. 57. ad Bar^an.
no not after his resurrection, as S. Augustine expressly witnesses, no more
then the bodies of other men. For which cause the Angel said of Christ, Non est
hic; surrexit enim: He is not here; Matt 2^.6.
for he is risen* This speech of the Angel, shows, (contrary to your
conceit) that the humanity and body of Christ, even after his resurrection,
is not in diverse places at once, as his Deity and Godhead is, and that it
cannot be in any more places then one at a time: because when his body was in
the grave, it was not any where else; and when it was risen ou^ of the grave
then it was not there, but in another place, as the Angel declares. Yea
whilst you make his humanity to be multi-present, what do ye else but
confound his humanity, and fall into as manifest an error, as is the Heresy
of the ubiquitares. If any allege, that the humanity of Christ and his
Deity be inseparable, Christus est ubique per id quod Deus est: In coelo aute^
per id quod homo est. August Epist. 57. ad Dardan. Caro Christi, quando in
terra fuit, non fuit in coelo: and nunc quia in coelo est, non est utique in
terra Vigil. cont. Eutich. lib. 1. Iere 23 24. 1. King. 8.27.
and that therefore wheresoever his Deity is, there is also his humanity, and
consequently because his Deity or Godhead is every where, his humanity also,
or manhood, must be likewise every where. This is but a sophistical and
deceitful kind of reasoning, wherewith none should be ensnarled: for,
although it be true, that the Deity and humanity of Christ, be inseparable in
him in respect of his person, in whom they are united, both together making but
one Christ* yet are they not so inseparable, but that the one may be, and is,
namely his Deity or Godhead, where the other is not. For example: the Deity
or Godhead of Christ is indeed every where, and fills heaven and earth, as
it is said in the Prophet: yea the heaven of heavens, cannot contain him, as
Solomon says, and consequently that Deity was also, even in the grave of
Christ after he was risen from death: and yet was not his humanity or manhood
there, as the Angel himself has before assured us. So that although
wheresoever his humanity or manhood is, there is also his Deity or Godhead:
yet it follows not contrariwise, that wheresoever his Deity or Godhead is,
there also is his humanity or manhood. Again, does not Christ Jesus himself
say thus: Matt. 26.11.
The poor ye have always with you but me ye shall not have always? How could
these words be true, except we confess that he may be, and is absent from us,
in his humanity and manhood; although he be always present with us in respect
of his Deity, and by his power and spirit? In which respect he has also said:
that, He will be with his Church to the end of the world. Matt. 28.2^.
You perceive then, how Christ is present, and how absent, namely, that he is
always present every where, in his Deity, but not so in his humanity or
manhood. And for further proof hereof, does not Christ Jesus say again
expressly thus: It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not
away, Io^. ^^.7.
the Comforter will not come unto you? Again he says: I leave the world and
go to the Father. And again he says: Ioh. 16.28.
Now am I no more in the world: but these are in the world, and I come to
thee. Ioh. 17.11.
Holy Father keep them in thy Name, even them whom thou have given me. What
means all this, but that Christ Jesus after his resurrection, was to ascend
into heaven, and so to go away, to depart, to leave the world, and to be (as
himself there speaks) no more in the world? Must not this needs be intended
in respect of his manhood and bodily presence? for most certain it is, that in
respect of his Deity, power, and spirit, he is with us, to the worlds end, and
for ever, as before is said. And therefore also does S. Peter witness, that in
respect of that his manhood or humanity, the Heavens must conteyne him, Act.
5.22.
until the time that all things be restored, which God has spoken by the
mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the world began. For which cause also,
we believe (according to our Creed) that from thence, he shall come to judge
both the quick and the dead. If then ever since his ascension, he be in
respect of his bodily presence and manhood, departed from the world, and in
that respect is (as himself affirms) no more in the world, but in heaven,
until the day of the general judgment, Ioh. 17.11. Act. 3.22.
as S. Peter also, and our Creed do teach us: how gross and absurd, yea what
misbeleevers, be Papists, that dare affirm him (clean contrary to his own
testimony, and the testimony of S. Peter, and the rest of the Scriptures, and
contrary also to the very Creed it self) to be still in the world in that
his manhood and bodily presence? It is high time therefore for all, to renounce
and forsake this monstrous and detestable error, if they will be right
Christians, and right believers. As for that Text where it is said: No man
ascends up to heaven; but he that descended from heaven, Ioh. 3.13.
even the son of man, which is in heaven: It is easily answered and
resolved: for most true it is, that the Son of man, Christ Jesus, was even
then in heaven, in his Deity, at such time, when he was also upon the earth,
in his humanity: So that in respect of that his Deity or Godhead, it is, that
being upon the earth, he was nevertheless also in heaven, and not in respect
of his manhood or humanity: for his manhood or humanity, or* bodily presence,
was then on the earth, and could not also be in heaven, at one and the self
same time, as is before declared. S. John says: that, Every spirit, which
confesses not, that Jesus Christ, is come in the flesh, is not of God, 1. Ioh.
4.3.
but this is the spirit of Antichrist. Now, what is it else to deny Jesus
Christ to be come in the flesh, but to deny him to be true man, and like unto
men, in all things, sin only excepted? Whilst men therefore thus deny
Christ to be come in the flesh, that is, to have all the properties of a True
man, and to be like unto other men in all things, sin only excepted: how can
they clear themselves, but that they must be enforced to yield and confess,
that they be, herein, led, not by the spirit of Christ, but by the spirit of
Antichrist? Yea whilst they thus say: that Christ is in his manhood and
natural body, present upon earth, what do they else, but deny or impugn,
not only those Articles of the Creed, viz. that Christ is ascended into
heaven, and that there he sits at the right hand of God his Father, and
that from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead? But this
Article also, that Jesus Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary, and was
incarnate and made man, of her substance? For this doubtless, is the right
Jesus Christ, in whom we are to believe: but (by this their doctrine) they
contrariwise believe in another Jesus Christ, namely in such a one, as they
affirm (by this their Transubstantiation) to be made of another substance,
namely, out of the substance of a piece of bread. And how can such a Christ,
so made of the substance of a piece of bread, be, the true Christ? Of which,
and of all other sorts of false Christ's, the true Christ Jesus himself, has
given us sufficient forewarning* Matt. 24.24.
Fifthly, they herein make their Massing Priest, after their words of
consecration uttered, to be the maker of his Maker, namely, of Jesus Christ:
And that Jesus Christ is thus made anew every day, Sacerdos est creator
creatoris sui: Qui creavit vos, dedit vobis creare se. Stella Cl^^icoru^. Sermon.
(...).
or so often* as their Mass is celebrated. How many thousand Jesus Christ's, by
this means, will they have in the world? But can any be so absurdlie impious,
as to believe or suppose, that Christ Jesus can be made, out of the substance
of a piece of bread, by a Priest by virtue of any words of consecration
uttered, or by any devise whatsoever? Can any creature possibly make his
Creator? or the thing made, make his maker? Fie on these, and all other such
senseless detestable abominations. Diverse other absurdities also of the
Papists might here be further alleged, but these before mentioned, will, I
hope, suffice, to declare, the most gross and most notorious false exposition
of the Popish Church, concerning those words of Christ (This is my Body) in
the Lords Supper, whereby they strangely suppose a Transubstantiation, and a
carnal eating of Christ his ver^e natural body; contrary to the Scriptures,
and contrary to all sense, reason, right faith, and true Religion. For ye must
learn so to expound Scripture, as that ye make all the rest of the
Scriptures, to stand and agree with that sense you set upon it, so that there
may be no repugnancie. But the sense and exposition which the Popish church
sets upon those words of Christ, (namely, This is my Body), is clearly
repugnant to other Scriptures, and even to the very Articles also of the
Creed, as well as to all sense and reason (as is before apparent): and
therefore it cannot possibly be the right sense, nor true exposition. What
remains then, but that the right and true sense and meaning of those words,
is, and must needs be, the same, which the Protestants set upon them? because
that their exposition is consonant and agreeing to the rest of the Scriptures,
and to all the Articles of the Creed, as well as to all sense and reason: and
is also suitable and correspondent to the like usual and ordinary phrase and
manner of speech, in other and former Sacraments, amongst the Jews, the old
people of God, under the old Testament: according to which manner of speech,
Christ also spoke, when he instituted this Sacrament of his Supper, under the
new Testament; calling (according to the usual Sacramental phrase) the sign
by the name of the thing signified: Which thing, I trust, is now so clear and
evident, as that none can justly any longer make any doubt or question of it.

5 But yet for the fuller discussing hereof, it will not be amiss, here to
speak a few words touching Consecration: because upon Consecration it is, that
they seem to build their before mentioned error of Transubstantiation. Let us
therefore consider what Consecration is, and what it imports, or works. To
Consecrate then, is to take a thing from the profane, or ordinary and common
use, and to destinate, or appoint it to some holy use, and end. And if we
would know, how things come to be consecrate, or sanctified, S. Paul says,
that every Creature of God, is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with thankesgiving: For it is sanctified (says he) by the word of
God, and prayer. Sanctification then, or Consecration of a thing, 1. Tim. 4 4,
5.
does here appear to be, by the institution and word of God, and by prayer,
or invocation, whereof thankesgiving is a part. And therefore the Lord Jesus,
before he brake the bread, and gave it, he Blessed, that is, he gave thanks
to his Father, that he, out of his love to men, had appointed him to be the
Redeemer, for the satisfying of his Justice, in the behalf of his elect, and
had given him authority to institute this Sacrament, in remembrance of that
his death and passion. For whereas in Matthew. 26.26. it is said, that, when
Christ had taken bread, he blessed* S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. Paul (all three
of them) as it were expounding what that means, in steed of those words (he
blessed) do say, that, He gave thanks. Mar. 14 22. Luke 22.19* 1. Cor.
11.24* By the word, blessing, then, mentioned in S. M^thew, is meant,
Thankesgiving, as by conferring him with the other three, does plainly
appear. Yea, this does also appear, even by S. Matthew himself: For whereas
S. Matthew says. That Jesus took the Bread, and when he had blessed, he
brake it, and gave it etc. he says likewise, that he took the Cup, and when
he had given thanks, he gave it etc. Mat. 26.26.27. thereby showing, that to
bless (in S. Matthew) and to give thanks, is all one. And this also serves
well, to declare and expound those other words of S. Paul, concerning the Cup,
in 1. Cor* 10.16. where he says thus: The Cup of blessing, which we bless,
is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? He calls it, the Cup of
blessing, which we bless (says Chrysostom) because when we have it in our
hands with admiration, and a certain horror of that unspeakeable gift, we
praise and bless Him, for that he has shed his blood, that we should not
remain in error, and has not only shed it, but made us all partakers of it.
And so does also Photius, and OEcumenius expound those words: The Cup of
blessing which we bless: that is (say they) which having in our hands, we
bless Him, who has graciously given us his blood, that is, we give him
thanks. Justin Martyr, toward the end of his 2. Apology, says thus: We
receive with the action of thankesgiving, the consecrated mea^e, blessed by
prayer. S. Augustine, in his third Book of the Trinity, Cap. 4. says: We
call that the body and blood of Christ Jesus, vvh^ch we receive for the
health of our souls, it being taken from the fruits of the earth, and
consecrated by mystical prayer. And Gregory the first, Bishop of Rome, in his
7. Book of Epistles, Epist. 63. says: that, The Apostles did consecrate by
prayer. Yea, Pope Innocentius the third also, in his third Book of the
Mysteries of the Mass, does himself hold, that Christ did not consecrate by
these words (Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body) but that he had
consecrated before those words were uttered. Consecration then in a Sacrament,
is of no such nature, operation, or force, as to make any change or alteration
in the substance of a thing, but only in the quality* use, or end. And this
you may very clearly and demonstrativelie perceive, by the water,
consecrated and applied in Baptism: for before it be consecrate to that use,
it is but common and ordinary water: But after it is consecrate, it is then
become another thing, namely, a sacred sign of the washing and cleansing we
have by Christ: and yet nevertheless it is still water, as touching the
substance of it* as it was before, although in the quality and use, it be
altered: So likewise is it of bread and wine, in the other Sacrament of the
Lords Supper* before Consecration, it is but ordinary and common bread, and
wine: but after Consecration, they are become holy signs, of the body and
blood of Christ, and yet are they still bread and wine, as touching the
substance of them, as before; though they be thus altered in the use, and
quality. And so says Ambrose: Sunt quae erant, and in aliud commutantur:
Ambros. de Sacram. lib. 4. cap* ^
They are the same things still (for matter and substance) which they were
before, and yet be changed into another thing (in respect of the use, and
quality.) An example, for better explications sake, and to take away all doubt
in this matter, he gives in a man, before he be consecrate, and sanctified,
and after he is sanctified: Tu ipse eras etc. Ambros de ijs qui M^ster. ca. 9.
Thou thy self vvast (faith he) (before thou vvast sanctified) but thou vvast
an old Creature* But after thou vvast sanctified, or consecrated, thou
begannest to be a new Creature. So that he is the same man still, as touching
matter and substance, after his consecration, or sanctification, that he was
before, albeit in quality, he be thus altered and changed. And this also
witnesses S. Chrysostom: Panis sanctificatus, dignus est dominici corporis
appellatione, Chrysostom. ad Casarium in Mat. hom. 15.
etsi natura panis in illo remanserit. The bread, after it is sanctified, or,
consecrated, has this dignity* to be called, the Lords Body, although (says
he) the nature of bread still remain in it. Theodoret, likewise, most
plainly tells us, that, Signa mystica, Theod. dialog. 1.2.
post sanctificationem, non recedunt a natura sua, manet enim in priori
substantia, and figura, and forma: The mystical sign^s, after sanctification,
or consecration, do not depart from their own nature, for they still remain
in their former substance, figure, and form, Yea even Gelatius himself, a
Bishop of Rome, says also: G^las. cont. E^^tych.
that after consecration, Non desinit esse substantia panis, and natura vini:
There cease not to be the substance of bread, and the nature of wine. These
so direct, and express speeches, and most evident testimonies of the ancient
times, concurring with the Scriptures, be they not sufficient to satisfy all
that be reasonable, and equal christians, that there is no transubstantiation
in this Sacrament, or real bodily presence of Christ, to the bodily Mouth of
the Receiver? For, that there is a real bodily presence of Christ, to be
apprehended by the mouth of the Soul, that is, by the faith of the Receiver,
is a thing granted, and so affirmed by S. Augustine, who expreslie says:
August. in Ioh. tract. 26. and tract. 50. and tract. 25. Ambros. in Psalm. ^* ^3.
that Faith is the mouth, vvherby we eat and drink Christ, and the hand,
which we stretch to heaven, to lay hold upon him sitting there* And so says
S Ambrose also: Fidei tactus est, qu^ tangitur Christus: It is by faith that
we touch Christ. Yea, this is so clear, as that the very Church of Rome it
self, in ancient and former times, believed herein, as we do: as is
manifest at large, in the second distinction of Consecration, and in the gloss
likewise upon the Canon hoc est: where it is said: that the consecrated bread
is called the Body of Christ, Non proprie, sed improprie, nec rei veritate,
sect significante mysterio: Not properly, but improperly, and not in the truth
of the thing, but in a mystery, signifying it. Thus then, as touching this
point, it is more then evident, that Rome is departed from that she was in
former times But hence arose (moreover) their adoration of the bread (at their
elevation) wherein most gross Idolatry is committed, inasmuch as it still
remains Bread, after consecration, as you see. And I wonder they tremble not
at this their most horrible Idolatry, so often as they think upon it, or use
it: For, even the rudest, and most barbarous Heathens, were never such gross
Idolaters, as to worship a piece of ^read, for God: Yea, even that Heathen man
Cicero, could say: Quem tam amentem esse putas, qui id quo vesc^tur, Ci^er. de
Not. Deorum.
Deum creda esse? Whom do you think to be so mad, as to believe that which
he eats to be God? Is it not then high time for all that love their own
salvation, utterly to forsake that monstrous and Idolatrous Church of Rome,
which is become thus extremely degenerate, and deformed?

6 But the Popish Church has yet further mangled, and maime^ this sacrament of
the Lords supper most audaciously, and Sacrilegiously: in that, contrary to
the Institution of Christ, and practice of the Apostolic and primitive
Church, it depriveth the Lay people of receiving any consecrated wine. As
though the Lay people might not receive as well the consecrate wine, as the
consecrate bread. Did not Christ say, Drink ye all of this? and does not S.
Paul show directly, that the Lay people in his time, Mat 26.27. 1. Cor.
11.26.27 28, 29, 30, 31.
did as well drink of that Cup, as eat of that Bread? Yea, the late Council
of Constance, does confess, that in the Primitive Church, the Lay people did
communicate in both kinds, Council Constable. sess. 13.
and received as well the wine as the bread, and yet for all that, do they
there decree against it. Must not this needs b^ the spirit of Antichrist, which
dares thus, in their Counsels, to contradict, and decree against the
Institutions of Christ, and the manifest, and confessed practice of the
primitive Church? For fear of spilling (some of them say) the Lay people may
not receive the consecrated wine: As though the Priest might not also sometimes
spill it, upon some accident, as well as they: or, as though the like
inconvenience of letting fall of the consecrated bread, by some accident, might
not as well be feared. But how comes it to pass, that the Popish Council,
and Church, takes upon them to be, herein, wiser then Christ, and all his
Apostles, and then the Primitive churches? For Christ ordained and so the
Apostolic, and Primitive churches practiced, and observed, that the Lay
people should as well drink of the consecrated wine, as eat of the consecrated
bread, without any such fear of inconvenience, or inconveniences as the
Popish church has, sithence that time, found out and devised. But they say,
that, per concomitantiam, by a concomitancie, forsooth, the blood is included
in the body of Christ* so that if the lay people receive the bread, which (say
they) after consecration, is the very natural body of Christ, they do therein
withal, receive the blood of Christ, because in the body (say they) the blood
also is included. And thus has one error begotten another with them, as is
indeed, the fashion of all errors to do: for, Vno absurdo dato, sequuntur
infinita But if this their doctrine of concomitancie be true, then by the same
reason also, it may suffice, the Priest to receive likewise the consecrated
bread only, without the wine. And why then does the Priest drink of the
consecrated wine? for, is not the blood of Christ, per concomitantiam, by their
concomitancie, as well included in the bread (which they say, is the body of
Christ) to him, as to the lay people? Can any tolerable, or allowable reason
be yielded by your Priests, or Church, for these things? May they not then all
be ashamed, thus grossly to abuse, and delude the world? But now, if that which
is confessed to be the Primitive, and Apostolic Church, administered the Lords
supper, to Lay people, in both kinds, namely, as well in wine, as in bread: How
can any suppose the Popish church, which has decreed, and observes the
clean contrary, to be herein like unto that Primitive and Apostolic Church?
And if that primitive and Apostolic Church, were (as questionless it was)
guided by the holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth: must not your Priests,
Teachers, and Church, observing, teaching, and decreeing the contrary, needs
be supposed ^o be led, not by that, but by another spirit? And what other
spirit then can it be, but the spirit of Error and of opposition to Christ,
even the spirit of Antichrist? Yea* far degenerate, even in this point also,
is the Church of Rome, from that it was in the days of Pope Gelasius, in whose
time it was decreed, Comperimus de consecra. did. 2.
that, All they should be excommunicated, that would receive but in one kind.

7 But yet a further wound also has the Papacy given to this Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, by diverting and turning it from a communion of the faithful,
into a private Mass, or into such an action, as wherein the Priest eats and
drinks alone, without any Communicants with him: the people only looking on.
Did Christ thus celebrate his Supper alone? and did the rest that were his
Disciples, only look on, and not communicate? We know, that Christ wills
them, both to eat, and to drink, at that Table, and not to be lookers on
only. And so in the Primitive, and Apostolic Churches, 1. Cor. 10.17. 1.
Cor. 11.20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25 etc.
not the Pastor alone, but the people also together with him, did communicate.
And, in very deed, what is more absurd, then to bid men to a Supper, to look
on only, and neither to eat, nor drink? S. Chrysostom complains of this
corruption, beginning to creep in, in his time: O custom (says he) O
presumption. In vain is the daily Sacrifice offered, in vain do we stand at
the Altar, Chrysostom. homil. 3. in Ephesians.
seeing no body communicates. And a little after, he says thus: The Lord
says these things to us all, who stand by heree, unwisely, and rashly: for
every one that partakes not of the Mysteries, is unwise, and rash, in standing
by. And he adds further, saying: Tell me, If a man that is bidden to a
feast, wash his hands, and be placed at the table, and yet eats not, does he
not wrong him that ^ad him? were it not better that such a one were not
present? So thou art present, thou have sung the Hymn, and in that thou have
not retired thy self with them that are unworthy, thou have made profession,
that thou art of the number of those that are vvor^hie: How then do thou
stay, and not partake of the Table? thou art therefore unvvorthy also to
partake of the Prayers. Yea, the rule even of the Church of Rome it self, in
ancient time said to be Pope Agapets (which is Did. 2. de Consecra Can.
peracta) is delivered in these words: When Consecration is finished, all that
will not be put out of the Church door, must Communicate: for so the Apostles
ordained, and so the Church of Rome observes. Mark well these words, for
thereby you see, how far differing at this day, the deformed and new Church
of Rome, is, in this point also, from that it was in former, and ancient time.
But again, can any be so besotted, as to think, that only by looking on,
he communicates, or that by the eating and drinking of another (as namely of
the Priest) himself can be fed or nourished? Can the eating or drinking of
another preserve your life, if your self neither eat nor drink? Be not such
gross impieties, and palpable absurdities, justly worthy, for ever to be
abhorred and detested.

FINIS SECVNDAE PARTIS.
THE THIRD PART of the BOOK.
CHAP. I.
That the Authority of the Church is not above the Authority of the
Scriptures: That Popish Rome, is the Whore of Babylon; and therein, of some
special spiritual Whoredoms, or Idolatries, of the Romish Church.

But yet when they further say, that the Authority of the Church is above the
authority of the holy Scriptures: what is this but to exalt men and their
authority, Plggh. hierar. lib. 1. cap 2 3 4. Cusan. Epist. 2. ad Bohemos.
Confess. Patrocen^ens. cap. 15.
above the authority of God himself, and to magnify the creature above the
creator, and to advance the wife in authority above her husband, Ephe 5 23, 24.
and his will, and commandment? The Church is the spouse of Christ, and
therefore is to be in subjection to him, as to her head and husband, as the
wife is to be in subjection to her head and husband; for so S. Paul declares.
If then the Church be, (as is evident) in subjection to Christ, it is clear,
she can claim no superiority or authority over him, or his will, or word,
in the Scriptures contained: yea, it is the note and mark of an harlot, and
dishonest woman, to challenge and usurp authority over her husband. And
therefore what does this position else prove, but that the Romish Church, is,
and must needs be, the proud, insolent, false, and dishonest Church, even the
whore of Babylon, as she is called in the Revelation of S. John? Rev. 17.18.
For what may not that Church do, or dare to do, be it never so wicked, or
ungodly, which holds her authority, to be above the authority of the
Scriptures? Is not this a door, that opens a way to all licentiousness, and
wickedness, and to devise, decree, and do, in matters concerning Religion,
whatsoever pleases her self? The right and true Church, is of another, and a
better disposition, and is ever content and desirous, to live in subjection,
and in obedience to Christ, and to his word, will, and pleasure, and accounts
that, as indeed it is, her greatest honor. And so also Christ Jesus himself
shows, that this is her chaste and godly disposition: for thus he says; My
sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, Ioh. ^^* 27, 18.
and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any pluck them out of my hands. Mark that he says, that his sheep hear
His voice, and, follow Him: and therefore they follow not others, nor their
own unbridled humors lusts, or pleasures, but desire and endeavor evermore to
obey him, and to do as he has willed and commanded them. Again, the Church
of Christ, is expressly charged to observe all those things, which Christ
Jesus her Lord, head, and husband* h^th commanded; and therefore is to keep
her self, Matt. 28.20.
within those her limits and bounds, and not licentiously to wander, or to go
beyond them. Wherefore S. Paul also says thus: that, the Lord Jesus, shall
show himself from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, 2 Thessalonians.
1.7, 8, 9, 10.
rendering vengeance unto them that know not God, and which obey not the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ: which shall be punished with everlasting perdition,
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, when he shall
come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made marvailous in all them that
believe. Do you not here likewise see, how great subjection and obedience unto
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and to his word, and will, is required of all men?
Yea, what great peril, and punishment, they are to undergo, which will not
subject themselves unto it: namely, that such shall be punished with
everlasting perdition? Take heed therefore, and with as much good have as ye
can, declare your subjection and obedience to the Gospel, and word of God, in
the sacred Scriptures contained, without any further neglect of it, or
opposition to it. As for the reason that some make, that because the Church
tells us, that This is the Scripture; therefore the Authority of the Church
is above the Scripture: it is but a very weak and an idle reason; and no
better then if it should be said, that you had not known that this were the
King, but that such a man told you, and showed him to you: Ergo this man is
above the King. Were not this a very ridiculous and a most absurd inference?
The Church is, by her Ministry, bound, and according to her duty, ought, to
tell, testify, and declare the word of God, and what Scriptures be canonical,
and what not, and to teach the truth in those Scriptures contained: but this
office shows rather service and subjection in the Church, then any
Soveraigntie or Superiority, in her, above the Scriptures. Scholars in a
School, can tell a stranger, who is the Master of the School: yet is not
their authority therefore, above the authority of their Master. Whilst then
the Popish Church holds, that her authority, is above the authority of the
Scriptures, it is manifest, she is not guided (as she vanteth) by the holy
Ghost, but, contrariwise, with a spirit of pride, and licentiousness, and of
opposition against God, and his authority, word and will in those his
Scriptures declared. And what then can such a spirit be, but the spirit, in
very deed, of Antichrist? and consequently, what can such a Church be, but the
erring and Antichristian Church?

2 For further proof whereof, give me leave now, to show unto you, that The
Popish City of Rome (from whence, as from their mother Church, all Papists
receive their bane) is that very woman, even that Whore of Babylon (as I said
before), Rev. 17.1.
which is mentioned in the Revelation of S. John: with whom the Kings of the
earth have committed fornication, Verse 2.
and with the wine of whose fornication, the Inhabitants of the earth, have
been made drunken. Verse 4.
Which Woman, is there further said to be arrayed in purple, and scarlet, and
gilded with gold, and precious stones, and to have also, outwardly, a Cup of
gold in her hand (full nevertheless, within, of abominations and filthiness,
of her fornications), and all this, to entise and allure Lovers and friends
unto her. Now, if we would know certainly, and assuredly, who this woman was,
which S. John thus saw in vision, the Angel tells us precisely, saying: Rev.
17. v. 18.
The woman which thou saw, is the great City, that reigns over the
Kings of the earth: But the great City, that then reigned over the Kings of
the earth, in the days of S. John, and had the Empire, was not Constantinople,
nor any other city, but only the city of Rome, as all men know; and
therefore only the city of Rome, and not any other city, is, and must needs
be there meant, under the name of the woman, there otherwise called the Whore
of Babylon. But, for more explication who this woman was, it is there further
said: that, there were seven hills or Mountains, vvhereon the woman sat: Now
it is clear, Rev. 17. ver. 9.
that there was, then, no city in the world, noted and known, by these seven
hills or mountains, but Rome only; and therefore does Virgil say of it:
Pulcherrima Roma, Geor^
Septem quae una sibi muro circumdedit arces, That Rome only, has seven hills
within her wall. For which cause also, (...) lib. 5. de ^^ng lat. calls it
(...). Eleg* 10. lib. 3.
it is commonly termed Septicollis, that is, the seven hild City. And
Propertius also says of it, that it is: Septem urbs alta Iugis, toti quae
praesidet orbi; A City high with seven Hills, that rules over all the world.
The names also of the seven hills, are to this day known, namely, Palatinus,
Caelius, Capitolinus (otherwise called, Ianiculus), Aventinus, Quirinalis,
Viminalis, and Esquilinus. Bellarmine him^selfe lib. 3. de Pont. Romans cap. 13.
confesses per Meretrice^ intelligi Roman, that by the whore of Babylon Rome is
understood. and lib. 2. c. 2. and Lessius page 73. and 82. and Riber. in Apoc.
14 n. 27.28.29.30. and Viegas in Apoc. 17 comment. 1. sect. 3. Maluenda de
Antich. lib. 4. c. 3. etc.
Seeing then there was, in that time of S. John, no city in the world, that
was noted and known by the seven Hills, and which also in those days, reigned
over the Kings of the earth, and had the Empire, but Rome only: even by these
two marks and demonstrations conjoined, it is infalliby manifest, that not
any other city in the world, but Rome only, is, and must needs be the Woman
and whore of Babylon, there described. And this is so clear and evident, that
the Papists themselves confess it to be Rome. But then for an evasion,
Bellarmine, and some other Papists, say, that, thereby only Heathenish Rome,
and such as it was in the time of Infidelity* and before it embraced the
Gospel and Religion of Christ, is signified and intended: but how untrue and
vain an evasion this is, let all men judge, that have any judgment or
indifferency in them. For first, why is that woman, that is, the city of
Rome, there called an Whore, but to show, that she was once an honest, chaste,
and obedient spouse of Christ, and that she afterward revolted and became an
Whore, and so fell from that obedience, says, and true Religion, which she
had formerly professed, and embraced? For is any called an Whore, but she
that was once an honest woman? And does not that word, Whore, import, that she
was now at this time, when she thus became an Whore, departed from that her
former faith, and fidelity? And indeed, most true it is, that the city of
Rome, did once embrace the faith and religion of Christ, and was an honest,
dutiful, and true spouse, unto him, as S. Paul himself, Romans 1.7*
and other Ecclesiastical Histories do witness: But, afterward, in process
of time, Ambition, Pride, Covetousness, and Licentiousness, growing in the
Church, and Church^men* (and an Apostasy, or departure, from the right faith
and religion, 2. (...)* 3 etc.
being also foretold to come into the world, for the neglect and contempt of
the Gospel) it came to pass, that the once faithful and Christian city of
Rome, departed from that her former true faith and obedience, and became an
Harlot, or Whore: so that now, and long sithence, it may be said of Rome, as
God himself sometime spoke of Jerusalem, Esa. 1.21.
saying; How is the faithful City, become an Harlot? It being therefore
manifest, and a thing confessed, even by the Papists themselves, that by this
Woman, the city of Rome is intended: thereupon must needs be further granted,
that, inasmuch as the Woman afterward became an Whore, that is, that, Rome,
afterward became an Adulteress, against Christ, her head, and husband; not the
Heathen and Infidel city of Rome, but Rome, after it had once received the
Christian faith and religion, and afterward fell from it, to follow her own
false doctrine and religion, is to be understood. For how could the city of
Rome whilst it was Heathenish, and before it ever embraced Christianity, be
properly or rightly termed, an Harlot, or Whore, that is, a violater or breaker
of any faith, formerly plighted by her unto Christ Jesus, when as yet (whilst
she was Heathen) she had plighted no such faith unto him? The city of Rome
therefore, which S. John thus saw, beforehand in vision, to be such a one as
should afterward become an Whore, and a great Whore, even the whore of
Babylon, (as she is entitled) must needs be intended of Papal, or, Popish
Rome: for with the Heathen Rome (that had never betrothed her self to Christ,
and consequently could, for that time, be no Whore or violater of her faith
unto him) it has no fit or apt coherence and agreement. Secondly, as touching
the Heathenish estate of Rome, in that respect, and for that purpose, S. John
needed not any Revelation at all: for he knew it otherwise, sufficiently,
(even by his own banishment into Pathmos, and other daily experiments) that
Rome, was then Heathenish, and governed by Heathen Emperors, and was, by that
means, a great persecutor of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus: but that the
same city, should be afterward governed by Popes, and so fall into the
spiritual whoredom of Popery, that he could not foresee, or foreknow, or
foretell, without a Revelation, and therefore has he a Revelation given him of
that matter. And hereat the Text also says; that He vvondred, and that, with
great marvel. This great vvondering of S. John, also, Thirdly, Rev. 17.^.
declares what manner of Rome, this was: for, even thereby likewise appears,
that not the Heathen city of Rome, (at whose persecutions, they being so
frequent and common in those days, he had no cause at all to wonder) but the
once true Christian city of Rome, which afterward revolted from that her true
Christianity, to her Antichristian and persecuting courses, (whereat there
was, indeed, just cause to wonder) is the thing there meant and intended.
Fourthly, Rome governed by the Emperors, is, in that Chapter, distinguished
from Rome as it was afterward governed by the Popes: yea, Rome, as it was
governed by the seven heads, or principal Rulers of it (from the beginning of
it, to the end) is there decyphered. For this whore, or, vvhorish woman, is
not only there said, to sit upon a scarlet colored beast (with which kind of
color, Rev. 17.3*
the Romish Popes, as well as the Roman Emperors, were and are delighted, as
appears in the Decret. did. 96.) but it is there further said: that this
beast, that is, this State, or, Dominion (for so by the Beast, is understood, a
State or Dominion, as afterward is showed) which thus bare up and supported
this woman, (the city of Rome) had seven Heads, and ten Horns: The seven
Heads, Rev. 17.3.7.
be, in the Text it self, expounded to be, seven Hills or mountains, which
are before named and mentioned: Rev. 17 9.
And they be also there further said, to be seven Kings, that is, seven sorts
of principal or sovereign Rulers, whereby Rome has been governed; These
five, does Livy thus reckon, initio libri sexti And Messala Corvinus lib. de
progen. August. Caesar. And C^^nelius Tacitus, Annaliu^ initio, lib. 1. And
Onuphrius also praefat (...) Fast. lib. (...) Augustinum. R^v. 17.10.
namely, by Kings, Consuls, Decemvirs, Dictators, Tribunes Military with
consular Authority, Emperors, Popes. Five of these, were fallen (says the
Text) in the days of S. John; namely, Kings, Consuls, Decemvirs, Dictators,
Tribunes: and one is (says he) that is, the government by Emperors: For
then, in S. John's time, was Rome governed by Emperors: and one is yet to come,
(says the Text) that is, the government by Popes. For as yet, the government
of the city of Rome by Popes, was not come to pass in the days of S. John,
but came in, afterward. And for the better comfort of Gods people, that should
be molested, disquieted, and persecuted, by this seventh head, that is, by the
government of Rome by Popes* it is said, that he shall continue but a short
space: For although the government of Rome by Popes, be and has continued
diverse hundredth years, which may seem to flesh and blood, and to a carnal and
worldly understanding, to be very long, yet in Gods reckoning and esteem, it
is but short, and of little continuance; 2. Pet. 3.8, 9. Psalm. 90.14.
inasmuch as, a thousand years, with God, are but as one day, as S. Peter, and
the Psalmist, do both witness: as also they are said to be but short, in
respect of Eternity, which Gods children do chiefly respect, and in comparison
whereof they set light by, and little esteem all worldly things. As for the
ten Horns, they be also expressly expounded in the Text it self to be
ten Kings, Rev. 17.12.16, 17.
which having formerly given the help and power of their Kingdom unto the
Beast, and in defense of the Whore, should afterward dislike, abhor and hate
her, make her desolate and naked, and burn her with fire. Who these ten
Kings be in particular, the Event will best declare, when this Prophecy, in
this point, shall be actually accomplished. In the mean time, observe, that
this very Beast with seven heads, and ten horns, which S. John saw in
vision, is now, at this time, in this chapter of Rev. 17. considerable as he
was the eight head, and one of the seven: for so it is directly manifest by
the very words of the Text it self, saying thus to S. John: The Beast that
thou have seen, Rev. 17.11.
was, and is not etc. And the Beast that was, and is not, Rev. 17.3.7.8.11.
(...). Is octavus est. s. Rex. he is the eight, that is, the eight King, or
the eight head.
is the Eight, and is one of the Seven. You see then, that this Beast, with
seven heads, and ten horns, was now at this time, much wasted in the number
of his heads, they all being spent gone, and abolished, except only, this
One, which is the E^ght, and one of the seven: for the Whole Beast is here
reckoned, and expreslie affirmed to be at this time only, he which was this
Eight Head. Let us then consider, who is the eight Head of the Beast, that is,
of the Roman State, or State of the City of Rome. The Text it self tells
us, that it is one of the seven. And indeed it is one of the seven, and the
very seventh. For. Popes, who be the seventh Head, (whereby that City of
Rome, now is, and of long time has been governed) is also the eight: because
the Pope comprehend^^^ in himself, a double Princehood, or Soveraignetie: For
he, (...) (as Bellarmine, and other Papists affirm of him) Summus Princeps
spiritualis, and, Summus Princeps temporalis* Bellarm. de Rom pont. lib. 5. ca.
1.
a Sovereign Spiritual Prinee, and, a Sovereign Temporal Prince. And the one,
namely, his temporal principality or Soveraignetie, some of them say, he
has directly from Christ: and othersome of them (as namely Bellarmine, and
those that take part with him) do hold, that he has it not directly, but
indirectly, and in ordine ad spiritualia, as they speak: that is, Bellarm. de
Romans pont. lib. 5. cap* 6.
so far forth, as it is for the good of Souls, and for the advancement of a
Catholic cause. But whether directly, or indirectly, it is agreed by them
all, that he has it. And consequently, Popes, in respect of this their double
Soveraignetie, appear to be both the seventh and eight head of the Beast. By
the power of which two Swords, which he has gotten, in the highest, and
supreamest degree, it is that he is the better able, and very sufficiently
furnished, to be (as he is also called) the Bea^t, that bears up, or
supporteth that Whore of Babylon. Yea, Rev. 17 3^7.
all those six heads of Rome (namely, Kings, Consuls, Decemvirs, Tribunes,
Dictators, and ^mperors) being gone and past (for the Emperors also have ceased
long since, to have any headship, or Sovereign rule there) what remains,
but that the Popes (who have succeeded the Emperors, at Rome, and be the
present Head of it, bearing the Soveraignetie there) be, and must needs be,
the seventh, and therewithal the eight and last Head of the Beast? All this
while then, I trust ye perceive, that seeing Rome is here discribed, only as
it was under the government of him that is the eight Head, therefore it cannot
possibly be intended of Heathen Rome: for Rome, whilst it was heathen, was
under the government of the heathen Emperors, and far remote from the times of
the government of it, by this eight Head. Yea, seeing Rome is here discovered,
and described as it was under the Popes, who be the seventh, and the eight, and
so the last head of that City: It must needs be granted, that not Heathen, but
Papal Rome, is there clearelie, and undoubtedlie intended. And it is there
further said to be the Beast, Rev. 17.8.
that was, and is not, and yet Is: because, whilst the Emperors were Heads of
Rome, the Imperial, and supreme Authority, was, in the Emperors: but
afterward, the Emperors ceased to be heads of Rome, or to have any
Soveraignetie or Supreamacie there, and then it was not in them. But, in
conclusion, the Popes became the Head of Rome, exercising there the
Soveraignetie; and then it was in them, and so continues, and yet is: So that
in respect of the diverse changes, and mutations that it had, it is said to be
the Beast that was, and Is not, and yet Is. Fiftlie, remember, that it is
confessed by the Adversaries themselves, Bellarm. de Romans pont. lib. 2. c. 2.
Less. page 72. Rib. in Apoc. 14.11.27, 28, 29, 30. V^^g. in Apoc. 17 com. 1.
sec. 3. M^luend. de Anti^h. lib. 4. c. 3. Rev. 1^.5. 2. These. 2.7. etc.
that by Babylon, mentioned in the Revelation, the City of Rome is understood:
Whereupon must further be granted, that it is that Babylon, that is, that
Rome, in whose forehead was a name written, A Mystery etc. which mystery, S.
Paul calls, A Mystery of Iniquity: And it is so called, because it should
hardly be discerned to be Iniquity, inasmuch, as it should outwardly carry
such a goodly face, pretense, and show of piety, sanctity, and christianity
with it. But the Heathen City of Rome, had not this mystical, hidden, and
covert Iniquity in it, but professed open enmity, and direct hostility
against Christ, and christianity: and therefore also, not the Heathen and
Infidel Rome, but the Papal or, Popish Rome, is, and must needs be there
intended. Sixthly, the Babylon, that is, the Rome, there spoken of, is said, to
have Merchants that sold their wares, and amongst the rest of their
merchandises, and wares, there is express mention made, not only of temporal
commodities, Rev. 18.11, 12, 13. etc. (...).
and of the Bodies of men, but of spiritual also, namely, even of the Souls
of men: that they also are there to be boght and sold. For there it a plain and
evident distinction, in the text it self, betweeen the Bodies and Souls of
men, and therefore they must not be confounded, or supposed all one. Now then, I
pray tell me, did ever heathen Rome use this trade, of merchandising men's
Souls? or, in what other Rome, then the Popish, have the souls of men bin
bought and sold? For, be not their Priests, Jesuits, Friars, and such other of
that counterfeit holy order, the men that are employed, as Merchants and
Factors, in such wicked merchandises? Yea, does not every (...) among them,
take upon him to forgive sins, very boldli^? I know, that the Ministers of
Christ, have power and authorite given them, to remit, and forgive sins: But
these Priests of theirs, be not the Ministers of Christ (whatsoever they
pretend) but the Ministers of Antichrist: and therefore they have no such
authority from Christ, to forgive sins, but do only cosen and abuse men's
souls therein. For the Pope, from whom they derive their authority, and
ordination to that their Priesthood, is the very grand Antichrist, as does
already, but yet more fully afterward, in good measure, shall appear. And
yet, even the authority also which Christ's Ministers themselves have received
herein, is to forgive sins, not absolutely, and as pleases themselves, but
ministerially only, and declaratively, and that to such persons, as by warrant
from Gods word be allowed to receive it: that is to say, they are to declare
and pronounce remission of sins, to all and every such person, or persons, as
unfainedlie believe in Jesus Christ, as in their whole and only Savior and
Redeemer, renouncing utterlie, all confidence in their own merits, and
righteousness, and together with a true and livelie faith, have an earnest
sorrow and repentance for their sins formerlie past, and a purpose and
endeavor of amendment for the time to come. And so S. Hierome (upon Matthew.
16.) expounds it, and says: that the Ministers of Christ have received power
to bind, and to loose, that is, (says he) to show or declare, who they be
that be bound, or loosed, in the sentence of God, and before his Tribunal, and
Judgment seat* And so do the Schoolmen also interpret it: and in all reason
it must be so. For if any Minister shall declare or pronounce remission of
sins, to an ungodlie, and impenitent, or unbeleeving person, or to any
whosoever, whom Gods word does not warrant remission of sins unto, every man
will grant, that such a one has not remission of sins at Gods hand,
notwithstanding the Ministers such pronouncing of remission of them. So that,
if they will have that to be bound in heaven, which they do bind on earth,
and that to be loosed in heaven, which they do loose on earth, they must be
careful to pronounce, both remission, and reteyning of sins, to such persons
only, as they be due unto, by the warrant of Gods word, For if they shall
bind the godly, penitent, and believing Soul, whom God loses, and
absolveth: or if they shall loose or absolve, the wicked, ungodlie, impenitent,
and unbeleeving person, whom God, by the tenor of his word, binds, and
forgiveth not: such binding and loosing, is not warranted, nor ratified in
heaven. Howbeit, most unreasonable, and unsatiable has been the covetous
merchandising, of men's souls, in the Popish Rome, not only this way, and by
buying and selling of Pardons, and Indulgences; but by buying and selling also
of Popedomes, Bishoprics, Cardinalships, Abbathies, Benefices, and such like.
Yea, from whence else arose the Proverb, so long used in Popery, viz. No
penie, no Pater noster, but from the intolerable greedy covetousness of the
Popish Priests, and Clergy, who would do nothing without money, and for money
seemed to do any thing? So that these Romish Merchants be those, 2. Pet
2.1.2^3. Claud. Espenc. in Tit. 1.
that through covetousness, with fained words, do merchandise men, as S,
Peter foretold they should; and as Claudius Espencaelus himself declares. But
moreover, whilst those their filthy Stews, be by public authority allowed
or tolerated amongst them, for rent, or money: do they not sell and
merchandise, both bodies and souls of men and women? Be not also Masses,
Trentals, Dirges, Requiems, Orizons, and Prayers, deliverance from supposed
Purgatory pains, the supposed merits of the Saints and Martyrs, the merits of
Christ, dispensations against Gods word, yea, and the Joys of heaven, and all
to be bought and sold in the Popish Church? S. Bernard (treating of the Psalm,
which begins, Whoso dwells) speaks on this manner, of that Church: The
dignities and promotions of the Church, are sought after, for filthy lucres
sake, and to keep revell-rout withal: and for these roumes, and their
revenues, they labor and contend in very shameless manner. And again, in
his Sermon of the Conversion of Paul, treating of the government of the
Church, under the Pope of Rome, he utters the like matter. And upon the
Canticles, Sermon 33. speaking further of the Romish Prelates, and Clergy, he
says thus of them: They bear out themselves (says he) i^ an honorable
port, with the goods of the Church: whereunto notwithstanding, themselves
bring no credit, or worship at all. Hence comes that whorish tricking, that
Stage-like attire* that Princelike pomp, which daily we see in them. Hence
proceeds the gold they use, in their Bridles, Saddles, and Spurs, insomuch as
their Spurs are more glittering, then their Altars. Hence came their stately
Tables, their variety of Dishes, and qu^ffing Cups. Hence issued their
Iunk^tting Bankets, their Drunkenness, and Surfeits. Hence followed their
Viols, Harps, and Shawmes. Hence flovved their Cellars, and Pantries, so
stuffed with vvines, and Viands of all sorts. Hence gat they their Lee pots,
and painting Boxes: And hence had they their Purses, so well lined with
coin. Oh, such men they will needs be, and yet they are our great Masters in
Israel, as Deanes, Archdeacons, Bishops, and Archbishops: These works of
theirs, are little inferior to that filthiness, which they commit in
Darkness. And in his 4. Book, De Consideratione, unto Eugenius, Bishop of
Rome, after that he has described and detested the pomp of Romish Bishops,
he shuts up the matter, in these words, saying thus unto him: Herein thou
shevvest thy self to have succeeded, not Peter, but Constantine the Emperor.
Peter is he, who never knevv, what belonged to such solemn showing of
himself abroad in braveries of precious stones, or silks, or gold, or riding
upon a white Palfrey, or being guarded with a troop of attendants, etc.
Agreeably also whereunto speaks S. Hillary (contra Auxentium) of the state of
Antichrist, saying thus: These fellows, do ambitiously affect the continuance
and maiestical port of the secular power: and so think to uphold the
flourishing estate of the Church, by a show of vvorldly Pomp. Again, he
says: They make great account of this, to be greatly accounted of in the
world. And therefore does S. Bernard, again, in his Epistle 230, further make
this accusation, and exclamation, against those Bishops of Rome, saying thus
unto them: At first, indeed, ye began to play the Lords over the Clergy, 1.
Pet. ^.3.
contrary to the counsel of Peter: And within a while after, 2. Cor. 1.24.
contrary to the advice of Paul (Peter's fellow-Apostle) ye would have dominion
over the faith of all men. But ye stay not there, ye have taken upon you
more, namely, to have a peremptory power in religion it self. What more
remains, wherein ye migh further encroach, except ye will go about to bring
the very Angels also, under your subjection etc. Now, how should all this pomp,
and pride, in the Pope and Popish Clergy* and so much licentiousnes withal
permitted to the people of their Church, be maintained and upheld, without this
covetous and greedy kind of merchandising? Who then does not see, that this
Rome mentioned in the Revelation, to be such a one, as did merchandise the
souls of Men, must needs be intended of Popish Rome, and not of Heathen Rome?
Rev 18.15.
For all men know, that the Heathen Rome, never used this kind of Trade,
namely, of merchandising men's souls. Seventhly, the Rome there mentioned, is
showed to be such a one as caused or made the Kings and inhabitants of the
earth, Rev. 14.8. Rev. 17.2. Rev. 13.16.
to drink of the wine of her fornication, that is, of the pleasant seeming,
but indeed filthy and poisoned Religion, and so to take upon them the Mark of
the Beast: But the Heathenish Rome, where she conquered, and prevailed, and
brought people in subjection under her, urged not nor enforced her religion,
upon those nations or people, which she subdued, but gave leave unto them
still to retain and hold that religion of their own, which formerly they had;
De Pet. and Paul. S^r^^. 1.
as even Leo Bishop of Rome, himself declares, and as is apparent by the
country of the Jews, and by other countries also, which she brought into
subjection. Whereupon follows, that not the Heathenish Rome, which allowed
the religion of other countries beside her own, but the Papal Rome, which
allows no other religion but her own, is, and must needs be there intended.
Eighthly, the Babylon, that is, the Rome, there mentioned, is such a Rome that
shall be so desolated and destroyed, as that it shall never be builded again,
or inhabited any more, as is very fully evident by the 18. chapter of the
Revelation: And this is so clear, that Suarez himself confesses and teaches
it. Rev. 18.14.21, 22, 23. Suarez. lib. 5. cap. 7. nu. 11. and cap. 21. nu. 6.
But the Heathenish Rome, governed by Heathen Emperors, was never yet so
destroyed: yea, after that the city of Rome was destroyed by the Goths, and
Vandals, and others, yet it was rebuilded again and reinhabited, and as yet it
continues, a city builded and inhabited, to this day. The Rome therefore,
that is here described and showed to be such a Rome, as shall be so desolated
and destroyed, as that it shall never be inhabited any more by men, cannot
possibly be imagined to be Heathen Rome, but contrariwise, must needs be
supposed that which is now the Papal or Popish Rome: for there is no Heathen
Rome remaining so to be destroyed. I hope therefore by this time, ye fully
perceive, that it is not the Heathen Rome (as Bellarmine and some other of your
Teachers, would blindfold the world) but the Papal, or Popish Rome, which in
that place of the Revelation of S. John* is intended and described. Yea
further, if ye would have Heathen Rome to be there described, then must ye
make Antichrist to be, come, in the days and times of the Heathen Emperors:
which is contrary to your own positions, and opinions, who say and hold
(though most untruly) that he is not yet come. Lastly, remember, that these
things which be mentioned concerning the Whore of Babylon, be brought in, and
mentioned, Rev. 11.15. Rev. 17.1.
after that the seventh Angel had blown his Trumpet: and therefore also, were
long after the time of the Heathen Emperors.

An Appendix to the former Chapter.
NOw because Popish Rome is so directly affirmed to be an Whore, and a great
Whore, and the mother of whoredoms, and abominations of the earth: not to
speak any more of her gross bodily whoredoms and filthinesses, wherein she
does excel: give me leave here to speak a few words of some of her spiritual
whoredoms and adulteries, that is to say, of some of her Idolatries, that so
the truth of this matter may the better appear. First then as touching her
most detestable Idolatry, committed in adoring and worshipping of a piece of
bread, I mean their consecrated bread, in stead of the true God, that made
heaven and earth, I have before spoken, and I do here only put you in
remembrance of it again, that ye may for ever hereafter tremble, and fear to
commit it. For whereas ye say, that ye take it not for bread any longer after
consecration, but for Jesus Christ his very natural body, by way of
Transubstantiation, consider that, that will not be sufficient to clear you:
yea, it is before showed unto you, that in so taking it, ye do utterly and
most grossly mistake, contrary not only to all sense and reason, but
contrary to all right faith and true religion also* And therefore your sin
of a most abominable Idolatry, cannot be so execused, but is rather so much the
more aggravated by such an untrue and a most ungodly construction and
supposition. Aug. de doctrine. Christiana lib. 3. cap. 9. and 10. and 16.
Ea demum est miserabilis animae servitus, signa pro rebus accipere: That is
(says S. Augustine) a miserable servitude of the soul, to take the signs,
for the things signified by them.

2 A second Idolatrous point in the Popish Church, is the making of Images or
visible forms of God. For what? Is not God a spirit? Ioh. 4.24.
How then can any fashion him by any bodily shape, or visible likeness? Is
he not also an eternal and invisible Spirit? Ioh. 1.18.
What man then can make an Image and visible similitude of him that is eternal,
and whom he never saw? Again, is not God incomprehensible, and infinite? Do
not I fill heaven and earth, Iere. 23.24.
says the Lord? And does not King Solomon say: 1. Kin 8.27.
That the heaven of heavens, are not able to conteyne him? And yet will silly
men, in the vanity of their foolish thoughts, presume to comprehend so
almighty and incomprehensible a Majesty, within the narrow compass of an
Image made by themselves? S. Paul shows it to be the error of the Heathen, to
take upon them, to make Images of God, and calls them fools for their
labor: When they professed themselves to be wise, they became fools (says
he): Romans 1.22.23.
for they turned the glory of the incorruptible God, to the similitude of an
Image of a corruptible man, and of birds, and of four footed beasts, and of
creeping things. If the Heathens were counted and called, Fools, (as ye see
they were) for taking upon them to make Images or visible similitudes of the
invisible and incorruptible God, and justly did deserve to be so called and
reputed for that high indignity, and dishonor, offered to so great and
incomparable a Majesty: what ought Papists to think of themselves, in this
case? Notwithstanding they say, they do it, for a remembrance, and to put them
in mind of God, and notwithstanding whatsoever devotion, or good intent or
meaning they pretend. For no doubt, even those Heathens likewise pretended a
devotion, and a good intent, and meaning in this matter, as well as Papists:
otherwise they would never have done it. But yet further, even God himself
does expressly dislike, that any should be so bold as to attempt to make any
Image or visible shape of him at all; reproving the Jews, for so doing, and
saying for that end and purpose, thus: Who is like unto me? And again he
says: Esaias 44.7.
To whom will ye make me like, or make me equal, or compare me that I
should be like him? Esaias 46.5.
All they that make an Image (says he) are vanity, and their delectable
things shall nothing profit. Esaias 44.9.
And again he says: All that are of the fellowship thereof, Esaias 44.11.
shall be confounded: for the workmen themselves are men. In vain therefore,
is that distinction, ye have, between an Idol and an Image, saying: That, an
Idol, is, of a false or fained thing, or which revera is not, or has no being
at all: and that, an Image, is of a true thing, or of such a thing as revera
is. For, you see by the premises, that even the portraiture or fashioning of a
true thing, as namely, even of the true God, by any similitude or likeness
whatsoever made by men, is utterly condemned. Yea, S. Stephen also confuteth
that distinction: for, even the golden Calfe, which the Israelites made,
although they made it to worship the true God by, is by him expressly called,
Act. 7 41. (...).
an Idol, Act. 7.41. Again, (...) graece formam sonat: ab eo, per
diminutionem, (...), deductum, aeque apud nos, formulam facit. Igitur, Tertull.
lib. de Idolat. cap. 3.
omnis forma, vel formula, Idolum, se dici exposcit. Idos in Greek (says
Tertullian) signifies a form, or figure: from whence the diminutive* Idolon,
is derived: which signifies, a little form or figure. Every form therefore,
or figure, requires to be called an Idol. Howsoever then, in French, or
English speech, the words, Idol and Image, may, by reason of use and custom,
sometime differ: yet in the Greek tongue from whence the word, Idol, is
originally derived, there appears to be no such d^fference. But hereof there
needs not to be any further dispute, because God himself has directly
forbidden, not only Idols, but all Similitudes also, or, Likenesses,
whatsoever, made and erected by men, in the way of Religion. Thou shall make
thee, Exodus 20.4.
(says he) no graven Image, nor any similitude of things that are in heaven
above, nor that are in the earth beneath, nor that are in the waters
underneath the Earth. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve
them. In which words, you see two things directly enioined: the one, that no
man presume to make any Images or similitudes, of God: the other, that if he
have made any such Image or similitude, that he proceed not further in
sinning, by bowing down to them, or serving them. Agreeably whereunto, is
likewise that which Moses spoke, as it were expounding that Commandment unto
the Israelites, and saying thus unto them: The Lord spoke unto you out of the
midst of the fire, Deuteronomy. 4.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18
and ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude, save a voice:
Then he declared unto you his Covenant, which he commanded you to do, even
the Ten Commandments, and vvrote them upon two Tables of stone. And the Lord
commanded me that same time, that I should teach you ordinances, which ye
should observe in the land vvhither ye go to possess it: Take therefore good
heed unto your selves, (for ye saw no Image in the day that the Lord spoke
unto you, in Horeb* out of the midst of the fire) that ye corrupt not your
selves, and make not a graven Image, or representation of any figure, whether
it be the likeness of male, or female the likeness of any beast that is on
the earth, or the likeness of any feathered soul that flies in the air, or
the likeness of any thing that creeps on the earth, or the likeness of any
fish that is in the waters beneath the earth. Mark well this reason of Moses,
that because they only heard a voice of God, but saw no Image or Similitude,
of him, therefore they should take heed that they be not so presumptuous, as to
make any visible Image or similitude of him. Theodoret also says: Theod in
Deu^. quaest. 1.
Deus ab ijs fieri, qui u^l^us creaturae imagine, effingunt Creatorem: that
they make gods, which fashion the Creator, by the image or likeness of any
creature. And S. Augustine says likewise: that, Dei praecepto prohibetur
aliqua, in figmentis hominum, Dei similitudo: August Ep. 119. ad Iannar.
By Gods commandment is forbidden, any similitude of God, devised by men.
Although therefore ye allege and say, that God in ancient time, appeared in
the similitude of a Man; and that the Holy Ghost also appeared upon Christ, in
the similitude of a Dove; all this makes nothing for you: for God might
appear in what similitude he pleased; and who shall or can forbid him, by any
law, to do whatsoever he pleases? But he has given a law, and a commandment
to us (his creatures) whereby we stand bound (though he be free) tha^ we
shall not make any Image, or, similitude of him: and therefore our duty is,
and accordingly our care must be, to do as he has enioined and commanded us,
and not licentiously, in matters concerning him and his religion, to devise,
invent, and do as we list our selves.

3 But they not only make Images, or visible shapes, of the every where
present, invisible, and incomprehensible God: but they proceed further in this
their boldness, and do also worship God in, or, by, those Images, after that
they have made them. It was one great wickedness, to be so audacious as to
make an Image, or similitude of God, and it is another to worship him after
that sort, in or by an Image after it is made. So this is a third point of
Idolatry, wherein the Popish Church is intolerablie faulty. For, God will be
worshipped as himself has prescribed in his word, and not according to men's
fancies and devises. Yea S. Paul expressly condemns all ethelothreskeian,
that is, vvill-worship, Col. 2.23.
or worshipping of God according to men's pleasures and conceits. And therefore,
Vetuit Deus, non solum Imaginem aliquam adorari, sed etiam seipsum adorari in
Imagine: Abulens. in Deuteronomy. 4.
God has forbidden not only an Image to be worshipped, but himself also to
be worshipped, in an Image, says Abulensis. Agreeably whereunto, S, Ambrose
also says: Ambr. Epist. 31. ad Valentinian.
Non vult se Deus in lapidibus coli: God will not have himself to be
worshipped in stones: For (as Christ himself also teaches) God is a spirit,
and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth. Ioh. 4.24.
Yea, their doings in this point, be as gross Idolatry, as was that of the
Israelites in the time of Moses, Exodus 32.1, 2, 3, 4. etc.
when they together with Aaron the high Priest, made the golden Calfe, and
worshipped God in that Image, which themselves had made. For ye must not
think them to be so senseless, or sottish, as that they did believe, that
very Image, it self to be God. I hope ye will suppose, that Aaron the high
Priest, being one of them, and the rest being the people of God, that had so
lately, even a little before, heard God speaking unto them, were at least as
wise as ye are, to know, that the Image which themselves had made, could not
be God: and therefore albeit they fell down before that Image, yet they
worshipped not the very Image for God, but God in the Image, as ye likewise
say ye do. Your cases then being both alike, how can ye choose but confess,
that yours is as plain and as flat Idolatry, as was theirs? The Scripture
calls all Idols, or, Images, that are made to worship God in, by the name of
Gods: thereby declaring, how odious a thing in Gods sight this is: whilst he
accounts it, a forsaking of him the true God, and a betaking of themselves to
other gods, to deal with him in that sort; taking it for no worshipping of him
at all, whatsoever men pretend, or say they do intend, in that case. And
indeed when GOD will have no such worshipping of him, in and by an Image, but
rejects and refuses to take it, for any worship of him: the worship that in
that case is performed, then remains and rests (as it must needs) wholly,
and entirely upon the Image it self: For which cause it is, that they are
called Gods, as I said before. And therefore also does God, bring in the people
of Israel, after the making of that their Image, and their intending to worship
him in that sort, as if they had said, These be thy gods, O Israel, Exodus 2^ ^^.
which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. For, in Gods esteem, they
worshipped not him, nor offered unto him, but worshipped their Moulten Calfe,
and offered thereunto, Psalm. 106.20.
whatsoever they pretended, or intended. For, that Aaron, the high Priest, and
the rest of the people of Israel, did, for their parts, intend to worship, by
that means, the true God, which brought them out of the land of Egypt:
besides these words, Nehem. 9.18.
which declare so much: it is further manifest, by that speech of Aaron, which
he uttered, saying: To morrow, shall be the holy day unto Jehovah: For
thereby is evident (inasmuch, Exo^* 32.4, 5. Ferus the Jesuit confesses and
teaches, that the Israelites intended to worship the (...) God, in the Calfe
which Aaron made, and shows his reasons for it, upon Act. 17. Exodus 32.7.30,
31. Exodus 32.10, 11 12. etc. In the two Calves likewise made by Jeroboam (in 1.
Kin. 12.28.) was the true God also intended to be worshipped: as Josephus
himself testifies. Antiquit. Iud. li. 8. c. 3. and yet was it Idolatry for
all that. Clem. Recog. ad ^ac. lib. 5.
as Jehovah, is the name proper to the true God, Exodus 15.3. Esaias 42.8.) that
the worshipping, and offering of burnt Offerings, and peace Offerings, the next
day, before that Idol, or Image, namely, before the moulten, and golden
Calfe, was in their purposes, and intentions, meant, and intended to the true
God, JEHOVAH: albeit, God, for his part, did not so account of it, nor take it
so; but refused it, as a thing odious, and abominable in his sight: Insomuch,
that this their pretended worship of God, by an Image, is called in the Text, A
grievous crime, a great sin, a corrupting of their ways, a making of
themselves gods of gold, and a thing, so highly offensive unto him, as that he
was exceedingly kindled in wrath against them, and sent deserved punishment
upon them for the same. Take heed therefore of this grievous sin, and know,
that your pretended good meanings, and intentions, be in this case, no more
allowable in Gods sight, nor can any more serve to excuse or free you from
Idolatry, or from incurring Gods just displeasure for the same, then did, or
could the same pretenses, and intentions in the Israelites. Yea, your Idolatry
herein, is not only as gross, and as inexcusable, as that of the Israelites;
but as gross also, as was that which was amongst some of the Heathens
themselves: for even they (as well as Papists) could, and did say (as Clemens
relates their words) Nos ad honorem invisibilis Dei, visibiles Imagines
adoramus. We, in honor of the invisible God, do worship visible Images.
And S. Augustine again, brings in the Heathen man, speaking thus: Non
simulachrum colo, sed per effigiem corporalem eius rei signum intueor quam
colere Debeo: August. in Psalm 113. concion. 2.
I worship not the Image, but by a bodily shape, I behold the sign of that
which I ought to worship. Yea, even Peresius, though a Popish Bishop, yet
affirms expreslie, that, not all the Idols amongst the Heathen, Peers. de
Tred. part. 3.
did signify a false god: and for proof of it, he alleges that Text of
Act. 17.23, 24. etc. where, at Athens, S. Paul, finding an Altar, with this
Inscription: To the unknown God: he took occasion to preach unto them, that
God, whom he there says, they ignorantly worshipped. Some then there were
(as appears) even amongst the very Heathens themselves, Romans 1.2^, 21, 22,
23. etc. Act. 17.23. etc.
that in those their Idols or Images, worshipped not the very Image it self,
but God, in those their purposes and intentions, as the Papists likewise say
they do. Where is then the difference of their Idolatry?

4 But they have yet, a fourth point of very gross Idolatry in their Church,
and that is in their Invocations or prayers to the blessed Virgin Marie, and to
other Saints departed this life, and unto Angels also. For does not S. Paul
plainly tell you, that men are to pray, or call upon none, but him in whom
they are to believe. How shall they call upon him (says he) in whom they have
not believed? Romans 10.14.
But none may believe in any, but in God, as, beside the Scriptures, the very
Creed it self also teaches you. And therefore, none may pray to any, or
call upon any in prayer, but upon God only. Again, when Christ Jesus taught
his Disciples to pray, Did he teach them to pray to any Saints, or Angels?
No: Luke 11.2. Mat. 6.9.
but, says he, When ye pray, say thus: Our father which art in heaven etc.
thereby teaching them, that when they pray, they must pray unto God only, their
heavenly Father, and not to any creatures, be they Saints, or Angels, or
whosoever. And this again, God himself expreslie wills and commands,
Psalm. 50.15.
saying: Call upon me in the d^y of trouble, so will I deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me. And again, in another Psalm, it is written thus:
Therefore shall every one that is godly, make his prayer unto thee: Psalm. 32.6.
that is, unto God. The Psalmist says again: Whom have I in heaven but thee?
And again, he says thus: Psalm. 73.25. Psalm. 62.5, 6, 7, 8
My soul, wait thou only upon God: for my expectation is from him: He
only is my Rock, and my Salvation. (Observe well that word, only, for so it
is in the new Translation, according to the Hebrew Original). Now then, if (as
here appears) godly men wait only upon God, and that He only, is their
Rock, their Salvation, their strength, their refuge, stay, and help, be not
all other hereby directly excluded? Bus yet further, Epiphanius says expressly
thus: Let no man worship the Virgin Marie. Yea, Epiphan. haeres. 79.
he shows it to be the heresy of the Collyridians, to worship her. But
consider yet moreover, that it is a chief part of Gods worship, and glory, to
call upon him in Prayer: for thereby we declare, that he is the only knower of
our hearts, and discerner of our thoughts, and affections, and feacher of the
reins: as also, that he is only powerful to yeed help, and to give all
gifts and graces requisite unto men: Inasmuch then, as it is a part, and a
chief part of Gods glory, to call upon him in prayer: and that God himself
says thus: I am Jehovah, this is my name: and my glory will I not give to any
other: Esaias 42.8.
How can men be excused of robbing GOD of his honor and glory, when they
pray not unto him, but unto Saints, or Angels, or such as be but creatures?
Yea, why should any pray unto any Saints or Angels, or such as be but mere
creatures, when they know not the secret intentions, affections, thoughts and
hidden closets, and corners of their hearts? For it is God only that knows
the hearts of all the children of Men, 1. King. 8.^^.
as Solomon expressly witnesses. Besides, ye cannot find so much as one
president, or example, throughout the whole Book of God, either in the old
Testament, or in he new, of any godly man, that made his prayer at any time
to any deceased Saints, or to Angels, or to any other, but to God only.
What strange people then be they, that both contrary to the Scriptures, and
without any president, or example, in those Scriptures to be found, will dare
to invocate and call upon Saints, and Angels in their prayers? Let the blessed
Virgin Marie, and other Saints and Angels, have their due regard, and reverence
that belongs to them: But let them not have that glory, honor, and worship,
that belongs only and properly unto God. Honorandi ergo sunt propter
imitationem, non Adorandi propter religionem: Saints and Martyrs therefore,
August. de vera Relig. cap. 55.
are to be honored for imitation (says S. Augustine) but they be not to be
adored or worshipped for religion. Sanctos Martyrs neque Deos esse dicimus,
neque adorare consuevimus: laudamus autem eos potius summis honoribus, quod pro
verite strenue certarunt, and fidei sinceritatem servarunt: We (says S.
Cyril) neither say, Cyril. cont. Julian. lib. 6.
the holy Martyrs are gods, neither are we wont to worship them: we rather
commend them very highly, that they have so strongly stood for the truth, and
kept the sincerity of faith. Yea, as touching the worshipping of Angels, S.
Paul also expreslie condemns it. Colos. 2.18.
Whereupon it was decreed (as Theodoret witnesses) in the Council of
Laodicea, Theodo. in Colos. 2.18.
that men should not pray unto Angels. And therefore does Saint Augustine,
Aug. ad quod vult Deum, haer. 39. Epiphan. haeres. 38. Aug. in Psalm. 96. Rev.
19.10.
likewise reckon amongst Heretics, a Sect, called Angelici, which were
inclined to the worshipping of Angels. And Epiphanius also, amongst other
wicked opinions and doings, notes the Ca^anes, for invocation of Angels: Yea,
we may (as S. Augustine again shows) learn of the Angels themselves, not
to worship them. And so, indeed, does it appear: For when S. John himself
fell down before the Angel (that showed him the Revelation) to worship him:
the Angel said unto him: Rev. 22.8, 9.
See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servants, and fellow servants of thy
brethren, which have the Testimony of Jesus: worship God. Where you see
plainly, that the Angel refuses to be worshipped, and bids to worship
God only, as being himself, a fellow-worshipper of God, with the rest of his
servants. If then the Angels of heaven, be not to be worshipped (which thing
you see here manifest) I hope you will soon conclude, that then the Saints in
heaven also are not to be worshipped. I know that ye have a distinction
between Latria, and Doulia, saying, that ye give, Latrian, that is, worship
unto God, but Doulian, that is, service unto Saints, and Angels. So that the
effect of this your speech and distinction, appears to be this, that ye
worship God, but serve Saints, and Angels. As though ye were not bound to
serve God, as well as to worship him. S. Paul shows, 1. These. 1.9. Romans 1.9.
that ye are, (...), to serve him, as well as to worship him. Yea, does not
Christ Jesus himself say, that it is thus written? Dominum Deum tuum adorabis,
and illi soli servies: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, Act. 20.19. Mat.
4.10.
and him only shall thou serve. (For so is your own latin Translation).
Whereby you see it evident, that ye are as well to serve God, as to worship
him: yea, that ye are to serve him, and to serve him only in the way of
religion. And so also does Samuel the Prophet, further expreslie teach. 1. Sam.
7.3.
And therefore we may not serve any Saints, or Angels, or Images, or any
other creatures whatsoever, in way of Religion, as the Popish Church most
wickedly teaches, and practices. But again, even in those very prayers
which they make to God himself, they also very impiously, have diverse
Mediators: and, therein also, they seek refuge by another, as vain a
distinction as the former, saying: that they, in their prayers, make the Saints
and Angels Mediators of Intercession, but not of Redemption: as though Christ
Jesus, were not as well our advocate, medi^atour, and intercessor, between God
and us, 1. Ioh. 2.1.
as our Redeemer. S. John says thus: These things I write unto you, that ye
sin not: and if any man do sin, Romans 8.34.
we have an advocate with the father, even Jesus Christ the righteous. Again
S. Paul says: That Christ is at the right hand of God, and makes intercession
for us. Again, it is written: that Christ is able, perfectly to save them that
come unto God, by him, seeing he ever lives, Heb 7.25.
to make Intercession for them. And diverse other Texts of Scripture do
manifestly prove, that Christ is as well our Mediator, and Intercessor, as
our Redeemer: insomuch, that unto him only, is given this title, Heb. 9.15.
To be the Mediator of the new Testament. Yea, S. Paul has further directly
told us: that, as, There is but one God, 1. Tim. 2.5.
so there is but one Mediator between God and men, namely, the man Christ
Jesus. Why then, or for what cause, or reason, will you have other Mediators or
Intercessors? Is not Christ Jesus sufficient to prevail with his Father for
us? Or, be any Saints or Angels, in greater grace or favor with God, then
his own Son, whom he has also appointed to this very office, to be the
Mediator, and Intercessor for us? Why then, without warrant from God, yea,
contrary to the express tenor of the Scriptures, and contrary to Gods own
appointment, will ye take upon you, to have other Mediators, and Intercessors,
beside Christ Jesus, as namely, the blessed Virgin Marie, and other Saints,
and Angels? this is no small, or slender impiety. But you answer, that we
be not worthy to come directly and imediatelie to God, without a Mediator,
neither may we be bold so to do. This is very true which ye thus say, in
respect of our selves, and our own unworthiness. But therefore it is, that
he has given us a Mediator, Ioh. 16.23.
namely, Christ Jesus, his own most dearly beloved Son, in whose name and
mediation, we are allowed (though most unworthie in respect of our selves) to
have access unto God, and may, with an humble reverence, be bold, to approach
unto him, and to ask of him whatsoever is necessary, or expedient for us. By
whom (says S. Paul, speaking of Christ Jesus our Mediator) We have
boldness, and entrance, with confidence, Ephesians. 3.12.
through faith in him. Again, it is written thus: Let us therefore go boldly
unto the Throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace, to
help in time of need. And again it is said: Heb. 4.16.
That by the blood of Jesus Christ, we may be bold to enter into the holy
place. Heb. 10.19.
Observe in all these places, that through Christ, his mediation, we have
boldness, and may be bold to come unto God. As touching that reason, which
ye draw from the manner of earthly Kings and Princes, This reason was also
alleged in S. Ambrose time, but he likewise answers it: in Epist. ad Romans
cap. 1.
to whom, you say, men usuallie have not access, without some friend to be
their mediator unto him: Although the cases be very unlike between God, and an
earthly man, yet it is before answered, that we have a friend, to be our
Mediator unto God, in the Court of heaven, and that a most assured and
especial friend, namely, Jesus Christ, whose love has showed it self to be
far greater toward us then the love of any Saints* Ioh. 15.13, 14, 15.
or Angels, is, or can be, in bearing the wrath of God for us, ^. Pet. 2.24.
2. Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.10.13.
due to our sins, and being made a curse for us, to deliver us from that
Curse of the Law, which we most justly had deserved to bear, and must have
borne for ever in our own persons, to our own everlasting woes, and
confusion, had not he interposed himself, as our most loving and kind
suertie, and Savior. Can any have, or desire to have, a better, or more
assured friend, then this? But you further allege, that the Saints deceased,
and Angels do pray for us: What of that? For thereupon it follows not, that
therefore we must, or may pray to them. Every good and godly Christian does
pray one for another, whilst they live together in this world: yet for all
that, it were monstrous, and intolerable impiety, for any one of them, to
fall down before another of them, and to direct his prayer unto him, as he
does unto God. But you say, that it is lawful in this life, for one Christian
to desire another to pray unto God for him: and why then should it not be
lawful to desire the Saints in heaven to pray for us? I answer, that the cases
be nothing like, and that there is that reason for the one, which is not for
the other: For first, when I desire a man living with me in this world, to
pray for me, I am sure, that he hears me, when I thus request him, for
otherwise, I speak in vain unto him: But you are not sure, that the Saints in
heaven, which be departed this life, do hear you, when ye speak unto them,
and desire them to pray unto God for you. You may peradventure suppose,
conceit, and imagine, that they hear you: but assurance thereof, or undoubted
proof, ye can produce none. And S. Augustine tells you plainly, that they
do not hear your prayers: for thus he says: August. de spirit. and anima
cap. 26.
Ibi siquidem sunt spiritus defunctorum, ubi nec vident, neque audiunt etc. The
souls of the dead (says he) be there, where they do neither see, nor
hear, what is done, or happens to men in this life: yet such care they have
of the living, (although they be utterlie ignorant, what they do here on
earth) as our care is for the dead, albeit, what they do, we likewise know
not. How vain a thing then is it, when you have no assurance, that the Saints
departed hear you, for you, nevertheless, ^o make prayers, and petitions unto
them, as if you were sure that they heard you? Secondly, there is manifest
warrant, yea, and a commandment, in the Scriptures, for one Christian to pray
for another, Romans 1.^.10. 1. These 5.25. Iam. 5.26.
whilst they be living in this world: but there is no commandment, warrant,
or example to be found in the Scripture, which requires, or allows
Christians, to pray unto Saints, departed this life. Thirdly, ye, in your
prayers to Saints in heaven, do sometimes beg, immediately, even of them,
and at their hands, assistance, help, protection, defense, and such other
things, as be indeed properly and only in the power and hands of God to give.
Fourthly, what do you else, but attribute, an omni-presence, and omni-science,
and even a knowledge of the thoughts, and affections also of men's hearts, unto
the Saints, when so many thousands of you, in such a number of distant places,
and at several times, do pray unto them? which things, namely, omni-presence,
that is, to be present every where: and omni-science, that is, to know all
things, and even the thoughts and affections of men's hearts, 2. Chr. 6.30.
be proper and peculiar to God alone. But lastly, if the Saints in heaven did
hear us, yet were that no argument therefore to Invocate or pray unto them, no
more then we may pray unto the Angels that stand about us, and be able to
hear our prayers: For, although we may pray to none but him that can hear
us: yet may we not exhibit Invocation or prayer to every one, or to any
whosoever that can or is able to hear us. For God only, is, in the way of
religion, to be invocated and prayed unto, and that only through the
Mediation and Intercession of Jesus Christ, and of no other, as before
appears.

5 But there is yet further, (if we may believe their doctrine) a fifth point of
a most gross Idolatry in the Popish Church. For Bellarmine teaches that even
the very Images themselves of Christ, Bellar. lib. de Imag. cap. 21.
and of the Saints, are to be worshipped, and that, not by accident only, or
improperly, but properly also, and by themselves: so that the worship of them
is determined in the Images, as they be considered in themselves, and not only
for or in respect of the things which they represent. Yea it is the constant
opinion of Popish Divines (says Az^rius the Jesuit) that the Image is to be
worshipped and honored with the same honor and worship, Azor. instit. mor.
part 1. lib. 9. cap. 6. tot^ haec.
wherewith that is to be worshipped whose Image it is. And Thomas Aquinas
likewise teaches, Tho Aquin. Sum. par. 3. quaest. 25. art. 3.
saying: Cum Christus latriae adoratione, sit adorandus: Imago quoque eius,
eadem adoratione adoranda est: That, seeing Christ is to be worshipped with
Latria, that is, with that worship that is proper unto God: His IMAGE also is
to be worshipped with the very same worship. But touching Christ: First, how
do they prove it lawful, to make an Image of Him, since he is not man only,
but God also? for can any make an Image or representation of him that is both
God an man? That image then which ye say, ye make of Christ, in respect of his
humanity only, consider whether it be any more the picture or image of
Christ, then of any other man. Secondly, how do ye prove it to be the true
Image of Christ, in respect of his humanity? Thirdly, admit it were the very
picture and Image of Christ, (made either in wood, stone, brass, silver, gold,
or howsoever) is it fit that this Image made of Metal, or wrought in any
sort, by man's hand, should be worshipped, Adoratione latriae, with that worship
that is properly belonging to God himself? May not those men that be thus
enamored with Images, and that hold these opinions, be therein supposed, to be
as senseless, as the very Images themselves? For what is this else, but to
worship stocks and stones, and the work of men's hands, with divine honor?
And can there be a greater, or a more gross Idolatry committed? Yea S.
Augustine notes it, as the heresy of the Carpocratians, Aug. hares. 7.
that they worshipped the Images of Jesus, and of Paul. Whereas some therefore
say, that the honor which is given to the sign or Image, does ever redound and
is given to the Prototypon, to that whose sign or Image it is: and
consequently that the honor given to the image of God, and of Christ, is
honor done to God himself, and to Christ himself, this appears not to be
true. Yea, even amongst men, if the respect that is yielded to the picture, or
Image of a friend, or of any great man, shall be accepted as honor due to the
man himself, whose picture and Image it is intended to be; it must be, with
these conditions, viz. first, that it be a right and true picture, and image of
the man: for if it be nothing like him, but more like some other man, or some
other creature, he has no reason to take it for his picture, or image, much
less to think himself thereby honored. Secondly, it must have an allowance,
or at least no disallowance, in respect of him to whose honor he intends to
make it, if he mean that the other shall accept and take it, as an honor done
unto him: for if he to whose honor it is intended, disallow it, or signify his
mind, that he will not have his picture drawn, or his image made, to be so
honored, it can be no honor acceptable to him in that case, but it will
rather move offense, and be ill taken, if it be done. How much more then will
God be offended with these things? For beside, that no man can make a true and
perfect picture or Image of him that is both God and Man, God has further
directly disallowed and forbidden these Images, Exodus 20.4, 5. Matthew. 4.10.
and all Images and Similitudes whatsoever, to be worshipped. In Gregory's
time, Images were not allowed to be worshipped: yea, Pope Gregory himself,
Lib. 7. epist. 119. and lib. 9. epist. 9.
well liked of Serenus, Bishop of Massilia, in this point, viz. for that, he
forbad Images to be worshipped. As for that second Council of Nice therefore,
which was after Pope Gregory's time, gathered under Irene the Empress,
inasmuch as it was assembled to overthrow the former godly Councels of
Constantinople and Ephesus, (which decreed against Images, and the worshipping
of them) it ought to carry no credit, or esteem: and the rather, because
that second Council of Nice was also afterward again further condemned in the
West, Ado^. Chron* in Ann. 795. Abbas usperg in Ann 793. Hincmar. Remens. lib.
20. cont. Episc. landanens. Matthew. Westmonaster. hist. in Ann. 793. etc.
Epiphan. Epist. ad Johan. Hiero.
by another Council held at Frankford. Which thing Carolus Magnus himself, in
his book made against Images, does also testify. The same is likewise
testified, by sundry other Authors. Yea Epiphanius, in his days, would not
allow so much as an Image of Christ, or of any Saint, to be, at all, in
Churches: for, coming to a Church at Anablatha, and there seeing in a Veil,
an Image painted, as it were of Christ, or of some Saint, he affirmed it to be
contrary to the Authority of the Scriptures, to have any such Image, in a
Christian Church, and therefore caused it to be taken down: And the Council of
Eliberis also decreed the like, Council. Eliber. can. 36.
against the having of Images in Churches. How much more then would these men
have condemned the Worship of the very Images themselves?

6 A sixth point of Idolatry in the Popish Church, is, that they worship the
Cross also, and pray unto it, saying: O Crux, ave Spes unica, hoc passionis
tempore, auge pijs iustitiam, reisque dona veniam: Hayle O Cross, our only
hope in this time of the passion, Increase righ^eousnesse to the god^y, and
give pardon to the guilty. Yea, Thomas Aquinas their Angelical Doctor (as they
call him) says, the Cross is to be worshipped with latria, and gives two
reasons of this Adoration, saying thus: The Aquin. par. 3. Sum. quaest. 25.
art. 4.
Crux Christi, in qua Christus crucifixus est, tum propter repraesentationem,
tum propter Membrorum Christi contactum latria, adoranda est: The Cross of
Christ, vvhereon Christ was crucified, both because of the representation, and
also for that it touched the members of Christ, is to be vvorshiped with
latria, that is, with that worship that is proper and due unto God. But be
these reasons sufficient in this case? Gal. 3.1.
The Gospel was so clearly preached to the Galathians, as if there had been a
lively Image of Christ crucified, set before their eyes: was therefore the
very Ministry or Preaching of the Gospel, whereby Christ crucified was thus
depainted out, to be adored or worshipped with that worship that is due and
proper to God? The breaking of the Bread in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
does represent unto us, the breaking and crucifying of Christ his Body upon the
Crosse^ and the pouring out of the wine, in the same Sacrament, represents
also the shedding or effusion of his Blood, upon the same Cross for us: shall
therefore the breaking of the Bread, or the pouring out of the wine, be adored
and worshipped with that worship that is due unto God? And yet is the Preaching
and Ministry of the Gospel, as likewise the administration of the Sacraments,
of Gods own institution: but no institution, commandment, or warrant from
him, can be showed, for making a wooden Cross, or any kind of Cross, to be a
representatio^ of Christ crucified. And yet, if such an institution could be
showed for the Cross, it follows not that therefore it is to be worshipped,
with that worship that is proper and due unto God: no more then Water in
Baptism, or Bread and Wine in the other Sacrament of the Lords Supper, are so
to be worshipped, although they be Gods institutions: or no more then the Brazen
Serpent, Number. 21.8.9. 2. King 18.4.
which was also Gods institution in times past, amongst the Jews, was
therefore so to be worshipped. What? Is the wooden Cross, or any Cross
whatsoever, become a God, that it should thus be worshipped? As for the other
reason, if because the Cross touched Christ, it be therefore to be worshipped:
why should not also the Nails, and the Crown of Thorns, and the Spear, or
Lance wherewith he was pierced, be likewise so adored or worshipped? or why
should not Judas Iscariot, who likewise touched Christ, betraying him with a
Kiss, and those wicked Jews that apprehended and took him, and that Woman
also that vvashed Christ's feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hairs
of her head: yea and the Pinnacle of the Temple whereon Christ was set, and all
those many places of ground whereon Christ stood, and all those sundry
persons which he touched, and which likewise touched him: I say, why should not
all and every of these, be, by the same reason, worshipped and adored with
divine honor? You see then, what weak and most poor reasons, Papists have
for this their Idolatry, in worshipping a wooden Cross, in stead of the true
God that made heaven and earth. Ambr. de Obitu Theodosij.
S. Ambrose directly brandeth it, and calls it an Heathenish error, to
worship the Cross vvhereon Christ dyed. And yet neither are ye able to prove
that all and every of those several Crosses, which in so many distant places
of several Kingdoms and Countries, amongst Papists, be thus worshipped, be
that very Cross, whereon Christ our Savior died, and was crucified. Yea it
is a thing impossible, that they all, and every of them, (they being so many
and diverse) should or can be that very Cross.

7 I shall not need, here to show how the Pope of Rome, is made a god, or
rather exalted above God himself, in the Papacy: because this is declared
partly before, and partly and more fully afterward. But yet consider here,
whether they make not also the Church, a God; whilst they not only believe
it, but believe in it. For, accordingly the Rhemists teach it to be lawful,
Rhem. Annot. upon Romans 10.14.
to believe in Men, and, in the Church. The Creed, contrariwise, teaches us:
Credere sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam: to believe that there is an holy Catholic
Church, but it does not bid us to believe, in the holy Catholic Church. Yea it
teaches every Christian, to believe, only In God: for thus it says: I
believe in God the Father, etc. and in Jesus Christ his only Son etc. and I
believe in the holy Ghost. And this distinction of creatures, and mysteries,
(in the Creed) from the Creator, by the preposition, In, is likewise so
observed, and taught by the Ancient Fathers. For Ruffinus says thus: Non
dixit* in sanctam Ecclesiam etc. He said not, Ruffinus in Symbolum.
I believe In the Catholic Church: nor, In the remission of sins: nor, In
the resurrection of the Body: for if he had added the preposition, In, there
should have been the same force of meaning, with that which went before: But
now in those words, in which, is set forth our faith of the Godhead, it is
said, In God the Father; and, In Jesus Christ his Son: and, In the Holy
Ghost. But, in the rest, where the speech is, not of the Godhead, but of
Creatures and Mysteries, the preposition, In, is not added: that it should be
said, In the holy Church: but, that we should believe, that there is an holy
Church, not as God, but as a Church gathered unto God: And men should believe,
that there is a remission of sins, but not, In the remission of sins: and
they should believe the resurrection of the Body, but not, In the resurrection
of the Body. Therefore by this syllable of Preposition, the Creator is
distinguished from the Creatures, and things pertaining to God, from things
belonging to men. Agreeablie to him, writes also Eusebius Emissenus, saying:
Aliud est credere Deo, Eusebius. Emiss. de Symb. hom. 2.
aliud In Deum credere etc. It is one thing to believe God, and another thing
to believe In God: we ought of right to believe both Peter and Paul; but to
believe In Peter and Paul, that were to bestow upon the servants, the honor
due to the Lord, which we ought not to do: To believe him, that is, to give
credit to him, every one may do it to a man: but this, to believe In him,
know, that thou owe only to the Divine Majesty. And this also is to be
marked: It is one thing, Credere Deum, to believe that there is a God; and
another thing, Credere in Deum, to believe in God: for the Devil is found to
believe that there is a God; but to believe In God, none is found to do this,
but he which has devoutely trusted in him: And therefore to believe, that
there is a God, is to know naturally: but to believe in God, is faithfully to
seek him, and with our whole love, to pass into him. So likewise, touching
the Articles, of the Catholic Church, Remission of sins, Resurrection, etc.
he says* Let us believe In God: These other things we do rehearse, we do
not believe in them: but we believe them: These things, I say, we confess,
not as God, but as the benefits of God. Primasius also observes this
distinction, saying: Fides perfecta est, Primas. com. Gal. 3.
non solum Christum sed etiam, In Christum credere: It is perfect faith, not
only to believe that Christ is, but to believe In Christ. If you would know
what it is to believe In God; S. Cyprian will further inform you: Cypr. de
duplici Martyrio.
Non credit In Deum, qui non in eo solo collocat totius foelicitatis suae
fiduciam: He does not believe In God, (says he) which does not repose in him
alone, the confidence of his whole felicity. Credere in Creaturam, est
divinitatis offensio: To believe in a Creature, is an offense against the
Deity, says Greg. Baeticus, ad Gallam and Placidiam. Yea, Cursed is the man,
that puts his trust in man, Iere. 17.5.
says the Lord God himself. Thus then you see a difference, between Credere
Deum, and Credere Deo, and Credere in Deum: namely, that Credere Deum, is to
believe that there is a God, and Credere Deo, is to believe all that God
speaks, to be true; and thus far Devils and Reprobates may go: but Credere
in Deum, to believe in God, that is, to repose the confidence of a man's whole
felicity, not in his own, or in other men's merits, nor in Saints, or Angels,
or in the Church, or in any creatures, but in God only, is the faith and
belief proper and peculiar to the true Christian. And, herewithall, you may
perceive, that Credere Ecclesiam Catholicam, is to believe that there is a
Catholic Church: and Credere Ecclesiae Catholicae, is to give credit to the
Catholik-Church; that is, to believe that to be true, which the Catholic
Church teaches: and that Credere in Ecclesiam Catholicam, is to repose, a man's
trust, affiance, faith, and confidence in the Catholic Church: which, what is
it else, but to make a god of it, and so to have more gods then One, and
consequently to commit a most gross Idolatry? For what greater dishonor, or
wrong, can be done, then to put the Church in the place of God, or to attribute
that to men, or Angels, or to any creatures, which properly belongs to the
Creator? But the Rhemists allege three Texts of Scripture, to prove it
lawful, to believe in men. The one is, in the Epistle to Philemon, where S.
Paul speaks thus unto him: Philem. ver. 5.
Hearing of thy love and faith which thou have toward the Lord Jesus, and
toward all the Saints, etc. But reddendo singula singulis, it is easy to be
perceived, that Faith is there to be referred to Christ, and, Love, to all the
Saints: for S. Paul himself (who is the best expositor of his own words) does
in other places declare, that they are so to be referred and expounded: saying
thus in his Epistle to the Ephesians; Ephe. 1.15.
Having heard of the Faith which ye have in the Lord Jesus, and love toward
all the Saints, etc. So again he speaks in his Epistle to the Colossians:
Coloss. 1.^.
Having heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of your love toward all the
Saints. By conferring of which two Texts, with that to Philemon, it is very
evident to every one that is not wilfully contentious or perverse, that Faith,
is as well in the one place, as in the other, to be attributed to Christ, and
Love to all the Saints. The other Text they allege, is Exodus 14.31. where the
words are not: They believed in God, and in Moses; but the words be thus: The
people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord, and his servant Moses. And so is
your own translation: Crediderunt Domino, and Mosi, servo eius: They believed
the Lord and Moses, his servant. The third Text they allege, is 2. Paral.
20.20. where your own translation likewise is thus: Credit in Domino Deo
vestro and securi eritis: Credit Prophetis eius, and cuncta evenient prospera:
Believe in the Lord your God, and ye shall be sure: Believe his Prophets, and
all things shall fall out prosperously. But the Rhemists here seem to appeal
to the Hebrew Text, because they see, their own Latin Translation to make
against them: and yet the Hebrew Text will also nothing help them: inasmuch as
it herein agrees with the same their own Latin Translation. But yet they
further allege, that ancient Fathers did read indifferently, I believe in the
Catholic Church, and I believe the Catholic Church. It is granted, that
some of them did so: and therefore to believe in the Catholic Church, was
with them, and in that speech of theirs, all one with this, to believe that
there is a Catholic Church: (as they said likewise: I believe, in one
Baptism: I believe in the Resurrection of the dead: and, in the life to come).
So that although their speech herein, was somewhat improper, as appears by
that which is before delivered by the ancient Fathers upon the Creed, yet
their meaning in those words, being (as is evident) no more, but to believe,
that there is a Catholic Church, and not that we should put our trust, faith,
and confidence in the Church: it makes nothing against that which is here
intended and spoken. And therefore still for any to believe in the Church, in
this sense, viz. to put his faith, affiance, t^ust and confidence in the
Church, is to attribute that to the Church which rightly and properly belongs
unto God, and consequently is to make a god of it, which is abominable
Idolatry.

8 I here forbear to speak of their superstitious reserving and worshipping
of Relics, that is, of dead bodies, and insensible bones of Saints and
Martyrs (which it were far more meet, honestly and decently to bury, then so
to abuse): yea, of some, that are by Papists supposed to be Saints and Martyrs,
and yet are not so. For all be not Saints, nor the Martyrs of Jesus, that are
supposed to be so: neither do all die ^or religion, that are supposed by
Papists to die for that cause. As for example there was a Book set forth of
late, entitled, Martyrium etc. The Martyrdom of Conoghor O Deveny, (which was
a Popish Bishop) and of Gilpatrick Ologran, (which was a Popish Priest): which
two nevertheless, were not put to death for the cause of Religion, (as that
Book would persuade), but for Treason, as the Enditements against them both,
extant of Record in the Kings Bench of Ireland, do expressly and openly
testify: and as all the multitude of people then present at their
arraignement, can also witness. Which is ever sufficient to confute the most
slanderous and most notorious untruth of that Book. But Popish Rome being
before very evidently proved, Rev. 17.6.
to be the whore of Babylon, and consequently the Persecutor of the Saints and
Martyrs of Jesus: it is thereby an easy matter to collect, who be the Saints,
and, Martyrs of Jesus, Papists, if any of them die in defense of the Pope, or
Popish religion, be therein no Martyrs of Christ, but of Antichrist.
and who not: namely, that the Protestants be the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus;
and that the Papists be the persecutors: So that if any be so wilful, as to
die in defense of the Pope, or Popish Religion, they appear to be, therein, no
Martyrs of Christ, but of Antichrist. And therefore also as touching this point
of martyrdom, let them be no longer mistaken, as heretofore they have been.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is further showed, that the Pope of Rome, is the Grand Antichrist, out
of 2 Thessalonians. 2.

BUT concerning this point, that the Pope of Rome is that very grand
Antichrist, and consequently, that the Popish Church, ruled and governed by
him, is the very undoubted Antichristian Church, and therefore of every one to
be utterlie forsaken, and detested: Although that clear and evident
testimony, before going, of S. John, in his Revelation, Rev. 17.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7.8. etc.
discovers the same sufficiently: yet shall you, have it manifested further,
by the direct testimony also of S. Paul, for your better, and fuller
satisfaction. S. Paul therefore, in his second Epistle to the Thessalonians,
foretelling of the great Apostacy, or departure from the right faith and
religion, which was then to come, writes thus: Let no man deceive you by any
means: 2. These 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
for that day, (namely, of Christ to Judgment) shall not come, except there
come a departure first, and that, that man of sin be disclosed, even the
son of perdition, which is an Adversary, and exalted above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped: so that he does sit in the Temple of God,
as God, showing himself that he is God. Remember ye not, that when I was
yet with you, I told you these things? and now ye know, what withholdeth,
that he might be revealed in his time: for the mystery of iniquity does
already work: Only be vvh^ch now vvithholdeth, shall let, until he be
taken out of the way, and then shall that wicked man be revealed: whom the
Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish with the
brightness of his coming: even him, whose coming is by the vvorking of
Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and in all
deceaveablenesse of unrighteousness, amongst them that perish, because, they
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved: And therefore,
God shall send them s^rong delusion, to believe lies: that they all might be
damned, which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. In
these words ye see, first, that S. Paul fortelleth of an Aposta^y, or Departure
from the right faith and religion, which should come and be in the world
(which apostacy, or departure, namely, from the faith, he al^o mentions in
his Epistle to Timothy. 1. Tim. 4.1.) And this Apostacy, or departure from
the faith, least we should be mistaken in it, he shows that it should be,
2. These. 2.7.
A mystery of Iniquity: thereby declaring, that it shall not be any open
hostility, or professed Enmity, Mysticam Iniquitatem* id est Pietatis nomine
palliatam: ut velint haberi ministri Christi qui sunt pseudapostoli Glossa.
ordin. in 2. These. 2 Dicitur Mysterium, quia videtur occultum: Quia tales
operarii ostendunt se velut Ministros aut samulos Christi, cum revera sint
Ministri Antichristi. Anselm. in 2. These. 2. 2. These. 2.7. 2. These. 2.9.
against Christ, and his Gospel (such as is amongst Turks, and Jews, and
other Infidells of the world) but an hidden, close, and covert Iniquity, not
easy to be discerned to be Iniquity, it should carry, and convey it self so
subtillie, and under such shows and pretenses of godliness, and
Christianity. And least we should deceive our selves in the time, or think
that this Mystery of Iniquity* was to rise to his height and fullness, on a
sudden, or all at once, or not till some few years before the end of the
world: behold, S. Paul tells us, that it was then, in working, eve^ in his
days: so that even then, namely, in S. Paul's time, it began to work, in such
sort, as it could, going on, and creeping forward, by little and little, and by
degrees, until at last, it came to his full stature, and highest, and tallest
growth. And further the text shows, that in this Apostacy, or mystical
Iniquity, there should be signs, wonders, and lying Miracles, wrought for
the better prevailing, and fortification of it, and for the stronger alluring
of people thereunto and confirming them therein. Now they be called lying
Miracles, or lying wonders: partly, for that they be false, and counterfeit,
and partly, for that they lead men into falsehood and errors, as Chrysostom
expounds those words. Chrysostom. in 2. These. 2.
And likewise S. Augustine shows, that they be called lying signs, and
wonders, either because he shall deceive the senses of mortal men, August. de
Civit. Dei* lib. 20. cap. 19. and d^ ^nitat. Eccl. ca. 16
by counterfeit shows, and apparances, that he may seem to do that which he
does not: or else, because they shall draw unto lies, such as shall believe,
that they could not be done but by the power of God; they not knowing the power
of the Devil. For the Devil sometimes interposeth himself, Rev 16.14. 2.
These. 2.9.
to work these miracles. And even in this very place also to the
Thessalonians, they are said to be done, by the operation, or, vvorking of
Satan. Consider then, whether these things be not found verified in the
Papacy. As touching the Miracles, which are said to be done in Popery, there
be (as that learned and reverend Bishop D. Dovvnam has distinguished, and set
them down) three degrees, or three sorts of them: In his Book concerning
Antichrist, in English, and also in his latin book.
the one, such as be merely fabulous, and devised by lying Companions,
whereof their Legends, and Festivalls, and other their Books, have good store
of examples: some of them being so notoriously incredible, as that none,
except he were miserably intoxicated and bewitched, could, or would believe
them: which loud and lewd lies, and no better then Poetical Fictions* were
nevertheless in so high esteem in the Popish Church, that they were both
publickelie, and privatelie read in the vulgar tongue, when as the sacred and
Canonical Scriptures were closed up, and kept from the people in an unknown
language. And as this first degree of Miracles, is of such, as never were
indeed, not so much as in appearance, but in the opinion only of men
besotted, and given over to believe incredible untruths: So the second degree,
or second sort of their Miracles, is of such, as be in show or appearance
only, or artificial conveiances of deceitful men, or iugling tricks of
Legerdemaine: of which sort are the nodding, or moving, the smiling, or
frowning, the sweating, or speaking of Images, and such like. The third sort of
their Miracles, be such as be done by the power of the Devil, working by
natural causes, and natural means, although so closely, covertlie, stilie,
and speedily, sometimes, as that they draw ignorant people, that perceive not
the reason of those things, into a great admiration and conceit, that they are
true miracles indeed: when as nevertheless, though they be done, yet they
surpass not the strength of nature, as those do that be true and divine
Miracles: For those that be true Miracles indeed, be supernatural, and beyond
the power of all natural causes whatsoever, and are done only by the
omnipotent power of God. Neither is the Pope, nor all his partakers able to
produce any one such true Miracle, wrought by a Divine power, and by the
finger of God, for confirmation of any point of their New Religion, wherein
they differ from us, although they pretend diverse. Yea, some of their own
writers, do ingenuouslie confess, that sometimes, Nicho. Lyran. in Dan. 14.
there is very great deceiving of the people, by Miracles, feigned by the
Priests, or their adherents for temporal gain sake. And another of them,
Alexander de Hale^. in 4. sent. q 53. Gabriel. Biel in Can. miss. lect. 49
says directly thus: That in the Sacrament appears flesh, sometime by the
conveyance of men, and sometime by the operation of the devil. Another of them
says likewise: that, Miracles be sometimes done to men that flock to Images,
by the operation of Devils, to deceive inordinate worshippers, God permitting
it, and the infidelity of such men requiring it. Irenaeus, even in his time
also, tells of a certain man called Mark, which in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, mightily deceived the people, Iren lib. 1. cap. 9.
by changing the color of the wine, in such sort, as that it seemed to be
blood. All which kind of deceiveable practices, it is good, that all those,
that be so much devoted, and wedded to Popery, and to listening after
Miracles, should take special notice of, and thereby learn to take heed of
such Impostors, and Deceivers, in time. All the great, wonderful, and
supernatural Miracles, which have been done by Christ, Mar. 16.20.
and his Apostles, and in those ancient, former, and elder times, be sufficent
for confirmation of that old and most ancient faith, and religion, which we
hold (namely, which is contained in the sacred and Canonical Scriptures)
neither do we desire any more, or think any more requisite, or necessary:
For, as S. Augustine says: Quisquis adhuc prodigia, Aug de Civit. dei lib. 22.
cap. 8.
ut credat inquirit magnum est ipse prodigium, qui mundo credente, non credit:
Whosoever still seeks after wonders, that he might believe, is himself a
great wonder, who, when the world believes, believes not. Yea, if the Papists
had not these their signs, wonders, and miracles amongst them, they could not
be (as here we see) the Antichristian Church: But there be no people of the
world, that so much object, and boast of them, as they: As for the Jews, they
have them not. The Turks, and Mahometists, disclaim them: professing, that
their religion is to be propagated, and promoted, not by miracles, but by
force, and arms, and by the sword: The true Christians, which be the
Protestants, urge them not, nor require them: only, the false Christians,
that is, the Antichristians, which be the Papists, do urge and require them,
and glory and vaunt of them, and none so much as they, nor any like to them:
and therefore this note* or mark of Antichristianisme, touching Miracles, is
very evident, and most apparent amongst them.

2 Again, this text of S. Paul shows, that this great Antichrist, (who is
the head of this Apostatical Church, which thus abounds with false and lying
Miracles, and Wonders) should sit in the Temple of GOD, that is, in the Church,
namely, amongst such as profess Christ, 2. These 2.^
and Christianity, and consequently, not amongst Jews, Turks* and other
Infidels of the world. For S. Paul is not wont to call any Infidells, The
Temple of God: but, to Christians only, and such as profess Christ, and
Christianity, he applies, and gives this term, saying unto them expreslie:
1. Cor. 3.16, 17. 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians 2 21. Rev. 3.12.
Vos estis Templum Dei: Ye are the Temple of GOD: and again, Templum Dei
sanctum est, quod estis vos: The Temple of God is holy, which ye are. The
Papists therefore are deceived who would have this place understood of a
material Temple, which they suppose, Antichrist shall build at Jerusalem, to
reign in: and this they thus expound to shift it from their Pope of Rome, that
he might not be supposed Antichrist: But what says S. Hierome? Antichrist
(says he) shall sit, in Templo Dei, id est, Hieronym ad Algas. quaest. 11.
vel Hierosolimis ut quidam putant: vel, in Ecclesia, ut verius arbitramur: In
the Temple of God, that is, either at Jerusalem, as some think, or in the
Church, as we more truly hold. So that the truer opinion, and righter
exposition of these words, he holds to be this, that by the Temple, there
is meant, not any Temple at Jerusalem, but the Church of Christians, namely,
of such as profess Christ, and Christianity. Yea, that conceit of the
Papists, whereby they suppose, that the Temple of Jerusalem, (which now lies
wast, and ruinated under the dominion of the Turks) shall be reedified, and
builded up again, S. Hierome reckons for a mere Jewish fable: And so does
Origin also. And indeed, Hieronym. ad Marcell. Orig. tract. 29. in Matthew.
after that the Temple was once destroyed by Titus and Vespasian, the rest of
the Romans, (according to the Prophecy of Christ, in Mat. 24.) the vulgar
translation (which the Papists hold for the only Authenticke text) in Daniel,
chap. 9.27. does show, that it is never to be reedified, but that it is to
remain in perpetual desolation, to the end: for the words are: Et erit in
Templo abominatio desolationis, and usque ad consummationem and finem
perseverabit desolatio: And there shall be in the Temple, the abomination of
desolation, and unto the consummation and end, shall the desolation continue.
And S. Hierome, interpreting it, speaks yet more plainly, Hieron. in Dan. 9
Chrysostom. orat. 2. con^. Iudaeos. Naz. orat. 2. con. Julian. Theo. lib. 3. c.
20. Socrat. li. 3. c. 20. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. ult. Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 37,
38.39.
saying: Vsque ad consummationem and finem mundi, perseverabit desolatio: The
desolation shall continue unto the consummation, and end of the world. And so
does S. Chrysostom also declare: and Nazianzen also. Theodoret, Socrates,
Sozomen, and Ruffinus also do likewise declare, that the Temple at Jerusalem,
is never to be reedified: for (say they) when Julian the Apostata endeavored
to reedifie the Temple, to the end he might falsify (if he had could) the
Prophecy, and preaching of Christ, concerning the said Temple: Our Savior
Christ, by fire, first, from heaven, and after out of the earth, and by a
fearful earthquake, hindered this enterprise: thereby proving his Godhead,
and the truth of his Prophecy: and showing, that he was not pleased as
Sozemen says, with the renewing of the Temple. Now how could Julian the
Apostata, by this action of his, and by this his attempt, in going about to
reedifie the Temple, think to falsify the words of Christ, and likewise the
opinion of Christians in that time, touching this matter, unless Christ had
taught, and the Christians in that time, had held and believed, that it was
never to be rebuilded, or reedified? And therefore by the temple of God,
wherein Antichrist shall sit, cannot be meant any Temple at Jerusalem (which is
never to have any rebuilding) but the Church of professed Christians, over
whom he was to rule and reign. Which thing is so evident, that besides S.
Hieroms exposition of it, in that sort, Chrysostom also does so expound it.
He shall sit (says he) in the Temple of God not in that Temple at Jerusalem,
Chrysostom. in 2. These* 2.
but in the Churches. And so the Greek Scoliast also (who usuallie reports
word for word out of Chrysostom) explaineth it, and says likewise: That he
shall sit in the Temple of God, Ou ton en Hierousalem alla eis ecclesias tou
The^u, Oecumen. in 2. These. 2.
not in the Temple at Jerusalem, but in the Churches of God. And so does
Theophilact also expound those words: That he shall sit, Theophi. in 2. These.
2. Dei templum appellavit Ecclesias, in quibus primam ^edem a^^piet. Theod. in
2. These. 2.
not in the Temple at Jerusalem, but simply in the Churches, and in every
Temple of God. Yea, that not Jerusalem, but the Whore of Babylon, namely, the
Papal, or Popish City of Rome, is the special place and seat, for the great
Antichrist to reign in, is before declared very evidentlie, and at large out
of the Revelation of S. John, Chap. 17. So that all these Scriptures do well
and rightly accord together, and agree in this, that the grand Antichrist, is
not to have his seat or place at Jerusalem, to reign over, either Jews, or
Turks, or other Infidells of the world, but at Rome specially, and generally
in the Temple of God, that is, in the churches of Christians, that is, amongst
such as profess Christ, and Christianity: All which (as is apparent) does
very fitly and fully agree to the Pope of Rome.

3 Here then you may perceive, what manner of adversary, or opposite,
Antichrist is to be supposed: (for S. Paul says of him, that he is, ho
Ant^keimenos, an Adversary, 2. These. 2.4.
or opposite) namely, that he is not to be supposed, any open and professed
enemy against Christ and Christianity, but a mystical, secret, hidden, and
disguised enemy, and such a one as shall outwardly pretend to be (as S.
Hierome shows) the head, or chief of the Covenant, that is, Hier. in Dan.
11. Simulabit se ducem Faederis hoc est, Legis and Testamenti Dei.

Duo usurpabit Testamenta. Primas. and glos. ordin. in Rev. 13 11. 1. Ioh.
2.18.22. 2 Ioh. ver 7. and 1. Ioh. 4.3.


a chief and principal friend of Christ, and Christianity, and yet revera
shall be an oppugner of him, and an abuser of his name, and of the name of the
Church, to serve his own wicked plots, and designs. And this is yet further
hereby manifest, because this very word Antichrist, is no where, throughout
the whole new Testament, expreslie found, but only in the Epistles of S. John:
where S. John does not call him an Antichrist, that openly, and professedly,
denies, or oppugneth Christ, but such as in his time were, Cerinthus, Ebion,
and the like, who making profession of Christ, outwardly, and in words, do
nevertheless hold, teach, or preach, false, erroneous, or heretical doctrins,
and opinions. Agreablie whereunto, S. Hillary also speaks, saying, It is the
property of Antichrists name, Hillar. ad Auxe^tium*
to be contrary unto Christ: This is practiced (says he) under the opinion of
counterfeit piety. This, under a show of preaching the Gospel, is practiced,
that our Lord Jesus Christ may be denied, vvhilest he is thought to be
preached. In explicat. super Matthew. ad Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 24.
And so also testifies S. Hierome, saying: Antichristus est, quisquis sub
nomine Christi ea docet, quae contraria sunt Christo: He is Antichrist,
whosoever teaches under the name of Christ, those things that be contrary
unto Christ. And therefore you must ever remember, to observe a difference
between Christian, Unchristian, and Antichristian people, (into which three
sorts of People, all the people in the world may aptly be divided). The
Unchristian people, be those that make no profession at all of Christ, or
Christianity: of which sort be Jews, Turks, and other Infidels of the world.
The Christian people revera, and indeed, of which in this distribution, I
speak, be those, that profess Christ, and believe in him, and addict
themselves only to his religion, and the rules and ways of it, as it is
described and set down in the sacred and canonical Scriptures. The
Antichristian people, be those that profess Christ in words, and in outward
shows, and semblance, but yet nevertheless deny or oppugn him in deeds, or
in doctrine, or in both. Whence is concluded, that neither the Turk, nor
Mahomet (as I said before) nor any of the rest of the Infidells of the world,
can properly and according to the Scripture phrase and sense, be termed
Antichrists, or Antichristians, (fith they make no profession of Christ at all)
but such are properly to be termed, Unchristian, and not Antichristian people:
and consequently it remains that Antichrist, and Antichristian people, be
only to be found within Christendom, and amongst those that profess Christ.
And who these be within Christendom, is easily to be discerned: for, that the
Pope of Rome and his followers, be this kind of covert, masked, and disguised
adversaries, and opposites to Christ, and that under the name and profession of
Christ, his church, and religion, I think there is none but does, or may very
readily perceive. But would you know it further, and in some particulars? For
you must indeed, come to particulars with them, inasmuch as, otherwise, in
general terms, and words, they will make great profession of Christ, and of
the rights, honors, and prerogatives, to him and his Church, belonging, and yet
in the mean time, in particulars, and indirectlie, and by consequent, they
will oppugn him. Inasmuch therefore, as he has the name of Antichrist
chiefelie by reason of his opposition unto Christ (in this covert and disguised
manner:) let us see, how that is verified in the Pope, and Papacy. For which
purpose, let us consider our Lord Jesus Christ, as he is to be considered:
namely, in respect of his person, and in respect of his offices, committed to
him from his Father. In respect of his person, he is both God and Man: in
respect of his offices, he is a Prophet, a Priest, and a King, unto us: Now, in
every of these respects, does the Pope and Papacy oppugn Christ. For, first,
what a God do they make Christ to be, when they prefer the Virgin Mary above
him, and acknowledge authority in her to command him? For thus they speak
unto her: Iube natum, Cassand. Consult. ar^* 21. Breviar. Romans and Offic. B.
Mar. refor. Missal. Parisiens*
and Iure Matris Impera redemptori: and, monstra te esse Matrem. That is,
Command thy Son, and by thy motherly authority command the Redeemer: and,
show thy self to be a mother. Is he God, and the creator and supreme
commander of all things, that is thus made subject to the authority and
commandment of a creature? But do they not further oppugn his Godhead very
manifestly, when they hold, that every Priest of theirs, after breathing of a
few words out of his mouth, can create and make Jesus Christ, his maker? for so
they say (as is before showed) that, Sacerdos est Creator creatoris sui: The
Priest, is the Creator or maker of his maker. Now then, is he a God, that can
be thus made by men? And what do they else but oppugn his Manhood also, very
manifestly, whilst they make his body to be multi-present, that is, present
in many places at one time? For, they say, it is both in heaven, and in earth
at once, yea in so many places as their Mass is celebrated, or their Host
reserved, at one and the self same time: which is contrary to the nature and
property of a true body, which we are sure Christ Jesus has. Yea, as they
hold his Body to be carnally eaten in the Sacrament, with the bodily mouth, so
do they hold it also to be void of dimensions, and quantity, and to be
uncircumscribed, and invisible, and no way sensible: which is, likewise, as
much, as to make him to have no true body at all. When, again, they hold,
that his body is made out of the substance of a piece of bread (for, so much,
that their very word, of Transubstantiation, imports) which was, indeed, not
so made, but of the substance of the Virgin Mary, do they not very cleerelie
oppugn his humanity, and the verity of his body? You see then, how they do
oppugn the person of Christ, both in respect of his Deity and also of his
humanity, very apparantlie. Let us now likewise briefly consider, how they
oppugn Christ, in his three offices, namely, as he is a Prophet a Priest, and
a King, unto us. The Prophecy of Christ (whose voice and instruction, as of a
Prophet and Teacher all-sufficient, Deuteronomy. 18.18.19 Act. 3.22.23. Matt. 17.5.
we are commanded to hear and obey) they oppugn: first, by teaching that the
sacred and Canonical Scriptures, be imperfect and insufficient, for a Christian
man's instruction and salvation, without their Traditions: secondly, by adding,
not only their own Traditions, but the Apocryphal Books and Decretal
Epistles also, Did 19. cap. Si Romanorum.
to the Canon of the Bible, and stablishing them to be, of equal authority
and reverence with the Canonical Scriptures themselves: thirdly, by equaling
also the determinations of their Popes, and the Decrees of their Councels, and
Church, (which they say, cannot err) unto the divine and canonical Scriptures;
they holding them to be as undoubtedlie the voice and oracle of the Holy
Ghost, as any thing is, which is contained in those Scriptures: fourthlie, not
only in equaling, but (which is more, and much worse,) in preferring,
magnifying, and advancing of their Pope and Church, and their authority, above
the authority of the Scriptures: and therefore does Silvester Prierias,
Contr^. Lutheri conclus. de potestate Papae.
Master of the Popes Palace, affirm, that Indulgences be warranted unto us,
not by the authority of Scripture, but by the authority of the Church and
Pope of Rome, which (says he) is a greater Authority. Again he says:
Whosoever rests not on the doctrine of the Roman Church, and Bishop of Rome,
as the infallible rule of God, a qua, sacra Scriptura robur trabit and
authoritatem, from which, the sacred Scripture draws her strength and
authority, he is an Heretic. Eck. de Ecclesia.
And so says Eckius likewise: that, Scriptura nisi Ecclesiae authoritate, non
est authentica: The Scripture is not authentical, but by the authority of the
Church* and sundry such ways do they oppugn the all-sufficient written word,
doctrine, and instruction of Christ, our Prophet. His Priesthood they also
oppugn, which consists chiefly in these two things: viz. in sacrificing
himself once for all his people, upon the Cross, to take away their sins:
and, in making intercession for them. Now this his onely-propitiatory, and
only-bodily, and all-sufficient Sacrifice, they oppugn by erecting of another
Sacrifice in their abominable Mass: wherein they say, their Priests offer up
Christ every day, or often, and that in a bodily manner* and this sacrifice so
offered by them, they also say is propitiatory, and takes away the sins of
men: which is most intolerably blasphemous against that sacrifice of Christ.
His all-sufficient mediation and intercession they also oppugn, by making
many Mediators and Intercessors beside him: as namely the Virgin Mary, and
other Saints and Angels, for whose intercession sake, they desire God to hear
them, and to grant their requests. The Kingdom of Christ, the Papacy likewise
oppugneth: for they will not suffer his Church to be ruled and governed by his
own Word, and by such orders, rules and laws, as he in his Scriptures has
ordained; but according to the canons, rules and pleasure of the Pope, and
according to his constitutions and ordinances. Yea, as for the laws and
ordinances of God, the Pope partly dispenses with them, and partly abrogateth
them, making them at his pleasure, of no effect by his constitutions,
traditions, and devises: yea, he takes to himself, to be king and head of
the whole militant Church, and all the authority to the head and king of the
Church belonging, and that without any warrant at all from Christ, like a
notable traitor and usurper. For which cause it is, that he also destroys, so
much as he can, all the good subjects of this kingdom of Christ, even his best
Saints and servants, be they Kings, Princes, or whosoever. And thus you see,
how he oppugneth Christ, every manner of way, both in respect of his Person,
and in respect of his Offices: and that not openly and professedly, but in a
cunning, close, and covert manner, that is, in such a sort, as belongs to
Antichrist, and Antichristian people to do.

4 It is further said in this Text, where Antichrist is described; that, He
shall be exalted above all that is called God, or that is worshipped. Observe,
that he does not say* that he shall be exalted above God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
but, above every one that is called God. For it is one thing to be God
essentially, and another thing to be called God, or to have the name of God or
Gods attributed to him. Who then be the men that be in Scripture, called God,
or Gods? Psalm 82.1.6.7. Exodus 7.1* Exodus 22.28.
It is evident that they be Kings, Princes, and other such like Rulers and
Magistrates. Now it is manifest, that, above all these the Pope is exalted; yea
even above the Emperors themselves. for he claims a Supremacy above them
all: taking upon him, to depose Kings, Princes and Emperors, and to give away
their Kingdoms, Empires and Dominions at his pleasure. O damnable and
intolerable pride in a Bishop: Did ever S. Peter (whose successor he pretends
to be) thus detestably magnify and exalt himself? All the Christian world
knows, 1. Pet. 2.13, 14.
that S Peter was of another and more humble spirit: not exalting himself
above, but subiecting himself evermore unto and under the authority of Kings,
Princes and Emperors, and taught all people likewise this duty of subjection
and obedience. And so did S. Paul also. Yea all Bishops, Romans 13.1. etc. Tit.
3.1.
and even the Bishops of Rome themselves, as well as the rest, were, in ancient
time, subject to the Emperors; and the Emperors commanded over them. The
Emperors Writ (says Hierome) caused the Bishops, Hieron. in Epita. Paul^.
Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. ^.
as well of the East, as of the West, to draw to Rome. This is (says Eusebius)
a copy of the Emperors Writ, whereby he commands a Council to be kept in
Rome. Note that he says, he commanded it. Leo, Epist. 12. and 17.
Yea he so commanded a Council, that Pope Leo himself excused his absence
before the Emperor. The Emperor Constantine (says Sozomen) sent out his
Letters unto all the Rulers of the Churches, Sozom. lib, 1. cap. 17.
that they should all meet at Nice upon a day: Unto the Bishops of the
Apostolic Sees, unto Macarius the Bishop of Jerusalem, and unto Julius the
Bishop of Rome, A^then. Consti. T^t. 15.
etc. We command (says Justinian the Emperor) the most holy Archbishops and
Patriarchs of Rome, of Constantinople, of Alexandria, of Antioch, and of
Jerusalem, etc. Seeing then, that all Bishops, and even the Bishop of Rome,
as well as the rest, were in ancient time, subject to Kings, Princes, Romans 1^.1.
and Emperors, as to the higher powers, so ordained of GOD, over them: What
monstrous pride is it now, in the Bishop of Rome, so highly to magnify and
advance himself, as to claim and arrogate to himself, a Supremacy and
authority over them all? Cae. Extravag. de maiorit. Et obed. C. 5. and seg.
extr de Translat. Epis^.
Insomuch that it is registered of him in his own Records, that he is so many
times greater then the Emperor, as the Sun is greater then the Moon. Is it
not then, high time and more then time, for all, to renounce and to be ashamed
of such an unholy Father, whose pride, by no pretenses, can be excused, and is
so superlatively ill, as that it is unmatchable?

5 For, indeed, long before this his usurping and taking to himself a
Supremacy over all Kings, Princes, and Emperors, to whom of right and duty
he ought to be subject, did his pride appear, and show it self, in taking
upon him a Supremacy over all Bishops and Patriarchs, who were his equals: so
that he would be called Universal Priest, or Universal Bishop, chiefest Bishop,
and head of the whole universal Church of Christ upon earth, and by other such
like lofty and supereminent titles. And yet when John, the Patriarch of
Constantinople, affected that title, of Universal Bishop over all, you may
remember, what Gregory himself, the then Bishop of Rome spoke, namely thus: I
speak it confidently, Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 30.
that whosoever calls himself the universal Bishop, or desires to be so
called, he is, in that his Elation, the forerunner of Antichrist, because in
that his pride, he sets himself before others. Again, he says: None of my
Predecessors, Bishops of Rome, Lib. 4. Epist. 32. and 36.
^ver consented to use this ungodly name: No Bishop of Rome over took upon
him, this name of singularity: we the Bishops of Rome, will not receive
this honor, being offered unto us. Again, writing unto Eulogius, he says
thus: Behold even in the preface of your letter, Ad Eulog.
you have written the word of a proud appell^tion, naming me the universal
Pope, notwithstanding I have forbidden it: I beseech your holiness to do so
no more: For whatsoever is given to any other above reason, the same is taken
from your selves. Yea, it is further recorded even in Gratian himself, that,
The Bishop of Rome may not be called universal Bishop. Gratian did. 99. pr^^.
sed.
Here then you may perceive, how shamelesly, the Popish Church abuses some
places of Scripture, wresting them, for the maintenance of this their Popes
claimed Supremacy and universalitie over all Bishops, and the whole Church of
Christ. As first, they allege that saying of Christ to Peter; where (after
that Christ had demanded of his Apostles: Whom do ye say that I am? and that
Peter had answered in the name of them all, Mat. 16.15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
saying, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God): Christ said unto him:
Blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not
revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven: And I say unto
thee, Thou art Peter: and upon this Rock will I build my Church: and the
gates of hell shall not overcome it: And I will give unto thee, the Keys of
the Kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be
bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven. Howbeit, first, you must be put in mind, that the confession which
Peter here made, Ioh. 6.67* 68.
of Christ to be the Son of the living God, was likewise the confession and
acknowledgement of the rest of the Apostles, (...). Theoph. in Luc. 21. and,
(...). Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 14.

Petrus, pro omnibus dixit, and cum omnibus accepit. Orig. Tract. 1. in Mat.


as well as of Peter: so that He for his part was, therein, but as the Mouth of
the rest, or like the Foreman of a Jury, pronouncing that verdict and
confession for them all. For which cause also, the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the power of binding and loosing of sins, be there promised to
be given to Peter, not as to him alone, but to him as bearing and representing
at that time the person of them all. For, that Peter at that time, represented
the person of them all, is manifest, by these reasons. First the question was
demanded, not of Peter alone, but of the rest of the Apostles as well as of him,
(for the words be not in the singular, but in the plural number: Vos autem quem
me esse dicitis? But Whom do ye say that I am?) and consequently, the answer
that was given, must consonantly thereunto, be supposed to be the answer of
them all. For it were a very uncivil and unseemely part, beside undutifull,
if the rest being demanded and asked the question as well as Peter; should give
no manner of answer to their Lord and Master demanding it of them. Which they
must needs be held guilty of, unless their answer be taken to be included,
and comprehended in that answer of Peter. Secondly, when this promise made to
S. Peter, came to be performed, it was performed to them all alike: as you may
see in that place of Ioh. 20.22, 23. where that promise was performed, and
accomplished. Which also shows, that the promise made to S. Peter, was not
made as to him alone, but to him, as representing at that time the person of
them all. For the promise, and the performance of that promise, must of
necessity have coherence, and be made to agree together, as most aptly and
rightly expounding one an other. And according hereunto, do the Ancient
Fathers likewise expound it: Origin says: This saying of Christ to Peter (I
will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven) is common also to the
rest of the Apostles: Origin. in Man. Tract. 1.
and the words that follow, as spoken to Peter, be also common to them all.
Again he says: Shall we dare to say, that the gates of hell shall not overcome
only Peter? and that the same gates shall prevail against all the other
Apostles? And again he says: If we speak^ the same thing that Peter spoke,
we are become Peter, and unto us it shall be said: Thou art Peter: for he is
a Rock, whosoever is the disciple of Christ. And again he says: If thou
think that the whole Church was builded only upon Peter: what will thou then
say of John, the son of Thunder: and of every of the Apostles? Cyprian
speaks in like sort, upon these words of Christ to Peter. In the person of
one man (says he) the Lord did give the Keys to all the Apostles, to
signify the unity of them all: Cyprian. de simplicit. Pr^lat.
for verily the rest of the Apostles, were the same that Peter was, endued
with equal f^llowship both of honor and power; But he did begin with unity,
that is to say, with one, that thereby it might be signified, that there is but
one Church of Christ. In like sort does S. Augustine expound it, saying: When
they were all asked, Peter alone makes the Answer: and it is said unto him:
August. in Ioh. tract. 124.
I will give unto thee the Keys of the kingdom of heaven: as though he
alone had received authority to bind and to loose: whereas HE had spoken
THAT, for them All, and received THIS, as representing, or bearing in himself
the person of unity. And again he says: If there were not a mystery of the
Church in Peter, The Lord would not have said, I will give to thee the Keys of
the Kingdom of heaven: August. in Ioh. tract. 50.
for if this were said only to Peter, then the Church has them not: And if
the Church has them, then when he received the Keys, he signified the whole
Church. So likewise testifies S. Hierome: Ye will say (says he) that the
Church is builded upon Peter: Hiero. cont. Iovinian. lib. 1.
howbeit in another place, the same thing is done upon all the Apostles: and
all receive the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and the strength of the
Church, is founded equally upon them all. Beda does likewise so expound it,
saying thus: The power of binding and loosing, Beda upon Mat. 16.
notwithstanding it seem to be given only to Peter, yet, without all doubt,
we must understand, that it was given also to the rest of the Apostles. Haymo
does also so affirm: This authority (says he) the Lord gave not only to
Peter, Haymo. in his Homily, upon the feast of Peter and Paul.
but also to all the Apostles: because Peter expressed the faith of all the
Apostles, when he said, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God: So that
what the Lord said to Peter, he said unto all his Apostles: as appears, Ioh.
20.23. where he says thus unto them all alike: Whose sins ye remit, they
are remitted unto them: and whose sins ye retain, they are retained.
Wherefore the Keys, whereby the Kingdom of heaven, is opened and shut to
sinners, and the power of binding and loosing sins, appear to be, no more
specially, or principally given to Peter, then to the rest of the Apostles,
but they all received that power and athority, equally, and alike. And here
withal you may perceive, that the very person of Peter, is not the Rock, or
foundation, whereupon the Church of Christ is builded (for then, upon the death
of Peter, the church, for want of a rock or foundation, to uphold it, would
have come to ruin) but it is Christ Jesus himself (whom Peter there, for
himself, and in the name of the rest, confessed) that is the Rock, and
foundation, to support and uphold the Church, and whereupon it is builded. For
so also does S. Paul expound and declare it, ^ Cor. 3.11. 1. Cor. 10.4.
saying in precise terms, thus: Other foundation can no man lay, then that
which is laid already, which is Jesus Christ* where you see, that he
expressly affirms, the Church to have no other foundation, but Christ only.
And in another place, he also calls Christ Jesus, the Rock, in express
terms: for he says: That Rock was Christ: yea, and Christ himself says:
He that hears my words, and does them, is the wise man, that builds his
house upon the Rock, Mat. 7.24.
What better expositors then these would you have, to expound and declare these
words? By the Rock then, not Peter, but Christ is to be understood. Yea,
howsoever Christ spoke in the Syriacke tongue, using the word Cepha, in both
places, yet in the Greek text, (which takes away all ambiguitie, and declares
the very true sense of those words) as also in the latin translations, there
is a clear and express difference, and distinction made, inter Petrum, and
Petram, between Peter, and the Rock: for the words be not, as you suppose:
Thou art Peter, and upon thee will I build my Church: but thus: Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church: that is, upon my self, whom
thou have thus confessed to be the Messiah, or Christ, the Son of the living
God, will I build my Church. So that howsoever the Church is builded upon
Christ, and such faith in him, and confession of him, as S. P^^er had, and
delivered, yet it is not builded upon the person of S. Peter, as is apparent.
And so also does S. Augustine teach and expound those words: Thou art Peter
(says he) and upon this Rock which thou have confessed, Aug. in Mat. Sermon
13. de verbi^ Domini.
upon this Rock which thou have acknowledged, in saying (Thou art Christ, the
Son of the living God) I will build my Church: that is upon my self, being
the Son of the living God. I will build my Church: I will build thee, upon
me, and not me upon thee. For men, vvilling to build upon men, said, I hold
of Paul, I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, that is, of Peter: but others, that
would not build upon Peter, but upon the Rock, said, I hold of Christ. Be not
these things, then very plain and evident? It is true, that in the numbering
of the names of the Apostles, Matthew. 10.2.
Peter is reckoned, first: but as they could not all be reckoned at once, but
that of necessity, some must be reckoned before the other, so Theophilact
tells you the reason of it, to be, namely, because he, and Andrew his
brother, were the first, that were called by Christ, to the Apostleship: as is,
indeed, manifest, in Mat. 4.18, 19. etc. And therefore does S. Ambrose also
acknowledge, that Paul was not interior to Peter, Ambr. in 2. Cor. 12.
or to any of the rest of the Apostles (that went before him) in Dignity, but
in Time. And in his Book De Incarnat. Domini cap. 4. he affirms, the
Primacie of Peter, to be Primatum confessionis etc. A. Primacie of confession
verily, but not of honor: a primacie of faith, but not of Degree. And likewise
does S. Augustine say of him, that he was ordine primus, the first, in order
or reckoning. Although then, Peter be granted to have a Primacie, Petrus in
Apostolorum ordine primus, in Christi amore promptissimus, Petrus respondet pro
omnibus* Aug. de verb. Dom. ser. 13. cap. 1. Vt Plat^ princeps Philosophorum
ita Petrus Apostolorum ^uit. Hironym. advers. Pelag. lib. 1. Luk 22.24, 25, 26.
Cyprian. de simplicit. Praelat. Cyprian. ad Quirin, in Act. 2.
yet you see what manner of Primacie it was, and that it was not any
King-like, or Emperour-like primacie, but a Primacie only of order, or of
Excellency in other respects. For Christ Jesus himself, when the Apostles
contended for a Maioritie, one over another, shows directly, that they might
not expect to reign, or bear Domination, one over another, although they saw
Kings and Princes, to do so over the people of those nations that were subject
to them: Vos autem non sic: Ye may not do so. Agreeablie whereunto, S.
Cyprian also has told us, that Christ gave to all his Apostles the same, or,
equal authority: And again he says, that Peter took nothing proudly upon
him, as to say, That he had a Primacie, whereby others that were his
after-commers, should be obedient to him. And so likewise testifies the
Greek Scoliast of him, saying thus: Behold how he does all things with
common consent: And further, he says of him: that he did nothing Archicos,
that is, Imperiously, or with Commanding authority: Much less did he any
thing, Monarchicos, that is, like a Monarch, or King over all. So that Peter
had no more primacie, in respect of any Legal, Princely, or Monarchical
authority over the rest of the Apostles, then the rest had over him: nor was
any more the Rock, or foundation of the Church, Ephesians. 2.20.
then the rest were. Yea, when S. Paul shows, that the Church is built upon
the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself, being the
chief Cornerstone: and when it is likewise said in S. John, Rev. ^1.14.
to have twelve foundations, and in them, the names of the Lambs twelve
Apostles: It is by both those places very apparent, that Peter, by being a
foundation, has therein, no more preeminence, or prerogative then the rest,
inasmuch as the rest be there expressly said to be foundations, as well as
he: The Church being founded, as well upon the rest of the Apostles, Hieronym.
ad Iovinian. lib. 1. cap. 14.
as upon Peter: and the strength of the Church, being equally builded upon them
all, as S. Hierome has also before affirmed. But then secondly, they allege,
Luke 22.31, 32. where Christ says thus unto Peter: Simon, Simon, behold, Satan
has desired you, to vvinnow you as wheat: Luke 22.31, 32. Satanas expetivit
vos* ut cribraret sicut triticum: Ego autem rogavi pro te etc.
But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, therefore when thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren. In which words, Christ foreseeing, how
Satan would sift and shake them all, but especially Peter (who by thrice
denying him, and forswearing of him, was to fall more grievouslie, and
dangerously then the rest) therefore tells him, that he had prayed for him
especially, that his faith fail not, that is, Beda. in Luke 22.
(as Beda expounds it) That after he was fallen by denying Christ, he
might rise again by repentance: and being so raised up to repentance, by Gods
special grace, and Christ's prayer, he might be afterward able, even by his
own example and experience, to comfort and strengthen others, in the like
case. S. Chrysostom likewise so expounds it: Oravi pro te ne deficeret,
fides tua, hoc est, ne in fine pereas: I have prayed for thee, Chrysostom. in
Ioh. homil. 72.
that thy faith fall not, that is (says he) that thou finally perish not.
Again, he shows you the true cause, why Christ did there so specially
mention Peter by name: If (says he) Satan desired to sift the miall, why did
not Christ pray for them all? It is evident, as I said before, that to touch
him the more deeply, Chrysostom. in Mat. homil. 83.
and to show his fall to be far more grievous, then any of the rest,
Christ turned his speech to him in particular. Again he says thus: I have
prayed for thee particularly, that thy faith fail thee not. This Christ spoke,
to touch Peter the more vehemently, signifying, that his fall should be much
fouler, then of his fellows, Ibidem Paulo aute.
and therefore that he needed the more help. This text then shows a greater
weakness in Peter, and a greater danger toward him, then toward the rest, and
from whence it was, that he had his strength and stabilitie, whereby he was
kept, that he did not utterlie perish, in that his so grievous and dangerous a
fall: but it is far from proving or intending, any Monarchical, or Princely
rule or authority in him over the rest: It has no such scope, purpose or
meaning in it.

And here also is answered the third Text they cite, of Ioh. 21.15, 16, 17.
where Peter having formerly denied Christ thrice, and yet having his sins
forgiven him (and therefore being bound to love Christ, more then the rest,
because more was forgiven him) Christ thrice requires of him, Luke
7.41.42.43.47.
to manifest and declare that his greater love, by so much the more diligenter
feeding of his Sheeepe: for this is the very drift, true scope, and meaning of
Christ, in that place. As S. Cyrill does also declare in these words: Because
Peter (says he) being enobled, Cyrill. in Ioh. lib. 12. cap. 46.
from Christ himself, with the name of the Apostleship with others, did thrice
deny Christ, in the time of his passion: now by right is required of him, three
confessions of his love: that three denials, might be countervayled, and
recompensed, with an equal number of confessings, etc. Christ asked of him
whether he loved him, more then the rest did? for he that had experience of
the greater clemency of the Lord toward him, ought of right to be affected
with greater love: for although generally all the Disciples were stricken with
great fear, when the Lord was betrayed: yet the fault of Peter was greater
then of the rest: who so denied Christ in so short a time. Because therefore
he obtained remission of sins by greater clemency of the Savior: greater
love of right is required of him: for he to whom more is forgiven, ought more
to love. Aug. tract. 123. in Ioh.
S. Augustine also, upon this Text likewise, infers, saying: Let the duty of
love be, to feed the Lords flock. And Chrysostom likewise says: Ter
interrogat etc. Christ asks thrice, Chrysostom. hom. 87. (...) Ioh.
and he always commands the same thing: that he might show how great care
he has of his sheep, and that the feeding of them is the greatest argument of
love. To the like effect speak other also of the ancient Fathers: declaring
that, the speech of Christ to Peter, touching the feeding of his sheep,
belongs not only to Peter, but to all Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of the
word also. Basil. de so. lib. visa cap. 23.
Wherefore S. Basil says thus: Christ said unto Peter; Love thou me? Feed
my sheep. And in like sort unto all Pastors, and Doctors he gave the same
power: a Token whereof is this, that they do All equally bind and loose,
as well as Peter. In like sort speaks again S. Augustine, saying: The words
of Christ, Aug. de ag^ne Christi cap 30.
Love thou me? and, Feed my sheep: when they are spoken unto Peter; they
are spoken unto all. And so witnesses S. Ambrose also, Ambr. de dignit.
Sacerd. cap. 2.
saying: Our Lord said unto Peter, Feed my sheep: which sheep and flock,
not only Peter then received, but he receives the same together with us: and
all we have received the same together with him. So that Peter, neither in
respect of feeding the flock of Christ, nor in any other respect, can be
showed to have, or to have exercised any imperious or Princely primacie, or
Monarchical superiority, over the rest of the Apostles, but was, in respect of
rule, power, and authority, equal with the rest, and the rest with him. And
this also further appears, by the very Commission it self (if you look upon
it) which was given to them, Matt 28.19 20. Mar. 16.15.16.
when they were sent out into all the world: for therein, is no more
principality, power, or authority given or appointed to the one, then to the
other. But now here, lastly observe withal, Matthew. 16.19.
that they be the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, (and not of Earthly
kingdoms) which Christ has committed to his Ministers. So that neither
Excommunication, nor any other power of the Keys (be it never so lawfully or
justly administered or executed) is of force, to depose any man from an earthly
kingdom, though it be of force, being rightly used, to seclude a man from the
kingdom of God, if he repent not. And therefore here I must crave leave to tell
you; that most wickedly and intolerably, has the Pope of Rome abused
excommunication and the power of the Keys, whilst he has used them for the
pulling down of Kings and Princes from their Thrones, and thereupon has moved
subjects to revolt from their Sovereigns, and to rebel against them. Is not
this sweet doctrine, and an holy religion, that upon no warrant at all, yea
contrary to the rule and commandment of God, shall presume to persuade
subjects, to rebel against their lawful Sovereigns, because forsooth, the
Pope has excommunicated them? For consider well the matter. First, it
appears that the Pope is no Minister at all of Christ, but the very Grand
Antichrist (as this Book clearly manifests) and has therefore no
authority from Christ, to excommunicate any Christians at all, much less to
excommunicate Christian Kings and Princes. But secondly, if he had that
authority, and that Princes were excommunicated by him, yet is excommunication
of no force (be it never so rightly done, or, used) to dissolve the duty and
allegiance of any subjects, or to depose from earthly kingdoms: inasmuch as
excommunication, and the whole power of the Keys (as is here apparent)
stretches only to the Kingdom of Heaven, and not to earthly Kingdoms. I
know they allege, that we are to account an excommunicate person, as a
Publican or Heathen. Matt. 18.17.
What of this? Admit, if you will, that he were thereby, become actually, and
in all respects, a very Heathen: yet I pray tell me; be not Heathen Kings
Kings, as well as those that be Christian? Yea, were they not, manifestly, Rev.
13.1. Tit 3.1. 1. Pet. 2.13.
Heathen Kings and Princes, whom nevertheless S. Paul, and S. Peter also,
commanded obedience and subjection to be yielded unto? Were not all those,
Heathen Emperors likewise, to whom the first Christians that lived under their
persecutions, were nevertheless obedient? You see then, that if it were so,
that excommunication did (as it does not) make a christian King to become a
very heathen King in all points and respects, yet still nevertheless he
remains a King, and consequently is still to be honored and obeyed, as a
King, of all his subjects.

They allege secondly, that the familiars and wonted companions of a man
excommunicated, are to withdraw their company from him, to the end he may be
ashamed of his sin, 2 Thessalonians 3.14.
and so be brought to repentance: but does this infer, that therefore
subjects may or ought to withdraw their obedience and allegiance from their
King? No such matter. For subjects cannot be termed or held, for familiars or
companions to those Kings and Princes under whom they be, but the Kings and
Princes of other Nations, and such as be forreiners, if any. If the Father be
excommunicated, though others withdraw their company from him, to the end he
may be ashamed of his sin committed, yet may not his son, that owes
special duty to him as to his father, therefore withdraw his duty and
obedience. For though excommunication make him, as an Heathen and a Publican,
yet it makes him not, no father, but he still remains a father as he was
before: and therefore of all his children, is to be reverenced, honored, and
obeyed, as a father. So likewise if the Husband, be excommunicate, and that
others therefore are to withdraw themselves from him, yet nevertheless he
still remains an husband, and consequently whatsoever others do, his wife,
that owes him special duty and respect, is not to withdraw her duty and
obedience, but is still to perform it unto him, as to her husband. If the
Master be excommunicate, and that others therefore do withdraw their company
from him; yet is not his servant to withdraw his duty and service from him:
for notwithstanding excommunication he still is and remains a Master to his
servant; and consequently notwithstanding excommunication, he is still of all
his servants to be obeyed as a Master. In like sort, if a King be
excommunicate, and that therefore other Kings and Princes, and such as owe him
no subjection, do withdraw themselves from him, yet may not his own subjects,
withdraw their subjection, duty, and obedience: inasmuch as notwithstanding
excommunication, he still is, and remains a King, to his subjects, and
consequently is of them, still to be honored, and obeyed, as their King. But
so as the Pope may serve his own turn, and erect and stablish to himself, a
Throne and Kingdom upon earth, above all Kings, Princes, and Emperors of the
world, (which is the chief, or only mark, he shot at) what cares he, what,
or whom, or how he does abuse, be they Kings, or subjects, or whosoever. Yea,
it is too well known to the world, that some of his Cardinals, Priests, and
Jesuits, have been so monstrous, as to persuade subjects to lay violent hands
upon, and to murder their own Sovereigns, accounting it, forsooth, to be a
matter meritorious, to commit such abominable and loathsome villainy, in their
pretended Catholic, but indeed most divellish and Antichristian cause. If
any make doubt hereof, let Parry, Ballard, Babington, and sundry others
executed in the late Queen ELIZABETH'S days, be witnesses hereof. And let also
that late most execrable plot and intention of theirs, to blow up the
Parliament house in England, and all that should be in it, with Gunpowder,
likewise bear witness hereof to all posterities. How then can such a
Religion, which under color of being Catholic, and under pretense of a
Catholic cause, (when nevertheless it is nothing so, but the clean
contrary) allows, warranteth, commands and commends rebellion, treason,
and murder of Christian and Protestant Kings and Princes, and their people, as
a matter good and meritorious, be, but most detestable and damnable? And what
can the Pope, being the approver, allower, and chief, in this business, and
for whose sake all this is done, be, but the Grand Antichrist? Where also you
may further understand, that the Popish Priests, Jesuits, and the rest of that
order, being (as they are) no Ministers of Christ, but of Antichrist, can
therefore give to none of you, any absolution or remission of your sins, but
do rather augment, enlarge, and increase your sins so much the more, (as
they must needs) by such your unlawful resorting to them. So that hereafter ye
shall do well, to forbear, and leave off your Eare-Christ, or, Auricular
Confession to them: which has also no commandment, or institution from
Christ, but is only an humane devise, whereunto none is necessarily tied.
Which thing is so clear that their own Canon Law affirms: De poenit. d 5.
in poenitent. gloss. Super. 5. de poenit. and remiss C. omnes utriusque.
Rhenan. Annot. ad Tertul. de poenit. Erasmus annot. ad Hiero. de obit. Fabiol.
Socrat. li. 5. c. 10. Sozom. li. 7. c. 16. Tripart. Hist. lib. 9. c. 35.
Niceph. lib. 12. c. 28. Mat. 3.6. Act. 19.18.
that, It was taken up only by a certain Tradition, and not by any
au^horitie of the Old or New Testament. Panormitan likewise says: That opinion
of the Canon Law, greatly pleases him, because he finds no manifest
authority, that ever God, or Christ, commanded us to confess our sins to a
Priest. And Rhenanus, and, Erasmus, also, affirm, that Christ ordained it not.
M^ctarius Bishop of Constantinople, upon an accident that fell out at
Confession, put it clean down in his Church: and the Bishops of the East did
the like in theirs. Which those godly ancient Bishops would never have done,
nor lawfully could have done, if it had been Gods own ordinance and
institution. As for the confession of sins which they made, that came to be
baptized of S. John Baptist; it was voluntary, and public, and no private,
or, auricular confession: and so was also their confession, voluntary and
public, and not secret or auricular, which is mentioned in Acts 19. It is
true, that S. James says: Iam. 5.16.
Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be
healed. But this no more tyeth you to confess your faults, or sins, to a
Priest, then to another man: yea, it no more tieth you (if ye well observe the
words) to confess your sins to a Priest, then ^t t^eth a Priest to confess
his sins to you: for by these words* Christian^ be charged to confess their
sins one to another: as they be likewise there charged, to pray one for
another. I grant, that in the ancient Church, such as were public offenders,
did, for those their open and public offenses, public penance, by public
and open confession of them, in the Congregation, with sorrow for the same, and
asking forgiveness first of God, then of the Church or congregation which they
had so offended: After which public confession, and penance, and satisfaction
so made to the Church or Congregation, where the offense was committed, they
were again reconciled, and received absolution by a public pronouncing of it
upon that their repentance declared. Which kind of public confession, and
open penance, and absolution thereupon, is also observed in the reformed and
Protestant churches. But this no way serves to prove your private, secret, and
auricular confession; yea it rather makes against it, because this was
public. Yet if any think, that a private confession to a Minister of Christ,
is, sometime, and in some cases, convenient and meet to be used: the
Protestants in their learned and godly works, against the Papists, have told
you, that they do not dislike it, but well allow and commend it, so often as
burden of conscience oppresses any man, for any sin by him committed, to
utter those his griefs, and confess his sins which wound him so sore,
either to any faithful Minister of Christ, or to any other skillful, godly,
and discreet Christian whosoever, thereby to receive help, remedy, and
consolation. Caietan himself, though he like well, Caietan. upon Ioh. 20.
with us, of a voluntary confession which is not forced or commanded, yet
expressly denies this Popish manner of Auricular Confession to be of Christ's
institution. And indeed the Ministers of Christ may very well pronounce
absolution or forgiveness of sins upon a free and voluntary confession,
though they bind not men, by a law of necessity, at certain times of the
year, to make such a confession unto them, as is used and urged in the
Papacy, after a tyrannical manner. This Christian, moderate, and allowable
course, do the Protestant Ministers hold, in their receiving of any
Confessions: as also they forgive not sins absolutely, and at pleasure, but
only (as is before said) ministerially and declaratively, and with a
limitation, viz. so as they have a right and lively faith, and a true
repentance, to whom they pronounce their absolution. But to proceed, and to
show how the other words in the Text, be also verified in the Pope: whilst he
takes upon him to forgive sins, as fully and absolutely as God himself:
whilst he takes upon him to depose Kings, and to dispose of their kingdoms
at his pleasure: whilst he takes upon him, not only to order and dispose of
earthly kingdoms, but also to rule and order the whole Church of God upon
earth, at his own will: what does he else, but sit in the Temple of God, as
God, and so show himself as if be were God? 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
yea, whilst he advances himself, above all Bishops, Kings, Princes, and
Emperors of the World, and above all general Councels also, so that he will
not be censured or controlled by any of these, or by any of their laws or
constitutions, and (which is yet more) whilst he advances himself even
above the divine Scriptures then selves, dispensing with them at his pleasure:
what does he else, but so carry himself as if he were God, or rather above
God? But, again, what does he else but sit in the Temple of God as God, and so
show himself as if he were God, whilst he rules and reigns in men's
consciences, like God, yea or rather above God himself? for common experience
shows, that the men and women that be under his subjection, and of his Church
and superstition, be more devoted, and more regardfull, to know and obey his
will, and his ordinances, and constitutions, then they be to know and obey God,
and his word, and commandments. It is then very evident that the Pope, is, at
the least, as a God unto them, and that upon him they as confidently rely, as
upon God himself, affirming and supposing him to have an infallibility of
judgment, and such a special direction by the Holy Ghost, as that he cannot
possibly err, in any thing he teaches, decrees, or determines. Yea does he
not sit in the Temple of God as God, and so show himself as if he were God,
when he not only takes upon him, Distinct. 21. and did 96 C satu evidenser.
the proper and peculiar powers, honors, preeminences, rights, and
authorities, belonging unto God, as is before declared, but even the very
title and name also of God? For, with a very bold face, he acknowledges
himself to be called God, urges the title, and challenges it: and further,
Christoph Marcell. in Council. la. ^eran. sess. 4.

In the gloss of the Extravant. cum inter.

In archa triumphali. Impress. Lugduni. in Anno 1555.


they say of him, that he is, Dominus deus noster Papa, Our Lord God the Pope.
And do not also these Verses, dedicated to him, and accepted of him,
sufficiently declare the same?

Oraclo vocis mundi moderaris habenas,
Et merito in terris crederis esse Deus.
That is, By Oracle of thy voice, thou rul'st and govern'st all,
And vvorthily a God on earth, men deem and do thee call.


6 But S. Paul proceeds, and says thus: Remember ye not, that when I was
yet with you, I told you these things? and now ye know, what vvithholdeth,
2. These. 2 5* 6, 7, 8.
that he might be revealed in his time: for the mystery of iniquity
already works: only be which now vvithholdeth, shall let, until he be
taken out of the way, and then shall that wicked (or, lavvlesse) ^an be
revealed. (...).
Here he shows, what it was that did withhold and keep back Antichrist,
that he did not appear in his colors, in those times of the Apostles:
albeit, the Mystery of that Iniqui^y was not then altogether idle, but was even
then a working, in such close manner as it could. This same, Tertul. de resur*
carnis. Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Aug. de Civit. Dei. li. 20 c 19. Hicronym ad
Algas. quaest. 11. Cyrill. Catech. 15. Primasius, Theophilact, Ambr. in 2.
These. 2.
To chatechon, which vvithholdeth, and lets, and hinders Antichrist, that
he could not then appear, was the Roman Empire, as Tertullian, Chrysostom,
Augustine, Hierome, and others do expound it. For so long as the Roman Empire
stood in his full and flourishing estate, Antichrist could not rise to that his
power and height. And therefore that Antichrist might appear, and show
himself in his glory and greatness, it was requisite, that the Emperor of
Rome, should give place and depart from that City, where the seat of the
Empire then was, that so the Pope might possess it, and make it his seat:
according to that prophecy in the Revelation of S. John before mentioned:
where it is foretold, that, Rev. 17.18.
that great City of Rome, was to become the head and Metropolitan City, for
the Antichristian Kingdom. And the issue and event has showed it self
answerable. For the Emperor Constantine, removed and translated the seat of the
Empire, from Rome in Italy, unto Bizantium, (otherwise called Constantinople)
in Greece: and after that began the Emperors, by little, and little, to loose
their right in Italy: so that at the last, Rome, the ancient seat of the
Empire, with a great part of Italy, fell into the Bishop of Rome his hands: and
now, and for the space of many hundred years, has the Bishop of Rome,
otherwise called the Pope (and not the Emperor) there had his seat. This is
so evident, as that it needs no further declaration. Wherefore to go
forward, S. Paul says: that, The coming of Antichrist, shall be by the
vvorking of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and in all
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, ^. These. 2.9.10.
amongst them that perish, because they received not the love of the truth etc.
This is before showed, to agree very fitly to the Kingdom of Popery. For who
boast so much of Miracles, as they? And yet, even touching the Miracles in
their Legends, Claudius Espencaeus himself says: Esp. 2 Timothy 4. digr. 21.
Can. loc. lib. 11. cap. 6. Caiet. opusc. de concep. Vir. c. 1.
No Stable is so full of dung, as their Legends are full of fables. Canus also
taxes, even Gregory's Dialogues, and Bedaes History in this point. And
Caietan further taxes, as uncertain, the Miracles done, even by those that
be the Canonized Saints in Popery. Why then will they still be so credulous,
as to believe their Miracles, to object them, or to rely upon them? For if you
doubt of the real bodily presence of Christ in the Sacrament, they will tell
you, that it has been confirmed by Miracle. If you doubt of Purgatory, and
whether Masses, Trentalls, Prayers, or such like, do the Souls of the dead
any good, they will also tell you of a Miracle, or of some strange Vision,
Revelation, or Apparition of some dead person, to prove the same: And so (to
comprehend all in few words) for the confirmation of their whole religion, they
will tell you strange tales of Miracles, Apparitions, and wonders, wrought by
their Popes, Priests, Jesuits, Monks, and other their supposed holy men, and
holy women of their religion. Howbeit, God himself has herein given us a good
rule, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
and direction, saying thus: If there arise among you, a Prophet, or a Dreamer
of Dreams, and give thee a sign or vvonder (and the sign, and the vvonder,
which he has told thee, come to pass) saying: Let us go after other gods,
which thou have not known, and let us serve them: thou shall not hearken to
the words of that Prophet, or unto that Dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your
God proves you, to know, whether you love the Lord your God, with all your
heart, and with all your soul: ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and
fear him, and shall keep his commandments: and hearken unto his voice, and
ye shall serve him, and cleave unto him: But that Prophet, or, that Dreamer of
dreams, he shall be slain, because he has spoken to turn you away from
the Lord your God, (which brought you out of the Land of Egypt, and delivered
you out of the house of Bondage) to thrust thee out of the way, wherein the
Lord thy God commanded thee to walk. Whereby we are admonished, that if any
Miracle be wrought, or wonder done, to lead a man out of the right way from
God, and his religion, or for the confirmation of any Idolatrous, erroneous,
or false religion, or of any point of Error, or Untruth: we must not regard
it, or be moved by it. And therefore we are first to examine, whether that
point of faith, and religion, which in these days, is so attempted, or
intended to be proved by Miracle, or Wonder, be consonant and agreeable to
the word of God, delivered unto us in the holy and Canonical Scriptures: For,
if it be not found to be thereby warranted, the Miracle, or wonder, wrought
for the confirmation of that untruth, must bear no sway with us, how great
soever it seem, but must be rejected, as here you see. And this is one cause,
amongst the rest why they be called, Lying Miracles, and wonders, which are
done in Popery, the Antichristian Church, 2 These. 2.9.
because they be done to this end, to maintain lies, and lying doctrines, and
an untrue and false religion: whereby they deceive men, and bring them, first
to Impiety, and misbeleefe, and afterward to utter ruin and destruction.

7 For as this Antichristian Popery was to prevail, by the subtlety, and
deceiveablenesse thereof, and by the working of Satan, and by the lying miracles
and wonders that be therein: so S. Paul further shows, amongst whom it should
prevail, namely, Amongst them that perish, because they received not the love
of the truth, that they might be saved: and that therefore God did sent them
strong delusion, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10.11.12.
that they should believe lies: that they all might be damned, which believed
not the Truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. In which words you see,
first, the cause and reason, which God had to punish the world, with this great
plague of Antichristian Popish blindness, namely, the neglect and contempt of
his Word and Gospel, and their preferring men's traditions, doctrines, lies,
and devises, before his truth in his Scriptures contained: For (says he)
because they received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved;
therefore it is, that Satan with his frauds and deceiptfull practices, should
so prevail among them. Again he says: And therefore shall God send them
strong delusion, that they should believe lies, that they all might be damned
which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Observe
here well, that he calls it (as most apparently it is indeed) a strong
delusion, wherewith Papists are possessed, and carried; and that it is also a
strong delusion to believe lies, and such, as that they take pleasure in that
unrighteousness. Do not all devoted Papists find this to be true? And is not
Popish Antichristianisme, also rightly and worthily called, Injustice, or,
unrighteousness? when most injuriously it has robbed God and men, Christ and
his Church, and the sacred and canonical Scriptures, and not only Bishops and
Clergy men, but Kings, Princes, and Emperors also, and people, of the rights,
and dues to them belonging? Yea, it breaks the strength and sinews of Commonweals also, as well as of the Church, by lying and deceiptfull equivocations:
by dispensing with oaths, and with other things: by their doctrine and Decree,
that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics: by their dissolving of the
allegiance of subjects: by their doctrine of deposing Kings: by their
Gunpowder plots, and most detestable devises of treasons, rebellions, murders,
and massacres of Christian and Protestant Princes, and their people: and by
sundry other ways, rufull to be told, and most shameful to be either
professed or put in execution. Can there be greater points of injustice or
unrighteousness then these? But all this while, forget not, I beseech you,
amongst what manner of people it is, that this Antichristian Popery prevails
namely, that it is amongst them that perish, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11, 12.
that all they might be damned which believed not Gods truth, (extant in his
Scriptures) but take pleasure in that unrighteousness: For, do you not hereby
perceive, the most fearful estate, and most woeful condition, that all
Papists be in, that notwithstanding, they be often admonished, will not, for
all that, forsake Antichrist, and his religion, to embrace the truth, and the
most pure religion of Christ, taught in the holy Scriptures? Be they not here
expressly affirmed to be such as perish, and are to be damned, if they persist
obstinate, and will not be reclaimed or converted? Agreeably hereunto is also,
that which is written in the Revelation of S. John, where the Angel uttered it
with a loud voice (to the end that all men should take notice of it) saying: If
any man worship the beast, and his image, and receive his mark in his
forhead, or on his hand, Rev. 14.9.10, 11.
the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, yea of the pure wine
that is poured into the cup of his wrath, and he shall be tormented with fire
and brimstone, before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb: and the smoke of
their torment, shall ascend up evermore, and they shall have no rest, day nor
night, which worship the beast, and his image, and whosoever receives the
print of his name. Consider these things seriously, ye that are wont to say
and hold, that None can be saved but he that is a pure Papist: Do ye not see
the clean contrary here directly affirmed, and that by warrant from God
himself, that whosoever is a pure Papist, and in contempt of all admonitions,
will so live and die, is not a saved but a damned soul? We wish your
salvation, and if your selves wish it likewise, (as no doubt ye do), ye will
then take the right course for it, and be content not only patiently, but
thankefully also, to receive these christian and friendly admonitions, and so
be moved in time to relinquish, and utterly to detest and abandon this
Antichristian Popery, that thus directly and certainly leads to Hell, and
damnation.

8 But consider yet further, the other words of S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
where he says of Antichrist, thus: Whom the Lord shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish with the brightness of his coming. For
hereby appears, that Antichrist, and his religion, shall be consumed by the
voice and preaching of the word of God, (which he calls the spirit of his
mouth), and that he shall be utterly abolished at the bright and glorious
coming of Christ to judgment: so that here you may observe the decay and
destruction of that Antichristian monster; namely, that though he shall not be
utterly destroyed in all points and respects, until the coming of Christ to
judgment, but that some remnants of him will be till then, yet he shall in the
mean space, be mightily decayed, wasted, and consumed, by the voice and
preaching of the pure, strong, powerful, and prevalent word of God: which is
able to cast down strong holds, Heb. 4.12*
and imaginations, and every high thing, that is exalted against the knowledge
of God, and to bring into captivity every thought, 2. Cor. 10.4 5.
to the obedience of Christ. The truth of this wasting and consuming of
Antichrist, by the powerful preaching of the Gospel and word of Truth, we
see apparent before our eyes: for who knows not, how since the preaching of
the Gospel, by those many excellent instruments of God, whom he was pleased
to raise up, in the later age of the world for that purpose; Pope and Popery
has come down in diverse kingdoms and dominions of Europe, and has been
much and mightily wasted and consumed, and must yet consume more and more,
until at last he be utterly destroyed and abolished, according to this
Prophecy of S. Paul? And agreeably hereunto, S. John also in his Revelation,
tells us, of seven Angels that were to blow their Trumpets, and that under
the blowing of the Trumpet by the seventh Angel, there shall be no more time,
but the mystery of God shall be finished, Rev. 10.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
and the world have his end. Now after that the sixth Angel had began to blow,
and before the blast of the seventh Angel, there is a little Book opened
(namely, the book of the holy Scriptures) which had before lien closed and
shut up in Popery) which book is there delivered to S. John, Rev 10.2.^, 9,
10, 11.
representing the person of Christ's faithful Ministers, with a commandment
given unto them, that they should take it, and eat it up, and that it should
make their belly bitter, but should, be in their mouth, as sweet as honey: and
that thereout they should preach, and prophecy again, among the people, and
nations, and tongues, and to many Kings. And this, in another place, is called
the Everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14.6.
committed to Christ his Ministers and servants, to preach unto them, that dwell
on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. This
Book (of the Everlasting Gospel, and Scriptures of God) is called little, in
respect of the great volumes of the Popes laws, and decrees, and constitutions
of men, and is commanded to be taken and eaten up by the Ministers and servants
of Christ, because they were eagerly and earnestly, and with a vehement
appetite, to read and study it, and to digest, muse, and meditate upon it:
and it is said, to make the belly bitter, though in their mouth it was as
sweet as honey: because such was the exceeding great contentment and abundance
of solace and joy, which they received thereby to themselves, as that tasting
and finding the incomparable sweetness of it, and letting it, as it were down
into their stomachs, and filling their bellies with it, they were not able to
contain it within themselves, but must needs utter and declare the same unto
others, whatsoever bitter troubles, afflictions, persecutions, or calamities,
should or did thereupon ensue: which molestations, their enemies would bring
upon them, purposely, to hinder the preaching and publishing of Gods religion,
and truth, contained in that Book, and for the maintenance of the Popes law,
religion, and constitutions, which had so long before prevailed in the world.
You see then, how after that this Antichristian Popery, had corrupted and
oppressed the most ancient and true religion of Christ, once planted and
stablished by the Apostles, and contained in that Book of the Scriptures: the
very same book of the Scriptures, and the truth therout, being (as was
foretold it should be) once again, preached and published, Rev. 10.11.
has begun to spread his beams, and taken in hand, the discovery and
conquest of that secret, hidden, and subtle traitor, the Antichristian Popery:
having already much wasted and consumed it by the power thereof, in diverse
parts of Europe, and still more and more must wast and consume it, until at
last it be utterly abolished. So that we may observe here, for the better
confirmation of us in our faith and religion, that all things fall out, in
their just times and seasons, foretold and before appointed of God; namely,
that this wasting and consuming of the Pope and Popery, by the preaching and
publishing of Gods truth and religion, in that book of the Scriptures
contained, came not to pass, nor was to come to pass, till after the time
that the sixth Angel had begun to blow his Trumpet, that is, not until toward
the latter end of the world: for under the blowing of the Trumpet by the
seventh Angel, the world is to end, as is before declared.

9* But now against this position of the Pope to be Antichrist, is objected,
that Antichrist shall be only one particular man in certain, which shall reign,
just three years and an half, and no longer: And so Bellarmine also teaches,
and for proof of this opinion, Bellarm. in his fifth Demonstration touching
Antichrist.
he cites diverse Texts of Scripture, out of Daniel, and the Revelation: as
namely Dan. 7.25. and Dan. 12.7. where mention is made of a Time, and times,
and half a time: and of Rev. 11.3. where mention is made of the two
vvitnesses, that they did prophecy 1260 days: and Rev. 12.6.4. where mention
is again made of 1260 days: and of a Time, and Times, and half a Time: and
Rev. 11.2. and Rev. 13.5. where mention is also made of 42 Months. All which
times, he makes to be one and the same: and, accounting 30 days to every
month, he says, they contain just three years and an half, and that this
is the precise and full time of Antichrist his Reign. Neither is it (says
he) against this, that in Dan. 12.11. Antichrist is said to reign, 1290
days: that is, 30 days more, then S. John mentioned: for S. John (says he)
speaks of the two witnesses, which shall be slain by Antichrist, one month
before Antichrist himself perish. But, how can these things stand together,
wherein there is such a palpable and manifest contradiction? For, first, if it
be true which he says, that Antichrist shall reign only 1260 days that is,
just three years and an half (as he expounds it) how can it be true, which
he afterward says, that Antichrist shall reign 1290 days, which is one
month longer, consisting of 30 days? Is there no difference between 1260
days, and 1290 days? Bellarmine himself confesses, that there is a months
difference (consisting of 30 days), between them. And is the difference of a
month, or 30 days, nothing in the account of time? Do not 1290 days, by
Bellarmines own reckoning, contain three years and seven months? and is
three years and six months, and three years and seven months, all one?
Yea, the very reason which Bellarmine brings to reconcile the difference of
the times, will not agree with himself. For you see, that he here teaches,
1290 days, to be the time allotted to Antichrist: and a part of this time,
namely, 1260 days, he shows that the two VVitnesses lived together with
Antichrist: and the residue of that time (which is 30 days more, that is, one
month after the death of those VVitnesses) he says, that Antichrist lived. If
then, those two Witnesses did accompany Antichrist, that is, came, when he
came, and did prophecy 1260 days, that is, just three years and an half
before they died, and that after their death, Antichrist still lived, and that
by the space of a month: how can it be shifted, but that Antichrists reign
must be granted to continue longer then that time aforesaid, of just three
years and an half? If you answer (as one Master Christopherson, in defense
of Bellarmine, does) that this last month is not to be accounted of, because
Antichrist during that his last month, reigned not so strongly, and firmly,
as he did before, and that his kingdom was then weak and declining: This
hinders not but that his reign and kingdom did, for all that, still
continue, even during that month, as well as during any of those former
months, days, or later times, wherein he was in his declination. For a man
cease not to be a King, because he at some time rules and reigns more
feebly and weakly, then at other-some times. And therefore even this last
month, as well as any of the rest of the later months or days, is to be
reckoned and accounted part of Antichrist his reign: for else you may as well
exclude the sixth month, or at least some part of it, or the last day of the
sixth month, as the seventh month, or the first day of the same seventh
month: because in those days also, Antichrist was declining. But what? Shall
not the reign of Antichrist, or of any King whosoever, be said and supposed
to continue, so long as he lives, whilst he is neither deposed, nor
surrendreth, nor yields up his kingdom to any other, nor has done, nor
suffered to be done, any act to the contrary? yea, Bellarmine himself does
expressly account this last month, as well as any of the former, as a part of
Antichrist his reign, using the very word, and saying: that he is, Regnaturus
mill ducentis nonaginta diebus, to Reign 1290 days. Here then you see by
this incurable contradiction and repugnant doctrine of Bellarmine and other
Papists, that the long retained opinion of Antichrist his reigning just three
years and an half, is either utterly uncertain, or utterly untrue. And that
you may yet better perceive the uncertaintie, Dan. 8.14.15.
or rather untruth of that opinion: consider, that the Prophet Daniel also
mentions 2300 days: which text and time, Hieronym* in Dan. cap. 8.
diverse also of the ancient Fathers (as S. Hierome witnesses) did apply unto
Antichrist. Which opinion of those ancient Writers, if a man should hold, then
must Antichrists reign, be yet of much longer continuance, then either 1260
days, or then 1290 days, that is, much longer then either three years and
six months, or three years and seven months. Such uncertaintie there is,
even in ancient Fathers, as well as in other writers, when they go by
conjectures or suppositions, without sufficient warrant of the divine
Scriptures. Bellarm. in his sixth Demonstration touching Antichrist.
But Bellarmine yet further proceeds, and says thus: that The Prophet Daniel
after he had said cap. 12.11. that Antichrists kingdom should endure 1290
days, adds verse. 12. Blessed is he which expects, and comes to 1335
days: that is, to 45 days after Antichrists death: for then will our Lord
come to judgment, and render the crowns of righteousness to the Conquerors.
Observe this well also: for, if this opinion of his, concerning Antichrist,
were true; namely, that he shall reign just three years and an half, and
yet that he shall continue one month longer (consisting of 30 days), to make
up the full number of 1290 days, and that 45 days after, shall be the time of
Christ's coming to judgment, and of eternal Blessedness, as he there
teaches: who sees not, that any man living in that time of the reign of
Antichrist, may, before hand, by this reckoning, certainly know, the very Day
of the end of the world, and of Christ his coming to judgment? Matthew 24.36.
Mat. 13.32.
But of That day, and hour, knows no man, no not the Angels of Heaven, but
my Father only* says Christ: and therefore that opinion cannot possibly be
true. But moreover, sundry learned men do say, that the Prophecy of Daniel
touching the little horn there mentioned, and the times ascribed to him,
concerns not Antichrist at all, directly and properly, but only Antiochus
Epiphanes, (that cruel tyrant, and great persecutor, and afflicter of those
Saints and ancient people of God, the Jews) in whom, and whose history, they
affirm, that all those several times, mentioned in Daniel, received their full
and due accomplishment.

But you allege, that even some Protestant Writers do also expound the Time,
and Times, and half a Time, mentioned in Daniel, as also the 1260 days
mentioned in the Revelation (there otherwise called 42 months, and, a Time,
and Times, and half a Time), to belong to Antichrist. Howbeit, you should
remember withal, that even those Protestants that so expound it, do teach,
that those days and times for all that, are not to be taken literally (as you
take them), but mystically and Prophetically, and namely, not for so many
common and natural days, but for so many years, that is to say, for 1260
years, accounting every day for a year: for so they say, that, in the
Scripture, it is sometimes used: as in Ezechiel, where God says thus unto him:
Thou shall bear the iniquity of the house of Judah, forty days: I have
appointed thee, Ezech. 4.6.
a day for a year. So in the Book of Numbers, God speaks thus: After the
number of the days, Numb. 14 34.
in which ye searched out the Land, even forty days, every day for a year,
shall ye bear your Iniquity for forty years, and ye shall feel my breach
of promise. So again does the Scripture mention a week of days, and a week
of years According whereunto, Dan. 10 2.3. Levit. 25.8. Dan 9.24.
the seventie weeks mentioned in Daniel, be also expounded, not of seventie
weeks of days, but of seventie weeks of years, that is to say, seventie
times seven years, which make 490 years, every day being reckoned for a
year: (for according to this computation, and reckoning of a day for a year,
is it, that, that Prophecy, had his accomplishment). Whereupon they conclude,
that Antichrists persecution, and reign, (being limited to a time, and times,
and half a time, expounded by 1260 days, every day being to be reckoned for
a year, (as they take it) is to have continuance, for much longer time, then
you suppose, namely, for 1260 years: which is far from your exposition and
opinion, who hold, that Antichrist should reign but just three years and an
half. But if this exposition, of reckoning a day for a year, seems (as to
some it does) to search too near into Gods secrets, and to know the times and
the seasons, which the Father has put in his own power: Act. 1.17.
There is another exposition, which the Protestants deliver unto you, touching
the 42 months, and 1260 days (otherwise called a Time, and Times, and half a
Time,) mentioned in the Revelation, which is this: namely, that times, in Gods
appointment certain, of the several persecutions and molestations of the
Church, be therein limited and prescribed; albeit to us, they be uncertain,
until the event do declare them. For, that, a time certain, even in the
Revelation of S. John, may be thus put for a time uncertain, the Rhemists
themselves do sufficiently declare: who expound the Thousand years, Rhem upon
Rev. 20.2.
wherein the Devil is said to be bound, (which in it self, is a time
certain) to be nevertheless the whole time (how long, or short, soever it be)
of the New Testament, until Antichrists time. If then, the certain time of a
Thousand years, signify no certain number of years, but are put for an
indefinite and an uncertain time, as the Rhemists, and other Papists also,
teach: what marvel is it, or what just exception can they take against us, if
we likewise expound the 42 months, and 1260 days (otherwise called a Time,
and Times, and half a Time) for a time indefinite, and uncertain, to us,
until it be accomplished, though God in his foreknowledge has certainly
limited it? Yea, according hereunto Beda says: By the number of these days
(which make three years and an half) the Holy Ghost comprehends all the
times of Christianity: Beda upon Rev. 12.
because Christ (whose body the Church is) preached so long in the flesh. To
the same effect he says (upon the 14 verse): Ambrosius Ausbertus upon this
place.
He designeth the whole time of the Church, comprehended before in the number
of Days. Ambrosius Ansbertus likewise says: The number of 1260 days, in
which the woman tarieth, and is fed in the wilderness, does so signify the
course of Preaching, or end of Persecution, (in which the old enemy is
permitted to rage, against the holy Church, by that damned man, whom he shall
possess) that nevertheless it comprehends the beginning, either of the
preaching or of the persecution, in which Christ began to preach and suffer:
yea, the whole time of this present life, which is between the beginning, and
the end. Rupertus upon this place.
Rupertus also expounds these days, for so long time, as the Church, being a
stranger in the world, suffers persecution. Haymo likewise says: It may be
referred unto all the time, from the ascension of Christ, Haymo upon this place.
unto the end of the world. Thus you see, that even these ancient Expositors
expound it, not for just three years and an half, as ye do, but as
comprehending, in it, a much longer time, and as being a time certain put for
an uncertain, as we do.

But yet, to answer more particularly to those Texts. And first to that Text
of Revelat. 11. It is there said: Rev. 11.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. etc.
That the Gentiles shall tread under foot, the holy City (that is, the true
Church of God) two and forty months: But I will give power unto my two
vvitnesses, and they shall prophecy (says the Text) 1260 days, clothed in
Sackcloth: These are two Olive Trees, and two Candlestickes standing before the
God of the earth. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their
mouths, and devoureth their enemies: For if any man would hurt them, thus
must he be killed. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the
days of their prophesying, and have power over waters to turn them into
blood, and to smite the earth with all manner of plagues as often as they
will: And when they have finished their Testimony, the Beast that comes out
of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall overcome
them, and kill them, etc. You suppose, that by these two witnesses here
mentioned, be meant Enoch and Elias; who, as you imagine, shall come again
personally, into this world, to encounter and oppose themselves against
Antichrist. But first, how do ye prove these two Witnesses, to be Enoch and
Elias? for ye find them not so named, in the Text. And indeed it is but an
imagination or surmise, which has no sufficient ground, or certainty in it.
Yea S. Hierom rejects it, and says, In Mal. 4.
that they be Iudei and Iudaizantes haeretici etc. Jews and Iudaizing
heretics, that look for a corporal or personal coming of Elias. And in
another place he reckons such manner of expectation and opinion touching Enoch
and Elias, as also the opinion touching the building again of the material
Temple at Jerusalem, Ad Marcellam.
in the number of Jewish Fable. Areth. in Apoc. 11.
Arethas indeed says of these two Witnesses, that it was constantly received,
that they should be Enoch and Elias: but Victorinus (who was more ancient, then
Arethas) tells us otherwise: Victorin. in Apoc. 11.
Many think (says he) that one of these two vvitnesses is Elias, the other
either Elizeus or Moses: but they are both dead: Howbeit the death of Jeremy,
is not found: And all our Ancients have delivered (says he) that, that other,
Hillar in Matthew. can 20.
is Jeremy. And S. Hillary thinks them to be Elias and Moses. Such
uncertaintie there is, even in ancient Fathers, as well as in other Writers,
when they go by conjectures, ghesses, and imaginations only, without
sufficient warrant from the word of God. It is therefore to be observed, that
the Revelation, is full of mystical, prophetical, and alluding speeches: As for
example, where these two Witnesses, be called two Olive trees, and
Candlesticks, he alludeth unto that prophecy in Zachary, chap. 4.1.2.3.4.5.6.
etc. Which witnesses of divine Truth, and Preachers and Ministers of the
Gospel, be not unfitly called Candlesticks, inasmuch as they bear and hold
out, the light of Gods word, unto the people: as also they be well resembled to
Olive trees, inasmuch as by the means of their Ministry and Preaching of the
Gospel, the Oil of Gods grace, and of his spirit, is powered into men's hearts,
to mollify and to convert them unto God. Again, in that he mentions two
witnesses, Deuteronomy. 19.15. Ioh. 8.17. Matt. 18.16.
he alludeth unto the Law, which requires the Testimony of two witnesses:
the testimony of which number of witnesses, is held sufficient, to ratify and
confirm a matter. So that by these two witnesses, he means that he will
ever have, even in the greatest fury and rage of Antichrist, a competent and
sufficient number to bear witness of his truth, and religion, contained in
the two Testaments of the holy Scriptures. Likewise he alludeth partly unto
the times of Elias, and partly unto the times of Moses, when he says: that
If any will hurt the two vvitnesses fire proceeds out of their mouths to
devour their enemies, and that these have power to shut heaven that it rain
not in the days of their prophesying: and have power over waters to turn
them into blood etc. For so in Moses time, in the land of Egypt, were the
waters in the River turned into Blood: Exodus 7.20.21. etc.
and sundry other plagues brought upon that land of Egypt, for molesting of
Gods people, and not suffering them to go out, that they might serve him. As
also in the days of Elias it was, that fire came down from heaven, 2. King.
1.9.10, 11, 12.
to consume and devour certain Captains and their Companies of fifties, that
came to apprehend, and disturb him. And so again at the prayer of Elias,
heaven was shut: so that it rained not on the earth, Iam. 5.17. Luke 4.25.
for the space of three years and six months. Wherefore here is a manifest
allusion, in some of these speeches, unto the times of Moses* and in othersome
of them, to the times of Elias: signifying thereby, that God will ever be the
revenger of such, as shall oppress, molest, or wrong any of these witnesses
of his truth, and religion. Now, as the famine, or grievance for want of rain,
in those days of the prophesying of Elias, was very great, continuing three
years and six months: so the oppression or grievance of the Church, in this
place, is answerably thereunto, limited to 42 months, as it is likewise in
Rev. 13.5. Which 42 months contain the very same time of three years and
six months, mentioned in Elias time: and be likewise all one with the 1260
days, mentioned in this Chapter of Rev. 11.3. and Rev. 12.6. reckoning thirty
days, to every month, according to the Grecian manner, as is fittest: this
Revelation being written in Greek, Ios. Scaliger. lib. de emend. temp.
and directed to the Greek Churches. But now, although these 42 months,
otherwise called 1260 days, being thus reckoned, do arithmetically contain
just three years, and an half: yet being (as they are) here spoken by way of
allusion, (whether it be to those three years and six months, in Elias time;
or to the three years and six months, employed about the siege and taking of
Jerusalem, by Vespasian and Titus; or to the three years and an half, of
Christ his preaching in the flesh): they are not to be taken literally, to
contain, during all the times of the Church her persecutions, just, three
years and an half, and neither more, nor less: (for her persecutions, every
one knows, were of much longer continuance then three years and an half).
But, as I said before, they import unto us, by that allusion, that there is a
certain set time appointed of God, how long those grievances and persecutions
of the Church should continue: albeit we, for our parts, know it not, till the
event has declared it. Although then, by the Gentiles, Rev. 11.2.
in this Text of Rev. 11. the false and Antichristian Church, be understood:
as, by Jews, likewise mentioned in the Revelation, Rev. 3.9.
the true Church of Christ, is intended: yet, the 42 months, and, 1260* days,
being to be expounded not literally, but mystically, allegorically, and by way
of allusion, can make no proof at all, for your purpose. Yea Arethas says,
that those Days and Times, so reckoned in the Revelation, Areth. in Apoc.
be, (...), Brevitatis Declarativum, to declare brevitie, or the shortness of
the time of the persecution of the Church, by Antichrist. And indeed so it
seems to be expounded in the Revelation it self, where speaking of this
Antichrist, Rev. 17.10.
(being the seventh head of the Beast) it is said, that he shall continue but a
short time. So that the one place in this Revelation, serves well to expound
the other. And it is thus reckoned by days, and times, and months, that is,
by a short time, for the comfort of Gods people, against those persecutions of
Antichrist, and that they should not think it long, as I said before, how long
soever otherwise it might seem to worldly-minded men. And even Hentenius also,
though a Papist, rejects this conceit of yours, that Antichrist should reign
but just three years and an half, alleging this for a reason, He^ten.
praefat. ad Comment. Arethae, in Apoc.
that it is impossible, that in so short a time as three years and an half,
Antichrist should obtain so many Kingdoms, and Provinces, as it is said he
shall conquer and subdue.

10 But to make this yet more manifest unto you, and that ye may certainly
know, the length and continuance of the time of Antichrist, and not be led by
uncertain conjectures, imaginations, or conceits of men: you must resort to
the sacred and canonical Scriptures, for your direction and assurance in this
point, as likewise in all other. For which purpose you must consider
Antichrist, in his beginning, and in his proceeding increase, and growth,
until he came at length to his highest step: and then, being at the highest,
you must consider him again, in his declination and consumption, until his
final destruction and utter abolishing. 1. Ioh. 2.18. 2. Ioh. 7. 1. Ioh. 4.3.
2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
That Antichrist, even, (...), had his beginning in the Apostles time, S. John
is a manifest witness. And so also witnesses S. Paul, saying expressly:
that, the Mystery of that his Iniquity, already wrought, even then, in his
days. And withal he shows, that more or less, he should continue, Verse 8.
and not be utterly abolished until the bright and glorious coming of Christ
to Judgment: Now then, seeing that Antichrist began in the Apostles times,
(albeit neither ^hen, nor long after, he came to his full growth and highest
step of pride) and seeing also that after he came (by degrees, and by little,
and little) to the superlative degree, he is not utterly to be abolished,
until the coming of Christ to Judgment (although in the mean space, he be
already much consumed, and is yet more and more to be consumed): what one man,
shall, or, can be named, that ever lived so long a time* as this Antichrist,
who beginning in the Apostles days, is to have continuance, notwithstanding
his consumption, to the end of the world? Can any reasonable man, imagine,
that any of that long continuance, should be but one singular and particular
person? Yea, must not every well-advised man, hereupon, needs conceive, that
Antichrist must be, not one singular and particular man, but many, and a
succession of men, that is thus to have continuance for the space of so many
hundredth years, in the world?

Another argument and proof thereof, is this. That which, in the Prophecies of
the Scripture, is described under the name and figure of a Beast, is not one
singular person, but an whole State or succession: As for example, the four
Beasts, mentioned in Dan. 7. whereof one was as a Lion, Dan. 7 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
the second like a Bear, the third like a Leopard, the fourth was unlike to
the former, and had ten horns. None of these four Beasts betoken any singular
or particular man, but every one of them betokens a State or Dominion,
wherein there was a succession of men. For the Beast that was like unto a Lion,
signified the Empire or Kingdom of the Assyrians and Babylonians: the Beast
like unto the Bear, signifies the Empire or Kingdom of the Medes and
Persians: the Beast likened to a Leopard, signifies the Empire or Dominion of
the Greeks and Macedonians: and by the fourth Beast, with ten horns, is the
Kingdom of the Seleucidae and Lagidae understood (as some suppose) or of the
Roman Empire (as some others understand it). So likewise is Antichrist,
described under the name and figure of a Beast (as is also confessed even by
the adversaries themselves): Rev. 13. Rev. 17.
and therefore neither can he be supposed one singular and particular person,
but a State and Dominion, wherein a succession of sundry persons, one after
another, is admitted. For whereas Bellarmine answers, that in the Prophecy
of Daniel, sometimes, by Beasts, are signified whole States, and Kingdoms: and
sometimes, particular persons, as in the eighth chapter, he says, that by the
Ram, is understood one particular King, Dan. 8.20.
namely Darius, the last King of the Persians; he is much deceived: and the
Text it self directly confuteth him: affirming this Ram, to be, (...),
Reges, not one particular King, but the Kings of the Medes and Persians. So
likewise by the Goat in Daniel, is not meant one singular person, namely
Alexander, (as Bellarmine again mistaketh) but the very Kingdom or kingly
state of Grecia: Dan. 8.21.
and the great horn between his eyes, is, in the Text it self, expounded to
be the first King of that Empire or Kingdom of Grecia, which was Alexander:
which horn being broken off, four other stand up in the stead of it. So that
by every Beast in Daniel, you see, that not any one particular person, but an
whole State, Empire, Kingdom, or Dominion is signified and intended: and
consequently Antichrist, being in the Revelation of S. John, Rev. 13. Rev. 17.
described under the name of a Beast, must needs likewise be supposed, not one
singular and particular person, but an whole State, Kingdom, or Dominion,
which admits many persons, to rule and reign in it, one after another, in
succession.

A third argument to prove this, is the exposition and acknowledgement of the
Rhemists themselves: for touching the seven heads of the Beast, (that is, of
the Latin or Roman State), Rhemists in their Annotat. upon Rev. 17.9.
the sixth head thereof, is (as themselves do show) not one singular and
particular person, but a State, Kingdom, or Empire, namely the Roman Empire,
wherein were diverse, that ruled and reigned in succession, one after another.
Now then, if the sixth head of the Beast, be not one singular and particular man
(which themselves declare, and affirm) but a State and succession of men: why
should they not grant, Antichrist (whom themselves also affirm to be the
seventh head of the Beast) to be likewise, not one singular and particular
person, but a State and succession of persons? for they are both called Heads
alike, and there is no reason of difference that can be showed, more for the
one then for the other.

A fourth argument is out of Revelation the 20: where the Devil being bound
for a thousand years, S. John saw in Vision, Rev. 20.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. etc.
the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the
word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, nor his Image, nor had
taken his mark upon their foreheads, nor in their hands, and they lived and
reigned with Christ, those thousand years: But the rest of the dead lived not
again, until the Thousand years were finished. This is the first
Resurrection. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection,
for, on such, the second Death, has no power, etc. In which words, you see
mention made of a Thousand years, expressly, in which this Antichristian
Beast, was in Esse: some all that while lying dead in their sins and
Antichristian Errors: and othersome rising from their sins and errors, to
newness of life, and to true Christianity, (which is there called the first
resurrection): and these are said to live (and not to be dead) and to reign
with Christ, subduing and getting victory over themselves, and over this
Antichristian Beast, like Kings and Conquerors, during all that time. When
therefore there is express mention made of a Thousand years, in which this
Antichristian Beast had to do: who does not perceive, that Antichrist cannot be
one singular and particular man, that shall reign only three years and an
half, but that he is, and must needs be, a State and succession of persons,
that is thus directly discovered to have had a continuance in the world, for at
least, a Thousand years.

A fifth argument is this, that S. John says thus: 1. Ioh. 2.18.
It is the last time: and as ye have heard that* (...), the Antichrist comes:
even now there be (...), many Antichrists: whereby we Know, that it is the
last time. Where you may easily observe, that (...), the Antichrist, is not one
particular person, but many: and that many Antichrists, be this Antichrist:
for so the Text it self declares. In like sort, he speaks in his second
Epistle: Many Deceivers be entered into this world, 2. Ioh. 7.
which confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh: This is (...), the
deceiver, and the Antichrist. Where again you see, that not only One, but
many Deceivers, be this Deceiver, and, the Antichrist. Whereunto add also the
opinion of diverse of the ancient Fathers, as of Irenaeus, Origin, Chrysostom,
Hierome, Ruffinus, Primasius, Augustine, expounding that place of Matt. 24.
which speaks of many false Christ's and false Prophets, Matt. 24.24.
that should arise and show great signs and wonders (so that, if it were
possible, they should deceive the very Elect) as spoken of Antichrist: for
thereby also they give us to understand, that Antichrist is to be conceived to
be many, and not one singular person.

A sixth argument, is taken from the Apostasy it self, which S. Paul speaks
of: which Apostasy, whether you expound it of the revolt and departure of so
many multitudes of people, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.7.
from the right faith and religion of Christ, or of a revolt from the Roman
Empire by the Kings and Princes of the earth, or from both: it cannot be
otherwise intended, then the work of many ages. Bellarmine says, that
thereby, we may, rectissime, most rightly, understand, Antichrist himself:
and he cyteth diverse ancient Fathers, for the proof of that opinion. Now
then, if by the Apostasy, Antichrist himself be, most rightly, understood (as
Bellarmine teaches), and that this Apostasy cannot in reason be otherwise
supposed, then the Work of Many ages, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
(as he also shows): especially considering, that the Mystery of that
Iniquity, or Apostasy, began to work even in S. Paul's days: how can
Antichrist be rightly conceived, to be one singular man, that shall reign
only three years and an half, and no longer? Yea it is manifest, that even
in the false teachers, and heretics, which were in the Apostles days, 1.
Ioh. 2.18. 1. Ioh. 4.3.
and which were helpers, and workers in this Apostasy and Mystery of
Iniquity, Antichrist was: for so has S. John before assured us. Neither, 2.
Ioh. 7.
indeed, could he afterward have been revealed, disclosed, detected, or
discovered, unless he had bin in Esse before, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
in some secret, hidden, close, and covert sort. For which cause Theodoret also
says: that, Defectionem appellat A,ntichristi praesentiam: Theod. in 2 Thessalonians.
2.
S. Paul calls The Apostasy, or, defection, the presence of Antichrist. In
that Apostasy then, or Mystery of Iniquity, which began to work, even in
S. Paul's, and S. John's time, it is apparent, that Antichrist was, and
consequently even then, had his beginning. And therefore, whilst you suppose,
that Antichrist is not yet come, and that all this while, namely for the space
of above 1600 years, there has been but a preparation made for him, and who
when he comes shall also continue, but just three years and an half: do
ye not perceive the unlikelyhood and utter incredibilitie of these conceits?
Yea, the premises considered, do you not perceive the manifest falsehood and
evident untruth of them? Why then should any be any longer deluded with them?

CHAP. III.
Where the Pope is further showed to be Antichrist, out of the thirteenth
chapter of the Revelation.

THere be two Beasts mentioned in this thirteenth chapter of the Revelation:
and what those two Beasts be, must be enquired. Wherein, the knowledge of the
one, will give a great light, for the understanding of the other. First,
therefore, by a Beast, in this place, according to the like phrase and manner
of speech in Daniel, is not any singular or particular man, but a State,
Kingdom, or Dominion, to be understood as I said before: for so are the four
Beasts, mentioned in Daniel, expounded, in the Text it self, to be four
Kings: and those Kings, Dan. 7.3.17.23.
be again expressly expounded, to be Kingdoms, in the 23 verse of the same
chapter. The next thing then, to be enquired of, is, what Kingdom, State, or,
Dominion, that is, which is here meant, Rev. 13.1.
by the Beast with seven heads, and ten horns: The most certain, and
undoubted exposition whereof, we must fetch (as I showed before) from the
seventeenth chapter of the Revelation, Rev. 17. verses 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12. etc.
where this Beast with seven Heads, and ten Horns, is expounded and declared:
for there, the seven heads be expounded to be seven Hills, or Mountains,
whereupon Rome is seated. They be further also there affirmed, to be seven
Kings: not ruling all at once, but successively, one after another; as
appears by the Text which says: that, five of these were fallen, Rev. 17.9,
10.
one is, and another is not yet come. These seven Kings, be those seven sorts
of supreme or Princely government, wherewith Rome has been governed: namely,
Kings, Consuls, Decemvirs, Tribunes, Dictators, Emperors, and Popes: whereof
five were fallen, in the days of S. John, namely Kings, Consuls, Decemvirs,
Tribunes, Dictators: One is, that is, the government of Rome by Emperors,
which was then in Esse, in the days of S. John: And another is not yet come,
that is, the government of Rome by Popes: for the government of Rome by
Popes, was not then come to pass, in the days of S. John, but came in
afterward. Which government by Popes, is there said to be of a short
continuance; both, Rev. 17.10.
for the comfort and encouragement of all Gods children, against their frauds
and persecutions: as also, in respect of Gods account, with whom a thousand
years, are but as one day (as S. Peter says): 2. Pet. 3.8.
and, in respect also of eternity, and everlasting happiness, which Gods
children do chiefly regard, and in comparison whereof, they make little or no
reckoning of the continuance of any time in this world, how long soever
otherwise it seem. Rev. 17.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
The ten Horns be likewise, there, expounded, to be ten Kings: which, at that
time (namely, in the days of S. John) had not received a Kingdom, but should
afterward receive absolute power, as Kings. Which ten Kings, howsoever they had
formerly given their help, strength, and power to the advancing, maintenance,
and defense of the Whore of Babylon, that is, of Popish Rome, yet should they
afterward be alienated from her, and abhor her, and make her desolate, and
naked, and consume her with fire. And it is said to be the Beast, that was,
and is not, and yet is: in respect of the diverse changes and mutations, Rev.
17.8.
whereto that City of Rome has been subject, being in several times ruled by
several heads, and sundry sorts of governors. The description then of this
Beast with the seven heads, shows it to be the State of Rome, or the Roman
State, which is there purtrayed and decyphered. But, because the Text it self
says, that, five of those, were gone and past, in the days of S. John, Rev.
17.10.
so that there needed to be, no further meddling with them, and that only one
was in Esse and being, in that time, (namely the government of Rome by
Emperors), and that another was to come, (which was the government of that
City of Rome, by Popes), it must therefore here be, more specially, and more
strictly, conceived and taken: namely, in respect of that one Head, then
present: and, of that other, which was afterward to come. The then present
government of the City of Rome all men know, was by Emperors: and the
government of it, after the Emperors, was by Popes. So that the Beast there
more specially intended, is the Roman State, considered in the two last Heads
thereof, viz. the Emperors, and the Popes. And therefore the Text says: that,
One of these Heads (that is, the sixth Head of it, Rev. 13.3.4.
viz. the government of Rome, by Emperors) was as it were wounded to death,
but his deadly vvound was healed, and so healed, as that all the Earth
vvondred, or was in admiration, after the Beast. That the Roman State governed
by Emperors, received a wound, is apparent, not only by that which the Goths,
Hunnes, Vandals, and others did unto it, but especially by that which was done
unto it afterward, in the time of the Lombards: So that at last, the Roman
Empire was as it were vvounded to death: but yet afterward, that deadly wound
was healed again, namely in the Popes; viz. when the Popes had gotten the
Headship, Imperial Majesty, and Monarchical and Sovereign rule of that City,
and therein were set and stablished above all Emperors, Kings, Princes, and
people. For then was the time, when all the Earth had this Beast in so high
admiration; and then did they say: Who is like unto the Beast? Rev. 13.3.4.
who is able to war with him? Yea of this Beast, it was then further said:
That to him was given power over every kindred, and tongue, and nation: and
that all that dwelt upon the earth, did worship him, whose names were not
written in the book of life of the Lamb, etc. Which speeches, voices, and
admirations, so great and so general, and in that manner and sort produced, do
not so well and fitly, agree to Charlemaigne, or to any other whosoever, as to
the Pope of Rome; as may appear, by further examination of it, in the
particulars. For although the Beast here, as it is taken, specialius, more
specially, comprehends the Roman State, as it was governed both by Emperors
and Popes, successively, one after another: yet, being taken (as sometime it
is) specialissime, that is, most specially, and most restrictively, it
betokens the Roman State only, as it was at last translated, and settled in
the Popes. First then, by this Beast cannot be intended, the Roman Heathen
Empire, (although that was also, a very great persecutor of the Saints and
peole of God): because the Roman Heathen Empire, was in Esse and being, (as
every one knows), in S. John's time, and at the time of this Revelation
given: and so was not this Beast, there most specially taken, and intended: For
it is said of this Beast, that, (...) ascensura est, Rev. 17.8.
it should afterward arise. Secondly, this Beast, there, most specially spoken
of, and intended, (to take away all manner of doubt in the case) is expressly
notified, and affirmed, in the very Text it self, to be the Eight head of the
Beast: Rev. 17.11. In the vulgar Latin translation, it is: Ipsa octava est: as
though Eight Beasts had bin there mentioned: which is a most manifest-false
Translation. Rev. 17.8. and 11.7.
((...): Is octavus est. s. Rex) and therefore is he far remote, from the
time of those old Heathen persecuting Emperors. Thirdly, consider, that this
Beast is said to come ex abysso, out of the bottomless pit: and therefore it
is the same Beast, that is likewise mentioned to come out of the same
bottomless pit, in Rev. 11.7. which persecuted the two witnesses there spoken
of, and put them to death, after the blowing of the Trumpet by the sixth Angel.
This circumstance of time, wherein this Beast was, and persecuted the two
witnesses, being after the blowing of the Trumpet by the sixth Angel, even so
near toward the end of the world, (for under the blowing of the seventh
Angel, the world is to end, Rev. 10. and 7. Rev. 11.15. etc.) does also
declare, that it cannot be intended the Roman Heathen Empire, which was before
the blowing of the sixth Angel, and is so long since ended, and expired. For
the Emperors ceased to be Heathens, and became Christians, about 300 years
after Christ, in the days of Constantine, the first Christian Emperor.
Fourthly, consider, that the second Beast, under which Antichrist (in respect
of his false doctrine, counterfeit holiness, Rev. 13.11, 12, 13, 14. etc. Rev.
16.13. Rev. 19.19, 20. Rev. 20.10. Rev. 19 20.
miracles, and other his spiritual actions) is more specially described, is all
one with him, which is often, otherwise called, in the same Revelation, the
false-Prophet: and remember withal, that both the first Beast, and this second
Beast (otherwise called the false-Prophet), lived together, and were both
destroyed together. So that the first Beast appears to be such a one, as is
to have a continuance in the world, until the destruction of the second Beast,
which is the false-Prophet, (Antichrist): and therefore he cannot possibly be
intended the old Roman Heathen Empire, no, nor yet the heretical Arian Empire:
for neither of these were of that long continuance, yea they both be long since
ended and determined, and yet is not Antichrist, that false-Prophet, destroyed.
Fifthly, here observe, that this chapter of Rev. 13. and the things therein
contained, concerning the Beast, be brought in, and mentioned, after that the
seventh Angel had blown his Trumpet: Rev. 10.7. Rev. 11.15. etc.
during the continuance of whose blowing, the Church of Christ is mightily to
prevail, and to be reformed, and the Gospel of the kingdom of Christ to
flourish, and get the upper hand, against all adversaries, (to the conversion,
at length, both of Jews and Gentiles, unto Christ and his religion).
Wherewithal, you may perceive, The chief drift and scope of the Revelation,
touching things future in the Church. Rev. 8.6, 7, 8. etc.
what is the chief drift, and scope of the whole Book of the Revelation, as
touching things future, in the Church: namely, that it is, to discover these
two things: first, the estate of the Church, as it grew by degrees deformed,
and corrupted, (comprised in the blowings of the Trumpets by the first five
Angels, and until the sixth Angel also had begun to blow his Trumpet): and
secondly, the estate of the Church, as it grew again by degrees reformed, and
restored, Rev. 9.1.2.3.4, 5. etc.
to her first and most ancient purity: Which happy reformation, and cleansing
of the Church (after so long a deformity, and corruptions grown in it) did
not begin, nor was to begin, (as this Prophecy shows) until after the time
that the sixth Angel had begun to blow his Trumpet: Rev. 9.13. etc.
for then, and not until then, was the book of the holy scriptures, Rev.
10.2.10.11.
and everlasting Gospel, opened, and the truth of Gods religion, (therein
contained) preached Once again, in the world, to discover and detect the
before-hidden frauds, false doctrines, and impieties of Antichrist. Whereupon
followed, Rev. 11.1.2.3.4* 5. etc.
a measuring of Gods Temple, and of the right worshippers therein, and some
VVitnesses also, of Gods truth, and religion, which did openly show themselves,
and were put to death, for profession and defense of the same truth. After
which, and after the blowing of the Trumpet by the seventh Angel, the
reformation and restoring of the Church, Rev. 11.15. etc.
formerly begun, is prosecuted, and further augmented, Rev. 12.1.2.3.4. etc.
and much more and mightily enlarged, and to be enlarged: Insomuch that the
Church of Christ, is, after this blowing of the Trumpet by the seventh Angel,
very splendently described, and that she brought forth masculine and strong
children, Gal. 4.19.
unto God, (of whom she travailed in birth, until Christ were formed in them)
such, as neither fraud, nor fury, of the great red Dragon (the Devil) could
daunt, dismay, or discourage: of which sort, were the Albigenses, in whose
times, were very famous, and splendent Churches, of valiant and courageous
Christians, that took part with Michael, and fought against the Dragon, and
his Angels, in the wars of those times. Yea, notwithstanding all, that those
great malignant adversaries of the Church, (namely, the Dragon, the Beast, and
the false-Prophet), did, or could devise to do; yet for all that, did the
Church of Christ, continue still, and increase, Rev. 14.1.2.3. etc.
and with the Lamb Christ Jesus, were there seen standing upon mount Sion,
144000, which took part with him, and would not remove their station, nor be
withdrawn from him. And after this again, is there record and mention made,
of these increasing and courageous Christians, that still got the victory over
the Beast, Rev. 15.1.2.3. etc.
and his Image, and his mark, and the number of his name: and that sung the
song of Moses, with much praise, and thankesgiving, unto God therefore. And in
the rest of the Chapters following, namely in the 16, 17, 18, 19, of the
Revelation, not only the true Church is showed to prosper and prevail, but to
the enemies and adversaries thereof, be threatened, and do befall, the Viols of
Gods wrath, calamities, miseries, and destruction, in their appointed times.
But thus it appears (which was my purpose to show) that the Beast here
mentioned (as it is, most specially, and, most restrictively taken) cannot be
meant of the old Roman Heathen Empire, nor yet of the heretical Arrian
Empire, because both these kind of Empires ceased, and were ended, long before
this time of the blowing of the Trumpet by the seventh Angel. Now let us see,
whether the Germane Empire, can be here intended: and it is very manifest
also, that it cannot: for, although the Emperor of Germany be called King of
the Romans, and has the title of Emperor, yet has he not Rome (the seat of
the old Roman Empire) neither has he any Principality, Headship, or
Soveraignetie, there. How then can he be the Head of Rome, that is not the
principal and sovereign Ruler of it? Yea, no manner of likelihood is there,
that the Emperor of Germany should be this Beast, seeing he has not only no
Headship or Sovereign authority over Rome, but sends also to Rome, to
tender his submission, and obedience to him, that bears the sway and
principality there, namely, to the Pope: to whom, for that purpose, he gives
an Oath of Homage, Allegiance, or, fealty; thereby declaring himself to be,
in respect of the Pope, but as an inferior to a superior, or as a subject to
a sovereign Lord. The old famous Roman Empire then, and the ample Majesty of
it, here appears to be now long sithence abolished. Which thing even
Machiavell himself also witnesses, in the first book of his Florentine
History, dedicated to Pope Clement the seventh, saying: Imperio e tutto in
terra, the Empire is fallen flat upon the ground. And so does Lipsius also
likewise testify, (who spent a great part of his study to attain to an exact
knowledge of the Roman State). So also does Augustinus Stenchus, the Popes
Library Keeper, in his first book of Constantines Donation, page 3. For,
howsoever Charlemaigne, and his successors, were styled Kings of Rome and for a
while had led the Popes, as their subjects, yet this lasted not long: but the
Pope, at last, found a means for to free himself from being under their
dominion, that he made the Emperors, in the conclusion, to be his vassals, and
at his command, and to yield him the Soveraignetie. And all this have the Popes
done under pretense of being Christ's Vicars, and of the Keys of the Kingdom
of heaven, and of S. Peter's Chair: Which things, have been also noted by
Guicciardine, in the fourth book of his History: where, after a long
discourse of the rising and advancement of the Popes, he shuts up all with
these words: The Popes (says he) upon these foundations, and by these means
being exalted to an earthly dominion, having by little and little neglected the
salvation of souls, and cast aside the remembrance of Divine instructions,
bending their minds how to attain to vvorldly greatness; and using spiritual
authority no further, but as it was an Instrument to help forward the
temporal, did begin to show more like secular Princes, then Bishops. These
words, as not pleasing them, have the Romish Expurgators, razed clean out of
the last Editions of Guicciardine: as likewise they have done many more out of
sundry other Authors, where they make against them. But thus it appears,
that not the Heathen Roman Empire, nor the Arrian, nor the Germane, but the
Roman State, as it is settled in the Popes of Rome (the now Head and sovereign
Ruler of that City,) is the Beast there, as it is most specially meant and
intended. And this is the Beast, Rev 17.3.7.8.11.
whereupon the whore of Babylon, that is, Popish Rome, sits, and whereby
she is supported: for, as his Spiritual authority, and pretense of the power
of the Keys, helped to raise him to his Imperial greatness, and Temporal
Monarchy: so this Temporal Monarchy joined to his Spiritual, do, both
together, make him a complete Beast, for the bearing up and supporting of that
Strumpet.

2 Let us therefore now come to the other Beast, mentioned in this thirteenth
chapter of the Revelation, and see what it is, Rev. 13.11.
and wherein it differs from the former. For a difference there must be
between them, in some respect, because it is called another Beast. In this
very chapter, ye find, that one of the heads of the Beast, (namely, that
which was, as it were vvounded to death, Rev. 13.3.
and afterward had his Deadly vvound cured again), is expressly called a
Beast, by it self. For, upon the curing of this head, that was before so
deadly wounded, it is said: that, All the earth vvondred after the Beast.
Again, Verse 12.
it is said: that the Inhabitants of the earth did worship the first Beast,
whose deadly vvound was healed. And again, Verse 14.
that they were willed to make an Image to the Beast, which had the vvound of
a sword and did live. By all which, we see, that this Head of the Beast, which
was so vvounded and healed again, is called a Beast, by it self, and by name
and expressly the very first Beast. Now the Head that was so vvounded, is
before showed to be the sixth head of the Beast, namely, the government of the
Roman State, by Emperors: for you hear before, that the Imperial State
received a deadly wound, in the time of the Lombards: and that, that deadly
wound, was afterward healed, and cured again in the Popes, in whom the
Majesty and splendour of the Roman Empire, was again revived. So that, the
first Beast is considerable in a double respect: first, as it was vvounded in
the sixth head (which were the Emperors), and secondly, as it was afterward
healed again in the seventh head (which were the Popes): (for, the Head,
vvounded, and cured, makes the first Beast). Now in the second Beast, is
showed, How, and by whose means, that recoverie and cure was wrought and
performed. In the first Beast then, Antichrist, that is, the Pope of Rome, is
described, as having both the Episcopal and Imperial Principality, conioined
together, in his person: which made him so great and mighty, and so much to be
admired at, in the world, and for which cause, he is also said, to be, Rev.
17.8.11.
both the Seventh and the Eighth Head of the Beast: but in the second Beast,
Antichrist is described in his Episcopal consideration only, and as he is the
false-Prophet. For, he which in this place is called the second Beast, is (as I
said before) in other places of the Revelation, called the false-Prophet:
thereby declaring them (namely, the second Beast, and, Rev. 19.20. Rev.
16.13.14. Rev. 20.10.
the false-Prophet) to be all one. Yea, even the Rhemists also themselves, do
expound this second Beast to be a false-Prophet, but they will have him to be a
false-Prophet, inferior to Antichrist. But, first, he is not only a false
Prophet, but, by way of excellency and eminency above all others, he is
called, (...), The false-Prophet, Rev. 19.20. Rev. 20.10. Rev. 16.13. And
secondly it appears that he is not Inferior to Antichrist, but Equal with
him: for in the first Beast, is Antichrist comprehended, as even the Rhemists,
and other Papists also, do themselves affirm: now it is evident by the Text
it self, that this second Beast, that is, this false-Prophet, did all that the
first Beast could do, or (which is all one) exercised all the power of the
first Beast (Rev. 13.12.): and therefore, as touching authority and power, he
appears to be, not inferior to him, but equal with him. If you say, that the
first Beast, and the second Beast, otherwise called the false-Prophet, Rev.
16.1^. Rev. 19.20.
be mentioned sometimes as if they were two: it is true. But the reason of it
is, because this grand Antichrist is considered in a double respect: namely, in
respect of his Temporal or Imperial Monarchy, and in respect of his Episcopal
or Spiritual. And for this cause also, the one, is said to arise out of the
Sea, and the other, out of the Earth, Rev. 13.1.11. for, in respect of his
Episcopal supremacy, and Pseudoprophetical demeanor, he arose from the
Earth, it receiving his original from below, and from the Earth, and not from
Heaven: and in respect of his Imperial dominion, he arose out of the Sea;
because the Ruins of the Empire, by means whereof he arose to that his
Imperial Greatness, were not otherwise wrought, but by the wavering and
disquiet turbulencies that were in the World in those days. So that, howsoever
it is called the first Beast, and the second Beast, in distinct considerations,
yet upon the matter they both make but one Antichrist. And therefore in Rev.
17. is there mention made but of One Beast only, Rev. 17.1, 2, 3, 4 etc.
which supported the Whore of Babylon. Yea, Fatentur omnes pertinere omnino ad
Antichristum verba illa Iohannis, Bellar. lib. 3. de pont. Romans c. 10.
etc. All men confess (says Bellarmine himself) that those words of John
(in Rev. 13.11. etc.) do undoubtedly belong to Antichrist. Now then let us
examine and see, if they be not all verified in the Pope and Papacy.

First, it is said, that this second Beast, had two horns like a Lamb but he
spoke like the Dragon: Rev. 13.11.
Duo Cornua similia Agni, scilicet Christi: cuius duo Cornua, sunt duo
Testamenta: He shall have two Horns, like to those of the Lamb, that is, like
to those of Christ: whose two Horns, be the two Testaments, as Lyranus,
Primasius, and Augustine also, expound them. Whereby appears, Lyra in Apo.
13. Primas. ibidem. August in Apoc. Hom. 11.
that Antichrist shall outwardly pretend great sanctity, sincerity,
humility, and simplicity, and as if he did all things by good authority and
strength of the holy Scriptures, the two Testaments, the Old and the New: and
yet, in very deed, his voice and speech, that is, his doctrines, decrees,
laws, canons, and constitutions, should bewray and discover him, to be but a
Wolf in Sheep clothing, and no less cruel, and malignant against the true
Church of God, then the very Dragon. Does not every man perceive, that these
things do rightly fit the Pope? For who makes a greater outward show of
sanctity, piety, and Christianity, then he? and what does he else, but
pretend the strength and authority of the two Testaments, namely, of the holy
Scriptures, for warrant and maintenance of the false doctrines, errors, and
heresies, he teaches and holds? Can any man outwardly pretend greater humi
litie, then he, when he entitleth himself, Servus servorum Dei, a servant of
Gods servants? and yet for all that, he takes upon him, by his claims and
actions, to be, Rex Regum, and Dominus Dominantium, the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords. So that, howsoever he pretends humility, yet we see he is far
from it. And howsoever he pretends the authority of the holy Scriptures,
viz the two Testaments, (for the strengthening and confirmation of his religion,
doctrine, and doings) alleging them to be shadowed out, and figured, in the
two Horns of his Myter: yet, partly, by reason of the unsound and false
translations of those Scriptures, which he defends and authorizeth against
the truth of the Originals: and partly, whilst he perverteth and
misinterpreteth the true Scriptures themselves, and equalleth also his
Traditions unto them, and moreover dispenses with them, at his pleasure, and
prefers his own authority, and the authority of his Church, above them,
and so makes them to speak in another sense, and otherwise then ever they
meant: it is apparent, that being thus used, and abused, they be, at the most,
but like the two Horns of the Lamb, (as this Text speaks) and be not the
very two horns themselves: that is, they be not the pure, incorrupt, and
undoubtedly true Scriptures themselves, but corrupted and differing from them.
Pope and Popery then, appears to consist all in shows, semblances, and
likenesses of verity, sanctity, and piety, and have it not in very deed and
substance. And therefore, not without good cause, did diverse Bishops make
their complaint, long sithence, in their Epistle to Pope Nicholas, recorded in
Aventine, saying in this sort, unto him: Thou bear the person of a Bishop,
Annal. Bo^or. lib. 4.
but thou playest the Tyrant: under the habit and attire of a Pastor, we
feel a Wolf: It is, a lying Title, that calls thee Father: thou in thy
deeds show thy self to be another Jupiter: being the servant of servants,
thou strivest to be the Lord of Lords etc. But moreover, does not the Pope
speak like the Dragon, that is, like the Devil, (for by the Dragon, in the
Revelation, Rev. 12 9. and Rev. 20.2.
is the Devil understood) when he says, that the Kingdoms of the world be
his, and that he has power to dispose and give them to whomsoever he will?
For, did not the Devil speak the very same to Christ in the Gospel? Yea,
Luke 4.5.6. Epist. ded. Antic. ad Gregor. 13. praef^^. Capistr. De Mayor. C.
unam Sanctam. Extra de Statut. Regular. pericul. in Glossa. Council. Lateran.
sub Leone 10. Sess. 10.
the Pope is (as they write) Totius orbis Dominus. The Lord of the whole
world, and has Coelestis and terrestris potestatis Monarchiam: The Monarchy
or soveraignetie both of the heavenly and earthly power: and to him, forsooth,
they apply that Prophecy, Dominabitur a mari ad mare, and a flumine, usque ad
terminos orbis, He shall rule from sea to sea, and from the river, to the ends
of the world. Yea, they attribute that unto him, which Jesus Christ spoke of
himself, saying: that, All power is given unto him, both in heaven and earth,
Matthew. 28.18. Be not these, most abominable, blasphemous and divelish speeches,
being attributed to the Pope? But yet further, what does he else, but speak
like the Dragon, that is, like the Devil, whilst he teaches that doctrine of
Devils, 1. Tim 4 1.2, 3, 4, 5.
mentioned in the Epistle to Timothy, as shall afterward appear? and whilst he
maintains a wrong worship of God, a false faith, and an Apostatical and
Antichristian religion, against the right, most pure, and only true religion
of Christ, extant in the book of God, the holy and canonical Scriptures.

3 Again it is said: that this second Beast, did exercise all the power of the
first Beast, Rev. 13.19.
and that, before him. And who is so ignorant, but he knows, that the Pope
exercises all the power of the first Beast, that is, of the Latin, or, Roman
State, and that before him, or before his face, that is to say, even at Rome,
and in the presence of the Roman State? For has not the Pope gotten that
which was the seat of the Emperor, namely Rome, and made it his seat? And is
not the Emperor, put down, from having any Headship, or Sovereign Authority
there? Yea, does not the Pope there take upon him, to exercise all the Imperial
power and authority, tamen sine nomine Romani Imperatoris, yet without the
name of the Emperor of Rome, as Bellar. himself also says, Bellar. cap. 15. de
miraculis Antichristi.
that Antichrist must do? For this Imperial Authority, as well as his
Ecclesiastical, that is to say, both his supremacies (as before is showed) he
claims and holds, under the name and title of being Pope and Bishop of
Rome, and not under any name or title of being the Emperor. For they hold (as
Antoninus writes) that, Potestas Papae mayor est omni alia potestate creata:
A^^onin. Sum. part. 3. cap. 5.
The power of the Pope, is greater then all other created powers. But, to
conclude, what does he else, but exercise this Imperial Authority before his
face, whilst he domineereth over him that is now called Emperor of Rome, and
Germany, and makes him his vassal, and at his command? Yea, not only has
the Pope for his part, thus disloyally and uniustly depressed and subiugated
the Emperor, exercising, and that very impudently, all his authority before
his face, but he did so work and persuade, with the inhabitants of the earth,
that they also were content at last to worship the first Beast, Rev. 13.12.
whose deadly vvound was healed: that is, to honor and submit themselves to
that Imperial State, whereof himself, after the overthrow of the Emperors,
became the Monarch. For it was an Imperial Monarchy, (to be joined to his
Episcopal) which he so much desired, and thirsted after.

4 Wherefore, to compass and effect this, which he so much affected, it is
said, that He did great wonders, so that he made fire to come down from
heaven on the earth, Rev. 13. verses 13, 14, 15.
in the sight of men, and deceived them that dwell on the earth, by the signs
which were permitted him to do, in the sight of the Beast: saying to them
that dwell on the earth, that they should make an Image to the Beast which had
the vvound of a sword and did live: And it was permitted to him, to give a
spirit unto the Image of the Beast, so that the Image of the Beast, should
speak, and also should cause that whosoever would not worship the Image of
the Beast, should be killed. If you remember who this Beast is, that had the
deadly vvound by the sword, namely, that it was the Roman State, wounded in
the sixth head, viz. in the Emperors, you will the better perceive, that the
Image of that Beast, is, and must needs be, some State, or, form of
government, erected, like unto that of the Imperial: for, what is an Image, but
a likeness, or resemblance of that whereof it is an Image? Now then, what is,
or can be, this Image of that Beast, but the Popedom, erected in lieu of that
Empire, at Rome? This does Augustinus Steuchus himself, though a great Papist,
sufficiently declare, in these words: In Pontificatu, etsi non illa veteris
Imperij magnitudo, species certe non long dissimilis, Aug. Stenchus, de
Donatione Constantini.
renata est: Qua Gentes omnes, ab ortu and occasu, band ^ecus Romanum
Pontificem venerantur, quam omnes Nationes Olim, Imperatoribus obtemperabant.
In the Popedom (says he) there arose, if not the greatness of the ancient
Empire, yet verily a form, not much unlike to it: VVherby all Nations, from
East and West, do in like manner, Worship the Pope of Rome, as they did, in
times past, obey the Emperor. And therefore a little after, the same Steuchus
calls the Popedom, an Empire, and, a Maiestical Royalty, in express
terms. Blondus likewise, comparing Rome restored under the Pope, with Rome
flourishing under the Emperors, Blond. Romans inst^ur. lib. 3. number. 16. etc.
says: that, Habet Roma in Regna and Gentes Imperium. -- Dictatorem nunc
perpetuum, non Caesaris sed Piscatoris Petri successorem, and Imperatoris
praedicti (id est, Christi) Vicarium, Pontificem summum, Principes Orbis
adorant and colun^, etc. Quid? quod maiora, vel c^rte paria priscorum temporum
Vectigalibus, Europa pene omni^ tribu^ a Romam mittit: Rome has an Empire over
Kingdoms and Nations. The Princes of the World do now adore and worship the
Pope of Rome, being the perpetual Dictator and successor (not of Caesar, but)
of Peter the Fisherman, and the Vicar of Christ, etc. Yea, in a manner, all
Europe, sends greater tribute to Rome, or at least, Equal, to that of the old
times. And with this agrees that also of Bellarmine, Bellar. cap. 15. de
Miraculis Antichristi.
where he says: Antichristum fore ultimum, qui tenebit Romanum Imperium; tamen
sine nomine Romani Imperatoris: that, Antichrist shall be the last head of
Rome, who shall hold the Roman Empire, but yet without the name of the
Roman Emperor. For the name and title, of being Pope of Rome, and of Christ's
Vicar, and Peter's successor, (under which, he exercises all his authority,
both Imperial and Episcopal, Spiritual and Temporal) is better pleasing and
more beneficial to him, then the name and title of Emperor. Yea, it is this
spiritual power, that animates, and gives life and spirit (as the Text
speaks) unto the temporal, Rev. 13.1^.
and which makes it to be of so great, so glorious, and so high esteem: for,
this opens the peoples hearts and purses unto him, and brings in, and heaps
up, abundance of wealth and treasure: this causes Kings to stoop and bow unto
him, and his censures and thunderbolts of Excommunication, to be so dreadful:
causes men to repair from all quarters to Rome, to partake of the spiritual
liberalities of his Holiness: and yet he is ever a gainer by that means,
notwithstanding all that his bounty and liberality.

Neither did this second Beast, the false-Prophet, Antichrist, cause only the
Image of the Beast, that is, the Papal Empire, to be thus made and erected, nor
did only put a life or spirit into it, whereby it did speak, that is, give
forth Edicts, Laws, Sentences, and Decrees, but did further so speak (as this
Text shows) that whosoever would not Worship the Image of the Beast (that
is, this Papal-Empire) should be killed, Rev. 13.15.
and put to death, namely as an Heretic or schismatic, or as a seditious
person. These things be so plain and evident, as that they need no further
explication, or proof. For to what other end, tend all their cruel
persecutions, their bloody Inquisitions, their detestable Massacres, their
abominable Leagues, Conspiracies, and Wars, against Protestant, Kings,
Princes, and people, but that none might live or breath (if they might have
their wills) which would not worship and become obedient to it? Yea, not only
would they have them to be deprived of their lives, but of houses also, lands,
goods, liberty, and whatsoever other solace of humane society. For thus did
Pope Alexander the third, decree, in the Council of Turon, against such as
would not subject themselves to the Sea of Rome: Ne, ubi cogniti fuerint,
receptaculum quisquam eis in terra sua praebere, Guil. Neubrig. rerum Angl.
lib. 2. cap. 15. inter decreta Turonensis Concilij.
aut praesidium impertiri praesumat: sed nec in venditione and emptione, aliqua
cum ijs communio habeatur: ut solatio humanitatis amisso, ab errore viae suae
resipiscere compellantur. Quisquis autem contra haec venire tentaverit, tanquam
particeps iniquitatis eorum, anathemate feriatur: Illi vero si deprehensi
fuerint, per Catholicos principes, custodiae mancipati, omnium ^onorum
amissione mulctentur. That, after they be known, no man presume to give them
any receipt upon his land, or harbor them: neither in buying and selling, let
any communion be had with them: that, loosing the solace of humanity, they
may be compelled to return from the error of their way. And whosoever shall
do the contrary, let him, as being a partaker of their iniquity, be sentenced
to be Anathema: and they, if they be taken, by Catholic Princes, let them be
committed to prison, and loose all their goods In the Council of Lateran
likewise, assembled against the Albigenses, (whom they call Cathari and
Pat^rini) it was said thus: Eos and defensores eorum, and r^ceptores,
Anathemati decernimus subiacere: Neubrig. lib. 3. cap. 3. and Decret. Greg.
lib. 5. tit. 7. de haeret. cap. 8.
Et sub Anathemate prohibemus, ne quis eos in domibus, vel in terra sua,
tenere, vel fovere, vel negotiationem cum ijs exercere praesumat: We decree,
Them, and their defenders and receivers, to be under the sentence of Anathema:
And under the same curse, We forbid, that no man presume to keep or harbor
them in their houses, or upon their land, or to negotiate with them. In like
sort did Pope Martin the fifth, in his Bull of condemnation against John Husse
and Hierome of Prage (annexed to the Acts of the Council of Constance)
straightly charge and command, that such as they were, which would not be
obedient to the Sea of Rome, nor hold communion with that Church, Epist. mart.
5.
should not be permitted, Domicilia tenere, larem fovere, contractus inire,
negotiationes and mercantias quaslibet exercere, aut humanitatis solatia cum
Christi fidelibus habere: to have any house or home* to make any contracts, or
to use any trade or traffic, or to enjoy any solace or comforts of humanity
with the faithful of Christ. And, as if all this were too little, Pope
Boniface the eight, did further say and decree, that it was, de necessitate
salutis, subesse Romano pontifici, Ext. de mayor. and obe^. C. unam ^.
of the necessity of salvation, for every man, to be subject to the Pope of
Rome. Thus you see, that this Image of the Beast (that is, the Emperor-like
State, and government of Rome by the Popes) was able to speak: for her own
exaltation and advancement, amongst the Inhabitants of the earth, and what
manner of speeches they were, and how terible, dammageable, and in conclusion,
deadly, to all that would not worship it, and become obedient thereunto. But
no only by words, speeches, sayings, persuasions, doctrines, and decrees, but
by miracles, signs, or wonders also, was this Image of the beast to be
erected: For the Text says, that this second Beast (the false-prophet,
Antichrist) did great Wonders, Rev. 13.13, 14.
so that he made fire come down from heaven on the earth, in the sight of men,
and deceived them that dwell on the earth, by the signs which were permitted
him to do, in the sight of the Beast: saying to them that dwell on the earth,
that they should make the Image of the Beast etc. So that the drift of all
these Miracles, was but to make the Image of the Beast. And this agrees with
that of S. Paul, where he says: that, the coming of Antichrist, shall be,
by the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.
and lying wonders: and with that also of the False-prophet (mentioned in this
Revelation of S. John) that he did Miracles. Rev. 19.20. Rev. 16.13, 14.
Which False-prophet, cannot be understood of Mahomet the False-prophet,
amongst the Turks, and Sarazens, for he did no miracles, but prevailed with
his religion an other way, and especially by force of Arms, and dint of
Sword. Yea, Mahomet openly protested, saying: Non sum miraculis, aut indicijs,
ad vos missis: I am not sent unto you with miracles, or signs. Matthew. Paris
Hist. in Angl. in Hen. 3. Dionys. Carth. in Apoc. 13.
And so also does Dionysius Carthusianus testify, that, Mahometes asserebat,
Deum sibi dixisse, quod non permisit eum Miracula facere: Mahomet affirmed,
that God said unto him, that he permitted him not to do miracles. But again,
the Miracles which this false Prophet mentioned in the Revelation, did, he did
them, before the Beast, and in his ^ight and presence, ( Rev. 13.14. Rev.
19.20.) that is, at Rome, and in the view of the Roman State, and not amongst
Turks or Sarazens. The false Prophet then, here mentioned in this Revelation,
which did these Miracles, appears to be such a false Prophet, as is among
Christians, to delude and deceive them, and not any such as is amongst the
Turks, or other Infidels of the World. Now, amongst the rest of the miracles,
which this second Beast (that is, this false Prophet amongst Christians, viz.
Antichrist) was to do, Rev. 13.13.
this is specially mentioned, that he made fire come down from heaven on the
earth, in the sight of men. Bellarmine, and some other Papists, would have this
to be understood, literally, of material fire. And yet, if they will needs
have it so to be taken, it will advantage them nothing. For in the Papacy,
they have made fire come down from heaven on the earth, as even their own
writings do declare: As for example, in their Legend for the feast of Corpus
Christi, to confirm their error of Transubstantiation, and the adoration of
their consecrated Bread in the Sacrament, In Festival^ quodam Anglico.
they report, that a Priest, carrying the Host to a Sick man, lost it by the
way, and being perplexed for so great a loss, there appeared a Pillar of fire,
shining like the Sun, from heaven to the earth, pointing to the very place
where the Body of Christ lay: attended with a company of devout Beasts^,
which falling down upon their knees, adored it. De Sacram. Euchar. lib. 3. c.
8. Portifor sive Breviar. ad usum Ecclesiae Sarisburg in festo Thom^ Cautuar.
Yea, Bellarmine alleges no less then seven miracles for confirmation of
this error. Likewise, to confirm another error of theirs, concerning the
worship of Saints, they allege sundry miracles, and amongst the rest, they
fetch fire from heaven for that purpose: For of Thomas, they say, that a
burning light descended four times, and kindled the Tapers in honor of that
Saint. In the Legend of Iacinth and Eugenne, they also fetch fire from heaven,
to consume Melance, the false accuser of Eugenne. Again, in the Legend of
Edward the Martyr, there is a Pillar of fire brought from heaven to the earth,
to show the place of his burial. In the Legend of S. George, they also fetch
fire from heaven, to burn Dacianus, who had be headed him. In the Legend
likewise of S. Barbara, they fetch fire from heaven, wherewith her Father that
persecuted her, was consumed. In the Legend of S. Martyn, they, to make him
like to the Apostles, do say, that the holy Ghost descended upon him in the
form of Fire, as it did upon the Apostles. But to leave all other errors of
Popery, which want no Miracles amongst them, to confirm them, and to come to
this very point in hand, touching this Image of the Beast, that is, touching
the Papal Empire, or, Emperor-like State, erected in the Popes at Rome, upon
the subversion of the Emperors: Was not Pope Hildebrand, otherwise called, Pope
Gregory the seventh, the first, that is most famous (or rather most infamous)
for resisting and weakening the Emperor of his time, by rebelling, and making
War against him? Does not Aventinus write directly thus of him? Hildebrandus,
qui and Gregorius septimus, primus Imperium, pontificium condidit: Aventin.
Annal. Boiorum. li. ^
quod successores per qurdringentos quinquaginta continenter annos invito
mundo, invitis Imperatoribus, adeo duxere, ut inferos superos, in servitutem
redigerint atque sub iugum miserint: Pope Hildebrand, who was also called
Gregory the seventh, is the first that founded the Papal Empire: which his
successors, for four hundredth and fifty years together, have so managed, in
despite of th World, and in despite of the Emperors, that they have brought
inferiors, and superiors into subjection, and under the yoke. The like
speaks Eberard: Apud Aventin. An. Boio. l. 1*
Hildebrandus ante annos centum atque septuaginta, primus, specie regligionis,
ANTICHRISTI Imperii fundamenta iecit. Hec Bellum nefandum, primus auspicatus
est, quod per successores hucusque continuatur: Pope Hildebrand, says he, an
hundred and seaventie years past, was the first, who under pretense of
religion, laid the foundation of the Empires of Antichrist. He first began
this wicked war, which by his successors, is hitherto continued. And even
Onuphrius also, a great favorer and maintainer of the Papal authority, says:
Huic vni etc. To this man only (viz. to Pope Hildebrand) all the Latin
Churches, Onuphr. in vita Greg 7. col. 271.272.
but especially the Church of Rome ought to attribute it, that she is free,
and pulled out of the hand of the Emperors, that she is enriched with so much
riches and wealth, and temporal Dominion: that she is ruler over Kings,
Emperors, and all Christian Princes: from whom, lastly, it is (that I may
comprehend all in one word) that this most great and excellent state flows,
that Rome is the Lady, or, Mistres, of all the Christian world: whereas
before, as a base handmaide, she was kept under, not only by the Emperors,
but by any Prince aided by the Roman Emperor. From him it is, that the right
of that greatest, and, in a manner, infinite, and in all ages terrible, and
venerable power of the pope of Rome, has issued. For, although formerlie, the
Popes of Rome were respected as heads of the Christian religion, and Vicars of
Christ, and the Successors of Peter: yet did not their Authority stretch any
further, but to defend or maintain opinions of faith. Yea, they were subject
to Emperors: al things were done at their beck: by them were the Popes made,
neither durst the Pope of Rome judge or determine any thing of them. Of all
the Popes of Rome, it is Gregory the seventh, that is the FIRST, who having
the assistance of the Normans, strengthened by the help of the Countess
Matildes (a Woman very potent in Italy) and inflamed through the discord and
civil war of the Germane Princes, was bold (beyond the manner of his
predecessors, and contemning the Authority and power of the Emperor) after
that he had obtained the Popedom, I do not say, only to excommunicate, but
also to deprive the Emperor himself of his Kingdom and Empire. A thing,
before those times unheard of. For those Fables which are reported, and carried
about, concerning Arcadius, Anastasius, and Leo Iconomachus, I regard not.
VVhereupon Oth^ Frisingensis, a Writer of those times, says also thus: I
read, and I read again, Oth^ Frising. Chronic. lib. 6. cap. 35.
the gests of the Roman Kings and Popes, and no where do I find any of
them, before this Emperor Henry, to be excommunicate by a Pope of Rome, or by
him deprived of his Kingdom. Gotfrid. Viterb. Chron part 17. Trithem. Chron.
Hirsa^g. An. 1106.
So far Onuphrius. Gotfridus Viterbiensis, likewise testifies, that, this
Emperor, Henry the fourth, was the first that was deprived of his Empire by
the Pope. Trithemius also witnesses the same, saying: Ipse primus est, inter
omnes Imperatores, per Papam depositus: He is the first amongst all the
Emperors, that was deposed by a Pope. By these Writers, and Historiographers,
it then appears, that although, before the times of Hildebrand, the Popes of
Rome, had an Episcopal, or Ecclesiastical supremacy, or Headship over all
other Bishops (which also began not, till about the year 606. in the time of
Boniface the third) yet a temporal supremacy, or, Imperial Monarchy over
Emperors, Kings, and Princes, they never fully compassed and effected, until
the days of this Pope Hildebra^d which was above a 1000. years after Christ.
And thus you see the original of both the Supremacies of the Pope. But what?
were there any Miracles, signs, or wonders done at this time when the
Imperial Monarchy (wherein, the Image of the Beast, chiefly consists) was
thus sought to be brought in, and settled in the Pope? especially, was there
any Miracle, or Wonder, by fire, then to be seen? It is manifest there were.
For thus Aventinus writes: Falsi tum Prophetae, Avent. Ann. Boior. lib. 5.
edit. Ingol^^ed. Ann. 1554. page 591.
falsi Apostoli, falsi Sacerdotes emersere, qui simulata religione populum
deceperunt, magna signa atque prodigia ediderunt, etc. False Prophets, false
Apostles, false Priests, did Then arise, who under pretense of Religion
deceived the people, and did great signs and Wonders, etc. And amongst other
Miracles, they allege this for one, Avent. lib. 5.470.
that a certain Bishop, whilst he was preaching against Pope Hildebrand,
fulmine tactum esse, was smitten with lightning. What is this, but fire from
heaven? Yea, Pope Hildebrand himself being a Magitian and Necromancer, would
no doubt, not fail to do such miracles and wonders, as by divelish device and
help he could, for the bringing of his designs and purposes to pass. And
amongst the rest of his Wonders, Cardinal Benno says: that, When he listed,
he would shake his sleeves: Benno, in vita Hildebrandi.
and fire, like sparkles, did fly out: and ijs Miraculis, oculos simplicium,
volunt signo sanctitatis, ludificabat: and with those Miracles (says he) as
it were with a sign of sanctity, did he delude the eyes of the simple.
Paulus Bernriedensis also, rehearses diverse Miracles or Wonders of Pope
Hildebrand, done by fire, Paul. Bernried. in vita Greg. 7. page 20.22.
and therefore often resembles him to Elias, in whose time, fire came down
from heaven. So that if these words in the Revelation, of fire coming down
from heaven on the earth, were to be taken literally, Rev. 13.13.
you see, how they may be verified in the Papacy, inasmuch as, in the Papacy,
they have made fire come down from heaven on the Earth, in the sight of men,
that is, as they made men to believe and think: for so also does Arethas,
expound those words. But indeed those words in the Revelation, Areth. in Apoc.
13. Hieron. epist. ad Paulin.
be rather mystically and allegorically to be taken: for S. Hierome says,
Apocalypsim, tot habere sacramenta quot verba, that the Revelation has as many
mysteries in it, as words: and again he says, totum esse spiritualiter
intelligendum, Epist. de 5. quast* Marcell.
that the whole book is spiritually to be understood. They seem therefore to
be words alluding to the times of Elias, and signifying, that as in his days,
God miraculously sent fire from heaven, 1. Kin. 18.21.22.23.24.25. etc.
thereby to certify the people of the true God, and of the truth of his
religion: so would Antichrist, by the miracles done in his Church, work so
powerfully and effectually in the minds of his followers, as that they should
believe his Supremacy and Religion to be as undoubtedly true and right, as if
the same had been approved and ratified by fire, sent down from God out of
heaven, for that purpose. And they may allude to the times of Elias in another
sense also, signifying, that as in his days, 2. Kin. 1.9.10.11.12.
fire came down from heaven, to consume certain Captains with their
fifties, which came to molest and disquiet him: so if any molest, interrupt,
or disturb the Pope, in any point touching his Supremacy, and the Religion
thereunto belonging, that he can likewise cause a Divine revenge, like fire
from heaven, to fall upon them, which he would persuade them, they shall not
escape.

Thus by words and deeds, persuasions and threats, fraud and force, by
doctrines, decrees, and constitutions by rewards and punishments by false
miracles, and by all the ways he could devise, has the Pope endeavored to
erect unto himself a Throne upon earth, and to have a Monarchy, not only
Episcopal and Ecclesiastical (for that would not content him, though it were
too much) but Civil and Imperial also, that so, in Him, as being the Head and
supreme governor of Rome in lieu of the Emperors, the Image of the Beast might
appear. Yea, to make himself yet more like to the Emperor, he has also taken
the Emperors habit which was of Skarlet, together with shoes of Skarlet,
which were proper to the Emperors. And as the Emperor had a Senate clad in
Skarlet: so has the Pope also a Senate of Cardinals, clad in cloth of the
very same color. Inasmuch then as the Pope, and his Cardinals, (which make
the State, whereby Rome is ruled and governed) be thus all of them, clad in
Skarlet: you therein, not only see the Image of the Beast, but therewithal
the very skarlet colored Beast, which was so long agone prophesied of and
foretold, Rev. 17.3.
that the Whore of Babylon should sit upon: for, a Prophecy, is of things to
come, and not of things present: and so is it, accordingly, expressly said, of
that prophecy in the Revelation of S. John, that it was to show him things
future* and which afterward should be done (Rev. 4.1.) and not things present,
and in esse, at that time.

5 In the three last verses of the chapter; it is further said: that this
second Beast, caused all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond,
to receive a mark in their right hand, Rev. 13.16.17.18.
or in their foreheads: and that no man might buy or sell, but he that had the
mark or the name of the Beast, or the number of his Name. Here is wisdom:
let him that has understanding, count the number of the Beast: for it is the
number of a man* and his number is 666. In which words, you see, that this
second Beast, was to cause men to receive a mark, in their right hand, or in
their forehead: and there he shows, what mark this is, namely, that it is
the mark of the Beast, whose deadly wound was healed, viz. in the Pope, in
whom, the ancient Imperial dignity was restored, and revived at Rome. So that
the mark of the Beast, here, that is, of the Latin or Roman State, as it was
and is in the hands of the Popes, and managed and ruled by them, (in respect of
Religion) is, and must needs be Popery, or (which comes all to one
reckoning), subjection and obedience to the Pope, and to his decrees, and
determinations. And, this mark, he causes all to receive in their right
hands, In front, per professionem: in manu, per operationem, Aug. de Civit.
Dei lib. 20. cap. 9. Lyran. in Apoc. 13. Richard de S. Vict. in Apoc. lib 4.
cap. 7. Apoc. 13.17.
or in their foreheads, that is, either by the manner of their actions, life,
and conversation, to show it, or, by their open and outward profession, to
declare it. For so does S. Augustine, Primasius, Lyranus, Haymo, Richardus de
S. Victore, and the ordinary Gloss likewise expounds those words. Yea, none
(says the Text) might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of
the Beast, or the number of his name: that is, none was to trade, or to be a
Merchant of the Popes Pardons, Indulgences, or such like Romish Merchandises,
unless he either professed subjection to the Pope and Popish Religion, or
unless he had the name of a Romanist; or were at least, reckoned, or numbered
amongst them, as if he were a very true Romanist, indeed. Yea, even concerning
temporal Merchandises also, did Pope Martin the fifth (in his Bull annexed to
the Council of Constance) and diverse other Popes also (as before appears)
give straight charge and commandment, that none which will not acknowledge
subjection to the Pope and his Religion, should buy or sell, or make my
contracts, or exercise any traffic or merchandise, or have any comforts of
humane society, with faithful Christians. Although therefore Bellarmine
obiecteth, that there be many within the dominion of the Pope, which not
professing the Popes Religion, do nevertheless, buy and sell, as namely the
Jews: thereunto is answered, first, that Antichrist (the Pope) is properly the
King and Head, not of Unchristian, but of Antichristian people, and therefore
is to exercise that his Papal and Antichristian Authority only amongst that
kind of people, and not over Jews, and such like Infidels, which make no
profession at all of Christ, or Christianity. Now as touching such as profess
the name of Christ, it is before showed that he suffers none of them, where
he has to do, by his good will, to buy or sell, or to exercise any trade of
merchandising: yea, or to enjoy the comforts of humane society, unless he
live in subjection to him, and hold communion with his Church. But secondly,
Jews, that live within the dominion of the Pope, be not within the compass of
such Merchants, as be here specially intended, viz. to buy and sell the Popes
Pardons, Indulgences, and such like Antichristian wares, wherein the chief
merchandising of Papal Rome consists, and whereat this Text principally
aims. For not Jews, but pretended Christians, and those of the forwarder
sort of their Religion, be the men used to be employed in this kind of
traffic. What have Jews to do, with this kind of Romish ware, or to deal
with such merchandise in the Church of Rome, concerning the souls of men,
whereunto they be altogether strangers, and which Church, together with the
orders, and religion thereof, they utterly disclaim and disavow? And yet,
thirdly, even the Jews themselves, that traffic and trade, temporal
commodities and merchandises, do it, by Letters Patents, Rescripts, Warrant,
or, License from the Pope of Rome, or his laws, (for otherwise they could not
do it): and so (upon the matter) have they also the name of the Beast to allow
and authorize them therein. And therefore even the very Jews themselves,
which do not otherwise trade, traffic and merchandise worldly commodities,
but by the Popes, authority, permission, or allowance, within his Dominions,
do no way confute, but rather confirm this point.

6 Here is wisdom, (says the Text): Rev. 13.18.
let him that has understanding, count the number of the Beast, for it is the
number of a man, (that is, such, as a man by his understanding, may possibly
attain unto) and his number is 666. That which is here called the number of
the Beast, Rev. 13.17. Rev. 15.2.
is in the very next verse going before, and elsewhere also, called the number
of the Name of the Beast. Now although it might be an hard and difficult matter
before the accomplishment of this Prophecy, to find out, this number of the
name of the Beast: yet after the accomplishment of it, it is not so hard a
matter. First therefore, they be much deceived who take this to be the proper
name of some one particular man, or singular person: for the Text it self
shows it, to be the name, not of any particular man, but of a Beast, that
is, of a State, Kingdom, or Dominion: and declares it also to be the name of
the Beast, that had seven heads; that is, of the Latin or Roman State. The
Beast then being now found out, and known to be the Latin or Roman State, it
is so much the more easy to search, and find out, whether, the number of this
Beasts name, that is, of the Latin or Roman State, do in the numeral letters
thereof, contain just 666. For if it contain just that number, then for that
cause also, will this matter, be so much the more apparent. In what language
then are we to reckon it? Most likely, either in the Hebrew, because the
Revelation (as some think) was given in Hebrew, to S. John, being an Hebrew
borne: or else in Greek, because the Revelation was written in Greek, and
that also to the Greek Churches: and all the letters in both these languages,
be also numeral: whereas the letters in the Latin tongue be not all numeral,
Malcuth, which signifies a Kingdom, in Hebrew, is of the feminine gender:
wherewith therefore Romijth, does fitly agree, being of the same gender.
though some be. If then you ask in Hebrew, what Malcuth, that is, what
Kingdom, this is, which is here spoken of? A fit, and congruous answer, is
made in the same Hebrew language, that it is, Romijth, (...), which signifies
Roman, denoting it thereby to be the Roman State, or Roman Kingdom: which
word, in Hebrew, does in the numeral letters thereof, contain the just number
of 666. If again you ask, in Greek, what Basileia, that is, what Kingdom it
is: it is likewise fitly and fully answered in Greek, that it is, (...), the
Latin Kingdom, or, the Latin State: which name of the Beast so produced in
Greek, does also in the numeral letters thereof, contain the just number of
666. Or, if you will think it fit to reckon it in the Latin tongue, which is
the proper tongue of the Beast (as possibly it is so to be reckoned, for in the
Latin tongue, some letters be also numeral, though all be not) what name or
title has the Pope, who has gotten to himself this headship, and sovereign
rule of Rome? Is he not usually called, Vicarius Generalis Dei in terris? Gods
Vicar general upon Earth? And do not these words thus produced in Latin,
contain, in them, in the numeral letters or characters, the just number of
666? It is clear and apparent, that they do. So that, whether you consider
the Latin or Roman State, simply by it self, or as it is long sithence
translated, or brought to the Pope of Rome, the last head thereof: you find,
in all the three languages, both of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, (which be
counted the three learned languages of the world) the number of the Beast,
fitly to agree: yea these very words (Latinus status, ad Papas allatus,)
directly signifying, the Latin State, as it is (now long since) translated and
brought unto the Popes, contains in the numeral letters thereof, the just
number of 666; which is therefore a thing, not unworthie the noting and
observing. Irenaeus lib. 5.335. De nomine Bestiae, omnes docent, tale futurum
esse, ut ex literis constet, quae ad ratione^ numerorum, iuxta Graecae linguae
morem redactae, numerum 666 contineant. Suarez lib. 5. cap. 19. n. 11. and 29.
Irenaeus (whose Master was Polycarpus, Disciple to S John, that received this
Revelation) says: that the number of the name of the Beast, should contain
666, according to the computation of the Greeks, by the Letters that be in it.
He therefore reckoning other names (as (...) and (...), in neither of which,
there is any likelihood, that any of them should be this name, seeing none of
these, is the name of a Beast, that is of a Kingdom, or State) sets down
the name, (...), whereof he writes thus: Sed and, (...), nomen sexcentorum
sexaginta sex, numerum: and valde verisimile est: quoniam verissimum Regnum,
hoc habet vocabulum: Latini enim sunt, qui nunc regnant: But the word, (...)
(lateinos) conteyneth also the number of 666: and this is very likely (says
he) to be the name: because the most true Kingdom, has this name: for they be
Latins, which now reign. Where you see, even by Irenaeus his testimony,
first, that the Beast here mentioned, signifies a Kingdom, or State:
secondly, that his name, containing the number of 666, must be in Greek, and
reckoned by the numeral letters of the name, in that language. And thirdly he
says, that it is very likely, to be (...). All which very fitly agrees (as
is apparent) to the Latin State, not only as it was ruled by Emperors, but as
it is sithence also ruled by Popes. For in the Papacy also, Latin, is in
chiefest request, and preferred before all other languages. All their Service
is in Latin: the people be taught to pray in Latin: the Scriptures be not
allowed of, but according to their Latin translations: and it is commonly and
vulgarly called, the Latin Religion etc. What therefore Irenaeus in those
ancient times affirmed to be very probable, and likely, We, living so many
hundred years after him, and seeing the accomplishment of this Prophecy, do
and must conclude it, by the event, to be not only probable and likely, but
necessarily true and undoubted, That it is the Latin Kingdom, or Roman State
which is there intended and described. As for that Bellarmine, and some other
Papists say, that the word, (...), may not be written with (...), but with a
simple Iota, it is too vain a cavil: for Irenaeus, being a Grecian borne,
knew how to write Greek, I hope, as well as Bellarmine, or any other that
takes the exception. Secondly, even mean Scholars in that tongue, do know,
that it may be written both ways, and that it is no new or strange thing, with
them, to write, I, long, by (...): as Atrides, and Aristides, be written in
Greek, (...). So Nilus, Epirus, and Mithras, be written in Greek, (...):
especially, when N follows I long, it is the observation of Joseph Scaliger
himself, (in his Notes upon Eusebius Chronicle, page 106) that the Grecians
do turn the I of the Latins, into (...): as in these words, (...). This
therefore appears to be, a very frivolous and idle exception.

And as touching that they further object, that there be many names, which
make that number of 666. and thereupon would infer, that any of those, may
be the name there spoken of, as well as Latin, or Roman; they talk likewise
very idely, and to no purpose: for although there be many names, that contain
that number of 666, yet none of them, containing that number, can be the name
there spoken of, unless it be the name, first, of a Beast, that is, of a
State, or Kingdom: secondly, unless it be the name of that very Beast with
seven heads, there mentioned: nor thirdly, unless it be such a name, as
agrees with that Beast, in every other respect and circumstance: of which
sort, none is, or can be showed to be, but only that which is the Latin, or
Roman State. Inasmuch then, as the Pope of Rome counterfeiteth the Lamb, but
acts the Dragon, in very deed: and exercises all the power and authority
of the first Beast, that is, of the Roman State, and that before his face: and
seeing that the deadly wound, given to the Empire, was cured and healed in
him: and that he with his Clergy, and holy men, and holy women, has by
their Miracles, done in the sight and view of the Roman. State, together with
his doctrine, and other his devises, so bewitched, and enchanted the
Inhabitants of the Earth, that they have as verily believed the Popes
Supremacy, and his religion to be of God, as if they had been ratified, and
approoved from God himself, by some miraculous sending of fire from heaven,
for the confirmation of them: and has also caused an Image of the Beast, to be
made, namely, the Papal State, in lieu of the Imperial, whereof himself is
now the Head and Monarch: and has moreover, put such a spirit into this Image
of the Beast, so that it did speak, and give forth such terrible Edicts and
Judgments, that whosoever did not obey it, and the decrees thereof, should be
put to death; and has also caused, and commanded all professors of
Christianity, under his rule and dominion, to receive the Mark of the Beast,
which, in respect of Religion, is manifestly, Popery: and has willed also,
and ordained, that none within his Dominions, professing the name of Christ,
should buy, or sell, or use the trade of Merchandising, unless he have the
mark of the Beast, that is, unless he profess the religion of Popery: or
have his name, which is to be a Romanist, or Latin man, that is, a man of the
Roman, or Latin Religion, professing subjection to him: or have the number of
his name, that is, unless he so carry and demean himself, as that he be
numbered, and reckoned amongst them, as if he were a very true Latin, or true
Roman indeed: and seeing that the number of the name of the Beast, containing
666. does also fitly and fully agree to the Latin, or Roman State: yea,
seeing the Pope has all the Marks whatsoever, mentioned in the holy
Scriptures, to belong to Antichrist (for no instance can be given to the
contrary) I conclude that he is, and must needs be held to be, the very
undoubted Grand Antichrist, and that there is no other to be expected.

CHAP. IIII.
Showing also the Pope to be Antichrist, and the Popish Church, to be the
Antichristian, out of the 1. Tim. 4. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

THE words of this Text be these: But the spirit speaks evidently, that in
the latter times, 1. Tim. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to spirits of error, and
doctrines of Devils, which speak lies in hypocrisy, having their consciences
seared, with an hot Iron: forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from
meats, which God has created to be received with thankesgiving, of them
which believe and know the truth: for every Creature of God is good, and
nothing to be refused, if it be received with thankesgiving: for it is
sanctified by the word of God and prayer. Beside the former notes and marks of
the Antichristian and Apostatical Church, the Apostle here has, for our
fuller, and better satisfaction in that point, notified also, and set down
unto us, two other marks, and those not the worst, but the most sensible, nor
the most wicked (though wicked enough) but the most easy to be known, that
none might any longer err, or go astray therein. The two marks, whereby to
discern and know this Antichristian Church, which has made an Apostacy, or
departure from the right faith (and whose teachers, be false teachers) he
specifieth to be these: namely, 1. Forbidding people to Marry, which by Gods
law be not prohibited. 2. A commanding to abstain from meats, for religion
sake, which God has created to be received with thanksgiving. Which two notes,
or marks, be apparently found in the Papacy* For there, namely in the
Papacy, are diverse persons forbidden to marry, which by Gods law be not
forbidden, as namely their Bishops, Deacons, Priests, Monks, Friars, Nuns
etc. And there also is a commanding to abstain from some kind of meats, for
religion sake, as is sufficiently known, and as shall afterward appear: and
therefore in the Papacy it is, that the Church is Apostatical and
Antichristian. But touching the point of Marriage, the Rhemists, and other
Papists answer, that S. Paul here speaks only of the Manichees, Encratites,
Marcionites, of the heretics, called Apostoloci, Ebionitae, and the like,
whose heresy about Marriage was (say they) that, to marry, or to use the Act
of Matrimony, is of Satan, and that the distinction of Male and Female, came
of an ill God. And thus would they have the old Heretics only to be branded,
and themselves noe way to be touched herein. But indeed (if you well observe
the words) not so much those old heretics, as the later heretics, namely,
the Papists, be there noted and branded: yea, these chiefly, and especially,
if not altogether. For those old heretics that attributed the institution of
Matrimony, to Satan, and the distinction of male and female, and procreation
of Children to the Devil, did not speak lies or falsehood in hypocrisy (as
these are here said to do) but in palpable, and open blasphemy, which might
therefore easily be discerned of Christians, and avoided. But the Papists,
that (under pretense of holiness, religion, purity, and chastity) forbid
Marriage, be those that utter this their doctrine in hypocrisy: and therefore
be such, of whom the Apostle here speaks, and had the more need to give the
Church a forewarning, that they might beware of them, and be the better armed
against them. But because they confess, the old Heretics, to be here
condemned, let them tell me, how much differs in this point, the Church of
Rome from those old Heretics, the Manichees? For even the Manichees permitted
marriage to the Lay people, which they called their hearers: but in no wise to
their Clergy, which they called their Elects, or chosen men, Aug. de haeres.
ad quod vult Deum haeres. 46.
as S. Augustine declares. Seeing then they are in the same heresy with them,
in this very point, how can they avoid from themselves herein, the note and
brand of those old Heretics? But they say, that their Clergy men, Monks,
Nuns, and the rest of their religious orders, be Votaries, and have vowed
continency, and therefore it is not lawful for them to marry, because of
their Vows. But I demand, What if they be not able to keep this vow, but
that notwithstanding their Vows, Prayers, Fastings, and other means, by them
used, they still burn in lust? For, in these cases, concerning marriage, or
single life, 2. ^or. 7.7.
Every one has his proper gift of God^ one after this manner, and another
after that: as S. Paul himself directly teaches and affirms. So that
Continency from Marriage, is a gift, not common to all, but proper to some, as
here appears, and therefore, every one that Fasteth, or that Prays, or
labors after it, does not always attain unto it: yea, Christ Jesus
himself, expressly tells us, that, All do not receive it, but they only to
whom it is given. Mat. 19.11, 12.
It must therefore, first of all be confessed, that it was a very
presumptuous, rash, and unadvised Vow, which such men and women make, as at the
time of their Vow-making, neither were, nor could be assured of that special
gift, nor yet afterward, have it given them from God: For which they are
therefore to repent. And secondly, their vow thus appeaing to be rash, and
unadvised, and such as they find themselves not able to keep, it were much
better for them to marry, then continually to burn in Lust, and so to fall
possibly, into fornication, or adultery, or other more lewd and abominable
sins. For it is the express rule of S. Paul, that, It is better to marry,
then to burn. Yea, 1. Cor. 7.9.
Marriage was instituted of God, for this very end, to prevent and^ void
fornication, and adultery, and all other uncleanness: For so S. Paul again
says and requires: that to Avoid fornication, every man should have his own
wife, and every woman her own husband. 1. Cor. 7.2.
And again he says: that, Marriage is honorable amongst all men, and the
Bed undefiled, but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. Heb. 13.4.
And therefore if such persons as have made vows, in this case, find
themselves not able to keep them, and thereupon do afterward Marry, S.
Augustine himself condemns not their Marriage: Non quia ipsae Nuptiae vel
talium etc. Not that the Marriage it self, even of such persons (says he) is
judged to be condemned Yea, August. de bono vidu^at. cap. 9.
he further speaks thus: They which say, that the marriage of such persons,
is no Marriage, but rather Adulteries, seem to me (says he) not to conside^
thoroughly, and diligently, what they say. Cap 10.
Yea, it was indeed the direct heresy of those old Heretics, called
Apostolici, not to permit such to marry as had made the vow of chastity,
Epiphan. har. 61
and were not able to keep it. And (...) is further declared to be, contrary
to the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, which (as Epiphanius also there
testifies) judged, it was better for such to marry openly, then to burn
privilie. Whilst therefore they suffer not such to marry, as have made a vow
of Continency, and be not able to keep it, what do they else, but, contrary
to the doctrine of the Catholic church, join with those old heretics,
called Apostolici, and consequently cannot herein avoid the same Antichristian
note and brand imposed upon them? But now (if a man should further expostulate
the matter with them) what good or sufficient reason can they show, why
Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of the Church, may not as well be allowed to
be married persons, as the Priests in the old Testament? For it cannot be
denied, but the Priests in the old Testament did Marry. If you say, that
Bishops and Ministers should be holy men: beside that marriage hinders not
holiness in them, that have not the gift of Continency (yea, it rather helps
holiness, making them to live honest; and holy lives, who otherwise burning in
lust, were likely to live very impurelie and unholily), might not likewise the
same objection be made, touching those Priests of the old Testament, in whom,
holiness was as well required, as in the Ministers of the new Testament? Yea,
if marriage were against holiness, or did hurt or hinder it, God would never
have allowed it to any kind of people: For even of Lay people, as well as of
Ecclesiastical Ministers, does God require sanctity, or holiness, saying thus
unto them: As he which called you is holy: even so be ye also holy, 1. Pet.
1.14.15.
in all manner of conversation: because it is written, be ye holy, for I am
holy. It is therefore a very profane speech of Papists, or of any whosoever,
that say, that Marriage is a profanation of holy orders, or that in his own
nature, it prophaneth any Christian, of what sort soever, it being a sacred
and holy Institution, and appointed of God, as a remedy against sin, and to
preserve men in honesty, goodness, and sanctity. Yea, some of the Apostles
themselves were married men, as S. Peter (otherwise called Cephas) and some of
the rest: and even those Apostles also that were unmarried, had the freedom
and liberty, nevertheless, to have been married, notwithstanding the sacred
function of the Apostleship. For so S. Paul witnesses of himself and
Barnabas, that it was lawful and free for them, if they had been so disposed,
to have taken wives, and to have led them about with them, as they traveled in
the execution of the office of their Apostleshippe. Have we not power (says
he) to lead about a Sister, A Wife, asvvell as other Apostles, and the
brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? 1. Cor. ^.5.
The Rhemists hereunto answer, that the words in the Text, (...), should not
be translated, a Sister, a Wife, but a Woman a Sister: and say, that the
Apostle means plainly, the devout women, that after the manner of Ievvry, did
serve the Preacher of necessaries, of which sort, many followed Christ, and
sustained him, and his, of their substance. But first they transpose, and
misplace the words in that text, For the words be not (as they in their
Translation suppose) (...), a Woman, a Sister, but, (...), that is, a Sister,
a Wife: For no man of understanding, would translate it, a Sister, a Woman,
because the word Sister, implies a woman, of it self. And therefore this
latter word, (...), must of necessity signify, a Wife: For to translate it
otherwise, namely, a Sister, a Woman, were to make the word (...) to be
superfluously added, and to no purpose. Besides, the word used in the text of
leading about, declares, that they were Wives, (...).
and not other Women: For it is a word, importing authority in it, as of the
husband over his wife, or of the master over his servant, or such like: Neither
had the Apostles any such command, or authority over other women. We read
indeed, of certain women, that followed our Savior Christ, but we read not
that he did lead them about. But lastly, the very scope of the Text, is also
directly against this their conceit, and exposition, which expound it of such
rich weomen, as did minister of their substance to the Apostles necessity: For
by such rich weomen, the Church could not be charged, but was rather helped
and relieved by them: whereas with the Apostles wives, that were poor as their
husbands, the Churches might lawfully have been charged: For this is the very
scope and purpose of the Apostle, in that place, to show to the Corinthians,
that in this point, He and Barnabas, used not that power and liberty, which
freely and lawfully they might have done, in leading about a Sister, a Wife
with them (as well as Cephas, that is Peter, and some other of the Apostles
did). And even S. Hierome against Helvidius, to the same effect, cites this
text also, thus: Numquid non habemus potestatem uxores circumducendi, sicut and
caeteri Apostolici. Have we not power to lead about wives, as well as the rest
of the Apostles? And Tertullian likewise, according to this Text, Tertul.
exhort. ad Cast.
says: Licebat and Apostolis nubere, and uxores circumducere: It was lavvfull
for the Apostles to marry, and to lead about their wives. Clemens
Alexandrinus also, by this Text, does prove, that the Apostles had Wives, and
did lead them about: Do they also (says he) reject the Apostles? For Peter
and Philip did beget Children: Philip also, did give his Daughter in marriage.
Clemen stromat lib. 3.
And therefore Paul says in a certain Epistle: Have we not power to lead
about a Sister, a VVif^, asvvell as the rest of the Apostles etc. 1 Cor. 9.5.


2 Yea, that Bishops, and Deacons, may be married men, and have wives, 1. Tim.
3.2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. etc.
S. Paul himself, further clearly witnesses: showing, both what manner of
men, Bishops and Deacons should be, and likewise what manner of weomen, their
wives should be. A Bishop (says he) must be blameless, the husband of one
wife, watching, sober, comely, a lover of hospitality, apt to teach, Tit.
1.5.6.7.8. etc.
not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lu^re, but gentle,
abhorring fighting, abhorring covetousness, one that rules well his own
house, having children in subjection, with all honesty: For if a man know not
how to rule his own house, how shall he care for the Church of God? Where
first you may observe, that a Bishop is expressly allowed to be the husband of
one wife. Some Papists, hereunto answer, that by being the husband of one
wife, is meant, that a Bishop must have but one wife before his admission to
that his Episcopal office: but after his admission to that office, he must have
none at all. It is a very strange answer, and untrue. For first they hereby
expound these words, (a Bishop must be, etc.) by these; A Bishop must be such a
one, as has been, etc. And so by this exposition of theirs, which will have
it expounded of the time past only, but not of the time present, they make the
Apostle to speak, as if he had said thus: Let such a one be ordained a Bishop,
as has heretofore been blameless, but now at the time of his ordination, and
after, is not so: such a one must be made a Bishop, as before he was a Bishop,
was watchful, sober, apt to teach, etc. But now after that he is a Bishop,
he may have none of these virtues or good qualities, in him. Is not such an
exposition senseless, impious, and absurd? And yet if they will expound the
one clause of the sentence, touching a Bishop to be the husband of one wife,
(as they do) of the time past only, and in no sort of the time present, they
must likewise expound all the rest of the members and clauses of the same
entire sentence, in the same manner, and so run into those senseless, and
impious absurdities, before mentioned. But the Apostle himself, to put the
matter further out of all controversy, speaking of Deacons, says in the
present tense: Diaconi sint unius uxoris viri; Let the Deacons, be the husbands
of one wife. Now, 1. Tim. 3.12.
as touching the meaning of these words, that a Bishop, or, Deacon, must be the
husband of one wife, it is not to tie him necessarily to have a wife, but to
this, that if he have any, care must be taken, that he have no more then one
at a time. So that this Text makes against Diga^y, or Bygamie, (as we call
it) or Polygamie, that is* against the having of two, or more wives at once,
and not (as some take it) against the having of several wives, one succeeding
after the death of the other. And so does S. Chrysostom expound this Text,
speaking thus: He says not this, as making a law, Chrysostom. upon this place.
that none without a wife may be made a Bishop, but appointing a measure of
that matter: for it was lawful for the Jews to be joined in the second
marriage, and to have two wives at once. Theodoret likewise upon these words,
The husband of one wife, says thus: Theod. upon his Text.
The preaching then began, and neither the Gentiles did exercise virginity,
nor the Jews admit it: for they esteemed the procreation of children, to be a
blessing: therefore, forasmuch as at that time, they were not easily to be
found, which exercised continency, he commands of such as had married
wives, to ordeyne them which honored temperance. And concerning that saying,
The husband of one wife, I think (says he) certain men have well said: for
of old time both Greeks, and Jews, were wont to be married* and that with
two, three, or more wives, at once. And even now also, when the Imperial
laws, forbid men to marry two wives at once, they have to do with Concubines
and Harlots. They have said therefore, that the holy Apostle says, That he
which dwells honestly with one wife only, is worthy to be ordained a
Bishop: for (say they) he does not reject the second marriage, who has often
commanded that it should be used. Theophilact does also so expound these words,
Theophilact upon this Text.
the husband of one wife. He spoke this (says he) because of the Jews, for
to them was permitted Polygamy, that is, to join marriage with many at one
time. Yea even S. Hierome, though no great favourer of marriage, and being
himself inclined to that opinion, that he which has been twice married,
should not be ordained: yet in his Commentary upon the Epistle to Titus, Hier.
Comme^t. upon Titus.
confesses and declares, that sundry did interpret the Text otherwise,
namely, as we do: Some Interpreters of this place (says he) do give this
sense. It was of the Jewish custom (say they) that men had two wives, or more
at once, as we read in the old Law, of Abraham, and Jacob: and this they
will have to be the Apostles commandment in this place, that he which is to
be chosen a Bishop, have not two wives together at one time. The sense and
meaning then of those words, is evident and plain enough, viz. that he which
is blameless or unreproveable, that is the husband of one wife, and of no mo
at once, that is watchful, sober, apt to teach, and has all those other
virtues and good qualities mentioned in that Text, is the man, that is meet to
be made a Bishop. S. Ambrose (in 2. Cor. 11.) says: That all the Apostles,
except John and S. Paul, had wives. Chaeremon Bishop of Nilus, fled with his
wife in persecution, Eusebius. lib 6. cap. 42. Demetrianus an excellent Bishop of
Antiochia, had a son, called Doranus, that was made Bishop, in stead of
Paulus Samosatenus the Heretic, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 30. Spiridion was a
famous Bishop in the Council of Nice, that was married* and had a daughter,
called Irene, Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 5. Gregory Bishop of Nazianzen, was a
notable Bishop, and father of the other Gregory that succeeded him, as
appears by the Oration he made, in praise of his father. Gregory Bishop of
Nissa, was an excellent Bishop, and was also married, Niceph. lib. 11. cap. 19.
S. Germanus, was a notable Bishop, in Africa, and was likewise married, having
a daughter called Leontia, that was afterward martyred by the Arrians, Victor.
Vticens* hist. lib. 3. Yea Fabianus, and, Hormisda, Bishops of Rome, were
married: and many other Bishops of Rome were Priests sons, as Pope Damasus
himself in his Pontifical, does testify. And although it be true, that many
holy men, were unmarried also: yet you see it to be untrue which the Rhemists
say, that no holy men ever used their wives after they were in holy Orders: For
Socrates further mentions diverse holy Bishops of the East Church, in his
time, that begat lawful children of their lawful wives, after that they were
Bishops, Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22. And so does Athanasius (ad Dracontium)
affirm, that he knew many Bishops unmaried, and again, Monks, to be
fathers of children: as on the other side, you may see (says he) Bishops to be
fathers of children, and Monke^ that have not sought liberty of generation.
And good it had been, if this freedom and liberty to marry as it was left by
God, had so continued to all sorts of men and women, without any restraint or
prohibition: for be not the Clergy men in Popery, that be thus restrained,
and prohibited to marry, and likewise the Monks, Friars, Nunns, and the rest,
thereby, occasioned, or may they not thereby, be occasioned, to be like those
old heretics, called Origeniani turpes, Filthy Originists? Who, as Epiphanius
testifies of them, Rejected marriage, Epiphan haeres. 63.
yet lust ceased not amongst them, but they defiled their body and mind with
wantonness: for some of them be in the habit of Monks that live solitarily;
and some of the women, are in the habit of women that live solitarily: but
they are, for all that, (says he) corrupt, performing their lust in their
bodies. And again he says of them: that, They study not for chastity, but
for fained chastity, and that which has the name only of Chastity.
Clemangis a Doctor of Paris, that lived above two hundred years agon,
concerning Monks, and Abbeyes, speaks thus: Clemang. de stat. Eccles. page
47. and inde.
What can I say of them that is commendable? they being so slippery,
indisciplinated, dissolute, unquiet, running up and down, into common and
dishonest places. And touching Friars, he says: They be worse then the
Pharisees, Page 53.
ravening Wolves in Sheep ^^othing, who in words pretend the forsaking of
the world, and in deeds with all possible frauds, deceit, and lying, hunt
after it: making semblance in outward show, of austeritie, chastity, humility,
holy simplicity, but, secretly, in exquisite delicates and variety of
pleasures, going beyond the luxuriousness of all vvorldly men: and, though not
with their wives, yet with their Bratts, filling themselves greedily with
wine, and good cheer, and polluting every thing with lust, whose heat
burns them. And concerning Nuns, he says: Page 56.
Shame forbids me to speak of them, lest I should mention, not a company
of Virgins dedicated to God, but stewed, deceiptfull, impudent whores, with
their fornications, and incestuous works. For what, I pray you, are
Nunneries now-adayes, but the execrable Brothel-houses of Venus? the harbors
of vvanton men, where they satisfy their lusts? that now, the veyling of a
Nun, is all one, as if you prostituted her openly to be a Whore. So far
He.

3 The sixth general Council therefore, assembled at Trulla, to make Canons,
has an express ordinance concerning this point, of the marriage of Ministers,
(in the 13 Canon) in these words* Forasmuch as we have understood, that it
has bin ordained for a rule in the Church of Rome that* whosoever will be a
Deacon or Priest, must first protest that he will never (...) more after that,
have to do with his wife* (...) following the Apostolical order and
discipline, will, that the lawful marriage of Clergy men, be for ever
avayleable: by no means separating them from their wives, nor forbidding them
to come together at convenient times. Wherefore, if any one shall be thought
worthy to be chosen a Subdeacon, Deacon, or, a Priest: let him not be hindered
from mounting to this degree, because he dwells together with his lawful
wife: and let it not be exacted of him in the day of his election, to renounce
the company of his lavvfull wife: lest, by this means, we be constrained to
disgrace marriage, which was first in instituted by God, and blessed by his
presence: seeing that the Gospel cries out, that no man should separate that
which God has joined together. The prohibition of marriage then, in the Popish
Church, to such as by Gods law be not prohibited, yea, which are directly
allowed* yea which are required and commanded (in case they have not the gift
of continency) to marry, rather then to burn, appears very clearly to be
wicked, and abominable; and consequently, the Popish Church, as touching this
point, must be concluded, to be the undoubted Antichristian Church. And so
much the rather; for that, they have made this prohibition, in mere
hypocrisy: they pretending that they do it for religion sake, and that
Clergymen should be the more holy and chaste: when the cause thereof, indeed,
is another matter, namely the preservation of Church goods, and lest a Bishop
or Priest, if he were married, should pare away something from them, and employ
it to the use of his wife and children: for this, a Pope of Rome himself, has
discovered and manifested in the 28. Distinction and Canon de Syracusanis;
where he says: that the reason, why he did refuse to admit of a certain
Bishop, was, because he had a wife and children, by whom the Church goods use
to be endangered: And yet notwithstanding at the urgent request of the people
of Syracusa, he did receive him, upon condition, that his wife and children,
should not have to do with the goods or profits of the Church. Let them not
therefore blind the eyes of the world any longer, as though care of chastity,
sanctity, and holiness, in Clergymen, were the cause of this prohibition,
when the true cause in very deed, appears to be merely politic, worldly,
and earthly, namely a respect and care for the preservation of the Church
goods, wholly, and entirely to themselves. But again, is it not gross
hypocrisy, and dissimulation, for them to pretend Chastity, in this matter,
wherein there appears to be none at all, but the clean contrary? For, how
can the forbidding of Marriage to such as have not the gift of Continency, tend
to chastity? Yea, how can it otherwise tend, but to unchastitie, filthiness,
dishonestie, and uncleanness? Yea, what a great affecter of chastity the
Popish Church is, may appear by the Canon, Is qui, in the 34 Distinction: the
inscription whereof is this: He that has no wife, let him, in stead of a
wife, have a Concubine. The Canon following, is this: It is not lavvfull for a
Christian to have, I do not say, many wives, but not so much as two wives,
but only one wife, or in defect thereof, a Concubine. Likewise, the Canon,
Dilectissimis, in the 12 cause, and the first question, does approove of
Platoes opinion, the wisest among the Greeks, which says: All things should
be common amongst friends: Now, under this name of all things (says this
Canon) men's wives also be comprehended. But I shall need to say no more
herein, because the premises, as touching this point of forbidding marriage,
under pretense of chastity, and religion (when there is neither chastity, nor
religion in it, but the clean contrary) do sufficiently declare, the Popish
Church, to be, very clearly and undoubtedly Antichristian.

4 The second mark of the Apostatical, and Antichristian Church, out of this
Text, is, a commanding to abstain from Meats, for Religion sake. And this
note, or mark, is also found very evidently to be in the popish Church: 1.
Tim. 4.3.
For in the Papacy, the people are enjoined, and that not for politic, or
civil respects, but for piety and religion sake, to abstain from
flesh-meates, and other meats, on certain days, and times, by them
appointed: although nevertheless, on the same days, and times, they permit
fish of all sorts, to be eaten, and wine also to be taken. Yea, they not only
account it a sin against God, to eat flesh on those days, but do also
repose matter of merit, and satisfaction to Gods Justice for their sins, in
that their abstinence, and in such their obedience, performed to their Mother,
the Church of Rome. Howbeit, S. Paul (contrariwise) says: that, The kingdom
of God, is not meat nor drink, but righteousness, Rom 14.17.
and peace in the holy Ghost. And again he says: If any of them which
believe not, bid you to a feast, and if you will go, 1. Cor. 10.2^.
whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake.
Yea, Christ Jesus himself shows, that they be not meats and drinks,
moderately taken, but other things that defile a man, for, says he: Perceive
ye not, that whatsoever enters into the mouth, goes into the belly, and is
cast out into the draught? Mat. 15.17, 18, 19, 20.
But those things which proceed out of the mouth, come from the heart, and
they defile a man: for out of the heart come evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornica^ions, thefts, false testimonies, slanders; these be the
things that defile a man. And again he says expreslie: That which goes
into the mouth, defiles not a man, but that which comes out of the mouth,
that defiles a man. Mat. 15.11.
Do not these testimonies manifestly prove, that good and true Christian
Religion, and the kingdom of God, consists not in these outward things, of
meat and drink, but in things inward, seated in the heart of a man, as namely,
Romans 14.17.
in righteousness, in peace, and in joy of the holy Ghost, and such like? Yea,
when God thus permits, as well flesh as fish to be eaten, and says
expressly, that, the Eating of it defiles not a man: can any Popish
Prohibition make it to defile a man, or to be sin in his sight, which
himself affirms to be none? For they say, that though God has not
forbidden it, yet their Mother, the Church of Rome, has forbidden it upon
pain of deadly sin, and damnation. Howbeit this excuses not: yea, herein it
is, that their church does disclose and declare her self, to be in very
deed, Antichristian, in thus exalting herself against God, and daring to
forbid that in the way of Religion, which he has not forbidden, but
(contrariwise) has allowed in his religion. The true Church has but one
Lavv-giver (as S. James speaks) and that is God, to make and give Laws, Iam.
4.12.
to bind the soul and consciences, and to certificus, what is sin, and what
is not sin, in his sight. How then can any Prohibition of the Pope, 1. Ioh. ^.4.
or Popish Church, make that to be sin against God and his religion, which
God himself affirms not to be so, yea, the contrary whereof, he teaches
and affirms? But consider yet further, what Mother it is that they be so
careful to obey, Rev. 17.5. etc.
and whether she be not the Mother of VVhoredomes and abominations of the
earth, and even the Whore of Babylon, as she is before declared to be, out of
the Revelation of S. John. For it will be small honor, joy, or comfort, for
any, to show or perform obedience to such a Mother. Yea, all Gods people be
expressly commanded by a voice from heaven, to forsake that Mother, and to go
out of her: lest being partakers of her sins, they also receive of her
plagues. Rev. 18.4.
And therefore, whilst they do it in obedience to such a Mother, their sin
is not thereby lessened, but is so much the greater. Yea, whilst your Church is
thus bold to give this Prohibition, S. Paul, even in this place to Timothy,
tells you, that God is so far from prohibiting, or forbidding any Meats,
in his religion, that contrariwise, he has created them to that very end, 1.
Tim. 4 4, 5.
to be received, and that with thankesgiving: and he there further teaches,
that, they are so far from having any sin, pollution, or uncleanness in
them, to a faithful and well persuaded Christian, as that they are to him
(clean contrariwise) sanctified by the word of God, and prayer. Can any thing
be more forciblie spoken, to confute that Prohibition? But amongst the rest,
this is most intolerable, that they place remission of sins, or matter of
merit, or satisfaction to Gods Justice for their sins, in this their
abstinence from flesh, and betaking themselves to fish, and other meats, which
they also call fasting: For, first, did ever any true christian Religion teach
a Fast, acceptable to God, and allowed of him, to consist in difference of
meats, or, (which is all one) in absteyning from some kind of meat, and
eating of othersome, as namely, in absteyning from flesh, and eating of fish,
or such like? A true christian Fast, whether it be public, or private, is, to
eat neither flesh, nor fish, nor any thing at all, for that day, or time,
that is so dedicated for humiliation, in Gods sight: and besides, it has
always, humble, earnest, fervent, and repentant prayers, joined with it, and a
serious and deep meditation and contemplation, of divine and heavenly things.
Yea, this kind of fasting, without prayer, and without other divine exercises,
joined therewith, is nothing else, but a mere bodily diet, and altogether a
corporal, and no spiritual exercise. But were fasting never so truly and
rightly performed, yet why should you account it meritorious, or of merit
sufficient to take away sins, or to satisfy Gods Justice for your sins?
Did it not cost more to redeeeme souls, and to satisfy Gods Justice for them,
then so? have we not been often told, that it is the Son of God, and our
all-sufficient Savior, and Redeemer, that has with his most bitter sufferings,
and most perfect obedience, satisfied Gods Justice for our sins, which we,
for our parts, were never able to satisfy? But again ye know, that true,
right, and christian fastings, prayers, humiliation, mortification, and all
other duties of obedience, we owe unto God, as a debt: And how then can the
payment, or performance of these debts, be a satisfaction to Gods Justice, for
other debts, which we did likewise owe, and have not performed? Yea, moreover,
all the duties of obedience, which we owe unto God, we perform with much
weakness, and imperfection, joined and mixed therwithall, and therefore even
all our best works and actions be so far from meriting, or deserving any
grace or ^avour at Gods hands, that contrariwise, in that respect, we had need
to crave mercy and forgiveness of him, even for those defects, frailty,
weakness, and imperfections, that is intermingled in them.

5 As for Christ his fasting forty days and forty nights, Mat* 4 2. Luke 4 2.
he eating nothing all that while, as S. Luke testifies, it was Miraculous,
and therefore not to be made an example for Christians to imitate. For what
christians can fast in that sort and live? The Rhemists from hence would deduce
the Lent Fast, or Fast before Easter, calling it, an Apostolical tradition: But
this opinion is confuted, first, by Eusebius, who in the fifth book of his
history, recites an Epistle of Irenaeus, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 26.
to Victor, Bishop of Rome, mentioning how diversely of diverse persons it was
observed in that ancient time. There be some (says he) which think they
must not fast but one day* others there be, that fast two days some more, and
some forty hours, day and night. And this diversity of fasting (says he)
commends the unity of faith and religion. Dionys. Alex. Ep. ad Ba.
Dionysius Alexandrinus also shows, that some fasted six days, before
Easter some two days, some three, some four, some none. S. Basil, in his two
Sermons of fasting, speaking of the fast before Easter, tells us often, that
this fast lasted not above five days. S. Ambrose, in his 34 Sermon, says:
That in his time, there were some, which made their Lent to last twenty days,
other thirty, by interchangeable weeks. But the Church disputing against the
Montanists (in the tenth chapter of Tertullians Book of fasts) says: That
those days in the Gospel, are marked out for fasting days, in which the
Bridegroom was taken away: that is to say, the days, in which Jesus Christ
suffered, and was in his grave: and that all other days be in a man's own
liberty. Soc. lib. 5. c. 22.
Again, Socrates says: that, At Rome they did not ^ast, but three weeks
before Easter, excepting Saturday, and Sunday: That in Sclavonia, Greece, and
Alexandria, they fasted six: That in other places, they fasted three times five
days, at three several times, and that yet nevertheless, they did call this,
Lent; every one alleging a diverse reason. That there was also a difference in
their fasting, touching their meat: some absteyning from all living creatures:
others feeding upon fish only: others eating foul, together with fish: and
some abstaining from the fruits of trees, and from Eggs: and some which tied
themselves to eat nothing but bread: and some that eat no bread at all.
Whence he collecteth, and infers, that this fasting is a matter voluntary,
and left free to be used, at such times, and in such order, as every man
shall think best and fittest. His words for this purpose, be these: Since no
man can show any express commandment, Soc. lib. 5. ca. 22.
as concerning this: It is evident, that the Apostles did leave it to every
man's own will, and pleasure, to the end, every man might do good, but not
through fear, or by constraint. And so S. Augustine likewise teaches, and
testifies, saying thus: I see well, August. epist. 86
that fasting is commanded, in the Evangelical, and Apostolical vvritings: and
throughout all the new Tastament: But upon what days we should fast, or
not fast, I see no commandment for this, neither of Christ nor of his
Apostles. And so also did the Catholics tell the Montanists, in ancient time,
saying: The Law and the Prophets lasted but till John, Tertull. advers.
Psychico^ cap. 2*
after which time, men fasted as they thought best: not for that they were so
commanded by the Imposition of a new discipline, but according as every man
saw his occasion, and that the Apostles used to do thus, imposing no burden of
solemn and set fasts. Yea, Montanus the heretic, Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib.
5. c. 18.
(as Eusebius also notes out of Apollonius) was the first that prescribed
Laws of Fasting. You see then that this Lent-fast, or fast before Easter, is
neither a divine ordinance, nor an Apostolical tradition. Yea Damasus Bishop of
Rome, in his Pontifical, affirms, that Telesphorus, Bishop of Rome, did
institute it: and Telesphorus also himself, in his Decretal Epistle,
testifies the same.

6 But touching this matter, the story of Spiridion related by Sozomen, is
also not unmeet to be remembered: Sozom. lib. 1. ca. ^.11.
to whose house, a stranger coming suddenly upon him, he commanded his
daughter to cover the Table, and to set something upon it for the stranger to
eat: and she at that time setting certain flesh-meate upon the Table for him
to eat, he answered, that he would not as then eat of it, because he was a
Christian: Then Spiridion replied, saying, that for this reason he should the
rather eat of it: for God says, Unto the clean, all things be clean: and he
did eat thereof himself, to give the other, an example to follow. He did not
say eat of it, for I have nothing else in the house, and so necessity may
excuse you: but he alleged a Text of Scripture, to assure him of the
lawfulness to eat of it, as being no offense against the Christian Religion:
and he himself in eating thereof, did likewise declare so much.

The Text which this godly man, Spiridion, cited, is S. Paul's, in his Epistle
to Titus, who says accordingly: that, Tit. 1.13.
Unto the clean, all things be clean. But the Rhemists take upon them to
answer this Text, and say, that S. Paul speaks not of their Churches
abstaining from meats, which is not for any uncleanenesse in the creatures,
but for chastening their bodies: and that he speaks against the Jewish
superstition, who now being Christians, would not, for all that, cease to put
difference of clean and unclean, according to the old Law But first, whereas
they say, that this abstinence from flesh-meate, in their Church, is and
serves for chastisement of their bodies, and for repressing of lust, what is
this else, but speaking an untruth, or a lie, (as S. Paul calls it) in
Hypocrisy, and so a clear fulfilling of this Prophecy? For, abstinence from
flesh, can have no such virtue in it, when as all other kinds of meats, and
drinks, are permitted them, which procure lust, as much, if not more, then
flesh meat which they are prohibited. Secondly, the Jewish abstinence from
some kind of meats, was not for any uncleanenesse by them supposed to be in
the creatures by Gods creation, but only in respect of Gods prohibition by his
law: Now, if notwithstanding Gods prohibition in his law, the Jewish
superstition in abstaining from some kind of meats be condemned, (as the
Rhemists themselves affirm), much more is the Popish superstition in their
abstinence from some kind of meats, to be condemned, who knowing that Christ
has made all things clean to the clean, yet cease not to put difference of
meats clean and unclean, holy and unholy, not according to Gods law, as the
Jews did, (which therefore might seem the more tolerable) but according to
man's law, even the law of the Pope, which is Gods adversary (and therefore the
more intolerable). Thirdly, they make the creatures of God, unclean, although
not in respect of their creation, yet in respect of their Antichristian
prohibition, it being given under pretense and color (forsooth) of a great
deal of sanctity, piety, and religion, by them supposed and taught, to be
therein. For if you read the Disputations of the Schoole-Doctors, as of
Durandus, and Alensis, and others, you shall find, that the reasons, which
they give, why flesh is forbidden, and not fish, do presuppose some
uncleanenesse in flesh, more then in fish. For some of them say (as namely
Durandus* lib. 6. cap. de alijs Ieiunijs) that the reason is, because the
creatures of flesh, were accursed and drowned in the general deluge, in the
days of Noah: others of them, allege the reason to be, because, Christ did
never eat any thing but fish, after his resurrection. Again, What needs
that custom of carrying their flesh-meate, after Lent, to the Priest, for him
to say his Exorcismes over it, if they did not think, that some wicked Spirits
lay lurking in it, all the Lent? or that it had some pollution in it, whereof
it had need to be purged? or why else are they accounted the most holy, and the
most religious men, amongst them, which most abstain from flesh, as the
Benedictines and Charterhouse-Monkes, which abstain from flesh all their life
long, and eschew the touching or tasting of it, as an unholy and profane
thing? Or why else does the Church of Rome, inflict a greater punishment upon
him that does eat flesh in Lent, then on him that has committed fornication?
For does it not hereby appear, that they take the eating of flesh in Lent to
be a more uncleanenesse, and a greater sin, then fornication? But yet further
S. Paul has an excellent Text, touching this matter, in his Epistle to the
Colossians, where he writes thus: Coloss. 2.20.21.22.23.
Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the ordinances of the world,
why, as though ye lived in the world, are ye burdened with Traditions? as
Touch not* Taste not, handle not: which all perish with the using, and are
after the commandments and doctrines of men: which things, have, indeed, a
show of wisdom, in voluntary religion, and humbleness of mind, and in not
sparing the body: which are things of no value, seth they belong to the
filling of the flesh. Observe here first, that he reproves such superstitious
people, as put piety, religion, and Gods worship, in abstinence from some
kind of meats, by reason of a prohibition of men: for these words (Touch not,
Taste not, Handle not) be plain and direct words of prohibition. And observe
withal, that these people used this abstinence (even as the Papists also say
they do) for humiliation of themselves, and for afflicting and chastening of
the flesh, or (which is all one) for not sparing the Body, as the Text here
speaks. But howsoever these things have a show of wisdom (as he calls
it) they have not, for all that, the substance of true wisdom in them:
because religion, and the right worship and service of God, and his kingdom,
consists not in meats and drinks, and such external things as perish with
the using, and belong only to the nourishment of our flesh and bodies; but in
those things that be spiritual and concern the soul, and life everlasting.
Yea observe further, that he calls them, things of no value: and that by
these prohibitions, there is a Burden imposed upon Christians, even a burden of
Men's Traditions and inventions: and therefore he utterly disalloweth them, as
being no commandments of God, or any of his doctrines, but as being the
commandments and doctrines of men. So that they cannot shift this Text, by
saying that he speaks here only of the Jews, or, of Jewish superstition:
for it before appears, that the Jews, did not abstain from certain kinds
of meat, to subdue their bodies, but to obey the law of God, given them by
Moses, in that case. Yea you see plainly, that S. Paul reproves these
observations, as being the commandments of men: but the Jews kept theirs, as
being the commandments of God. And therefore in that place he speaks against
any sort of superstitious people whosoever, who being Christians would
nevertheless suffer themselves to be thus yoaked and burdened with men's
Traditions and commandments, in the way of Religion. Although then the
Rhemists, and other Papists, answer, as well to this Text (of 1. Tim 4.1.2, 3*
4* 5.) as also to that other Text (of Tit. 1.15.) that S. Paul in both those
places, speaks only against such Heretics, as abstained, in respect of an
impuritie of an uncleanenesse supposed to be in the meats, by nature and
creation: it appears by that which is before spoken, that even they also that
hold no impuritie in the meats by creation, but abstain from them, in this
respect, Col. 1.20 21.22.23.
of not sparing their Bodies, or, for chastening and subduing the flesh (by
reason of Men's commandments, given for religion sake, in that case) be taxed,
and reproved. For, In vain do they worship me (says Christ) teaching for
doctrines, Matthew. 15.9.
the commandments of men. Ye have heard before, that the Montanists were
condemned by the ancient Church, because they forbad flesh to be eaten: whether
they did this, out of an opinion that flesh was defiled and polluted, or for
discipline and exercise sake, to repress the body, and subdue lust, who can
better resolve us then Tertullian, who himself was stained with this error?
Tertull. advers. Psychicos cap. 2. and cap. 15.
Now, he reciting the objections and arguments of the Catholics, against these
Montanists, they appear to be such and the same, that we also use against the
Church of Rome, herein. But, lastly, whilst the Popish Church forbids flesh,
permitting nevertheless fish, and wines of all sorts, and all manner of
confections, and banqueting stuff, to be taken: who sees not, that such a
kind of fast or abstinence, pretended to be for religion sake, to keep down
the body, and to suppress lust, is merely hypocritical, and a very
mockery? serving for nothing so well, as to declare it self, to be an
apparent, direct, and demonstrative note, of Antichristianisme. For, to
abstain from flesh, and to fill the belly with fish, and wine, and other
dainties and delicates, or, to have a law permitting this; Can any that has
but common understanding suppose it, to be availeable to the chastening of the
body, taming of the flesh, and subduing of lust? Must not he needs be very
senseless, that shall believe it, and very shameless, that shall affirm it?

7 Touching that they allege, of the Rechabites absteyning from drinking Wine,
at the commandment of their father: they did therein well, Ier. 35.14.
to obey the lawful commandment of their father, whom Gods law also requires
to honor and obey; but this is no warrant for any, to obey an unlawful
commandment of an unlawful and wrong mother, namely of the Church of Rome:
which is before evidently proved unto you, to be the whore of Babylon, Rev.
18.4.
whom all Gods people be required, not to obey, but to depart from, and to
renounce, and forsake. And as touching that they allege of the Nazarites, that
they also absteined from wine; Number. 6.1.2.3.4. etc.
they had Gods express commandment, requiring them to do so, and therefore
might not omit it. But have they likewise Gods express commandment to
abstain from flesh in their fasts, with an allowance and permission,
nevertheless, to eat fish, and other meats, during the same days, and that
also for religion sake? If there be any such express commandment from God
for this, as is for the other, let them bring it forth, that it may appear:
but if they can show none such (as we are sure they cannot) in vain do they
make those cases like, that do so far differ, and have no resemblance. As
for the Fast of the Ninevites, Moses, Elias, Anna, or of any other godly
persons, mentioned in the holy Scriptures (their fastings, not consisting in
difference of meats, but in an abstinence from all kind of meats, for the
time): they be so apparently unlike to your Fasts, as that it were but labor
vainly bestowed, to take pains to make any further answer to them. Touching
that you say, that in England Fish-dayes be observed and commanded to be
observed, and therein an abstinence from flesh required, during those times:
you are to know, that it is no constitution, or decree of the Church, for
religion sake, but a Statute of the commonweal, made only in politic and
civil respects, namely for the maintenance of Navigation, and Fishermen, and
for the breed of young cattle, and such like civil uses and ends. And so much
the very Statute it self made in that behalf, does tell you, if you please
to read it. But for your better and easier satisfaction, I will here recite
unto you, one clause of the same Statute, which is this: Because no manner of
person shall mis-iudge of the intent of this Statute, Statute 5. Eliz. cap. 5.
limiting orders to eat fish, and to forbear eating of flesh, but that the
same is purposely intended and meant politickely, for the increase of
Fishermen, and Mariners, and repayring of Port-townes and Navigation, and not
for any superstition to be maintained in choice of meats: Be it enacted, that
whosoever shall by preaching, teaching, vvriting, or open speech, notify,
that any eating of fish, or forbearing of flesh, mentioned in this Statute, is
of any necessity for the saving of the soul of man, or that it is the service
of God otherwise then as other politic Laws are, and be, that then such
persons shall be punished, as spreaders of false news are, and ought to be.
Whereby you see, that the Statute and Law of England, is so far from
favoring their opinion, touching abstinence from flesh, and eating of fish,
(by reason of prohibition given in the way of religion, or otherwise then in
politic, and commonweal respects) upon fish days (for so the Statute also
calls them fish-daies, and not fasting days) that contrariwise it inflicteth
a punishment upon those, that shall spread or publish any such opinion.

8 Now then, forasmuch as these two notes and marks of the Apostatical and
Antichristian Church, viz. forbidding of Marriage, under color and pretense of
chastity and holiness: and commanding to abstain from some kind of meats,
for Religion sake, and under pretense to chasten the body, and subdue lust,
(when nevertheless Fish, and other kind of meats be permitted) be clearly
and undeniably found in the Church of Rome: it follows that the Church of
Rome, is and must needs be concluded to be, not the Christian and
Apostolical, but the Apostaticall and Antichristian Church: and consequently
that the Pope of Rome, being the Head and Ruler thereof, is and must needs be
the Grand Antichrist. For howsoever the Rhemists and other Papists, to shift
these things from their Church, would have, this Text of S. Paul, to Timothy,
expounded only of the heretics in old time, that utterly condemned both
marriage and meats as things in themselves, and by nature and creation,
polluted and unclean: you perceive, that it much more fitly agrees to the
later heretics, namely the Papists. First, because the Text it self shows,
that it is most properly to be intended, of such false Teachers, as speak lies
or falsehood in Hypocrisy: but those old Heretics, that utterly condemned
Marriage and Meats, 1. Tim. 4.1.2.
as things in themselves and by creation polluted and unclean, did not speak
lies in Hypocrisy, but in plain, manifest, palpable, and open blasphemy: On
the other side, the later Heretics, namely, the Papists, be such as speak
these lies or falsehood, in Hypocrisy; inasmuch as they forbid Marriage and
Meats, not in respect of any supposition that they be in themselves or by
creation polluted or unclean: but upon pretense of much chastity, (forsooth)
sanctity, and religion, therein to be contained. And therefore these later,
rather then those old Heretics, be here to be intended. Secondly, this
Prophecy is of such as did make the Apostacy or departure from the faith:
Now, this (...), Apostasy, 1. Tim. 4.1. (...).
or departure from the right faith, (being the same that is mentioned in 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.) does for that cause also, rightly and fitly agree to the Papacy.
Thirdly observe, that he says, this Apostacy or departure from the right
faith, and this attending to spirits of error, and doctrines of Devils, (by
means of such persons, as speaking lies, in hypocrisy, should forbid Marriage
and Meats) was to come to pass, neither in the first or elder times, not yet
in the last times, but in the later times: for we must note, 1. Tim. 4.1.
(...).
that Saint Paul in these his Epistles to Timothy, speaks distinctly of two
times; showing him, what shall come to pass, not only in the later, but in
the last times also. Seeing therefore he has expressly distinguished these
times, 2. Tim. 3.^. (...).
we must not confound them: and consequently this Apostacy, and prohibition
of Meats and Marriage, in hycrisie (that is, under color and pretense of
sanctity, piety, and religion, when revera there appears to be no
sanctity, piety, or good religion in them) being to fall out and to be
accomplished, neither in the primitive, first, or elder times, nor yet in the
last times, but in the latter times, as it were between them both, does, for
that reason also, more aptly and fitly agree to these latter Heretics, the
Papists, then to those old and ancient Heretics, before mentioned. And
therefore it still appears by this Text and Prophecy of S. Paul to Timothy,
that the Church of Rome, is the undoubtedly Apostaticall, and Antichristian
Church, and consequently, that the Pope, the head thereof, is the undoubted
grand Antichrist.

CHAP. V.
Answering certain Objections of the Adversaries, concerning Antichrist.

OBJECTION. I.
THE Bodies of the two witnesses that were slain, did lie in the streets of
the great City, which spiritually is called Sodom, and Egypt, where also our
Lord was crucified. Rev. 11.8.

Answer. By the great City, there is meant, not Jerusalem, (as you suppose)
but Rome, otherwise called Babylon, which throughout the whole Book of the
Revelation, is called the great City, (as namely, Rev. 14.8. Rev. 16.19. Rev.
18.10.16.18, 19.21. and Rev. 17.18. etc. except only once, that this Title is
given to Jerusalem, but then also, not to the earthly, but to the new and
heavenly Jerusalem, which will advantage your cause nothing at all Rev. 21.10.
Neither indeed, was our Lord crucified within the City of Jerusalem, but
without. Heb. 13.12. Now Rome is said to be the City where our Lord was
crucified, both because, by Authority of that City it was, that Christ
himself was put to death (for he suffered under Pontius Pilate, the Roman
Emperors Deputy, and also because, there, and from thence it is, that he
still suffers, and is persecuted in his Members: For, the persecution done to
any of his members, is by him accounted as done to himself, Act. 9.4. And
therefore also be those two Martyrs, or witnesses of Christ's Truth, said to be
slain, and to have their bodies lie in the streets of the great City, that is,
within the compass and precincts of Romes authority and dominion. Again,
that great City (Rome) is there called Sodom, for her pride, and monstrous
uncleanness: and Egypt, for her Idolatry, and cruelty toward Gods people: and
Babylon, for her so long and miserable deteyning them, in spiritual captivity.
S. Hierome also herein is directly against you: who ( Ep. 17. and, ad
Marcellam) earnestly contradicts your opinion, contending and maintaining,
that it cannot be meant of Jerusalem in Iewry. It therefore still remains
firm, that not Jerusalem, but Rome, is the Seat of Antichrist.

Object. 2. I am come (says Christ to the Jews) in my fathers nume, and ye
receive me not: If an other come in his own name, him ye will receive.
Ioh. 5.43.

Ans. This Text also makes nothing for you: For you expound it, as if Christ
had spoken definitely, of one singular man (to be Antichrist) whom the Jews
should receive: whereas Christ speaks indefinitely, of any False-teacher,
whosoever, that should come in his own name, that is, not sent of God. And
sure it is, that the Jews have received more then one, of such as have come in
their own name: as namely, Theudas, Judas Galilaeus, Barcocabas, etc. In the
text it is (...), indefinitely, and not, (...), definitely (as it is used in
Ioh. 18.16. and Ioh. 20.2, 3, 4,) And therefore also does Nonnus, in his
paraphrase upon this place, expound those words thus: (...), But if any other
come, whosoever he be etc. Yea, the very words of Christ be directly
Hypothetical, or conditional: If another come: and not Categorical, or
affirmative, of Antichrist, or of any other in particular, as ye conceive and
mistake. And further, whereas Christ speaks of those Jews that were then and
there present, to hear those his words: you understand him to speak of such
Jews, as should be, by your opinion, a little before the end of the world: at
which time it is, and not before, that you suppose Antichrist shall come.
Howbeit, the purpose of Christ in that place, is not to foretell, what manner
of people the Jews should be so long after, namely, toward the end of the
world, but how, in respect of their present disposition, they were then, at
that time affected: namely, that him that came in his fathers name, that is,
that was sent from God, they refused, and yet, if any should come in his own
name, that is, not sent of God, him they were ready to receive. But lastly,
why should you think, that the Jews before the end of the world, shall
receive Antichrist for their Messiah, when as S. Paul (contrariwise) has
foretold and assured us, Romans 11.11, 12 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. etc.
that the Jews, before the end of the world, shall be converted to Christ,
and his religion. Yea, it is before very evident, that Antichrist, shall not
be a Jew, nor an observer of the Jewish religion, but a pretended Christian,
and such a one as shall sit in the Temple of God, and be the head of the
Apostacy, and apostated and revolted Christians: of which sort and number, the
Infidels, and unbeleeving Jews cannot be. For how can they be said to be
Apostataes, or to make any apostasy, or departure from Christ, who never
formerly embraced him, nor received the profession of him?

Object. 3 Christ is one certain and singular man, therefore Antichrist must
be so also.

Ans. It follows not: yea, howsoever there is but one true Christ, yet are
there many Antichrists, as S. John expreslie affirms: 1. Job. 2.18. and many
false Christ's, and false Prophets (as Christ himself declares) which shall
Show great signs and wonders, insomuch, that if it were possible, they should
deceive the very elect. Mat. 24.24. And yet also, since the time that the Pope
got the headship and Soveraignetie of Rome, is Antichrist one, as the Pope of
Rome is one: that is, not in number and nature, as one certain and singular
man, but one, at once, by law and institution: though successively, so many,
as since that time have enjoyed the same Popedom.

Object. 4. He is Antichrist, which denies the Father and the Son. 1. Ioh.
2.22.

Ans. The Pope and Popish Church also, deny the Father and the Son, in such
sort, as belongs to Antichrist and Antichristian people to do: that is to
say, not openly and professedly, but in a covert and disguised manner. For,
Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father: says the same S.
John. 1. Io^. 2.23. The like testifies Christ Jesus himself, in Job. 5.23. So
that to deny the Son, is to deny the Father also: inasmuch as the one
cannot be denied without denial of the other. And that the Pope and Papacy do
deny the Son, namely, Christ Jesus, ( viz. in respect of his Person, and in
respect of his office^) though not directly, yet indirectly, and by way of
Consequent, and in such manner and form as becomes Antichristianisme, is
before showed in diverse particulars.

Object. 5 Antichrist is called (...) etc. and (...) etc. and (...) (in 2.
These. 2.) The man of sin, the Son of perdition, and the lawless person:
This Greek article (...), does show him to be some one singular man, or
particular person only, and no more.

Ans. You are much deceived in so concluding or thinking, by reason of the
Greek Article: For, although it be true, that the Greek Article there, has
his Emphasis, or force, to point at some certain thing, yet this certain
thing, may be as well, a certain kind of men (as namely of Popes, going in
succesio^ one after another) as one singular or particular person. Neither does
Epiphanius (haeresi 9, quae est samaritanoru^) teach otherwise concerning this
Greek article, then other learned men do. For thus he says: (...) etc. Vbi
enim adiungitur articulus, ad unum aliquod definitu^ and clarissimu^, omnino
and quaedam Emphasis propter articulum: sine vero articulo, sumendum est
vocabulum indefinite de re aliqua vulgari. Quemadmodum si dixerimus, (...),
nomen quidem expressimus, sed non perspicue monstravimus definitum aliquem:
Regem enim dicimus, and Persarum, and Thedorum, and Elamitarum. Sin vero, cum
appositione ar^iculi, dixerimus (...)* extra dubium and, quid significetur:
subindicatur enim per articulum, ipse Rex quaesitus, vel de quo sermo fuit, vel
qui notus est, vel qui dominatur in Regione aliqua etc. So that it is true,
that Epiphanius will, by the Greek Article added, have some certain or
definite thing, to be noted, or pointed out: and so say we also: but what
that certain or definite thing is, before appears. Learned men do wonder,
that so learned a man as Bellarmine is, should so far be mistaken in so
plain a matter. For, does (...), and (...), (in Ioh. 10.10 12.13.) because of
the Greek Article added, denote only one particular man, and no more; that is
to say, but only one in all the world, to be a These, or an hireling? or
when Christ says: (...) etc, and (...) etc. (in Mat. 12.35.) does he mean,
that only some one good m^n, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings
forth good things? and that only, one evil man, out of the evil treasure of
his heart, brings forth evil things? or does he not rather mean, in a
generality, or community, every, or any good man whosoever, or any evil
man whosoever, in that case. Again, when it is said (in Luke 4.4.) that (...),
lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of God: It is not meant of one Individuum, or singular person only, but in a
generality or community of any or every one, that he lives by that means.
So again S. Paul would, that (...), the man of God should be perfect, and
instructed to every good work (2. Tim. 3 17) he does not mean because of the
Greek article added, that only one man of God, but in a generality or
community, that every, or any man of God whosoever, should be so perfect,
and so well instructed. Again, when it is said, that (...), Heb. ^7.25.
the high Priest alone, went once every year into the second Tabernacle: it
is meant, not of one particular high Priest only, but of the whole order of
high Priests. And so by (...), and, (...), the hinderer, and that which
hindered Antichrist from appearing in his height, is not meant, 2. These. 2.6.7.
because of the addition of the Greek article, that only one Emperor, but
the whole succession of the Emperors of Rome, even the State of the Roman
Emperors, which was then flourishing, was the hinderer of that his revealing or
appearing: and so also do the ancient fathers themselves expound it, as is
before declared. Neither is this any unwonted, or unusual speech: For we
speak so commonly, and say, that the Emperor goes before Kings: meaning
thereby, not one particular Emperor only, but the whole State and succession
of Emperors: And when we say likewise, The King goes before all Dukes and
Earls, it is not meant only of this King, or that King, but generally, of
all Kings, and of the very State and succession of Kings. So also, when our
Adversaries themselves do say, The Pope is head of the Church, they mean not
this Pope, or that Pope only, in Individuo, but, generally, the whole Order,
State, and succession of Popes. And therefore, when the grand Antichrist, that
is, the Pope of Rome, is thus called, The man of sin etc. Thereby likewise
is, and may very well be intended not one singular man only, or this Pope,
or that Pope in Individuo, but generally, the whole State, Rank, and Order of
the Popes, succeeding one another.

Object. 6. Antichrist shall call himself in express terms, god: ostendens
se (...), quod sit Deus, showing himself that he is God, as it is in the Greek.

Ans. But your latin translation, which you hold for the only Authentical, and
which agrees in sense with our translation, is, Ostendens se, tanquam sit
Deus, showing himself as though he were God. Howbeit, beause you urge the
Greek Text, which we ever allow: We thereunto answer, first, with Aecumenius:
that, Non ait, Dicens, sed, ostendens hoc est, operibus signis, ac miraculis,
nitens ostendere quod sit Deus: The Apostles words, concerning Antichrist, be
not (as you suppose) That he shall say, that he is God, but showing, that is,
by his works, signs, and miracles, endeavoring to show, that he is god. And
secondly, we answer, that the Pope is in express terms called god, well
allows of that title, and thereby proves, that he cannot be judged by men;
in the Canon, Satis, the 96 Distinct. Again, the Gloss of the Extravagant,
Cum inter, has these words: To think, that our Lord God the Pope, the author
of the foresaid Decretal, and of this, had no power to decree, as he has
decreed, would be judged an heresy. Here likewise you see, that they call
him, Our Lord God the Pope, in express terms. In Italy also, upon the gate of
Tolentum, is this inscription: To Paul the third, the most high and migh^ie God
upon earth. In the Council of Lateran, and 9 Session, in the year 1514, one
of the Secretaries of the Popes chamber, speaks thus to Leo the 10: The looks
of your Divine Majesty, with the beame-darting splendour, of which, my weak
eyes are dimmed. Stapleton, in the Preface of his Book, of the Principles of
the doctrine of faith, calls Pope Gregory the 13, Supremum, plane Supremum in
terris Numen: The supreme, verily the supreme god upon earth. And Steuchus, the
Popes Library keeper, in his Book of the Donation of Constantine, says: that
Constantine the Emperor, held Pope Silvester for a god, and ^doravit ut Deum,
and worshipped him as God. And the Council of Lateran* in the 3 and 10
Sessions, further tells you, saying: The Pope ought to be worshipped of all
people, and is most like unto God: and least you should think, that he
speaks of a civil kind of worship, it is there told you, what manner of
worship it is: namely, that it is with that kind of worship or adoration, that
is mentioned in the 72 Psalm: Adorabunt eum, omnes Reges terrae: All the Kings
of the earth shall worship him: where by worship, the highest kind of worship
is meant, which is due to the Son of God: as Tertullian also teaches, in his
5 Book, and 7 Chapter, against Marcion. Again, Leo the 10 (in the Council of
Lateran, before cited) is called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the root of
David, Rev. 5.5. Esa. 28.16. 1. Pet 2.6. Act. 4.11. Psalm. 118.22. Mat. ^1.4^.
the Savior of Sion. And Bellarmine, in the Preface of his Book, calls the
Pope, the Cornerstone, a tried stone, a precious stone: All which be titles,
proper and peculiar to the Son of God. And in the 25 Cause, 1 quaest. it is
said: that to violate his Canons and ordinances, is to blaspheme against the
holy Ghost: which is a sin, not to be forgiven in this world, nor in the
world to come. Again, he calls his decrees and Canons, by the name of
Oracles. Now an Oracle signifies an heavenly answer, proceeding from the mouth
of God. Romans 3.2. and 11.4. Sutably whereunto he says: That his decretal
Epistles, are to be numbered amongst the Canonical Scripturs, in the 19
distinction, in the Canon, In Canonicis. Again, what can be more said of God,
then that which the before cited Council of Lateran, in the 9, and 10 Sessions
attributes to the Pope? namely, that he has all power, above all Powers,
both in heaven and earth. And himself speaks as much of himself, in the
first Book of holy Ceremonies, saying thus: This Pontifical Sword,
represents the Sovereign temporal power, that Christ has given the Pope,
his Vicar upon earth: as it is written: All power is given me, both in heaven,
and in earth, and elsewhere, His dominion shall be from Sea, to Sea, and from
the River, to the ends of the earth. And Pope Paul the 5. in his holy Register,
calls himself a Vicegod, the Monarch of the Christian world, and the
upholder of the Papal Omnipotency: So that if the words of S. Paul in 2 These.
2. concerning Antichrist, had been (as they are not) that he should expressly
say and affirm, that he is god, you perceive by that which is before spoken,
how it might have been verified, and withal, in what sort and sense it is,
that the Pope has the very name of God, given unto him. For, it appears to
be given him in a far other sense, then it is to Kings and Princes: Psalm.
82.1.6.
and yet in very deed, Kings and Princes, and such like Magistrates of the
earth (and not Bishops) be the men, Exodus 22.28.
that in Scripture be called Elohim, or (...), that is, Gods. And they are
called Gods (as Christ himself declares, in respect that the word of God was
committed to them, Ioh. 10.34 35.
not as it is to Bishops, and Pastors, publicly to preach in the
Congregations, Ioh. 10.34.35.
but by their authority to establish and promote it, to command obedience to
it, and to punish the violators of it, and to countenance and encourage the
professors and observers of it: For to this end is it committed to their charge
and custody: And for this cause are they called, Custodes utriusque Tabulae,
The keepers of the two Tables, wherein the Laws of God were written. And for
this cause also, was it an Institution from God, and accordingly, an
observation in the Church of the Jews, that at the Coronation of a King, Deuteronomy.
17.14* ^8 19, 20. 2. Kin. 11.12
the Book of Gods Law should be delivered unto him. When therefore the
Bishops of Rome, take upon them this title, to be called gods, they take that
which God in his Scriptures, does no where give them: but when further they
take upon them, to be adored as God, they do that which is in them most
intolerably bl^sphemous. And when you suppose, out of this Text, that
Antichrist shall call himself God, you see how much you are mistaken, and that
the Text affirms it not.

Object. 7. Yea, Antichrist must be exalted, even above God himself. 2. These.
2.4.

Ans. How prove you that? For, in the very Text it self, the highest degree
and step, of the pride and aspiring mind of Antichrist, is discribed and set
forth in these words: (...) etc. 2. These. 2.4.
So that he shall sit in the Temple of God, as God, showing himself that he
is God. He does not say, that such shall be his pride and elation, as that he
shall sit in the Temple of God, above God, or so show himself, as if he were
above God, but only, that he does sit in the Temple of God, as God, and so
show himself, as if he were God. The pride of the Devil himself, is noted
to be such, as that he would be only as God, Esai. 14 14.
or, like the most high, but not above Him. And when the Devil tempted the
first man, Adam, (being in state of Innocence and Integrity) unto pride, Genesis
3.5.
and ambition, it was not to any such pride or elation, as to be above God,
but to be only, as God, knowing good and evil. It were therefore strange, if
the pride of Antichrist, should be supposed to exceed or go beyond the pride
of the Devil, his Master. Yea, indeed, how can it enter into the conceit of
any creature, to think it any way possible for him, to be exalted above God,
his creator? when nothing can be conceived or imagined, greater, nobler, or
higher, then He: who is God over all, blessed for ever. But secondly, observe,
Romans 9.5.
that the words be, not as you suppose, viz. that Antichrist shall be exalted
above God, but above all, or every one, that is called God: 2. Tess. 2 4.
for the words (in the Greek Text) be, (...), super omnem qui dicitur Deus,
aut Sebasma: that is, above every one that is called God, and above every one
also, that is called (...), Sebasma,.i. (...), hoc est, Augustus, (for so
Pausanias interprets that word, Pausan.
and so is it likewise taken and used in the New Testament it self. Act.
25.21.25.
) So that the meaning of those words, is, that the grand Antichrist, should be
exalted, not only above Kings, Princes, and other Magistrates, but even above
those also that be Emperors, and have an Imperial command and authority. For
it was, indeed, this Imperial State that was the hinderance or impediment that
Antichrist could not (so long as that flourished) appear in his height. And
therefore well says Optatus: Cum super Imperatorem non sit nisi solus Deus,
qui fecit Imperatorem, certe qui se super Imperatorem extollit, Optat. lib. 5.
p. 85.
iam quasi hominum excesserit metas, se, ut Deum, non Hominem aestimat: Seeing
there is None above the Emperor, but God only, which made the Emperor,
certainly he that exalts himself above the Emperor, as one that has gone
beyond the bounds of men, esteems himself, not now any longer as a Man, but,
as God. You must then, ever remember to distinguish between these two, which
Irenaeus also observes: namely, between him that is God indeed and
essentially, and those that be called Gods. Non super hunc extolletur
Antichristus, sed super eos, qui dicuntur quidem, Iren. lib. 3. c. 6.
uon autem sunt Dij: Not above Him, that is God indeed, shall Antichrist be
exalted (says he), but above those that he called Gods, and are not. Anselmus
does also so distinguish, and says: Antichrist shall be exalted, Anselm. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
super omne quod dicitur Deus: id est, super illos qui nuncupative, non
essentialiter sunt Dij: Deus enim dici aliquando and homo potest etc. above all
that is called God, that is (says he) above those that be Gods, nuncupatively,
but not essentially. For, even a man, may sometime be called God. And so
likewise does Remigius Remensis, Peter Lombard, Bruno, Thomas Aquinas, and
Dionysius Carthusian^^, distinguish, writing upon this Text of 2 Thessalonians. 2. And
therefore observe well the difference, and forget not withal, that the Pope is
exalted above all these, namely, above all Emperors, Kings, Princes, and other
Potentates of the earth.

But you will say, that not only Princes on earth, but Angels also in heaven,
be, in Scripture, called (...), that is Gods, as appears by conferring Psalm.
8.5 with Heb. 2.7. and Psalm. 97 7. with Heb. 1.6. etc. and that therefore the
Pope must have an exaltation above Angels also, if he shall be Antichrist. But,
first, what necessity is there, that these words, (...), super omnem, should
extend any further, then to Every man? for he is but a man himself of whom
that Text speaks, namely Antichrist, the man of sin: and is it not
sufficient to declare his pride and elation, that he is exalted above every
one of his own kind, c. in canonem de constit. Conditori canonis omnis
creatura subjicitur. Dec^us in Decret. de constit. C. Canonum. so. 5. n 14
Antonin. sum. p. 3. tit. 22. c. 5. Aug. Tr. ep. dedic. ad Joan. 22. Felin.
extr. de constitut. Statuta canonum and alij canonista apud Phil morn. myster.
Iniquit. sub Joan. 22. ^dit. in 8. page 991.
that is, above Every Man on Earth, be he never so sacred, regal, or Imperial,
or never so high or Maiestical? But if these words be to be extended to Angels
in heaven also, then has Innocentius the fourth, told you, that to the Pope,
subdita est omni^ creatura, Every creature is subject Antoninus says: that,
His power is greater then all other created powers; extending it self to
things celestial, terrestrial and infernal. Augustinus Triumphus likewise
says: that, All knees must how unto him, both of things in heaven, and things
in earth, and things infernal. Again it is said, that the Pope, Vicariatum
Christi gerit, non tantum in terrenis, coelestibus, and infernis, sed etiam in
and super Angelos bonos and malos, bears the Vicarship of Christ, not only
in earthly, heavenly, and infernal things, but also over and above the Angels
both good and bad. Yea, it is there said, that Potestatem habet maiorem quam
omnes Angeli, adeo ut ipsos excommunicare possit: He has greater power then
all Angels, so that he may excommunicate them. And therefore it is further
said, that Papa Angelis habet imperare, the Pope has to do, Greg. Halmburg.
in appell. Sigism. Duc. Austr. Nichol. Egmundan apud. Bal. de vit. pont* in
Clem* 8 in fine. C. Agrip. de vanit. scient. ex car. notensi.

Clem. 6. in Bulla super An. 1350. Jub. Ba^. in vit. Clem. 6. Vid. etia^ Mist.
Iniquit. seu histor. Papatus sub Clem. 5. and 6. and Cor. Agri, ^de vanit.
scient. obi. Morton. Apol. cathol. l. 1.249.


to command the Angels. And again: Papa habet Imperium in Angelos and
Daemonas, The Pope has command over Angels and Devils. And again: Papa
Angelis praecipit: The Pope commands the Angels. And the Pope has
(accordingly) actually commanded the Angels. For Pope Clement the sixth, in that
his indulgent Bull, in the year of Iubiley, commands the Angels that they
should carry the right way to heaven, the souls of them that purposed to go
on pilgrimage to Rome, if being confessed, they chanced to die by the way:
Mandamus prorsus Angelis paradisi, quatenus animam a purgatorio penitus
absolutam, in paradisi gloriam introducant: We straightly command the Angels
of Paradise (says he) that they bring the soul being altogether absolved,
from Purgatory, into the glory of Paradise. So that you see, the Pope of Rome,
is exalted even above the Angels also* which be in Scripture called Gods. What
then now hinders but that he should be the undoubted grand Antichrist? Yea by
thus exalting himself above the Angels, what does he else, but so show
himself, as if he were God? For by this argument does the Apostle prove Christ
to be God, Heb. 1.4.5.
in that he is superior to the Angels.

As for the Idols or gods of the Gentiles, if any do vilipend and contemn
them, it is not to be imputed to him for a fault: for all those Gods, be (as
the Psalmist says of them) (...), Psalm. 96.5. 1. Cor. 8.4.
res nihili, things of no account or esteem. Yea the sacrifices which the
Gentiles offered unto them, were made, not unto God, but unto Devils, as S.
Paul affirms. 1. Cor. 10.20.
And therefore when the Apostle says of Antichrist, (as taxing, therein, his
pride, and alleging it as a matter highly faulty and blameworthie in him)
that he did exalt himself above all that is called God: it is manifest that it
cannot be meant of the Idols, or false gods of the Gentiles (which it is no
fault for any man to debase, or depresse) but it must be intended of his
exaltation above such as be called gods, Psalm. 82.1.6. Exodus 22.28.
by Gods own good liking and approbation: of which sort, are Kings, Princes,
and the other Potentates of the earth. And so also for the same reason must the
Sebasma, mentioned in this Text, be intended, not of the Idols or superstitious
worship used amongst the Pagans, Act. 17.23. Wisd. 15.17.
Heathens, or Gentiles (although they be also called Sebasmata) but of such a
Sebasma, as God in his censure and word, allows. Now it is expressly
evident, that the Emperor is called, and that by way of approbation, in Gods
Book, Act. 25.21.25.
(...), i. Sebastos, Augustus, and consequently the reverence, worship, and
honor, that was given unto him, might well be called Sebasma. And yet, if this
Text were to be understood of any false gods, or superstitious Sebasmata, used
in the Popish Church, we see, that the Pope is, in that Church, exalted above
them all. Is not the Altar a sacred and venerable thing unto them? Lib. Carem.
1. fol. 16. and lib. e^ em. 3. sect 4. ca. 1. fol. 296.
Yet when the Pope is once chosen, he is exalted above the Altar, and the Altar
is made his seat to sit upon. Is not the Cross also another great and
venerable Sebasma amongst them? They say, it is to be worshipped with divine
honor, Lib. carem. 1. sect* 12. c. 4. ^. 112
even with Latria, that is, with that worship that is due and proper unto God:
and yet is this Cross laid under the Popes feet, and carried before him, as
an Ensign of honor, and as the Sword is before a King, to wait and attend
upon him. So that he is also exalted above this Sebasma. Yea what say ye to
this, that he is exalted even above their consecrated Host, which they so
devoutely worship, accounting it their God and their Maker, and affirm to be
the very Body of Christ? is not this the greatest and highest Sebasma, or, the
most venerable thing in their Service and Religion? and yet is even this their
god, and body of Christ (as they call it) as well as the Cross, made to wait
and attend upon the Pope* Lib. 1* sect. 12. c. 4. fol. 112 and fol 34.
Ante Pontificem semper praefertur Crux: and post Crucem portatur corpus
Christi super equum album cum campanella: The Cross is always carried before
the Pope (says the Book of Ceremonies) and after the Cross, is the Body of
Christ carried, upon an white horse with a little Bell etc. Yea, the fact of
Pope Gregory the seventh declares, how much the Pope, when he lists, ^eno.
Card. in vita Greg. 7. seu Hildebr.
esteems this breaden God and consecrated Host* and how far, when he
pleases, he exalts and magnifieth himself above it: for He consulting with
that breaden god, and demanding answers of it, for that it gave him no answer,
he took it, and threw it into the fire. And therefore you perceive how the
Pope is exalted and advanced, even above the greatest and highest Sebasmata in
the Romish church, as well as above those amongst the Gentiles, if the text were
of them to be understood.

Yea, if you would further force the words of the Text, and make the meaning of
them to be, that Antichrist should be exalted, even above the true God
himself, you may see, Cardinal. Cusan epist. 2. ad Bohem. Did. 40. c. 51.
papa.

Eckins Enchir. loc. 1. de Eccles. Pist^rius Archim. cont. disp. 1. Mentz. 898
Pigh* hier. Eccl. lib, 1. c. 2, 3. and 4.


how even that also is found verified in the Pope. For does not he exalt
himself, even above the true God, which holds his Authority, and the
Authority of his Church, to be greater then the authority of the holy
Scripture? That without the Authority of the Church, the Scripture is not
authentical? Yea, that the Scripturs be of as much worth as Aesops fables if
they be destitute of the authority of the church? Does not Pighius also teach:
Authoritatem Ecclesiae, and in ea pontificis, maiorem esse quam Scripturae:
That the authority of the Church, and therein of the Pope, is greater then the
authority of the Scripture? Does not Stapleton likewise teach, Staplet.
controv. 5. lib. 9. c. 14. Antonin. p. 3. ^. 22* c. 6.. 2.
and defend the same, and sundry other Popish writers? Again, when the Pope
dispenceth with the Law, Commandments, and Precepts of God, what does he else,
but advance and exalt himself above God? For, In praecepto superioris, De
conces. pr^bend. cap. proposuit. decret. Greg. l. 3. tit. 8. cap. 4. vid. glos.
Hostiens. in c. proposuit. de concess. praebend. number. 12.
non debet dispensare inferior: With the precept of a superior, an inferior
ought not to dispense. Now, the Pope boasts, that by that fullness of power
which he has, he may lawfully dispense above the Law. And they say, that the
Pope may dispense against the Apostle: and against the Canons of the Apostles:
and, in matters of Oaths, Vows, Marriages, obedience of Subjects, and such
like: and against the Old Testament and the New. Yea, they say: Papam posse
mutare Evangelium, Bertach. repert. dictione papa. Henric. Doct. Magister sacr.
pala.

Card. Cusan. ep. 2. ad Bohem. p. 833 and ep* 7.857. Hosius de expresso Dei
verbo.


eique pro loco and tempore alium sensum tribuere: That the Pope may change the
Gospel, and give unto it another sense, as time and place requires. And that
the Scripture, and sense of it, is to be fitted to the time, and as the
practice of the Church is: so that it is sometimes to be taken in one sense,
and sometimes in an orher: and that the Scripture, is not otherwise to be
accounted the word of God, then in that sense, or interpretation, which the
Pope, or Church of Rome approoveth and sets upon it: and that if it be in
any other sense, it is not the Word of God, but the word rather of the Devil.
Observe then, that they say; first, that the authority of the Church, is above
the authority of the Scriptures: and secondly, that the Popes authority is
above the authority of the Church: so, by this rekoning, they make the Pope to
be two degrees above God, speaking in his Word: seeing he is above the Church,
and the Church above the Scriptures. But yet further, who knows not that an
offense against the Pope, and his constitutions, and the commandments of his
Church, is, amongst them, more heedefully regarded, and more severely censured,
and punished, then an offense against God and his Commandments? Whereby does
likewise appear, that the Pope bears sway, amongst his followers, more then
God, and consequently, that he is amongst them exalted, even above God
himself. But now, lastly, consider, how much you be here again mistaken,
whilst you think, that Antichrist shall be exalted above God, which the words
of the Text do not affirm.

Object. 8. The whore of Babylon, in the Revelation of S. John, may be
interpreted for the universal Corpse, or Company of all the wicked in the world.

Answ. It cannot be so taken, or interpreted: For then upon the burning and
destruction of that Whore of Babylon, should all the ungodly and wicked of the
world, come also to confusion, and be destroyed: but it is evident, that after
her burning and destruction, sundry wicked and ungodly people of the world,
do live, lamenting that her ruin. Rev. 18.9, 10, 11.15, 16. etc. Yea, the
very description of that Whore of Babylon, in Rev. 17, and all the
circumstances, to her belonging, do show, that it is meant of a particular
City, and even of that particular City, which then reigned over the Kings of
the earth, and was situate upon seven hills, namely Rome. And therefore does
Bellarmine himself confess, that the better exposition, even in his
judgment, is: Per Meretricem, intelligi Romam: That by the Whore, Rome is
understood. Bellar. de ^ont. Romans lib. 3. c. 13.
And again, Cap. 5, he says: Explicat Mulierem esse urbem magnum quae sedet
super septem colle^, id est, Romam: The Angel Explaineth that woman to be the
great City, which fitteth upon seven hills, that is, Rome. Other Jesuits that
have written Commentaries upon the Revelation, as namely, Ribera, and Viegas,
do also expressly affirm, that it is to be understood of a particular City,
and namely, of Rome. Yea, whereas Bellarmine, for an evasion, would have it
understood only of Heathen Rome. Ribera, against that conceit, says: We are
to understand it, not only of Rome, as it was long sithence, under the heathen
Emperors, but also, Ribera in Apoc. cap. 14. numb. 4^
as it shall be in the end of the world. And Viegas likewise speaks after
the same manner, saying: All that which is spoken in those Chapters, does most
manifestly agree to Rome. And again he says: The name of Babylon. is to be
applied to Rome, which served Idols before ever it received the faith of
Christ, and to Rome also, Vieg. in Apoc. 17. Com. 1. sect. 3.
as it shall be in the time of Antichrist. And thus you see, that not only
the Adversaries themselves, do confess this Whore of Babylon, to be Rome, but
further also, some of them, against Bellarmine acknowledge and teach, that it
is to be understood, not only of heathen Rome, but of Rome also, after it had
forsaken heathenisme, and had received the faith of Christ, and turned again
from that, unto Antichristianisme.

Object. 9. But although those Jesuits do mean, that Rome shall become
Antichristian, and be ruled by Antichrist, yet they do not mean that it
shall be so, until some few years before the end of the world.

Ans. They mean (as they must needs) that Rome should become Antichristian, in
the days and times of the Grand Antichrist, who is come long sithence. For
whereas they have a conceit, that this Antichrist is not yet come, and that when
he comes, he shall reign but three years and a half, therein is their
great error, and mistaking. For, what was it that hindered, or let his
appearing? was it not the Roman Empire? Only be which now lets, shall
let, until he be taken out of the way: and then shall that wicked man be
revealed: says S. Paul. Hereupon Tertullian, in his Book of the Resurrection
of the flesh: Chapt. 24, says thus: Only he which now lets, must let,
till he be abolished: 2. These. 2.7.8.
What is this but the Roman Empire? Chrysostom in his fourth Sermon upon the
second to the Thessalonians, is of the same opinion, and so is the Greek
Scholiast: And so does S. Augustine also expound it, in his twentieth Book,
and ninteenth Chapter, of the City of God: and Primasius also. S. Hierome
likewise says the same, in th 11 Question to Algasia, and adds: That the
Apostles durst not say, in express terms, that the Roman Empire should be
abolished, for fear of drawing persecution upon the Church. Howbeit, this
needs no proof at all, because the Adversaries themselves do also teach,
that the impediment to Antichrist, mentioned by S. Paul, was the Roman Empire.
But the Roman Empire (which was the Only let, (...) etc. 2. These. 27.
or impediment, of Antichrist his appearing) is now long sithence taken out of
the way: Ergo, long since, was the time of Antichrist his coming and
appearing. That the Roman Empire, which was so flourishing in S. Paul's time,
is now long sithence abolished, or taken out of the way, is before prooved by
the express testimony of the Historiographers themselves, affirming the same:
as namely by Machiavell, who dedicateth his Florentine History to Pope Clement
the seventh: by Guicciardine, in the fourth Book of his history: and by
Augustinus Steuchus: and by Lipsius etc. And so also is it testified in Synodo
Reginoburgensi, that Romani Maiestas Populi, Avent. Annal. lib. 7.
qua olim orbis regebatur, Sublata est de terris: Imperator, vana apellatio,
and sola umbra est: The Majesty of the Roman people, whereby the world in
times past was governed, is taken from the earth. The Emperor is now a vain
title, and a shadow only. And so likewise affirms Lyranus: that, Ab Imperio
Romano, recesserunt quasi omnia Regna, negantia ei subijci, and redditionem
Tributi: All Kingdoms, in a manner, have departed from the Roman Empire,
Lyran in 2. These. cap. 2.
denying to be subject to it, and to pay it tribute. And he further adds,
saying: I am a multis annis, Imperium illud caruit Imperatore: Now many years
sithence, has that Empire wanted an Emperor. This also appears by Sigonius,
in his history of the Kingdom of Italy, lib. 3. where, showing by what means
it was, that the Emperors lost all their right in Rome: he concludes thus,
saying: By this means, Rome, and the Dukedom of Rome, came to be in the Popes
power. But what need any proofs by histories, or Authors, of a matter so
clear and evident? For, does not every man's knowledge, eyes, and ears, tell
and testify unto him, without any more ado, that he that is called the
Emperor at this day, is the Emperor of Germany, and that the Emperor of
Germany, (howsoever he be entitled) is not, for all that, Emperor of Rome?
For, he has not the headship, or Sovereign rule there. Yea, the Pope is he,
that now is, and long has been (to the eyes and view of the whole world) the
head and Sovereign ruler of that City. If then the Pope be at this day (as
none is so simple or ignorant, but he knows it) the head and Sovereign Ruler
of Rome, then is not the Emperor of Germany, nor any other, the head and
supreme Governor of it. Yea, the Emperor of Germany, is so far from having
any chief, or supreme rule there, that clean contrariwise, he
acknowledges subjection to him that has the Headship and Soveraignetie there,
namely, to the Pope, to whom, for that purpose, he gives an oath of homage,
fealty, or allegiance. The ample and Sovereign rule of the Emperors, then,
which they had, appears to be long sithence abolished, and taken away, and
the Popes have succeeded in their place, at Rome, and have gotten the headship
and Sovereign rule there. And therefore also the grand Antichrist, who by this
direct Prophecy of S. Paul, was then to appear, has accordingly appeared
long sithence, (...) 2. These. 2.8.
even ever since the time, that the headship and supreme rule and government
of that City, was taken from the Emperors, and exercised by the Popes. For
there be two or three degrees of the appearing of that grand Antichrist: the
one, when he became an universal Bishop, over all Bishops, and was made head
over all the Christian Churches in the world. The second, when after that his
Episcopal, and Ecclesiastical supremacy obtained, he attained to a Temporal
supremacy, or terrestrial Monarchy, which he also got, by the decay and
ruins of the Empire. But an other clear and demonstrative argument of this
matter, has also S. John given us (in Rev. 17.3.7.9, 10, etc.) Showing, that
the state of Rome, from the beginning of it, to the end of it, is to have but
seven sorts of Sovereign Rulers, or Heads of it, which be, Kings Consulls,
Decemvirs, Tribunes, Dictators, Emperors, and Popes, (For though an eight head
be there mentioned, yet is that eight expressly affirmed to be one of the
seven, Rev. 17.11. Rev. 13.3.) Now then, if Rome be to have, in all, but these
seven heads, as is apparent: and that Rome, at some one time or other, before
the end of the world, is to become Antichristian, and to be ruled and governed
by Antichrist, as the Adversaries also themselves confess: How can they choose
but grant, that Antichrist is already come,, and has long since ruled and
reigned in Rome, and at this day there rules and reigns? inasmuch, as the
Popes, visibly, and undeniably, appear to be the seventh, and consequently,
the last head of that City. Yea, this the Rhemists themselves, confess, and
do say: Rhem. Test. upon Rev. 17 9
the seventh head, is Antichrists state, which shall not come, so long as the
Empire of Rome stande^h. And Bellarmine likewise writes: Antichristum fore
ultimum, qui tenebit Romanum Imperium, Bellar. cap. 15. de miracu. Antichrist.
tamen sine nomine Romani Imperatoris: That Antichrist shall be the last head,
who shall hold the Empire of Rome, and yet without the name of the Roman
Emperor. Seeing then the Empire of Rome is dissolved, ever since the Emperor
ceased to have any Sovereign command in that City, and that the Pope has
gotten the sovereign rule and command there, and is apparently become the
seventh, and so the last Head of Rome; How can it be avoided, but that
Antichrist must needs be come long sithence, and that the Pope of Rome
undoubtedly is he, and that there is none other to be expected?

Object. 10. Antichrist is to be an open oppugner of Christ, and a direct and
professed enemy to all manner of Christianity.

Ans. You are mightily deceived, if you think so. For, first, the Scripture
tells us of many Antichrists, and of one grand Antichrist above the rest. 1.
Ioh. 2.18. 2. These. 2.3, 4. Orig. in Math. tract. 30.
According whereunto Origin says: Generaliter unus est Antichristus, species
illius multae etc. Generally there is one Antichrist, but there be many sorts
of him etc. For as all the true Prophets had relation to Christ, By whose
spirit they spoke (as S. Peter shows): 1. Pet. 1.11.
so have all the false teachers, and false prophets, in the Church, relation to
Antichrist, 1. Ioh. 4.3.
by whose spirit they speak (as S. John affirms) in the Church, relation to
Antichrist, by whose spirit they speak (as S. John affirms). For which
cause, Cypr. epist. 75.
S. Cyprian says: that Novatianus the Schismatic, is to be reckoned amongst
the Antichrists. And so says S. Hierome: Hier. in Matthew. c. 24. and in Nahum.
cap. 3. 1. Ioh. 2.18.19. 2. Ioh. 7. 1. Ioh. 4 3.
that all Arch* Heretics, be Antichrists: and again, there be so many
Antichrist^ (says he) as there be teachers of false doctrine in the Church.
Yea, this they might learn of S. John himself, in his Epistles, who likewise
calls those that were heretics, and false Teachers in the Church, so many
Antichrists. And this also Saint Augustine teaches, saying: Hide quibus
Johannes, Aug de Civit. Dei l. 20. c. 29.
Epist. 1, Antichristi, sunt ad illum novissimum pertinentes etc. These
Antichrists of which Saint John speaks in his first Epistle, be belonging to
that last, the grand Antichrist. Again, Quisquis Christum, qualis est ab
Apostolis praedicatus, negat, Antichristus est. Hillar contr. Auxentium.
Whosoever (says Saint Hillary) denies Christ to be such a one, as he was
preached to be by the Apostles, is an Antichrist. Irenaeus affirms, that
Valentinus, Basilides, and C^rinthus, were Antichrists. Iren. li. 3. cap 17.
Origin. in Matt. Tract. 24.
Antichrist (says Origin) has nothing but the name of Christ: for he neither
does the works of Christ, nor teaches his doctrine. Christ is the very
Truth* and Antichrist is the disguiser or counterfeyter of Truth. 2 Thessalonians* 2.7.
The mystery of that Antichristian Iniquity, wrought even in S. Paul's time,
as he himself affirms. Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
He well calls it (says S. Chrysostom) a mystery of Iniquity: because he
shall not come like a Nero, by open force, and without all manner of shame etc
but entisingly, and underhand. This Mystery (says Theodoret) signifies the
heresies, Theod. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Greg. in Moral. lib. 33. cap. 26.
by which the Devil makes way for Antichrist. S. Gregory says, that
Antichrist seduceth the people, by his Preachers, the ministers of lying. He
has two horns like to those of the Lamb (Rev. 13.11.) that is, (says S.
Augustine) he has the two Testaments, like to those of the Lamb: inasmuch as
under the name of Christ, August. in Apoc. hom. 11.
he does covertly infuse the venom of the Dragon. And for this cause, is he
called the false-Prophet, diverse times, Rev. 16.13. Rev. 19.20. Rev 20.10.
in the Revelation, by reason of the false Religion, and false doctrines he
teaches in the world, under the name of Christ and Christian verities. Yea,
this Antichrist must sit in the Temple of God, amongst Christians, 2 Thessalonians.
2.4.
and within Christendom (and not without it, amongst Turks, Jews, and such
like Infidels of the world) for he must pretend himself to be a chief
Christian (as S. Hierome also shows): Hieronym. in Dan. 11.
which, none of those so much as pretend themselves to be: yea they utterly
disclaim to be any Christians at all: so that those be rightly and properly
to be termed unchristian, A difference Between unchristian and Antichristian
people, is ever to be observed.
but not Antichristian people. Within Christendom then, and no where else, is
Antichrist to be sought and found. Now then within Christendom, where shall we
find him? Can Protestants be he? No: for they profess not to confirm their
doctrine and religion, nor any point thereof, with miracles, signs, and
wonders done by them, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.
as this Antichrist and his accomplices do: neither do any of their Bishops or
Pastors, exalt themselves against or above all Kings, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
Princes, Emperors and Magistrates of the earth, (which be called gods in the
Scripture) as this Antichrist also does: neither do they teach that doctrine
of Devils (as S. Paul calls it), which consists in prohibiting of Meats,
and Marriages, 1. Tim 4.1 2* 3.4.5.
for conscience and religion sake, as this Antichristian and Apostaticall
Church likewise does. Protestants then, very clearly appear to be such as
belong not to this Antichristian crew or company. Who then within
Christendom, or outwardly professing Christianity, is more likely, or so
likely to be, or possibly can be, this grand Antichrist, but he only that
exalts himself, not only against, but above all Kings, Princes, Emperors,
and Potentates of the world? and that obtrudeth, vaunteth, and boasts of so
many miracles, signs, and wonders, done in his Church, and by him, and his
Clergy, and people, for confirmation of his religion? and that teaches also
that doctrine of Devils aforesaid, consisting in prohibition of Meats and
Marriage, that is to say, the Pope of Rome? For there is no other within
Christendom to be named, to whom these things do thus fitly agree. Yea He,
and only he, in all the world, has all the marks of the grand Antichrist,
upon him. And therefore he, and only he, and no other, is to be held of all,
for the undoubted grand Antichrist.

Object. 11. The grand Antichrist, is, The man of sin, the son of
perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. But shall any be so bold to affirm these things of
the Pope of Rome? especially does it not seem to be a rash and uncharitable
thing to affirm of him, that he is the son of perdition?

Answ. It is never any rashness, or uncharitableness, to affirm, what God
in his word affirms. It were rather incredulity not to believe it, and
impiety not to affirm, it. For if the Pope of Rome be that grand Antichrist,
and the man of sin, does it not well agree, unto him, that he should also be
the son of perdition; as well as Judas Iscariot, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Ioh. 17.12.
who likewise pretending to be a friend to Christ, did nevertheless betray
him? He that under the like pretense of being a special friend to Christ, and
under color of Christianity, destroieth himself and others, and that without
check of conscience, remorse, or repentance, at any time showed, is he not
worthily and justly called the son of perdition? Yea, does not the Scripture
directly say of him, that he is in Hebrew, Abaddon, and in Greek, Apollyon,
that is, in English, Rev 9.11.
a destroyer. And must not he needs be deemed: (...), The son of Perdition*
who, together with himself, thus destroys others? For, all those, that be
led by him, and maugre all admonitions, will nevertheless irremoveably adhere
unto him and follow him, be (answerably thereunto) expressly said to be (...),
that is, such as perish, and are to go (with him) to destruction. Can any
thing then be more evident? 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. Rev. 19.20. Rev. 20.10. Rev.
14.9.10.11.
Now, that the Pope of Rome, is The man of sin, that is, according to the
Hebrew phrase, a very notorious sinner, or, a most sinful man (and
consequently well deserves to be called the son of perdition) who can doubt
of it? inasmuch as he is in Christendom, like Jeroboam in Israel, who not
only was a great sinner in his own person, but caused also Israel to sin:
or like Ahab, with his Iezabel, 1. Kin. 15.30. 1. Kin. 16 30.31. etc.
who did exceed Jeroboam in wickedness: or worse then these. For must not he
needs be a very notorious wicked man, who being at first a Bishop equal with
the rest of his fellow Bishops, was not so content, but with his wings of pride
and ambition, would mount above them all? Yea who, with that his unmeasurable
pride, has exalted himself, not only above all those his fellows, but even
above his superiors also, namely above all Kings, Princes, and Emperors of the
world? nor yet so content, proceeded further, claiming authority also even
over the Angels of heaven: for so it appears by the Bull of Pope Clement the
sixth, before mentioned, where he says: Mandamus prorsus Angelis Paradisi etc
We straightly command the Angels of Paradise, etc. And in another place, he
forbids Hell also from taking any hold of those, that should cross
themselves for the holy wars. But has he here ceased? No: for he has gone
yet further, clayming the power and authority of God himself, and even the
name of God also, to be given him: and (which is yet a further degree, beyond
all degrees) he has exalted himself even above God himself, amongst his
followers, as before appears. But to show this matter yet further by some
other particulars. And, to begin with the word of God, the sacred and canonical
Scriptures: does not He, and his Clergy, extremely dishonor and vilipend
them? 1. In that they prefer their corrupt Latin translation, before the
originals of the Greek and Hebrew. 2. In that they make Apocryphal books, to
be of equal authority, with the Canonical. 3. In that they equal their
Traditions, with the Canonical Scriptures. 4. In that they number their
Decretall Epistles also, amongst the canonical Scriptures. 5. In that they
accuse the holy Scriptures, as not containing sufficient matter of instruction,
for a man's salvation, without their Traditions. 6. In that they take upon them
to expound those Scriptures according to their own fancy, sense, and
pleasure, and as they list themselves. 7. In that they prefer the authority
of their Church, before the authority of the scriptures, and the Popes
authority above both. Concerning the Sacraments also: how have they perverted
those Two, which be of Christ his institution? and have added to the number of
them, making seven in all? And this is one note of Antichrist (as S. Hierome
upon 2 Thessalonians. 2. observes) that he should change, and attempt to increase the
Sacraments of the Church. The Sacraments they also strangely hold to give
grace, ex opere operato, by virtue of the very work done and performed. And
touching Baptism, have they not horribly polluted and abused it? And
concerning the other Sacrament of the Lords Supper, have they not also taken
away the one half of it from the people, and moreover turned it into such a
fearful and abominable Idolatry, viz. of adoring and worshipping a piece of
bread, for God, as that amongst the very Pagans and Heathens, the like has
not been seen? The virtue also, efficacy, end, fruit, and benefit of Christ,
his coming into the world, they have likewise clean overturned, debased, or
diminished: 1. in that themselves take upon them, either in the whole, or in
part, to be their own Saviors and Redeemers, by their own merits, and
works of satisfaction, (as they call them) to Gods Justice: as also by
suffering satisfactorie punishments in their own persons, for their sins,
after this life ended, in their supposed Purgatory: 2. for that in their
detestable Mass, their Priests take upon them, to offer up Christ every day,
or often, in a bodily manner, and that as a sacrifice propitiatory for the
taking away of the sins of men: when in very deed, that Bodily propitiatory
sacrifice, was offered but Once, and that by Christ himself only, and namely
upon the Cross. 3. In that they hold not Justification in Gods sight, to be by
faith in Christ, but by a righteousness inherent in their own persons* nor
will allow a man to make a particular application of Christ to himself to be
his Savior and Redeemer: or any way to be, and rest so assured: which what is
it else, but to bereave a man of all sound comfort and benefit by Christ? For
what profit, comfort, or benefit, is it, to any, to know and believe that
Christ is a Savior and Redeemer indefinitely, or to others, if he know not, or
believe not, that he is a Savior and redeemer to himself, in particular? For
so far even the Devils themselves do go, believing all to be true that God
speaks in his word, and that Christ is a Savior and Redeemer to others, and
hereat they tremble, as S. James speaks. Iam. 2.19. Mar. 1.24. Luke 4.34.
Act. 19.15.
It is not enough therefore for men that desire to be saved, to believe
(historically) all the Articles of the Creed to be true, or whatsoever God
speaks in his word, to be true, or, that Christ is a Savior and Redeemer to
others (for thus far, as is evident, even Devils, and, Reprobates, may go)
but they must go further, by applying the truth of all the Articles of the
Creed, and of the promises of salvation, made in Gods word, and of Christ
Jesus, to bes a Savior and Redeemer, in particular, to themselves, by a
special faith. 4. In that they allow not Christ to be the sole and only
Mediator and Intercessor between God and his People, but will needs have other
Mediators, and Intercessors for them, besides him, namely, the blessed Virgin
Marie, and other Saints, and Angels. The Ecclesiastical discipline likewise,
especially in the point of Excommunication, they have extremely perverted,
abusing it most grossly, impiously, and traitorously, to the deposing of Kings
and Princes, from their Thrones and Kingdoms, and to the disanulling of the
subjection and loyalty of Subjects, and to the raising of treasons and
rebellions within their Kingdoms. And as touching Prayer, Almesdeeds, Fasting,
and all the chief duties, and works of Christianity, they have also utterly
marred and corrupted them: For their usual fasting, is not an abstinence from
all kind of meats and drinks, joined with fervent and repentant Prayers unto
God, and other holy exercises and divine meditations, during that time or day
of the fast (as true Christians, and rightly religious fasts ought to be) but
consists in a difference of meats, as namely, in an abstinence from flesh,
and eating fish, and whit-meates. Yea, all their Fastings, Almsdeeds, and the
rest of their best works they do, be, in them, turned to sin, as being
poisoned with a conceit of their own merits, and of making satisfaction to
Gods Justice for their sins, by that means. And be not even their Prayers also,
and Invocations, Prove. 15.8.
which they make unto GOD, poisoned, and become wicked and abominable, whilst
they pray to be heard, and their petitions to be granted them, for the merit,
or merits of such a Saint, or such a Saint, or of all Saints? or for the
Intercession-sake of such a Saint or such a Saint, or of all Saints? and not
for the merit, or Intercessions sake of Jesus Christ only? Yea, do they not
direct, and make their prayers, many times, and too often, not unto God
himself (as they ought) but to his Creatures, as namely, to the blessed Virgin
Mary, and to other Saints, and to Angels, which is a most intolerable
impiety? Yea, do they not also suffer and allow a Psalter, commonly called
the Psalter of Bonaventure, made in honor of the Virgin Marie. For, in that
Book, sundry parts of the Psalms of David, be applied to the Virgin, and
her name put in the place of Gods name, most audaciously, and blasphemously. As
for example, in the 110 Psalm, where it is said in David's Psalter, The Lord
said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand etc. In that Psalter, it is thus:
Dixit Dominus Dominae nostrae etc. The Lord said to our Lady, sit thou at my
right hand etc. Again, the words in 130 Psalm, be in that Psalter made thus:
De profundis cla^^avi ad te Domina, etc. Out of the deep places have I cried
unto thee, O Lady: O Lady, hear my voice, etc. and sundry such like:
whereby does appear, that they not only (very dishonourablie, and
injuriously to God) pray to the Virgin Marie, but further also falsify, and
misturne the words of holy Scripture, to serve their own bad humors and
fancies. There is moreover a Book, called Liber Taxarum, or Taxa Cancellariae
Apos^^lica, their Taxe-booke, (Printed at Paris with privilege, sub sole
aureo) which shows, what intolerable Licentiousnes and Wickedness, is
permitted and dispensed with in the Papacy. For, even Murders, Incests,
Sodomitrie, and other most gross sins, be there rated and taxed at a
certain price: which being paid, the Popes Pardons, Indulgences, Licenses, and
dispensations be permitted to have passage in those cases. Where, together
with this licentiousness permitted, you may observe a most horrible
licentiousness in the Pope, and his Clergy: For poor men that have not
wherewithal to pay, may not be partakers of any of those favors: as
appears by a note in the 23 leaf of that Book, in the Chapter of
Matrimonial causes, where it is said thus: Nota diligenter etc. Note
diligently, that these favors, and dispensations, are not granted to the
poor, because they have not wherewithal, and therefore they cannot receive
consolation. And there you may observe further, that even the most monstrous
sins, as Incest, Sodomitry, Dealing with beasts, (sins, not meet to be named,
or heard of amongst Christians) be not taxed at so high a rate, as those be,
that be committed against the Popes laws, and the Commandments of his Church,
as the eating of White-meates, of Butter, of Flesh upon days and times, by
them forbidden, etc. So that intolerable pride and ambition, joined with
unmeasurable avarice, and covetousness, in the Pope and his Clergy, together
with abominable licentiousness, permitted to the people, by reason of the
Stews, Priests absolutions, Popes pardons, Indulgences, Dispensations, and
such like, and a great deal of Hipocrysie also, under pretext of Piety,
therewithal intermingled, may and do appear, to be the Founders, Pillars,
Supporters, and Vpholders of all Popery. If a man feared Purgatory, either for
himself or his friends, though he had done all the villainies of the world;
yea, though he had deflowred the Virgin Marie (for such were the wicked and
execrable speeches of Teceleus, Sleid. Comment. Christoph. Massaeut in Chron.
Anno 1515.
and other Preachers of the Popes Indulgences, in times past) yet so soon as
ever he had cast the money into the Basin, the Souls were presently said to
be set at liberty. The Abbot of Vsperge (in the life of Philip the Emperor,
page 321) writes in this sort: Scarce is there (says he) any Bishopric, or
Ecclesiastical dignity, or Parish Church, remaining, that is not made
litigious, and the cause by an appeal, brought to be heard at Rome: But it is
in vain to go thither with an empty hand. Rejoice, O Mother Rome, because
the floudgates of earthly treasures be laid open unto thee, that whole Rivers
and heaps of silver might come flowing upon thee, in great abundance. Rejoice
thou, because of the iniquities of the sons of Men: for they pay thee a price,
in recompense of all their transgressions. Rejoice thou, because of Discord,
which is profitable for thee, she coming out of the bottomless Pit, to
beape store of money upon thee. Thou have that now which thou have desired a
long time: Sing a Song, because that by the wickedness of men, and not by any
virtue of thy religion, thou have overcome the world. Theodorick de Nihem also
(in his 6 Tractat. chap. 32) speaks to the like purpose, saying thus: The
Apostolic Chamber is like to the Sea, into which all Rivers do run, and
yet it does never overflow: For thither, from most parts of the world, are
there great su^^es of gold, carried by thousands, and yet it is never full.
There is a generation in that place, that have svvords, instead of teeth, for
to dev^ure the poor of the earth. There are also many H^rsleeche^, which cry,
Bring, Bring. And a little after, he says thus* O just Men, who if you had
your right, should have your portion with the Harpies, infernal Furies, and
T^^tal^^, that can never be satisfied. Likewise Aeneas Sylvi^^ (afterward
called, Pope Pius Secundus) in the 66 Epistle to John Peregall, speaks to the
same effect: The Court of Rome (says he) gives nothing without many: yea, the
impos^^ion of hands, and the gif^s of the holy Ghost, he sold: And the
remission of s^nnes is communicated to none, (...) have not vvherevvithall to
pay for it. Never was there man that did more prostitute himself, to uphold
the ruinous and tottering Papacy, then Baronius: and yet, behold his own
words, upon the year 912, and 8 Article: With what face (says he) did the
Church of Rome then look, and how ill-favouredly? Then, when famous Que^nes,
and lewd Strumpets, did domineer^ ^ Rome, at whose pleasure, Church livings
were bestovved, Bishoprics were given, and that which is horrible to
hear, and not to be spoken, their Lovers, false Popes, thrust into the seat
of Peter. And then afterward he adds, saying: What Priests and Deacons
Cardinal, do ye think, were chosen by these Monsters? There he
complains, that Jesus Christ did sleep. But he speaks of such a number of
vicious and wicked Popes* that it should seem by his reckoning, that Jesus
Christ slept a long time: For from the year 870, to the year 1050, whom do
you see but Necromancers, but Adulterers, and Murderers, and Infamous persons,
pr^ferred to the Papacy? Platius, in the life of Benedict the fourth, speaks
the like, and gives the reason of all this, saying thus: This liberty of
sinning (says he) has begotten us these Monsters and Prodigies, who by
ambition and corruption, have rather usurpt, then possessed the holy chair of
Peter: there being no Prince to repress the wickedness of these men. Yea,
Platina, though the Popes Servant and Secretary, yet well knowing their vices,
and the vices of the people under his government, does in a manner speak, as
if himself despaired of their salvation; for thus be his words: Our vices
(says he) be grown to tha^ height, that they will hardly ever find
mercy in the sight of God. But observe yet further, how horrible and wicked
their reproachings, slanderings, and defamings, heretofore have been, and yet
still be, of Gods church and people, and their religion: calling them usually
Heretics, Schismatickes, and by such other odious names, and laying
sometimes, most notorious slanders, and most impious false accusations to their
charge: and persuading, as if our religion, were a religion allowing
licentiousness, a condemner and disallower of all good works, and as though
we approoved of all dissoluteness, and were enemies to the Virgin Marie, and
to all Saints, and as though we made God the Author of sin and evil, and
other such like things, which we utterly detest, dislike, and abhor, and
which he clean contrary to our opinion, and to the doctrine of our Religion.
Yea, they not only thus dishonor and wrong the true Church, and people of
God, upon earth, but even the Church triumphant and Saints also in heaven. For,
is it not a great wrong and dishonor to the glorified Saints in heaven, to
turn them into Idols, or to make them instruments of Idolatry, or, of
dishonouring God, by invocating and praying unto them? when as Prayer and
Invocation, is a service, worship, and honor, properly and only belonging to
God? Again, do they not much dishonor the Saints, when they employ them about
base offices? commending the keeping of their Hogs to one, of their horses to
another, the curing of the Scurffe to a third, etc. Yea, even concerning that
most chaste, blessed, and glorious Virgin Mary, Do they not extremely
dishonor her, when they make her to favor Immodestie, and uncleanenesse? For
there is an Italian book, entitled: Miracoli d^ella glorios^ Virgin Maria,
printed at Millan, in the year 1547, which says: that, a certain Abbess,
being with Child, the holy Virgin, being willing to cover her crime, did in her
stead, present her self before the Bishops in form of the Abbess* and showed
him by an ocular demonstration, that she was not with Child. Caesarius also,
in his seventh Book, Chapt. 35* reports: that the Virgin Marie, for twelve
whole years, did supply the place of a certain Nun^^, called Beatrice,
whilst she lay in the S^ewes: till at last she came back again to take her
place, and freed the Virgin from being in her room any longer. But consider
yet further, the most terrible, cruel, barbarous, and bloody persecutions of
Gods Church and people, committed by Papists About 400 years since, Pope
Innocent the third, within the space of a few months, made more then 200000 of
the faithful to be slain, whom they called Albigenses. In S. Bartholomewes
Massacre, in the year 1572, more then 80000 men were slain, in cold blood. In
a Massacre in France, within a few days, were murdered, 70000 persons. And
how execrable, and beyond all measure abominable, and damnable, was that their
late Plot of Gunpowder-Treason, for the overthrow of the whole State of
England, in Parliament at a blow, and God knows, of how many States and
Kingdoms beside* Yea* what means their Holy League, (as they call it) not
long since made, for the extirpation, and rooting out of all Protestancie? Do
they not by all these, show themselves to be utter enemies, and that in the
worst sort that can be, to all Civil States, Kings, and Kingdoms, which
reject the Popes usurped Supremacy, and his depraved and Antichristian
Religion. Why else, also, have they decreed, that, Faith is not to be kept with
Heretics? And why else do they hold, that, before Heretical Judges, and
Magistrates, (as they call them) it is lawful for them to swear with
Equivocations, and Mental reservations, and in a false, deluding, and
deceitful manner? And why else do they dislike, and disallow Subjects, not
only to take the Oath of Supremacy, but the Oath also of Allegiance, when, in
very deed, and of right, neither of both ought to be refused? What also
means, the resort and coming of Popish Priests, and Jesuits, into Protestant
Kingdoms, under color and pretense of Religion? Is it not to make a party
for the Pope, or some of his confederates, against a fit time? And does it not
also tend to sedition and treason in a Commonweal? What does the Popes
claim, to depose Kings, and to give away their Kingdoms, when, and to whom
he list, tend unto, but to the setting of Princes together by the Ears,
as well as Subjects to rebel against their lawful Sovereigns? Do not all
these things tend to the overthrow, as well of civil States, and civil
Justice, as of Religion? and of Kingdoms and Commonweals, as well as of Gods
Church? and (which makes the matter yet more, and indeed, most odious) all
this they do, under pretense of Christianity, and of a Catholic cause, when
it is nothing so, but, clean contrariwise, extremely divelish and
Antichristian. Let then every equal person now judge, whether the Pope of
Rome, that thus wrongeth God, his Church, and Religion; and not only Bishops,
but all Kings, Princes, and Emperors also, their People, Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths, and that thus intolerably abuses the whole Christian world,
and yet for all that, inflexibly persisteth therein, without any remorse, or
repentance showed, yea, which with all his power and strength, justifies,
upholdeth, and defends, all those his wrongs errors, abuses, and impieties,
boasting, glorying, and delighting in them, be not rightly affirmed to be, The
Man of sin, the Son of perdition, and the very undoubted Grand Antichrist,
in all respects.

THE CONCLUSION, to the same pretended CATHOLICS.
NOw then, it appearing very clearly by the premises, that the Pope of Rome,
(whom his blinded followers so much adore and reverence) is the very grand
Antichrist: and that the Popish City of Rome, whereof he is the Head and
Ruler, is undoubtedly the Whore of Babylon, mentioned in the Revelation of S.
John: What scruple or doubt should you, or any of you, conceive, to make all
the good have ye may, to forsake that grand Antichrist, and that his Concubine
the whore of Babylon, and all his Priests, Jesuits, Bishops, Monks, Friars,
Nunns, and the rest of that his Antichristian rabble, and to betake and apply
your selves, with us, to the embracing and following of Christ, and of his most
holy and most pure Religion, and ordinances, delivered in the sacred and
canonical Scriptures, the Infallible rule of Truth? For do you think, that
ever Christ and Antichrist, will agree together? What has the chafe to do
with the wheat? says the Lord. Or, Ier. 23.28.
What fellowship (as S. Paul speaks) has righteousness with
unrighteousness? 2. Cor. 6.14.15.16.
what communion has light with darkness? what concord has Christ with
Belial? what part has the Believer with the Infidel? what agreement has
the Temple of God, with Idols? In some things, I grant, the Popish Church
holds rightly, and in all things (such is the mystery of Iniquity) makes a
semblance and pretense of piety and Christianity. But take heed, and be not
here with deceived: for (beside that it is the nature and manner of Hypocrisy,
so to do) you now, I hope, do sufficiently understand, that neither the Pope
of Rome could be Antichrist, nor his Church be the Antichristian, unless they
did make this semblance of piety, and outward show and pretense of
Christianity: yea, clearly, they should be altogether Unchristian, and not
Antichristian people, if they made no semblance or profession at all of Christ.
But all is not gold that glistereth: nor that ever right and true
Christianity, that seems to be so. The Devil himself will hold some things
rightly, and will sometimes utter and tell some truths: but it is to the end,
to gain credit and belief to himself, at other times, and in other things,
when and wherein he speaks lies. And this craft and subtlety, have all
Antichristian and false teachers, learned, and do practice: being (as S. Paul
calls them) False-Apostles, deceiptfull workmen, 2. Cor. 11.13.14.15.
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ: And no marvel (says
he): for Satan also himself is transformed into an Angel of light. Therefore
it is no great thing, though his ministers transform themselves, as though
they were the Ministers of righteousness: whose end shall be according to
their works. Now then, concerning the Kings Supremacy, and his Authority, in
all kind of causes, and over all sorts of people, as well Ecclesiastical, as
Civil, you see what it is, and you understand, I trust, the clear lawfulness
of it, within his own Dominions. For, a time there was (as before is showed)
when the Bishop of Rome was limited his precincts and bounds, as well as other
Bishops, and had no more Supremacy or Authority over other Bishops, then they
had over him* Yea a time there was when Bishops in a Council assembled, had
authority over the Pope of Rome, and might and actually did depose him: and
when also the Bishops of Rome were subject to the Emperor, and at his command,
as is likewise before declared. So that the best title, which the Bishop of
Rome at any time had to his Supremacy, within any Kingdom, appears to be,
not by any institution or law of God, but by an humane constitution only, and
a positive law: And seeing that this his Supremacy was afterward put down
again, dissolved, and abolished, within this Kingdom, as also in all the rest
of his Majesty's Dominions, by as high and as good authority, as at any time
it was erected and established in the same, namely by Act of Parliament, made
within those Realms: Every subject to his Majesty now stands tied and
bound in duty, utterly to renounce and forsake it. If yet ye allege (as ye
sometimes do) that for the space of diverse hundredth years, in the later
times, the Kings and Princes in Christendom, submitted themselves to this
Supremacy of the Pope: I answer, first, that it is apparent, that, Non fuit
sic, ab initio, it was not so, from the beginning: and, that the most ancient
Precedents be to the contrary. Secondly, that this was to fulfill a prophecy
in the Scripture, which foretold that so it should come to pass, namely, that,
these Kings should, Rev. 1^.13.17.
with one consent, submit, or give their Kingdom, unto the Beast, until the
words of God were fulfilled. Yea, these Kings not only submitted themselves,
and their Kingdoms, to this Supremacy of the Pope, but to the adulterated
Religion likewise of that Whore of Babylon, the Papal City of Rome, to fulfill
the like Prophecy, which says, that with her have committed fornication, the
Kings of the earth, Rev. 17.2. Rev 18.3. Rev. 14.8.
and the Inhabitants of the earth have been made drunken, with the wine of
her fornication. Inasmuch then, as these things be thus foretold in holy
Scripture to come to pass, what marvel should it now be to any, to see and
know them to have been accomplished accorcordingly? But yet thirdly, observe
that although these kings did for so long time yield and submit themselves, and
the people of their kingdoms, to this Beast and whore of Babylon, yet the
later part of this Prophecy, remains to be fulfilled, which is this: that
Ten of these Kings, that were so long enchanted and bewitched with this
Whore, and seduced and abused by her, shall afterward discern and epsy her
frauds and wickedness, and thereupon shall detest and hate her, Rev. 17.16.
Rev. 18.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9. etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
make her desolate and naked, eat her flesh, and shall burn her with fire.
Which Prophecy, as it is already begun to be performed, in some of these
Kings which have fallen from her, hating and detesting both her authority, and
her adulterated religion: so, shall it, in all the parts and points of it, in
the due time appointed of God, be fully and actually performed, and
accomplished. The long continuance then of Pope and Popery in the world, is no
argument or proof of the lawfulness or allowablenesse of them: for (beside
that it was foretold to be of that long continuance) Mahometisme, Paganism,
heresy, and error, drunkenness, adultery, and sundry other sins, and
vices, be also very ancient, and of long continuance, in the world, yet does
not that make them therefore to be ever the more lawful, or allowable. Yea,
the longer the Popes Supremacy, and his adulterated Religion, have continued,
the greater wrong and injury has been done, all that while, not only to all
other Bishops in the world, and to all Emperors, Kings, and Princes likewise,
but also to the whole Church and religion of God, and even to God himself. And
therefore this makes not for the upholding or confirmation, but for the
further and greater detestation and condemnation of them both.

2 So that, no sufficient cause or reason can any of you show, why ye should
refuse to be of our Religion, or why ye should not all come to our Churches
and assemblies, and join with us in the right and true service of God. For
first, where ye suppose Ours, the Protestant Religion (as it is called) to be
false and heretical, and yours, the Popish, to be the only Catholic and
right: it has before bni made very manifest unto you, clean contrariwise,
that Ours is the right, Apostolic, Catholic, and most ancient religion, and
that yours, coming in afterward, is the new, adulterate, heretical, false, and
Antichristian: and that those be not the children of the right and true Church,
but of the whore of Babylon, which submit themselves, and yield their obedience
to the Pope, and Popish Rome. And whereas, secondly, ye object, that it would
move scandal and offense to others, if ye came to our Churches: What need ye
care that others, without cause, be offended, so long as God is well pleased.
For in such a case, it is an offense not given, but taken. And when there is,
no just cause given, why any should be offended, the fault is theirs that be
so causelessly offended, and not yours. A man must never forsake God, and Gods
religion, nor absent himself from the true Church of God, because some seduced
or ill-disposed people, will find fault with it. Thirdly, ye object, that it
were but a point of dissembling to come, if your mind stand against it: But
this allegation is soon answered, if ye please to come (as ye may, and ought)
that is, with sincere hearts, and unfeigned affections, and without any such
wicked Hypocrisy, and Dissembling: For, indeed, all halting, dissembling, and
counterfeyting, especially in matters of Gods service, and religion, is ever to
be eschued and detested. Fourthly, ye object, that the Translation of the holy
Scriptures amongst us, is not right: But it has before been showed unto you,
that our Translations, being according to the originals of the Hebrew and
Greek, must needs be right: whereas contrariwise, your Translations, not being
according to those originals, be, and must needs be untrue, in all those
sundry and many places (detected and discovered at large, by the
Protestants), wherein they differ from those originalls. Fifthly, ye say, that
our Church Service, and Liturgy, is disallowable, for that it wants your
Popish Mass, and sacrificing Priesthood: But to that we answer, that our
Church Service is so much the better, and the more to be liked, for that it
has abolished (as it ought) that Idolatrous Popish Mass, and that abominable
Priesthood, thereto belonging, which, fearelesly and impiously, presumes to
offer up, and that in a bodily manner (as they say) Christ Jesus, again, and
again, and often, and that also as a Sacrifice propitiatory for the taking
away of men's sins: whereas all true Christians do know, contrariwise, that
Christ Jesus, was in a Bodily manner to be offered up in sacrifice to his
Father but once, and that was upon the Cross: and that himself was the only
Priest allowed and appointed of God, to make that Bodily oblation, and no
other: and that this Bodily oblation and sacrifice by himself performed upon
the Cross, is the only propitiatory Sacrifice, and only availeable, and
effectual, to cleanse and take away the sins of men. So that our Church and
Church Service were, indeed, justly worthy to be abhorred, detested, and
condemned, (as now yours is, for the same cause) if such blasphemous, and
intolerable monstrous abominations, were suffered or allowed in it. And we are
highly and everlastingly to thank^ God, that they be removed* and abolished.
Sixthly, ye allege, that in a Psalm or Hymn which we sometimes sing in our
Churches, we pray unto God, to keep and defend us from the Pope and Turk:
and why should we not do so? It is plainly and clearly proved before, that
the Pope is the grand Antichrist, and that he, not openly and professedly (as
the Turk does) but closely and covertly (and therefore in a more subtle, and
more dangerous manner) oppugneth Christ and his religion, and ordinances:
deceiving under the name of Catholics, and of the Catholic Church, and
pretense of the Holy Ghost ruling that Church of his, so that it cannot err,
as he suggesteth to his credulous and blinded followers: whereunto he has
also added all manner of impostures, and deceiveable and lying signs and
wonders, to enchant and seduce the people, and to allure them to himself, and
to confirm them in their misbeleefe and errors. Wherefore, not without good
cause, do we pray God to keep and defend us from him, especially now in this
later age of the world, wherein he uses not only secret sleights and frauds,
but open wars also and rebellions, when he sees fit time for them, and
murders and massacres of Protestant Princes and people, Gunpowder villainies,
and such like hellish abominations. Who then can justly blame us, for praying
against him that does thus abound with these his wicked and mischievous plots,
frauds, forces, treacheries and conspiracies? Lastly, ye allege it to be
against your conscience to come to our Churches: But herein I desire you, to
consider better and more seriously, whether this will stand, or be allowed for
a good excuse or plea for you, in the day of Judgment. For may not Turks,
Jews, Pagans, heretics, schismatics, or whatsoever other erroneous,
deceived, and misbeleeving persons, make the like excuse, and plead the same
plea, and say, that it is against their conscience, to become Christians, or to
come to their assemblies, or to be Orthodox and right-beleeving people? Or, if
they make that plea, do you think it will pass for good and allowable,
before Gods Judgment seat in the last day? But ye, I pray, show some cause,
or reason, (if ye can) why your ^^^science will not give you leave, to come to
our Churches? Is there any thing in our Church Service that may justly offend*
any of you* ^f there be, declare it. But you were (...) yet able to show it,
and I assure my self you never will be able. If then, your Conscience be (as
in this case, it appears to be) not, a right but a wrong and an erring and
missed conscience, you must endeavor to rectify and reform this kind of
conscience, and not be guided or carried any longer by it* For so also
^tacheth Si^^^^^^ Pri^rias (in^^^^ ^^^scientia) that a man is bound to forsake
his erroneous conscience, and not to follow it.

3 But consider yet further, how many Martyrs also, there have bin, that have
died for and in defense of several points of our religion: and how few, or
rather none at all, there be, that have bin put to death, for and in defense of
any one particular point of Popish religion against Protestantie: unless you
will account denying the Kings Supremacy, and such like points of treason,
disloyalty* and contempt against Princes, the^^ Common^weales, and Kingdoms,
to be points of that Religion. For example, that I may be the better
understood, What man amongst them, was ever put to death for that their Article
of Transubstantiation: or for their opinion of Purgatory* or for their opinion
of praying to Saints and Angels* or for their opinion of me^^ meri^^? or for
any other such like point of their religion? for of such it is, that I speak
and mean. Can ye name or produce any one man that ever since the world began
died for any of these articles? If you say ((...) some amongst you have been
bold to say) that there neither was, nor is, any Law amongst us to put Papists
to death for any point of their religion, are you not, therein, much deceived?
For may not Heretics, by the Law of the Realm, be put to death? or was there
a Law, in former times, when Popery reigned, to put Protestants to death,
under the (...) of Heretics, which were in very died no Heretics, but of
the most ancient religion, and the Orthodox and right believing Christians? and
is there not a Law now, when Protestancie reigns to put Papists to death for
heresy, who be Heretics reve^^, and in verse deed? For you must (...) it is
not the Determination of a Council, without app^^bation of Gods word, that is
sufficient to prove a man an Heretic: because then should that renowned,
famous, and godly Bishop Athanasius, (who was condemned in the Councels of Tire
and Antioch) be held and concluded to be an Heretic, Which God forbid. Yea,
if (as is evident) the determination of Counsels, be not sufficient, to
convince or prove, Athanasius, John Chrysostom, and other Orthodox Bishops,
in that time, to be Heretics: much less is the determination of the Bishop
of Rome, and of his Counsels, in these latter times, (when both he and they
be so far revolted and degenerate) able to convince the Orthodox
Protestants, of Heresy. The strength, force, and authority of the holy and
Canonical Scriptures, must be produced to convince a man to be an Heretic:
For an Heretic is he, that stiffly and obstinately holds and maintains an
error in matter of Faith, against the manifest authority of the Canonical
Scriptures. So that, not what men hold, but what God holds to be error and
heresy, is so to be reputed? And by this rule, namely, by sufficient evidence
and warrant of the Canonical Scriptures, it was, that the Bishops and their
Councels, in ancient time, convinced the Arrian^, Nestorian^* E^t^chians, and
the other Heretics of their days. Which rule of judging, and convincing
Heretics, by the Canonical Scriptures, if it had been held, as evermore it
ought: it is thereby evident, that Protestants never were, nor ever rightly
could have been concluded to be Heretics. Yea, by this rule, Papists
clearly are to be judged the Heretics: as appears by examining and trying
their several and particular Doctrines, and Opinions (wherein they differ from
us, and wherein they be so wilful and pertinacious) by the same Canonical
Scriptures. And how should it, or can it be otherwise? For, must not the
doctrine of the g^and Antichrist, and of his Concubine the Whore of Babylon,
bring adulterate, erroneous, and Antichristian, needs be concluded, if it be
wilfully and obstinately persisted in, to be clear Heresy? If then our
Bishops should, as they might (if they were so disposed, and that His Majesty
would give ^^ave thereunto) censure some points of Popery to be heresy, being
(...), and obstinately persisted in, and thereupon should cite some Papists to
come before them to answer as for heresy, and did upon hearing and examining
of the cause, by sentence defi^^tive, declare and pronounce them to be
Heretics: What should, or can hinder, but that the Kings Writ, de Haeretic^
Comburendo, (after all due circumstances observed) might issue, and be awarded
for the putting of them to death? Does not the Law of the Realm apparently
warrant this? For the Lawyers of your own Religion can tell you, that even by
course of Common Law, those that be convicted and condemned of heresy, may
be put to death. Fitzherb. not. brev. fol. 269.
And this it further evident, even by those very Statutes themselves, viz. of
2. H. 4. cap. 1.5. and 2. H. 5. cap. 7. and 25. H. 8, cap. 14. which, although
they were afterward repealed in England, yet do they sufficiently show and
declare, both what was and yet still is, the Common Law in that case: namely,
that Bishops in their several Diocesses, and Provinces, (as well as in their
Convocations) might, and therefore still may, even by course of Common Law,
(notwithstanding the repeal of those Statutes) by their Jurisdiction
ordinary, cite Heretics, 10 H. 7. fol. 17.
censure, and sentence them, and so leave them to the Lay power, to be
executed. And this also, is learned and judicious Writer, in his Apology of
certain proceedings, by Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, does tell you, and
testifies (against Fitzherberts opinion, who seems to put a difference in
this point, between the Bishop of a Diocese, and the Convocation) that he
has heard the two Chief Justices, the Lord chief Bar^ (...) some other
Judges, Apolog. part. 1. cap. 12. page 81, 82. and cap. 8. pa. 47.
and the Queens learned Council, resolve (against that difference) in a
special consultation, held about the matter of Heresy: viz that Every Bishop
within his own Diocesse^ as well as the Convocation, might, at the Common Law,
and still may, ^^^ demne an Heretics: Yea, he has made a whole Chapter,
affirming this very point, viz. that, Judgment of Heresy* still re^aineth at
the Common Law, Apolog part. 1. cap. 13. page ^9.
in Judges Ecclesiastical: and that the Provise, in the Statute of 1 Fliz. cap.
1, (which is in Ireland 2 Eliz. cap. 1.) touching Heresy, is only spoken of
the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, and such as be authorized by that Statute.
So that the authority and Jurisdiction of Bishops, in their several Diocesses
and Provinces, as also in their Convocations, notwithstanding that, or any
other Stat. still remains such as it was at the Common Law, namely, of force
sufficient for the citing, censuring, and sentencing of Heretics: whereupon,
Execution of death by burning, may ensue. All which, nevertheless, I speak
not to any such end, as to incense or exasperate any in authority, so far
against papists, but only to answer, and disanull their untrue conceits, and so
to repress and remove the insolency of some of them, and to show them, that
if our Protestant princes pleased, and were so disposed, they might have found,
as still also they may, a way and mean, and law sufficient to put Papists to
death for Heresy. Wherefore it is no defect of matter of Heresy in Popery
(wherewith it does abound) nor any defect of law (which sufficiently
warranteth the putting of Heretics to death) but it is the mere mercy and
clemency of His Majesty, and of other Protestant Princes, his Predecessors,
that does thus spare and forbear them. Whereby, as they may all learn to be
highly thankful unto God, for such merciful and gracious Princes to whom they
are so much beholding, for not executing the severitie of their laws upon
them, in this case: so is it their parts to give no occasion, further to
incense, or any way to provoke them thereunto. Where also you may observe to
put a difference between the two Religions, viz. of Protestancie, and Popery:
considering how mild, gentle, and merciful the one is, namely, Protestancie,
in comparison (...) the other, which is, and ever has been (where it is
predominant, and bears rule) against Protestants, most terrible, cruel,
inhumane, and extremely Bloody: and so be moved to affect and embrace the
one, and to abhor and detest the other, as it deserves.

But as touching these points, I shall not need to use many words to men of
understanding, learning, and judgment: especially when the thing desired of
you, tends to your own good, not only in respect of this world* but chiefly
in respect of the world to come. For it has (as you see) Gods own express
commandment, bidding all his people to depart from that mystical Babylon,
Popish Rome. Rev. 18.4.
When therefore God himself thus speaks, and would have none that be his
people, to adhere to such a Mother, as the Whore of Babylon is, but clean
contrariwise, would have them to depart from her, and utterly to renounce,
abhor, and detest her, as being indeed, the Mother of VVhoredomes, Rev. 17.5.
and abominations of the Earth: (as she is entitled) is it not good reason,
and your bounden duty, to give ear unto him, and to obey his voice herein, as
you tender your own salvations, and desire to be His People? It appears that
ye have been of a long time mistaken, as touching the right Mother Church: For
not Popish Rome, but Jerusalem, which is from above, is the Mother of us all,
as S. Paul expressly witnesses: Yea, Gal. 4.26.
what manner of Mother Popish Rome is, I trust ye now sufficiently perceive.
Be no longer therefore so much abused, or so extremely deluded, as to take
the wrong Mother for the right: and him that is the grand Antichrist, to be
Christ's Vicar, the head of his Church, S. Peter's successor, and the Bishop that
cannot err, in matter of Faith: For what christian, charitable, and good
mind, does not grieve to see so many honorable, and honest-hearted men* to
be so far carried away, and misled, to their own perdition?

Howbeit, if any amongst you rest not satisfied herewith, but thinks that
he can answer this Book, and will take upon him so to do: I desire him,
first, that he will do it, not by parts or peece-meales, but wholly and
entirely, from the beginning of it to the end. Secondly, I desire him to do
it, not superficially, or sophistically, but substantially, soundly, and
satisfactorilie, if he can. Thirdly, as I would have him to do it in love and
charity, and with an affection only to follow Gods truth; so do I also desire
him to set his name unto it, as I have done here to this. But if none amongst
you, can make any solid, sound, sufficient, and satisfactorie Answer unto it,
(as I rest assured before hand, none can, or will be able: For, who was, or
ever will be able to Answer or confute that Word of God, whereupon the
Protestants Doctrine and Religion is apparently grounded?) then is there so
much the more reason, for you all, to yield to that which you see to be
evident, unanswerable, and irrefutable. God Almighty (if it be his will) open
all your eyes to see his splendent and invincible truth, in his sacred and
Canonical Scriptures contained; and grant both to you and to us, that we may
all acknowledge, profess, and observe it to his glory, the discharge of our
duties, and our own everlasting comforts, and salvation, through Jesus Christ.
Amen.

VVisdome is justified of all her Children. Luke 7.35.

Unto the King everlasting, Immortal, Invisible, unto GOD only wise, be honor,
and glory, for ever, and ever. AMEN. 1. Tim. 1.17.

FINIS.
AN EPISTLE WRITTEN BY THE REVEREND FAther in God, James Vssher Bishop of
Mead, concerning the religion anciently professed by the IRISH and SCOTTISH;
Showing it to be for substance the same with that which at this day is by
public authority established in the Church of ENGLAND.
WORTHY SIR:
I Confess, I somewhat incline to be of your mind, that if unto the
authorities drawn out of Scriptures and Fathers (which are common to us with
others) a true discovery were added of that religion which anciently was
professed in this kingdom; it might prove a special motive to induce my poor
contrymen to consider a little better of the old and true way from whence
they have hitherto been misledd. Yet on the one side, that saying in the
Gospel runs much in my mind; Luke 16.31.
If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded,
though one rose from the dead: and on the other, that heavy judgment
mentioned by the Apostle; 2* These. 2.10, 11.
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, God
shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe lies. The woeful
experience whereof, we may see daily before our eyes in this poor nation:
where, such as are slow of heart to believe the saving truth of God delivered
by the Prophets and Apostles, do with all greediness embrace, and with a most
strange kind of credulity intertaine those lying Legends, wherewith their
Monks and Friars in these latter days have polluted the religion and lives of
our ancient Saints.

I do not deny but that in this country, as well as in others, corruptions
did creep in by little and little, before the Devil was let loose to procure
that seduction which prevayled so generally in these last times: but as far
as I can collect by such records of the former ages as have come unto my hands
(either manuscript or printed) the religion professed by the ancient Bishops,
Priests, Monks, and other Christians in this land, was for substance the very
same with that which now by public authority is maintained therein, against
the foreign doctrine brought in thither in later times by the Bishop of Romes
followers. I speak of the more substantial points of doctrine, that are in
controversy betwixt the Church of Rome and us at this day; by which only we
must judge, whether of both sides has departed from the religion of our
ancestors: not of matters of inferior note, much less of ceremonies and such
other things as appertain to the discipline rather than to the doctrine of the
Church. And whereas it is known unto the learned, that the name of Scoti in
those elder times (whereof we treat) was common to the inhabitants of the
greater and the lesser Scotland (for so heretofore they have been
distinguished) that is to say, of Ireland, and the famous colonie deduced from
thence into Albania: I will not follow the evil example of those that have of
late labored to make dissension betwixt the daughter and the mother, but
account of them both, as of the same people.

Tros Rutulusve fuat, nullo discrimine habebo. That we may therefore fall upon
the matter in hand, without further preambles: two excellent rules does S. Paul
prescribe unto Christians for their direction in the ways of God: the one,
that they Ephesians. 5.17.
be not unwise, but understanding what the will of God is; the other, that they
Romans 12.3. (...).
be not more wise then behooves to be wise, but be wise unto sobriety, and that
we might know the limits, within which this wisdom and sobriety should be
bounded; he elsewhere declares, that not to be more wise then is fitting, is
1. Cor. 4.6 (...).
not to be wise above that which is written. Hereupon Sedulius (one of the
most ancient writers that remains of this country birth) delivers this for
the meaning of the former rule; Scrutamini legem, in qua voluntas ejus
continetur. Sedul. in Ephesians. 5.
Search the Law, in which the will of God is contained: and this for the later;
Plus vult sapere, qui illa scrutatur qu^e Lex non dicit. Id. in Romans 12.
He would be more wise then is meet, who searches those things that the Law
does not speak of. Unto whom we will adjoyne Claudius another famous Divine,
(counted one of the founders of the universitie of Paris) who for the
illustration of the former, affirms that men Propterea errant, quia
scripturas ne sciunt: and quia scripturas ignorant, consequenter nesciunt
virtutem Dei, hoc est, Christum, qui est Dei virtus and Dei sapientia. Claud.
in Matthew. lib. 3.
therefore err, because they know not the Scriptures; and because they are
ignorant of the Scriptures, they consequently know not Christ, who is the power
of God and the wisdom of God: and for the clearing of the latter, brings in
that known Canon of S. Hierome; Hoc, quia de scripturis non habet
authoritatem, eadem facilitate contemnitur qua probatur. Id. ib.
This, because it has not authority from the Scriptures, is with the same
facility contemned, wherewith it is avowed.

Neither was the practice of our ancestors herein different from their
judgment. For as Bede touching the latter, records of the successors of
Colum-kille the great Saint of our country; that they Tantum ea qua^ in
Propheticis, Evangelicis and Apostolicis literis discere poterant, pietatis and
castitatis opera diligenter observantes. Bed. lib. 3. histor ecclesiast. cap. 4.
observed only those works of piety and chastity, which they could learn
in the Prophetical, Evangelicall and Apostolical vvritings: so for the
former, he specially notes of one of the principal of them, to wit Bishop
Aidan; that In tantum autem vita illius a nostri temporis segnicia distabat; ut
omnes qui cum eo incedebant, sive adtonsi sive laici, meditari deberent, id
est, aut legendis Scripturis aut Psalmis discendis operam dare. Id. ibid. cap 5.
all such as went in his company, whether they were shorn or laymen, were
tied to exercise themselves, either in the reading of Scriptures or in the
learning of Psalms. For the Bonis semper moribus delectatur and consentit; and
assiduis scripturarum meditationibus and eloquiis animam vegetat. Patric. de
abusionibus saculi, cap 5. de Pudi^itia.
continual meditation of the Scriptures was held to give special vigor and
vegetation to the soul (as we read in the book attributed unto S. Patrick,
of the abuses of the world:) and the holy documents delivered therein, were
esteemed by Christians as their chief riches; according to that of Columbanus,
Columban. in Mon^stichis; and in epistola ad Hunaldum.
Sint tibi divitiae, divinae dogmata legis. In which heavenly riches our
ancient Scottish and Irish did thrive so well, that many worthy personages in
foreign parts were content to undergo a voluntary exile from their own
country; that they might more freely traffic here for so excellent a
commodity. And by this means Altfrid king of Northumberland, purchased the
reputation of Successit Ecgfrido in regnum Altfrit, vir in scripturis
doctissimus. Bed. lib. 4. hist. cap. 26.
a man most learned in the Scriptures. Scottorum qui tum versatus incola terris,
Coelestem intento spirabat cord sophiam.
Nam patriae fines and dulcialiquerat arva,
Sedulus ut Domini mysteria disceret exul.
as Bede writes of him, in his Poem of the life of our countreyman S.
Cuthbert. So when we read in the same Bid of Ab ipso tempore pu^ritiae suae
curam non modicam lectionibus sacris, simul and monasticis exhibebat
disciplinis. Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 19.
Fursaeus, and in another ancient author of A pucrili aetate magnum habet
studium sacras discere literas. Tom. 4. Antiqu. lect. Henr. Canis. page 642.
Kilianus, that from the time of their very childehood, they had a care to
learn the holy Scriptures: it may easily be collected, that in those days it
was not thought a thing unfit, that even children should give themselves unto
the study of the Bible. Wherein how greatly some of them did profit in those
tender years, may appear by that which Boniface the first archbishop of
Mentz, relates of Livinus (who was trained, up in his youth by Benignus in
Davidicis psalmorum melodiis, and sanctorum Evangeliorum mellifluis
lectionibus, atque caeteris divinis exercitationibus. Bonifac. in Vita Livini.
the singing of David's Psalms, and the reading of the holy Gospells, and other
divine exercises) and Jonas of Columbanus; in whose Tantum in eius pectore
divinarum thesauri scripturarum conditi tenebantur; ut intra adolescentiae
aetatem detentus, Psalmorum librum elimato sermon exponeret. Jonas, in Vita
Columbani, cap. 2.
breast the threasures of the holy Scriptures were so laid up, that within the
compass of his youthful years he set forth an elegant exposition of the book
of the Psalms. by whose industry likewise afterward, the study of Gods word
was so propagated; that in the monasteries which were founded B Burgundofora
monasterium quod Euoriacas appellatur, etc. secundum regulam S. Columbani
instituit. Id. in Vita Burgundof.
according to his rule beyond the Seas, not the men only but the religious
women also did carefully attend the same, that through patience and comfort of
the Scriptures they might have hope. See for this, the practice of the virgin
Cum ^am in extremis posita posceret per successiones noctium lumen coram se
accendi, and sacrae lectionis praeconia ante se legi, etc. Id. ib.
Bitihildis lying upon her deathbed; reported by the same Jonas, or whosoever
else was the author of the life of Burgundofora.

As for the edition of the Scriptures used in these parts at those times: the
Latin translation was so received into common use among the learned, that the
principal authority was still reserved to the original fountains. Therefore
does Sedulius in the Old Testament commend unto us Hebraicam veritatem. Sedul.
in Gal. 3. and Hebr. 7.
the Hebrew verity (for so with S. Hierome does he style it:) and in the New
correct oftentimes the vulgar Latin according to the truth of the Greek
copies. For example: in 1. Cor. 7.34 he reads as we do, There is difference
between a wife and a virgin; and not as the Rhemists have translated it out of
the Latin. Romans 12.19. he reads, Non vosmetipsos vindicantes, not avenging
your selves: where the vulgar Latin has corruptly, Non vosmetipsos
defendentes, not defending your selves. Romans 3.4. where the Rhemists translate
according to the Latin, God is true: he shows that in the Greek copies it is
found, Let God be true, or, let God be made true. Romans 15.17. he notes that
the Latin books have put glory for gloriation. Galat. 1.16. where the Rhemists
have according to the Latin, I condescended not to flesh and blood: he says,
that in Graeco melius habet (for so must his words be here corrected out of S.
Hierome, whom he follows) the Greek has it better, I conferred not. Romans
8.3. where the Rhemists say of God, according to the Latin translation, that of
sin he damned sin in the flesh: Sedulius affirms, that verius habetur
apud Graecos, it is more truly expressed in the Greek books; that for sin
he damned sin in the flesh. Lastly, where the Rhemists translate after their
Latin copy, Gal. 5.9. A little leaven corrupts the whole paste: he says it
should be, leaveneth, (as we have it) and Non, ut male in Latinis codicibus,
corrumpit. Sedul. in Gal. 5.
not, corrupts, as it is ill read in the Latin books. So where they
translate by the same authority, Gal. 6.1. Instruct such an one in the spirit
of lenity: Instruat; sive, ut melius habetur in Graeco, perficiat in spiritu
lenitatis. Claud. in Gal. 6.
Claudius, following S. Hierome, affirms that it is better in the Greek,
Restore or perfect him. and where they make S. Peter say, Matthew. 16.22. Lord,
be it far from thee: Absit a te Domine: vel, ut melius habetur in Graeco;
Propitius esto tibi, Domine. Id. lib. 2. comment. in Matthew. Habetur MS. Romae
in Bibliotheca Vallicellana and Cantabrigia in Bibliothec. Colleg. Benedict.
and Aula Pembrochianae.
he notes, that it is better in the Greek; Lord, favor thy self.

The doctrine which these worthy men observed out of the Scriptures and the
writings of the most approved Fathers, was this. that God Praescitam and
praedestinatam immobili consilio creaturam, ad se laudandum, and ex se and in
se and per se beat vivendu^. S. Gallus in sermon. habit. Constant.
by his immovable counsel (as Gallus speaks in his Sermon preached at
Constance) ordained some of his creatures to praise him, and to live blessedly
from him and in him, and by him: namely, Praedestinatione scilicet aeterna, non
creatione temporaria, sed vocatione gratuita, vel indebita gratia. Id. ib.
by his eternal predestination, his free calling, and his grace which was due
to none. that Miseretur magna bonitate, and obdurat nulla iniquitate: ut neque
liberatus de suis meritis glorietur, neque damnatus nisi de suis meritis
conqueratur. Sola enim gratia redemptos discernit a perditis; quos in unam
perditionis concreaverat massam, ab origin ducta caussa communi Sedul. in Romans
9.
he has mercy with great goodness, and hardneth without any iniquity: so
as neither he that is delivered can glory of his own merits, nor he that is
condemned complain but of his own merits. forasmuch as grace only makes the
distinction betwixt the redeemed and the lost; who by a cause drawn from their
common original, were framed together into one mass of perdition. For Videt
universum genus humanum tam justo judicio divinoque in apostatica radice
damnatu^; ut etiamsi nullus inde liberaretur, nemo recte posset Dei vituperare
justitiam: and qui liberantur, sic oportuisse liberari, ut ex pluribus non
liberatis, atque damnatione justissima de^elictis, ostenderetur quid meruisset
universa conspersio. quod etiam justos debitum judicium Dei damnaret, nisi in
ejus debitu^ miscricordia subveniret: ut volentium dei suis meritis gloriari,
omne os obstruatur; and qui gloriatur, in Domino glorietur. Id. ibid.
all mankind stood condemned in the apostaticall root (of Adam) with so just
and divine a judgment; that although none should be freed from thence, no man
could rightly blame the justice of God: and such as were freed, must so have
been freed, that by those many which were not freed but left in their most
just condemnation it might be showed, what the whole lump had deserved. that
the due judgment of God should have condemned even those that are justified,
unless mercy had relieved them from that which was due: that so all the
mouths of them, which would glory of their merits, might be stopped; and he
that glories, might glory in the Lord.

They further taught (as S. Augustine did) that Libero arbitrio male utens homo,
and se perdidit, and ipsum. Sicut enim qui se occidit, utique vivendo se
occidit, sed se occidendo non vivit, neque seipsum poterit resuscitare cum
occiderit: ita cum libero arbitrio peccaretur, victore peccato amissum est and
liberu^ arbitrium. a quo enim quis devictus est, huic and servus addictus est.
sed ad been faciendum ista libertas unde erit homini addicto and vendito, nisi
redimat, cujus illa vox est; Si vos Filius liberaverit, vere liberi eritis? Id.
ib.
Man using ill his Free will, lost both himself and it. that, as one by living
is able to kill himself, but by killing himself is not able to live, nor has
power to raise up himself when he has killed himself: so when sin had
been committed by freewill, sin being the conqueror freewill also was lost;
forasmuch as of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he also brought in
bondage (2. Pet. 2.19.) that unto a man thus brought in bondage and sold, there
is no liberty left to do well, unless he redeem him, whose saying is this;
If the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed. (Ioh. 8.36.) that Quod ab
adolescentia men's hominu^ apposita sit ad malitiam: non est enim homo qui non
peccet. Id. in Ephesians. 2.
the mind of men from their very youth is set upon evil: there being not a
man which sins not. that a man Quid habes ex ^eipso nisi peccatum? Id. in 1.
Cor. 4.
has nothing from himself, but sin. that Deus author est omnium bonorum,
hoc est, and naturae bonae, and voluntatis bonae; quam nisi Deus in illo
operetur, non facit homo. quia praeparatur voluntas a Domino in homine bona; ut
faciat Deo donante, quod a seipso facere non poterat per liberi arbitrii
voluntate^. Claud. lib. 1. in Matthew.
God is the author of all good things, that is to say, both of good nature, and
of goodwill; which unless God do work in him, man cannot do. because this
good will is prepared by the Lord in man; that by the gift of God he may do
that, which of himself he could not do by his own freewill. that Praecedit
bona voluntas hominis multa Dei dona, sed non omnia: quae autem non praecedit
ipsa, in eis est and ipsa. Nam utrumque legitur in sanctis eloquiis; and
misericordia eius praveniet me, and misericordia eius subsequetur me: nolente^
praev^^it ut velit, volentem subsequitur, ne frustra velit. Cur enim admonemur
petere ut accipiamus; nisi ut ab illo fiat quod volumus, a quo factum est ut
velimus? Sedul. in Romans 9.
the good will of man goes before many gifts of God, but not all: and of those
which it does not go before, it self is one. For both of these is read in the
holy Scriptures; His mercy shall go before me, and, His mercy shall follow
me: it preventeth him that is unwilling that he may will, and it follows him
that is willing, that he will not in vain. and that therefore we are
admonished to ask that we may receive; to the end, that what we do will may
be effected by him, by whom it was effected that we did so will.

They taught also, that Non ergo lex data est, ut peccatum auferret, sed ut sub
peccato omnia concluderet. Lex enim ostendebat esse peccatum, quod illi per
consuetudinem caecati possent putare justitiam: ut hoc modo humiliati
cognoscerent non in sua manu esse salutem suam, sed in manu mediatoris. Id. in
Gal 3.
the Law was not given, that it might take away sin, but that it might shut
up all under sin: to the end that men, being by this means humbled, might
understand that their salvation was not in their own hand, but in the hand of
a Mediator. that by the Law comes, Non remissio, nec ablatio peccatorum, sed
cognitio. Id. in Romans 3.
neither the remission nor the removeall, but the knowledge of sins: that it
Lex, quae per Moysen data est, tantum peccata ostendit, non abstulit Claud. in
Gal. 2. Perque illam legem morbos ostendentem non auferentem, etiam
praevaricationis crimine contrita superbia est. Id. in Gal. 3.
takes not away diseases, but discovers them; Lex non donat peccata, sed
damnat. Sedul. in Romans 4.
forgiveth not sins, but condemns them. that Dominus Deus imposuerat non
justitiae servientibus sed peccato: justam scilicet legem iniustis hominibus
dando, ad demonstranda peccata eoru^, non auferenda. Non enim aufert peccata
nisi gratia fidei quae per dilectionem operatur. Claud in argument. epist. ad
Galat.
the Lord God did impose it, not upon those that served righteousness, but
sin; namely by giving a just law to unjust men, to manifest their sins, and
not to take them away: forasmuch as nothing takes away sins but the grace of
faith which works by love. That our Gratis nobis donantur peccata. Sedul. in
Gal. 1. A morte redemptis gratis peccata dimittuntur. Id. in Ephesians. 1.
sins are freely forgiven us; Absque operum merito, and peccata nobis
concessa sunt pristina, and pax indul^a post veniam. Claud. in Gal. 1.
without the merit of our works: that Gratia estis salvati per fidem, id est,
non per opera Sedul. in Ephesians. 2.
through grace we are saved, by faith, and not by works; and that therefore
we are to rejoice, Non in propria iustitia, vel doctrina, sed in fide crucis,
per quam mihi omnia peccata dimissa sunt. Sedul. and Claud. in Gal. 6.
not in our own righteousness, or learning, but in the faith of the Cross,
by which all our sins are forgiven us. That Abiecta and irrita gratia est, si
mihi sola non sufficit. Sedul. in Gal. 2.
grace is abject and vain, if it alone do not suffice us: and that we
Christum vilem habetis, dum putatis eum vobis non sufficere ad salute^. Id. in
Gal. 3.
esteem basely of Christ, when we think that he is not sufficient for us to
salvation.

That Disposuit Deus propitium se futurum esse humano generi, si credant in
sanguine eius se esse liberandos. Id. in Romans 3.
God has so ordered it, that he will be gracious to mankind, if they do
believe that they shall be freed by the blood of Christ. that, as Vita corporis
anima, vita animae fides est. Id. in Hebr. 10.
the soul is the life of the body, so faith is the life of the soul: and
that we live In fide vivo filii Dei, id est, in sola fide, qui nihil debeo
legi. Id. in Gal. 2.
by faith only, as owing nothing to the Law. that Perfectionem legis habet, qui
credit in Christo. Cum enim nullus iustificaretur ex lege, quia nemo implebat
legem, nisi qui speraret in promissionem Christi: fides posita est, quae
cederet pro perfectione legis; ut in omnibus praetermissis fides satisfaceret
pro tota lege. Id. in Romans 10.
he who believes in Christ, has the perfection of the Law. For whereas none
might be justified by the Law, because none did fulfill the Law, but only he
which did trust in the promise of Christ: faith was appointed, which should be
accepted for the perfection of the Law, that in all things which were omitted
faith might satisfy for the whole Law. That this righteousness therefore is
Non nostra, non in nobis, sed in Christo, quasi membra in capite. Id in 2 Cor.
5.
not ours, nor in us, but in Christ* in whom we are considered as members in
the head. That Fides, dimissis per gratiam peccatis, omnes credentes filios
efficit Abrahae. Id. in Rom 4.
faith, procuring the remission of sins by grace, makes all believers the
children of Abraham: and that Iustum fuerat, ut quo modo Abraham credens ex
gentibus per solam fidem iustificatus est; ita caeteri fidem eius imitantes
salvarentur. Id. in Romans
it was just, that as Abraham was justified by faith only, so also the rest
that followed his faith should be saved after the same manner. That Per
adoptionem efficimur filii Dei, credendo in Filiu^ Dei. Claud. lib. 1. in Matthew.
through adoption we are made the sons of God, by believing in the Son of
God: and that this is Testimoniu^ adoptionis, quod habemus spiritum, per quem
ita oramus: tantam enim arram non poterant, nisi filii accipere* Sedul. in Romans
8.
a testimony of our adoption, that we have the spirit; by which we pray, and
cry Abba Father; forasmuch as none can receive so great a pledge as this, but
such as be sons only. That Ipse Moses distinxit inter utramque iustitiam,
fidei scilicet atque factorum: quia altera operibus, altera sola credulita^e
iustificet accedentem* Id. in Romans 10.
Moses himself made a distinction betwixt both the justices, to wit of faith
and of deeds: that the one did by works justify him that came, the other by
believing only. that Patriarchae and Prophetae non ex operibus legis, sed ex
fide iustificati sunt. Id. in Gal. 2.
the Patriarchs and the Prophets were not justified by the works of the Law,
but by faith. that Ita praevaluit consuetudo peccandi, ut nemo iam perficiat
legem: sicut Petrus Apostolus ait; Qu^d neque nos neque patres nostri portare
potuimus. Si qui vero iusti non erant maledicti; non ex operibus legis, sed
fidei gratia salvati sunt. Id. in Gal. 3.
the custom of sin has so prevayled, that none now can fulfill the Law: as
the Apostle Peter says, Act. 15.10. Which neither our fathers nor we have
been able to bear. But if there were any righteous men which did escape the
curse: it was not by the works of the Law, but for their faithes sake that
they were saved.

Thus did Sedulius and Claudius, two of our most famous Divines deliver the
doctrine of free will and grace, faith and works, the Law and the Gospel,
Justification and Adoption; no less agreeably to the faith which is at this
day professed in the reformed. Churches, then to that which they themselves
received from the more ancient Doctors, whom they did follow therein. Neither
do we in our judgment one whit differ from them, when they teach that Hoc
contra illos agit, qui solam fidem posse sufficere dicunt. Sedul in Eph^s. 5*
Non ergo sola ad vitam sufficit fides. Claud in Gal. 5. b^. Haec sententia
illos revincit, qui solam fidem ad salutem animarum suarum sufficere
arbitrantur. Id. ibid. in fine.
faith alone is not sufficient to life. For when it is said, that Faith alone
justifies: this word alone may be conceived to have relation either to the
former part of the sentence, which in the schools they term the Subject; or
to the latter, which they call the Predicat. Being referred to the former, the
meaning will be; that such a faith as is alone (that is to say, not accompanied
with other virtues) does justify: and in this sense we utterly disclaim the
assertion. But being referred to the latter, it makes this sense; that faith
is it which alone or only justifies: and in this meaning only do we defend
that proposition; understanding still by faith, not a dead carkase thereof (for
how should the just be able to live by a dead faith?) but a true and lively
faith, Gal. 5.6.
which works by love. For as it is a certain truth, that among all the
members of the body, the eye is the only instrument whereby we see; and yet
it is as true also, that the eye being alone, and separated from the rest of
the members, is dead, and for that cause does neither se^ only, nor see at
all: so these two sayings likewise may stand well enough together, that among
all the virtues in the soul, faith is the only instrument whereby we lay hold
upon Christ for our justification; and yet, that faith being alone, and
disioyned from the society of other graces, is dead in it self, (as S. Iam.
2.17.
James speaks) and in that respect can neither only justify, nor justify at
all.

So though Claudius do teach, as we do, that Si gentes fides sola non salvat,
nec nos: quia ex operibus legis nemo iustificabitur. Claud. in Gal. 2.
faith alone saves us; because by the works of the law no man shall be
justified: yet he adds withal this caution. Non quo legis op^ra contemnenda
sint, and absque eis simplex fides adpetenda; sed ipsa opera fide Christi
adornentur. Scita est enim sapientis viri illa sententia; non fidelem vivere ex
iustitia, sed iustum ex fide. Id. in Gal. 3.
Not as if the works of the law should be contemned, and without them a simple
faith (so he calls that solitary faith whereof we spoke, which is a simple
faith indeed) should be desired; but that the works themselves should be
adorned with the faith of Christ. For that sentence of the wise man is
excellent; that the faithful man does not live by righteousness, but the
righteous man by faith. In like manner Sedulius, acknowledges with us, that God
Gratis proposuit per solam fidem dimittere peccata. Sedul. in Rom* 4.
has purposed by faith only to forgive our sins freely, and Vt sola fide
salvarentur credentes. Id. in Gal. 3.
by faith only to save the believers; and that, when men have fallen, they are
to be renewed Per solam fidem Christi, quae per dilectionem operatur. Id. in
Heb 6.
only by the faith of Christ, which works by love. intimating by this last
clause, that howsoever faith only be it which justifies the man, yet the work
of love is necessarily required (for all that) to justify the faith. And this
faith (says Haec fides cum iustificata fuerit, tanquam radix imbre suscepto
haeret in animae solo; ut cum per legem Dei excoli caeperit, rursum in came
surgant rami, qui fructus operum ferant. Non ergo ex operibus radix iustitiae,
sed ex radice iustitiae fructus operum crescit: illa scilicet radice iustitiae,
cui Deus acceptam fert iustitiam sine operibus. Id. in Romans 4.
he) when it has been justified, sticks in the soil of the soul like a
root, which has received a shower: that when it has begun to be manured by
the law of God, it may rise up again into bows, which may bear the fruit of
works. Therefore the root of righteousness does not grow out of works, but
the fruit of works out of the root of righteousness; namely out of that root
of righteousness, which God does accept for righteousness without works. The
conclusion is: that saving faith is always a fruitful faith; and though it
never go alone, yet may there be some gift of God, which it alone is able to
reach unto. as Columban. in Monoslichis.
Columbanus also implies in that verse: Sola fides fidei dono ditabitur almo.

The greatest depressers of Gods grace, and the advancers of man's abilities,
were Pelagius and Celestius: the one borne in Britain (as appears by
Prosper Aquitanus) the other in Scotland or Ireland; as Pers. three Convers.
part. 1. chap. 3. s^^t. 10.
Mr. Persons does gather out of those words of S. Hierome in one of the
Prefaces of his commentaries (not upon Ezechiel, as he quoteth it, but) upon
Jeremy. Habet enim progenie^ Scoticae gentis, de Britannorum vicinia. Hieronym
pro^^m^i^. 3. commentar. in Ierem.
He has his offspring from the Scottish nation, near to the Britans. Against
these Palladius and Patricius, Prosp. Aquitan. advers Collator. circa finem.
sent into these parts by Celestinus Bishop of Rome, bent their forces: by
whose means, the grounds of sound doctrine in these great points were well
settled among the Scottish and Irish. And when the poison of the contrary
heresy, about two hundred years after that, began to break out among them
again: the Clergy of Rome in the year of our Lord DCXXXIX. (during the
vacancie of the Sea, upon the death of Severinus) directed their letters unto
them, for the preventing of this growing mischief. Wherein among other things
they put them in mind, that Blasphemia and stultiloquiu^ est dicere, esse
hominem sine peccato: quod omnino non potest, nisi unus mediator Dei and
hominum homo Christus Jesus, qui sine peccato est co^ceptus and partus. Epist.
Cler. Roman. apud Bedam, lib. 2. hist. cap. 19.
it is both blasphemy and folly to say, that a man is without sin: which none
at all can say, but that one mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ
Jesus, who was conceived and borne without sin. Which is agreeable, partly
to that of Claudius; that Quja, (quod omnibus sapientibus patet, licet
haeretici contradicant) nemo est, qui sine adtactu alicuius peccati vivere
possit super terram. Claud. lib. 2. in Matthew.
it is manifest unto all wise men, although it be contradicted by heretics,
that there is none who can live upon earth without the touch of some sin:
partly to that of Sedulius, that Nullus electus et ita magnus, quem Diabolus
non audeat accusare: nisi illum solum, qui peccatum non fecit, qui and dicebat;
Nunc venit princeps huius mundi, and in me nihil invenit. Se^ul. in Romans 8.
there is none of the elect so great, whom the Devil does not dare to accuse,
but him alone who did no sin, and who said; The Prince of this world comes
now, and in me he finds nothing.

For touching the imperfection of our sanctification in this life, these men
held the same that we do: to wit, that the Law Non potest impleri. Id. in
Romans 7.
cannot be fulfilled; that Non est qui faciat bonum, hoc est, perfectum and
integrum bonum. Id. in Romans 3.
there is none that does good, that is to say, perfect and entire good. that Ad
hoc nos elegit, ut essemus sancti and immaculati, in futura vita; quoniam
Ecclesia Christi non habebit maculam neque ^ugam Licet etiam in praesenti vita
iusti, and sancti, and immaculati, qu^^is non ex toto, tamen ex part, non
inconvenienter dici possunt Id in Ephesians. 1.
Gods elect shall be perfectly holy and immaculate in the life to come, where
the Church of Christ shall have no spot nor wrinkle: whereas in this present
life they are righteous, holy, and immaculate, not wholly, but in part only.
that Tunc erit iustus sine ullo omnino peccato, quando nulla lex erit in
membris eius, repugnans legi mentis eius Claud. in Gal 5.
the righteous shall then be without all kind of sin, when there shall be
no law in their members, that shall resist the law of their mind. that although
Non enim iam regnat peccatum in eorum mortali corpore ad obediendum desideriis
eius: quamvis habitet in eodem mortali corpore peccatum, nondum extincto impetu
consuetudinis naturalis, qua mortaliter natisumus, and ex propriis vitae
nostrae, cum and nos ipsi peccando auximus quod ab origin peccati humani
damnationis trahebamus. Id. ibid.
sin do not now reign in their mortal body to obey the desires thereof: yet
sin dwells in that mortal body, the force of that natural custom being
not yet extinguished, which we have gotten by our original and increased by
our actual transgressions. And as for the matter of merit: Sedulius does
resolve us out of S. Paul, that we are Saints Vocatione Dei, non merito facti
Sedul. in Romans 1.
by the calling of God, not by the merit of our deed; that God is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, Secundum virtutem quae
operatur in nobis; non secundum merita nostra. Id. in Ephesians. 3.
according to the power that works in us, not according to our merits; that
Sciendum est, quia omne quod habent homines a Deo, gratia est: nihil enim ex
debito habent. Id. in Romans 16.
whatsoever men have from God, is grace, because they have nothing of due; and
that Nihil dignu^ inveniri vel co^parari ad futuram gloriam potest Id. in Romans
8.
nothing can be found worthy or to be compared with the glory to come.

The next point that offers it self unto our consideration, is that of
Purgatory. Whereof if any man do doubt; Qui de Purgatorio dubitat, Scotiam
pergat, Purgatorium sancti* Patricii intret, and de Purgatorii poenis amplius
non dubitabit. Caesar. Heisterbach. Dialog. lib. 12. cap. 38.
Caesarius (a Germane Monk of the Cistercian order) advises him for his
resolution to make a journey into Scotland (the greater Scotland he means)
and there to enter into S. Patricks Purgatory: and then he gives him his word,
that he shall no more doubt of the pains of Purgatory. If Doctor Terry (who
commends this unto us as the testimony of Cuius loci fama, ita sparsim per
omnes* Europae parts volare visa est; ut Caesarius celeberrimus auctor, de eo
nihil dubitans sic scribat. Guil. Thyram, in Discurs. Panegyrie. de S. Patric.
page 151.
a most famous author) should chance to have a doubtful thought hereafter of
the pains of Purgatory: I would wish his ghostly Father to injoine him no
other penance, but the undertaking of a pilgrimage unto S. Patricks purgatory;
to see whether he would prove any wiser when he came from thence, than when he
went thither. In the mean time, until he has made some further experiment of
the matter, he shall give me leave to believe him that has been there, and
has cause to know the place as well as any (the Island wherein it is seated,
being held by him as a part of the inheritance descended unto him from his
ancestors) and yet professes that he found nothing therein, which might afford
him any argument to think there was a Purgatory. I pass by, that Nennius,
and Probus, and all the elder writers of the life of S. Patrick that I have met
withal, speak not one word of any such place; and that Hem. Sal^^reyens. in
lib. de Visione Oeul militis. MS. in publica Cantabrigiensi^ academiae
Bibliothec^; and privata viri doctiss. M. Thoma Alani Oxoniensis; and in Nigro
libro Ecclesia S. Trinitat. Dublin.
Henry the monk of Saltrey, in the days of king Stephen, is the first in whom
I could ever find any mention thereof. this only would I know of the Doctor,
what the reason might be, that where he brings in the words of Giraldus
Cambrensis touching this place, as De posteriori non minus auctentica videtur
auctoritas Geraldi Cambrensis, rerum Ibernicarum diligentissimi investigatoris,
qui taliter loquitur. Thyr. Discurs. Panegyric. page 153.
an authentical authority; he passes over that part of his relation,
wherein he affirms, that S. Patrick intended by this means to bring the
rude people to a persuasion of the certainty De infernalibus namque reproborum
poenis, and de vera post mortem perpetuaque electorum vita vir sanctus cum
gente incredula dum disputasset: ut tanta, tam inusitata, tam inopinabilis
retu^ novitas rudibus infidelium animis oculata fide certius imprimeretur:
efficaci orationu^ instantia magnam and admirabilem utriusque rei notitiam,
duraeque cervicis populo perutilem, meruit in terris obtinere. Giral. Cambrens.
T^pograph. Hibern. distinct. 2. cap. 5.
of the infernal pains of the reprobate, and of the true and everlasting life
of the elect after death.

The Grecians allege this for one of their arguments against Purgatory: that
whereas (...), etc. (...). Marcus Ephesius, in Gratorum Apolog. de igne
Purgatori^ ad Council. Florentin.
their Fathers had delivered unto them many visions and dreams and other
wonders concerning the everlasting punishment wherewith the wicked should be
tormented in Hell; yet none of them had declared any thing concerning a
purgatory temporary fire. Belike the Doctor was afraid, that we would
conclude upon the same ground; that S. Patrick was careful to plant in men's
minds the belief of Heaven and Hell, but of Purgatory taught them never a
word. And sure I am, that in the book ascribed unto him, De tribus habitaculis,
(which is to be seen in his Majesty's Library) there is no mention of any
other place after this life, but of these two only. I will lay down here the
beginning of that treatise; and leave it to the judgment of any indifferent
man, whether it can well stand with that which the Romanistes teach concerning
Purgatory at this day. Tria sunt sub omnipotentis Dei nutu habitacula: primu^,
imum, medium. Quorum summum, regnum Dei vel regnu^ Coelorum dicitur, imum
vocatur Infernus, medium Mundus praesens vel Orbis terrarum appellatur. Quorum
extrema omnino sibi invicem sunt contraria, and nulla sibi societate conjuncta:
(quae enim societas potest esse luci ad tenebras, et Christo ad Belial?) medium
vero nonnullam habet similitudinem ad extrema. etc. Commixtio namque malorum
simul and honorum in hoc mundo est. In regno aute^ Dei nulii mali sunt, sed
omnes boni: at in Inferno nulli boni sunt, sed omnes mali. Et uterque locus ex
medio suppletur. Hominu^ enim hujus mundi alii eleva^tur ad Coelu^, alii
trahuntur ad Infernu^. Similes quippe similibus junguntur, id est, boni bonis,
and mali malis; justi homines justis angelis, transgressores homines
transgressoribus angelis; servi dei Deo, servi diaboli Diabolo. Benedicti
vocantur ad regnu^ sibi paratu^ ab origin mundi: maledicti expellu^tur in
igne^ aeternu^, qui praeparatus est Diabolo and angelis ejus. Patrie de trib.
habitac. MS. in Bibliothea Regia Iacobaea.
There be three habitations under the power of almighty God: the first, the
lowermost, and the middle. The highest whereof is called the kingdom of God or
the kingdom of Heaven, the lowermost is termed Hell, the middle is named the
present World or the circuit of the Earth. The extremes whereof are altogether
contrary one to another: (for what fellowship can there be betwixt light and
darkness, betwixt Christ and Belial?) but the middle has some similitude
with the extremes. For in this world there is a mixture of the bad and of the
good together, whereas in the kingdom of God there are none bad, but all good:
but in Hell there are none good, but all bad. And both those places are
supplied out of the middle. For of the men of this world, some are lifted up to
Heaven, others are drawn down to Hell, namely, like are joined unto like,
that is to say, good to good, and bad to bad: just men to just Angels, wicked
men to wicked Angels; the servants of god to God, the servants of the devil to
the Devil. The blessed are called to the kingdom prepared for them from the
beginning of the world: the cursed are driven into the everlasting fire that is
prepared for the Devil and his angels. Thus far there:

Hitherto also may be referred that ancient Canon of one of our Irish Synods,
wherein it is affirmed, that the soul being separated from the body is
Custodit anima^ usque dum steterit ante tribunal Christi; cui refert sua prout
gesserit propria. Nec archangelus potest ducere ad vitam, usque dum judicaverit
came Dominus; nec Z^bulus ad poena^ traducere, nisi Dominus damnaverit ea^.
Synod. Hibern. in vet. cod. Canonu^, tituloru^ 66. MS. in Bibliotheca D.
R^ber^i Cottoni.
presented before the judgment seat of Christ, who renders it own unto it,
according as it has done: and that neither the Archangel can lead it unto
life, until the Lord has judged it; nor the Devil transport it unto pain,
unless the Lord do damn it. as the sayings of Sedulius likewise; that after
the end of this life, Finem dixit exitum vitae and actuum; cui aut mors, aut
vita suceedit. Sedul. in Rom 7.
either death or life succeeds, and that Mors porta est, per quam itur a^
regnu^. Id. in 1. Cor. 3.
death is the gate by which we enter into our kingdom: together with that of
Claudius; that Suscepit Christus sine reatu suppliciu^ nostrum; ut inde
solveret reatum nostru^, and finiret etia^ supplicium nostrum. Claud. in Galat.
3.
Christ did take upon him our punishment without the guilt, that thereby he
might loose our guilt, and finish also our punishment. Cardinal Bellarmine
indeed alleges here against us the vision of Furseus: who Beda lib. 3. hist.
Anglor. cap. 19. scribit, B. Fursaeum a mortuis resurgentem narrasse multaquae
vidi^ de purgatoriis poenis. Bellarm. de Purgator. lib. 1. cap. 11.
rising from the dead, told many things, which he saw concerning the pains of
purgatory; as Bede, he says, does write. But, by his good leave, we will be
better advised, before we build articles of faith upon such visions and dreams
as these: many whereof deserve to have a place among (...). Ph^^ Bibliothec.
number. 130.
the strange narrations of souls appearing after death, collected by Damascius
the heathen Idolater; rather than among the histories and discourses of sober
Christians. As for this vision of Furseus: all that Bid relates of it to this
purpose, is concerning certain great fires above the air, appointed to Etsi
terribilis iste and grandis rogus videtur, tamen juxta merita operum singulos
examinat: quia uniuscujusque cupiditas in hoc igne ardebit. Bed. lib. 3. ca. 19.
examine every one according to the merits of his works. which peradventure
may make something for Damascius his Purgatory in Circulo lacteo (for in that
circle made he (...). Damasc. apud. lo. Philoponum. in 1. Meteor. fol. 104. b.
a way for the souls that went to the Hades in heaven; and (...). Id. Ibid.
would not have us wonder, that there they should be purged by the way:) but
nothing for the Papists Purgatory, which Bellarmine by the common consent of
the Schoolmen determines to be within the bowels of the earth. Neither is
there any thing else in the whole book of the life of Furseus (whence Bid
borrowed these things) that looks toward Purgatory: unless peradventure
that speech of the Devil may be thought to give some advantage unto it. Hic
homo non purgavit delicta sua in terra; nec vindictam h^c recipit. Vbi est ergo
justitia Dei? Lib. vitae Fursai.
This man has not purged his sins upon earth; neither does he receive
punishment for them here. Where is therefore the justice of God? as if Gods
justice were not sufficiently satisfied by the sufferings of Christ; but man
also must needs give futther satisfaction thereunto by penal works or
sufferings, either here or in the other world. which is the ground, upon which
our Romanists do lay the rotten frame of their devised Purgatory.

The latter visions of Malachias, Tundal, Owen, and others that lived within
these last five hundred years; come not within the compass of our present
inquiry: nor yet the fables that have been framed in those times, touching the
lives and actions of elder Saints; whereof no wise man will make any
reckoning. Such (for example) is that which we read in the life of S. Brendan:
that the question being moved in his hearing, Si peccata mortuorum redimi
possunt ab amicis suis remanentibus in hac vita; orando, vel eleemosynas
faciendo. Vit. Brendani, in Legenda Io. Capgravij.
Whether the sins of the dead could be redeemed by the prayers or almsdeeds
of their friends remaining in this life (for that was still a question in the
Church:) he is said to have told them, that on a certain night, as he sailed
in the great Ocean, the soul of one Colman Colmannus, inquit, vocor; qui fui
monachus iracundus, discordiaeque seminator inter fratres. Ibid.
(who had been an angry Monk, and a sower of discord betwixt brethren)
appeared unto him; who complained of his grievous torments, entreated that
prayers might be made to God for him, and after six days thankefully
acknowledged that by means thereof he had gotten into heaven. Whereupon it is
concluded, In hoc ergo, dilectissimi, apparet: quod oration vivorum multum
mortuis prodest. Ibid.
that the prayer of the living does profit much the dead. But of S. Brendans
sea-pilgrimage, we have the censure of Molanus a learned Romanist; that there
be Multa apocrypha deliramenta. Molan. in Vsuard. martyrolog. May. 26.
many apocryphal fooleries in it: and whosoever reads the same with any
judgment, cannot choose but pronounce of it, as Photius does of the strange
narrations of Damascius, formerly mentioned; that it contains not only
apocryphal but also (...). Phot. Bibliothec. number. 130.
impossible, incredible, ill-composed, and monstrous fooleries. Whereof though
the old Legend it self were not free (as by the heads thereof, touched by
Glaber Rodulphus and Giraldus Cambrensis, may appear) yet for the tale that I
recited out of the Nova Legenda Angliae. impress. Londin. an. 1516.
New Legend of England, I can say, that in the manuscript books which I have
met withal here, in S. Brendans own country, (one whereof was transcribed for
the use of the Friars minors of Kilkenny, about the year of our Lord 1350.)
there is not the least footstep thereof to be seen.

And this is a thing very observable in the ancienter lives of our Saints
(such I mean, as have been written before the time of Satan's loosing; beyond
which we do not now look:) that the prayers and oblations for the dead
mentioned therein, are expressly noted to have been made for them, whose
souls were supposed at the same instant to have rested in bliss. So Adamnanus
reports, that S. Colme (called by the Irish, both in Qui videlicet Columba
nunc a nonnullis, composito a cella and Columba nomine, Colum-celli vocatur.
Bed. lib. 5 hist. cap. 10.
Bedes and our days, Colum-kille) Adamn^n. Vit. Columb. lib. 3. cap. 15.
caused all things to be prepared, for the sacred ministry of the Eucharist;
when he had seen the soul of S. Brendan received by the holy Angels: and
that he did the like, when Columbanus Bishop of Leinster departed this life.
for I must to day (says S. Colme Meque (ait) hodie, quamlibet indignus sim, ob
venerationem illius animae, quae hac in nocte inter sanctos Angelorum choros
vecta ultra siderea caeloru^ spatia ad Paradisum ascendit, sacra oportet
Eucharistiae celebrare mysteria. Ib. cap. 16.
there) although I be unworthy, celebrate the holy mysteries of the Eucharist,
for the reverence of that soul which this night, carried beyond the starry
firmament betwixt the holy quires of Angels, ascended into Paradise. Whereby
it appears, that an honorable commemoration of the dead was herein intended,
and a sacrifice of thanksgiving for their salvation rather then of propitiation
for their sins. In Bid also we find mention of the like obsequies
celebrated by S. Cuthbert for one Hadwaldus; after Vidi, inquit, animam
cujusdam sancti manibus Angelicis ad gaudia regni coelestis ferri. Bed. in vit.
Cuthbert. cap. 34
he had seen his soul carried by the hands of Angels unto the joys of the
kingdom of heaven. So Gallus and Magnus (as Walafridus Strabus relates in the
life of the one, and Theodorus Campidonensis or whosoever else was author of
the life of the other) Coeperunt missas agere, and precibus insistere pro
commemoratione B Columbani. Walafrid. Vit. Gall. lib. 1. cap. 26. Theodor. Vit.
Magni, lib. 1. cap. ult. edit. Goldasti, cap. 12. Canisij.
said Mass (which what it was in those days, we shall afterward hear) and
were instant in prayers for the commemoration of abbat Columbanus their
countreyman; Deinde tanti patris memoriam precibus sacris and sacrificiis
salutaribus frequentaverunt. Ibid
frequenting the memory of that great Father, with holy prayers, and healthful
sacrifices. Where that speech of Gallus unto his deacon Magnus or Magnoaldus,
is worthy of special consideration: Post hujus vigilias noctis, cognovi per
visione^, Dominu^ and patrem meu^ Columbanu^ de huius vitae angustiis hodie ad
Paradisi gaudia con migrasse. Pro eius itaque requie sacrificium salutis debeo
immolare. Ibid.
After this nights watch, I understood by a vision, that my master and father
Columbanus is to day departed out of the miseries of this life unto the joys
of Paradise. For his rest therefore I ought to offer the sacrifice of
salvation. In like manner also, when Gallus himself died; Presbyter cum ut
surgeret monuit, and pro requie defuncti ambitiosius Dominum precaretur:
intraverunt itaque ecclesias, and Episcopus pro carissimo salutares hostias
immolavit amico. Finito autem fraternae co^memorationis obsequio, etc. Walafrid
Strab. Vit. Gall. lib. 1. cap. 30. qui etiam addit postea, Discipulos eius,
pariter cum Episcop^ oratione^ pro illo fecisse. cap. 33.
John Bishop of Constance prayed to the Lord for his rest, and offered
healthful sacrifices for him: although he were certainly persuaded that he
had attained the blessing of everlasting life; as may be seen in Walafridus.
And when Magnus afterward was in his deathbed, he is said to have used these
words unto Tozzo Bishop of Ausborough, that came to visit him. Noli ^lere,
venerabilis Praesul, quia me in tot mundialium perturbationum procellis
laborantem conspicis: quoniam credo in misericordia Dei, quod anima mea in
immortalitatis liberate sit gavisura. tamen deprecor, ut orationibus tuis
sanctis me peccatorem and animam meam non desinas adjuvare* Theodor. Campidon.
vel quicunque author fuit Vitae Magni, lib. 2. cap. 13. edit. Goldasli, cap 28.
Canisij.
Do not weep, reverend Prelate, because thou beholdest me laboring in so
many storms of worldly troubles: because I believe in the mercy of God, that
my soul shall rejoice in the freedom of immortality. yet I beseech thee,
that thou will not cease to help me a sinner and my soul with thy holy
prayers. Then follows: that at the time of his departure, this voice was
heard; Veni, Magne, veni; accipe coronam, quam tibi Dominus praeparatam habet.
Ibid.
Come, Magnus, come, receive the crown which the Lord has prepared for thee.
and that thereupon Tozzo said unto Theodorus (the supposed writer of this
history) Cessemus flere, frater; quia potius nos oportet gaudere de animae
eius in immortalitate sumptae in hoc signo audito, quam luctum facere: sed
^amus ad Ecclesiam, and pro tam charissimo amico salutares hostias Domino
immolare studeamus. Finito itaque fraternae commemorationis obsequio, etc. Ibid.
Let us cease weeping, brother; because we ought rather to rejoice, having
heard this sign of the receiving of his soul unto immortality, than to make
lamentation. but let us go to the Church, and be careful to offer healthful
sacrifices to the Lord for so dear a friend.

I dispute not of the credit of these particular passages: it is sufficient,
that the authors from whom we have received them, lived within the compass of
those times, whereof we now do treat. For thereby it is plain enough (and if
it be not, it shall elsewhere be made yet more plain) that in those elder
days it was an usual thing, to make prayers and oblations for the rest of
those souls, which were not doubted to have been in glory: and consequently,
that neither the Commemoration nor the Praying for the dead nor the Requiem
Masses of that age, have any necessary relation to the belief of Purgatory.
The lesson therefore which Claudius teaches us here out of S. Hierome, is
very good: that Dum in praesenti seculo sumus, sive orationibus sive consiliis
invice^ posse nos adiuvari* cum autem ante tribunal Christi venerimus, nec Job,
nec Daniel, nec Noe, rogare posse pro quoquam; sed unumquemque porta^e onus
suum. Claud. in Galat. 6.
while we are in this present world, we may be able to help one another,
either by our prayers or by our counsels, but when we shall come before the
judgment seat of Christ, neither Job nor Daniel nor Noah can entreat for any
one, but every one must bear his own burden. and the advice which the no
less learned then godly abbat Columbanus gives us, is very safe: not to
pitch upon uncertainties hereafter, but now to trust in God, and follow the
precepts of Christ; while our life does yet remain, and while the times,
wherein we may obtain salvation, are certain.

Vive Deo fidens ( says Columban. in epist* ad Hunaldum.
he) Christi praecepta seque^do;
Dum modo vita manet, dum tempora certa salutis.
Touching the worship of God (that I may now come to that point) Sedulius
delivers this general rule: that to Adorare alium praeter Patrem, and
Filiu^, and Spiritum sanctum, impietatis crime^ est. Sedul. in Romans 1.
adore any other beside the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost, is the
crime of impiety; and that Totu^ quod debet Deo anima, si alicui praeter Deum
reddiderit, moechatur. Id. in Romans 2.
all that the soul owes unto God, if it bestow it upon any beside God, it
commits adultery. More particularly, in the matter of Images, Recedentes a
lumine veritatis sapientes; quasi qui invenissent, quo modo invisibilis Deus
per simulacrum visibile coleretur. Id. in Romans 1.
he reproves the wise men of the heathen, for thinking that they had found out
a way, how the invisible God might be worshipped by a visible image: with whom
also accords Claudius; that Deus non in manufactis habitat, nec in metallo
aut saxo cognoscitur. Claud. lib. 2. in Matthew.
God is to be known, neither in mettle nor in stone. and for Oaths, there is
a Canon ascribed to S. Patrick; wherein it is determined, that Non adiurandam
esse creaturam aliam, nisi creatorem. Syno^. Patricij. can. 23. MS.
no creature is to be swor^e by, but only the Creator. As for the form of the
Liturgy or public service of God, which the same S. Patrick brought into this
country: it is said, that he received it from Germanus and Lupus; and that it
originally descended from S. Mark the Evangelist. for so have I seen it set
down in an ancient fragment, written wellnigh 900. years since: remaining now
in the Library of Sir Robert Cotton, my worthy friend; who can never
sufficiently be commended, for his extraordinary care, in preserving all rare
monuments of this kind. Yea S. Hieroms authority is there vouched for proof
hereof. Beatus Hieronymus adfirmat, quod ipsum cursum, qui dicitur praesente
tempore Scottorum, beatus Marcus decantavit. which being not now to be found in
any of S. Hieroms works, the truth thereof I leave unto the credit of the
reporter.

But whatsoever Liturgy was used here at first: this is sure, that in the
succeeding ages no one general form of divine service was retained, but
diverse rites and manners of celebrations were observed in diverse parts of this
kingdom; until the Roman use was brought in at last by Gillebertus and
Malachias and Christianus, who were the Popes Legates here about 500. years
ago. This Gillebertus (an old acquaintance of Anselm. lib. 3. epist. 143.
Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury) in the Prologue of his book De usu
ecclesiastico, directed to the whole Clergy of Ireland, writes in this manner.
Episcopis, presbyteris totius Hiberniae, infimus praesulum Gille Lunicensis in
Christo salute^. Rogatu, nec non and praecepto multorum ex vobis (Charissimi)
canonicalem consuetudinem in dicendis Horis, and peragendo totius Ecclesiastici
ordinis officio, scribere conatus sum; non praesumptivo, sed vestrae cupiens
piissim^ servire jussioni: ut diversi and schismatici illi Ordines, quibus
Hibernia pene tota delusa est, uni catholico and Romano cedant officio Quid
enim magis indecens aut schismaticu^ dici poterit; quam doctissimum unius
ordinis in alterius Ecclesia idiotam and laicum fieri? etc. Prolog. Gille sive
Gilleberti Lumnicensis episc. De usu Ecclesiastic. MS. in Bibliothec. Colleg.
S. Benedict. Cantabrig.
At the request, yea and at the command of many of you (dearly beloved) I
indevoured to set down in writing the canonical custom in saying of Hours,
and performing the Office of the whole Ecclesiastical Order; not
presumptuously, but in desire to serve your most godly command: to the end that
those diverse and schismatic Orders, wherewith in a manner all Ireland is
deluded, may give place to one Catholic and Roman Office. For what may be
said to be more undecent or schismatic; then that the most learned in one
order, should be made as a private and lay man in another man's Church?

These beginnings were presently seconded by Malachias: in whose life, written
by Bernard, we read as follows. Apostolicas sanctiones ac decreta sanctorum
patru^, praecipueque consuetudines sanctae Romanae ecclesiae in cunctis
ecclesiis statuebat. Hinc est quod hodieque in illis ad horas canonicas
cantatur and psallitur juxta morem universae terrae: nam minime id ante fiebat,
ne in civitate quidem. Ipse vero in adolescentia cantum didicerat, and in suo
coenobio mox cantari fecit; cum necdum in civitate seu in episcopatu universo
canta^e scirent, vel vellent. Bernard. in vita Malachia.
The Apostolical constitutions, and the decrees of the holy Fathers, but
especially the customs of the holy Church of Rome, did he establish in all
Churches. And hence it is, that at this day the canonical Hours are chanted
and song therein, according to the manner of the whole earth: whereas before
that, this was not done, no not in the city it self. (the poor city of
Ardmagh he means.) But Malachias had learned song in his youth, and shortly
after caused singing to be used in his own Monastery; when as yet, as well in
the city as in the whole Bishopric, they either knew not, or would not sing.
Lastly, the work was brought to perfection, when Christianus Bishop of Lismore,
as Legate to the Pope, was President in the Council of Casshell: wherein a
special order was taken for Officium etiam Ecclesiasticum rite modulandum
statuerunt. Johan. Brampton, in ^oralanensi historia. MS.
the right singing of the Ecclesiastical Office; and a general act
established, that Omnia divina ad instar sacrosanctae Ecclesiae, iuxta quod
Anglicana observat Ecclesia, in omnibus partibus Hiberniae amodo tractentur.
Girald. Cambr. Hibern. ex pugna^. lib. 1. cap. 34.
all divine offices of holy Church should from thenceforth be handled in all
parts of Ireland, according as the Church of England did observe them. The
statutes of which Council were Concilii statuta subscripta sunt, and Regiae
sublimitatis authoritate firmata. Id. ib.
confirmed by the Regal authority of King Henry the second; Ex ip sius
triumphatoris mandato, in civitate Cassiliensi convenerunt Id. ibid.
by whose mandate, the Bishops that met therein were assembled, in the year of
our Lord 1172. as Giraldus Cambrensis witnesses, in his history of the
Conquest of Ireland. And thus late was it, before the Roman use was fully
settled in this kingdom.

The public Liturgy or service of the Church, was of old named the Mass:
even then also, when prayers only were said, without the celebration of the
holy Communion. So the last Mass that S. Colme was ever present at, is noted
by Adamnan. Vit. Columb. lib. 3. cap. 31.
Adamnanus to have been vespertinalis Dominicae noctis Missa. He dyed the
midnight following; whence the Lords day took his beginning (9o viz. Iunij,
anno Dom. 597.) according to the account of the Romans: which the Scottish and
Irish seem to have begun from the evening going before* and then was that
evening Mass said: which in all likelihood, differed not from those (...)
mentioned by Leon. Tacti^. cap. 11. sect. 18.
Leo the Emperor in his Tacticks, that is to say, from that which we call
Even-song or Evening prayer. But the name of the Mass was in those days more
specially applied to the administration of the Lords Supper: and therefore in
the same Adamnan. Vit. Columb. lib. 3. cap. 15.
Adamnanus we see that Sacra Eucharistiae ministeria and Missarum solemnia, the
sacred ministry of the Eucharist and the solemnities of the Mass, are taken
for the same thing. So likewise in the Walafrid. Strab. Vit. Galli, lib. 1.
cap. 26. Theodor. Campidonens. vel quicunque auth^r fuit Vit. Magni, lib. 1.
cap. 9. edit. Goldast. cap. 12. Canisij.
relation of the passages that concern the obsequies of Columbanus, performed
by Gallus and Magnoaldus; we find that Missam celebrare and Missas agere, is
made to be the same with Divina celebrare mysteria and Salutis hostiam (or
salutare sacrificium) immolare: the saying of Mass, the same with the
celebration of the divine mysteries and the oblation of the healthful
sacrifice* for by that term was the administration of the sacrament of the
Lords Supper at that time usually designed.

For as in our Hebr. 13.16. 2. Cor. 8.5.
beneficence, and communicating unto the necessities of the poor (which are
sacrifices wherewith God is well pleased) we are taught to give both our selves
and our alms, first unto the Lord, and after unto our brethren by the will of
God: so is it in this ministry of the blessed Sacrament. the service is first
presented unto God, (from which, as from a most principal part of the duty,
the sacrament it self is called the Eucharist; because therein we Hebr. 13.15.
offer a special sacrifice of praise and thankesgiving always unto God) and
then communicated unto the use of Gods people. in the performance of which part
of the service, both the minister was said to give, and the communicant to
receive the sacrifice: as well as in respect of the former part, they were said
to offer the same unto the Lord. For they did not distinguish the Sacrifice
from the Sacrament, as the Romanists do now adays: but used the name of
Sacrifice indifferently, both of that which was offered unto God, and of that
which was given to and received by the communicant. Therefore we read of
offering the sacrifice to God: as in that speech of Gallus to his scholar
Magnoaldus; Praeceptor meus B. Columbanus in vasis aeneis Domino solet
sacrificium offerre salutis. Walaf. id. Strab. Vit. Gall. lib. 1. cap. 19.
My master Columbanus is accustomed to offer unto the Lord the sacrifice of
salvation in brazen vessels. Of giving the sacrifice to man: as when it is said
in one of the ancient Synods of Ireland, that Testamentu^ Episcopisive
principis est; 10. scripuli Sacerdoti danti sibi sacrificium. Synod. Hibern. in
vet. lib. Canonum Cottoniano, titulorum 66.
a Bishop by his Testament may bequeath a certain proportion of his goods for a
legacy to the Priest that gives him the sacrifice. and of receiving the
sacrifice from the hands of the minister: as in that sentence of the Synod
attributed unto S. Patrick; Qui in vita sua non merebitur sacrificiu^ accipere:
quomodo post mortem illi potest adjuvare? Synod. Patric. cap. 12.
He who deserves not to receive the sacrifice in his life, how can it help
him after his death? and in that gloss of Sedulius upon 1 Cor. 11.33. Invicem
expectate, id est, usque quo sacrificium accipiatis. Sedul. in 1. Cor. 11.
Tarry one for another, that is, (says he) until you do receive the
sacrifice. Whereby it does appear, that the sacrifice of the elder times was
not like unto the new Mass of the Romanists, wherein the Priest does eat and
drink alone, the people being only lookers on; but unto our Communion, where
all that are present at the holy action do Hebr. 13.10.
eat of the Altar, as well as they that serve the Altar.

Again, they that are communicants in the Romish sacrament, receive the
Eucharist in one kind only: the Priest in offering of the sacrifice receives
the same distinctly, both by way of meat and by way of drink; which they tell
us Id fit potissimum ob Sacrificii, non ob Sacramenti integritatem. Bellarmin.
de sacrament Eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 22. in fine.
is chiefly done, for the integrity of the Sacrifice and not of the
Sacrament. For in the Sacrifice, they say, Rhem. Annotat. in Matthew. 26.26.
the several elements be consecrated, not into Christ's whole person as it was
borne of the Virgin or now is in heaven: but the bread into his body apart, as
betrayed, broken, and given for us; the wine into his blood apart, as shed out
of his body for remission of sins and dedication of the new Testament, which
be conditions of his person as he was in sacrifice and oblation. But our
ancestors, in the use of their Sacrament, received the Eucharist in both
kinds: not being so acute as to discern betwixt the things that belonged unto
the integrity of the sacrifice and of the sacrament; because, in very truth,
they took the one to be the other.

Thus Bid relates, that one Hildmer, an officer of Egfrid king of
Northumberland, entreated our Cuthbert Mittas presbyterum qui illum, priusquam
moriatur, visitet; cique Dominici corporis and sanguinis sacramenta ministret.
Bed. de Vit. Cuthbert. pros. cap. 15.
to send a Priest that might minister the sacraments of the Lords body and
blood unto his wife that then lay a dying: and Cuthbert himself, immediately
before his own departure out of this life, received the communion of the Lords
body and blood; as Acceptis a me sacramentis salutaribus exitum suum, que^ jam
venisse cognovit, Dominici corporis and sanguinis communione munivit Ibid. cap.
39.
Herefride abbat of the monastery of Lindisfarne (who was the man that at that
time ministered the sacrament unto him) made report unto the same Bid. who
elsewhere also particularly notes, that he then tasted of the cup. Bed. de
Vit. Cuthbert. carm. cap. 36.
Pocula degustat vitae, Christique supinum
Sanguine munit iter.
least any man should think, that under the forms of bread alone he might be
said to have been partaker of the body and blood of the Lord, by way of
Concomitance: which is a toy, that was not once dreamed of in those days. So
that we need not to doubt, what is meant by that which we read in the book of
the life of Furseus (which was written before the time of Bid) that Petivitque
and accepit sacri corporis and sanguinis communionem. Author antiqu. Vita
Fursai.
he received the communion of the holy body and blood; and that he was wished
to admonish Principes and doctores Ecclesiae Christi, animas fideliu ad
poenitentiae lamentum post culpas provocent; and eas spirituali pastu
doctrinae, ac sacri corporis and sanguinis participatione solidas reddant. Ibid.
the Pastors of the Church, that they should strengthen the souls of the
faithful with the spiritual food of doctrine, and the participation of the
holy body and blood. or of that which Cogitosus writes in the life of S.
Brigid, touching the place in the Church of Kildare; Per alteru^ ostium
Abbatissa cum suis puellis and viduis fidelibus tantum inerat, ( leg. intrat)
ut convivio corporis and sanguinis fiuantur Jesus Christi, Cogitos. rit. Brigid.
whereunto the Abbatesse with her maidens and widows used to resort, that
they might enjoy the banquet of the body and blood of Jesus Christ. which was
agreeable to the practice, not only of the Nunneries founded beyond the seas
according to the rule of Columbanus; where the Virgins Quaedam ex his nomine
Domna, cum iam corpus Domini accepisset, ac sanguinem libasset. Ion. Vit.
Burgundofor.
received the body of the Lord, and sipped his blood (as appears by that
which Jonas relates of Domna, in the life of Burgundofora:) but also of S.
Brigid her self, who was the foundresse of the monastery of Kildare; one of
whose miracles is reported, even in the later Legends, to have happened when
she was about to drink out of the Chalice, at the time of her receiving of the
Eucharist. which they that list to look after, may find in the collections of
Capgrave, Surius, and such like.

But, you will say; these testimonies that have been alleged, make not so
much for us, in proving the use of the communion under both kinds, as they
make against us, in confirming the opinion of Transubstantiation: seeing they
all specify the receiving, not of bread and wine, but of the body and blood of
Christ. I answer, that forasmuch as Christ himself at the first institution of
his holy Supper did say expressly; This is my body, and, This is my blood: he
deserves not the name of a Christian, that will question the truth of that
saying, or refuse to speak in that language, which he has heard his Lord and
Master use before him. The question only is, in what sense, and after what
manner, these things must be conceived to be his body and blood. Of which there
needed to be little question: if men would be pleased to take into their
consideration these two things; which were never doubted of by the ancient, and
have most evident ground in the context of the Gospel. First, that the subject
of those sacramental propositions delivered by our Savior (that is to say,
the demonstrative particle THIS) can have reference to no other substance, but
that which he then held in his sacred hands, namely, bread and wine: which are
of so different a nature from the body and blood of Christ, that the one cannot
possibly in proper sense be said to be the other; as the light of common reason
does force the Romanists themselves to confess. Secondly, that in the
predicate, or later part of the same propositions, there is not mention made
only of Christ's body and blood; but of his body broken, and his blood shedd:
to show, that his body is to be considered here apart, not as it was borne of
the Virgin or now is in heaven, but as it was broken and crucified for us, and
his blood likewise apart, not as running in his veins, but as shedd out of his
body; which the Rhemists have told us to be conditions of his person, as he was
in sacrifice and oblation.

And least we should imagine, that his body were otherwise to be considered in
the sacrament then in the sacrifice; in the one alive, as it is now in heaven,
in the other dead, as it was offered upon the cross: the Apostle puts the
matter out of doubt, that not only the minister in offering, but also the
people in receiving, even 1. Cor. 11.26.
as often as they eat this bread and drink this cup, do show the Lords death
until he come. Our elders surely, that held the sacrifice to be given and
received (for so we have heard themselves speak) as well as offered; did not
consider otherwise of Christ in the sacrament then as he was in sacrifice and
oblation. If here therefore, Christ's body be presented as broken and livelesse,
and his blood as shedd forth and severed from his body; and it be most
certain, that there are no such things now really existent any where (as is
confessed on all hands:) then must it follow necessarily, that the bread and
wine are not converted into these things really. The 1. Rhem. in Matthew. 26.26.
Rhemists indeed tell us, that when the Church does offer and sacrifice Christ
daily; he in mystery and sacrament dies. Further then this they durst not go:
for if they had said, he died really; they should thereby not only make
themselves daily killers of Christ, but also directly cross that principle of
the Apostle, Romans 6.9. Christ being raised from the dead dies no more. If then
the body of Christ in the administration of the Eucharist be propounded as
dead (as has bin showed) and die it cannot really but only in mystery and
sacrament: how can it be thought to be contained under the outward elements,
otherwise then in sacrament and mystery? and such as in times past were said
to have received the sacrifice from the hand of the Priest; what other body and
blood could they expect to receive therein, but such as was suitable to the
nature of that sacrifice, to wit, mystical and sacramental?

Coelius Sedulius (to whom Gelasius Bishop of Rome, with his Synod of LXX.
Bishops, gives the title of Venerabilis viri Sedulii Paschale opus, quod
heroicis descripsit versibus, insigni laud praeferimus. Synod. Roman. sub
Gelasio.
venerable Sedulius; and Hildephonsus Toletanus of the Bonus Sedulius, poeta
Evangelicus, orator facundus, scriptor catholicus. Hildephons. Toletan. sermon.
5. de assumpt. Mariae.
good Sedulius, the Evangelicall poet, the eloquent orator, and the catholic
writer) is by Trithemius and others supposed to be the same with our Sedulii
Scoti Hiberniensis, in omnes epistolas Pauli Collectan: excus. Basil. an. 1528.
Sedulius of Scotland (or Ireland) whose Collections are extant upon S. Paul's
Epistles: although I have forborne hitherto to use any of his testimonies,
because I have some reason to doubt, whether he were the same with our Sedulius
or no. But Coelius Sedulius (whatsoever countreyman he was) intimates plainly,
that the things offered in the Christian sacrifice, are the fruit of the corn
and of the vine: ( Sedul. Carm. Paschal. lib. 4.
Denique Pontificum princeps summusque Sacerdos
Quis nisi Christus adest? gemini libaminis author,
Ordine Melchisedech, cui dantur munera semper
Quae sua sunt, segetis fructus, and gaudia vitis.)
or, as he expresses it in his prose, Triticeae sementis cibus suavis, and
amaenae vitis potus amabilis. Id. pros. lib. 4. cap. 14.
the sweet meat of the seed of wheat, and the lovely drink of the pleasant
vine. Of Melchisedek (according to whose order Christ, and he only, was
Priest) our own Sedulius writes thus: Melchisedech vinum and pane^ obtulit
Abraham, in figura^ Christi, corpus and sanguinem suum Deo patri in cruce
offerentis. Sedul. in Hebr. 5.
Melchisedek offered wine and bread to Abraham, for a figure of Christ,
offering his body and blood unto God his father upon the Cross. Where note,
that first he says, Melchisedek offered bread and wine to Abraham, not to
God: and secondly, that he was a figure of Christ offering his body and blood
upon the cross, not in the Eucharist. But we (says Nos vero in
commemorationem Dominicae semel passionis quotidie nostraeque salutis
offerimus. Id. in Hebr. 10.
he) do offer daily, for a commemoration of the Lords passion (once performed)
and our own salvation. and elsewhere, expounding those words of our Savior, Do
this in remembrance of me; he brings in this similitude, used before and
after him by others. Suam memoriam nobis reliquit: que^admodum si* quis peregre
proficiscens, aliquod pignus ei quem diligit derelinquat; ut quotiescunque
illud viderit, possit eius beneficia and amicitias recordari. Id. in 1. Cor. 11.
He left a memory of himself unto us: even as if one that were going a far
journey, should leave some token with him whom he loved; that as often as he
beheld it, he might call to remembrance his benefits and friendship.

Claudius notes, that our Saviors Voluit ante discipulis suis tradere
sacramentu^ corporis and sanguinis sui, quod significavit in fractione corporis
( so it is in my transcript: but it should doubtless ^e panis) and effusione
calicis; and postea ipsum corpus immolari in ara Crucis. Claud. lib. 3. in
Matthew.
pleasure was, first to deliver unto his disciples the sacrament of his body
and blood; and afterward to offer up the body it self upon the altar of the
cross: thereby plainly distinguishing the sacrament from the body represented
thereby. and for the sacramental relation betwixt the one and the other, he
yields this reason. Quia panis corpus confirmat, vinu^ vero sanguine^
operatur in carne: hic ad corpus Christi mystice, illud refertur ad sanguinem.
Id. ibid.
Because bread does confirm the body, and wine does work blood in the flesh:
therefore the one is mystically referred to the body of Christ, the other to his
blood. Which doctrine of Claudius Scotus (that the sacrament is in it own
nature bread and wine, but the body and blood of Christ by mystical relation)
was within fifty or threescore years afterward so fully maintained by
Johannes Scotus in a book that he purposely wrote of that argument: that when
it was alleged and extolled by Berengarius; Pope Leo (the ninth) with his
Bishops assembled in Synodo Vercellensi, ano. Domi. 1050. (which was 235.
years after the time that Claudius wrote his commentaries upon S. Matthew) had
no other means to avoyde it, but by flatt Iohannis Scoti liber de Eucharistia
lectus est, ac damnatus. Lanfranc. de Eucharist. contr. Berengar.
condemning of it. Of what great esteem this John was with king Alfred, may be
seen in William of Malmesbury, Roger Hoveden, Matthew of Westminster and other
writers of the English history. The King himself, in the preface before his
Saxon translation of S. Gregory's Pastoral, professes that he was helped in
that work by Iohanne (...). Aelfred. prafat. in Gregor. Pastoral Saxoni^.
John his Mass Priest. By whom if he did mean this John of ours: you may see,
how in those days a man might be held a Mass Priest, who was far enough
from thinking that he offered up the very body and blood of Christ really
present under the forms of bread and wine; which is the only Mass that our
Romanists take knowledge of.

Of which wonderful point how ignorant our elders were, even this also may be
one argument: that the author of the book of the wonderful things of the holy
Scripture (who is accounted to have lived here, about the year of our Lord
DCLVII.) passes this quite over, which is now esteemed to be the wonder of all
wonders. And yet does he profess, that he Praesertim cum ex mirabilibus
Scripturae Dominicae nil* praeterire disposui, in quibus a ministerio
quotidiano excellere in aliis videntur. Lib. ^. de mirabilib. Scriptur. cap.
21. ( inter opera B. Augustini, tom. 3.)
purposed to pass over nothing of the wonders of the Scripture, wherein they
might seem notably to swerve from the ordinary administration in other things.
Only when he comes to the apocryphal additions of Daniel he tells us, that
what is reported De lacu vero iterum and Abacuk translato in Belis and Draconis
fabula, id circo in hoc ordine non ponitur; quod in authoritate divinae
Scripturae non habentur. Ibid. cap. 32.
touching the lake (or den) and the carrying of Abackuk, in the fable of Bell
and the Dragon, is not therefore placed in this rank, because these things
have not the authority of divine Scripture. as also, when he comes to the
Maccabees: In Macca baeorum ibris etsi aliquid mirabilium numero inserendu^
conveniens fuisse huic ordini inveniatur; de hoc tamen nulla cura fatige bimur:
quia tantum agere proposuimus, ut de divini canonis mirabilibus exi guam
(quamvis ingenioli nostri modulum excedentem) historicam expositionem ex part
aliqua tangeremus. Ibid. cap. 34.
In the books of the Maccabees, says he, howsoever some wonderful things be
found, which might conveniently be inserted into this rank; yet will we not
weary our selves with any care thereof: because we only purposed to touch in
some measure a short historical exposition of the wonderful things contained
in the divine Canon. Which two last sentences I thought good not to pretermitt:
because thereby men may see, that in the distinction of the apocryphal books
from the Canonical, we still retain the tradition of our ancestors; which
the late Romanists have openly forsaken.

Who, as they have increased the Canon of the divine Scriptures, by addition of
other books not received into that rank by the ancient Church: so have they
augmented the number of the Sacraments, by intruding into that reckoning five
new ones; to wit, Confirmation, Penance (which carries sacramental Confession
and Absolution with it) Matrimony, Orders, and Extreme Unction. Of the last of
which I find no mention at all, of the next to that, very frequent mention,
but no where as of a sacrament; in any of our writings, that may appear to
have been written before the Hildebrandine times. Touching the rest, Bernard
reports, that Malachias in his time (which was after Hildebrands days) did
Vsum saluberrimu^ Confessionis, sacramentum Confirmationis, contractum
con^ugiorum (quae omnia aut ignorabant aut negligeba^t) M^lachias de novo
instituit. Bernard in Vit. Mala^^iae.
of the new institute the most wholesome use of Confession, the sacrament of
Confirmation, and the contract of marriages: all which he says the Irish
before were either ignorant of, or did neglect. Which, for the matter of
Confession, may receive some further confirmation from the testimony of
Alcuinus: who writing unto the Scottish (or, as other copies read, the Gothish)
and commending the religious conversation of their laity, who Inter mundanas
occupationes castissimam vitam ratio^abili consideratione degere dicuntur.
Alcuin. epist. 26. edit. H. Can s^^, 71. Andreae Quercetani
in the midst of their worldly employments were said to lead a most chaste
life; condemns notwithstanding another custom, which was said to have
continued in that country. For Dicitur vero neminem ex Laicis suam velle
Confessionem sacerdotibus dare: quos a Deo Christo cum sanctis Apostolis
ligandi solvendique potes^a emaccepisse credimus. Ibid.
it is said (quoth he) that no man of the la^tie will make his confession to
the Priests; whom we believe to have received from the Lord Christ, the power
of binding and loosing, together with the holy Apostles.

They had no reason indeed to hold (as Alcuinus did) that they ought to
confess unto a Priest all the sins they could remember: but upon special
occasions, they did (no doubt) both publicly and privately make confession of
their faults; as well that they might receive counsel and direction for their
recoverie, as that they might be made partakers of the benefit of the keys,
for the quieting of their troubled consciences. Whatsoever the Gothish did
herein: sure we are, that this was the practice of the ancient Scottish and
Irish. So we read of one Fiachna or Fechnau^, that being touched with remorse
for some offense committed by him, he fell at S. Colmes feet, lamented
bitterly, and Coram omnibus qui ibide^ erant peccata sua confessus est,
Adamnan. Vit. Columb. lib. 1. cap. 16. ( vel 20. in MS.)
confessed his sins before all that were there present. Whereupon the holy
man, weeping together with him, is said to have returned this answer: Surge
fili, and consolare: dimissa sunt tua, quae co^misisti, peccamina. quia sicut
scriptu^ est; Cor contritu^ and humiliatu^ Deus non spernit. Ibid.
Rise up, Son, and be comforted, thy sins which thou have committed are
forgiven; because (as it is written) a contrite and an humbled heart God does
not despise. We read also of Adamanus, that being very much terrified with
the remembrance of a grievous sin committed by him in his youth; he Accedens
ad Sacerdotem, a quo sibi sperabat iter salutis posse demonstrari; confessus
est r^atum suum, petiitque ut consilium sibi daret, quo posset fugere a ventura
Dei ira. Bed. lib. 4. histor. cap. 25.
resorted unto a Priest, by whom he hoped the way of salvation might be showed
unto him, he confessed his guilt, and entreated that he would give him
counsel, whereby he might flee from the wrath of God that was to come.

Now the counfell commonly given unto the Penitent after Confession, was; that
he should Confessa dignis (ut imperabat) poenitentiae fructibus abstergerent.
Id. ibid. cap. 27.
wipe away his sins by meet fruits of repentance: which course Bid observes
to have been usually prescribed by our Cuthbert. For penances were then
exacted, as testimonies of the sincerity of that inward repentance which was
necessarily required for obtaining remission of the sin: and so had reference
to the taking away of the guilt, and not of the temporal punishment remaining
after the forgiveness of the guilt; which is the new found use of penances,
invented by our later Romanists. One old Penitential Canon we find laid down
in a Synod held in this country about the year of our Lord CCCCXL. by S.
Patrick, Auxilius, and Isserninus: which is as follows. Christianus qui
occiderit, aut fornicationem fecerit, aut more Gentilium ad aruspicem meaverit;
per singula crimina annu^ poenitentiae agat, impleto cum testibus veniat anno
Poenitentiae, and postea resolvetur a Sacerdote. Synod. Patricij, Auxilij and
Issernini MS. in Bibliotheca Collegij Benedict. Cantabrig.
A Christian who has killed a man, or committed fornication, or gone unto a
southsayer after the manner of the Gentiles, for every of those crimes shall do
a year of Penance: when his year of penance is accomplished, he shall come
with witnesses, and afterward he shall be absolved by the Priest. These Bishops
did take order (we see) according to the discipline generally used in those
times, that the penance should first be performed; and when long and good
proof had been given by that means of the truth of the parties repentance,
they wished the Priest to impart unto him the benefit of Absolution* whereas by
the new devise of sacramental penance the matter is now far more easily
transacted: by virtue of the keys the sinner is instantly of attrite made
contrite, and thereupon as soon as he has made his Confession he presently
receives his Absolution: after this, some sorry penance is imposed, which upon
better consideration may be converted into pence; and so a quick end is made of
many a foul business.

But for the right use of the keys, we fully accord with Claudius: that
Necnon etiam nunc in Episcopis ac Presbyteris omni Ecclesiae officium idem
committitur: ut videlicet agnitis peccantiu^ caussis, quoscunque humiles ac
vere poenitentes aspexerint, hos jam a timore perpetuae mortis miserantes
absolvant; quos vero in peccatis quae egerint persistere cognoverint, illos
perennibus supplicus obligandos insinuent. Claud in Matthew. lib. 2.
the office of remitting and retayning sins which was given unto the
Apostles, is now in the Bishops and Priests committed unto every Church.
namely, that having taken knowledge of the causes of such as have sinned, as
many as they shall behold humble and truly penitent, those they may now with
compassion absolve from the fear of everlasting death; but such as they shall
discern to persist in the sins which they have committed, those they may
declare to be bound over unto never ending punishments. And in thus absolving
such as be truly penitent, we willingly yield, that the Pastors of Gods Church
do remit sins after their manner, that is to say, ministerially and
improperly: so that the privilege of forgiving sins properly and absolutely,
be still reserved unto God alone. Which is at large set out by the same
Claudius; where he expounds the history of the man sick of the palsy, that
was cured by our Savior in the ninth of S. Matthew. For following Bid, upon
that place, he writes thus. Verum dicunt Scribae, quia nemo dimittere peccata
nisi solus Deus potest; qui per eos quoque dimittit, quibus dimittendi tribuit
potestate^. Et ideo Christus vere Deus esse probatur; quia dimittere peccata
quasi Deus potest. Verum Deo testimonium reddunt; sed persona^ Christi negando
falluntur. Id. in Matthew. lib. 1.
The Scribes say true, that none can forgive sins but God alone; who also
forgiveth by them, to whom he has given the power of forgiving. And therefore
is Christ proved to be truly God; because he forgiveth sins as God. They
render a true testimony unto God: but in denying the person of Christ, they are
deceived. and again. Si and Deus est, juxta Psalmistam, qui quantum distat
Oriens ab occasu elongavit a nobis iniquitates nostras; and silius hominis
potestatem habet in terra dimittendi peccata: ergo idem ipse and Deus and
filius hominis est. ut and homo Christus per divinitatis suae potentiam peccata
dimittere possit; and idem Deus Christus per humanitatis suae fragilitatem pro
peccatoribus more. Ibid.
If it be God that, according to the Psalmist, removes our sins as far
from us, as the East is distant from the West; and the Son of man has power
upon earth to forgive sins: therefore he himself is both God and the Son
of man. that both the man Christ might by the power of his divinity forgive
sins; and the same Christ being God, might by the frailty of his humanity
dye for sinners. and out of S. Hierome: Ostendit se Deum, qui potest cordis
occulta cognoscere; and quodam modo tacens loquitur. Eadem majestate and
potentia qua cogitationes vestras intucor, possum and hominibus delicta
dimittere. Ibid.
Christ shows himself to be God, who can know the hidden things of the
heart; and after a sort holding his peace he speaks. By the same majesty and
power, whereby I behold your thoughts, I can also forgive sins unto men. In
like manner does the author of the book of the wonderful things of the
Scripture observe these In paralytico a quatuor viris portato, quatuor divina
opera cernuntur. Dum dimittuntur ei peccata, and praesentis aegritudinis plaga
verbo tunc solvitur, and cogitationibus in ore Dei omnia scrutantis
respondetur. Auth. lib. de Mirabilib. S. Scriptur. lib. 3. cap. 7.
divine works in the same history: the forgiving of sins, the present cure
of the disease, and the answering of the thoughts by the mouth of God who
searches all things. With whom, for the property of beholding the secret
thoughts, Sedulius also does concur, in those sentences. Deus solus potest
occulta hominum scire. Sedul. in Romans 2.
God alone can know the hidden things of men. Corda hominum nosse solius Dei
est, and mentis secreta agnoscere. Id. ibid.
To know the hearts of men, and to discern the secrets of the mind, is the
privilege of God alone.

That the contract of Marriages, was either unknown or neglected by the Irish,
before Malachias did institute the same anew among them (as Bernard does seem
to intimate) is a thing almost incredible. although Nondum decimas vel
primitias solvunt: nondum matrimonia contrahunt; non ince^^us vitant. Girald.
Cambr. Topograph. Hibern. distinct. 3. cap. 19.
Giraldus Cambrensis does complain that the case was little better with them
after the time of Malachias also. The licentiousness of those ^uder times, I
know, was such, as may easily induce us to believe, that a great both neglect
and abuse of Gods ordinance did get footing among this people. Which enormities
Malachias, no doubt, did labor to reform: and withal peradventure brought in
some new matters, not known here before; as he was very desirous, his
countrymen should generally conform themselves unto the traditions and
customs of the Church of Rome. But our purpose is here only to deal with the
doctrine and practice of the elder times: in which, first, that Marriage was
not held to be a sacrament, may be collected from Videtur indicare, esse
aliquid quod donum quidem ^it, non tamen spirituale: ut Nuptiae. Sedul. in Romans
1.
Sedulius, who reckons it among those things, which are gifts indeed, but not
spiritual. Secondly, for the degrees of Consanguinitie hindering marriage, the
Synod attributed unto S. Patrick seems to refer us wholly unto the
Leviticall law; prescribing therein De consanguinitate in coniugio. Intelligite
quid Lex loquitur, non minus nec plus. Quod autem observatur apud nor, ut
quatuor genera dividantur; nec vidisse dicunt nec legissae. Synod. Patrie. cap
29.
neither less nor more then the Law speaks: and particularly, against
matching with the wife of the deceased brother (which was the point so much
questioned in the case of King Henry the eight) this Audi decreta Synodi super
istis. Frater thorum defuncti fratris non ascendat: Domino dicente, Erunt duo
in carne una. Ergo uxor fratris tui soror tua est. Ibid. cap. 25. and in
Excerpti^ e Iure Sacerdotali Egber^i archiepiscoper Hucarium Levitam. MS.
Synodicall decree is there urged. The brother may not ascend into the bed of
his deceased brother: the Lord having said, They two shall be one flesh.
Therefore the wife of thy brother, is thy sister. Yet how far this abuse
prevayled afterward in this country, and how foul a crime it was esteemed to
be by others abroad (notwithstanding the Pope does now by his Bulls of
dispensation take upon him to make a fair matter of it) may easily be
perceived by this censure of Giraldus: Quinimo (quod valde detestabile est, and
non tantum fidei, sed and cuilibet honestati valde contrarium) fratres pluribus
per Hiberniam locis fratrum defunctorum uxores, non dico ducunt, sed traducunt,
imo verius seducu^t; dum turpiter eas, and tam incestuose cognoscunt: vetoris
in hoc testamenti non medullae sed cortici adhaerentes, veteresque libentius in
vitiis quam virtutibus imitari volente^. Girald. Cambr. Topograph. Hibern.
distinct. 3. cap. 19.
Moreover, says he, which is very detestable, and most contrary not only to
the faith but also unto common honesty; brethren in many places throughout
Ireland do, I say not marry, but mar rather and seduce the wives of their
deceased brothers, while in this sort they filthily and incestuously have
knowledge of them: cleaving herein not to the marrow but to the bark of the
old testament, and desiring to imitate the ancient in vices more willingly
then in virtues.

Thirdly, touching divorces, we read in Sedulius; that Non licet secundum
proeceptum Domini ut dimittatur conjunx, nisi caussa fornicationis. Sedul. in
1. Cor. 7.
it is not lawful, according to the precept of our Lord, that the wife should
be put away, but for the cause of fornication. and in the Synod ascribed to S.
Patrick. Non licet viro dimittere uxorem nisi ob caussam fornicationis. ac si
dicat, ob hanc caussam. Vnde si ducat alteram, velut post mortem prioris, non
vetant. Synod. Patric. cap. 26.
It is not lawful for a man to put away his wife, but for the cause of
fornication, as if he should say; for this cause, he may. Whence if he marry
another, as it were after the death of the former, they forbid it not. Who they
were, that did not forbid this second marriage, is not there expressed: that S.
Patrick himself was of another mind, would appear by this constitution
following; which in another ancient Canon-book I found cited under his name. Si
alicujus uxor fornicata fuerit cum alio viro: non adducet aliam uxorem, quandiu
viva fuerit uxor prima. Si forte conversa fuerit, and agat poenitentiam,
suscipiet eam; and se^^iet ei in vicem ancillae: and annum integrum in pane and
aqua per mensuram poeni^eat; nec in uno lecto permaneant. Ex libro Canonum
Cottoniano, titulorum 66.
If any man's wife have committed adultery with another man: he shall not
marry another wife, as long as the first wife shall be alive. If peradventure
she be converted, and do penance: he shall receive her; and she shall serve
him in the place of a maid servant. Let her for a whole year do penance in
bread and water, and that by measure: neither let them remain in the same bed
together. Fourthly, concerning single life, I do not find in any of our
records, that it was generally imposed upon the Clergy; but the contrary
rather. For in the Synod held by S. Patrick, Auxilius, and Isserninus; there is
a special order taken, Quicunque Clericus, ab Ostiario usque ad Sacerdote^,
sine tunica visus fuerit, etc. and uxor ejus si non velato capite ambulaverit:
pariter a laicis contemnentur, and ab Ecclesia separentur. Synod. Patric.
Auxil. Issernin.
that their wives shall not walk abroad, with their heads uncovered. And S.
Patrick himself confesses (at leastwise the Confession which goes under his
name says so; and Probus, Iocelinus, and others that write his life, agree
therewith) that he Patrem habui Calpornium Diaconem, filium quondam Potiti
presbyteri. S. Patricij Confessio. MS.
had to his father Calpurnius a Deacon, and to his grandfather Potitus a
Priest. True it is, that for the most part the Clergy here did live unmarried:
but the special reason thereof was, because Fere omnes Hiberniae praelati de
monasteriis in clerum electi sunt. Girald. Cambren. Topograph. Hibern.
distinct. 3. cap. 29.
almost all the prelates of Ireland were chosen into the Clergy out of
monasteries, not because that secular Priests were by any law debarred from
marriage.

For our monasteries in ancient time were the seminaries of the ministry:
being as it were so many Colleges of learned divines, whereunto the people did
usually resort for instruction, and from whence the Church was wont continually
to be supplied with able ministers. The benefit whereof was not only
contained within the limits of this Island, but did extend it self to foreign
countries likewise. For this was it that drew Ecgbertus cum Ceadda adolescente
and ipse adolescens in Hibernia monasticam in orationibus and continentia and
meditatione divinarum scripturarum vita^ sedulus agebat. Bed. lib. 4. ^ist.
cap. 3.
Egbert and Ceadda (for example) into Ireland; that they might there lead a
monastical life in prayers and continency and meditation of the holy
Scriptures: and hence were those famous monasteries planted in England by
Aidan, Finan, Colman, and others; unto which Sed and diebus Dominicis ad
ecclesiam sive ad monasteria certatim, non reficiendi corporis, sed erudiendi
sermonis Dei gratia conflueba^t. Id. lib. 3. cap. 26.
the people flockt apace on the Lords day; not for the feeding of their body,
but for the learning of the word of God, as Beda witnesses. Yea this was the
principal means, whereby the knowledge both of the Scriptures and of all
other good learning was preserved, in that inundation of babarisme, wherewith
the whole West was in a manner overwhelmed. Hitherto (says Hactenus videri
poterat actum esse cum sapientiae studiis; nisi semen Deus servasset in aliquo
mundi angulo. In Scotis and Hibernis haeserat aliquid adhuc de doctrina
cognitionis Dei and honestatis civilis, quod nullus fuerit in ultimis illis
mundi finibus armoru^ terror. etc. Et summa^ possumus ibi conspicere and
adorare Dei bonitatem; quod in Scotis, and locis, ubi nemo putasset, tam
numerosi coaluerint sub strictissima disciplina caetus Jacob. Curio, lib. 2.
rerum Chronology.
Curio) it might seem that the studies of wisdom should quite have perished;
unless God had reserved a seed in some corner of the world. Among the Scottish
and the Irish something as yet remained of the doctrine of the knowledge of God
and of civil honesty; because there was no terror of arms in those utmost
ends of the world. And we may there behold and adore the great goodness of
God; that among the Scotts, and in those places where no man would have thought
it, so many great companies should be gathered together under a most strict
discipline.

How strict their discipline was, may appear partly by the Rule and partly by
the Daily penances of Monks; which are yet extant of Columbanus his writing.
In the later of these, for the disobedience of Monks these penances are
prescribed. Si quis frater inobedie^s fuerit; duos dies uno paxmate and aqua.
Si quis dicit, Non faciam; tres dies uno paxmatio and aqua. Si quis murmurat;
duos dies, uno paxmatio and aqua. Si quis veniam non p^tit, aut dicit
excusatione^; duos dies, uno paxmatio and aqua. Columban. lib de quotidianis
Poenitemijs monachor. cap. 10.
If any brother be disobedient; he shall fast two days, with one biscuit and
water. If any say, I will not do it; three days, with one biscuit and water.
If any murmr; two days, with one biscuit and water. If any do not ask
leave, or tell an excuse; two days, with one biscuit and water. and so in other
particulars. In his Rule, these good lessons does he give unto his Monks,
among many others. That Quid prodest, si virgo corpore sit, and non sit virgo
mente? Id. in Regula monachor. cap. 8.
it profited them little, if they were virgins in body, and were not virgins in
mind. that they Quotidie proficiendum est: sicut quotidie orandum, quot
^^ieque est legendum. Ibid. cap. 5.
should daily profit, as they did daily pray, and daily read. that Bona vane
laudata Pharisaei perierunt: and peccata publicani accusata evanuerunt Non
exeat igitur verbum grande de ore Monachi: ne suus grandis pereat labor. Ibid.
cap. 7.
the good things of the Pharisee being vainly praised were lost, and the sins
of the Publican being accused vanished away: and therefore that a great word
should not come out of the mouth of a Monk, least his great labor should
perish. They were not taught to vaunt of their state of perfection, and works
of supererogation: or to argue from thence (as Celestius the Pelagian monk
sometime did) that Tantam nos habere per naturam liberi arbitrii non peccandi
possibilitatem: ut plus etia^ quam praeceptum est, faciamus: quoniam perpetua
servatur a plerisque virginitas, quae praecepta non est; cum ad non peccandum
praecepta implere sufficiat Augustine. de gestis Pelagij. cap. 13.
by the nature of their free will they had such a possibility of not sinning,
that they were able also to do more then was commanded; because they did
observe perpetual virginity which is not commanded, whereas for not sinning
it is sufficient to fulfill the precepts. It was one of the points which Gallus
(the scholar of Columbanus) delivered in his sermon preached at Constance;
that our Savior Ipsis Apostolis and eorum sequacibus ita bonum virginitatis
arripiendum persuasit: ut hoc scirent non humanae industriae, sed muneris esse
divini S. Gallus, in sermon. habit Constant.
did so persuade the Apostles and their followers to lay hold upon the good of
virginity; that yet they should know, it was not of humane industry, but of
divine gift. and it is a good observation which we read in Claudius: that Non
in solo rerum corporearum nitore, sed etiam in ipsis sordibus luctuosis esse
posse jactantiam: and eo periculosiorem, quo sub nomine servitutis Dei decipit.
Claud. lib. 1. in Matthew.
not only in the splendour of bodily things, but also in mournful abasing of
ones self, there may be boasting; and that so much the more dangerous, as it
deceives under the name of the service of God.

Our Monks were religious in deed, and not in name only; far from the
hypocrisy, pride, idleness and uncleanenesse of those evil beasts and
slothful bellies that afterward succeeded in their room. Under color of
forsaking all, they did not hook all unto themselves; nor under semblance of
devotion did they devour widows houses: they held begging to be no point of
perfection; but Act. 20.35.
remembered the words of our Lord Jesus, how he said, It is a more blessed thing
to give rather then to take. When King Sigebert made large offers unto
Columbanus and his companions, to keep them within his dominions in France: he
received such another answer from them, as (...); Eusebius l^b. 1. hist. cap. ult.
Thaddaeus in the Ecclesiastical history is said to have given unto Abgarus
the governor of Edessa: Qui nostra reliquimus, ut secundum Evangelicam
^ussionem Dominum sequeremur, non debemus alienas amplecti divitias; ne forte
praevaricatores simus divini mandati. Walafrid. Strab. Vit. Galli, lib. 1. cap.
2.
We who have forsaken our own, that according to the commandment of the
Gospel we might follow the Lord, ought not to embrace other men's riches; least
peradventure we should prove transgressors of the divine commandment. How then
did these men live; will you say? Walafridus Strabus tells us, that Alii
hortum laboraverunt, alii arbores pomiferas excoluerunt: B. vero Gallus texebat
retia, etc. and de eode^ labor assiduas populo benedictiones exhibuit. Ibid.
cap. 6.
some of them wrought in the garden, others dressed the orchard; Gallus made
netts and took fish, wherewith he not only relieved his own company, but was
helpefull also unto strangers. So Bid reports of Cuthbert, that when he
retired himself unto an anchoretical life, he Et primum quide^ permodieum ab
eis pane^, quo vesceretur accipiebat, ac suo bibebat e sonte: postmodum vero
proprio manuu^ labor juxta exempla patru^ vivere magis apt^ ducebat. Rogavit
ergo afferri sibi instrume^ta quibus terram exerceret, and triticum quod
sereret. Bed Vit. Cuthbert. prof. cap. 19. Vid. lib. 4. hist. eccles. cap. 28.
first indeed received a little bread from his brethren to feed upon, and drank
out of his own well; but afterward he thought it more fit to live by the
work of his own hands, after the example of the Fathers: and therefore
entreated, that instruments might be brought him wherewith he might till the
earth, and corn that he might sow. Id. in Car^. de vis. Cuthbert. cap. 17.
Quique suis cupiens victum conquirere palmis;
Incultam pertentat humum proscindere ferro,
Et sator edomitis anni spem credere glebis.
The like does he relate of Id. lib. 3. hist. eccles. cap. 19.
Furseus; and Bonifacius of Bonifac. in Vita lavini, page 240.
Livinus; and Theodorus Campidonensis (or whosoever else wrote that book) of
Theod. Campid. Vit. Magni, lib. 1 cap. 5. edit. G^ldasti, 6. Canisij.
Gallus, Magnoaldus, and the rest of the followers of Columbanus; that they got
their living by the labor of their own hands. And the 2 Thessalonians. 3.12.
Apostles rule is generally laid down for all Monks, in the life of Furseus:
Qui in monasteriis degu^t, cum silentio operantes, suum panem manducent. Vit.
Fursei.
They which live in monasteries should work with silence, and eat their own
bread.

I pass by a like sentence, which we read in the life of S. Brendan; Monachum
oporter labor man^um suar^ vesci and vestiri. Vit. Brendani.
A Monk ought to be fedd and clothed with the labor of his own hands: that
is more memorable, which others do write of the same Brendan; that he Tribus
monachorum (qua^ suis, sibi ipsi laboribus victu^, manibus operando
suppeditabant) millibus praefuisse creditur. Nicol. Harpifeld. histor.
Ecclesiast. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 25.
governed three thousand Monks, who by their own labors and handy-worke did
earne their living. Such was the monastery of Magio, founded in this country
by Bishop Colman for the intertainment of the English: where they Ad exemplum
venerabilium patrum, sub regula and abbate canonico, in magna continentia and
sinceritate proprio labor man^um vivunt. Bed. li. 4. hist. ecclesiast. cap. 4.
did live, according to the example of the reverend Fathers (as Bede writes)
under a rule and a^ canonical abbot, in great continency and sincerity, with
the labor of their own hands. Such also was the monastery of Mailros planted
by Bishop Aidan and his followers in Northumberland; where S. Cuthbert had his
education: who affirmed, that Iure, inquit, est coenobitaru^ vita miranda, qui
Abbatis per omnia subjiciuntur imperiis; ad ejus arbitrium cuncta vigilandi,
orandi, jejuna^di, atque operandi tempora moderantur. Bed. Vit Cuthbert. pros
cap. 22.
the life of such monks was justly to be admired, which were in all things
subject to the commands of their Abbot; and ordered all the times of their
watching, praying, fasting, and working, according to his direction.

Id. Carm. cap. 20.
Excubiasque, famemque, preces, manuumque laborem
Ad votum gaudent proni fraenare regentis.
As for their fasting (for of their watching and praying there is no question
made; and of their working we have already spoken sufficiently) by the rule of
Columbanus, they were Quotidic^ jeiunandu^ est, sicut quotidie reficiendu^ est.
Columban. Regul cap. 5.
every day to fast, and every day to eat: that by this means, Quia haec est
vera discretio, ut possibilitas spiritalis profectus cum abstinentia carnem
macerante retentetur. Ibid.
the enabling of them for their spiritual proficiency might be retained,
together with the abstinence that did macerate the flesh. He would therefore
have them Ideo quotidie edendum est, quia quotidie proficiendum est. Ibid.
every day to eat, because they were every day to profit; and because Si enim
modum abstinentia excesserit, vitium non virtus erit. Ibid.
abstinence, if it did exceed measure, would pro^e a vice and not a virtue. and
he would have them to fast every day too, that is, not to eat any meat at
all (for other fastes were not known in those days) until evening. Let the
food of Monks (says Cibus sit vilis and vespertinus Monachorum, satietatem
fugiens and potus ebrietatem; ut and sustineat, and non noceat. Ibid.
he) be mean, and taken at evening; flying satietie, and excess of drink:
that it may both sustain them, and not hurt them. This was the daily fasting
and feeding of them that lived according to Columbanus his rule. Such as
followed the instructions of Bishop Cuius exemplis informati, tempore illo,
religiosi quique viri ac foeminae, consuetudinem fecerunt per totum annum,
(excepta remissione quinquagesimae Paschalis) quarta and sexta sabbati i^iunium
ad nonam usque horam protelare. Bed. lib. 3. hist. eccles. cap. 5.
Aidan, observed this kind of fast on Wednesdayes and Fridayes only: upon
which days they forbear eating of any meat until the ninth hour, that is
to say, until three of the clock in the afternoon, according unto our
account. So Bishop Cedd (who was brought up at Lindisfarne with Aidan and
Finan) keeping a strict fast, upon a special occasion, in the time of Lent,
did Quibus diebus cunctis, excepta Dominica, i^iunium ad vesperam iuxta morem
protelans; nec tunc nisi panis permodicum, and unum ovum gallinaceum, cum parvo
lacte aqua mixte percipiebat. Ibid. cap. 23.
every day, except the Lords day, continue his fast, (as the manner was) until
the evening; and then also did eat nothing but a small pittance of bread, and
one egg, with a little milk mingled with water. Where by the way you may
note, that in those days eggs were eaten in Lent, and the Sondayes excepted
from fasting, even then when the abstinence was precisely and in more then an
ordinary manner observed.

But generally for this point of the difference of meals, it is well noted by
Claudius out of S. Augustine, that Ostendens evidenter, filios sapientiae
intelligere, nec in abstinendo nec in manducando esse iustitiam; sed in
aequanimitate tolerandi inopiam, and temperantia per abundantiam non se
corrumpendi, atque opportune sumendi vel non sumendi ea, quorum non usus sed
concupiscentia reprehendenda est. Claud. lib. 2. in Matthew.
the children of wisdom do understand, that neither in abstayning nor in
eating is there any virtue; but in contentedness of bearing the want, and
temperance of not corrupting a man's self by abundance, and of opportunely
taking or not taking those things, of which not the use but the concupiscence
is to be blamed. and in the life of Furseus, the hypocrisy of them is justly
taxed, that being Sunt nonnulli, qui spiritualibus vitiis impugnantur; sed his
omissis, corpus in abstinentia affligunt. Vit. S. Fursei.
assaulted with spiritual vices, do yet omit the care of them, and afflict
their body with abstinence: who Multi enim cibis, quos Deus ad percipiendum cum
gratiarum action creavit, abstinentes, haec nefanda quasi licita sumunt; hoc
est, superbiam, avaritiam, invidiam, falsum testimonium, blasphemiam. Ibid.
abstayning from meats, which God has created to be received with
thankesgiving, fall to wicked things, as if they were lawful; namely to pride,
covetousness, envy, false witnessing, backbiting. And so much for that matter.

Now concerning the Catholic Church, our Doctors taught with S. Gregory; that
God Habet vinea^, universam scilicet Ecclesiam; quae ab Abel justo usque ad
ultimum electum qui in fine mundi nasciturusest, quot sanctos protulit, quasi
tot palmites misit, Claud. lib. 2. in Matthew.
has a vineyard, to wit, the universal Church, which from just Abel until
the last of the elect that shall be borne in the end of the world, as many
Saints as it has brought forth* so many branches (as it were) has it budded.
that Congregatio quippe iustoru^, regnum coelorum dicitur; quod est Ecclesia
iustorum. Id lib. 3. in Matt.
the congregation of the just is called the kingdom of heaven; which is the
Church of the just. that Ecclesiae filii sunt omnes ab institutione generis
humani usque nunc, quotquot iusti et sancti esse potuerunt. Id* lib. 2. in
Matthew.
the sons of the Church be all such as from the beginning of mankind until
now* have attained to be just and holy. that His and caeteris instruimur, tam
Apostolos omnesque credentes* quam ipsam quoque Ecclesiam, columna^ in
Scripturis appellari; and nihil interesse de corpore quid dicatur an membris,
cum and corpus dividatur in membra, and membra sint corporis. Id. in Gal. 2. ex
Hieronymo.
what is said of the body, may be said also of the members; and that in this
respect, as well the Apostles and all believers, as the Church it self, have
the title of a pillar given them in the Scriptures. that Ecclesias vocat, quas
postea errore arguit depravatas. Ex quo noscendum, dupliciter Ecclesiam posse
dici: and eam, quae non habeat maculam aut rugam, and vere corpus Christi sit;
and eam, quae in Christi nomine absque plenis perfectisque virtutibus
congregetur Id. in Galat. 1. ex eodem.
the Church may be considered two manner of ways: both that which neither has
spot nor wrinkle and is truly the body of Christ, and that which is gathered in
the name of Christ without full and perfect virtues; which notwithstanding by
the warrant of the Apostle, may have the name of the Church given unto it,
although it be depraved with error. that Ecclesiam non habituram maculam neque
rugam dicitur, respectu futurae vitae Sedul. in Ephesians. 1.
the Church is said not to have spot or wrinkle, in respect of the life to
come. that when the Apostle says; In a great house there are not only vessels
of gold, etc. but some to honor and some to dishonor: (2. Tim. 2.20.) by this
Magnam domum non Ecclesiam dicit (ut quidam putant) quae non habet maculam
neque rugam: sed mundum, in quo zizania sunt mixta tritico. Id. in 2. Tim. 2.
great house he does not understand the Church (as some have thought) which
has not spot nor wrinkle: but the world, in which the tares are mingled with
the wheat. that yet in Sancta Ecclesia december Virginibus similis denuntiatur:
in qua quia mali cum bonis and reprobi cum electis admixti sunt, recte similis
virginibus prudentibus and fatuis esse perhibetur. Claud. lib. 3. in Matthew.
the holy Church also, the evil are mingled with the good, and the reprobate
with the elect: and that in this respect it is resembled unto the wise and
foolish virgins; as also to Per has Regis nuptias praesens Ecclesia designatur;
in qua cum bonis and mali convenient. Id. lib. eod.
the Kings marriage, by which this present Church is designed, wherein the good
and the bad do meet together. So that In hac ergo Ecclesia, nec mali esse sine
bonis, nec boni esse sine malis possunt: quos tamen sancta Ecclesia and nunc
indiscrete suscipit, and postmodum in egressione discernit Id. ibid.
in this Church, neither the bad can be without the good, nor the good without
the bad: whom the holy Church notwithstanding does both now receive
indifferently, and separate afterward at their going from hence.

They taught further, that Nonnunquam Ecclesia tantis gentilium pressuris, non
solum afflicta, sed and faedata est; ut, si fieri possit, rede^ptor ipsius eam
prorsus deseruisse ad tempus videretur. Id. lib. 2. in Matt.
the Church sometimes is not only afflicted but also defiled with such
oppressions of the gentiles; that if it were possible, her redeemer might seem
for a time utterly to have forsaken her: and that, in the raging times of
Antichrist, Ecclesia non apparebit; impiis tunc persecutoribus ultra modum
saevientibus. Id. lib. 3. in Matthew.
the Church shall not appear; by reason that the wicked persecutors shall then
exercise their cruelty beyond all measure. that in those Temporibus Antichristi
non solum tormenta crebriora and acerbiora, quam prius consueverant, ingerenda
sunt fidelibus; sed (quod gravius est) signorum quoque operatio eos qui
tormenta ingerunt, comitabitur: test Apostolo, qui ait; Cuius est adventus
secundum operationem Satanae, in omni seductione, signis, and prodigiis
mendacii. Id. lib. cod.
times of Antichrist, not only more often and more bitter torments shall be
put upon the faithful, then before were wont to be; but (which is more
grievous) the working of miracles also shall accompany those that inflict the
torments: as the Apostle witnesses, saying; Whose coming is after the working
of Satan, with all seduction, signs, and lying wonders. namely, Praestigiosis
sicut ante praedictum est; Dabunt signa, ita ut seducantur, si fieri porest,
etiam electi. per phantasticam virtutem: sicut Iamnes and Mambres coram
Pharaone fecerunt. Sedul. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
juggling ones: as it was foretold before; They shall show such signs that, if
it were possible, the very elect should be deceived by such a fantastical
power, as Iamnes and Mambres wrought withal before Pharao. Quis ergo ad fidem
convertitur incredulus? cuius iam credentis non pavet and concutitur fides?
quando persecutor pietatis fit etiam operator virtutis: idemque ipse qui
tormentis saevit ut Christus negetur, provocat miraculis ut Antichristo
credatur. Claud. lib. 3. in Matthew.
What unbeleever therefore (say they) will then be converted unto the faith?
and who is he that already believes, whose faith trembles not and is not
shaken? when the persecuter of piety is the worker of wonders: and the same
man that exercises cruelty with torments, that Christ may be denied;
provokes by miracles, that Antichrist may be believed? And Quam ergo mundo and
simplici oculo opus est, ut inveniatur via sapientiae, cui tantae malorum and
perversorum hominum deceptiones erroresque obstrepunt? quas omnes necesse est
evadere, hoc est, venire ad certissimam pacem, and immobilem stabilitatem
sapientiae. Id. lib. 1. in Matthew.
what a pure and a single eye is there need of, that the way of wisdom may be
found; against which, so great deceivings and errors of evil and perverse men,
do make such a noise? all which notwithstanding men must pass through; and so
come to most certain peace, and the unmovable stabilitie of wisdom.

Hence, concerning Miracles, they give us these instructions. First, that Nec
si s^ Angelus nobis ostendat ad seducendos nos subornatus fallaciis patris sui
Diaboli, praevalere debebit adversum nos: neque si virtus ab aliquo facta sict,
sicut dicitur a Simone Mago in aere volasse. Sedul. in Romans 8.
neither if an Angel should show himself unto us to seduce us, being suborned
with the deceipts of his father the Devil, ought he to prevayle against us;
neither if a miracle should be done by any one, as it is said of Simon Magus
that he did fly in the air: Neque signa vos terreant, tanquam per Spiritum
facta: quia hoc and Salvator praemonuit. Id. in 2 Thessal. 2.
neither that signs should terrify us, as done by the Spirit; because that
our Savior also has given us warning of this before hand. (Matthew. 24.24, 25.)
Secondly, that Hic ostenditur, crescente fide signa cessare: quando fidelium
caussa danda esse praedicantur. Id. in 1. Cor. 14.
the faith having increased, miracles were to cease; forasmuch as they are
declared to have been given for their sakes that believe not. and therefore
that Vnde nunc cum fidelium numerositas excrevit, intra sanctam ecclesiam multi
sunt qui vitam virtutum tenent and signa virtutum non habent: quia frustra
miraculum foris ostenditur, si deest quod intus operetur. Nam iuxta Magistri
gentium voce^: Li^guae in signum sunt, non fidelibus sed infidelibus. Claud.
lib. 1. in Matthew.
now when the number of the faithful is grown, there be many within the holy
Church that retain the life of virtues, and yet have not those signs of
virtues: because a miracle is to no purpose showed outwardly, if that be
wanting which it should work inwardly. For according to the saying of the
Master of the Gentiles; Languages are for a sign, not to the faithful but to
infidells. (1. Cor. 14.22.) Thirdly, that the working of miracles is no good
argument to prove the holiness of them that be the instruments thereof: and
therefore Qualia propter infideles cum fecerit Dominus, monuit tamen ne talibus
decipiamur, arbitrantes ibi esse invisibilem sapientiam, ubi miraculum visibile
viderimus. Adiungit ergo and dicit. Multi dicent mihi in illa die, Domine,
Domine: nonne in nomine tuo prophetavimus, and in tuo nomine daemonia ejecimus,
and in tuo nomine virtutes multas fecimus? Id. lib. eod.
when the Lord does such things for the convincing of infidels, he yet gives
us warning that we should not be deceived thereby, supposing invisible
wisdom to be there, where we shall behold a visible miracle. For he says:
Many shall say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord; have we not prophesied in thy
name, and in thy name cast out Devils, and in thy name done many miracles?
(Matthew. 7.22.) Fourthly, that Ille Deum tentat, qui iactantiae suae vitio,
superfluam and inutilem vult ostentare virtutem. Quid enim utilitatis habet,
quid co^modi confert; si praeceps hinc in plana descendero? etc. Id lib. eod.
he tempts God, who for his own vain glory will make show of a superfluous
and unprofitable miracle. such as that (for example) was, whereunto the Devil
tempted our Savior, Matt. 4.6. to come down headlong from the pinnacle of the
Temple unto the plain. Inane est enim omne miraculum, quod utilitatem saluti
non operatur humanae Ib. d.
every miracle being vain, which works not some profit unto man's
salvation. Whereby we may easily discern, what to judge of that infinite
number of idle miracles, wherewith the lives of our Saints are every where
stuffed: many whereof we may justly censure (as Amphiloch. in Iambi^ ad
Selencum.
Amphilochius does the tales that the Poets tell of their Gods) for (...),
Fables, of laughter worthy, and of tears;
Yea some of them also we may rightly brand, as (...),
Unseemly fables, and Devils documents.
For what (for example) can be more unseemely, and tend further to the
advancement of the doctrine of Devils, then that which Cogitosus relates in
the life of S. Brigid? that she, for saving the credit of a Nun that had
been gotten with child, Cogitos. Vit. Brigid. in exemplari MS. antiquiss.
Bibliothec. Cottonianae.
blessed her faithfully forsooth (for so the author speaks) and so caused her
conception to vanish away, without any deliverie and without any pain. which
for the saving of S. Brigids own credit, either Tom. 5. Antiqu. lection. in
lacuna, sub finem page 629.
Hen. Canisius or the friars of Aichstad (from who^ he had his copy of
Cogitosus) thought fit to scrape out, and rather to leave a blanke in the book,
then to suffer so lewd a tale to stand in it. But I will not stir this puddle
any further: but proceed on, unto some better matter.

And now are we come at last to the great point, that touches the Head and the
foundation of the Church. Concerning which Sedulius observes, that the title
of Fundame^ta.] Christum, and Apostolos, and Prophetas. Sedul. in Hebr 11.
foundation is attributed both to Christ, and to the Apostles and Prophets.
that where it is said, Esai. 28.16. Behold, I lay in Sion a stone etc.
Compertum est in petra vel lapide Christu^ esse significatu^. Id. in Romans 9.
it is certain, that by the rock or stone Christ is signified. that, in Ephesians.
2.20. Apostoli fundamentum sunt, vel Christus fundamentum est Apostolorum.
Christus est fundamentum, qui etiam lapis dicitur angularis, duos conjungens
and continens parietes. Ideo hic fundamentum and summus est lapis; quia in ipso
and fundatur, and consummatur Ecclesia. Id. in Ephesians. 2.
the Apostles are the foundation, or Christ rather the foundation of the
Apostles. For Christ (says he) is the foundation, who is also called the
corner stone, joining and holding together the two walls. Therefore is he the
foundation and chief stone; because in him the Church is both founded, and
finished. and we are to account the Apostles Vt ministros Christi: non ut
fundamentum* Id. in 1. Cor. 4.
as ministers of Christ, and not as the foundation. The famous place, Matthew.
16.18. (whereupon our Romanists lay the maine foundation of the Papacy)
Claudius expounds in this sort. Super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam,
id est super Dominu^ salva^orem, qui fideli suo cognitori, amatori, confessori,
participium sui nominis donavi^ ut scilicet a petra Petrus vocaretur.
Aedificatur Ecclesia: quia non nisi per fidem and dilectionem Christi, per
susceptionem sacramentorum Christi, per observantiam mandatorum Christi, ad
sortem electorum and aeternam pertingitur vitam Apostolo attestante qui ait;
Fundamentum enim aliud nemo potest ponere praeter id quod positum est, qui est
Christus Jesus. Claud. lib. 2. in Matthew.
Upon this rock will I build my Church, that is to say, upon the Lord and
Savior, who granted unto his faithful knower, lover, and confessor the
participation of his own name; that from petra (the rock) he should be called
Peter. The Church is builded upon him: because only by the faith and love of
Christ, by the receiving of the sacraments of Christ, by the observation of the
commandments of Christ, we come to the inheritance of the elect and eternal
life, as witnesses the Apostle who says; Other foundation can no man lay
beside that which is laid, which is Christ Jesus.

Yet does the same Claudius acknowledge, that Petrum solum nominat, and sibi
comparat: quia primatum ipse accepit ad fundandam Ecclesiam: se quoque pari
modo electum, ut primatum habeat in fundandis Gentium Ecclesiis. Id. in Gal. 2.
S. Peter received a kind of primacie for the founding of the Church (in
respect whereof he terms him Id in Gal. 5.
Ecclesiae principem and Id. in Gal. 2.
Apostolorum principem, the prince of the Church and the prince or chief of
the Apostles) but he adds withal, that S. Paul also was chosen in the same
manner, to have the primacie in founding the Churches of the Gentiles. and that
he Ab his itaque probatum dicit donu^ quod accepit a Deo, ut dignus esset
habere primatu^ in praedicatione Gentium, sicut and habebat Petrus in
praedicatione Circumcisionis. Id. in Gal. 2.
received this gift from God, that he should be worthy to have the primacie in
preaching to the Gentiles, as Peter had it in the preaching of the
Circumcision. and therefore that Gratiam sibi soli primus vendicat concessam a
Deo, ficut and soli Petro concessa est inter Apostolos, Id. ibid.
S. Paul challenges this grace as granted by God to him alone, as it was
granted to Peter alone among the Apostles* and that he esteemed himself Non
illi sum inferior; quia ab uno sumus ambo in unum ministerium ordinati. Id.
ibid.
not to be inferior unto S. Peter, because both of them were by one ordained
unto one and the same ministry. and that writing to the Galatians, Apostolum
se Christi titulo praenotavit, ut ex ipsa lecturos nominis auctoritate
terreret; iudicans omnes, qui in Christo creed rent, debere sibi esse
subiectos. Id. in Gal. 1.
he did in the title name himself an Apostle of Christ, to the end that by the
very authority of that name he might terrify his readers; judging, that all
such as did believe in Christ, ought to be subject unto him.

It is furthermore also observed by Claudius, that Nam sicut interrogatis
generaliter omnibus, Petrus respondit unus pro omnibus: ita quod Petro Dominus
respondit, in Petro omnibus respondit Id. lib. 2. in Matthew.
as when our Savior propounded the question generally unto all the Apostles,
Peter did answer as one for all; so what our Lord answered unto Peter, in Peter
he did answer unto all. and therefore Quae solve^di ac ligandi potestas, qua^vis
soli Petro data videatur a Domino; absque ulla tamen dubietate noscendu^ est,
quia and ceteris Apostolis datur: ipso test, qui post passionis
resurrectionisque suae triumphu^ apparens eis insufflavit, and dixit omnibvs:
Accipite Spiritu^ sanctu^, quoru^ remiseritis peccata, remittu^tur eis, and
quoru^ retinueritis, rete^ta sunt Id. lib. cod.
howsoever the power of loosing and binding might seem to be given by the Lord
unto Peter alone, yet without all manner of doubt it is to be known, that it
was given unto the rest of the Apostles also: as himself does witness, who
appearing unto them after the triumph of his passion and resurrection, breathed
on them, and said unto them all; Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins ye remit,
they are remitted unto them, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained.
Lastly, as Claudius notes, that Super ipsos Ecclesias sit positu^ fundamentu^.
Id. in Gal. 2.
the foundation of the Church was laid not only upon S. Peter, but also upon S.
John: so in a certain Hymn supposed to be written by Secundinus (known in
this country commonly by the name of S. Schachlin) in the year of our Lord
CCCCXLVIII. S. Patrick also is thus commended. Constans in Dei timore, et fide
immobil^^, super que^ aedificatur ut Petrum Ecclesia: cuiusque Apostolatu^ a
Deo sortitus est, and inferni portae adversus cu^ no^ praevalebu^t. Hymn. in
land. S. Patric^.
He is constant in the fear of God, and unmovable in the faith, upon whom the
Church is builded as upon Peter; whose Apostleship also he has obtained from
God, and the gates of Hell shall not prevayle against him. yea Christus illum
sibi elegit in terris Vicarium. Ibid.
Christ is there said to have chosen him for his Vicar upon earth. and as for
the titles of Cogitos. in vit. Brigid. tom. 5. antiqu. lect. Henr. Canisij.
page 625. lin ult.
Summus Sacerdos and Ibid. page 640. lin. 2.
Summus Pontifex, the highest Priest and the highest Bishop; we find them in
Cogitosus attributed unto the Bishop of Kildare himself. those titles and
prerogatives, which the Pope now peculiarly challenges unto himself, as
ensigns of his Monarchy, being then usually communicated unto other Bishops,
when the universal Church was governed by an Aristocraty.

Master Campion, I know, tells us; that Edm. Camp. History of Ireland, lib.
2. cap. 2.
when Ireland first received Christendom, they gave themselves into the
Jurisdiction both spiritual and temporal of the Sea of Rome: but therein he
speaks without book; of the spiritual jurisdiction untruly, of the temporal
absurdly. For from the first legation of Palladius and Patricius, who were sent
to plant the faith in this country, it cannot be showed out of any monument of
antiquity, that the Bishop of Rome did ever send any of his Legates to
exercise spiritual jurisdiction here (much less any of his Deputies to
exercise jurisdiction temporal) before Gillebertus, quem aiunt prima functum
legatione Apostolicae sedis per universam Hiberniam; says one that lived in
his own time, even Bernard himself in the life of Malachias. One or two
instances peradventure may be alleged out of some obscure authors, whose names
and times and authority no man can tell us news of: but unless that which is
delivered by Bernard, as the tradition that was current in his time, can be
controlled by some record that may appear to have been written before his
days; we have small reason to detract any thing from the credit of so clear
a testimony.

This country was heretofore, for the number of holy men that lived in it,
termed the Sanctus pater Columbanus ex Hibernia insula Sanctorum cum sancto
Gallo aliisque probatis discipulis venit in Burgundiam. Ma^ian. Scot. Chronic.
MS. ad an. Dom. 589. secundum Dionysium.
Island of Saints: of that innumerable company of Saints, whose memory was
reverenced here; what one received any solemn canonization from the Pope,
before Malachias archbishop of Ardmagh and Laurence of Dublin? who lived, as it
were, but the other day. We read of sundry Archbishops that have been in this
land: betwixt the days of S. Patrick and of Malachias, what one of them can be
named, that ever sought for a Pall from Rome? Ioceline indeed a late Monk of
the abbey of Furnesse, writes of S. Patrick; that the Bishop of Rome Pallio
decoravit, illique vices suas committens atque legatum suum constituens,
quaecunque in Hibernia gesserat, constituerat, disposue rat, auctoritatis suae
munimine confirmavit. Iocelin. vit. Patric. cap. 166.
conferred the Pall upon him, together with the execution of legatine power in
his room. But he is well known to be a most fabulous author: and for this
particular, Bernard (who was his ancient) informs us far otherwise; that
Metropoliticae sedi decrat adhuc, and defuerat ab initio pallii usus. Bernard.
Vit. Malach.
from the very beginning until his time, the metropoliticall see of Ardmagh
wanted the use of the Pall. And therefore Giraldus Cambrensis, howsoever he
acknowledges that S. Patrick did Apud Ardmacham sibi sedem elegit; quam etiam
quasi metropolim constituit and proprium totius Hiberniae primatiae locum.
Girald. Cambr. Topograph. Hibern. distinct. 3. cap. 16.
choose Ardmagh for his seat, and did appoint it to be as it were a
metropoliticall see, and the proper place of the primacie of all Ireland; yet
does he affirm withal, that in very deed Archiepiscopi vero in Hibernia
nulli fuerant; sed tantum se Episcopi invicem consecrabant: donec Johannes
Papyrio Romanae sedis legatus, non multis retro annis advenit. Hic quatuor
pallia in Hiberniam portavit, etc. Ibid. cap. 17.
there were no Archbishops in Ireland, but that Bishops only did consecrate
one another, until Johannes Paparo the Popes legate brought four palls
thither, in the year of our Lord 1152. Gelasius was then arcbishop of Ardmagh,
who dyed in the year 1174. at which, we find this note in our Annals. Hic
primus Archiepiscopus dicitur, qui primo pallio usus* est. Alii vero ante ipsum
solo nomine Archiepiscopi and Primates vocabantur; ob reve^^ntiam and honorem
Sancti Patricii, tanquam Apostoli illius gentis. Annal. Hib^^n. a Guil. Camdeno
edit. and MS. abbatiae B. Mariae iuxta Dublin.
This man is said to be the first Archbishop, because he used the first Pall.
But others before him were called Archbishops and Primates in name only; for
the reverence and honor of S. Patrick, as the Apostle of that nation.

The same time that the four Archbishopricks were established by Johannes
Paparo; our Bishoprics also were limited, and reduced unto a fewer number:
whereas at the beginning they were very many (for we read in Nennius, that S,
Patrick Ecclesias eodem numero fundavit CCCLXV. Ordinavit Episcopos eodem
numero CCCLXV Presbyteros autem usque ad tria millia ordinavit. Nenn. histor.
Brit. MS.
founded here 365. Churches, and ordained 365. Bishops, beside 3000.
Presbyters) and in process of time were daily Mutabantur and multiplicabantur
Episcopi pro libitu metropolitani; ita ut unus Episcopatus uno non esset
contentus, sed singulae pene Ecclesiae singulos haberent Episcopos* Bernard
V^t. Malach.
multiplied according to the pleasure of the Metropolitan, so far that every
Church almost had a several Bishop; whereof Bernard does much complain in the
life of Malachias. For in erecting of new Bishoprics the Pope was no more
sought unto here, then in the nomination and confirmation of the Bishops
themselves: all matters of this kind being done at home, without relation to
any foreign authority. The ancient form of making a Bishop, is thus laid
down by Bonifacius archbishop of Mentz, in the life of Livinus. Illo defuncto,
Rex Calomagnus, and eius Palatinorum chorus cum suis subaulicis, totiusque
regionis illius confluentia, pari cordis affectu conclam^verunt, sanctum
Sacerdotem Livinum in honorem hu^us ordinis dignissime sublimandu^ fore. His
Rex omnibus devotior consentiens, ter quaterque beatum virum in cathedra
Archiepiscopatus debito honor, Domino jubente, collocavit. Bonifac. Vit. Livin.
When Menalchus the Archbishop was dead, Calomagnus the King of Scotts, and
the troop of his Officers with the under-courtiers, and the concourse of all
that country, with the same affection of heart cried out, that the holy Priest
Livinus was most worthily to be advanced unto the honor of this order. The
King (more devoute then all of them) consenting thereunto, three or four times
placed the blessed man in the chair of the Archbishopric with due honor,
according to the will of the Lord. In like manner also did Rex Ecgfridus
episcopum fecit ordinari Lindisfarnensium ecclesiae virum sanctum et
venerabilem Cudbertum. Bed. lib. 4. hist. cap. 27. and Vit. Cuthbert. cap. 24
king Ecgfrid cause our Cuthbert to be ordained Bishop of the Church of
Lindisfarne; and king Pipin Episcopatum Salzburge^sem, pro debito regiae
magnificentiae, sancto concessit Virgilio. Vit. Epis^. Salisburgens. tom. 2.
Antiqu. lect. Henr. Canis. page 259. and ^^m. 6. page 1174.
granted the Bishopric of Salzburg to our Virgilius: and Duke Gunzo would have
Walafrid. Strab. Vit. Gall. lib. 1. cap. 16.17.19.20.
conferred the Bishopric of Constance upon our Gallus; but that he refused
it, and Theodor. Campidonens. vel quicunque author fuit vitae Magni, lib. 1.
cap. 8. edit. Goldasti, 10. Canisij.
caused another upon his recommendation to be preferred thereunto.

As the Pope intermedled not with the making of our Bishops: so neither can we
find by any approved record of antiquity, that any Visitations of the
clergy were held here in his name; much less that any Indulgences were sought
for by our people at his hands. For as for the Charta S. Patricii. in Guilielmi
Malmesburiensi^ libello, de Antiquitate Glastoniensis ecclesiae. MS.
Charter of S. Patrick (by some entitled, De antiquitate Avalonica) wherein In
scriptis recentioribus inveni, quod sancti Phaganus and Deruvianus
perquisierant ab Eleutherio papa, qui eos miserat, X. ( al. XXX.) annos
indulgentiae. Et ego frater Patricius a pi^ memoriae Celestino Papa XII. annos
tempore meo acquisivi. Ibid.
Phaganus and Deruvianus are said to have purchased ten or thirty years of
Indulgences from Pope Eleutherius; and S. Patrick himself to have procured
twelve years in his time from Pope Celestinus: it might easily be demonstrated
(if this were a place for it) that it is a mere figment, devised by the Monks
of Glastenbury. Neither do I well know, what credit is to be given unto that
straggling sentence, which I find ascribed unto the same author (for I will
still deal fairly, and conceal nothing that I meet withal in any hidden
part of antiquity, that may tend to the true discovery of the state of former
times; whether it may seem to make for me, or against me.) Patricius ait. Si
quae quaestiones in hac Insula oriantur, ad sedem Apostolicam referantur Vet.
Collect. Canonum, Biblioth^ca Co^tonian^.
If any questions do arise in this Island, let them be referred to the Sea
Apostolic. Only this I will say, that as it is most likely, that S. Patrick
had a special regard unto the Church of Rome, from whence he was sent for the
conversion of this Island: so if I my self had lived in his days, for the
resolution of a doubtful question I should as willingly have listened to the
judgment of the Church of Rome, as to the determination of any Church in the
whole world; so reverend an estimation have I of the integrity of that Church,
as it stood in those good days. But that S. Patrick was of opinion, that the
Church of Rome was sure ever afterward to continue in that good estate, and
that there was a perpetual privilege annexed unto that See, that it should
never err in judgment, or that the Popes sentences were always to be held as
infallible Oracles; that will I never believe: sure I am, that my countrymen
after him were of a far other belief; who were so far from submitting
themselves in this sort to whatsoever should proceed from the Sea of Rome, that
they oftentimes stood out against it, when they had little cause so to do. For
proof whereof I need to seek no further, then to those very allegations
which have been lately urged for maintenance of the supremacy of the Pope and
Church of Rome.

First Mr. Coppinger comes upon us, with this wise question. Copping.
Mn^m^synum to the Catholics of Ireland, lib. 2. cap. 3.
Was not Ireland among other countries absolved from the Pelagian heresy by
the Church of Rome, as Caesar Baronius writes? then he sets down the copy
of S. Gregory's Gregor. lib. 2. epist. 36. Iudict. 10.
epistle, in answer unto the Irish Bishops that submitted themselves unto him
and concludes in the end (according to his skill) that the Bishops of Ireland
being infected with the Pelagian error, sought absolution first of Pelagius
the Pope: but the same was not effectually done, until S. Gregory did it. But
in all this, the silly man does nothing else but bewray his own extreme
ignorance. For neither can he show it in Caesar Baronius or in any other author
whatsoever, that the Irish Bishops did ever seek absolution from Pope Pelagius;
or that the one had to deal in any business at all with the other. Neither
yet can he show that ever they had to do with S. Gregory in any matter that
did concern the Pelagian heresy. for these be dreams of Coppingers own idle
head. The epistle of S. Gregory deals only with the controversy of the
three chapter^, which were condemned by the fifth general Council; whereof
Baronius writes thus. Ardentissimo studio pro triu^ capitulorum defensione,
junctis animis, omnes qui in Hibernia erant Episcopi, insurrexere Addiderunt
and illud nefas, ut cum percepissent Romana^ Ecclesiam aeque suscepisse Trium
damnationem capitulorum, atque suo consensu Quintam Synodum roborasse: ab eade^
pariter resilierint, atque reliquis qui vel in Italia vel in Africa aliisve
regionibus erant* schismaticis inhaeserint; fiducia illa vana erecti, quod pro
fide Catholica starent, cum quae essent in Concilio Chalcedonensi statuta
defenderent. Baron. Annal. tom. 7. ann* 566. numer. 21.
All the Bishops that were in Ireland, with most earnest study, rose up
jointly for the defense of the Three Chapters. And when they perceived that the
Church of Rome did both receive the condemnation of the Three chapters, and
strengthen the fifth Synod with her consent: they departed from her, and clave
to the rest of the schismatics, that were either in Italy or in Africa or in
other countries; animated with that vain confidence, that they did stand for
the Catholic faith, while they defended those things that were concluded in
the Council of Chalcedon. Sed eo fixius inhaerent errori, cum quaecunque
Italia passa sit bellorum motibus, fame, vel pestilentia, ea ex caussa illi
cuncta infausta accidisse putarent, quod pro Quinta Synodo adversus
Chalcedonense Concilium praelium suscepisset. Ibid.
And so much the more fixedly (says he) did they cleave to their error,
because whatsoever Italy did suffer by commotions of war, by famine or
pestilence, all these unhappy things they thought did therefore befall unto it,
because it had undertaken to fight for the Fifth Synod against the Council of
Chalcedon.

Thus far Baronius: out of whose narration this may be collected, that the
Bishops of Ireland did not take all the resolutions of the Church of Rome for
undoubted oracles; but when they thought that they had better reason on their
sides, they preferred the judgment of other Churches before it. Wherein how
peremptory they were, when they wrote unto S. Gregory of the matter; may
easily be perceived by these parcells of the answer, which he returned unto
their letters. Prima itaque epistolae vestrae frons, gravem vos pati
persecutione^ innotuit. Quae quidem persecutio dum non rationabiliter
sustinetur, nequaquam proficit ad salute^. Gregor. Regest. lib. 2. epist. 36.
The first entry of your epistle has notified, that you suffer a grievous
persecution: which persecution indeed, when it is not sustained for a
reasonable cause, does profit nothing unto salvation. and Dum igitur ita sit,
incongruum nimis est de ea vos, quam dicitis, persecutione gloriari, per quam
vos constat ad aeterna praemia minime provehi. Ibid.
therefore it is very unfit, that you should glory of that persecution, as you
call it, by which it is certain you cannot be promoted to everlasting rewards.
Quod autem scribitis, quia ex illo tempore inter alias provincias maxim
flagelletur Italia; non hoc ad e^us debetis intorquere opprobrium: quoniam
scriptum est; Quem diligit Dominus, castigat, flagellat autem omnem filium quem
recipit Ibid.
And whereas you write, that since that time among other provinces Italy has
been most afflicted; you ought not to object that unto it as a reproach:
because it is written; Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every
son that he receives. Then having spoken of the book that Pope Pelagius did
write of this controversy (which indeed was penned by Gregory himself) he
adds. Porro autem si post hujus libri lectionem in ea, qua estis, volueritis
deliberatione persistere; sine dubio non rarioni operam, sed obstinationi vos
dare monstratis. Ibid.
If after the reading of this book, you will persist in that deliberation,
wherein now you are; without doubt you show, that you give your selves to be
ruled not by reason, but by obstinacy. By all which you may see, what credit
is to be given unto the man, who would bear us in hand, that this epistle of
S. Gregory was sent as an answer unto the Bishops of Ireland, that did submit
themselves unto him: whereas the least argument of any submission of theirs
does not appear in any part of that epistle; but the whole course of it does
clearly manifest the flat contrary.

In the next place steppeth forth Osullevan Bear, a wild Bear indeed rather
then a Christian man; who in his Catholic History of Ireland (for so he
styles his traiterous and barbarous Collections) lately published, would have
us take knowledge of this, that Quando vero Doctores Ibernici de gravibus fidei
quaestionibus minime consentiebant, v^ aliquid novi dogmatis peregre allati
audiebant; soliti erant Romanu^ Pontificem veritatis Oraculu^ consulere.
Philip. Osullevan. Bearr. Histor. Catholic. Ibern. tom. 1. lib. 4. cap. 6.
when the Irish Doctors did not agree together upon great questions of faith,
or did hear of any new doctrine brought from abroad, they were wont to consult
with the Bishop of Rome the Oracle of truth. That they consulted with the
Bishop of Rome, when difficult questions did arise, we easily grant: but that
they thought they were bound in conscience to stand to his judgment, whatsoever
it should be, and to intertaine all his resolutions as certain Oracles of
truth; is the point that we would feign see proved. For this he tells us,
that Namque de tempore agendi Paschatis solemnia (de quo aliae quoque
Catholicae gentes saepe ambegerunt) and de Pelagiana haeresi ubi fuit in
quaestionem disputationemque deducta; Doctores Iberni ad Sedem Apostolicam
retulerunt. Ac ita miseri Pelagii error nullum in Ibernia patronum vel
assertorem invenisse fertur; vel insulae aditu interclusus, vel ab ea protinus
explosus, ubi contagiosam faciem aperuit, seseque cognoscendum praebuit: and
ratio communis and ab Ecclesia usitata celebrandi redivivi Domini festum ab
Australibus Ibernis fuit semper observata; and a Septentrionalibus quoque and
Pictis and Britonibus, qui Doctoribus Ibernis fidem acceperunt, amplexa, ubi
Ecclesiae Romanae ritum cognoverunt. Quod ex Apostolicarum literarum duplici
capite a Beda relato non obscure constat. Ibid.
when questions and disputations did arise here concerning the time of E^ster
and the Pelagian heresy; the Doctors of Ireland referred the matter unto the Sea Apostolic. Whereupon, the error of Pelagius is reported to have found no
patron or maintayner in Ireland: and the common course of celebrating Easter
was embraced both by the Northren Irish, and by the Pictes and Britons, as
soon as they understood the rite of the Roman Church. Which (says he) does
not obscurely appear by the two heads of the Apostolic letters, related by
Bid, lib. 2. cap. 19.

But that those Apostolic letters (as he calls them) had that success which
he talks of, appears neither plainly nor obscurely by Bid, or any other
authority whatsoever. The error of Pelagius, says he, is reported to have
found no patron or maintayner in Ireland. But who is he that reports so,
beside Philip Osullevan? a worthy author to ground a report of antiquity upon:
who in relating the matters that fell out in his own time, discovers
himself to be as egregious a liar, as any (I verily think) that this day
breaths in Christendom. The Apostolic letters he speaks of, were written
(as before has been touched) in the year of our Lord DCXXXIX. during the
vacancie of the Roman See, upon the death of Severinus. Our countreyman
Kilianus repaired to Rome 47. years after that, and was ordained Bishop there
by Pope Conon in the year DCLXXXVI. The reason of his coming thither, is thus
laid down by Egilwardus or who ever else was the author of his life. Hibernia
siquidem olim Pelagiana faedata fuerat haeresi, Apostolicaque censura damnata,
quae nisi Romano judicio solvi non poterat. Author antiqu. Vit. Kilian.
For Ireland had been of old defiled with the Pelagian heresy, and condemned
by the Apostolical censure, which could not be loosed but by the Roman
judgment. If this be true: then that is false which Osullevan reports of the
effect of his Apostolical Epistle, that it did so presently quassh the
Pelagian heresy, as it durst not once peep up within this Island.

The difference betwixt the Romans and the Irish in the celebration o^ Easter,
consisted in this. The Romans kept the memorial of our Lords resurrection upon
that Sunday, which fell betwixt the XV. and the XXI. day of the Moon (both
terms included) next after the XXI. day of March; which they accounted to be
the seat of the Vernall aequinoctium, that is to say, that time of the Spring
wherein the day and the night were of equal length. and in reckoning the age
of the Moon they followed the Alexandrian cycle of XIX. years (whence our
golden number had his original) as it was explained unto them by Dionysius
Exiguus: which is the account that is still observed, not only in the Church of
England, but also among all the Christians of Greece, Russia, Asia, Egypt, and
AEthiopia; and was (since the time that I my self was borne) generally
received in all Christendom, until the late change of the Calendar was made
by Pope Gregory the XIIIth. The Northren Irish and Scottish, together with the
Pictes, observed the custom of the Britons: Non enim Paschae diem Dominicum
suo tempore, sed a decima* quarta usque ad vicesimam Lunam observabant Quae
computatio 84. annorum circulo continetur Bed. lib. 2. hist. cap. 2.
keeping their Easter upon the Sunday that fell betwixt the XIIII. and the XX.
day of the Moon; and following in their account thereof, not so much the XIX.
years computation of Anatolius, Porro isti secundum de cennem novennemque
Anatolii computatum, aut potius juxta Sulpicii Severini regulam, qui LXXXIV,
anno rum cursum descripsit, XIV. Luna cum Iudaeis Paschale sacramentum
celebrant: cum neutrum Ecclesiae Romanae Pontifices ad perfectam calculi
rationem sequantur. Aldelm. epist. ad Geruntium regem and Demnonie^: inter
epistolas Bonifacq^, number. 44.
as Sulpicius Severus his circle of LXXXIIII. years. for howsoever they
extolled Anatolius Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 3. and 25.
for appointing the bounds of Easter betwixt the XIIII. and the XX. day of the
Moon; yet Wilfride in the Synod of Strenshalch charge them utterly to have
rejected his cycle of XIX. years: from which therefore Cummianus draws an
argument against them; that Ad veram Pascha^ rationem nunquam pervenire eos,
qui cyclum LXXXIIII annorum observant, Cummian. epist. ad Segien^ abbat. de
Dispu^atione Lunae. MS. in Bibliothec. Cottonian.
they can never come to the true account of Easter, who observe the cycle of
LXXXIIII. years.

To reduce the Irish unto conformity with the Church of Rome in this point,
Pope Honorius (the first of that name) directed his letters unto them:
Exhortans, ne paucitatem suam in extremis terrae finibus constituta^,
sapientiorem antiquis sive modernis, qu^ per Orbem terrae erant, Christi
ecclesiis aestimarent: neve contra Paschales computos, and decreta synodalium
totius Orbis Pontificum aliud Pascha celebrarent. Bed. lib. 2. cap. 19.
Exhorting them, that they would not esteem their own paucitie, seated in the
utmost borders of the earth, more wife then the ancient or modern Churches of
Christ through the whole world; and that they would not celebrate another
Easter contrary to the Paschall computations, and the Synodall decrees of the
Bishops of the whole world. and shortly after, the clergy of Rome (as we have
said) upon the death of Severinus, wrote other letters unto them to the same
effect. Now where Osullevan (pardon me, if I honor the rake-hell too much, in
naming him so often) avoucheth, that the common custome^ sed by the Church in
celebrating the feast of the Lords resurrection was always observed by the
Southern Irish; and now embraced also by the Northren, together with the
Pictes and Britons (who received the faith from Irish Doctors) when they had
knowledge given them of the rite of the Church of Rome: in all this (according
to his common wont) he speaks never a true word. For neither did the
Southern Irish always observe the celebration of Easter commonly received
abroad: neither did the Northren Irish, nor the Pictes, nor the Britons, many
years after this admonition given by the Church of Rome, admit that
observation among them. to speak nothing of his folly in saying, that the
Britons received the faith from the Irish: when the contrary is so well
known, that the Irish received the same from the Britons.

That the common custom of celebrating the time of Easter was not always
observed by the Southern Irish, may appear by those words of Bid, in the
third book of his history and the third chapter. Porro gentes Scottorum, quae
in australibus Hiberniae insulae partibus morabantur, jamdudum ad admonitionem
Apostolicae sedis antistitis Pascha canonico ritu observare didicerunt. For if
(as this place clearly proves) the nations of the Scotts, that dwelt in the
Southern parts of Ireland, did learn to observe Easter after the canonical
manner, upon the admonition of the Bishop of Rome: it is evident, that before
that admonition they did observe it after another manner. The word jamdudum,
which Bid here uses, is taken among authors oftentimes in contrary senses:
either to signify a great while since, or else, but lately or erewhile. In the
former sense it must be here taken, if it have relation to the time wherein
Bid did write his book: and in the latter also it may be taken, if it be
referred to the time whereof he treats, (which is the more likely opinion)
namely to the coming of Bishop Aidan into England; which fell out within a
year or little more, after that Honorius had sent his admonitorie letters to
the Irish. who, as he was the first Bishop of Rome we can read of, that
admonished them to reform their rite of keeping the time of Easter: so that
the Irish also much about the same time conformed themselves herein to the
Roman usage, may thus be manifested.

When Bishop Aidan came into England from the island Hy, now called
Y-Columkille; Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 5.
the college of monks there was governed by Segenius, who in the Id. lib. 2.
cap. 19.
inscription of the epistle of the clergy of Rome sent unto the Irish, is
called Segianus. Now there is yet extant in Sir Robert Cottons worthy library,
an epistle of Cummianus directed to this Segienus (for so is his name there
written) abbot of Y-Columkille: wherein he plainly declares, that the great
cycle of DXXXII. years, and the Roman use of celebrating the time of Easter
according to the same; was then newly brought in into this country. Ego enim
primo anno quo cyclus DXXXII anno. rum a nostris celebrari orsus est; non
suscepi, sed silui, nec laudare nec vituperare ausus. Cummian. epist. ad
Segienum.
For the first year (says he) wherein the cycle of DXXXII years began to be
observed by our men; I received it not, but held my peace, daring neither to
commend it nor to disprayse it. That year being past, he says he consulted
with his ancients; who were the successors of Bishop Ailbeus, Queranus
Coloniensis, Brendinus, Nessanus and L^^gidus. who being gathered together in
Campo-lene, concluded to celebrate Easter the year following together with the
universal Church. Se^ non post multum fuirexit quidam pa^ies de albatus,
traditionem seniorum servare s^ simulans; qui utraque non fecit unum sed
divisit, and ir^itum ex part fecit quod promissum est: quem Dominus, ut spero,
percutiet quoquo modo voluerit. Ibid.
But not long after (says he) there arose up a certain whited wall,
pretending to keep the tradition of the Elders; which did not make both one,
but divided them, and made void in part that which was promised: whom the
Lord (as I hope) will smite, in whatsoever manner he pleases.

To this argument drawn from the tradition of the elders, he makes answer:
that Seniores vero, quos in velamine repulsionis habetis, quod optimum in
diebus suis esse noverunt simpliciter and fideliter sine culpa contradictionis
ullius and animositatis observaverunt, and suis posteris sic mandaverunt Ibid.
they did simply and faithfully observe that which they knew to be best in
their days, without the fault of any contradiction or animositie, and did so
recommend it to their posterity. and opposes thereunto Vniver^alis Ecclesiae
Catholicae unanime^ regulam. Ibid.
the unanimous rule of the Universal Catholic Church: deeming this to be a
very harsh conclusion. Roma errat, Hierosolyma errat, Alexandria errat,
Antiochia errat, totus mundus errat; soli tantum Scoti and Britones rectu^
sapiunt. Ibid.
Rome erreth, Jerusalem erreth, Alexandria erreth, Antioch erreth, the whole
world erreth: the Scottish only and the Britons do alone hold the right. but
especially he urges the authority of the first of these Patriarchicall Sees,
which now (since the advancement thereof by the Emperor Phocas) began to be
admired by the inhabitants of the earth, as the place which God had chosen;
whereunto, if greater causes did arise, recourse was to be had, according to
the Synodicall decree, as unto the head of cities and therefore he says, that
they sent some unto Rome: who returning back in the third year, informed
them, that they met there with a Grecian, and an Hebrew, and a Scythian, and an
Egyptian in one lodging, and that they all, and the whole world too, did keep
their Easter at the same time, when the Irish were disjoined from them by the
space of a whole This seems to have fallen out, either in the year 634. or
^4^. wherein Easter was solemnized at Rome the 24. day of April, and it
appears by our Annals, that Segenius was abbot of Y-Columkille from the
year 624. until 652.
month. Vidimus oculis nostris puella^ coecam omnino ad has reliquias oculos
aperientem, and paralyticum ambulantem, and multa daemonia eiecta. Cummian.
And we have proved (says Cummianus) that the virtue of God was in the
relics of the holy martyrs and the scriptures which they brought with them.
For we saw with our eyes, a maid altogether blind opening her eyes at these
relickes, and a man sick of the palsy walking, and many devils cast out.
Thus far he.

The Northren Irish and Albanian Scottish on the other side, made little
reckoning of the authority, either of the Bishop or of the Church of Rome. And
therefore Bid, speaking of Oswy king of Northumberland, says that*
Intellexerat enim veraciter Oswi, quamvis educatus a Scotis, quia Romana esset
Catholica and Apostolica ecclesia, Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 29.
notwithstanding he was brought up by the Scottish, yet he understood that
the Roman was the Catholic and Apostolic Church (or, that the Roman Church
was Catholic and Apostolic) intimating thereby, that the Scottish, among whom
he received his education, were of another mind. And long before that,
Laurentius, Mellitus and Iustus (who were sent into England by Pope Gregory to
assist Augustine) in a letter which they sent unto the Scotts that did inhabit
Ireland (so Bid writes) complained of the distaste given unto them by their
countrymen, in this manner. Sed cognoscentes Britones, Scottos meliores
putavimus. Scottos vero per Dagamum episcopu^ in hanc insula^, and Columbanu^
abbatem in Galliis venientem, nihil discrepare a Britonibus in eoru^
conversatione didicimus Na^ Dagamus episcopus ad nos veniens, non solum cibum
nobiscum, sed nec in eodem hospitio quo vescebamur, sumere voluit. Laurent
epist. apud Bed. lib. 2. cap 4.
When we knew the Britons, we thought that the Scotts were better then they.
But we learned by Bishop Daganus coming into this Island, and abbot Columbanus
coming into France; that the Scotts did differ nothing from the Britons in
their conversation. For Daganus the Bishop coming unto us, would not take
meat with us, no not so much as in the same lodging wherein we did eat.

And as for miracles, we find them as rife among them that were opposite to
the Roman tradition, as upon the other side. If you doubt it, read what Bid
has written of Bishop Aidan ( Qui cujus meriti fuerit, etiam miraculorum
signis internus arbiter edocuit. Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 15. item 16. and 17.
who of what merit he was, the inward Judge has taught, even by the tokens of
miracles; says he) and Adamnanus of the life of S. Colme or Columkille.
Whereupon Bishop Colman in the Synod at Strenshalch frames this conclusion.
Nunquid reverendissimum patrem nostrum Columbam, and successores ejus, viros
Deo dilectos, qui eodem modo Pascha fecerunt, divinis paginis contraria
sapuisse vel egisse credendum est? cum plurimi fuerint in eis, quorum
sanctitati coelesti signa and virtutum quae fecerunt miracula, testimonium
praebuerunt: quos ut ipse sanctos esse non dubitans semper eorum vitam, mores
and disciplinam sequi non desisto. Colman. apud Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 25.
Is it to be believed, that Colme our most reverend father, and his successors,
men beloved of God, which observed Easter in the same manner that we do, did
hold or do that which was contrary to the holy Scriptures? seeing there were
very many among them, to whose heavenly holiness the signs and miracles
which they did, bare testimony: whom nothing doubting to be Saints, I desist
not to follow evermore their life, manners, and discipline. What Wilfride
replied to this, may be seen in Bid: that which I much wonder at, among the
many wonderful things related of S. Colme by Adamnanus, is this. that where he
says, that this Saint, during the time of his abode in the abbay of Clone
(now called Clonmacnosh) did Revelante Spiritu Sancto prophetavit de illa quae
post dies multos ob diversitatem Paschalis festi orta est inter Scotiae
Ecclesias discordia. Adamnan. Vit. Columb. lib. 1. cap. 3.
by the revelation of the holy Ghost prophecy of that discord, which after
many days arose among the Churches of Scotland (or Ireland) for the diversity
of the feast of Easter: yet he tells us not, that the holy Ghost revealed
unto him, that he himself (whose example animated his followers to stand more
stiffely herein against the Roman rite) was in the wrong, and ought to
conform his judgment to the tradition of the Churches abroad* as if the holy
Ghost did not much care, whether of both sides should carry the matter away in
this controversy: for which (if you please) you shall hear a very pretty
tale out of an old Legend, concerning this same discord whereof S. Colme is
said to have prophesied.

Quodam tempore erat magnum Concilium populorum Hiberniae in Campo albo: inter
quos erat contentio circa ordinem Paschae. Las^eanus enim abbas monasterii
Leighlinne, cui suberant mill quingenti monachi, novum ordinem defendebat qui
nuper de Roma venit: alii vero veterem defendebant. Vit. S. Munn^ abbatis MS.
Upon a certain time (says my Author) there was a great Council of the
people of Ireland in the White field: among whom there was contention about the
order of Easter. For Lasreanus, the Abbot of the monastery of Leighlin, unto
whom there were subject a thousand and five hundred monks, defended the new
order that lately came from Rome: but others defended the old. This Lasreanus
or Lazerianus is the man, who in other Legends (of no greater credit then this
we now have in hand) is reported to have been the Bishop of Romes legate in
Ireland; and is commonly accounted to have been the first Bishop of the Church
of Leighlin. His principal antagonist at this meeting was one Munna, founder
of the monastery which from him was called Teach-munna, that is, the house of
Munna (in the Bishopric of Mead:) who would needs bring this question to the
same kind of trial here, that Augustine is said to have done in England. In
defense of the Roman order, Bid tells us that Augustine made this motion to
the British Bishops, for a final conclusion of the business. Obsecremus
Deum, qui habitare facit unanimes in domo patris sui, ut ipse nobis insinuare
coelestibus signis dignetur, quae sequenda traditio, quibus sit viis ad
ingressum regni illius properandum. Adducatur aliquis aeger; and per cuius
preces fuerit curatus, huius fides and operatio Deo devota atque omnibus
sequenda credatur. Bed. lib. 2. hist. cap. 2.
Let us beseech God, which makes men to dwell of one mind together in their
fathers house; that he will vouchsafe by some heavenly signs to make known unto
us, what tradition is to be followed, and by what way we may hasten to the
entry of his kingdom. Let some sick man be brought hither; and by whose
prayers he shall be cured, let his faith and working be believed to be
acceptable unto God, and to be followed by all men.

Now Munna, who stood in defense of the order formerly used by the British and
Irish, makes a more liberal proffer in this kind, and leaves Lasreanus to
his choice. Breviter disputemus: sed in nomine Domini agamus judicium. Tres
optiones dantur tibi, Lasreane. Duo libri in igne^ mittentur, liber veteris
ordinis and novi; ut videamus, quis eoru^ de igne liberabitur* Vel duo monachi,
unus meus alter tuus, in unam domum recludantur, and domus comburatur: and
videbimus, quis ex eis evadat intactus igne. Aut eamus ad sepulcru^ mortui
iusti monachi, and resuscitemus eum; and indicet nobis, quo ordine debemus hoc
anno Pascha celebrare Vit. S. Munnu.
Let us dispute briefly, (says he) but in the name of God let us give
judgment. Three things are given to thy choice, Lasreanus. Two books shall be
cast into the fire, a book of the old order and of the new; that we may see
whether of them both shall be freed from the fire. Or let two Monks, one of
mine and another of thine, be shut up into one house: and let the house be
burnt, and we shall see which of them will escape untouched of the fire. Or
let us go unto the grave of a just Monk that is dead, and raise him up
again: and let him tell us, after what order we ought to celebrate Easter this
year. But Lasreanus being wiser then so, refused to put so great a matter to
that hazard: and therefore returned this grave answer unto Munna; if all be
true that is in the Legend. Non ibimus ad judiciu^ tuu^ quonia^ scimus quod,
pro magnitudine laboris tui and sanctitatis, si diceres ut mons Marge
commutaretur in locum Campi albi and Campus albus in locum montis Mairge* hoc
propter te Deus statim faceret. Ibid.
We will not go unto thy judgment: because we know that, for the greatness
of thy labor and holiness, if thou should bid that mount Marge should be
changed into the place of the White field, and the White field into the place
of mount Marge; God would presently do this for thy sake. So prodigal do
some make God to be of miracles, and in a manner careless how they should fall;
as if in the dispensing of them, he did respect the gracing of persons rather
then of causes.

In what year this Council of the White field was held, is not certainly
known: nor yet whether S. Munna be that whited wall, of whom we heard Cummianus
complain. The Synod of Strenshalch (before mentioned) was assembled long
after, at Whitby (called by the Saxons Streanesheale) in Yorkshire, the Bed.
lib. 3. hist. cap. 26.
year of our Lord DCLXIIII. for the decision of the same question. Concerning
which, in the life of Wilfrid (written at the commandment of Acca, who in the
time of Bid was Bishop of Hangustald or Hexham, in Northumberland) we read
thus. Quodam tempore in diebus Colmanni Eboracae civitatis episcopi
metropolitani, regnantibus Oswi and Alhfrido filio eius, Abbates and Presbyteri
omnesque Ecclesiasticae disciplinae gradus simul in unum convenientes, in
coenobio quae Streaneshel dicitur; praesente sanctimoniale matre piissima
Hilde, praesentibus quoque Regibus and duobus Colmanno and Aegelberhto
Episcopis, de Paschali ratione conquirebant, quid esset rectissimum, utrum more
Bryttonum and Scottorum omnisque aqui^^nalis partis a XIIII. Luna Dominica die
veniente usque ad XXII. ( leg. XX.) Pascha agendum; an melius sit ratione Sedis
Apostolicae, a XV. Luna usque XXI Paschalem Dominicam celebrandam. Tempus datum
est Colmanno episcopo primum, ut dignum erat, audientibus cunctis reddere
rationem. Ille autem intrepida mente respondens, dixit. Patres nostri and
antecessores eorum manifest Spiritu sancto inspirati, ut erat Columcille,
XIIII. Luna die Dominica Pascha celebrandum sanxerunt: exemplum tenentes
Iohannis Apostoli and Evangelistae, qui supra pectus Domini in Coena recubuit,
and amator Domini dicebatur. Ille XIIII. Luna Pascha celebravit; and nos, sicut
discipuli eius Polycarpus and alii, celebramus: nec hoc audemus pro patribus (
fort. partibus) nostris, nec volumus mutare. Vit. Wilfrid. cap. 10. MS. in
Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
Upon a certain time in the days of Colman metropolitan Bishop of the city
of York, Oswi and Alhfrid his son being Kings; the Abbots and Priests and
all the degrees of Ecclesiastical orders meeting together at the monastery
which is called Streaneshel, in the presence of Hilde the most godly mother of
that abbay, in presence also of the Kings and the two Bishops Colman and
Aegelberht, inquiry was made touching the observatio^ of Easter, what was most
right to be held: whether Easter should be kept according to the custom of the
Brittons and the Scotts and all the Northren part, upon the Lords day that
came from the XIIII. day of the Moon until the XX. or whether it were better,
that Easter Sunday should be celebrated from the XV. day of the Moon until
the XXI. after the manner of the Sea Apostolic. Time was given unto Bishop
Colman in the first place, as it was fit, to deliver his reason in the
audience of all. Who with an undaunted mind made his answer, and said. Our
fathers and their predecessors, who were manifestly inspired by the holy Ghost,
as Columkille was, did ordain that Easter should be celebrated upon the Lords
day that fell upon the XIIII. Moon; following the example of John the Apostle
and Evangelist, who leaned upon the breast of our Lord at his last Supper, and
was called the lover of the Lord. He celebrated Easter upon the XIIII. day of
the Moon: and we with the same confidence celebrate the same, as his disciples
Polycarpus and others did; neither dare we for our parts, neither will we
change this.

Bid relates his speech thus. Pascha hoc quod agere soleo, a majoribus meis
accepi, qui me huc Episcopum miserunt: quod omnes patres nostri viri Deo
dilecti eodem modo celebrasse noscuntur. Quod ne cui contemnendu^ and
reprobandum esse videatur: ipsum est quod beatus Evangelista Ioannes,
discipulus specialiter Domino dilectus, cum omnibus quibus praeerat Ecclesiis,
celebrasse legitur. Colman. apud Bedam, lib. 3. hist. cap. 25.
This Easter which I use to observe, I received from my elders, who did send me
Bishop hither: which all our fathers, men beloved of God, are known to have
celebrated after the same manner. Which that it may not seem unto any to be
contemned and rejected: it is the same which the blessed Evangelist John, the
disciple specially beloved by our Lord, with all the Churches which he did
oversee, is read to have celebrated. Fridegodus (who wrote the life of Wilfride
at the command of Odo archbishop of Canterbury) expresses the same in verse,
after this manner. Fridegod. Vit. Wilfrid. MS. in Bibliothec. Cottonian.
Nos seriem patriam non frivola scripta tenemus,
Discipulo i. Sancti vel Beati.
eusebij Polycarpo dante Iohannis.
Ille etenim bis septenae sub tempore Phaebae
Sanctum praefixit nobis fore Pascha colendum,
Atque nefas dixit, si quis contraria sentit.
On the contrary side Wilfride objected unto Colman and his clerks of
Ireland; that they with their accomplices, the Pictes and the Brittons, Cum
quibus de duabus ultimis Ocea^i insulis, his non totis, contra totum Orbem
stulto labor pugnant. Wilfrid. apud Bed^ lib. 3. cap. 25.
out of the two utmost Isles, and those not whole neither, did with a foolish
labor fight against the whole world. Et si sanctus erat ac potens virtutibus
ille Columba vester, imo and noster si Christi erat: number praeferri potuit
beatissimo Apostolorum principi? cui Dominus ait: Tu es Petrus, and super hanc
petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam and portae inferi non praevalebunt adversus
eam; Et tibi dabo claves regni coelorum. Ibid.
And if that Columb of yours (says he) yea and ours also if he were Christ's,
was holy and powerful in virtues: could he be preferred before the most
blessed prince of the Apostles? unto whom the Lord said: Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevayle
against it; and I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven.
Which last words wrought much upon the simplicity of King Oswy; who feared,
that Ne forte me adveniente ad feres regni coelorum, nen sit qui reseret,
averso illo qui claves tenere probatur. Ibid.
when he should come to the doors of the kingdom of heaven, there would be
none to open, if he were displeased who was proved to keep the keys: but
prevayled nothing with Bishop Colman; who Tonsuram and Paschae rationem propter
timorem patriae suae contempsit. Vit. Wilfrid. cap. 10
for the fear of his country (as the ancient author of the life of Wilfride
writes) contemned the tonsure and the observation of Easter used by the
Romans; and Colman videns spreta^ suam doctrina^, sectamque esse despecta^;
assumptis his qui se sequi volueru^t, id est, qui Pascha catholicu^ and
tonsura^ coronae (nam and de hoc quaestio non (...) erat) recipere ^oleba^t, in
Scotia^ regressus est. Bed. li. 3. hist. cap. 26. Vide etia^ lib. 4. cap. 4.
taking with him such as would follow him, that is to say, such as would not
receive the catholic Easter and the tonsure of the crown (for of that also
there was then no small question) returned back again into Scotland.

In his room was Wilfride chosen archbishop of York: who had learned at Rome
from archdeacon Boniface, Paschalem rationem, qua^ schismatici Brittanniae and
Hiberniae non cognoverunt; and alias multas Ecclesiasticae disciplinae regulas
Bonifacius archidiacon^^ quasi proprio filio suo diligenter dictavit Vit.
Wilfrid. cap 5. See also Bid, lib. 5. cap. 20.
the course of Easter, which the schismatics of Britain and Ireland did not
know (so go the words of the ancient writer of his life:) and afterward did
brag, Se primum fuisse, qui veru^ Pascha in Northanimbria Scotis eiectis
docuerit, qui cantus Ecclesiasticos antiphonatim instituerit, qui sanctissimi
Benedicti regula^ a monachis observari jusserit. Guili^lm. Malmesbur lib. 3. de
gest. Pontific. Angl.
that he was the first which did teach the true Easter in Northumberland
(having cast out the Scotts,) which did ordain the Ecclesiastical songs to be
parted on sides, and which did command S. Benetts rule to be observed by
Monks. But when he was named to the Archbishopric, Sed perstitit ille negare;
ne ab Episcopis Scottis, vel ab iis quos Scotti ordinaverant, consecrationem
susciperet, quorum communionem seeds aspernaretur Apostolica. Id ibid.
he refused it at the first (as William of Malmesbury relates) least he should
receive his consecration from the Scottish Bishops, or from such as the Scotts
had ordained, whose communion the Apostolic See had rejected. The speech
which he used to this purpose, unto the Kings that had chosen him, is thus
laid down by the writer of his life. O Domini venerabiles Reges; omnibus modis
nobis necessarium est provide considerare, quomodo cum electione vestra, sine
accusatione catholicorum virorum, ad gradum Episcopalem cum Dei adiutorio
venire valeam. Sunt enim hic in Brytannia multi Episcopi, quoru^ nullum meum
est accus^re, quamvis veraciter sciam, quod aut quatuordecim anni sunt, ut
Brytones and Scotti ab illis sunt ordinati, quos nec Apostolica seeds in
communionem recepit, neque eos qui schismaticis consentiunt. Et ideo in mea
humilitate a vobis posco, ut me mittatis cum vestro praesidio ^ans mare ad
Galliarum regionem, ubi catholici Episcopi multi habentur: ut sine controversia
Apostolicae sedis, licet indignus, gradum Episcopalem merear accipere. Vit.
Wilfrid. cap. 12.
O my honorable Lords the Kings; it is necessary for us by all means
providently to consider, how with your election I may (by the help of God)
come to the degree of a Bishop, without the accusation of catholic men. For
there be many Bishops here in Brittayne, none of whom it is my part to accuse,
ordained within these fourteen years by the Brittons and Scotts, whom
neither the Sea Apostolic has received into her communion, nor yet such as
consent with the schismatics. And therefore in my humility I request of you,
that you would send me with your warrant beyond the Sea, into the country of
France, where many Catholic Bishops are to be had; that without any
controversy of the Apostolic See I may be counted meet, though unworthy, to
receive the degree of a Bishop.

While Quo ultra mare moras nectente, Oswius rex, praeventus consiliis
Quartadecimanorum (qui vocaba^tur ita, quia Pascha in quartadecima Luna cum
Iudaeis celebrabant) Ceddam virum sanctissimum, tamen contra regulas, intrusit
tribunali Eboracensi. Guilielm. Malmesbur. lib. 3. de gest. Pontif. Angl.
Wilfride protracted time beyond the Seas, King Oswy led by the advice of the
Quartadecimans (so they injuriously nicknamed the British and Irish, that did
celebrate Easter from the fourteenth to the twentieth day of the moon)
appointed Ordinantes servum Dei religiosissimum and admirabilem Doctorem, de
Hibernia insula venientem nomine Coeodda, adhuc eo ignorante, in sedem
episcopalem Euroicae civitatis indocte contra canones constituerunt. Vit.
Wilfrid. cap 14.
a most religious servant of God and an admirable Doctor that came from
Ireland, named Ceadda, to be ordained Bishop of York in his room. Constituunt
etenim perverso canone Coeddam,
Moribus acclinem, doctrinae robore fortem,
Praesulis eximij servare cubilia: sicque
Audacter vivo sponsam rapuere marito,
says Fridegodus. This Ceadda, being the scholar of Bishop Aidan, was far
otherwise affected to the Brittis^ and Irish then Wilfride was: and therefore
was content to receive his ordination from Ab illo est consecratus antistes,
assumptis in societatem ordinationis duobus de Britonum gente Episcopis, qui
Dominicum Paschae diem secus morem canonicum a XIIII. usque ad XXI. Lunam
celebrant. Non enim erat tunc ullus, excepto illo Wini, in tota Britannia
canonice ordinatus episcopus. Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 28.
Wini Bishop of the West Saxons and two other British Bishops that were of the
Quartadeciman party. For at that time (as Bede notes) there was not in all
Britain any Bishop canonically ordained (that is to say, by such as were of
the communion of the Church of Rome) except that Wini only.

But shortly after, the opposition betwixt these two sides grew to be so great,
that our Cuthbert (Bishop of Lindisfarne) upon his death bed required his
followers; that they should Cum illis autem qui ab unitate catholicae pacis,
vel Pascha non suo tempore celebrando, vel perverse vivendo aberrant, vobis sit
nulla communio: etc. Id. in V^^. Cuthbert. cap. 39.
hold no communion with them which did swerve from the unity of the catholic
peace, either by not celebrating Easte^ in his due time, or by living
perversely: and that they should rather take up his bones and remove their
place of habitation, then any way condescend to submit their necks unto the
yoke of schismatickes. And among the decrees made by some of the Saxon Bishops
(which were to be seen in the library of Sir Thomas Knevet in Northfolke, and
are still, I suppose, preserved there by his heir) this is laid down for one.
Qui ordinati sunt a Scottorum vel Brittanorum Episcop^^, qui in Pascha vel
Tonsura Catholicae non sunt adunati Ecclesiae; iterum a Catholico Episcopo
manus impositione confirmentur. Similiter and Ecclesiae quae ab illis Episcopis
ordinantur, aqua exorcizata aspergantur, and aliqua collectione confirmentur.
Licentiam quoque non habemus eis poscentibus Chrismam vel Eucharistiam dare, ni
ante confessi fuerint velle se nobiscum esse in unitate Ecclesiae. Et qui ex
horum similiter gente, vel quacunque, de baptismo suo dubitaverint,
baptizentur. Decret. Pontific. MS. cap. 9. De co^municatione Scottoru^ and
Brittonu^, qui in Pascha and tonsura catholici no^ sunt.
Such as have received ordination from the Bishops of the Scotts or Brittaynes,
who in the matter of Easter and Tonsure are not united unto the Catholic
Church, let them be again by imposition of hands confirmed by a Catholic
Bishop. In like manner also let the Churches that have bin ordered by those
Bishops, be sprinkled with exorcized water, and confirmed with some service. We
have no license also to give unto them Chrisme or the Eucharist, when they
require it; unless they do first profess, that they will remain with us in
the unity of the Church. And such likewise as either of their nation, or of
any other, shall doubt of their baptism, let them be baptized. Thus did they.
On the other side, how averse the British and the Irish were from having any
communion with those of the Roman party; the Bed. l^b. 2. hist. cap 4.
complaint of Laurentius, Mellitus and Iustus before specified, does
sufficiently manifest. But above all others, the British Priests that dwelt in
West-wales abhorred their communion beyond all measure: as Aldhelme abbot of
Malmesbury declares at large in his Epistle sent to Geruntius king of
Cornwall. where among many other particulars he shows, that Si quilibet de
nostris, id est, Catholicis ad eos habitandi gratia perrexerint, non prius ad
consortiu^ sodalitatis suae adsciscere dignantur, quam quadraginta dierum
spatia in poenitendo peragere compellantur. Aldhelm. epist. ad Domnoni^s.
if any of the Catholics (for so he calls those of his own side) did go to
dwell among them; they would not vouchsafe to admit them unto their company
and society, before they first put them to forty days penance. Yea Quippe
cum usque hodie moris sit Britonum, fide^ religionemque Anglorum pro nihilo
habere, neque in aliquo eis magis communicare quam paganis. Bed. lib. 2. hist.
cap. 20.
even to this day (says Bid, who wrote his history in the year DCCXXXI.) it
is the manner of the Brittons, to hold the faith and the religion of the English
in no account at all, nor to communicate with them in any thing more then with
Pagans. Whereunto those verses of Taliessyn (honored by the Britains with the
title of Ben Beirdh, that is, the chief of the Bardes or wisemen) may be
added: which evidently show, that he wrote after the coming of Austin the
monk into England, and not 50. or 60. years before, as others have imagined.
Gwae'r offeiriad bid
Nys angreifftia gwyd
Ac ny phregetha:
Gwaeny cheidw ey gail
Ac of in vigail,
Ac nys areilia:
Gwae ny cheidw ey dheuaid
Rhac bleidhie, Rhufeniaid
A'i ffon gnwppa.
which Humfrey Lhoyd does thus English.

VVo be to that priest yborne,
That will not cleanly weed his corn
And preach his charge among:
VVo be to that shepherd (I say)
That will not watch his fold always,
As to his office does belong:
VVo be to him that does not keep
From Romish wolves his sheep
With staff and weapon strong.
By all that has been said, the vanity of Osullevan may be seen, who
fayneth the Northren Irish, together with the Pictes and the Britons, to have
been so obsequious unto the Bishop of Rome; that they reformed the celebration
of Easter by them formerly used, as soon as they understood what the rite of
the Roman Church was. Whereas it is known, that after the declaration thereof
made by Pope Honorius and the clergy of Rome; the Northren Irish were nothing
moved therewith, but continued still their own tradition. And therefore Bid
finds no other excuse for Bishop Aidan herein; but that Quod aute^ Pascha non
suo tempore observabat, vel canonicu^ eius tempus ignorans, vel suae gentis
auctoritate, ne agnitum sequeretur, devictus; non approbo nec laudo* Bed. lib.
3. hist. cap. 17.
either he was ignorant of the canonical time, or if he knew it, that he was
so overcome with the authority of his own nation, that he did not follow it:
that he did it, More suae gentis. Ibid. cap. 3.
after the manner of his own nation; and that Pascha contra morem eorum qui
ipsum miserant, facere non potuit. Ibid. cap. 25.
he could not keep Easter contrary to the custom of them which had sent him.
His successor Finan Id. ibid.
contended more fiercely in the business with Ronan his countryman, and
declared himself an open adversary to the Roman rite. Colman that succeeded
him, did tread just in his steps so far, that being put down in the Synod
of Streanshal, yet for fear of his country (as before we have heard out of
the ancient writer of the life of Wilfride) he refused to conform himself;
and chose rather to forgo his archbishopric, then to submit himself unto the
Roman laws. Colmanusque suas inglorius abjicit arces,
Malens Ausonias victui dissolvere leges:
says Fridegodus. Neither did he go away alone: but Colmanus qui de Scotia
erat episcopus, relinquens Britanniam, tulit secum omnes quos in Lindisfarorum
insula congregaverat Scotos. Bed. lib. 4. cap. 4.
took with him all his countrymen that he had gathered together in Lindisfarne
or Holy Island: the Scottish monks also that were at Rippon (in Yorkshire)
Optione data, maluerunt loco cedere, quam Pascha catholicum, caeterosque ritus
canonicos juxta Romanae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae consuetudinem recipere. Id.
lib. 5. cap. 20. See also lib. 3. cap. 25. where Humpu^ seems to be put for
Hrippun.
making choice rather to quit their place, then to admit the observation of
Easter and the rest of the rites according to the custom of the Church of
Rome. And so did the matter rest among the Irish about forty years after that:
until their own countreyman Ibid. cap. 16. and 22.
Adamnanus persuaded most of them to yield to the custom received herein by
all the Churches abroad.

The Pictes did the like not long after, under king Naitan: who Nec mora, quae
dixerat, regia autoritate perfecit. Statim nanque jussu publico mittebantur ad
transcribendu^, discendum, observandum per universas Pictorum provincias
circuli Paschae decennovennales; obliteratis per omnia erroneis octoginta and
quatuor annorum circulis. Attondebantur omnes in coronam ministri altaris ac
monachi. etc. Ibid. cap. 22.
by his regal authority commanded Easter to be observed throughout all his
provinces according to the cycle of XIX. years (abolishing the erroneous
period of LXXXIIII. years which before they used) and caused all Priests and
Monks to be shorn croune-wise, after the Roman manner. The monks also of the
Island of Hy or Y-Columkille, Id. lib. 3. cap. 4. and lib. 5. cap. 23.
by the persuasion of Ecgbert (an English Priest, that had been bredd in
Ireland) in the year of our Lord DCCXVI. forsook the observation of Easter
and the tonsure which they had received from Columkille a hundred and fifty
years before, and followed the Roman rite; about LXXX. years after the time
of Pope Honorius, and the sending of Bishop Aidan from thence into England. The
Brittons in the time of Id. lib. 5. cap. 23. and 24.
Bid retained still their old usage: until See the History of Wales; after
the year* 755. and 808.
Elbodus (who was the chief Bishop of Northwales, and dyed in the year of our
Lord DCCCIX.) brought in the Roman observation of Easter. which is the cause,
why Ego Nennius sancti Elbodi discipulus, aliqua excerpta scribere curavi.
Nen^. MS. in publica Cantabrig. academ. Bibliotheca ubi alia exemplaria haben^:
Ego Nennius ( vel Ninnius) Elvodugi discipulus.
his disciple Nennius, designeth the time wherein he wrote his history, by the
character of the Ab adventu Patricii in jam dictam insulam ( Hiberniams^.)
usque ad cyclu^ decennovennalem in quo sumus, 22. sunt cycli, id est, 421 and
sunt duo anni in Ogdoa* de usque in hunc annum. id.
XIX. years cycle, and not of the other of LXXXIV. But howsoever Northwales
did; it is very probable that West-wales (which of all the other parts was
most eagerly bent against the traditions of the Roman Church) stood out yet
longer. For we find in the Greek writers of the life of Chrysostom, that
certain clergy men which dwelt in the Isles of the Ocean, repaired from the
utmost borders of the habitable world unto Constantinople, in the days of
Methodius (who was Patriarch there, from the year DCCCXLII. to the year
DCCCXLVII.) to enquire of (...). Tom. 8. Chrysostom. edit. Henr. Savil. page
321.6. and in Notis* col. 966.5*
certain Ecclesiastical traditions, and the perfect and exact computation of
Easter. Whereby it appears, that these questions were kept still a foot in
these Islands; and that the resolution of the Bishop of Constantinople was
sought for from hence, as well as the determination of the Bishop of Rome, who
is now made the only Oracle of the world.

Neither is it here to be omitted, that whatsoever broils did pass betwixt
our Irish that were not subject to the Sea of Rome, and those others that were
of the Roman communion: in the succeeding ages, they of the one side were
esteemed to be Saints, as well as they of the other; Aidan for example and
Finan, who were counted ringleaders of the Quartadeciman party, as well as
Wilfride and Cuthbert, who were so violent against it. Yet now a days men are
made to believe, that out of the communion of the Church of Rome nothing but
Hell can be looked for; and that subjection to the Bishop of Rome, as to the
visible Head of the Universal Church, is required as a matter necessary to
salvation. Which if it may go current for good Divinity: the case is like to
go hard, not only with the Bed. lib. ^hist. cap 2.
twelve hundred British Monks of Bangor, who were martyred in one day by
Edelfride king of Northumberland (whom our Annals style by the name of An.
Dom. 612 ( vel 613.) Bellum Cairelegion, ubi Sancti occisi sunt. Anual. Vlton.
MS.
the Saints;) but also with S. Aidan and S. Finan, who deserve to be honored
by the English nation with as venerable a remembrance, as (I do not say,
Wilfride and Cuthbert, but) Austin the monk and his followers. For by the
ministry of Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 3. and 6.
Aidan was the kingdom of Northumberland recovered from paganism: (whereunto
belonged then, beside the shire of Northumberland and the lands beyond it unto
Edenborrow Frith, Cumberland also and Westmoreland, Lancashire, Yorkshire, and
the Bishopric of Durham:) and by the means of Ibid. cap. 21.22.24.
Finan, not only Essex and Middlesex regained, but also the large kingdom of
Mercia converted first unto Christianity; which comprehended under it,
Glocestershire, Herefordshire, Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Leicestershire,
Rutlandshire, Northamptonshire, Lincolneshire, Huntingtonshire, Bedfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, Staffordshire, Darbyshire, Shropshire,
Nottinghamshire, Chesshire, and half Hertfordshire.

The Scottish that professed no subjection to the Church of Rome, were they,
that sent preachers for the conversion of these countries; and ordained Bishops
to govern them: namely Ibid. cap 3.5.17.25.26.
Aidan, Finan and Colman successively for the kingdom of Northumberland; Ibid.
cap. 22.25.
for the East Saxons, Cedd brother to Ceadda the Bishop of York before
mentioned; Ibid cap. 21.24.
for the Middle-Angles and the Mercians, Diuma (for Paucitas enim Sacerdotu^
cogebat unum antistitem duobus populis praefici. Ibid. cap. ^1.
the paucitie of Priests, says Bid, constrained one Bishop to be appointed
over two people) and after him Cellach and Trumhere. And these with their
followers, notwithstanding their division from the Sea of Rome, were for Ibid.
cap. 3.4.5.17.26.
their extraordinary sanctity of life and painfulnesse in preaching the
Gospel (wherein they went far beyond those of the other side, that afterward
thrust them out and entered in upon their labors) exceedingly reverenced by all
that knew them: Aidan especially, who Etsi Pascha contra morem eorum qui ipsum
miserant, facere non potuit; opera tamen fidei, pietatis and dilectionis, juxta
morem omnibus sanctis consuetum diligenter exequi curavit. Vnde ab omnibus,
etiam his qui de Pascha aliter sentieba^t, merito diligebatur: nec ^olum a
mediocribus, verum ab ipsis quoque episcopis, Honorio Cantuarioru^ and Felice
Orientalium Anglorum, venerationi habitus est Ibid. cap. 25.
although he could not keep Easter (says Bid) contrary to the manner of them
which had sent him; yet he was careful diligently to perform the works of
faith and godliness and love, according to the manner used by all holy men.
Whereupon he was worthily beloved of all, even of them also who thought
otherwise of Easter then he did: and was had in reverence not only by them that
were of meaner rank, but also by the Bishops themselves, Honorius of
Canterbury, and Felix of the East Angles. Neither did Honorius and Felix any
other way carry themselves herein, then their predecessors Laurentius, Mellitus
and Iustus had done before them: who writing unto the Bishops of Ireland, that
dissented from the Church of Rome in the celebration of Easter and many other
things; made no scruple to prefixe this loving and respectfull superscription
to their letters. Dominis charissimis fratribus, Episcopis vel abbatibus per
universam Scotiam; Laurentius, Mellitus and Iustus episcopi, servi servorum
Dei. Id. lib. 2. cap. 4.
To our Lords and most dear brethren, the Bishops or Abbots throughout all
Scotland; Laurentius, Mellitus and Iustus Bishops, the servants of the servants
of God. For howsoever Ireland at that time Gens quanquam absque reliquaru^
gentium legibus; tamen in Christiani vigoris dogmate florens, omnium vicinarum
gentium fide^ praepollet. Io^^ it. Columban. cap. 1.
received not the same laws wherewith other nations were governed: yet it so
flourished in the vigor of Christian doctrine, (as Abbot Jonas testifies)
that it exceeded the faith of all the neighbor nations; and in that respect
was generally had in honor by them.

It now remains that in the last place we should consider the Popes power in
disposing the temporal state of this kingdom: which either directly or
indirectly, by hook or by crook, this graund Usurper would draw unto himself.
First therefore Cardinal Allen would have us to know, that Allen. Answer to
the Execution of Justice in England. page 140.
the Sea Apostolic has an old claim unto the soverainty of the country of
Ireland; and that before the covenants passed between king John and the same
Sea. Which challenges (says he) Princes commonly yield not up, by what ground
so ever they come. What Princes use to yield or not yield, I leave to the
skanning of those, unto whom Princes matters do belong: for the Cardinals
Prince I dare be bold to say, that if it be not his use to play fast and loose
with other Princes, the matter is not now to do; whatsoever right he could
pretend to the temporal state of Ireland* he has transferred it (more then
once) unto the Kings of England. and when the ground of his claim shall be
looked into; it will be found so frivolous and so ridiculous, that we need not
care three chippes, whether he yield it up or keep it to himself. For
whatsoever become of his idle challenges: the Crown of England has otherwise
obtained an undoubted right unto the soveraintie of this country; partly by
Conquest, prosecuted at first upon occasion of a Sociall war, par^ly by the
several submissions of the chieftaines of the land made afterward. For Cum
juri suo renuntiare liberum sit cuilibet (quanqua^ subjectionis cujuslibet
hactenus immunes) his tamen hodie nostris diebus, Anglorum Regi Henrico secundo
omnes Hiberniae principes firmis fidei sacramentique vin^ulis se sponte
submiseru^t. G^rald. Cambrens Hibern exp^gnat. lib. 2. cap. 7.
whereas it is free for all men, although they have been formerly quitt from
all subjection, to renounce their own right: yet now in these our days (says
Giraldus Cambrensis, in his history of the Conquest of Ireland) all the
Princes of Ireland did voluntarily submitt, and bind themselves with firm
bonds of faith and oath, unto Henry the second King of England. The like might
be said of the general submissions made in the days of King Richard the
second and King Henry the eighth: to speak nothing of the prescription of
diverse hundreds of years possession; which was the plea that Judge. 11.26.
Iephte used to the Ammonites, and is indeed the best evidence that the Bishop,
of Romes own Genebrard. Chronograph. lib. 3. in Sylvest. I. Bellarmin. de
Roman. Pontis. li. 5. cap. 9. in fine.
proctors do produce for their Masters right to Rome it self.

For the Popes direct dominion over Ireland; two titles are brought forth;
beside those covenants of King John (mentioned by Allen) which he that has
any understanding in our state, knows to be clearly void and worth nothing.
The one is taken from a special grant supposed to be made by the inhabitants
of the country, at the time of their first conversion unto Christianity: the
other from a right which Insulas omnes sibi speciali quodam jure vendicat.
Girald. Cambrens. Hibern. expugnat. lib. 2. cap. 7.
the Pope challenges unto himself over all Islands in general. The former of
these was devised of late by an Italian, in the reign of King Henry the
eighth; the later was found out in the days of King Henry the second: before
whose time not one footsteppe does appear in all antiquity of any claim
that the Bishop of Rome should make to the dominion of Ireland; no not in the
Popes own records, which have been curiously searched by Nicolaus Arragonius,
and other ministers of his, who have purposely written of the particulars of
his temporal estate. The Italian of whom I spoke, is Polydore Vergil; he that
composed the book De inventoribus rerum, of the first Inventers of things:
among whom he himself may challenge a place for this invention; if the
Inventers of lies be admitted to have any room in that company. This man
being sent over by the Pope into England Nos hanc olim quaesturam aliquot per
annos gessimus; eiusque muneris obeundi caussa, primum in Angliam venimus.
Polydor. Vergil Anglic. histor lib. ^
for the collecting of his Peter Pence, undertook the writing of the History
of that nation; wherein he forgatt not by the way to do the best service he
could to his Lord that had employed him thither. There he tells an idle tale;
how the Irish being moved to accept Henry the second for their King, Id Hiberni
posse fieri, nisi autoritate Romani Pontificis negabant; quod iam inde ab
initio, post Christianam religionem acceptam, sese ac omnia sua in eius
ditionem dedidissent: atque constanter affirmaba^t, non alium habere se
Dominum, praeter ipsum Pontificem; id quod etiam nunc jactitant Id. lib. 13.
eiusd. histor.
did deny that this could be done otherwise then by the Bishop of Romes
authority: because (forsooth) that from the very beginning, after they had
accepted Christian religion, they had yielded themselves and all that they had
into his power. and they did constantly affirm (says this fabler) that they
had no other Lord, beside the Pope: of which also they yet do brag.

The Italian is followed herein by two Englishmen, that wished the Popes
advancement as much as he; Edmund Campian and Nicholas Sanders. the one whereof
writes, that Camp. History of Ireland. lib. 2. cap. 1.
immediately after Christianity planted here, the whole Island with one consent
gave themselves no^ only into the spiritual, but also into the temporal
Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome. the other in Polydores own words (though he
name him not) that Hiberni initio statim post Christianam religionem acceptam,
se suaque omnia in Pontificis Romani ditionem dederant; nec quenquam alium
supremum Hiberniae Principem ad illud usque tempus praeter unum Romanu^
Pontificem agnoverunt. Sander. de schism. Anglican. lib. 1. ad an. 1542.
the Irish from the beginning, presently after they had received Christian
religion, gave up themselves and all that they had into the power of the Bishop
of Rome; and that until the time of King Henry the second, they did
acknowledge no other supreme Prince of Ireland, beside the Bishop of Rome
alone. For confutation of which dream, we need not have recourse to our own
Chronicles: the Bull of Adrian the fourth, wherein he gives liberty to King
Henry the second to enter upon Ireland, sufficiently discovers the vanity
thereof. For he there showing what right the Church of Rome pretended unto
Ireland, makes no mention at all of this (which had been the fairest and
clearest title that could be alleged, if any such had been then existent in
rerum natura) but is feign to fly unto a far fetched interest which he says
the Church of Rome has unto all Christian Islands. Sane omnes Insulas, quibus
Sol justitiae Christus illuxit* and quae documenta fidei Christianae
susceperunt, ad jus S Petri and sacrosanctae Romanae Ecclesiae (quod tua etiam
Nobilitas recognoscit) non est dubium pertinere. Bull. Adrian. IV. ad Henr. l
l. Angl. reg.
Truly (says he to the King) there is no doubt, but that all Islands unto which
Christ the Sun of righteousness has shined, and which have received the
instructions of the Christian faith, do pertain to the right of Saint Peter
and the holy Church of Rome: which your Nobleness also does acknowledge.

If you would further understand the ground of this strange claim, whereby all
Christian Islands at a clap are challenged to be parcel of S. Peter's
patrimony: you shall have it from Johannes Sarisburiensis, who was most inward
with Pope Adrian, and obtained from him this very grant whereof now we are
speaking. Ad preces meas illustri Regi Angloru^ Henrico secundo concessit and
dedit Hibernia^ iure haereditario possidenda^: sicut literae ipsius testantur
in hodiernum diem. Nam omnes insulae, de iure antiquo, ex donatione
Constantini, qui eam fundavit and dotavit, dicuntur ad Romanam Ecclesiam
pertinere. Iohann. Saruburiens. Metalogic. lib. 4. cap. 42.
At my request (says he) he granted Ireland to the illustrious King of England
Henry the second, and gave it to be possessed by right of inheritance: as his
own letters do testify unto this day. For all Islands, of ancient right, are
said to belong to the Church of Rom^, by the donation of Constantine, who
founded and endowed the same. But will you see, what a goodly title here is, in
the mean time? First, the Donation of Constantine has been long since
discovered to be a notorious forgerie, and is rejected by all men of judgment
as a senseless fiction. Secondly, in the whole context of this forged Donation
I find mention made of Islands in one place only: Per nostram Imperialem
iussionem sacram, tam in Orient qu^m in Occidente, vel etiam septentrionali
and meridiana plaga, videlicet in Iudaea, Graecia, Asia, Thracia, Aphrica and
Italia^, vel diversis Insulis nostra largitate eis libertatem concessimus: ea
prorsus ratione, ut per manus beatissimi patris nostri Sylvestri Pontificis
successorumque eius omnia disponantur. Edict. Constantin
where no more power is given to the Church of Rome over them, then in general
over the whole Continent (by East and by West, by North and by South) and in
particular over Iudaea, Graecia, Asia, Thracia, and Aphrica; which use not to
pass in the account of S. Peter's temporal patrimony. Thirdly, it does not
appear, that Constantine himself had any interest in the kingdom of
Ireland: how then could he confer it upon another? Some words there be in an
oration of Vltra Oceanum vero quid erat praeter Britanniam? Quae a vobis ita
recuperata est ut illae quoque nationes terminis eiusdem insulae cohaerentes
vestris nutibus obsequantur. Eumen. Panegyric. ad Constant.
Eumenius the Rhetorician, by which peradventure it may be collected, that his
father Constantius bare some stroke here: but that the Island was ever possessed
by the Romans, or accounted a parcel of the Empire, cannot be proved by any
sufficient testimony of antiquity. Fourthly, the late writers that are of
another mind, as Pomponius Laetus, Cuspinian and others, do yet affirm
withal, Pomp. Lat. in Roman. histor. Compend. Io. Cuspinian. in Caesarib. Seb.
Munster. in lib. 2 Cosmograph.
that in the division of the Empire after Constantines death, Ireland was
assigned unto Constantinus the eldest son: which will hardly stand with this
donation of the Islands supposed to be formerly made unto the Bishop of Rome and
his successors. Pope Adrian therefore, and John of Salisbury his so^licitor,
had need seek some better warrant for the title of Ireland, then the Donation
of Constantine.

John Harding in his Chronicle says, that the Kings of England have right
Harding. Chronic. cap. 241.
To Ireland also, by king Henry (le fitz
Of Maude, daughter of first King Henry)
That conquered it, for their great heresy.
which in another place he expresses more at large, in this manner. Ibi^. cap.
1^^.
The King Henry then, conquered all Ireland
By Papal dome, there of his royaltee
The profytes and revenues of the land
The domination, and the soverayntee
For error which again the spiritualtee
They held full long, and would not been correct
Of heresies, with which they were infect.
Philip Osullevan on the other side, does not only deny Osullevan. Histor.
Catholic. Iberniae, tom. 2. lib. 1. cap 7.
that Ireland was infected with any heresy: but would also have us believe,
Ibid. cap. 4.5.9. and lib 2. cap. 3.
that the Pope never intended to confer the Lordship of Ireland upon the
Kings of England. For where it is said in Pope Adrians Bull; Illius terrae
populus te recipiat, and sicut Dominum veneretur. Bull Adrian. IV.
Let the people of that land receive thee, and reverence thee as a Lord: the
meaning thereof is, says this Glozer, Sicut Dominum veneretur, id est, ut
Principem dignum magno honor; non Dominum Iberniae, sed praefectum caussa
colligendi tributi Ecclesiastici. Osullevan. Histor. Ibern. fol. 59. ^. in
ma^gine.
Let them reverence thee, as a Prince worthy of great honor; not as Lord of
Ireland, but as a Deputy appointed for the collecting of the Ecclesiastical
tribute. It is true indeed that King Henry the second, to the end he might the
more easily obtain the Popes good will for his entering upon Ireland, did
voluntarily offer unto him the payment of a yearly pension of one penny out of
every house in the country: which (for ought that I can learn) was the first
Ecclesiastical tribute that ever came unto the Popes coffers out of Ireland.
But that King Henry got nothing else by the bargain but the bare office of
collecting the Popes Smoke-silver (for so we called it here, when we paid
it) is so dull a conceit; that I do somewhat wonder how Osullevan himself
could be such a blockhead, as not to discern the senselessness of it.

What the King sought for and obtained, is sufficiently declared by them that
writ the history of his reign. Robert. de Monte. Matthew. Paris. and Nico^.
Trivett. in Chronic. an 1155.
In the year of our Lord MCLV. the first Bull was sent unto him by Pope
Adrian: the sum whereof is thus laid down in a second Bull, directed unto him
by Alexander the third, the immediate successor of the other. Venerabilis
Adriani Papae vestigiis inhaerentes, vestrique desiderii fructum attendentes;
concessionem^eiusdem super Hibernici regni domini vobis indulto (salva Beato
Petro and sacrosanctae Ecclesiae Romanae, sicut in Anglia sic in Hibernia, de
singulis domibus annua unius denarii pensione) ratam habemus and confirmamus.
Bull. Aleuandri I ll. apud Giraldum Cambrens. lib. 2. Histor. Hibern. expugnat.
cap. 6. in codicibus. MS. (in edito enim caput hoc mancum est) and Io. Rossum
Warvicensem, in tract. De terris Coronae Angliae annexis.
Following the stepps of reverend Pope Adrian, and attending the fruit of your
desire; we ratify and confirm his grant concerning the dominion of the
KINGDOM of Ireland conferred upon you: reserving unto S. Peter and the holy
Church of Rome, as in England so in Ireland, the yearly pension of one penny
out of every house. In this sort did Pope Adrian, as much as lay in him, give
Ireland unto King Henry, haereditario jure possidendam, to be possessed by
right of inheritance; and withal Annulum quoque per me transmisit aureum,
smaragdo optimo decoratum, quo fieret investitura iuris in gerenda Hibernia:
idemque adhuc annulus in curiali archio publico custodiri jussus est. Io.
Sarisbur. Metalogic. lib. 4. cap* 42. de quo consulendus etiam est Giraldus
Ca^hrens. lib. 2. Hibern. expugnat. cap. 6.
sent unto him a ring of gold, set with a fair Emerauld, for his investiture
in the right thereof: as Johannes Sarisburiensis, who was the principal agent
betwixt them both in this business, does expressly testify. After this, in
the year MCLXXI. the King himself came hither in person: where the
Archbishops and Bishops of Ireland In Regem and Dominum receperunt. Matthew
Paris. in Historia maiori. an. 1171. Roger. Hoveden* in posteriore part
Annalium. Johan. Brampton in Historia Ioralanensi. MS.
received him for their KING and Lord. The King (says John Brampton) Recepit
ab unoquoque Archiepiscopo and Episcopo literas, cum sigillis suis in modum
Chartae pendentibus; regnum Hiberniae sibi and haeredibus suis confirmantes,
and testimonium perhibentes ipsos in Hibernia eum and haeredes suos sibi in
Reges and Dominos in perpetuu^ constituisse. Io. Brampton ibid.
received letters from every Archbishop and Bishop, with their seals hanging
upon them in the manner of an Indenture; confirming the KINGDOM of Ireland unto
him and his heirs, and bearing witness that they in Ireland had ordained him
and his heirs to be their KINGS and Lords for ever. At Waterford (says Roger
Hoveden) Venerunt ibidem ad regem Angliae omnes Archiepiscopi, Episcopi,
Abbates totius Hiberniae, and receperunt eum in Regem and Dominum Hiberniae;
iurantes ei and haeredibus suis fidelitatem, and regnandi super eos potestatem
in perpetuum: and inde dederunt ei chartas suas. Exemplo autem clericorum,
praedicti Reges and principes Hiberniae, receperunt simili modo Henricum regem
Angliae in Dominum and Regem Hiberniae; and homines sui devenerunt, and ei and
haeredibus suis fidelitatem iuraverunt contra omnes homines Rog Hoveden. ad an.
1171.
all the Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots of Ireland came unto the King of
England, and received him for KING and Lord of Ireland; swearing fealty to him
and to his heirs, and power to reign over them for ever: and hereof they gave
him their Instruments. The Kings also and Princes of Ireland, by the example of
the clergy, did in like manner receive Henry King of England for Lord and KING
of Ireland; and became his men (or, did him homage) and swore fealty to him
and his heirs against all men.

These things were presently after confirmed in the National Synod held at
Casshell: the Acts whereof in Giraldus Cambrensis are thus concluded. Dignum
etenim and iustissimum est, ut sicut Dominum and Regem ex Anglia sortita est
divinitus Hibernia; sic etiam exinde vivendi formam accipiant meliorem. Girald.
Cambrens. Hibern. Expugnat lib. 1. cap. 34.
For it is fit and most meet, that as Ireland by Gods appointment has gotten a
Lord and a KING from England; so also they should from thence receive a better
form of living. King Henry also at the same time Rex Angliae misit
transscriptum Chartarum universorum Archiepiscoporum and Episcoporum Hiberniae,
ad Alexandrum Papam: and ipse authoritate Apostolica confirmavit illi and
haeredibus suis regnum Hiberniae, secundum formam Chartarum Archiepiscoporum
and Episcoporum Hiberniae. Rog. Hoveden.
sent a transcript of the Instruments of all the Archbishops and Bishops of
Ireland, unto Pope Alexander: who by his Apostolical authority (for so was it
in those days of darkness esteemed to be) did confirm the KINGDOM of
Ireland unto him and his heirs, (according to the form of the Instruments of
the Archbishops and Bishops of Ireland) Nam summus Pontifex regnum illud sibi
and haeredibus suis auctoritate Apostolica confirmavit; and in perpetuum eos
co^stituit inde Reges. Io. Brampton.
and made them KINGS thereof for ever. The King also Perquisierat ab Alexandro*
summo Pontifice, quod liceret ei filium suum quem v^^let Regem Hiberniae
facere, and similiter coronare; ac Reges and potentes eiusdem terrae, qui
subiectione^ ei facere nollent, debellare. Id. ad an. 1177.
obtained further from Pope Alexander, that it might be lawful for him to make
which of his sons he pleased, KING of Ireland, and to crown him accordingly;
and to subdue the Kings and great ones of that land, which would not subject
themselves unto him. Whereupon, in a graund Council held at Oxford in the
year of our Lord MCLXXVII. Iohannem filium suum coram Episcopis and regni sui
principibus Regem Hiberniae constituit. Id. ibid and Gualterus Co^entrensis, in
eiusdem anni histori^.
before the Bishops and Peers of the kingdom he constituted his son John
KING of Ireland; Constituit Iohannem filiu^ suum Regem in Hibernia, concessione
and confirmatione Alexandri summi Pontificis. Rog. Hoveden Annal part. 2 a^ an
1177.
according to that grant and confirmation of Pope Alexander. And to make the
matter yet more sure, in the year MCLXXXVI. he obtained a new license from Pope
Urban the third; Ab co imp^travit; quod unus quem vellet de filiis suis
coronaretur de regno Hiberniae. and hoc confirmavit ei Dominus P^pa Bulla sua:
and in argumentum voluntatis et confirmationis suae, misit ei coronam de penna
pavonis auro contextam* Id. ad an. 1185.
that one of his sons, whom he himself would, should be crowned for the
KINGDOM of Ireland. And this the Pope did not only confirm by his Bull: but
also the year following purposely sent over Cardinal Octavian and Hugo de
Nunant (or Novant) Quibus ipse commisit legatiam in Hiberniam, ad coronandum
ibi Iohannem filium Regis. Sed Dominus Rex coronationem illam distulit. Id. ad
an. 1187.
his legates into Ireland, to crown John the Kings son there.

By all this we may see, how far King Henry the second proceeded in this
business: which I do not so much note, to convince the stoliditie of
Osullevan, who would feign persuade fools, that he was preferred only to be
collector of the Popes Peter-p^nce; as to show, that Ireland at that time was
esteemed a Kingdom, and the Kings of England accounted no less then Kings
thereof. And therefore Paul the fourth needed not make all that noise, and
trouble Ad Dei omnipotentis laudem and gloria^, ac gloriosissimae eius
genitricis Virginis Mariae, totiusque Curiae coelestis honorem, and fidei
Catholicae exaltationem, Philippo Rege and Maria Regina nobis super hoc
humiliter supplicantibus, de fratru^ nostrorum consilio and Apostolicae
potestatis plenitudine, Apostolica authoritate Regnum Hiberniae perpetuo
erigimus; ac titulo, dignitate, honor, facultatibus, iuribus, insigniis,
pr^rogativis, antelationibus, praeeminentiis regiis, ac quibus alia Christi
fidelium Regna utuntur, potiuntur, and gaudent, ac uti, potiri, and gaudere
poterunt, in futurum insignimus and decoramus. Bulla Pauli IV. in Rotu^o
Patentium, ann. ^ and 3. Philippi and Mariae, in Cancellaria Hiberniae.
the whole Court of heaven with the matter: when in the year MDLV. he took
upon him by his Apostolical authority (such I am sure, as none of the
Apostles of Christ did ever assume unto themselves) to erect Ireland unto the
title and dignity of a Kingdom. Whereas he might have found, even in his own
Roman Provincial, that Ireland was reckoned among the Kingdoms of
Christendom, before he was borne. Insomuch, that in the year MCCCCXVII. when
the legates of the King of England and the French Kings ambassadors fell at
variance in the Council of Constance for precedencie; the English Orators,
among other arguments, alleged this also for themselves. Satis constat,
secundum Albertum Magnu^ and Bartholomaeum de proprietatibus rerum, quod toto
Mundo in tres parts diviso (videlicet Asiam, Africam and Europam) Europa in
quatuor dividitur regna: primum videlicet Romanum, secundum
Constantinopolitanum, tertium regnum Hiberniae quod iam translatum est in
Anglicos, and quartum regnum Hispaniae. Ex quo patet, quod rex Angliae and
regnum suum sunt de eminentioribus antiquioribus Regibus and Regnis totius
Europae: quam praerogativam regnum Franciae non fertur obtinere. Act. Council.
Constant. Sess. 28. MS. in Bibliotheca Regia Iacobaea.
It is well known, that according to Albertus Magnus and Bartholomaeus in his
book de proprietatibus rerum, the whole world being divided into three parts
(to wit, Asia, Africa and Europe) Europe is divided into four Kingdoms:
namely, the Roman for the first, the Constantinopolitane for the second, the
third the kingdom of Ireland which is now translated unto the English, and the
fourth the kingdom of Spain. Whereby it appears, that the king of England
and his kingdom are of the more eminent ancient Kings and Kingdoms of all
Europe: which prerogative the kingdom of France is not said to obtain. And
this have I here inserted the more willingly, because it makes something for
the honor of my country (to which, I confess, I am very much devoted) and in
the printed Acts of the Council it is not commonly to be had.

But now comes forth Osullevan again, and like a little fury flies upon
Cuius mali maxima culpa in aliquot Angloibernos Sacerdotes iure transferenda
est; qui tartareum dogma ab Orco in Catholicoru^ per niciem emissu^ non
^^egabant, licere Catholicis contra Catholicos and sua^ patriam pro Haereticis
gerere arm^ and dimicare, Philip. Osullevan. Hist. Catholic. Iberniae, tom. 4.
lib. 3. cap. ^. fol. 263. edit. Vlyssipon. an. 1621.
the English-Irish Priests of his own religion, which in the late rebellion of
the Earl of Tirone did not deny that Hellish doctrine, fetched out of Hell for
the destruction of Catholics, that it is lawful for Catholics to bear arms
and fight for Heretics against Catholics and their country. or rather (if
you will have it in plainer terms) that it is lawful for them of the Romish
religion, to bear arms and fight for their Sovereign and fellow subjects
that are of another profession, against those of their own religion that
traitorously rebel against their Prince and country. and to show, Haec est
Academiarum censura; qua liquido co^stat, quanta ignoratione and caligi ne
erraverint illi Iberni, qui in hoc bello* Protestantibus opem tulerunt, and
Catholicos oppugnarunt: quamque insanam and venenosam doctrina^ attulerint
nonnulli doctiores vulgo habiti, qui saeculares homines ad Reginae parts
sequendas exhortati, a fide tuenda averterunt. Id. tom. 3. lib. 8. cap. 7. fol.
204.
how mad and how venomous a doctrine they did bring (these be the caitiffes
own terms) that exhorted the laity to follow the Queens side: he sets down
the Censure of the Doctors of the Universitie of Salamanca and Vallodilid,
published in the year MDCIII. for the justification of that Rebellion, and the
declaration of Pope Clement the eights letters touching the same; wherein he
signifies that Cum enim Pontifex dicat Anglos adversus Catholicam Religione^
pugnare, eosque non minus ac Turcas oppugnari debere; eisdemque gratiis eos
oppugnantes prosequatur, quibus co^tra Turcas pugnantes prosequitur: quis
dubitet, bellu^ ab Anglis adversus exercitu^ Catholicu^ omnino iniquu^ geri?
Censur. Doct. Salmantic. et Vallisolet. de Hibernia bello.
the English ought to be set upon no less then the Turks, and imparteth the
same favors unto such as set upon them, that he does unto such as fight
against the Turks. Such wholesome directions does the Bishop of Rome give unto
those that will be ruled by him: far different (I wisse) from that holy
doctrine, wherewith the Church of Rome was at first seasoned by the Apostles.
Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers; for there is no power but
of God: was the lesson that S. Paul taught to the ancient Romans. Where if it
be demanded; Quid, and illa potestas, quae servos Dei persequitur, fidem
impugnat, religionem subver^it, a Deo est? Ad quod respondendum, quod etiam
talis potestas a Deo data est, ad vindictam quidem malorum, laudem vero
bonorum. Sedul. in Romans 13.
whether that power also, which persecuteth the servants of God, impugneth the
faith, and subverteth religion, be of God? our countreyman Sedulius will teach
us to answer with Origin; that even such a power as that, is given of God, for
the revenge of the evil, and the praise of the good. although he were as
wicked, as either Nero among the Romans or Herod among the Jews: the one
whereof most cruelly persecuted the Christians, the other Christ himself.

And yet when the one of them swayed the scepter, S. Paul told the Christian
Romans; that they Romans 13.5.
must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake: and
of the causeless fear of the other, these verses of Sedulius are solemnly
song in the Church of Rome, even unto this day. Sedul in Hymno acrostich. de
Vi^a Christi.
Herodes hostis impie,
Christum venire quid times?
Non abripit mortalia,
Qui regna dat coelestia.
Why, wicked Herod, do thou fear
And at Christ's coming frown?
The mortal he takes not away,
That gives the heavenly crown.
a better paraphrase whereof you cannot have, then this which Claudius has
inserted into his Collections upon S. Matthew. Rex iste qui natus est, non
venit Reges pugnando superare, sed moriendo mirabiliter subiugare: neque ideo
natus est ut tibi succedat, sed ut in eum mu^dus fideliter credat Venit enim,
non ut regnet viva^, sed ut triumphet occisus: nec ut sibi de aliis gentibus
auro exercitu^ quaerat; sed ut pro salvandis gentibus preti osum sanguine^
fundat. Inaniter invidendo timuisti successorem, quem credendo debuisti
quaerere salvatorem: quia si in eum crederes, cum eo regnares; and sicut ab
illo accepisti temporale regnum, acciperes etiam sempiternum. Hujus enim pueri
regnum non est de hoc mundo; sed per ipsum regnatur in hoc mundo. Ipse est
etiam Sapientia Dei, quae dicit in Proverbiis: Per me Reges regnant. Puer iste
Verbum Dei est, puer iste Virtus and Sapientia Dei est. Si pot^s, contra Dei
sapientiam cogita: in tuam perniciem versaris, and nescis. Tu enim regnum
nullatenus habuisses, nisi ab isto puero qui nunc natus est accepisses. Claud.
lib. 1. in Matthew.
That King which is borne, does not come to overcome Kings by fighting, but to
subdue them after a wonderful manner by dying: neither is he borne to the end
that he may succeed thee, but that the world may faithfully believe in him. For
he is come, not that he may fight being alive, but that he may triumph being
slain: nor that he may with gold get an army unto himself out of other
nations, but that he may shed his precious blood for the saving of the nations.
Vainly did thou by envying fear him to be thy successor, whom by believing
thou ought to seek as thy Savior: because if thou did believe in him,
thou should reign with him; and as thou have received a temporal kingdom
from him, thou should also receive from him an everlasting. For the kingdom
of this Child is not of this world; but by him it is that men do reign in
this world. He is the Wisdom of God, which says in the Proverbes: By me
Kings reign. This Child is the Word of God: this Child is the Power and
Wisdom of God. If thou can, think against the Wisdom of God* thou
workest thine own destruction, and do not know it. For thou by no means
should have had thy kingdom, unless thou had received it from that
Child which now is borne.

As for the Censure of the Doctors of Salamanca and Vallodilid: our Nobility
and Gentry, by the faithful service which at that time they performed unto the
Crown of England, did make a real confutation of it. Of whose fidelity in
this kind I am so well persuaded, that I do assure my self, that neither the
names of Franciscus Zumel and Alphonsus Curiel (how great Schoolmen soever
they were) nor of the Fathers of the Society (Johannes de Ziguenza, Emanuel de
Roias, and Gaspar de Mena) nor of the Pope himself, upon whose sentence they
wholly ground their Resolution; either then was or hereafter will be of any
force, to remove them one whit from the allegiance and duty which they do
owe unto their King and Country. Nay I am in good hope, that their Ioyall
minds will so far distaste that evil lesson, which those great Rabbis of
theirs would have them learn; that it will teach them to unlearne another bad
lesson, wherewith they have been most miserably deluded: namely, that In
doctrina religionis non quid dicatur, sed quis loquatur attendendum esse. Tho.
Stapleton. De^ens. Ecclesiastic. a^thoritat. lib. 3. cap. 7. and Demonstrat.
Principior. Doctrinal. lib. 10. cap. 5.
in the doctrine of Religion we are to attend, not what the thing is that is
said, but what the person is that speaks it. But how dangerous a thing it is,
to have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons; and to give
entertainment to the truth, not so much for it self as for the regard that is
had to the deliverer of it: I wish men would learn otherwise, then by woeful
experience in themselves. Veritas propter seipsam diligenda est, non propter
hominem, aut propter Angelum, per quem adnunciatur. Qui enim propter
adnuntiatores eam diligit, potest and mendacia diligere, si qua forte ipsi sua
protulerint. Claud. in Galat. 1.
The truth (says Claudius) is to be loved for it self, not for the Man, or
for the Angel, by whom it is preached. For he that does love it in respect
of the preachers of it, may love lies also, if they peradventure shall deliver
any. as here, without all peradventure, the Pope and his Doctors have done:
unless the teaching of flatt Rebellion and high Treason may pass in the
account of Catholic verities. The Lord of his mercy open their eyes, that
they may see the light and give them grace to receive the love of the truth,
that they may be saved. The Lord likewise grant (if it be his blessed will)
that Truth and Peace may meet together in our days, that we may be all
gathered into Ioh. 10.16.
one fold under one shepherd, and that Psalm. 72.19.
the whole earth may be filled with his glory. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

