Sir. P. S. His Astrophel and Stella.

Wherein the excellence of sweet Poesy is concluded

To the end of which are added, sundry other rare Sonnets of diverse Noble men
and Gentlemen.

At London, Printed for Thomas Newman. Anno. Domini. 1591.

To the worshipful and his very good Freende, Ma. Frauncis Flower Esquire,
increase of all content.
IT was my fortune (right worshipful) not many days since, to light upon the
famous device of Astrophel and Stella, which carrying the general commendation
of all men of judgment, and being reported to be one of the rarest things that
ever any Englishman set abroach, I have thought good to publish it under your
name, both for I know the excellency of your worships conceit, above all
other to be such, as is only fit to discern of all matters of wit, as also
for the credit and countenance your patronage may give to such a work.
Accept of it I beseech you, as the first fruits of my affection, which desires
to approve it self in all duty unto you: and though the Argument perhaps may
seem too light for your grave view, yet considering the worthiness of the
Author, I hope you will entertain it accordingly. For my part, I have been
very careful in the Printing of it, and where as being spread abroad in
written Coppies, it had gathered much corruption by ill Writers: I have used
their help and advice in correcting and restoring it to his first dignity,
that I know were of skill and experience in those matters. And the rather was
I moved to set it forth, because I thought it pity any thing proceeding
from so rare a man, should be obscured, or that his fame should not still be
nourisht in his works, whom the works with one united grief bewailed. Thus
craving pardon for my bold attempt, and desiring the continuance of your
worshippes favor unto me, I end.

Yours always to be commanded. Tho: Newman.

Somewhat to read for them that list.
TEmpus adest plausus aurea pompa venit, so ends the Scene of Idiots, and
enter Astrophel in pomp. Gentlemen that have seen a thousand lines of folly,
drawn forth ex vno puncto impudentiae, and two famous Mountains to go to the
conception of one Mouse, that have had your ears deafned with the echo of
Fames brazen towers, when only they have been touched with a leaden pen, that
have seen Pan sitting in his bower of delights, and a number of Midasses to
admire his miserable hornepipes, let not your surfeted sight, new come from
such puppetplay, think scorn to turn aside into this Theater of pleasure, for
here you shall find a paper stage streud with pearl, an artificial heaven to
ouershadow the fair frame, and crystal walls to encounter your curious eyes,
whiles the tragicommody of love is performed by starlight. The chief Actor
here is Melpomene, whose dusky robes dipped in the ynke of tears, as yet seem
to drop when I view them near. The argument cruel chastity, the Prologue
hope, the Epilogue despair, videte queso et linguis animisque fauete. And here
peradventure, my witles youth may be taxt with a margent note of presumption,
for offering to put up any motion of applause in the behalf of so excellent a
Poet, (the least syllable of whose name sounded in the ears of judgment, is
able to give the meanest line he writes a dowry of immortality) yet those that
observe how jewels oftentimes com to their hands that know not their value, and
that the cockscombes of our days, like Esops Cock, had rather have a Barley
kernel wrapped up in a Ballet, then they will dig for the wealth of wit in any
ground that they know not, I hope will also hold me excused, though I open the
gate to his glory, and inuit idle ears to the admiration of his melancholy.

Quid petitur sacris nisi tantum fama poetis.
Which although it be oftentimes imprisoned in Ladies casks, and the president
books of such as cannot see without another man's spectacles, yet at length it
breaks forth in spite of his keepers, and uses some private pen (in steed
of a picklock) to procure his violent enlargement.

The Sun for a time, may mask his golden head in a cloud: yet in the end,
the thick veil does vanish, and his embellished blandishment appears. Long
has Astrophel (Englands Sun) withheld the beams of his spirit, from the
common veiw of our dark sense, and night has houered over the gardens of the
nine Sisters, while Ignis fatuus, and gross fatty flames (such as commonly
arise out of Dunghilles) have took occasion in the midst eclipse of his
shining perfections, to wander a broad with a wispe of paper at their tails
like Hobgoblins, and lead men up and down in a circle of absurdity a whole
week, and never know where they are. But now that cloud of sorrow is
dissolved, which fiery Love, exhaled from his dewie hair, and affection has
unburdened the laboring streams of her womb, in the low cesterne of his
grave: the night has resigned her iettie throne unto Lucifer, and clear
daylight possesses the sky that was dimmed; wherefore break of your dance
you Fayries and Elues, and from the fields with the torn carcases of your
Timbrils, for your kingdom is expired. Put out your rush candles, you Poets
and Rimers, and bequeath your crazed quaterzayns to the Chaundlers, for lo,
here he comes that has broe^k your legs. Apollo has resigned his Iuory Harp
unto Astrophel, and he like Mercury, must lull you a sleep with his music.
Sleep Argus, sleep Ignorance, sleep Impudence, for Mercury has Io, and only
Io Paean belongs to Astrophel. Dear Astrophel, that in the ashes of thy
Love, live again like the Phoenix; o might thy body (as thy name) live
again likewise, here amongst us: but the earth, the mother of mortality, has
snacht thee too soon into her chilled cold arms, and will not let thee by
any means, be drawn from her deadly embrace; and thy divine Soul, carried on
an Angels wings to heaven, is installed in Hermes place, sole prolocutor to the
Gods. Therefore may thou never return from the Elisian fields like
Orpheus, therefore must we ever mourn for our Orpheus.

Feign would a second spring of passion here spend it self on his sweet
remembrance: but Religion that rebukes profane lamentation, drinks in the
rivers of those dispaireful tears, which languorous ruth has outwelled, and
bids me look back to the house of honor, where from one and the self same
root of renown, I shall find many goodly branches derived, and such as with
the spreading increase of their virtues, may somewhat ouershadow the grief of
his los. Amongst the which fair sister of Phoebus, and eloquent secretary to
the Muses, most rare Countess of Pembroke thou art not to be omitted: whom
Arts do adore as a second Minerua, and our Poets extol as the Patroness of
their invention; for in thee, the Lesbian Sappho with her lirick Harp is
disgraced, and the Laurel Garlande which thy Brother so bravely aduaunst on his
Lance, is still kept green in the Temple of Pallas. Thou only sacrificest thy
soul to contemplation, thou only entertainest empty handed Homer, and keep
the springs of Castalia from being dried up. Learning, wisdom, beauty, and
all other ornaments of Nobility whatsoever, seek to approve themselves in thy
sight, and get a further seal of felicity, from the smiles of thy favor.

O Jove digna viro ni Jove nata fores.
I fear I shall be counted a mercenary flatterer, for mixing my thoughts with
such figurative admiration, but general report that surpasses my praise,
condemns my rethoricke of dullness for so cold a commendation. Indeed to
say the truth, my style is somewhat heavy gated, and cannot dance trip and
go so lively, with oh my love, ah my love, all my loves gone, as other
Sheepheards that have been fools in the Morris time out of mind: nor has my
prose any skill to imitate the Almond leap verse, or sit tabring five years
together nothing but to be, to he: on a paper drum. Only I can keep pace
with Grauesend barge, and care not if I have water enough, to land my ship of
fools with the Term, (the tide I should say.) Now every man is not of that
mind, for some to go the lighter away, will take in their fraught of spangled
feathers, golden Peebles, Straw, Reeds, Bulrushes, or any thing, and then they
bear out their sails as proudly, as if they were balisted with Bulbiefe.
Others are so hardly bested for loading that they are feign to retaile the
cinders of Troy, and the shiuers of broken trunchions, to fill up their boat
that else should go empty: and if they have but a pound weight of good
Merchandise, it shall be placed at the poope, or plucked in a thousand pieces
to credit their carriage. For my part every man as he likes, Men's cuinsque is
est quisque. It Is as good to go in cut fingerd Pumps as cork shoes, if one
were Cornish diamonds on his toes. To explain it by a more familiar example, an
Ass is no great stateman in the beasts commonwealth, though he wear his
ears vpseuant musse, after the Muscouy fashion, and hang the lip like a
Capcase half open, or look as demurely as a six penny brown loaf, for he
has some imperfections that do keep him from the common Council: yet of many,
he is deemed a very virtuous member, and one of the honestest sort of men that
are; So that our opinion (as Sextus Empedocus affirms) gives the name of good
or ill to every thing. Out of whose works (lately translated into English, for
the benefit of unlearned writers) a man might collect a whole book of this
argument, which no doubt would prove a worthy commonwealth matter, and far
better than wits wax karnell: much good worship have the Author.

Such is this golden age wherein we hue, and so replenisht with golden Asses
of all sorts, that if learning had lost it self in a grove of Genealogies,
we need do no more but set an old goose ouerhalfe a dozen pottle pots,
(which are as it were the eggs of invention) and we shall have such a
breed of books within a little while after, as will fill all the world
with the vvilde foul of good wits; I can tell you this is a harder thing
then making gold of quicksiluer, and will trouble you more then the Morrall
of Aesops Glovv-vvorme, has troubled our English Apes, who striving to vvarme
themselves, with the flame of the Philosophers stone, have spent all their
wealth in buying bellovves to blow this false fire. Gentlemen, I fear I
have too much presumed on your idle leisure, and been too bold, to stand
talking all this while in an other man's door: but now I will leave you to
survey the pleasures of Paphos, and offer your smiles on the Aulters of Venus.

Yours in all desire to please, Tho: Nashe.

SIR P. S. HIS ASTROPHEL AND STELLA.
Loving in truth, and feign my love in verse to show,
That the dear She, might take some pleasure of my pain:
Pleasure might cause her read, reading might make her know,
Knowledge might pity win, and pity grace obtain.
I sought fit words, to paint the blackest face of woe,
Studying inventions fine, her wits to entertain,
Often turning others leaves, to see if thence would flow,
Some fresh and fruitful shower, upon my Sunne-burnt brain.
But words came halting out, wanting inventions stay,
Invention Natures child, fled Stepdames studies blows:
And others feet, still seem'de but strangers in my way,
Thus great with Child to speak, and helpless in my throws,
Biting my tongue and pen, beating my self for spite:
Fool said My muse to me, look in thy heart and write.
NOt at first sight, nor with a dribbing shot,
Love gave the wound, which while I breath will bleed:
But known, worth did in tract of time proceed,
Till by degrees it had full conquest got.
I saw and liked, I liked but loved not,
I loved, but did not straight what Love decreede:
At length to Loves decrees, I first agreede.
Yet with repining at so partial lot.
Now even that foot-steppe of lost liberty
Is gone, and now like slave borne Muscouite:
I call it praise to suffer tyranny,
And now employ the remnant of my wit
To make my self believe that all is well,
While with a feling skill I paint my hell.
LEt Dainty wits cry, on the Sisters nine,
That bravely maskt, their fancies may be told:
Or Pinders Apes flaunt in their phrases fine,
Enameling their pride with flowers of gold.
Or else let them in stately glory shine,
Ennobling new found tropes, with problemes old:
Or with strange similes, inricht each line,
Of herbs or beasts, which Inde or Affricke hold.
For me in sooth, no Muse but one I know,
Phrases and Problemes from my reach do grow,
And strange things cost too dear for my poor sprites,
How then? even thus, in Stellas face I reed,
What love and beauty be, then all my deed.
But coppying is, what in her nature writes.
Virtue (alas) now let me take some rest,
Thou set'st a bate between my love and me:
If vain love have my simple soul oppressed,
Leave what thou like, and deal thou not with it.
Thy Scepter use in some old Catoes breast,
Churches and Schools are for thy seat most fit:
I do confess, (pardon a fault confessed,)
My mouth too tender is for thy hard bit.
But if that needs, thou will usurping be
That little reason that is left in me.
And still the effect of thy persuasions prove,
I swear, my heart such one shall show to thee,
That shrines in flesh so true a deity.
That Virtue, thou thy self shall be in love.
It is most true, what we call Cupids dart,
An Image is, which for our selves we carue:
And fools adore, in Temple of our heart,
Till that good God make church and Churh-men starve.
It is most true, that eyes are bound to serve
The inward part: and that the heavenly part
Ought to be King, from whose rules who does swerue,
Rebels to nature, strive for their own smart.
True that true beauty virtue is indeed,
Whereof this beauty can but be a shade,
Which Elements with mortal mixture breed,
True that on earth we are but Pilgrims made.
And should in soul, up to our Country move:
True and most true, that I must Stella love.
SOme Lovers speak, when they their Muses entertain
Of hopes begott, by fear, of wot not what desires,
Of force of heavenly beams, infusing hellish pain;
Of living deaths dear wounds, fair storms and flashing fyres.
Some one his songs in Jove and Jove's strange tales attyres,
Bordered with Bulls and Swannes, poudered with golden rain:
An other humbler wit to shepherds pipe retyres,
Yet hiding royal blood, full often in Rural vain.
To some a sweetest plaint a sweetest style assordes,
Whiles tears pour out his ink, and sighs breath out his words.
His paper pale despair, and pain his pen does move.
I can speak what I feel, and feel as much as they,
But think that all the map of my state, I display.
When trembling voice bringes forth, that I do Stella love.
WHen nature made her chief work, Stellas eyes,
In color black, why wrapped she beams so bright?
Would she in beamy black like Painter wise,
Frame daintiest luster mixte with shadows light?
Or did she else that sober hew devise,
In object best, to strength and knitt our sight:
Least if no veil these brave beams did disguise,
They Sun-like would more dazell than delight.
Or would she her miraculous power show,
That whereas black seems Beauties contrary,
She even in black does make all Beauties flow:
But so and thus, she minding Love should be
Plaste ever there, gave him this mourning weed:
To honor all their deaths, who for her bleed.
Love borne in Greece, of late fled from his native place,
Forced by a tedious proof, that Turkish hardened hearts
Were no fit marks, to pearce with his fine pointed darts:
And pleased with our soft peace, staide here his fleeting race.
But finding these cold climes, too coldlie him embrace,
Not used to frosen lips, he straue to find some part
Where with most ease and warmth, he might employ his art.
At length himself he pearch'd in Stellas face,
Whose fair skin, beamie eyes, like morning Sun in snow:
Deceived the quaking boy, who thought from so pure light,
Effects of lively heat in nature needs must grow.
But she most fair, most cold; made him there take his flight
To my close heart; where while some fire brands he did lay,
He burnt unawares his wings, and cannot fly away.
QVeene Virtues Court, which some call Stellas face,
Prepared by Natures cheifest furniture:
Has his front built of Alablaster pure,
Gold is the covering of that stately place.
The door, by which sometimes runs forth her grace
Red Porphire is, which lock of Pearl makes sure:
Whose Porches rich, with name of chekes endure,
Marble mixed red and white, do enterlace.
The Windows now, through which this heavenly guest
Looks on the world, and can find nothing such,
Which dare claim from those sightes the name of best,
Of touch they are, that without touch do touch,
Which Cupids self, from Beauties mine did draw:
Of touch they are, and poor I am their straw.
REason, in faith thou art well served, that still
Would brabling be, with sense and love in me:
I rather wish thee climb the Muses hill,
Or reach the fruit of Natures chiefest tree;
Or seek heavens course, or heavens vnusde to thee:
Why should thou toil, our thornie ground to till?
Leave sense and those that senses obiectes be,
Deal thou with powers, of thoughts leave thou to will.
But thou would needs fight both with Love and sense,
With sword of wit, giving wounds of dispraise:
Till down right blows did foil thy cunning fence,
So soon as they struck thee with Stellas rays.
Reason, thou knewst, and offered straight to prove
By reason good, good reason her to love.
IN truth oh Love: with what a boyish kind
Thou do proceed, in thy most serious ways;
That when thy heaven to thee his best displaies,
Yet of that best thou leau'st the best behind.
That like a Child that some fair book does find
With gilden leaves of colloured Velom, plays
Or at the most on some fair picture stays,
But never heedes the fruit of Writers mind.
So when thou saw in Natures cabinet,
Stella, thou straight lokest babies in her eyes:
In her chekes pit, thou did thy pitfall set,
And in her breast to peep, a lowting lies.
Playing and shining in each outward part:
But fool seekst not to get into her heart.
Cupid because thou shin'st in Stellas eyes,
That from her looks thy dimnesse now scapes free:
That those lips swelde so full of thee they be.
That sweet breath makes often the flames to rise,
That in her breast thy pap well sugared lies,
That grace even makes thy gracious wrongs; that she,
What word so ere she speaks, persuades for thee:
That her clear voice, lifts the Sun to Skies.
Thou countest Stella thine, like those whose powers
Having got up a breach, (by fighting well)
Cry victory, this happy day is ours:
Oh no, her heart is such a Cytadell.
So fortified with wit, stored with disdain:
That to win it, is all the skill and pain.
PHoebus was Judge, twixt Jove and Mars in love,
Of those three Gods whose arms the fairest wear:
Jove's golden shield, did Eagle Sables bear.
Whose talents hold young Ganimede above.
But in verde fields, Mars bears a golden Spear,
Which through a bleeding heart, his point did shoue:
Each had his Crest, Mars carried Venus glove.
Jove on his Helm the Thunder bolte did rear.
Cupid then smiles, for on his crest there lies
Stellas fair hair, her face he makes his shield:
Where Roses gules, are borne in silver field.
Phoebus drew wide the Curtain of the skies
To blase the last, and swore devoutly then:
The first thus macht, were scarcely Gentlemen.
ALas, have I not pain enough my friend,
Upon whose breast, a fiercer gripe does tire,
Than did on him, who first stole down the fire;
While Love on me, does all his quiver spend,
But with your rubarbe words you must contend,
To grieve me worse in saying, that desire
Does plunge my well formed soul, even in the mier
Of sinful thoughts, which do in ruin end.
If that be sin which does the manners frame,
Well stayed with truth, in word and faith of deed,
Ready of wit, and fearing naught but shame;
If it be sin which in sixth heart does breed,
A loathing of all loost true chastity;
Then love is sin, and let me sinful be.
YOu that do search for every purling spring,
Which from the rybs of old Pernassus flows,
And every flower (not sweet perhaps) which grows
Near there about, into your Poems wring.
You that do dictionary method bring
Into your rymes, running in rattling rows,
You that old Petrarchs long deceased woes
With newborn sighs, and wit disguised sing;
You take wrong ways, those far-fet helps be such,
As do bewray a want of inward tutch,
And sure at length stolen goods do come to light.
But if both for your love and skill you name,
You seek to nurse at fullest breast of Fame,
Stella behold and then begin to write.
IN nature apt to like, when I did see
Beauties which were of many Carrects fine,
My boiling spirits did thither then incline,
And Love I thought that I was full of thee;
But finding not those restles flames in me
Which others said did make their souls to pyne,
I thought those babes of some pins hurt did whine:
By my love judging what loves pains might be.
But while I thus with this young Lion played,
Mine eyes (shall I say cursed or blessed) beheld
Stella: now she is nam'de, need more be said?
In her sight I a lesson new have speld.
I now have learnd love right, and learnd even so,
As they that being poisoned, poison know.
HIs mother dear Cupid offended late,
Because that Mars grew slacker in her love,
With pricking shot he did not thoroughly move
To keep the place of their first loving state:
The boy refusde, for fear of Marses hate;
Who thretned stripes, if he his wrath did prove:
But she in chafe him from her lap did shoue,
Broke bow, broke shaftes, where Cupid weeping sat,
Till that his Grandam Nature pitying it,
Of Stellas brows, made him two better bows:
And in her eyes of arrows infinite.
O how for joy he leapes, o how he crows;
And straight therewith, like wagges new got to play:
Falls to shrewde turns, and I was in his way.
WIth what strange checkes I in my self am shent,
When into Reasons Audit I do go:
And by such counts my self a Banckerowt know
Of all those goods which heaven to me has lent,
Unable quite, to pay even Natures rent,
Which unto it by birthright I do owe:
And which is worse, no good excuse can show,
But that my wealth I have most idly spent,
My wit does waste, my knowledge bringes forth toys,
My wit does strive, those passions to defend
With my reward, the spoil of vain annoyes;
I see my course, to loose my self does bend.
I see and yet no greater sorrow take
Than that I loose no more for Stellas sake.
ON Cupids bow, how are my heart strings bent?
That see my wrack, and yet embrace the same:
When most I glory, then I feel most shame;
I willing run, yet when I run repent;
My best wits still their own disgrace invent,
My very yncke, turns straight to Stellas name:
And yet my words (as them my pen does frame)
For though she pass all things, yet what is all
That unto me, that fare like him that both
Looks to the skies and in a ditch does fall,
O let me prove my mind yet in his grouth
And not in nature, for best fruits unfit;
Scholar says Love bend hitherward thy wit.
FLy, fly my friends, I have my deaths wound, fly;
See there that boy, that murdering boy I say,
Who like a thief hid in a bush does lie,
Till blooddy bullet get him wrongful pray.
So, tyrant he no fitter place could spy,
Nor so far level in so secret stay:
As that sweet black which walls thy heavenly eye,
There he himself with his shot close does lay.
Poor passenger, pass now thereby I did,
And staid to see the prospect of the place,
While that black hue from me the bad guest hid,
But straight I saw motions of lightnings grace,
And there discried the glisterings of his dart:
But ere I could fly thence, it pearst my heart.
YOur words my friends me causelessly do blame,
My young mind marde who^ Love does menace so:
That my own writings like bad servants show
My wits, quick in vain thoughts, in virtue lame;
That Plato I have read for naught, but if he tame
Such coltish years; that to my birth I owe
Nobler desires: least else that to my foe
Great expectation were a train of shame.
For since mad Mars great promise made to me,
If now the May or my years much decline,
What can be hoped my harvest time will be,
Well said, your wit in virtues golden mine
Digs deep with learnings spade: now tell me this,
Has this world ought so fair as Stella is?
IN highest way of heaven the Sun did ride,
Progressing from fair Twynns in golden place,
Having no mask of Clouds before his face,
But streaming forth of his heat in chiefest pride,
When some fair Ladies by hard promise tide,
On horseback met him in his furious race,
Yet each prepar'de with Fannes well shading grace,
From that foes wounds their tender skins to hide.
Stella alone, with face unarmed marched,
Either to do like him, as careless shown:
Or careless of the wealth, because her own.
Yet were their hid and meaner beauties parcht,
Her daintiest bare went free; the cause was this,
The Sun that others burnt, did her but kiss.
THe curious wits, seeing dull pensiuenes
Bewray it self in my long settled eyes:
When these same fumes of mellancholie rise,
With idle pains and missing pains does guess;
Some that know how, my spring I did adresse,
Deem that my Muse some fruit of knowledge plyes:
Others, because the Prince my service tryes,
Think that I think, State errors to redress;
But harder Judges, judge ambitious rage,
(Scourge of it self, till clyming slippery place)
Holds my young brain captived in golden cage.
O fools, far otherwise alas the case;
For all my thoughts have neither stop nor start,
But only Stellas eyes, and Stellas heart.
RIch fools there be, whose base and filthy heart,
Lies hatching still the goods wherein they flow:
Damning themselves to Tantalus his smart,
Wealth breeding want, more rich, more wretched grow.
Yet to those fools, heaven does such wit impart,
As what their hands do hold, their heads do know.
And knowing love, and loving lay apart,
As scattered things, far from all dangers show.
But that rich fool, whom by blind Fortunes lot,
The richest gem of love and life enioyes,
And can with foul abuse such beauties blot:
Let him deprived of sweet, but unfelt joys
Exilde for aye, from those high treasures which
He knows not grow, in only folly rich.
THE wisest scholar of the wight most wise,
By Phoebus doom, with sugared sentence says:
That virtue if it once meet our eyes,
Strange flames of love it in our souls would raise.
But for that man with pain this truth discries,
While he each thing in senses balance ways,
And so, nor will nor can behold those skies,
Which inward Sum to heroicke minds displaies.
Virtue of late with virtuous care to stir
Love of himself, take Stellas shape, that he
To mortal eyes might sweetly shine in her.
It is most true, for since I did her see,
Virtues great beauty in her face I prove,
And find defect; for I do burn in love.
THough duskie wits do scorn Astrology,
And fools can think those lamps of purest light.
Whose number ways greatness eternity.
Promising wondrous wonders to inuit,
To have for no cause birthright in the skies.
But for to spangle the black weeds of Night,
Or for some brave within that Chamber hie,
They should still dance to please a gazers sight.
For me I nature every deal do know,
And know great causes, great effects procure,
And know those bodies high, reign on the low.
And if these rules did fall, proof makes me sure,
Who often bewraies my after following case,
By only those two stars in Stellas face.
BEcause I often in dark abstracted guise,
Seem most alone in greatest company,
With dearth of words, and aunswers quite awry,
To them that would make naked speech arise;
They deem, and of their doom the rumor flies,
That poison foul of bubling pride does lie
So in my swelling breast, that only I
Faune on my self, all others do despise:
Yet pride (I think) does not my soul possess,
(Which looks too often in this vnflattering glass)
But one worse fault, ambition I confess,
That makes me often my best friends ouer-passe,
Unseen unheard, while thought to highest place
Bends all his powers, even unto Stellas grace.
YOu that with allegories curious frame
Of others children changlings use to make,
With me those pains for God-sake do not take,
I list not dig so deep for brazen fame.
When I see Stella, I do mean the same
Princess of beauty, for whose only sake,
The raynes of love I love, though never slake;
And joy therein, though Nations count it shame:
I beg no subject to use eloquence,
Nor hidden ways to guide Philosophy,
Look at my hands for no such quintessence,
But know that I in pure simplicity,
Breathe out the flames which burn within my heart,
Love only leading me into this art.
LIke some weak Lords neighbors by mighty kings,
To keep themselves and their chief Cities free
Do easily yield, that all their coast may be
Ready to serve their Camp of needful things:
So Stellas heart finding what power Love brings,
To keep it self in life and liberty,
Does willing grant that in the Frontire he
Use all to help his other conquerings.
And thus her heart escapes, but thus her eyes
Serve him with shot, her lips his Herralds are,
Her breasts his Tents, legs his tryumphall Chare,
Herself his food, her skin his Armor brave.
But for because my chiefest prospect lies
Upon the coast, I am given up for a slave.
WHether the Turkish new Moon minded be,
To fill her horns upon the Christian coast,
How Polands King minds without leave of host,
To warm with ill made fire cold Musconie,
If French can yet three parts in one agree,
What now the Dutch in their full diets boast,
How Holland hearts, now so good Towns are lost,
Wherewith my Father made it once half tame,
If in the Scottish Court be weltering yet;
These questions busy wits to me do frame:
I combered with good manners, answer do,
But know not how, for still I think on you.
WIth how sad steps o Moon thou clim'st the skies,
How silently, and with how mean a face,
What may it be, that even in heavenly place,
That busy Archer his sharp Arrows tryes?
Sure if that long with love acquainted eyes
Can judge of love, thou feelst of Lovers case,
I read within thy looks thy languisht grace.
To me that feel the like, my state discries.
Then even of fellowship o Moon tell me,
Is constant love deemde there but want of wit?
Are beauties there, as proud as here there be?
Do they above, love to be loved, and yet
Those Lovers scorn, whom that love does possess?
Do they call virtue there ungratefulness?
MOrpheus the lively son of deadly Sleep,
Witness of life to them that living die:
A Prophet often of hidden mystery;
A Poet eake as humors fly and creep:
Since thou in me so sure a hold do keep,
That never I with closed up sense do lie,
But by thy work, my Stella I discry,
Teaching blind eyes both how to smile and weep;
Vouchsafe of all acquaintance this to tell,
Whence have thou Iuorie, Rubies, Pearl, and Gold,
To show her skin, lips, teeth, and head so well?
(Fool aunswers he) no Indes such treasures hold,
But from thy heart, while my Sire charmeth thee,
Sweet Stellas Image I do steal to me.
I Might, unhappy word, (woe me) I might,
And then would not, or could not see my bliss:
Till now, wrapped in a most infernal Night,
I find, how heavenly day (wretch) did I miss;
Heart rent thy self, thou do thy self but right.
No lovely Paris made thy Helen his,
No force, no fraud, robbed thee of thy delight,
No Fortune of thy fortune Author is;
But to my self, my self did give the blow,
While too much wit forsooth so troubled me,
That I respects for both our sakes must show.
And could I not by rising morn foresee,
How fair a day was near, (o punished eyes)
That I had been more foolish, or more wise.
COme let me write, and to what end? to ease
A burdened heart, (how can words ease, which are
The glasses of thy daily vexing care?)
Oh, cruel fights well pictured forth do please.
Art not ashamed to publish thy disease?
Nay, that may breed my fame, it is so rare,
But will not wise men think thy words fond ware?
Then be they close, and they shall none displease,
What idler thing than speak and not be heard?
What harder thing than smart and not to speak?
Peace foolish wit, with wit my wit is marde;
Thus write I while I doubt to write, and wreake
My harms in ynkes poor loss, perhaps some find
Stellas great power, that so confused my mind.
WHat may words say? or what may words not say,
Where truth it self must speak like flattery?
Within what bounds can one his lyking stay,
Where Nature does with excellence agree?
What Nestors counsel can my flames allay,
Since Reasons self does blow the coals to me?
And ah, what hope that hope should once see day,
Where Cupid is sworn page to Chastity;
Honor is honored, that thou do possess
Him as thy slave, and now long needy Fame
Does even grow rich, meaning my Stellas name;
Wit learnes in thee perfection to express,
Not thou by praise, but praise in thee is raised,
It is a praise, to praise where thou art praised.
STella, whence does these new assaults arise,
A conquered, yielding, ransackt heart to win?
Whereto long since, through my long battred eyes,
Whole Armies of thy beauties entered in,
And there long since, Love thy Lieuetenant lies,
My forces razed, thy banners raised within;
Of conquest what do these effects suffice,
But wilt new war upon thine own begin,
With so sweet voice, and by sweet nature so,
In sweetest strength, so sweetly skild withal,
In all sweet stratagems sweet Art can show:
That not my soul which at thy foot did fall
Long sithence forced by thy beams; but stone nor tree
By senses privilege can escape from thee.
THus night while sleep begins, with heavy wings
To close mine eyes, and that my troubled thought
Does fall to stray, and my chief powers are brought
To leave the scepter of all subject things,
The first that straight my fancies error brings
Unto my mind, is Stellas Image, wrought
By Loves own self, but with so curious draught,
That she me thinks not only shines but sings:
I start, look heart, hark, but what enclosed up sense
Was held, in open view it flies away,
Leaving me naught but wayling eloquence.
I seeing bitter sights in sighs decay,
Called it anew, and woed Sleep again,
But him her host her unkind guest had slain.
COme Sleep, o Sleep, the certain knot of peace,
The bathing place of wits, the balm of woe,
The poor man's wealth, the prisoners release,
The indifferent Judge between the hie and low,
With shield of proof, shield me from out the press
Of these fierce darts, Despair at me does throw;
O make in me those civil wars to cease:
I will good trybute pay if thou do so.
Take thou of me smooth pillowes, sweetest bed,
A chamber deaf of noise, and blind of light,
A rosy garland, and a weary head.
And if these things (as being thine in right)
Move not thy heavy grace, thou shall in me
(Liuelier then else) rare Stellas Image see.
AS good to write, as for to lie and groan,
O Stella dear, how much thy power has wrought,
That have my mind now of the basest brought,
My still kept course while others sleep to moan;
Alas if thou, the height of Virtues throane,
Can but vouchsafe the influence of a thought,
Upon a wretch which long thy grace has sought,
Way then by thee how I am overthrown;
And then think thus, although thy beauty be
Made manifest, by such a victory,
Yet noblest Conquerers do wreaks avoid;
Since then thou have so far subdued me,
That in my heart I offer still to thee,
O do not let thy Temple be destroide.
Having this day, my horse, my hand, my Lance
Guided so well, that I obtaind the prize,
Both by the judgment of the English eyes,
And of some sent by that sweet enmie France,
Horsemen my skill in horsmanship advance,
Town folk my strength: a daintier Judge applies
His praise to slight, which from good use does rise:
Some luckie wits, impute it but to chance:
Others, because from both sides I do take
My blood, from them that do excel in this,
Think Nature me a man at Arms did make.
How far they shoot awry; the true cause is,
Stella looked on, and from her heavenly face,
Sent forth her beams, which made so fair a race.
O Eyes, which do the Spheres of beauty move,
Whose beams all joys, whose joys all virtues be:
Who while they make Love conquer, conquer Love,
The Schools where Venus has learnd Chastity;
O eyes, where humble looks most glorious prove,
Only love tasting of your cruelty.
Do not, do not, from me, poor me, remove,
Keep still my Zenith, ever shine on me;
For thoughts eye never sees them, but straight ways
My life forgets to nourish languisht sprights:
Yet still on me (o eyes) dart down your rays;
And if from Majesty of sacred Lights
Oppressing mortal sense, my death proceed:
Wreckes tryumphs best, which Love hie set does breed.
Fair eyes, sweet lips, dear heart, that foolish I
Could hope by Cupids help, on you to pray:
Since to himself he does your gifts apply,
As his maine force, chief sport, and easefull stay.
For when he will see who dare him gainesay,
Then with those eyes he looks, lo by and by,
Each soul does at Loves feet his weapons lay,
Glad if for her he give them leave to die.
When he will play, then in her lips his eye,
Where blushing red, that Loves self them do love,
With either lip he does the other kiss;
But when he will for quiets sake remove
From all the world, her heart is then his room:
Where well he knows, no man to him can come.
MY words I know do well set forth my mind,
My mind, bemones his sense of inward smart:
Such smart may pity claim of any heart;
Her heart, sweet heart, is of no Tigers kind,
And yet she hears, and I no pity find,
But more I cry, less grace she does impart;
Alas, what cause is there so overthwart,
That Noblenes it self makes thus unkind?
I much do guess, yet find no truth but this,
That when the breath of my complaints do touch
Those dainty doors unto the Court of Bliss,
That once come there, the sobs of my annoyes,
Are metamorphos'd straight to tunes of joys.
STella often sees the very face of woes
Painted in my bewrinckled stormy face:
But cannot skill to pity my disgrace;
No though the cause hereof herself she knows.
Yet Hermes late, a Fable who did show,
Of Lovers never known, (a pittious case)
Pity thereof got in her breast such place,
As from her eyes, a Spring of tears did flow.
Alas, if Fancy drawn by fained things,
Though false, yet with free store more grace does breed
Then Servants wreck, where new doubt honor bringes,
Than think my Dear, that in me you do reed
Of Lovers ruin some sad Tragaedie:
And if not me, pity the tale of me.
I Cursed thee often, I pity now thy case,
Blind hitting Boy, since she that thee and me
Rules with a beck, so tyranniseth thee,
That thou must want or food or dwelling place;
For she protests to bannish thee her face.
Her face (o Love) a roge then should thou be,
If Love learn not alone to love and see,
Without desire to feed of further grace.
Alas poor wagge, that now a Scholar art
To such a Schoole-mistris, whose lessons new
Thou needs must miss, and so thou needs must smart;
Yet dear, let me this pardon get of you,
That he so long may sport him with desire,
Till without Fuel, thou can make hot fire.
WHat, have I thus betraide my liberty,
Can those black beams, such burning marks engraue
In my free side, or am I borne a slave,
Whose neck becomes such yoke of tyranny?
Or want I sense to feel my misery,
Or spirit, disdain of such disdain to have,
Who for long faith some gentle pity crave,
Yet get no alms, but scorn of beggerie.
Virtue awake, beauty but beauty is;
I may, I must, I can, I will, I do
Leave following that which it is gain to miss,
Let her go: soft, but there she comes, go to,
Unkind I love you, not, (woe me) that I
Must make my heart thus give my tongue the lie.
Souls joy, bend not those morning stars from me,
Where virtue is made strong by beauties might,
Where love is chastnes, scorning youths delight,
And humblenes is linckt with majesty;
What ever may ensue, ah let me be
Copartner of the riches of that sight:
Let not mine eyes be blinded from that light;
Oh look, oh shine, o let me die and see,
For though I often my self of them bemone,
That through my heart their beamie darts be gone,
Whose curelesse wounds even now most freshly bleed;
Yet since my deaths wound is already got,
Dear killer, spare not thy sweet cruel shot,
A kind of grace it is to kill with speed.
I On my horse, and Love on me does try
Our horsmanship, while two strong works I prove,
A horsman to my horse, a horse to Love;
And now man's wrongs in me poor beast discry.
The raines wherewith the ryder does me tie
Are reverent thoughts, which bit of reverence move,
Curbde in with fear, but with gilt bosse above
Of hope, which makes it seem fair to the eye:
The wande is will, thou fancy saddle art,
Girt fast by memory; and while I spur
My horse, he spurs with sharp desires my heart,
He sits me fast how ever I do stir,
And now has made me to his hand so right,
That in the manage I my self delight.
STella, the fulness cannot stayed be
Of hidden thoughts, within my panting breast:
But they do swell and struggle forth of me,
Till that in words thy figure be expressed;
And yet as soon as they thus formed be,
According to my Lord Loves own behest,
With sad eyes I their weak proportion see
To portract what within this world is blessed.
So that I cannot choose but write my mind,
And cannot choose but put out that I write,
While those poor babes their death in birth do find;
And now my pen these lines had dashed quite,
But that they stop his fury from the same:
Because their forefront bears sweet Stellas name.
PArdon mine ears, both I and they do pray,
So may your tongue still flauntingly proceed,
To them that do such entertainments need;
So may you still have something new to say
On silly me, do not your burden lay
Of all the grave conceits your brain does breed:
But find some Hercules, to bear (in steed
Of Atlas tyrde) your wisdoms heavenly sway,
For me while you discourse of courtly tides,
Of cunningst Fishers in most troubled streams,
Of straying waves when valiant error guides;
Mean while my heart confers with Stellas beams,
As pity it is so sweet a Comedy,
By such unfitted speech, should hindered be.
A Strife is grown between Virtue and Love,
While each pretends, that Stella may be his:
Her eyes, her lips, Love says that he owes this,
Since they do wear his badge, most firmly prove;
But Virtue thus, that title does disprove.
That Stella, (o dear name) that Stella is,
That virtuous Soul, sure heir of heavenly Bliss:
Not this fair outside, which our heart does move;
And therefore, though her beauty and her grace,
Be Loves indeed, in Stellas self he may
By no pretense claim any manner place.
Well Love, since this Demurre our suit does stay,
Let Virtue have that Stellas self, yet thus,
That Virtue but that body grant to us.
IN Martial sports I had my cunning tryde,
And yet to break more Staves I did adresse
While people shoutes: indeed I must confess,
Youth, luck, and praise, filled my veins with pride;
When Cupid having me his slave discride,
In Mars his liuerie, prauncing in the press,
Now what sir fool said he (I would no less)
Look here I say, I looked, and Stella spide:
Who hard by, through a window sent her light;
My heart then quakt, then daz'led were my eyes,
One hand forgot to rule, the other to fight,
No Trumpet sound I heard, nor freendly cries;
My foe came on, and beat the air for me,
Till that her blush, taught me my shame to see.
BEcause I breathe not love to every one,
Nor do not use set Colors for to wear:
Nor nourish special locks with vowed hair,
Nor give each speech a full point of a groan,
The Courtly Nymphs acquainted with the moon
Of them, which in their lips Loves Standard bear:
What he, (say they of me) no I dare swear,
He cannot love: no, no, let him alone.
And think so still, so Stella know my mind.
Protest indeed, I know not Cupids dart:
But how fair Maids, at length this true shall find,
That his right badge, is learned in the heart.
Dumb Swans, not chattering Pyes do Lovers prove,
They love indeed, who dare not say they love.
FIE school of Patience, fie, your Lesson is
Far far too long, to learn it without book:
What, a whole week, and get not half a look?
And think I should not your large precepts miss,
When I might read these Letters fair of bliss,
Within her face each virtue I could brook,
From what the leaden counsels that I took:
As of a freende which meant not much amiss.
But now alas, that I do want her sight,
What do thou think that I can euertake,
In thy cold strife, a phlegmatic delight?
No Patience, if thou will my good, then make
Her come, and here with patience my desire:
And then with patience bid me bear my fire.
Muses, I often have craved your holy aid,
With choicest flowers, my speech t'engarland so,
That it disguisde, in true (but naked) show,
Might win some grace in your sweet skill arraide;
And often whole troops of saddest words I said,
Striving abroad, a forraging to go,
Until by your inspiring I might know,
How the black banners might be best displaid.
But I mean now no more your help to prove.
No other sugering of speech to try,
But on her name incessantly to cry.
For let me but name her whom I do love,
So sweet sound straight my ears and heart do hit,
That I well find no eloquence to it.
WOe having made with many sighs his own
Each sense of mine; each gift, each power of mind
Grown now his slaves, he forced them out to find
The throwest words, fit for Woes self to groan
Hoping that when they might find Stella alone,
Before she could prepare to be unkind,
Her soul (armed with such a dainty rind,)
Should soon be hurt with sharpnes of the moon.
She heard my plaints, and did not only hear,
But them so sweet, she did most sweetly sing,
With that fair breast, making Woes darkness clear,
My privy cares I help to her to bring,
To tell my grief, and she with face and voice,
So sweetes my pains, that my pains me rejoice.
DOubt there has been, when with his golden chain
The Orator so far men's hearts does bind:
That no place else their giddie steps could find;
But as he them more slacker short did rain,
Whether with words his sou'raigntie he gain,
Clothed with fine tropes as his strongest linde,
Or else pronouncing grace, wherewith his mind
Prints his own form lively, in rudest brain.
Now judge by this, in pearcing phrases late
The Anatomy of all my woes I wrate,
Stellas sweet breath the same to me did reed.
Oh voice, oh face, mauger my speeches might,
With wooed words, most rauishing delight,
Even those sad words a joy to me did breed.
Dear, why make you more of a dog than me?
If he do love, alas I burn in love;
If he wait well, I never thence would move;
If he be fair, yet but a dog can be;
Little he is, so little worth is he:
He barks, my songs in one voice often does prove;
Bidden, (perhaps) he fetches thee a glove;
But I vnbid, fetch even my soul to thee.
Yet while I languish, him that bosom clips,
That lap does lap, nay lets in spite of spite
This fauning mate taste of those sugared lips;
Alas, if you grant only such delight
To witles things, then Love I hope, (since wit
Becomes a clogge) will soon ease me of it.
WHen my good Angel guides me to the place
Where Is al my good; I do in Stella see,
That Heavenly joys throws only down on me
Thundered disdaines, and Lightning of disgrace;
But when the ruggedst step of Fortunes race
Makes me fall from her sight, then sweetly she
With words, wherein the Muses Treasures be,
Shows love and pity to my absent case.
Now I (with beating long, by hardest fate)
So dull am, that I cannot look into
The ground of this fierce love, and loving hate;
Then some good body tell me how to do,
Whose presence absence, absence presence is:
Blessed in my curse, and curssed in my bliss.
Often with true sighs, often with uncalled tears,
Now with slow words, now with dumb eloquence,
I Stellas eyes assailde, I closde her ears,
But this at last is her sweetest defense;
That who indeed a sound affection bears,
So captives to his Saint both soul and mind,
That wholly Hers, all selfnes he forbeares.
Thence his desire he learnes, his lives course thence,
Now since this chaste love, hates this love in me;
With chastned mind I needs must show, that she
Shall quickly me from what she hates remove.
O Doctor Cupid, thou for me reply:
Driven else to grant by Angel Sophistry,
That I love not, without I leave to love.
LAte tired with woe, even ready for to pine
With rage of love, I call my Love unkind.
She in whose eyes, loves fyres unfelt do shine,
Sweetly said; I true love in her should find.
I joy, but straight thus watered was my wine:
That love she did, but with a love not blind.
Which would not let me, whom she loved decline,
From Nobler course, fit for my birth and mind.
And therefore by her loves Authority;
Wild me these Tempests of vain love to flee:
And Anchor fast my self on virtues shore.
Alas if this the only metal be,
Of love new coined to help my beggary:
Dear, love me not, that you may love me more.
OH Grammar rules, oh now your virtues show,
So Children still read you with awful eyes,
As my young Dove may in your precepts wise,
Her grant to me by her own virtue know.
For late with heart most hie, with eyes most low;
I craved the thing which ever she denies.
She lightening Love, displaying Venus skies,
Least one should not be heard twice, said no no.
Harken Envy not at my high triumphing:
But Grammers force with sweet success confirm,
For Grammar says ah (this dear Stella way)
For Grammar says (to Grammar who says nay)
That in one speech, two negatiues affirm.
NO more my dear, no more these Counsels try,
O give my passions leave to run their race:
Let Fortune lay on me her worst disgrace.
Let Folk orechargde with brain against me cry,
Let Clouds be dim, my fate bereaues mine eyes,
Let me no steps but of lost labor try,
Let all the earth in scorn recount my race;
But do not will me from my love to fly.
I do not envy Aristotle's wit,
Nor do aspire to Caesar's bleeding fame:
Nor ought to care though some above me sit;
Nor hope nor wish an other course to frame:
But that which once may win thy cruel heart,
Thou art my wit; and thou my virtue art.
Love, by sure proof I may call thee unkind,
That gives no better ears to my just cries:
Thou whom to me, such my good turns should bind,
As I may well account, but cannot prise.
For when naked boy, thou could no harbor find
In this old world, (grown now so too too wise)
I lodg'de thee in my heart; and being blind
By nature borne, I gave to thee my eyes.
Mine eyes, my light, my life, my heart alas,
If so great services may scorned be:
Yet let this thought thy Tygirsh courage pass,
That I perhaps am somewhat kin to thee,
Since in thine arms, of Fame most truly spread,
Thou bearst the Arrowe, I the Arrowhed.
AND do I see some cause of hope to find?
Or does the tedious burden of long woe
In weakened minds, quick apprehension breed
Of every Image which may comfort show.
I cannot brag of word, much less of deed,
Fortunes winds still with me in one sort blow:
My wealth no more, and no whit less my need,
Desire, still on stilts of fear does go.
And yet amids all fears, a hope there is
Stolen to my heart: since last fair night (nay day)
Stellas eyes sent to me the beams of bliss,
Looking on me, I look an other way:
But when mine eyes black to their heaven did move:
They fled with blush, which guilty seemed of love.
HOpe art thou true or do thou flatter me?
Does Stella now begin, with pitteous eye
The reign of this her conquest to epsy?
Will she take time before all wracked be?
Her eye speech is translated thus by thee.
But failste thou not in phrase so heavenly hye?
Look ore again, the fair text better pry;
What blushing notes do thou in Margent see?
What sighs stolen out, or killed before full borne
Have thou found such and such like arguments?
Or art thou else to comfort me forsworn?
Well how so ere thou do interpret my contents,
I am resolved thy error to maintain:
Rather than by more truth to get more pain.
STella, the only Plannet of my light,
Light of my life, and life of my desire,
Chief good, vvhereto my hope does sole aspire;
World of my wealth and heaven of my delight.
Why do thou spend the Treasure of thy sprite
With voice more fit to wed Amphyons Lyre?
Seeking to quench in me the noble fire,
Set by thy wrath and kindled by thy sight.
And all in vain, for while thy breath so sweet
With choicest words; thy words with reasons rare:
Thy reasons firmly set, are virtues feet,
Labor to kill in me this killing care
Oh think I then, what Paradise of joy
It is, so fair a virtue to annoy.
OH joy, too high for my Love still to show,
Oh bliss, fit for a nobler seat than me,
Envy put out thine eyes, least thou do see
What Ouans of delight, in me does flow.
My friend that often saw through all maskes, my woe,
Come, come, and let me pour my self in thee:
Gone is the winter of my misery.
My Spring appears, lo see what here does grow,
For Stella has with words (where faith does shine)
Of her high heart given me the Monarchy:
And Io, I may say that she is mine.
And though she give but this condicionally,
This Realm of bliss, while virtues course I take;
No Kings be Crowned, but they some covenant make.
MY Muse may well grudge at my heavenly joy,
If still I force her thus in woe to weep:
She often has drunk my tears, now hopes t'enioy
Nectar of mirth; since I Jove's Cupid keep.
Sonnets be not bound Prentice to annoy,
Trebbles sing high, so well as bases deep:
Grief but Loves winter liuerie, the boy
Has cheeks to smile, so well as eyes to weep.
Come then my Muse, show the force of delight
In well raisde noates; my pen the best it may
Shall paint out joy, though but in black and white.
Cease eager Muse, peace pen, for my sake stay.
I give you here my hand, for truth of this:
Wise silence is best Music unto bliss.
WHo will in fairest book of nature know,
How Virtue may best lodgde in Beauty be,
Let him but learn of love to read in thee
Stella those fair lines which true Beauty show.
There shall he find all vices overthrow;
Not by rude force, but sweetest sovereignty
Of reason, from whose light, the night birds fly;
That inward Sun in thine eyes shines so.
And not content to be perfections heir,
Thy self do strive all minds that way to move:
Who marking thee, which art indeed most fair,
See while thy beauty drives my heart to love,
As fast thy virtue bends that love to good:
But ah, Desire still cries, give me some food.
DEsire, though thou my old commpanion art,
And often so clinges to my pure Love; that I
One from the other scarcely can discry:
While each do blow the fire of my heart;
Now from thy fellowship I needs must part.
Venus is taught with Dians vvings to fly,
I must no more in thy sweet passions lie:
Virtues gold now, must head my Cupids dart,
Service and honor wonder with delight,
Fear to offend, well worthy to appear:
Care shining in mine eyes, faith in my spright,
These things are left me by my only dear.
But thou Desire, because thou would have all:
Now banished art, but yet within my call.
Love still a Boy, and often a vvanton is,
Schoolde only by his Mothers tender eye:
What vvonder then if he his lesson miss,
When for so soft a rod dear play he try.
And yet my star, because a sugared kiss,
In sport I suck, while she a sleep does lie:
Does lowre, nay chide, nay threat for only this:
Sweet it was saucy love, that pressed so nigh.
But no scuse serves, she makes her wrath appear
In Beauties throne, see now who dares come near
Those scarlet Judges, threatening blooddie pain.
O heavenly Fool, thy most kiss worthy face
Anger invests with such a lovely grace,
That Angers self I needs must kiss again.
I Never drank of Aganippe well,
Nor never did in shade of Tempe sit:
And Muses scorn with vulgar brains to dwell,
Poor Layman I, for sarcred rites unfit.
Some do I hear of Poets fury tell,
But God wot, wot not what they mean by it:
And this I swear by blackest brook of hell,
I am no Pickepurse of an others wit.
How falls it than, that with so smooth an ease
My thoughts I speak? And what I speak I show
In verse; and that my verse best wits does please,
Guess we the cause. What is it this? fie no.
Or so? much less. How then? sure thus it is;
My Lips are sure inspired with Stellas kiss.
OF all the Kings that ever here did reign,
Edward namde fourth, as first in praise I name:
Not for his fair outside, nor well linde brain,
Although less gift, are feathers of high fame.
Nor that he could young wise, wise valliant frame
His Syres revenge, ioynde with a kingdoms gain:
And gaind by Mars, could yet make Mars so tame,
That balance waide what sword did late obtain.
Nor that he made the Flower deluce so fraide,
Though strongly hedgd of bloody Lions paws:
That witty Jews to him a tribuite paid;
Nor this nor that, nor any such small cause,
But only, for this worthy King durst prove,
To loose his Crown, rather then loose his Love.
She comes, and straight therewith her shining twins do move
Their rays to me: who in her tedious absence lay
Bath'de in cold woe; but now appears my shining day,
The only light of joy, the only warmth of Love.
She comes with light and warmth, which like Aurora prove;
Of gentle face, so that my eyes dare gladly play
With such a rosy Morn: whose beams both fresh and gay
Scorch not; but only do dark chillinge spirits remove.
But lo, while I do speak it grows noone with me,
Her flamy glittering lights increase with time and place:
My heart cries oh it burns, mine eyes now dazzled be:
No wind, no shade, no cool: what help then in my case?
But with short breath, long looks, staide feet, and waking head,
Pray that my Sun go down with meeker beams to bed.
Those looks, whose beams my joy, whose motion is delight,
That face whose lecture shows what perfect Beauty is:
That presence which does give dark hearts a living light,
That grace, which Venus weeps that she her self did miss.
That hand, which without touch, holds more than Atlas might,
Those lips, which makes deaths pay a mean prise for a kiss:
That skin, whose passing hue scorns this poor term of white,
Those words that do sublime the quintessence of bliss.
That voice which makes the soul plant himself in the ears,
That conversation sweet, where such high comforts be:
As construed in true speech, the name of heaven it bears.
Makes me in my best thoughts, and quiet judgments see,
That in no more but this I mightt be fully blessed:
Yet ah, my maiden Muse does blush to tell the best.
OH how the pleasant airs, of true Love be
Infected by those vapors, which arise
From out that noisome gulf: which gaping lies
Between the jaws of hellish Ielousey.
A Monster, others harms, self misery.
Beauties plague, Virtues scurdge, succor of lies:
Who his own joy to his own heart applies,
And only cherrish does with injuries:
Who since he has by natures special grace,
So pearsing paws as spoil when they embrace,
So nimble feet as stir though still on thorns,
So many eyes as seeking their own woe.
So ample ears, that never good news know,
Is it not ill that such a beast wants horns?
Sweet kiss, thy sweetes I feign would sweetly indite,
Which even of sweetness, sweetell sweeter art;
Pleasing consort, where each sense holds part,
With coopling Doves guides Venus chariot right,
Best charge and brau'st retraite in Cupids sight,
A double key which opens to the hearts,
Most rich when most his riches it impartes.
Nest of young joys, Scholemaster of delight,
Teaching the means at once to take and give,
The friendly fray where blows do wound and heal,
The pretty death while each in other live,
Poor haps first wealth a pledge of promised weal,
Breakfast of love, but lo, lo where she is,
Cease we to praise, now pray we for a kiss.
SWeet swelling lip well may thou swell in pride,
Since best wits think it best thee to admire,
Natures praise, virtues stall, Cupids cold fire,
Whence words, not words but heavenly graces slide,
The new Pernassus where the Graces bide:
Sweetness of Music, Wisdoms beautifier,
Breather of life, and fastness of desire,
Where Beauties blush in Honors grain is did.
Thus much my heart my mouth compeld to say:
But now, spite of my heart my tongue will stay,
Loathing all lies, doubting this flattrie is,
And no spur can this restie race refrain;
Wherefore to try if that I said be true,
How can I better prove then with a kiss?
O Kiss which does those ruddie gems impart,
Or joys or fruits of new found Parradise,
Breathing all bliss and sweetness to the heart,
Teaching dumb lips a nobler exercise.
O kiss which souls even souls together ties
By linkes of love, and only natures Art,
How feign would I paint thee to all men's eyes,
Or of thy gifts at least set out some part?
But she forbids, with blushing words she says,
She builds her fame on higher seated praise:
But my heart burns, I cannot silent be,
Then since dear kiss you feign would have me peace,
And I (mad with delight) want wit to cease,
Stop you my mouth with still still kissing me.
NYmph of the garden where all beauties be,
Beauties which do in excellence surpass,
His whose till death locked in a watery glass,
Or her whom naked the Trojan boy did see.
Sweet garden Nymph which keeps the Cherry tree,
Whose fruit does far the Hesperian taste surpass,
Most sweet fair, most fair sweet, do not alas
From coming near these Cherries banish me,
For though full of desire, empty of wit,
Admitted late by your best graced grace,
I caught at one of them a hungry bit,
Pardon that fault, once more grant me the place,
And so I swear by the self same delight,
I will but kiss, I never more will bite,
GOod brother Phillip I have for borne you long,
I was content you should in favor creep,
While craftily you seemed your Cut to keep,
As though that fair soft hand did you great wrong,
I bear with envy, yet I hear your song,
When in her neck you did love ditties peep,
Nay, (more fool I) often suffered you to sleep,
In lillies nest where Loves self lies along,
What? does high place ambitious thoughts augment?
Is saucines reward of courtesy?
Cannot such grace your silly self content,
But you must needs with those lips billing be?
And through those lips drink Nectar from that tung,
Leave that Sir Phillip lest your neck be wrung.
HIgh way since you my chief Pernassus be,
And that my Muse to some ears not unmeet,
Tempers her words to trampling horses feet,
More often than a Chamber mellodie,
Now blessed you bear onwards blessed me,
To her where my heart safeliest shall meet,
My Muse and I must you of duty greet,
With thanks and wishes wishing thankfully;
Be you still careful kept by public heed,
By no encrochment wronged, nor time forgot,
Nor blamed for blood, nor shamed for sinful deed,
And that you know I envy you no whit,
Of highest wish, I wish you so much bliss,
Hundreds of years you Stellas feet may kiss.
BEhold my heart the house that thee contains,
Beware full Sails drown not thy tottering Barge,
Least joy by nature apt (spirits to colarge)
Thee to thy wrack beyond thy limits strains,
Nor do like Lords whose weak confused brains,
Not pointing to fit folks each vndercharge,
Strive in themselves each office to discharge,
With doing all leave nothing done but pain,
But give apt servants their due place; let eyes
See beauties total sum found in their face,
Let ears hear speech which will to wonder ties,
Let breath suck up those sweets, let arms embrace.
ALas whence comes this change of looks? If I
have changed deserts, let mine own conscience be
a still felt plague to self condemning me.
Let woe grype on my heart, shame load mine eyes:
But if all faith like spotles Ermine lie
Safe in my soul (which only does to thee
As his sole object to felicity
With wings of Love in air of wonder fly.)
Cease your hard hand, threat not so hard your slave,
In Justice, pains come not till faults do call:
Or if I needs (sweet Judge) must torments have,
Seek some thing else to chasten me withal,
Than those blessed eyes where all my hopes do dwell,
No doom shall make ones Heaven become his Hell.
When I was forced from Stella ever dear,
Stella, soode of my thoughts, hurt of my heart:
Stella, whose eyes make all my temples clear,
By Stellaes laws, of duty to impart,
Alas I found that she with me did smart:
I saw that tears did in her eyes appear:
I saw that sighs her sweetest lips did part:
And her sad words my sad dear sense did hear.
For me, I weep to see Pearls scattered so:
I sighd her sighs, and wailed for her woe:
Yet swamme in joy such love in her was seen.
Thus while the effect most bitter was to me,
And than the cause nothing more sweet could be,
I had been vexed, if vexed I had not been.
OVt Traitor absence dare thou counsel me
From my dear Conqueror to run away,
Because in brave arraye here marches she
That to entice me profers present pay.
Is Faith so weak, or is such force in thee?
When Sun is hid, can Stars such beams displaie?
Cannot Heavens food once felt keep stomachs free
From base desire on earthly cates to pray?
When absence with her mistes obscures her light,
My Orphan sense slides to the inward sight:
Where memory feeds forth the beams of Love,
That where before heart loved and eyes did see,
In heart my sight and Love both coupled be,
United powers make each the stronger prove.
NOw that of absence the most yrksome night,
With darkest shade does overcome the day:
Since Stellaes eyes that wont give me my day,
Leaving my Hemisphere o'recast with night,
Each day seems long, and longs for long stayed night,
The night as tedious, wooes th'approch of day:
Toyled with dustie toils of busy day,
Languisht with horrors of the silent night,
Suffering the evils both of day and night,
While no night is more dark than is my day,
Nor no day has less quiet than my night:
With such bad mixture of my night and day,
That living thus in blackest VVinter night,
I feel the gleames of hottest Summers day.
STella, think not that I by verse seek fame,
Who seek, who hope, who love, who like, but thee:
Thine eyes my pride, thy lips my history,
If thou praise me, all other praise is shame.
Nor so ambitious am I, as to frame
A nest for my young praise in Laurel tree,
In truth I swear, I wish not there should be
graued in my Epitaph a Poets name.
Nor if I would could I just title make
That any laud thereof to me should grow
Without my Payns from others wings I take;
For nothing from my wit or will does flow:
Since all my words thy beauty does indite,
And Love does hold my hand, and makes me write.
STella, while now by honors cruel might,
I am from you (light of my light) misled,
And whiles fair you, my Sun thus ouerspred
With absence vale I live in sorrows night.
If this dark place yet show by candle light
Some Beauties piece, as amber collourd head,
Milk hands, rose cheeks, or lips more sweet more red,
Or seeming iett black, yet in blacknes bright.
They please I do confess, they please mine eyes,
But why? because of you they moddels be;
Moddels such be wood globes of glistering skies:
Dear therefore be not jealous over me,
If you hear that they seem my heart to move,
Not them, no no, but you in them I love.
BE your words made (good sir) of Indian ware,
That you allow them me by so small rate,
Or do you the Caconians imitate,
Or do you mean my tender ears to spare,
That to my questions you so total are?
When I demand of Phoenix Stellaes state,
You say (forsooth) you left her well too late.
O God, think you that satisfies my care?
I would know whether she did sit or walk:
How cloathd: how waited on: sighd she or smilde:
Whereof: with whom: how often did she talk:
With what pastimes, times journeys she be guild?
If her lips daine to sweeten my poor name?
Say all: and all well said: say still the same.
O Fate or fault, O cursed child of my bliss,
What sobs can give words grace my grief to show?
What ink is black enough to paint my woe?
Through me, wretch me, even Stella vexed is:
Yet Truth, if Caitiues brath might call thee his,
Witness with me, that I fool stumbling fell:
For carelesnes did in no manner grow,
But wit confusd with too much care did miss.
And do I then my self this vain scuse give:
I do sweet Love, and know this harmed thee.
The world quit me, shall I my self forgive?
Only with pains thy pains thus eased be:
That all thy hurtes in my hearts wrack I reed
I cry thy sighs (my dear) thy tears I bleed.
Grief find the words, for thou have made my vain
So dark with mistie vapors which arise
From out thy heavy mould, that even mine eyes
Can scarce discern the shape of mine own pain:
Do thou then (for thou can) do thou complain
For my poor soul which wit that sickness tries,
Which even to sense, sense of it self denies.
Though harbengers of death and of his train,
The execution of my fate forbeares,
As of a Caitife not vouchsaft to die:
Yet show thy hate of life in living tears:
That though in wretchedness thy life does lie,
Thou may more wretched be than nature bears,
As being plast in such a wretch as I.
YEt sighs, dear sighs, indeed true friends you are,
That do not leave your best friend at the wurst;
But as you with my breast I often have nursed:
So grateful now you wait upon my care.
Faint coward Joy, no longer tarry dare,
Seeing hope did yield when this woe struck him first,
Delight exclaims is for my fault cursed,
Although my mate in Arms himself he swear,
Nay Sorrow in as great a rage as he,
Kills his own children Tears, finding that they
By Love were made apt to consort with me,
Only true Sighs, you do not go away:
Thank may you have for such a thankful part:
Thank worthiest yet, when you shall break my heart.
THough with good cause thou like so well the night,
Since kind or chance gives both one liberty,
Both sadly black, both blackly darkened be:
Night bard from Sun, thou from thine own Suns light
Silence in both displaies his sullen might:
Slow Heavens in both do hold the one degree,
That full of doubts, thou of perplexity:
Thy tears express nights native moisture right,
In both a woeful solitarines:
In night of Spirits the ghastly power sturr,
And in our sprites are Spirits gastlines:
But but (alas) nights sights the ods has furr.
For that at length inuites us to some rest,
Thou though still tired, yet still do it detest.
DIan that feign would cheer her friend the Night,
Does show her often at full her fairest face,
Bringing with her those starrie Nymphs, whose chase
From heavenly standing hurts each mortal wight.
But ah poor Night in love with Phoebus light,
And endlesly dispairing of his grace,
Her self to show no other joy has place,
Sylent and sad in moorning weeds does dight:
Even so (alas) a Lady Dians peer,
With choice delight and rarest company,
Would feign drive clouds from out my heavy cheer:
But woe is me, though joy her self were she,
She could not show my blind brain ways of joy
While I despair my Suns light to enjoy.
AH bed the feeld where joys peace some do see:
The feeld where al my thoughts to war be traind,
How is thy grace by my strange fortune staind?
How thy low shrowdes by my sighs stormed be?
With sweet soft shades thou often inuitest me
To steal some rest, but wretch I am constrained,
Spurd with Loves spurr, this held and shortly rained
With Cares hard hand, to turn and toss in thee,
While the black horrors of the silent night,
Paint VVoes black face so lively in my sight,
That tedious leisure marks each wrinckled line:
But when Aurora leads out Phoebus dance,
Mine eyes then only wink for spite perchance,
That worms should have their Sun and I want mine.
WHen far spent night persuades each mortal eye
To whom nor Art nor Nature granted light:
To lay his then mark wanting shaftes of sight,
Closed with their quiuers in Sleeps armorie;
With windows open then most my heart does lie
Viewing the shape of darkness and delight,
And takes that sad hue, with which inward might
Of his mazde powers he keeps just harmony:
But when birds chirpe air, and sweet air which is
Mornes messenger with rose enameld skies
Calls each wight to salute the heaven of bliss;
Intombd of lids then buried are mine eyes,
Forced by their Lord who is ashamd to find
Such light in sense with such a darkened mind.
OH tears, no tears, but shoures from beauties skies,
Making those Lilies and those Roses grow,
Which aie most fair now fairer needs must show,
While grateful pity Beauty beautifies,
Oh minded sighs that from that breast do rise,
Whose pants do make vnspilling Cream to slow,
VVinged with woes breath so does Zephire blow
As might refresh the hell where my soul fries,
Oh plaints conseru'd in such a sugared phrase,
That eloquence enuies, and yet does praise,
While sightd out words a perfect music give:
Such tears, sighs, plaints, no sorrow is, but joy:
Or if such heavenly sighs must prove annoy,
All mirth farewell, let me in sorrow live.
STella is sick, and in that sickbed lies
Sweetenes, that breathes and pants as often as she:
And Grace sick too, such fine conclusions tries,
That Sickness brings it self best graced to be.
Beauty is sick, but sick in such fair guise,
That in that palenes Beauties white we see,
And Joy which is vnseuer'd from those eyes.
Stella now learnes, (strange case) to weep with me,
Love moves thy pain and like a faithful page,
As thy looks stir, runs up and down to make
All folks pressed at thy will thy pain to swage,
Nature with care seeks for her darlings sake,
Knowing worlds pass, ere she enough can find
Of such heaven stuff to cloth so heavenly mind.
WHere be those Roses, which so sweetened erst our eyes?
Where be those red cheeks, which fair increase did frame
No hight of honor in the kindly badge of shame,
Who has the crimson weeds stolen from the morning skies?
How does the coullor fade of those vermillion eyes,
Which Nature self did make and self engraue the same?
I would know by what right this palenes overcame
That hue, whose force my heart in so great thraldom ties?
Gallens adopted sons, who by a beaten way
Their judgments hackney on, the fault of sickness lay:
But feeling proof makes me say, they mistake it sure,
It is but love that makes this paper perfect white,
To write therein more fresh the story of Delight,
VVhiles Beauties reddest incke Venus for him does stir.
O Happy Thames that did my Stella bear,
I saw thee with full many a smiling line
Upon thy cheereful face Jove's Livery wear:
While those fair Plannets on thy streams did shine,
The boat for joy could not to dance forbear,
While wanton winds with beauty so divine
Ravished, staid not, til in her golden hair
They did themselves (o sweetest prison) twine.
But feign those friendly winds there would their stay
Have made, but forced by Nature still to fly,
First did with puffing kiss those Locks display:
She so discovered, blushed. From window I
with sight thereof cride out; Ah fair disgrace,
Let honors self to thee grant highest place.
Envious wits what has been mine offense,
That with such poisoned care my wits you mark,
That to each word, nay sigh of mine you hark,
As grudging me my sorrows eloquence?
Ah, is it not enough, that I am thence:
Thence, so far thence, that scantly any spark
Of comfort dare come to this dungeon dark
Where rigorous exile locks up al my sense:
But if I by a happy window pass,
If I but Stars upon mine Armor bear,
Sick, thirsty, glad (though but of empty glass)
Your morals note straight my hid meaning there,
From out my ribs a whirlewind proves that I
Do Stella love fools, who does it deny?
Unhappy sight and has she vanished by,
So near, in so good time so free a place,
Dead glass do thou thine object so embrace,
As what my heart still sees thou can not spy,
I swear by her Love and my lack, that I
Was not in fault that bent my dazzling race
Only unto the heaven of Stellaes face,
Counting but dust that in her way did lie:
But cease mine eyes, your tears do witness well,
That you guiltles therefore your necklace mist,
Cursed be the Page from whom the bad torch fell,
Cursed be the night which did your will resist,
Cursed be the Cochman that did drive so fast,
With no less curse then absence makes me taste.
O Absent presence Stella is not here,
False flattering hope that with so fair a face,
Bare me in hand that in this Orphane place,
Stella I saw, my Stella should appear,
What say thou now, where is that dainty clear
Thou would mine eyes should help their famisht case:
But how art thou? now that self felt disgrace
Does make me most to wish thy comfort nere.
But here I do store of fair Ladies meet,
Who may with charm of conversation sweet
Make in my heavy mould new thoughts to grow:
Sure they prevail as much with me, as he
That bad his friend but then new maimed to be
Merry with him, and so his forget woe.
STella since thou so right a Princess art
Of all the Powers which life bestow on me,
That ere by them ought undertaken be,
They first resort unto that sovereign part;
Sweet for a time give respite to my heart,
Which pants as though it still should leap to thee:
And on my thought give the Lieuetenancie
To this great cause, which needs both wit and Art,
And as a Queen who from her presence sends
Whom she emploies, dismiss from thee my wit,
Still to have wrought that thy own will attends,
For servants shame of Masters blame does sit.
O let not Fools in me thy works approve,
And scorning say, see what it is to love.
When sorrow (using my own Siers might)
Melts down his lead into my boiling breast,
Through that dark Furnace of my heart oppressed,
There shines a joy from thee my only light:
But soon as thought of thee breeds my delight,
And my young soul once flutters to her nest,
Most dead despair my daily unbidden guest
Clips strait my wings, strait wraps me in his night,
And makes me then bow down my head and say,
Ah what does Phoebus gold that wretch avail
Whom Iron darts does keep from use of day,
So strangely (alas) thy works on me prevail,
That in my woes for thee, thou art my joy;
And in my joys for thee, my onel'anoy.
Other Sonnets of variable verse.
First Sonnet.
DOubt you to whom my Muse these notes intends,
Which now my breast surchargd with music lends?
To you, to you all song of praise is due,
Only in you my song begins and ends.
2
Who has the eyes which marry state with pleasure,
Who keeps the key of Natures chiefest treasure:
To you, to you al song of praise be due,
Only for you the heavens forget all measure.
3
Who has the lips where wit with fairenes reigns,
Who womenkinde at once both decks and staineth:
To you, to you al song of praise is due,
Only by you Cupid his crown maintains.
4
Who has the feet whose steps al sweetness planteth,
Who else for whom Fame worthy trumpets wants:
To you, to you all song of praise be due,
Only to you her scepter Venus grants.
5
Who has the breast whose milk does patience nurish,
Whose grace is such, that when it chides does cherish:
To you, to you al song of praise be due,
Only through you the tree of life does slourish.
6
Who has the hand which without stroke subdueth
Who long hid beauty with increase renueth:
To you, to you al song of praise is due,
Only at you al envy hopeless ends.
7
Who has the hair which most loose most fast tieth,
Who makes a man live then glad when he dies:
To you, to you al song of praise is due,
Only of you the flattrer never lies.
8
Who has the voice which soul from senses sunders,
Whose force but yours the bolt of beauty thunders?
To you, to you al song of praise is due,
Only with you no miracles are wonders.
9
Doubt you to whom my Muse these notes intends,
Which now my breast orechargd with music lends?
To you, to you al song of praise is due,
Only in you my song begins and ends.
Second Sonnet.
Have I caught my heavenly Iuel
Teaching Sleep most fair to be:
Now will I teach her, that she
When she wakes is too too cruel.
2
Since sweet Sleep her eyes has charmed,
The two only darts of Love:
Now will I with that Boy prove
Some play while he is disarmed.
3
Her tongue waking still refuses,
Giving frankly niggard no:
Now will I attempt to know,
What no her tongue sleeping uses.
4
See the hand that waking gardeth,
Sleeping grants a free resort:
Now I will invade the fort,
Cowards Love with loss rewards.
5
But (O fool) think of the danger
Of her just and high disdain,
Now will I (alas) refrain
Love fears nothing else but anger.
6
Yet those lips so sweetly swelling,
Do inuit a stealing kiss;
Now but venture will I this,
Who will read must first learn spelling.
7
Oh sweet kiss, but ah she is waking,
Lowering beauty chastens me.
Now will I for fear hence flee,
Fool, more Fool for no more taking.
Third Sonnet.
IF Orpheus voice had force to breathe such musicks Love
Through pores of senseles trees, as it could make them move;
If stones good measure daunst the Thebane walls to build,
To cadence of the tunes which Amphions Lyre did yield,
More cause a like effect at least wise brings.
O stones, o trees, learn hearing, Stella sings,
2
If Love might sweeten so a boy of Shepherds brood,
To make a Lyzard dull to taste Loves food:
If Eagle fierce could so in Grecian maid delight,
As her eyes were his light, her death his endless night:
Earth gave that Love, heaven (I trow) Love refineth.
O Beasts, o Birds, look Love; for Stella shines.
3
The beasts, birds, stones and trees feel this, and feeling love:
And if the trees, nor stones stir not the same to prove,
Nor beasts, nor birds do come unto this blessed gaze;
Know that small Love is quick, and great Love does amaze;
They are amazed, but you with reason armed,
O eyes O ears of men, how are you charmed?
Fourth Sonnet.
Only Joy, now here you are,
Fit to hear and ease my care;
Let my whispering voice obtain
Sweet rewards for sharpest pain:
Take me to thee, and thee to me.
No no no no, my Dear let be.
2
Night has closde all in her cloak,
Twinkling stars love thoughts provoke,
Danger hence good care does keep,
Iealozie himself does sleep:
Take me to thee, and thee to me.
No no no no, my Dear let be.
3
Better place no wit can find
Cupids knot to loose or bind,
These sweet flowers, our fine bed too,
Us in their best language woo:
Take me to thee, and thee to me:
No no no no, my Dear let be.
4
This small light the Moon bestoes,
Serves thy beams for to disclose,
So to raise my heart more hie;
Fear not, else none can us spy:
Take me to thee and thee to me.
No no no no, my Dear let be.
5
That you heard was but a mouse,
Dumb Sleep holds all the house,
Yet a sleep (me thinks) they say,
Young fools, take time while you may:
Take me to thee, and thee to me.
No no no no, my Dear let be.
6
Niggard time threats if we miss
This large offer of our bliss,
Long stay ere she grant the same:
Sweet then, while each thing does frame
Take me to thee and thee to me.
No no no no, my Dear let be.
7
Your fair Mother is a bed,
Candles out, and curtains spread;
She thinks you do letters write:
Write, but first let me endite.
Take me to thee, and thee to me:
No no no no, my Dear let be.
8
Sweet, alas why strive you thus?
Concord better fitteth us;
Leave to Mars the force of hands,
Your power in your beauty stands.
Take me to thee, and thee to me.
No no no no, my Dear let be.
9
VVoe to me, and do you swear
Me to hate but I forbear?
Cursed be my destnies all,
That brought me so high to fall:
Soon with my death I Will please thee.
No no no no, my Dear let be.
The fifth Sonnet.
WHile favor fed my hope, delight with hope was brought,
Thought waited on delight, and speech did follow thought,
Then drew my tongue and pen records unto thy glory;
I thought all words were lost that were not spent of thee,
I thought each place was dark but where thy lights would be,
And all ears worse than deaffe, that hard not out thy story.
2
I said thou were most fair, and so indeed thou art;
I said thou were most sweet, sweet poison to my heart;
I said my soul was thine, o would I then had lied;
I said thy eyes were stars, thy breasts the milken way,
Thy fingers Cupids shafts, thy voice the Angels lay:
And all is said so well, that no man it denied.
3
But now that hope is lost, unkindness kills delight,
Yet thought and speech do live, thought metamorphisde quite,
For rage now rules the reins, which guided were by pleasure,
I think now of thy faults, who late wrote of thy praise,
That speech falls now to blame which did thy honor raise:
The same key open can, which can lock up a treasure.
4
Then thou whom partial heavens conspired in one to frame
The proof of beauties work, the inheritance of fame,
The mansion state of bliss, and just excuse of lovers:
See now those feathers plucked wherewith thou flewst most hie,
See what clouds of reproach shall dark thy honors sky;
Whom fault once casts down, hardly high state recouers.
5
And o my Muse, though often you luld her in your lap,
And then a heavenly Child gave her Ambrosian pap,
And to that brain of hers your highest gifts infused;
Since she disdaining me, does you in me disdain,
Suffer not her to laugh, and both we suffer pain:
Princes in subjects wrongs must deem themselves abused.
6
Your client poor, my self, shall Stella handle so,
Revenge, revenge, my Muse desiance trumpet blow,
Threate, threat, what may be done; yet do no more but threaten:
Ah, my suit granted is, I feel my breast does swell;
Now Child, a lesson new you shall begin to spell,
Sweet babes must babies have, but shrewd girls must be beaten.
7
Think now no more to hear of warm fine shining snow,
Nor blushing Lillyes, nor pearls Rubie hidden row,
Nor of that golden sea, whose waves in curles are broken:
But of thy soul fraught with such ungratefulness,
As where thou soon might help, most there thou do oppress
Ungrateful who is called, the worst of ills is spoken.
8
Yet worse than worse, I say thou art a Thief. A thief?
Now God forbid: a thief, and of worst thieues a thief;
Thieues steal for need, and steal for goods, which pain recouers
But thou, rich in all joys, do rob my goods from me,
Which cannot be restorde by time nor industry:
Of foes the spoil is evil, far more of constant lovers.
9
Yet gentle English thieues do rob, and will not slay;
Thou English murdring thief, wilt have hearts for thy pray.
The name of murdrer now on thy fair forhead sits,
And even while I do speak my death wounds bleeding be,
Which I protest proceed from only cruel thee,
Who may and will not save, murder in truth commits.
10
But murders private fault seems but a toy to thee.
I lay then to thy charge injustice Tirannie,
If rule by force without all claim, a Tyrant shows;
For thou art my hearts Lord, who am not borne thy slave,
And which is worse makes me most guiltles torments have,
A rightful Prince by unrightful deeds a Tyrant grows.
11
Lo you grow proud with this, for Tyrants makes folk bow:
Of foul rebellion then I do appeach thee now,
Rebels by Natures laws rebel by way of reason;
Thou sweetest subject were borne in the Realm of Love,
And yet against thy Prince, thy force do daily prove,
No virtue merits praise, once touched with blot of Treason.
12
But valiant Rebels often in fools mouths purchase fame,
I now then stain thy white with blackest blot of shame,
Both Rebel to the Son, and vagrant from the Mother;
For wearing Venus badge, in every part of thee,
Unto Dianaes train thou runnaway did fly:
Who fails one is false, though trusty to another.
13
What is not this enough, nay far worse comes here:
A Witch I say thou art, though thou so fair appear.
For I protest, mine eyes never thy sight enjoys,
But Im me am changed, I am alive and dead.
My feet are turned to roots, my heart becomes lead,
No witchcraft is so ill, as which man's mind destroys,
14
Yet Witches may repent, thou art far worse than they:
Alas, that I am forced such evil of thee to say:
I say thou art a Devil though cloathd in Angels shining:
For thy face tempts my soul to leave the heavens for thee,
And thy words of refuse do power even hell on me:
Who tempts, and tempted plagues are Devils in true desining.
15
You then ungrateful thief, you murdering Tyrant you,
You Rebel runnaway to Lord and Lady untrue,
You witch, you Devil (alas) you still of me beloved,
You see what I can say; mend yet your froward mind,
And such skill in my Muse you reconciled shall find,
That by these cruel words your praises shall be proved.
The sixth Sonnet.
O You that hear this voice,
O you that see this face,
Say whether of the choice,
Deserves the better place,
Fear not to judge this bate,
For it is void of hate.
2
This side does Beauty take,
For that does Music speak,
Fit Orators to make,
The strongest judgments weak,
The bar to plead the right,
Is only true delight.
3
Thus does the voice and face,
The gentle Lawiers wage,
Like loving brothers case,
For Fathers heritage,
That each while each contends,
It self to other lends.
4
For Beauty beautifies
With heavenly view and grace,
The heavenly harmonies;
And in this faultles face
The perfect beauties be,
A perfect harmony.
5
Music more lusty swells
In speeches nobly placed,
Beauty as far excels
In actions aptly graced.
A friend each party draws,
To countenance his cause.
6
Love more affected seems
To Beauties lovely light,
And Wonder more esteems
Of Musicks wondrous might;
But both to both so bent,
As both in both are spent.
7
Music does witness call
The ear, his truth to try:
Beauty brings to the hall
The judgment of the eye:
Both in their objects such,
As no exceptions tuch.
8
The common Sense which might
Be arbitrer of this,
To be forsooth upright,
To both sides partial is:
He lays on this chief praise,
Chief praise on that he lays.
9
Then reason Princess hie,
Whose throne is in the mind;
Which Music can in sky,
And hidden Beauties find:
Say, whether thou will crown
With limitlesse renown.
The seventh Sonnet.
WHose senses in so evil comfort their step dame Nature lays,
That rauishing delight in them most sweet tunes does not raise,
Or if they do delight therein yet are so cloid with wit,
As with sententious lips to set a little vain on it:
O let them hear these sacred tunes, and learn in wonders schools,
To be (in things past bounds of wit) fools, if they be not fools.
Who have so leaden eyes, as not to see sweet Beauties show:
Or seeing, have so wooden wits as not that worth to know;
Or knowing, have so muddie minds, as not to be in love;
Or loving, have so frothie hearts, as easy thence to move:
O, let them see these heavenly beams, and in fair letters reed
A lesson, fit both sight and skill, Love and firm Love to breed.
3
Hear then, but then with wonder hear; see, but admiring see;
No mortal gifts, no earthly fruits now here discerned be:
See, do you see this face: a face, nay image of the skies,
Of which, the two life-giuing lights are figured in her eyes:
Hear you this soule-inuading voice, and count it but a voice,
The very essence of their tunes, when Angels do reoyce.
The eighth.
IN a grove most rich of shade;
Where birds wanton Music made:
May then young his pide weeds showing,
New perfumes with flowrs fresh growing.
2
Astrophel with Stella sweet,
Did for mutual comfort meet:
Both within themselves oppressed,
But either in each other blessed.
3
Him great harms had taught much care,
Her fair neck a foul yoke bare:
But her sight his cares did banish,
In his sight her yoke did vanish.
4
Wept they had, alas the while:
But now tears themselves did smile,
While their eyes by Love directed,
Interchangeablie reflected.
5
Sighd they had: but now betwixt
Sighs of woe were glad sighs mixed:
With arms crossed, yet testifying
Restles rest, and living dying.
6
Their ears hungry of each word
Which the dear tongue would afford,
But their tongues restraind from walking,
Till their hearts had ended talking.
7
But when their tongues could not speak,
Love it self did silence break:
Love did set his lips asunder
Thus to speak in love and wonder.
8
Stella, Sovereign of my joy,
Fair Triumphres in annoy:
Stella, Star of heavenly fire,
Stella, loadstarre of desire.
9
Stella, in whose shining eyes
Are the lights of Cupids skies,
Whose beams where they are once darted
Love there with is straight imparted.
10
Stella, whose voice when it speaks,
Senses all asunder breaks:
Stella, whose voice when it sings,
Angels to acquaintance brings.
11
Stella, in whose body is
Writ the caracters of blis:
Whose sweet face all beauty passes,
Save the mind which it surpasses.
12
Grant, o grant, but speech (alas)
Fails me, fearing on to pass:
Grant to me, what am I saying?
But no sin there is in praying.
13
Grant (o Dear) on knees I pray
(Knees on ground he then did stay)
That not I, but since I prove you,
Time and place from me nere move you.
14
Never season was more fit,
Never room more apt for it:
Smiling air allows my reason:
These birds sing; now use the season.
15
This small wind which so sweet is,
See how it the leaves does kis;
Each tree in his best attyring,
Sense of Love to Love inspiring.
16
Love makes earth the water drink,
Love to earth makes water sink:
And if dumb things be so witty,
Shall a heavenly Grace want pity?
17
There his hands (in their speech) feign
Would have made tongues language plain:
But her hands his hands compelling,
Gave repulse, all grace expelling.
18
Therewithal, away she went,
Leaving him with passion rent,
With what she had done and spoken,
That therewith my song is broken.
The ninth Sonnet.
Go my Flock, go get you hence,
Seek a better place of feeding,
Where you may have some defense
From the storms in my breast bleeding,
And showers from mine eyes porceeding.
2
Leave a wretch in whom all woe,
Can abide to keep no measure;
Merry Flock, such one forgo
Unto whom mirth is displeasure,
Only rich in measures treasure.
3
Yet alas before you go,
Hear your woeful Masters story,
Which to stones I else would show;
Sorrow only then has glory,
When it is excellently sorry.
4
Stella, fairest Shepherdess,
Fairest, but yet cruelst ever;
Stella, whom the heavens still bless,
Though against me she persevere,
Though I bliss inherit never.
5
Stella has refused me,
Stella, who more love has proved
In this caitiffe heart to be,
Than can in good to us be moved
Toward Lambkins best beloved,
6
Stella has refused me
Astrophel that so well served.
In this pleasant Spring (Muse) see,
While in pride flowers be preserved,
Himself only, winter starued.
7
Why (alas) then does she swear
That she loves me so deerly;
Seeing me so long to bear
Coals of love that burn so clearly:
And yet leave me hopeless merely.
8
Is that love? forsooth I trow,
If I saw my good dog grieved,
And a help for him did know,
My love should not be believed,
But he were by me relieved.
9
No, she hates me (welaway)
Faining love, somewhat to please me;
Knowing, if she should display
All her hate, death soon would seize me,
And of hideous torments ease me.
10
Then my dear Flock now adieu:
But alas, if in your straying
Heavenly Stella meet with you,
Tell her in your piteous blaying
Her poor Slaves just decaying.
The tenth Sonnet.
O Dear Life, when shall it be,
That mine eyes thine eyes shall see,
And in them thy mind discover,
Whether absence have had force
Thy remembrance to divorce
From the image of thy Lover?
2
O if I my self find not
By thine absence often forgot,
Nor debard from Beauties treasure,
Let no tongue aspire to tell
In what high joys I shall dwell,
Only thought aims at the pleasure.
3
Thought therefore will I send thee
To take up the place for me,
Long I will not after tarry:
There unseen, thou may be bold
Those fair wonders to behold,
Which in them my hopes do carry.
4
Thought, see thou no place forbear,
Enter bravely every where,
Seize on all to her belonging:
But if thou would guarded be,
Fearing her beams, take with thee
Strength of liking, rage of longing.
5
O my Thoughts, my Thoughts sure ease,
Your delights my woes increase,
My life fleetes with too much thinking:
Think no more, but die in me,
Till thou shall received be,
At her lips my Nectar drinking.
Finis
Sir P.S.
Poems and Sonets of sundry other Noble men and Gentlemen.
The Author of this Poem, S. D.
GO wayling verse the infant of my love,
Minorua like, brought forth without a mother:
That bears the image of the cares I prove;
Witness your fathers grief exceeds all other.
Sigh out a Story of her cruel deeds
With interrupted accents of despair,
A monument that whosoever reeds,
May justly praise and blame my loueles Fair.
Say her disdain has dried up my blood,
And sterued you in succors still denying,
Press to her eyes, importune me some good,
Waken her sleeping cruelty with crying,
Knock at her hard heart: say, I perish for her,
And fear this deed will make the world abhor her.
Sonnet 1.
IF so it hap the Offspring of my care,
These fatal anthemes and afflicted songs
Come to their view who like to me do fare,
May move them sigh there at and moan my wrongs.
But untouched hearts with unaffected eye,
Approach not to behold my souls distress,
Clear sighted you will note what is awry,
Whilst blind ones see no error in my verse.
You blinded souls whom hap and error leads,
You outcast Eglets dazeled with the Sun,
Ah you and none but you my sorrow reads,
You best can judge the wrong that she has done;
That she has done, the motive of my pain,
Who whilst I love does kill me with disdain.
Sonnet, 2.
THese sorrowing sighs, the smokes of mine annoy;
These tears, which heat of sacred fire distills:
These are the tributes that my faith does pay,
And these my tyrants cruel mind fulfills.
I sacrifice my youth and blooming years
At her proud feet, that yet respects no whit
My youth, untimely withered with my tears
By winter woes, for spring of youth unfit.
She thinks, a look may recompense my care;
And so with looks prolongs my long looked ease:
As short the bliss, so is the comfort rare;
Yet must that bliss my hungry thoughts appease:
Thus she returns my hopes to fruitless ever;
Once let her love indeed, or eye me never.
Sonnet 3.
THe only bird alone that Nature frames,
When weary of the tedious life she lives,
By fire dies, yet finds new life in flames,
Her ashes to her shape new essence gives.
When only I the only wretched wight,
Weary of life that breaths but sorrows blasts,
Pursues the flame of such a beauty bright,
That burns my heart, and yet my life still lasts.
O Sovereign light that with thy sacred flame
Consumes my life, revive me after this,
And make me (with the happy bird) the same
That dies to live, by favor of thy bliss.
This deed of thine shall show a Goddess power,
In so long death, to grant one living hour.
Sonnet, 4.
Tears, vows and prayers gains the hardest hearts,
Tears, vows and prayers, have I spent in vain,
Tears cannot soften flint, nor vows convert,
Prayers prevail not with a quaint disdain.
I loose my tears, where I have lost my love,
I vow my faith, where faith is not regarded,
I pray in vain a merciles to move,
So rare a faith ought better be rewarded.
Though frozen will may not be thawed with tears,
Though my souls Idol skorneth all my vows,
Though all my prayers be made to deafned ears,
No favor though, the cruel fair allows,
Yet will I weep, vow, pray to cruel she,
Flint, frost, disdain, wears, melts and yields we see.
Sonnet, 5.
WHy does my Mistres credit so her glass,
Gasing her beauty dein'd her by the skies,
And does not rather look on him (alas)
Whose state best shows the force of murdering eyes.
The broken tops of lofty trees declare
The fury of a mercie-wanting storm;
And of what force your wounding graces are,
Upon my self you best may find the form.
Then leave your glass, and gaze your self on me,
That myrror shows the power of your face;
To admire your form too much may danger be,
Narcissus changd to flower in such a case:
I fear your change not flower nor Hiacynth,
Medusas eye may turn your heart to flint.
Sonnet 6.
THese amber locks are those same nets (my Dear)
Wherewith my liberty thou did surprise,
Love was the flame that fierd me so near,
The darts transpersing were these Crystal eyes.
Strong is the net, and fervent is the flame.
Deep is the stroke, my sighs can well report,
Yet do I love, adore and praise the same,
That holds, that burns, that wounds me in that sort.
I list not seek to break, to quench, to heal,
This bond, this flame, this wound that festereth so,
By knife, by liquor, or by salve to deal;
So much I please to perish in my woe:
Yet, least long travels be above my strength;
Good Lady, lose, quench, heal me now at length.
Sonnet 71.
BEhold what hap Pigmalion had to frame,
And carue his grief himself upon a stone;
My heavy fortune is much like the same,
I work on flint and that is the cause I moan.
For hapless lo even with mine own desires,
I figured on the table of my heart
The goodliest shape that the worlds eye admires,
And so did perish by my proper art.
And still I toil to change the Marble breast
Of her, whose sweet Idea I addore,
Yet cannot find her breath unto my rest,
Hard is her heart, and woe is me therefore.
O blessed he that joys his stone and art,
Unhappy I to love a stony heart.
Sonnet 8.
Often and in vain my rebels thoughts have ventred,
to stop the passage of my vanquished heart,
And close the way, my friendly foe first entered,
Striving thereby to free my better part.
VVhilest garding thus the windows of my thought,
Where my harts-thiefe to vex me made her choice,
And thither all my forces to transport,
Another passage opens at her voice.
Her voice betraies me to her hand and eye,
My freedomes-tyrant glorying in her art:
But (ah) sweet foe, small is the victory
With three such powers to plague one silly heart.
Yet my souls sovereign, since I must resign,
Reign in my thoughts, my love and life are thine.
Sonnet 9.
Reign in my thoughts, fair hand, sweet eye, rare voice,
Possess me whole, my hearts Triumuirate:
Yet heavy heart to make so hard a choice,
Of such as spoil thy whole afflicted state.
For whilst they strive which shall be Lord of all,
All my poor life by them is trodden down;
They all erect their triumphs on my fall,
And yields me naught: who gains them there renown.
When back I look, and sigh my freedom past,
And wail the state wherein I present stand,
And see my fortune ever like to last;
Finding me reynd with such a cruel hand,
What can I do but yield, and yield I do,
And serve them all, and yet they spoil me too.
Sonnet 10.
THe sly Inchanter, when to work his will
And secret wrong on some forespoken wight,
Frames wax, in form to represent a right
The poor un witting wretch he means to kill,
And pricks the image, framed by Magicks skill;
Whereby to vex the party day and night:
Like has she done, whose show bewitched my sight
To beauties charms, her Lovers blood to spill.
For first, like wax she framed me by her eyes,
Whose nayes sharp poynted set upon my breast,
Martyrs my life, and plagues me in this wise
With lingering pain to perish in unrest;
Naught could (save this) my sweetest fair suffice
To try her art on him that loves her best.
Sonnet 11.
REstore thy treasure to the golden ore,
Yield Cythereas son those arckes of love,
Bequeath the heavens the stars that I adore,
And to the Orient do thy pearls remove.
Yield thy hands pride unto the iuory white,
To Arabian odor give thy breathing sweet,
Restore thy blush unto Aurora bright,
To Thetis give the honor of thy feet.
Let Venus have the graces her resignd,
And thy sweet voice yield to Hermonius spheres:
But yet restore thy fierce and cruel mind
To Hircan Tigers, and to ruthlesse Bears;
Yield to the Marble thy hard heart again:
So shall thou cease to plague, and I to pain.
Sonnet 12.
THe tablet of my heavy fortunes here
Upon thine Altar ( Paphian Power) I place;
The grievous shipwreck of my travels dear
In bulged bark, all perished in disgrace.
That traitor Love, was Pilot to my woe,
My Sails were hope, spread with my sighs of grief,
The twinelights which my haples course did show,
Hard by the inconstant sands of false relief,
Where two bright stars which led my view apart,
A Sirens voice allured me come so near,
To perish on the marble of her heart,
A danger which my soul did never fear:
Lo thus he fares that trusts a calm too much;
And thus fare I whose credit has been such.
Sonnet, 13.
MY Cinthia has the waters of mine eyes,
The reddie handmaides on her grace attending,
That never falls to ebb nor ever dies,
For to their flow she never grants an ending.
The Ocean never does attend more duly
Upon his sovereign, the night wandering Queen;
Nor ever has his impost paid more truly,
Than mine to my souls Queen has ever been.
Yet her hard rock firm fixed for ay removing,
No comfort to my cares she ever gives;
Yet had I rather languish in her loving,
Than to embrace the fairest she that lives.
I fear to find such pleasure in my reigning,
As now I taste in compass of complaining.
Sonnet, 14.
IF a true heart and faith unfeigned,
If a sweet languish with a chaste desire,
If hunger-steruen thoughts so long retained,
Fed but with smoke, and cherisht but with fire.
And if a brow with Cares caracters painted,
Bewrayes my Love with broken words half spoken,
To her which sits in my thoughts temple sainted,
And lays to view my vulture-gnawen heart open.
If I have wept the day, and sigthd the night,
Whilst thrice the Sun approcht this northern bound:
If such a faith has ever wrought aright,
And well deserud, and yet no favor found:
Let this suffice, the wholeworld it may see
The fault is hers, though mine the most hurt be.
Sonnet 15.
SInce the first look that led me to this error,
To this thoughts-maze to my confusion tending;
Still have I liude in grief, in hope, in terror,
The circle of my sorrows never ending.
Yet cannot have her Love that holds me hateful,
Her eyes exacts it, though her heart disdaines me,
See what reward he has that serves th'ngratefull,
So long and pure a faith no favor gains me.
Still must I whet my young desires abated,
Upon the flint of such a heart rebelling,
And all in vain her pride is so imated,
She yields no place at all for pities dwelling,
Often have I told her that my Soul did love her,
And that with tears; yet all this will not move her.
Sonnet, 16.
WAy but the cause, and give me leave to plain me,
For all my hurt, that my hearts Queen has wrought it,
She whom I love so dear, the more to pain me,
VVithholds my right, where I have dearly bought it.
Dearly I bought that was so highly rated,
Even with the price of blood and bodies wasting,
She would not yield that ought might be abated,
For all she saw my Love was pure and lasting.
And yet now scorns performance of the passion,
And with her presence Justice ouerruleth,
She tells me flat her beauty bears no action,
And so my plee and process she excludes:
What wrong she does, the world may well perceive it,
To accept my faith at first, and then to leave it.
Sonnet, 17.
WHilst by her eyes pursude, my poor heart flue it
Into the sacred bosom of my dearest,
She there in that sweet Sanctuary slew it,
When it had hoped his safety to be nearest.
My faith of privilege could no whit protect it,
That was with blood, and three years witness signed,
Whereby she had no cause once to suspect it:
For well she saw my love, and how I pined.
Yet no hopes letter would her brow reveal me,
No comforts hue, which falling spirits erecteth;
What boots to laws of succor to appeal me?
Ladies and tyrants never laws respects.
Then there I die, where I had hope to liuen;
And by her hand that better might have given.
Sonnet 18.
Look in my griefs, and blame me not to mourn,
From thought to thought that lead a life so bad:
Fortunes Orphan, hers and the worlds scorn,
Whose clowded brow does make my days so bad.
Long are their nights, whose cares do never sleep;
Loathsome their days, whom never sun yet ioyed;
A pleasing grief impressed has so deep,
That thus I live both day and night annoyed.
Yet since the sweetest root does yield thus much,
Her praise from my complaint I must not part:
I love the effect, because the cause is such;
I praise her face, and blame her flintie heart:
Whilst that we make the world admire at us,
Her for disdain, and me for loving thus.
Sonnet 19.
Happy in sleep, waking content to languish,
Embracing clouds by night, in day time mourn:
All things I loath save her and mine own anguish,
Pleased in my heart moved to live forlorn.
Naught do I crave but love, death, or my Lady,
Horce with crying mercy, (mercy yet my merit)
So many vows and prayers ever made I,
That now at length to yield mere pity were it.
Yet since the Hidra of my cares renewing,
Reuiues still sorrows of her fresh disdaining,
Still must I go the Summer winds pursuing,
And nothing but her love and my hearts paining.
Weep howrs, grieve days, sigh months, and still mourn yearly,
Thus must I do because I love her dearly:
Sonnet, 20.
IF Beauty bright be doubled with a frown,
That Pity cannot shine through to my bliss,
And Disdaines vapors are thus ouergrowen,
That my lives light to me quite darkened is.
Why trouble I the world then with my cries,
The air with sighs, the earth below with tears,
Since I live hateful to those ruthful eyes,
Vexing with my untuned moan her dainty ears.
If I have loved her dearer than my breath,
My breath, that calls the heavens to witness it.
And still hold her most dear until my death:
And if that all this cannot move one whit;
Yet let her say that she has done me wrong,
To use me thus and know I loved so long.
Sonnet, 2.
COme Death the Anchor hold of al my thoughts,
My last resort whereto my Soul appealeth:
For all too long on earth my fancy dotes,
Whiles dearest blood my fiery passions seals.
That heart is now the prospectiue of horror,
That honored has the cruelst Fair that lives,
The cruelst Fair, that knows I languish for her.
And never mercy to my merit gives.
This is the Laurel and her tryumphes prise.
To tread me down with foot of her disgrace,
Whilst I did build my fortune in her eyes,
And laid my souls rest on so fair a face:
That rest I lost, my Love, my life and all,
Thus high attempts to low disgrace do fall.
Sonnet, 22.
IF this be Love to draw a weary breath,
To paint on flods till the shore cry to the air,
With prone aspect still treading on the earth,
Sad horror, pale grief, prostrate despair:
If this be Love, to war against my soul,
Rise up to wail, lie down to sigh, to grieve me,
With ceaseles toil Cares restless stones to roll,
Still to complain and moan, whilst none relieve me:
If this be Love, to languish in such care,
Loathing the light, the world, my self, and all.
With interrupted sleeps fresh griefs repair,
And breath out horror in perplexed thrall:
If this be Love, to live a living death;
Lo then love I, and draw this weary breath.
Sonnet 23.
MY cares draws on my everlasting night,
And horrors sable clouds dims my lives sun;
That my lives sun, and thou my worldly light,
Shall rise no more to me, my days are done.
I Will go before unto the myrtle shades,
To attend the presence of my worlds dear,
And dress a bed of flowers that never fades,
And all things fit against her coming there.
If any ask, why that so soon I came?
I Will hide her fault, and say, it was my lot,
In life and death I Will tender her good name,
My life and death shall never be her blot:
Although the world this deed of hirs may blame,
The Elisian ghoasts shall never know the same.
Sonnet 24.
THe Star of my mishap imposd my paining
To spend the April of my years in crying,
That never found my fortune but in wayning,
With still fresh cares my blood and body trying.
Yet her I blame not, though she might have blessed me
But my desiers wings so high aspiring;
Now melted with the Sun that has possessed me,
Down do I fall from of my high desiring.
And in my fall do cry for mercy speedy,
No piteous eye looks back upon my mourning;
No help I find, when now most favor need I;
My Ocean tears drown me, and quench my burning,
And this my death must christen her anew,
Whiles faith does bid my cruel Fair adieu.
Sonnet 25.
TO hear the impost of a faith not faining,
That duty paies, and her disdain extorteth:
These bear the message of my woeful paining,
These Olive branches mercy still exorteth.
These tributarie plaints with chaste desires,
I send those eyes, the cabinets of love,
The paradise where to my soul aspires
From out this hell, which my afflictions prove:
Wherein (poor soul) I live exiled from mirth,
Pensive alone, none but despair about me,
My joys liberties perished in their birth,
My care's long lived, and will not die without me:
What shall I do but sigh and wail, the while
My martyrdom exceedes the highest style.
Sonnet 26.
I Once may I see when years may wrecke my wrong,
And golden hairs may change to silver wire,
And those bright rays (that kindle all this fire)
Shall fail in force, their power not so strong.
Her beauty, now the burden of my song,
Whose glorious blaze the worlds eye does admire,
Must yield her praise to tirant times desire,
Then fades the flower which fed her pride so long.
When if she grieve to gaze her in her glass,
Which then presents her winter withred hieu,
Go you my verse, go tell her what she was:
For what she was, she best may find in you.
Your fiery heat lets not her glory pass,
But Phoenix like to make her live anew.
Sonnet 27.
RAising my hope on hills of high desire,
Thinking to scale the heaven of her heart,
My slender mean presumes too high a part:
For disdaines thunderbolt made me retire,
And threw me down to pain in all this fire.
Where lo I languish in so heavy smart,
Because the attempt was far above my Art,
Her state brooks not poor souls should come so nie her.
Yet I protest my high aspiring will,
Was not to dispossess her of her right,
Her Sovereignty should have remained still,
I only sought the bliss, to have her sight:
Her sight contented thus to see me spill,
Framed my desires fit for her eyes to kill.
Finis,
Daniel.
Canto primo.
Hark all you Ladies that do sleep,
The Fairie Queen Proserpina
Bids you awake, and pity them that weep.
You may do in the dark
What the day does forbid;
Fear not the dogs that bark,
Night will have all hid.
But if you let your Lovers moan,
The Fairie Queen Proserpina
Will send abroad her Fairies every one:
That shall pinch black and blew
Your white hands and fair arms,
That did not kindly rewe
Your Paramours harms.
In myrtle arbours on the downs,
The Fairie Queen Proserpina
This night by Moon shine leading merry rounds,
Holds a watch with sweet Love,
Down the dale, up the hill,
No plaints nor grieves may move,
Their holy vigill.
All you that will hold watch with Love,
The Fairie Queen Proserpina
Will make you fairer than Dianas Dove,
Roses red, Lillies white,
And the clear damask hue
Shall on your cheeks alight:
Love will adorn you.
All you that love, or loved before,
The Fairie Queen Proserpina
Bids you increase that loving humor more:
They that have not yet fed
On delight amorous,
She vows that they shall lead
Apes in Auernus.
Canto Secundo.
WHat fair pomp have I spide of glittering Ladies,
With locks sparckled abroad, and rosy Coronet
On their yuorie brows, trackt to the dainty thies
With roabs like Amazons, blew as Violet:
With gold Aglets adornd, some in a changeable
Pale, with spangs wavering taught to be moveable.
2
Then those Knights that a far off with dolorous viewing,
Cast their eyes hetherward: lo in an agony
All vnbrac'd, cry aloud, their heavy state ruing;
Moist cheeks with blubbering painted as Ebonie
Black, their feltred hair torn with wrathful hand,
And whiles astonished, stark in a maze they stand.
3
But hark what merry sound; what sudden harmony
Look, look near the grove where the Ladies do tread
With their knights the measures waide by the melody,
Wantons whose trauesing make men enamoured,
Now they feign an honor, now by the slender wast
He must lift her aloft, and seal a kiss in have.
4
Straight down under a shadow for wearines they lie,
With pleasant daliance, hand knit with arm in arm,
Now close, now set aloof they gaze with an equal eye,
Changing kisses alike, straight with a false alarm,
Mocking kisses alike, powt with a lovely lip,
Thus drowned with iollities, their merry days do slip.
5
But stay now I discern they go on a Pilgrimage:
Toward Loves holy land fair Paphos or Cyprus,
Such devotion is meet for a blithesome age,
With sweet youth it agrees well to be amorous,
Let old angry fathers lurk in an Hermitage,
Come we will associate this iollie Pilgrimage.
Canto Tertio.
MY Love bound me with a kiss
That I should no longer stay;
When I felt so sweet a bliss,
I had less power to pass away:
Alas that women do no not know
Kisses make men loath to go.
Canto Quarto.
Love whets the dullest wits, his plagues be such,
But makes the wise by pleasing dote as much.
So wit is purchased by this dire disease,
Oh let me dote, so Love be bent to please.
Canto Quinto.
A Day, a night, an hour of sweet content,
Is worth a world consumed in fretfull care,
Unequal Gods in your Arbitrament
To sort us days whose sorrows endless are,
And yet what were it? as a fading flower;
To swim in bliss, a day, a night an hour.
2
What plague is greater than the grief of mind,
The grief of mind that eats in every vain,
In every vain that leaves such clods behind
Such clods behind as breed such bitter pain,
So bitter pain that none shall ever find,
What plague is greater than the grief of mind.
3
Does sorrow fret thy soul? o direful spirit,
Does pleasure feed thy heart? o blessed man:
Have thou bin happy once? o heavy plight:
Are thy mishaps forepast? o happy than:
Or have thou bliss in eld? o bliss too late:
But have thou bliss in youth? o sweet estate.
Finis. CONTENT. Megliora spero.
FAction that ever dwelles, in Court where wit excelles,
has set defiance.
Fortune and Love have sworn, that they were never borne,
of one alliance.
Cupid which does aspire, to be God of Desire,
Swears he gives laws;
That where his arrows hit, some joy, some sorrow it,
Fortune no cause.
Fortune swears weakest hearts (the books of Cupids Arts)
turned with her wheel,
Sensles themselves shall prove: venture has place in Love,
ask them that feel.
This discord it be got Atheists, that honor not.
Nature thought good,
Fortune should ever dwell in Court where wits excel,
Love keep the wood.
So to the wood went I, with Love to live and die,
Fortune's forlorn:
Experience of my youth, made me think humble Truth
In deserts borne.
My Saint I keep to me, and Ioane her self is she,
Ioane fair and true:
She that does only move passions of love with Love:
Fortune adieu.
Finis
E. O.
If floods of tears could cleanse my follies past,
And smokes of sighs might sacrifice for sin,
If groaning cries might salve my fault at last,
Or endless moan for error pardon win;
Then would I cry, weep, sigh, and ever moan
Mine error, fault, sins, follies past and gone.
I see my hopes must wither in their bud,
I see my favors are no lasting flowers,
I see that words will breath no better good
Than loss of time, and lightning but at hours:
Then when I see, then this I say therefore,
That favors, hopes, and words, can blind no more.
FINIS.

