Upon the Frontispice.
HE that in words explaines a Frontispice,
Betrays the secret trust of his Device:
Who cannot guess, where Mott's and Embl^mes be,
The drift, may still be ignorant for me.


THE ARCADIAN PRINCESS; OR, THE TRIVMPH OF JUSTICE:

Prescribing excellent rules of Physic, for a sick Justice.

Digested into four Books, And Faithfully rendered to the original Italian
Copy,

By RI. BRATHVVAIT Esquire.

Uulnera clausa potius cruciant. Greg. LONDON, Printed by Th. Harper for Robert
Bostocke, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Church yard, at the sign of
the Kings head. 1635.

(...) 7. 1634.
REc^nsui hanc Versionem Operis Mariani Sile^ii Florentcu^ (...), The Arcadian
Princess, or Physic for a sick Justice, etc: una cum vita author is annexa,
quae continet folia 75. aut circa, in quibus nihil reperio sanae doctrine aut
bonis ^oribus contrarium quo (...) cum p^blica utilitate imprimatur, sub ea
tamen condition ut si non intra annu^ proxime sequente^ typis mandetur, haec
lice^tia ^it omnino irrita.

(...) HAYWOOD.

TO The excellent Model of true Nobility; the Right Honorable, Henry
Somerset, Earl of Worcester, Baron Herbert, Lord of Chepstow, Ragland and
Gower; all correspondence to his recollected'st thoughts.
SIR;

I Have here sent you an Italian plant, translated to an English platte: whose
flower will not appear half so delightful to your Smelling, as the fruit
will become (...) for preserving. You shall here meet with an Author walking in
an unbeat path. One, who discurtains the vices of that Time so smoothly, though
smartly, as his continued Allegory pleads his Apology. A right Italian wit
shall your Honor find him, quick and spritely: and of eminent race and rank in
his Country. And it is my joy, to address a Work so richly interveined with
strains of wit and judgment, to one, whom descent and desert have equally
ennobled; and who with so clear and discerning a spirit can judge of it. Now,
if this new dress do not become him, all that I can say in mine own defense
is this, and no other; there is great difference betwixt Tailor and Translator:
Sure I am, that the Loome is the same, if not the Luster; the Stuff the same,
though not the Color: wherein He freely appeals to your Censure, who has
professed himself

Your Honors in duest observance,

RI. BRATHWAIT.

TO THE DESERVING READER.
DEserving Reader; every Author, as this scribbling age goes, may find a
Reader well worthy his Labor; but very few Authors publish such Works as
deserve the labor of a discerning Reader. Like to some of our
PorcupineTheatrall Pantomimes, who dare adventure in their spongie Labors,
begot of a barmie spirit, and other no^ious vapors, to display a Gentlewoman
in her compleatest Nature; though they err egregiously in her favor, figure
and feature. Peruse this, and return me answer, if it be not worth thy Labor
to bestow an hour or two in the Reading of this Author. Foreign he is, and
yet familiar; choice and dainty his conceits, yet allayed with so sweet a
temper, as they retain in them the relish of a good nature. So free his
invention, and so clear from invection, as it admits no sinister inver^ nor
intention. Whatsoever he (...) inserts, holds apt proportion and connection
with (...) Subject whereo^ he treates. So as, being not only a Stranger, but
so discerning an Author, he can expect no less than a Candid censure from so
deserving a Reader.

THE TESTIMONY OF SABAEUS AMNIANUS, touching Mariano Silesio; with his
judgment of his Work, entitled, The Arcadian Princess; or, The triumph of
Justice.
WHat pregnancy of conceit, and gravity of judgment, that Learned Florentine
Silesio expressed, may appear by those excellent Labors of his: wherein he
addressed his Pen to Subjects of diverse natures, according to those
occasional employments, wherein he stood engaged. His youth he bestowed in
Poesy; wherein he showed that vivacity and quickness: as the Court of Florence
resounded with the fame of his ^imensions. In his riper years, he became
employed in affairs of high consequence: being twice elected by the vote and
suffrage of the whole State for an Ambassador to the Genueses: where he
demeaned himself in such sort, as he was with no less cautious observance
admired abroad, than with all honor entertained at his return home. But
growing old, and wearied with the mannagement of public affairs: he desired
to retire, and in his retirement to address the remainder of his days to some
profitable works which might live in his death, and to posterity revive the
memory of his life. Amongst which, he composed a work (in my judgment) of
exquisite wit, entitled the Arcadian Princess: wherein hoth language, and
Invention discovered their Masterpiece. He dyed An* Dom. 1368. And interred
with great solemnity in the Latmian arch.

THE OP^ION OF Corranus Amnensis touching Silesio: with his judgment of his
works; and of those, his high approvement of that Masterpiece, entitled The
Arcadian Princess.
WIth what pregnancy of wit, and solidity of judgment the ever-living Silesio,
whom to silen^ were to detract from the fame of Florence, was endowed, may
sufficiently appea^e by his exq^isite Labors. In which Art and Nature so
sweetly contend^d, as they erected such trophies in hi^ lines, which exceeded
the bounds of Fate, or Time, to be by oblivion blemished; or by neglect seized.
He was descended of a noble Family, which he renowned by his own actions, by
making his own pen the surviving Annall of her memory. He was twice elected
by the general voice and vote of the State, for Ambassador to the Genue^s:
where he demeaned himself with such cautious reservance and judicious
prudence, as he became no less admired abroad where he stood interessed, than
honored at home when he returned. But wearied with affairs of State, and
desiring much retirement, he privately withdrew himself into the Country;
where willing to publish some Works, by leaving to the world, before he left
the world, such legacies of his love, in his life, as might live in his death;
he composed div^rs Subjects of infinite benefit and approvement to the State.
Howbeit, in his younger years he stood much affected to Poesy; wherein he so
excelled, as his Poems were held equal with those enlivened composures of
Tasso's. His Invention was much employed in his youth, (which time he bestowed
in observance of the Court) in CourtMaskes and other Theatrall presentiments;
wherein none ever contended with him, who in the end did not ingenuously veil
unto him. But growing to riper years, he retired from these, and accommodated
his style to the maturity of his time. In which serious studies such
accomplishment seconded his retirement, as his private recluse could not be
free from concourse: so highly did such as perused him, lov^ him, as they
desired nothing more than to live with him. Amongst others of his Labors,
during his retire, he wrote a Book entitled the Arcadian Princess, which he
caused to be transcribed and sent to Florence; a Work in my opinion, of
incomparable worth, for Language and Invention. That Parthenius, of whom he
makes such honorable mention, was such a favorite of the Muses, as so many
Poems of his as are extant, have equaled, if not surpast those Moenian
Measures of Petronius. Having thus flourished for many years, with much fame
in Florence, and enjoyed the sweetness of many retired hours in his Country
repose, He bad the world farewell with a smile. Anno Dom. This Aut^or differs
from the f^rmer (...) the (...) of (...).
1368. And was interred with all solemnity in the Lemnian arch.

THE TESTIMONY OF Adrianus Barlandus, touching Silesio: in his Historical
observations on Florence.
SIlent I should be touching Silesio; but being daily versed in the perusal of
his Labors, I might seem conscious to my self of envying his worth, if I
should seek to obscur^, what my judgment does so highly admire. Truth is, he
lived long before us, yet lives he still with us. For though he dye, his
Annals live. Now, to render him in his true effigies and expressive Character;
He was an Eloquent Orator, an Elegant Poet, and in the maturer close of his
time, an eminent Patritian. In his writing, he was witty without scurrilous
lightness, serious without censor^ous sowrenesse. Accurate without
affectation; passionately moving beyond imitation. He had the happin^sse to
gain friends, and to retain them: which facility in gaining, and felicity in
retaining, may be ascribed to his discretion, who in the whole passage of his
life was never known to lose his friend for a jest: nor entertain a jealous
conceit of his trust without apparent cause. During his aboade at Court, he was
much honored; in his retire, he was much frequented: in both generally loved.
Many princely favors were shown him by the Duke, which with a native modesty
he rejected. And being demanded by some of his friends, why he accepted not
such gracious tenders, being assured arguments of his future advancements; he
was wont to answer them: That those glorious favors were golden fetters, which
might endanger to restrain the liberty of his better part. Being on a time
importuned in his youth by two complete Curtezans, to write a Poem in the
praise of beauty; he made answer: That he could go near to paint them out,
but he thought his Pensill might be well spared, for they knew better how to
paint themselves. He could never endure to comply with a light friend, saying,
That he who entrusted himself with a Faune, brought his discretion in question.
He was affable to his friends, reconcilable to his foes, affectionate to all.
Abstenious in his diet, civil in his habit, temperate in his delights. He
lived to a ripe age; and was intombed in a Monument of Thracian Marble, within
the Lemnian arch.

THE IVDGEMENT OF Conradus Minutius, touching Silesio: and the surviving memory
of his Labors.
SVfficiently we cannot admire, much less imitate these exquisite composures
of that Florentine Silesio. By so much more famous for his Learning, because
borne in a time, almost ignorant of learning. He was of pregnant wit, present
conceit, solid judgment and retentive memory. He scorned nothing more, than
to impe his wings with others feathers; for his usual saying was this: He does
himself dishonor, who makes himself witty by another Labor. In the time of
his reside at Court, there were no Transcripts held so precious as his Poems.
In his r^per years, bidding adue to those trifles of youth, (for so was he
pleased to style them) he addressed his employments to more serious studies:
for observing, how the State took especial notice of him, he held it
indiscretion to bestow his oil on ought less, than what might redound to the
benefit of the State. Albeit, in his latter years, being much addicted to
privacy, He retired and withdrew himself from the grandeure of public
affairs: resolving to dedicate the remainder of his days to a contemplative
life, which he called his souls love: where he breathed forth many divine
fancies full of spirit and moral profit. He dyed, Anno Dom. 1368. and was
honorably buried in the Lemnian arch, with a pyram^dall Monument erected over
him.

A Summary of the Contents: WITH An Explanation of every distinct Subject, and
personal Name, contained in this Allegorical discourse, entitled, THE
ARCADIAN PRINCESS, OR, THE TRIUMPH OF JUSTICE.
Composed at first by that incomparable Ornament of Florence, MARIANO SILESIO,
in the Italian tongue. This Summary was by the (...) ^refixed, that these Names
^uiting with the Natures of these Persons here pres^nted, might be explaned.

THE MISTA the Arcadian Princess, and Soveraignesse of Justice, in her
supposed descent from Heaven, and visit of Earth, makes a Survey or Scrutiny of
her Pretorian; which State in six distinct Persons, ingeniously presented, she
finds miserably distempered. For the preservation of her judicial
Sovereignty, she addresseth her Care for their recovery: whence the Author
properly entitles his first Book, THEMISTA'S CARE.

She finds METOXOS her first Consul in this representative Body, and
personating Partiality, taken with a Squinancy. EPIMONOS, personating
Pertinacy, with an Apoplexy. VPEREPHANOS, presenting H^ displaye^ these nu^
distempers, by branching them into d^stinct fi gure, as may appe^re in the
second Book.
vainglory, with a Frenzy. MEILIXOS, personating Pusillanimity, with an
Epilepsie. VPOTOMOS presenting Severity, with a Plurisie. AMERIMNOS,
personating Security, with a Lethargy: whence it is, that he styleth his
second Book, THE STATE-SOARE.

These several distempers she recommends to the Cure of AESCVLAPIVS; who,
after the discovery of their Griefs, applies proper Receipts to the quality of
their distempers, and restores them to their health: whence it is, that his
third Book bears the Title of THE CONS^LS CVRE.

THEMISTA transported with their unexpected recovery, seems doubtful at first
of such good News: which to strengthen with more certainty, and enliven her
depressed spirits with more alacrity; ISOTES, personating Equity,
inapt-composed measures becomes Relat^r of METOXOS recovery.

EPIEICES, personating Moderation, becomes Relator of EPIMONOS recovery.

TAPEINOS, presenting Humility, becomes Relator of VPEREPHANOS recovery.

ISCVROS, personating Fortitude or Constancy, becomes Relator of MEILIXOS
recovery.

ELECMON, presenting Mercy, becomes Relator of VPOTOMOS recovery.

EPIMELES personating Industry, becomes Relator of AMERIMNOS recovery.

And to second Her longing hopes, She causes her ^ate distempered Consuls to
come before her to describe the manner of their Cure, the highest Object of her
Care: This done, THEMISTA delivers her CHARGE to her restored and re-estated
Consuls; wherein she recommends to them the love of Justice and Equity:
closing with a thankful remonstrance to AESCVLAPIVS: (...) to erect lasting
Trophies of living memory, to gratify his successive Care in her Consuls
recovery. So as, from the expression of her Charge, and the apprehension of
this universal joy, Silesio entitles his fourth and last Book,

THE CONSVLS CHARGE, with THEMISTA'S TRIVMPH.

The Arcadian Princess, OR, The triumph of Justice; Prescribing excellent
rules of Physic for a sick JUSTICE.
THEMISTA'S CARE.
The first Book.
Argument.
THemista descends from heaven, purposely to revisit earth: expressing in apt
measures, what desire the heavenly powers have to see Justice executed. The
Excellency of Justice, properly styled the Epitome of all virtues.

POESY I.
THus long in heaven; now must we down to Earth,
To see what fruits that hopeful Soil brings forth,
How Justice thrives, from whose divinest birth
All sacred virtue do derive their worth,
W^ose presence makes the earth resound with mirth:
"Harsh is the accent of that melody,
"Where Justice does not keep her Iubily.
Nor do those glorious powers which shine above,
And dart their beams upon the inferior sphere,
On any Object fix their eye of love,
More than on that, where Justice does appear;
Whose graceful beauty like a golden grove,
Adornes the Earth, and like a Conqueror,
Empals their heads with wreaths that follow her.
How heavens do smile, to see good men reputed!
How goodness shines, when Error is suppressed^
How earth revives, when Iustice's executed!
How Worth appears, when virtue is r^freshed!
How ^tate endeers, that is with true honor su^ted!
These bear no other Frontispiece than this,
"the Excellence of Justice what it is.
Justice! a virtue styled properly
By those which know the goodness of her nature,
"Virtues choice Abstract or Epitome,
Who lives above the reach of any Satyr,
And scorns a name that is got by infamy.
Blessed is that State; her Sciens heirs of honor,
Who has so bright a star to shine upon her.
For to the L^st of Justice she is confined,
"But such a Bird, I fear, is rare to find.
Argument.
Themista bewailes the corruption of the time; what miseries befall that State,
where Justice is not administered; She laments Arcady, (where she is supposed
to descend) for suffering the Seat of Justice to be so defiled: the comely
face of so promising a State disfigured.

PROSE I.
PItifully perplexed Themista, who can see thee, and not suffer with thee? who
can endure to take a view of thy grief, and not afford thee the tribute of one
poor tear for thy relief? She, who was sometimes more beautiful than the
Evening Star; more amiable than the curiousest and choysest feature upon
earth; how is she become darkened? how is her beauty blemished? her glory
obscured? her favor perished? her feature blanched? Observe but the corruption
of the time, and then see if my sorrow be groundless! Consider this universal
contagion, and how should my sorrow but be endless! Hear the mercenary
gilded tongue, who stands not much upon the cause, so he may receive his
coin, how he coins untruths, belyes his own knowledge, inveighs against a
subject of innocence, to delude the credulous Ear of his too easy Judge: and
all this to enrich his seldome-thriving posterity, with the injurious revenues
of his partiality! There, another seconds a great man's cause with a brazen
face; where the better cause must fare the worse, because the worser cause has
the better purse. So as justice becomes so perverted, as she may be compared to
the Celedonie stone, which retains her virtue no longer, than while it is
rubbed with gold. The precious stone Diocletes, though it have many rare and
excellent soveraignties in it, yet it loses them all, if it be put in a dead
man's mouth: so Justice, which is the sole ornament and accomplishment of State,
that sacredsecret cement to knit up all breaches and divisions, though it have
many rare and exquisite virtues in it, yet does this soveraignesse of all
princely virtues, loose them every one, when she is put into a corrupt mouth,
or a deceitful heart; who guilds Justice over with pretenses; or assuming upon
him some awful command, binds her to peace, purposely to cram his own purse.
And what is this but Worme-wood Justice, making that bitter, which is sweetly
relishing of its own nature?

What excellent Hieroglyphics were conceited by the ancient Ethnicks, to
design (amongst other expressions) the right office of justice? The Athenians
erected images of Judges without hands and eyes: implying, that Rulers and
Magistrates should neither be infected with bribery, nor any other way drawn
from that which was lawful and right. Lame they should be in receiving a fee,
blind in discerning friend from foe. But alas! all ages could ever better
prescribe, than observe: yet of all ages, none more irregular than Here the
Original transcribed Ann. Dom. 1368. fr^ely g^anceth at the corruptions of
that present state: which by a long cessation f^o^ Arms with the Cilic^ans
abroad, and Genueses at home, was grown to that fulnesor surfeit, rather, of
peace; as plenty the fostermother of Security, had begot in the^ with their
affluence of wealth, a confluence of vi^e. Vid. vit. Mar. Sil.
this, where Corruption becomes a custom, and no greater foe to a good cause,
than poverty, or a powerful adversary.

Nor can that State be secure, where such injustice reigns. Though the Night
silence her, the walls encompasse her, the curtains of (...) shroud her: there
can be no darkness so thick and palpable, (were it like the Cimmerian shade)
that the p^ercing eye of heaven cannot spy through it. Vain is thy hope, thou
Scarlet peccant, by sinning secretly, to sin securely. Impiety plays the
sycophant with her self, when she promises her self impunity. That State
cannot choose but be to misery engaged, where justice is not duly administered.

Should she pride it with the Babylonian, brave it with the Theban, trade it
with the Tyrian, sport it with the Sydonian, or spell it with the Egyptian;
her bravery shall turn to rags, her glory to contempt, her wealth to want, her
sport to discontent, her knowledge to folly; the whole fabric of her state,
to an universal misery. And this is thy miserable estate, poor Arcadia! for
how is thy former beauty blemished, the comely face of so promising a State
disfigured, by suffering the seat of justice, (Astraeas throne) to be so
defiled, the ornaments of virtue stained? Shall we bemoane thy disconsolate
State, while thou senseless of thine own misery, perceives not that thou art
wounded? yes, thy want of sense aggravates our sense of sorrow. O that we were
turned all a Niobe, and resolved into tears, so we might but extract from
thee one sigh, to argue thou had a sense of thy sin! Reflect, we pray thee,
upon thy former beauty; and what it was that thus has blemished thee. Want of
consideration makes thee thus senseless of thy affliction. Let us wipe thine
eyes, that thou may see thy self, and seeing, loath that which has made
thee so unlike thy self. Hither are we come to revisit thee, and hopeful
were we to have found thee in the same state, wherein we did leave thee. But
corruption has seaz'd on thy Bench; thy Scarlet has got a stain; this is thy
state; hence is our grief.

Argument*
Themista recollects her spirits; comforts her self with the conceit of her
own innocence; she bethinks her how she may take away this stain, and restore
the light of Justice to a disconsolate State.

POESY II.
But whence com these sloods of tears?
Ease they may, but cannot cure;
Free thy breast of fruitless fears,
Joy thou may in being pure;
This corruption of the time,
Js man's fault, it is not thine.
Js not thine! no, heaven knows;
Strive then to attemper grief;
Do not waste thy self with woes,
Tears can tender ^mall relief:
They that naught but sorrow vent,
Never can cure their Patient.
Let it be thy care to heal,
As thine art has found the sore,
And restore a Commonweal
To that health it had before:
So may thou support that State
Which lies now disconsolate.
Artists, when they search a wound,
And do find the incision deep,
Must not f ll into a sound,
Nor like Babies pule and weep:
The distemper's now descride,
Let some physic be applide.
Argument.
Themista directs a message by her servant Euphorbus to the Counsel of State.

PROSE II.
But present necessity of cure, admits no time of complaint. So as, calling
forthwith of her servant Euphorbus, who was there attending her, she delivered
to him her message in these words.

Come hither Euphorbus, we have ever had sufficient proof of thy diligence,
being at all times no less ready to discharge our trust, than we to impose our
command. Nor are we ignorant of thy approved care in performing whatsoever may
either redound to our honor, or benefit of the Republique, wherein we are
highly interessed. Thou shall therefore receive these directions from us (as
we solely rely on thee) the substance whereof we shall deliver thee in these
particulars.

Thou art presently to repair to our Counsel of State; acquainting them with
our command, that forthwith all frivolous delays and unnecessary excuses set
apart, they repair to our Palace, and there attend our pleasure, in behalf of
the public service. Wherein, if they become inquisitive what the business
may be: Thou may answer them in general terms, that we are to expect an
account from them, in their affairs of Judicature; wherein, if any of them
prove defective, they are for Example-sake to receive condign censure. Some
complaints we have already heard against them, which how justly exhibited, we
will as yet suspend, till more frequency of proof evince them. Inform them
likewise, since our descent to Earth, how we have visited their Pretorian,
wherein we found nothing but confusion: Their Comitiall Courts like Deserts,
wild and unexercised; only some surreptitious Proctors were there fishing,
who knew no methodicall course of pleading, nor any Law-Intergatory, but the
demand of their undeserved Fees; whereof receiving no preset discharge, with a
Stentors voice, they re-eccho their vouchers and double vouchers in a clamorous
Replication. Some decayed remnants, or useless instruments of discording
Justice, we likewise found: who had got so much tongue, as Parachito-like,
they could cry, Commit him, Commit him, before ever they had heard what he had
done. From whence we gathered, that many had aspired to that place, before
ever they knew what the definition of justice was: so as, they usually caused
the nocent and innocent to cast lots whether of them should be punished.
Innumerable such Objects of sorrow have we viewed, since we descended; the sad
memory whereof renewes our grief, and leaves us ever with a tear in our eye,
a sigh in our heart: nor should we be comforted, but that the knowledge of our
own innocence has so fortifide us, as no censure can deservedly touch us.
Make haste Euphorbus, and deliver our Message with a courage: mean time, we
shall expect their attendance, with a due and formal account of all their
actions. With this Message her faithful servant Euphorbus departed, while she
taking her Lute in her hand, to expel melancholy with a strain of melody, and
retain a constant remembrance of her servants fidelity, chanted out the^e
Lays.

Argument.
Themista rejoices in the enjoying of so faithful a servant; She recounts
the benefits redounding from such: and reproves the uniustnesse of unthankful
Masters, who come short in recompencing such.

POESY III.
WEll! Euphorbus, thou art he
With thy service comforts't me.
When I am surpised with grief,
Thine advice affords relief:
Thou finds solace when I joy,
Suffers with me in annoy:
Be it mirth or discontent,
Thou art for that Element:
So as I may well aver,
Having such a comforter;
"There Is no Treasure may compare
"With a faithful Servants care:
Who is early up and late
To increase his Masters state.
He Is a Crane for vigilance,
An Emmet for his providence:
He Is no Sea-Maw, that can show
Any tempest in his brow:
He is legal, loyal, just,
Sworn unto his Masters trust:
Graceless are such thanklesse men,
Who such servants can contemn,
For they take far more delight
To receive than to requite:
Curt'sies they retain not long,
Yet can recompense a wrong.
Any one will cheer his Curre
When he barks and makes a stir,
And gives warning to his house
If he do but hear a Mouse:
What is he, pray tell me than,
Cheeres his Curre, and checks his man!
Argument.
Euphorbus returns answer to Themista, that the whole body of her Council of
Sta^e is become infirm, as they cannot without apparent danger of death,
repair to her Grace. He shadowingly delivers unto her, in what manner they
are handled, and how long they have continued.

PROSE III.
NO sooner had Euphorbus dispatched his message, than he returned answer unto
his Lady: humbly showing to her Grace, that her whole Council of State was
grown so infirm, some through distempers, others through weakness of nature,
as they could not without apparent danger of death, attend her Grace. What, is
their infirmity so universal, (answered Themista) as none of all our Conscript
Fathers, whose reverend judgments were sometimes held Oracular, can now tender
us their Observance? Pray thee relate, Euphorbus, how are they handled, or
whether they pretend but this only, to free them from attendance.

Truly, (answered Euphorbus) so please your Grace, I think they do not
counterfeit. For I am persuaded, little did they expect my coming, yet found I
some of them raving, as if taken with some dangerous frenzy: Others so
melancholy and lumpish, as I could scarcely force one word from them in an
hour; and when it came, as good as no thing, for it was to no purpose. Others
infinitely given to laughter; but none so discreetly sober as might deserve
admittance to your presence. Several were the humors did surprise them, yet
not one temperate humor among them. Some were altogether silent, and they the
wisest, for they spoke nothing: Others too liberal and lavish of tongue, whose
discourse was so disjoynted, as the Scene of one of their distracted sentences,
lay in all the four parts of the world.

Heavens bless me (said Themista) is Arcadia, once a seat of Justice, a
Treasury of prudence, and a fruitful Nurcery of all liberal and free borne
studies, become a Fatuano or Bedlam of distracted persons? Be our hopes so
quickly blasted? But inveterate sores are hardest to be cured; tell us then
Euphorbus, how long may report give out, that these distempers have continued?

Not long, as I hear (answered Euphorbus) nor these neither continuate, for
they admit intermissions. More dangerous are they (replied Themista) these
interspirations minister new matter to their distempered humor to work on.
But pray thee what times are held most violent.

Some of them (answered Euphorbus) are in good temper till after noone; their
pulses beat moderately, their conceits full of quickness and pregnancy, their
understandings poized with serious solidity; They can walk, talk, and
converse no less gravely than gracefully. But the Meridian has no sooner
overshadowed them, then they have quite lost their former alacri^y. Talk they
cannot without stammering, nor walk without supporting; yea, they clean
forgot what they did ith morning; and should your Grace ask them a question,
they cannot answer you without sleeping. What a soporiferous humor is this
(replide Themista?) Sure they have drunk Oppium or Nightshade, or they could
never be so heavy-headed: but how stand the rest affected?

Truly Madame (said Euphorbus) some of them are so fierce and violent, as
their gates are ever kept bolted; where, if you would be admitted, you must
pay the Porter. Upon your admittance, if you desire to go farther, you must
liberally reward the Doore-keeper; by whom being brought into their presence,
you shall find them like so many State-Idols reered up, beckning nothing but
awful reverence. Which made me remember the saying of Cineas, That he never
came in presence of the Roman Senators, but he verily thought he came before
so many magnificent Emperour^ Big and boisterous are they in their salutes,
as thus; Fellow, approach nearer. Whereas poor Snakes, their affrighted
Supplicant^ fearing to come within their reach, or draw near the side of their
grate, (for it may be supposed, they have heard the description of a Caniball)
double their reward to that commodious Keeper of the Ward, to procure their
escape. Yet are not these always thus cruel and untractable. For there were
diverse mollifying playsters and other suppling oils to allay their distemper,
and b^ing them (as I heard after) to a more pleasing and affable humor: but
these were privately applied, and by their most intimate follower^ practiced,
or el^e they could work no cure. Trust me (quoth ^hemista) howsoever their
Natures are to be suppled, these distempers are worst to be cured: for they
partake of two incorrigible humors; immoderate inflammation of the heart, and
insatiate extension of the hand; their blood therefore must be cooled, and the
nerves of their palms straightened, or they can never be cured; but how are the
last disposed?

Clear of an other humor (answered Euphorbus) for these seem ind^fferent how
the world go; They are sparing in dispatch, but speedy in repast; the height
of their humor is a plenteous dinner: free they are from anger, or any
passionate distemper: only, they feed so liberally, as they g^ow unwealdy:
they hate nothing more than business, so as their judgments ever close with a
reference: yet are they of good dispositions, but through discontinuance grown
so useles^e, as they cannot possibly give the Grace attendance. Well done,
Euphorbus; thou have freely, though shadowingly, discovered their maladies: it
rests, that amidst these discomforts we conceive through their misery, we
comfort our self with the continuate remembrance of our own integrity.

Argument.
Themista continues her comforts in dilated measures, upon reflexe had to her
own integrity; She imagines her absence to be the greatest cause of these
maladies: for whose Cure, she bestows her whole Care.

POESY IIII.
GRieve may we well, yet in our grief may we impart
Some equal measure of relief unto our heart.
We suffer in their misery, yet when we view
Our well-approv'd integrity, we then renew
Those comforts we conceived before and still retain;
"Such may sit safe and sing a shore have past the Maine.
No treasure to a spotless mind, whose virtues are
In an untainted heart enshrined, which cures all care.
Yet was not Phoebus free from blame to make his Son
A Coachman ere he knew the same, proud Phaeton.
Nor we to leave our Throne to these, who cannot keep
Their lips from Cup^, their hands from fees, nor eyes from sleep.
Our absence was the cause, I fear, through want of us,
Which made these Conscript fathers here distempered thus.
It rests, that we partake a share, (though wee'r secure)
In their distress, and have a Care upon their Cure.
Argument.
Themista resolves to go visit her langu^shing Iusticiaries: Euphorbus
diswades her from it: showing what danger she might incur by such a visit: No
plague more infectious to the body, than the corruption of vice to the mind.

PROSE IV.
But Cures of this nature (said Themista, require present relief. There is
more advan^age in dispatch, than delay; for by neglect of opportunity, we ever
lose the benefit that accrues by it. It is not so hard to give comfortable
counsel to the afflicted, as to find a fit season when to give it. Expedition
is the best season in extremes: lest by delaying of our Cure, we dispatch our
Patient. It shall be our first resolve then to go visit our languishing
Iusticiaries, and to employ our best Care for their Cure. It is their inward
estate that we tender, for in that consists their highest honor. We are not
afraid, (to use the words of our sententious Petrarch) to see the ^uinous
houses of their decayed bodies shaken; for we know well their condition, with
the necessity of their dissolution: so their souls, vessels of pur^r
substance, though guests of their bodies, farewell. We ever hold Critolaus
balance for our direction; who poizing the Goods of Body and Fortune in one
Scale; and the Goods of the Mind in the other, found those precious and
inestimable Goods of the Mind so far to weigh down the other, as the Heaven
does the Earth and Seas. We stand still for that rich and curious Cabbinet of
the Soul; which, so long as it is not rifled by that vicious Crew of
inordinate affections, all is safe, all secure: but once soyled, hardly
restored to her former beauty But alas for sorrow! we cannot choose but sigh,
to see old men so senseless of their misery. Grieve they cannot for
themselves, though they see themselves now descending to their Graves.
Uncomfortable is that affliction, which conceives for it self no sensible
Compassion: and such is these men's case. Their bodies are by age weakened, with
rumerous infirmities enfeebled; there is scarce a day but threatens ruin to
their crazie Cottages. Yet are they as fresh and youthfully green for vice, as
if they but lately entered this Theater of vanity, and might promise to their
sparkling youth more years, than they can hours, by all possibility. On then,
Euphorbus, we will vi^t them, lest they perish through our neglect. Desist
Madame (answered Euphorbus) from a resolve of such infinite danger. I
understand their disease to be infectious; sure I am, their whole family seems
to have a spice of the same malady; Be not then such an enemy to your self, as
to expose your Honor to apparent danger, and so perish through your own
Error. This, Madame, will turn your visiting of them, to a visitation in your
self. Who will go into an infected house, or tempt the divine providence, by
subjecting himself wittingly to inevitable peril? And no plague more
infectious to the Body, than the Corruption of vice ^o the mind. Of what
strong Constitutions were some of these, who now lie mortally languishing? Able
they were to the sight of man to repel all crudities; yet see how soon they
were vanquished, and to the inbred corruption of their own vicious nature,
miserably captivated. I know, Madame, that you partake of immortality; yet is
there something mortal in you; that may bring you to stoop to that Lure,
which, although you now loath, by consorting with them, you may hereafter love.
And what then safe amongst us, if you should fail, or fall from us? Good
Madame then, intend your own safety: Too much affection may bring you to an
infection: Prevention is the life of Policy. He is an indiscreet General, who
lies his own person open unto peril: for his fall makes an end of the
battle. Secure your self by retiring to your Palace: Let Artists, whose
Profession it is to intend these Cures, search their griefs, and expose their
persons unto danger; Be it your Care, our joy, to enjoy the safety of your
Honor.

Argument.
Themista concludes, that a pious disposition ever carries with it a
preservative against all vicious infection: She continues her purpose of
visiting distempred S^atists, and prepares a Confection against all Corruption.

POESY V.
THough vices like diseases run in blood,
A freeborn disposition that is good,
May amongst vicious persons p^rest live,
And in her breast wear a preservative
Against all infection. "Herepels all vice,
"Who looks to have God still before his eyes.
The sighing Heart being wounded, straight does fly
By mere instinct, for cure to Ditany:
So will the Bear, if she feel any grief,
Fly to the herb Acanthus for relief:
Balme-mint delights the Be, to which amain
She makes recourse, to ease her of her pain:
Right well her Celandine the Swallow knows,
Whereto, if ought distemper her, she goes.
And shall these creatures, which have only sense,
Challenge above us a preeminence?
No; wee've the herb of grace, whose sacred stem
Affords such native vigor unto men,
As where it is applide, they need not fear
That any foul infection can come there.
Surcease to move us then; we must prepare
To visit these who so distempered are:
Weak Conscript-fathers! Like's that State to fall
When such Night-Birds do keep the Capital.
But that we may our self the stronger make,
Confection against infection we will taken
Which shall be this: "a pure untainted breast,
With oil of Grace, the better to resist.
The State-Soare.
The second Book.
Argument.
Themista having visited and felt the pulses of her languishing Council,
bemoanes their desperate estate; She advises for their recovery; but finds
the height of their distemper, to exceed the compass of her Cure; She
resolves to send her servant Euphorbus for Aesculapius to procure their
recovery, and prevent their relapse into the like infirmity.

PROSE I.
NO sooner had Themista felt the pulse of her diseased Statists, than she
perceived their distemper to be of that nature, as being a desperate Soar, i^
required a desperate Cure. Some of their pulses beat faintly; as if Nature were
spent in them, and their wasted Lamps near the snuff. Others clear of an
other temper, for they beat so violently, as it might be easily gathered, that
their enraged humor rather labored of fury and frenzy, than any other
indisposed quality. Diversely found she her languishing Senate affected; but
none of them rightly tempered; which drove her into these and such like
perplexed resolves.

Where (said she) shall we turn us, and see not some heavy Object or other to
afflict us? Every where do we see a distempred State; every where a
growinggroaning malady. And what way may we cast for their recovery? He that
visiting his friend, finds him sick, and will not minister unto him; heavy,
and will not comfort him; needy, and will not relieve him; such an one may be
rather said to mock him than bemoane him, scoff him than cheer him, scorn
him than succor him. But alas! we fear much that the nature of their disease
far exceeds the measure of our art. Maladies of this quality require an
experienced hand to afford them remedy. And so tenderly affected are we to
their persons, as we shall not have the heart to search their wounds, as a
pitiless Artist should do: for these griefs cannot be cured, unless they
be to the bottom searched. Mean time, how worthily may we bemoane this
distracted Estate; when those who should be the Guardidians of the Republique,
are so besotted and benumbed; or otherwise with some exorbitant passion so
transported, as they, who should guard the public State, cannot guide their
own persons: but like children, go by holds, to keep themselves from falls?
Where may the wronged find redress, when he that does the wrong, is exempted
from censure; either by Corruption, which seals up the mouth of Justice: or
Ignorance, which knows not how to distinguish of the quality of an offense?
Happy were those days wherein Ba^il the Emperor of Constantinople lived: for
so peaceful was his State in the gracious progress of his time, that
whenever he came to his Iudgement-Seat, he neither found Party to accuse,
nor Defendant to answer. But we, to live both in these factious and unpeaceable
times; and to be distitu^e of such as should censure these crimes, where
connivence gives impunity to impiety, and greatness becomes a Subterfuge to
guiltiness; who can justly blame us, to vye in tears with the Errors of the
time; and bemoane that State with a compassionate pity; which we cannot by our
own Endeavors remedy! Now, should we leave them to theselves, how should they
possibly cure their own Soars, who are insensible of their effects? True it
is; that as the Scorpion has in her the remedy of her own poison; so the
Evil man carries always with him the punishment of his own wickedness:
which never leaves to torment and affli^t his mind, both sle^ping and waking;
as it fared with Apollodorus, Hipparchus, Pausanias and many others; who were
so conscious of their own enormities, as they were ever in pursuit by their
own Furies. But what of all this? Neither personal shame, nor apprehension of
their own guilt, nor any other subsequent effect, could afford to the public
State, a sovereign Cure; till these vicious ones were weeded, virtuous ones
elected, and the whole form or model of the State changed. O my perplexed
Spirit, how justly may we take up the complaint of our divinely-morall Seneca!
who writing to his friend Lucilius, discovered the face of a corrupted State in
this sort: Our news from Rome are these; the walls of Rome are ruined; the
Temples not visited; the Priests fled; the Treasure robbed; old men are dead;
young men are mad; and vices are Lords over all. O my good friend Luciliu^, if
these things seem great faults, there be greater yet than these in Rome: and
they are, that no man will confess himself culpable of any of these things:
but the Dictator lays fault upon the Consul; the Consul upon the Censor; the
Censor upon the Praetor; the Praetor upon the Aedile; and the Aedile upon the
Questor: in so much as; because no man will confess his fault, we have no hope
of amendment.

But fruitless are these complaints; our griefs require a speedy hand, and a
resolved heart; de^terity in the one, and constancy in the other; speedy in
applying, and happy in performing. We shall do well then in resolving to send
our Servant Euphorbus for Aesculapius; by whose incomparable skill, not only
means may be made for their recovery; but directions had for preventing their
relapse into the like infirmity. Haste then with winged speed, Eup^orbus, to
that prime Artist of Physic; present our Love unto him; the desire we have to
see him; how much we rely on him; the necessity of his repair: which shall
individually tie us to him.

Argument.
Themista descants on the birth and worth of Aesculapius, the admirable effects
of Physic; with a just and judicial reproof of all Empiricks.

POESY I.
BEtwixt such men there is great ods
Whose parents are immortal Gods and have their birth above;
And those who take their birth from me^,
Or from low Earth, derive their stem, as their own acts approve.
Great Aesculapius, who was bred
Of heavenly not of earthly ^eed does his rich gifts impart;
Nor is he honored in scorn
By Pagans in a Serpents form,
But for his divine art.
For as the Serpents watchful care
Exc^eds all other Creatures far
In wit and polic^e:
So Aescu^apius does exceed
All Artists sprung of mortal seed
In his dexterity.
Thrice sacred Art! which d^st restore
To life, what was decayed before,
And re-infusest breath
To breathless souls, by giving health'
The rich and poor man's chiefest wealth'
To stay th'arrest of death.
But hapless they, who deadly ^icke,
Rely upon an Empiricke
Whose physic makes them worse,
For what ^e does apply to them
Agrees not with the state of men
But rather with his h^rse.
"You then, on whom distempers make surprise,
"Be known to such, have practice and advice.
Argument.
Aesculapius offers his best service to Themista; She discovers unto him the
cause of her grief; She remembers the endeared name of her Parthenius; His
Poem; the many virtues which did enrich him: She entreats Aesculapius his best
succor; and he promises his best art and assistance unto her.

PROSE II.
NO sooner had Euphorbus delivered his Ladies Message to Aesculapius, who was
then engaged in sundry Cures of great difficulty, by means of Priapus and his
dissolute followers, (who had brought a dangerous d^ease into that Province
where he resided:) then pre^ently, this divine Artist repaired to Themista,
offering to her his best service; which was accepted by her with much thankful
entertainment and affectionate solace. And sitting together in a delightful
Arbor, without more delay, She discovered the cause of her grief unto him, in
this manner.

Renowned Sir, to impart unto you, the grounds of our grief in every
particular, would require an ample volume of Iliads: Neither would time
suffice, nor your numerous employments admit, any such copious relations. In
one word, if miserably-perplexed Hecuba, whose fortune in her time had no
parallel, expressed such discon^olate effects in the sad ashes of her ruined
Troy, and her slaughterd Children; We are sure the sorrowful Scene of our
Tragic mishaps, may deserve some Annals to memotize them, lest continuance of
time might bury in oblivion, the heavy issue of such doleful occurrents. We
well remember, how Polo the tragedian, acting the part of Electra upon the
Stage; and being mournefully to bring in the bones of her brother Orestes in a
pot, he brought in the bones of his own Son lately buried, that the sight
of them might wring forth true tears indeed; and by their passionate
presentment of them, act it more feelingly: for obj^cts of Ocular passion
cannot choose but work in the actors person. The same part may we be truly
said to personate: Nor may we possibly so display them to life, whom we a^e
here to present, as our afflicted breast conceives: so that, as Pictures receive
their life from shadows, so are you Aesculapius to conceive them shadowed,
when our tongue cannot reach so high as to have them fully expressed.

For murdering wounds do ever lose their tongue;
"Small griefs do speak, when greater griefs are dombe.
But you will say, true passion admits no Rhetorical introductio^; it is true;
yet fares it with us in this discovery of our fresh-bleeding woes, as it does
with such, on whom the judgment of death being now pronounced, and now come to
that fatal place, where they are to satisfy the Law, and disburden their
conscious souls of many secret facts, which till then, never came to light, nor
admitted a discovery: many trifling delays will they pretend, purposely to
protract time, and enjoy the sweet society of an expiring life: But omitting
these, we will now descend to a free delivery of these our captived and
restrained griefs: in discovery whereof, pardon our effeminacy, if we drop
some tears, to ease the surcharged relapse, of our afflicted heart.

Know (quoth she) thou divine Artist, that we were sometimes styled the
Soveraignesse of justice; and in person, intended our care to the execution of
it. During which time, our imparalel'd State flourished, Laws were duly
administered, good men were rewarded, the evil justly punished; the State of
justice so equally poized, as Saturns age seemed to be revived.

Having thus planted our State, we held our selves se: cure: but too much
security gives vice opportunity to make her entry: for no sooner were we
removed (recommending our government to such, whose fidelity we held so
inviolably firm unto us, as nothing could divide them from us:) then that
blessed State, where before never corruption reigned, no Oily nor Sycophant
tongue ever pleaded, no malady nor distemper raged; became universally
diseased. Not one sound Member left uninfected. Sundry vicious and malignant
humors distilled srom the head to the body: which so distempered the whole
State, as nothing could be more ^eared than an Epidemicall contagion. To give
some woeful instances herein, that my grief may appear real without
dissembling; truly passionate without faigning: what a number of
Conscript-fathers lie now desperately languishing; and what small hope have we
of their recovering? Sick, and heart sick they are; yet like Children, rather
would they have their Soars to rankle, corrupt, and putrify, than have their
wounds searched, and so find remedy. One we had (and only one) who was sound
at heart, whose name (and blessed be the memorial of so untainted a name) was
Parthenius: to them only odious, who No greater argument of ^ corrupt State,
^han (...) of M^rit.
were vicious; by them proscribed, who were contagious; by all esteemed, who
were truly virtuous. Him they banished in our absence, nor since could he
ever be admitted to our presence. Whose pregnancy may appear by that Poem
which his nimble Notarie Ephepomenos in his person, ingeniously composed, and
by a petitionary way in his Exile presented, to express the wrongs he had
^uffered, and how injuriously the Censure of his proscription had been
pronounced; nor shall it a little comfort us, to repeat it, now in his absence
(whose memory is so precious to us) who first addressed it:

Exiled! stern State, what was the cause?
Corruption, or neglect of laws?
For th'first, I may be bold to swear,
I had least share in all the shere.
Ten years and more I served the State;
Yet all that time I nothing gat:
And for the last, I never slept,
While other Birds the Capitol kept.
Speak Pig, Lamb, Chicken, Capon, Goose,
If ere I wronged ASTRAEAS horse,
Or made it Errors Rendevous,
Or ever minced a Mittimus;
Or e're was of that nasty Tribe
To slight a brawle, to take a Bribe;
Or sought a wrong cause to advance,
Or e're suppressed Recognizance:
If any these against me call,
I Will loose Man, Cognizance and all.
But trust me, State, while I co^plain,
My loss, me thinks, becomes my gain:
Now may I freely walk at large,
And never be put to any charge:
And view what weaklings cannot see,
The secrets of Philosophy:
Or with my Muse in private meet,
Lest justice set us both by th'feet^,
While we bemone ASTRAEAS throne
To see a stone sit on a stone.
Thanks then not to my friend but foe,
Whose loving hate has freed m^ so.
"Just is my brethrens Bench I trust,
"And I Have within a Breast as just.
Nor was he more pregnant in wit, than rich in the supply of all virtues: for
all that knew him, will give this testimony of him, that his constancy in
opposing strong delinquents, did exile him. For like an impregnable Rock, he
stood stoutly against all Opposition; or like a sweet cooling Spring in a
desert, refreshed both himself, and others in their affliction, Or like green
Bays in hoary winter, flourished still in the most violent and tempestuous
season. Such men have our corruptedst times brought forth, but those were rare,
as Soranus and Cannius, Phocion and Socrates; whose surviving virtues preserve
their memory to posterity; and whose steps our Parthenius has so well traced
in acts of justice and piety.

But to you Aesculapius, must we address our request; it is your succor we
entreat; whose Experienced art has wrought such admirable effects. Be it your
Care to tender our Senates Cure. So shall you find us just in our requital
ofso ample a benefit, whenever opportunity shall so offer it self that we
may show it.

Whereto Aesculapius replied; As pity moves me to commiserate your Estate
(Noble Lady) so shall it appear, that my zeal to your Honor is unfaigned, by
the expression of my Cure. Let it suffice, Madame, that I do here promise my
best art and assistance in the accomplishment of your desires: Mean time,
comfort your self with expectance, till time come that we present to your
Honor some manifest tokens of success, by the effects of your practice.

Argument.
Themista bemones Parthenius his banishment; wishing him some rays of comfort
amidst those clouds of discontent: How meditation of others miseries, is a
sovereign Balm to attemper, if not to cure any ones affliction.

POESY II.
WHat age is this, when such are forced
Who live the best, to fare the worst?
What better may a State befit
Then wisdom, honesty and wit?
Which in Parthenius were compiled,
The only cause he was exiled.
Had he played Buffoun, Fawn or knave
To Pandor, flatter or deceive,
He had far more respected bin,
Nor felt those perils he is in:
For he by soothing great men's crimes
Had been a Minion for these times.
But he still scornd such base extremes
To gather wealth, by servile means:
He rather did the Gods beseech
Pure to live poor than basely rich.
Well then, though thou an Exile be,
Thou have a breast to comfort thee:
Choice virtues to thy Cell frequent,
To clear those clouds of discontent
With sacred rays, to crown my wish,
"That Exile may become thy bliss.
But while our doleful Ear applies
Her self to others miseries,
A sovereign Balm they do procure
To temper ours, if not to cure:
For when we others woes express,
They heal our own, or make the^ less.
But so it fares not with mine,
For they are increased with thought of thine.
Argument.
Aesculapius delivers his opinion touching his Patients; their wounds must be
discovered, before they be cured; He enjoynes them one by one to show unto him
how they are handled, that receipts to the quality or distemper of the Patient
may be seasonably ministered.

PROSE III.
THis exquisite Artist Aesculapius, having duly observed their distinct
humors, passions, symptoms and dispositions; freely in this manner delivered
his opinion, touching his Patients.

It is easy (said he) to collect by the outward Physnomy, that there is an
inherent Malady: but there is some difficulty in discovering, the true nature
or effects of that infirmity, by any conjecture derived externally. We of our
profession receive especial notions by the Patients urine, and by other
practick means, whereof our experienced Artists make singular use: yet may we
err in these, be our judgments never so clear; because the Water does not
ever discover the quality of the humor: yea, I my self have heard of one
within these few years, who was esteemed an Eminent Professor in our art, and
of excellent judgment in waters, to have returned his opinion, that such a
water as was brought unto him, (rather indeed to try him, than any necessity
they had to employ him) was the water of one who was deeply fallen into a
Consumption, yet was it the Stale of a fat Palfrey, as appeared afterward upon
discovery. I hold it then very needful in the whole course of our Practice (if
the Patient be not altogether insensible of his own grief, by reason of the
height or extension of his Malady, or incapably of any such discovery in
respect of his infancy) that he freely disclose the nature or condition of his
own grief: by showing in every particular how he is handled; at what times
most distemperd; how in his Siedge, how in his stomach affected: all which are
ever by the Patient himself best discovered, and upon his relation, by
Physical directions best attempered. My Conclusion then shall be this;
forasmuch as no wound can be possibly cured, unless it be first discovered;
nor salued, unless to the bottom searched: I hold it not only fi^, but
necessarily consequent, that one after another he brought forth in a Chair,
and before they receive their means of Cure, disclo^e truly how they feel
themselves handled* that a receipt to the quality of the disease might be
seasonably ministered.

VVhereto, after Themista had condescended, her distempered Statists were
brought forth one after another, according to their degree and order; whom
Aesculapius his Boy comforted with a musical measure after this manner.

Argument.
Harmonious, Aesculapius his Boy, comforts the dejected Patients; recounting
what innumerable difficult Cures his Master had effected.

POESY III.
TAke courage to you Sirs,
Of this you may be sure,
Who has you now in hand
Has done as great a Cure.
When Nonius that same scabbe
Did of a Strume complain,
He cured the impostume quite
By opening of a vain.
Demosthenes was hoarse
And could not raise a note,
Yet cured he him, and pulled
An Ox out of his throat.
Stesichorus, whose vein
Was fluent and divine,
The only Lyricke strain
Reputed in his time,
When he had lost his eyes
Through Helena's disgrace,
My Master them restored
And set them in their place.
Theotmius was choked
With Helleborian fume,
Yet he his gullet swept,
And brought his pipes in tune.
Diaphanus as clear
As ever christ all was,
That any one might view
His guts as he did pass,
Was by his art so closed
With Cement that he made,
That naught could be descride
Within his solid shade.
Stilpho a man of note,
But fiercer than a Lion,
More wanton than a Goat,
He made more chaste than Dian.
Lime-twigs were Brusons hands,
They were but touch and take,
His pilfring was his Lands,
Yet them so stench did make
By oils which he applide,
As theft did him displease:
Thus has his art been tried
With thousands more than these.
Take courage then; that care
Which he in these did show,
His wisdom will not spare
To any one of you.
Argument.
Themista causes Metoxos, the ancientst of her Senators to be brought forth;
She acquaints him with her Care for his Cure; She wills him to declare unto
Ae^culapius, how he feels himself handled, and to what distempers most
subject; Metoxos discovers his grief, with the effects of his distemper, in
each particular.

PROSE IV.
NO sooner had that admirable Artist told Themista, what necessity and
consequent utility there was in the discovery of a Patients griefs; and how
none, were he never of so quick and piercing a judgment, could come so fully
to the knowledge of their distemper, as when the Sufferer himself became the
Relator; then this equal Soveraignesse of Justice; Themista, caused Metoxos,
the antientst of all her Senators to be brought forth, acquainting him with her
Care for his Cure: Which done, after some comfortable exhortations to prepare
his feeble and uncomposed mind, She wil'd him to declare there unto
Aesculapius how he felt himself handled; how in the state of his body
disposed, and to what distempers most subject. Themista was not more ready to
command, than Metoxos was to obey; so as, raising himself a little in his
Chair, and borne up with pillowes to give him more ease, with the best voice
that his enfeebled spirits could afford, he begun to discover his grief,
with the effects, in these particulars.

Seeing Madame* (said he) that it is your sacred pleasure, that I disclose mine
own griefs, which by con tinuance, are grown so habituate, as I solace my
self in my sufferings, I will humbly observe your command. 1 First then, I
must ingenuously confess, there is such a secret sympathy betwixt my nature
and the temper of that metal, as I can see no gold but my teeth water. 2 There
is such an extension likewise of my sinews, as mine hand is ever open, nor can
I for a world shut it together, till some powder of the foresaid Mineral close
it. 3 I fear too, a decay in my Lungs; for I am become of late very
asthmaticall: and am often times troubled with a swelling in my throat (when
Saturn is predominant) so as I cannot for the whole world speak for my
Client. 4. I am a little troubled with the Migrim, which makes me I cannot
look steadily upon a just Complainant. And albeit, I must confess, that I am
an old man, and that the very Lamp of my life is nearely spent, yet do I 5
affect dalliance, and am infinitely taken with three Curtezans, Philia,
Dusnoia, Aneleutheria: the immoderate haunting of whose company has so weakened
my spirits, as it has driven me into a Consumption.

Argument.
Themista laments the misery of their condition, who make gold their god; or
proportions Justice by amity, Enmity, or commodity; Nothing so precious to a
composed mind, as integrity.

POESY IV.
WRetched are worldlings, who their hopes dosettle
On the base rubbish of an earthly metal,
Which like to bright glass, though it shine, is brittle
When it is used.
Like Midas blinded with an endless hunger,
They rear an Idol to their Isis honor,
Gold is their sole God, and they doat upon her
Shameless abused.
Yet worse are they far, who do Justice measure
By profit, hatred, or unequal favor,
Where he that gives most, may respective have her
As he desires.
Like to a fresh Rose in a Spinet closed,
Nothing's so precious as a mind composed,
Pure and untainted is her heavenly Closet
Where she retireth.
Argument.
Themista causes Metoxos to withdraw; Epimonos is called forth, who after some
reluctance (sorting well with the pertinacy of his Spirit) shows after what
manner he is handled.

PROSE V.
MEtoxos having so freely discovered his distemper, Themista caused him to
withdraw, and keep apart from consorting with any (being told first by
Aesculapius, that his disease was very contagious) and acquainting him withal,
that Aesculapius would take course for h^s recovery as well as the rest, after
he had heard a free and particular discovery of every ones distemper and
infirmity. Which done, Epimonos was called forth, who discovering at his very
first approach his refractorie nature, after some reluctance, suiting well with
the Pertinacy of his spirit, showed after what manner he was handled, in this
sort.

Since I must perforce, (said he) address my self to do what mine own
nature will hardly incline un^o (though, I must confess, I had far rather
labor still of my supposed distemper, than be put out of my humor;) I will
for once, Madam, become mine own Anatomist before your Honor, and this
reverend Artist, whom you so highly tender. 1. I feel very usually such a
stiffnesse or unpliablenesse in my self, as I would not willingly be either
led or driven. 2. The more I am moved, the less I feel. 3. I have got such a
buzzing in mine head, as I can hear no man's opinion but mine own. 4. And now
of late, grown so insensible of my malady, as I greatly fear, ere long, to
fall into an Apoplexy.

Argument.
Themista justly reproves such, as being wed^ed to their own opinion, will not
incline to Reason, but prefer a precipitate will before a deliberate
Judgment.

POESY V.
LIke to a Top which runs round,
And never wins any ground;
Or the dying ^cien of a Uine,
That rather breaks than it will twine:
Or the Sight-lesse Moale, whose life is spent,
Divided from her Element:
Or Plants removed from Tagus shore,
Who never bloome, nor blossom more:
Or dark Cimmerians, who delight
In shadie shroud of pitchie night:
Or mopping Apes, who are possessed
Their Cubbes are ever prettiest:
So he, who makes his ow^e opinion
To be his one and only M^nion:
Nor will incline in any season
To the weight of proof or strength of reason,
But prefers will precipitate
Before judgment that is deliberate:
He nere shall lodge within my roof,
Till rectifide by due reproof,
He labor to reform this ill,
By giving way to others will.
Argument.
Themista causes Vperephanos to be brought forth; who after some arrogant
passages, sprung from an insolent humor, is at last content to disclose the
nature of his distemper.

PROSE VI.
SHortly after, upon Themista's especial command, was Vperephanos brought
forth; who, after some arrogant passages distemperately uttered, in holding
himself exempt from others command, was at last content (with much seeming
discontent) to disclose the nature of his distemper.

Although (said he) I know no Sovereignty whereto I am subject, unless my own
disposition in mere curtsy, give way unto it; or this absolute Soveraignesse
of justice injoyne it, I will daigne to rank my self with others, (though
much inferior to my rank) in this naked discovery.

So it is with me, 1. that I verily think my self (especially at the full of
the Moon, and when the Dog -- star rages) to be Atlas, and that the
weight of the whole world lies upon my shoulders. 2. I fear much, that this
life shall no sooner leave me, than the world will make an Idol of me. 3. I
feel a perpetual tinckling and sowing in mine Ears; and these I hold to be
the tongues of the State, who are chanting my praises. 4. I wonder how the
world was governed before I came into it. 5. I neither see nor hear any, but
they admire me; and were I Isis Palfrey, they would adore me. 6. I find a
windy or flatuous matter near to the Orifice of my stomach, which gathers like
a purse, and falls into my bladder. 7. I am troubled with many humerous and
fantastic dreams, amongst which, that I have a shuttle-Cocke in my brain; and
am swallowing Gudgeons. 8. And when I awake and walk abroad, I am so taken up
with favor and fancy, as when I am my self, and in good temper, I doubt
verily I shall fall into a phren^ie.

Argument.
Themista wonders how any one should be so much transported with vainglory,
as to be wholly forget^ull of their own frailty. The only way to humble man,
is to con^ider how many imperfections accompany him, and how short he comes,
in ought that may truly accomplish him.

POESY VI.
Why should man be transported with conceit
Of fame, strength, beauty, excellency of wit?
Or catch himself with a vaineglorious bait?
Or make his soul a servile prey to it?
Why should he th'ro^e of frailty so forget?
Which like a mirror or true chry stall glass,
Presents his native face wheres'ere he pass.
Should he conceive what imperfections are,
In Check-roule his attendants; which obscure
Those glimmering virtues in him few and rare;
What poor defense to keep his fort secure;
How he is hemmed in with danger every hour;
How he exceeds in Complements of sin;
How short in that which should accomplish him.
O then I know this painted Butterfly
Would hang his wing, and yield himself a man!
A man! the Emblem of mortality;
Who, if he would but imitate the Swan,
And eye his feet, he would be humbler than!
Since his best virtues, if to life expressed,
Are but resplendent vices at the best.
Argument.
Themista calls forth Meilixos; who in all submissive manner shows the
weakness of his Constitution by nature.

PROSE VII.
NO sooner was that vain glorious Statist removed, being to retire to a
private Cell or recluse divided from the rest; fearing, belike, his distemper,
which was sometimes furious beyond measure; than Themista (whose Care was ever
addressed for their Cure) calls forth Meilixos; who in all humble and submissive
manner showed; 1 That from his very childhood, he was of a weak constitution;
2. Of an ea^ie and facile nature; 3 Ever cold and aguish; 4. Subject to
bleeding; 5. And sinew-shrunk: 6. He^ was grown so feeble, as he could
scarcely support himself: 7. He found a great decay in his sight, and could go
no way but as others led him. He would freely submit himself to any
extremity, so he might enjoy the least hope of recovery; but he greatly
feared an hereditary Malady, descending to all his family, and that was an
Epilep^ie.

Argument.
Themista comforts Meilixos; She assures him his disease is not desperate;
Cordials rather than Corrasives are to be applied: wherein she submits her
self to Aesculapius opinion.

POESY VII.
BE of good comfort, thy weak state
Meilixos, is not desperate.
Let thy dead spirits be reverst,
By recollecting them dispersed.
Thou ha^t a feeling of thy grief,
Which promises more quick relief
Than those, whom sharper fits assail,
And cannot tell us what they ayle.
This Expert Man, thou may be sure,
By his Experienced Care, and Cure,
Will thy di^temper take away,
Or by his Art the grief allay.
"For such as have both skill and will,
"Do often Cure, but seldom kill.
Now, my conceit is that these grieves
Crave Cordials more tha^ Corrasives:
^n which opinion I submit
To Aesculapius, as is fit.
Argument.
Themista sends for Vpotomos; She commands him to discover his grief, which
he performs with much discontent.

PROSE VIII.
NOt a little was Meilixos comforted, by these sweet measures; so as his very
Countenance gave promising hopes of his recovery. But being commanded to
retire, and with patience at^end the opportunity of his Cure; Themista
forthwith sent for Vpotomos; who presented himself with a stern and rough
Countenance: indifferent he seemed who were pleased, who displeased: full of
discontent was his visage: nothing but fire and fury sparkled from his eyes:
small was the reverence he showed in the presence of his Soveraignesse. In one
word, he seemed as if he had fallen at odds with himself; so cloudy was his
Countenance, so distasteful his appearance. Being at last commanded to discover
his grief (whereof he retained an Index in his face) and in what sort he
felt himself distempered; as one incensed with that command, and fixing his
Ferret eyes in a furious and dispassionate manner, with much avers^nesse
returned this answer.

It is not my condition to thaw or resolve into tears, nor come with an Humble
complaining, like that whiteliver'd Senator, whose effeminate nature discovers
the Babie to be of a poor and irresolute teper. I can disclose my grief
without a groan; and my pain without a plaint: which, to satisfy my self,
next your command, Lady; to whom by our Official degrees we owe some
Sovereignty, I shall briefly unfold. For my Constitution, it is strong and full
of vigor, unless some violent fit of anger bring it to distemper. From whence
some incident Maladies arise, which enfeeble the strength of nature; and
whereof I shall here return a relation more punctually particular. 1. First
then, I can justly complain of nothing more than inflammation of mine eyes,
and heat of stomach. 2. And I verily think, that my too long familiarity with
one Eris, a near acquaintance of mine, has so infected my blood, as it is
impossible to bring it to a right temper; so as this exquisite Artist of yours
(Madame) may save that labor. For I never yet saw that object, which gave me
delight; nor that Subject, wherein I took content. 3. I am subject to
fearful dreams, which so startle and distract me, that albeit I am but
seldom drunk, yet am I never mine own man, neither sleeping nor waking. 4. I
am grievously troubled with stitches, and with that incessancy of passion, as
they admit no intermission. All which together, heat my blood so
intemperately, as I much fear a dangerous Pluri^ie.

Argument.
Themista condemns these fiery and furious Spirits, who ever labor to
distemper: and before ever they hear the cause, pronounce their Censure. As
wounds are to be searched, so are they with Oil to be suppled, and with Balm
healed.

POESY VIII.
YE fiery furious spirits, sons of thunder,
Who fill judicial seats with naught but wonder;
Ye labor of distemper; rack our Laws,
Pronouncing judgment ere you hear the cause!
Know ye shrill Bonargs, for to you we speak,
Whose State-recov'ry is the goal we seek,
Thunder spoils fruits when they are in their setting,
Sharp doomes indurate natures most relenting.
The glorious Sun works by divine reflex
On several subjects, several effects;
For when he is pleased his tresses to display,
"Same beams which soften wax, do harden clay.
For howsoever all of one mass be made,
Yet equally all are not tempered.
This then my counsel is, lest justice wither,
Favor and rigor must be mixed together;
So wounds well searched, (it is folly to conceal them)
There Is Oil to supple, and a Balm to heal them.
Argument.
Themista sends for Amerimnos to come unto her, whom her faithful servant
Euphorbus finds sleeping in a corner* Being asked the ground of his distemper,
after a nod or two, he returns her t^is answer.

PROSE IX.
THat sullen discontented Malevolo, had no sooner upon Themista's command
retired, being close pent up in a Cave, lest he should quarrel with the light
(a Consort much different to his unsociable humor) for privacy was his Lawne,
and discontent his Lure: then Themista sent her faithful servant Euphorbus for
Amerimnos, the very last of her Patricians, to come unto her; whom he took
napping, for he found him sleepingin a corner. Long did he whup and hollow, but
all in vain; Endymion vero si fabulas audire volumus, n^sclo quando in Latm^
obdormivit, nondum ut opinor experrectus. Cicero lib. 1. Tuscul* quaest.
Endymion never slept soundlier on Latmus mount, than this State-crickit did in
his Chimney nooke. Many ways he used to awake him forth of that Lethaean
slumber, by cramping, tickling under the ear, applying fumes to his nose; but
fruitless was all Euphorbus practice: till at last, starting suddenly out of
his dream, he called aloud Sympotio, Sympotio, (for so was the Yeoman of his
Cellar called) bring me a lusty Cup of Frontineack, to clear mine eyesight
this morning; but he was much mistaken both for the time o'th day, and his
liquor; for it was now drawing toward the Evening; and for his Frontineack,
there was none such in all his Cellar. Howsoever, Euphorbus had prevented his
Carouse by his Message; being then to deliver unto him his thanklesse errand.

Long was it, after such time as Euphorbus had acquainted him with T^emista's
pleasure, before this dreaming man could call to mind what that Lady might be;
so much had sleep dulled him, or his darling Sack besotted him, as a
mindlesse* oblivion had seaz'd on him, and made him quite forget who first
advanced him. At last, rubbing his over-steep'd noddle, and sounding a retrait
to his wandering senses, who were gone a wooll-gathering, he gave ear to
Euphorbus message; and with an indented pace (with two Bonsocio's to support
him) addressed himself with best speed he could, toward Themista: by whom
being asked the ground of his distemper, after a nod or two, he returned this
drowsy answer.

Madame, I took very good rest, before your Servant called me, and should
shortly do so again, if you would but dismiss me. Truth is, I am neither
greatly sick nor well: for mine appetite to eat, drink and sleep, did never
yet fail me; but it fares with me as with them that are taken with an
Atrophie, though I feed well; 1. I thrive ill. In the afternoon, I am ever
taken with a 2. dry Hecup: which makes mine head so heavy, as i am enforced to
lay my Chin on my Breast: I know not what familiar has thrown his Clubbe over
me, but questionless, there is some Gypsy trick in it, for I can never hear
Justice talked of, but I must have a 3. nappe. I am ever 4. dreaming on the
Bench, that I am shooting at rovers, which makes me to pronounce judgment at
hap hazard: wherein (like a just man) I am ignorantly innocent whether it pass
for Plaintiff or Defendant. The greatest fault I find with my self, is my 5.
defect of memory; so as I verily think, I shall play Messala Corvinus, and
forget my own name, and so by degrees fall into a Lethargy.

Argument.
Themista concludes, that there can be no secure State, where Security fits at
the Stern. She solicites Aesculapius Care, and recommends them to his Cure.

POESY IX.
HOw can that State be secure,
Or true freedom ever erne,
Where Security has power,
To direct and guide the Stern?
Haplesse-hopelesse is that Clime,
Which is of this humor sick,
And in sleep consumes her time,
Ruin to States politic.
"States are ever most secure,
"When they hold themselves least sure.
But you grave Artist, we solicit
Who daign'd our Patients to visit,
Neither care nor cost to spare,
So you cure them by your Care.
"For we to that skill of yours
Recommend our S^natours:
Praying Heavens your Cure to bless,
And to crown it with success.
The CONSVLS Cure.
The third Book.
Argument.
Aesculapius admires the difference of their distempers; and after some
discourse of his travail and practice, prescribes Phy^icall directions to
Metoxos.

PROSE I.
WHen the Learned Aesculapius had heard this free delivery of their
infirmities; turning to Themista, Madam (said he) I never found more different
distempers in any State. Through most parts of the whole World have I
travailed, and in my travail practiced either in my own person or by mine
Agents. Where in my Survey of this Universe, and the exercise of my Profession,
I encountered with diverse Maladies, which had made Fools of the best
Physicians: yet with Cures of more difficulty than these, have I seldom
grappled. Personally stood I engaged for the service of Athens, when that great
Plague so universally raged, as there sufficed not among the living to bury
the dead. Even then, I say, when that flourishing Treopagus, where those
jud^cious Senators (surnamed Areopagites) exercised judgment was not only
left desolately unfrequented, but the very Seats of Justice were with brambles
over-shadowed; the public Market place where such Confluence of people from
all Coasts and Countries resorted, with grass covered; those sumptuous
buildings, wherein A^t seemed to contend with her self, utterly re^inquished;
and those glorious Temples of the gods, by reason of shady Coverts so obscured,
as their magnificence could not be discerned. When (I say) nothing but an
universal desolation had seaz'd on that disconsolate City, so as her very
enemies, who sometimes maligned her happiness, now melted into tears to see
her glory so eclipsed, and to misery reduced. Even then did I happily arrive at
Pylae, and by my art so purified the air (which was then so infected, as the
very Birds fell down dead with corruption of it) as in very short time, the
City recovered, the Senators returned, the Citizens re-inhabited their
relinquished Mansions.

The like service I did to the flourishing State of Sparta, where they erected
a Temple to mine honor; and retain to this day the memory of me in a
sumptuous Statue, which they reared for me. Bizantium will acknowledge the like
courtesy; and so will all States, who have at any time been surprised with
any raging malady.

But this I do not speak of to set my self at Sale, or like our Mercenary
Mountebanke, to erect a Stage for discovery of my Cures; and by a Comic
Interlude with a servile Buffoun, fool my self into popular esteem: or set
up in some frequented place, a fictitious Catalogue of my incredible Cures; Or
hang up my Picture, to enforce a deeper impression in the taking eye of the
vulgar; Or with sophisticated oils, delude the sight of a bleereey'd
Spectator. No; I do value more the honor of my Profession, than to set it at
so low a rate as to beg estimation: or by sordid means s^rue my self into
opinion. True worth can never admit of Ostentation. It shall be my glory to
afford my best art to others necessity; wherein their health shall be my
highest gain, their recovery my wished goal. And to you, Madam, do I speak
it, who^e virtuous fame shall ever endeere me to your memory (nor was I ever
conscious of flattery) that my Practice hereupon these your distempered
Statists shall manifest to the world, that effects give the best approvement to
all Professions. But delay ministers fuel to a growing disease; this Preamble,
Madam, was but to acquaint you with the method of our Profession, who must
aggravate the difficulty of their Cure, to procure them the more credit.

Whereat, Themista smiling, replied; Renowned Sir, Leave that Method to such
novice Artists, who stand in need of a public Crier of their Cures; for your
self, we dare avouch, that so much are you indebted to fame, or she rather
indeered to you, that you cannot be more highly possessed of opinion than you
are. That fame of Pergamus, your Scholar Galen, has dispersed your glory by
the excellency of his art. That joint name of Six renowned Physicians,
Hippocrates has with no less repute advanced you. That surviving glory of
Anazarba, Dioscorides, whom the familiarity shown him by those princely but
unhappy Amorists, Mark Antony, and Cleopatra, so highly raised; has with no
less art improved your fame. The universal opinion which all Nations retain
of you, may be probably gathered, by those many Temples erected to your Honor,
and entitled by your own Name, the more to dilate your honor. What Statues
have been reared, what Shrines erected for you? and how severely have
punishments been inflicted on such as have either detractively inveyed against
you, or sacrilegiously dishonored you? Which might be instanced in the
misfortunes of Dionysius; who, though he made a jest of Sacrilege, and gave
easy reins to all profaneness, yet his exile from the flowery boundiers of
his Empire, rewarded him for his impious designs toward the Gods: amongst
which, for the dishonor he did unto you, Aesculapius, in cutting off your
beard, and clozing up his Sacrilege with a jeere, saying, it was unfit, for
you the Son to have a beard, and your Father Apollo to have none.

It is true, Lady, (answered Aesculapius) just was the censure inflicted on
Dionysius; but undeserved was his impiety toward me, for those many favors
which his Country had received from me. Howsoever, you shall know (Madame)
that I was never ambitious after fame; which, for the most part, is soonest
procured, when it is least desired: for where virtue is the sole ground of our
actions, it ever draws to her some discerning Spectators to crown them with a
deserving applause. Ever to do good has been mine aim without affectation;
for actions done for vainglory, lose their desert; but protraction in Cures;
gives life to distempers. It is more than high time, that we now address our
self to our Practice: wherein, though most of our surreptitious Empiricks,
gain them experience by the death of their Patients; our Patients (so heavens
breath on our Endeavors) shall suffer no such fatal prejudice by our
Experience.

Nor do we fear it, Aesculapius, (answered Themista,) where Theory, Practice,
and Honesty meet together in one Subject, the Cure cannot but promise
success; proceed then happily to your succe^ding fame, and your Patients
cheerful recovery.

Aesculapius having thus received Themista's charge, for the Care and Cure of
her Consuls; prepares proper receipts to be seasonably applied to every Malady.
He craves Eucrisius assistance; whose presence assures him of success in his
Practice. And first, because first in order, and a distemper of infinite
danger, and therefore requisite to have the expeditest Cure, he calls forth
Metoxos, to whom he gives these directions.

Metoxos, you have a foul body, full of vicious and malignant humors, my
opinion therefore (drawn from the seldom erring rule of judgment and
practice) is this; that you first be purged, that your body may be better
prepared. Secondly, you must be blooded, that all corrupt, clotted and
congealed blood may be removed. Thirdly, you must have a vomit, that all
crudities which lie rotting about your stomach, may be exhaled. The necessity
of which Experiments shall appear (said Aesculapius) by the effects, which
each of these produce.

1. For your Siege, the Lake Cocitus, or Stimphalus were odoriferous Bathes
unto it. The whole History of Ajax cannot show the like: for the luscious't
nutriment ever renders the loath somst excrement.

2. Secondly, for your blood, it is so thick and corrupt, as Bulls blood is of
a pure, simple, and subtle quality in comparison of it: which may appear by
the standing color, or Jewish tincture you have in your face, which being laid
on with an Aurum technicum, cannot blush.

3. Thirdly, for the Crudities of your Stomach; they are so numerous, and
those so onerous, as they that see your Eiectments, will hold them mere
deceptions of the Sight: for sometimes, you shall cast up a whole Ox (equal
for proportion to Milo's Bull) which stuck so in your throat, as you could not
speak, but brought you by means of this Obstruction, in great danger of a
Squinancy; other times, a Massy Basen and Eure, all partiall-guilt; Now an
hundred or two of Rixe dollors; and in the end, when your stomach is disgorged
of these, you shall cast up a whole Covy of Partridge, Ducke and Mallard,
Crammed Capons, with much other both wild foul and tame; all which lay
fluttering on your queasie stomach, unconcocted. And all this by the sorcery
of your Curtezan Analeutheria.

Having prescribed you these directions; and prepared for you a Pectorall of
Herb of Grace: with a Plaster of Liver-wort; (for I conceive all these
distempers to proceed from an ill liver) I must advise you to be patient in
your Cure; which if you do, I make little doubt, but to work a rare Cure upon
you. For this has been ever my positive Conclusion in the whole course of my
Practice, that there is nothing, which makes diseases more incurable, than the
negligence or impatience of the Patient: as might be instanced in Sisambres;
which Story, Harmonius, it is my pleasure you relate in a Musical strain,
while I prepare his Physical ingrediences.

Argument.
Harmonius relates how Sisambres one of King Cambyses judges, and taken with
like infirmity as Metoxos was, would not be persuaded to take a purge, nor be
cured of those corrupt humors, wherewith he was oppressed: which cost him his
life, being by Cambyses Command flead, and his skin nailed to the judicial
Seat, upon which his Son, succeeding him, was to sit, to put him in mind of
his duty.

POESY I.
Often would Cambyses that great Persian King
Acquaint Sisambres with his disease,
And to his Couch his choice Physicians bring,
Yet he would incline to none of these.
Purge, purge (said one) Sisambres, ^r you dye,
Look to it by time, you are one of note;
A vomit take (said this) for I descry
A stall-fed Ox stick in your throat.
You Are rank in blood, Sir, you must blooded be,
An other Artist to him said,
There is no Cure like to Phlebotomie,
To have your humor right allai'd.
But none of these could any way prevail,
Sisambres their opinions s^eighted;
Knows any (said he) better what I ayle
Than I my self? that Art's quick-sighted
That sees more in us than our selves do feel;
That wee'r distempered thus or thus,
Wherea^ our temper steeres the Commonweal;
"Physicians cure yourselves not us.
Your purging pills, vomits, phlebotomie
Shall work no practick Cure on me;
He that is well how can he better be?
Be gone, your art deserves no fee.
"He that can feed and sleep, and take his ease,
"He may be sick, but it is a sweet disease.
But poor^ deluded Judge, he could not find
That which most distempered him,
Those rank corrupting humors of his mind,
Which caused him after loose his skin.
For when no Art nor Counsel could persuade,
Cambyses held it very meet,
Sisambres for example should be fleade,
And's skin nailed to the judgment seat,
That his succeeding Son might thence rememb^r
The duty was imposed on him,
To do what is just to all, as he did tender
The future safeguard of his skin.
"His grief, Metoxos, much resembled yours,
"Purge then by time, and please Superior powers.
Argument
Aesculapius prescribes directions to Epimonos; diseases insensible are most
incurable; He is confident of his Cure, if he freely submit himself to his
Care: with the danger he may incur by declining from his prescriptions.
Small griefs in an untoward patient, become in short time mortally desperate.
This he instanceth in the misfortunes of M. Caelius, the relation whereof he
recommends to Harmonius.

PROSE II.
DIsposed had this judicious Artist no sooner of Metoxos, whose violent
distemper required present relief; than, leaning a little on his Elbow, as one
deeply engaged to some serious contemplation, he in the end burst out into
these words.

Madame (quoth he to Themista) it is an usual Proverb in these parts, that
the Ship had need be free from leakes, where the Pilot is drunk.

What do you mean by that (answered ^hemista) Mary thus (quoth Aesculapius:)
your Grace has here a fair, ample, and flourishing estate; of a large extent
is your government; but the members, whereof your State consists, had need be
well disposed, when their heads be so distempered. How do you think of us
(answered ^hemista) we should be the Head? do you find any such distemper in
our affections? Excuse me, Madame, (replied Aesculapius) There is none that
knows you, but truly honors you; your actions are rightly squared; your
affections sweetly tempered; your Scale of Justice equally poized: but a
sinister hand perverts it. The fountain is not to be blamed, if any troubled
or brackish water, partaking of the Earth, not of the Spring, corrupt it. Pure
is her nature, and had so continued, had not some impurer mixture soiled her;
which is merely contingent, and no way inherent to her. And how (said
Themista) might we restore these corrupted Conduits of ours to their former
purity? By preserving and reteining your own (answered Aesculapius:) The
Unicorns horn being dipped in water, cleares and purifies it. In our applying
Cures to Subjects of this nature, it must be our work to imitate, but yours to
perfect. Equal prejudice befalls Justice, either through your absence, or
connivence. Where, if a flux of humors be not timely prevented, the whole body
will become shortly endangered. Trust me, Noble Lady, had my Patient Metoxos
been begun with in time, he might have been cured with lesser difficulty and
danger: for there is naught that more hazards us, than giving way to an humor.
Which I shall return manifest proof of in the Cure of my next Patient, those
habituate infirmity will force me to the utmost of mine art; in trying many
conclusions, e're I shall bring him to a perfect recovery. The more are we tied
to your attendance (answered Themista) being so full of practice, and those so
powerful and eminent Patients, which remain under your ^ure, in all parts
where you reside: but Themista knows how to requite a Curtsie of such high
consequence; which shall appear in a more real and expressive recompense.
Presents and ample promises are moving objects to mercenary Professants
(answered Aesculapius) but as Nature has enabled me with gifts of knowledge,
so has she given me a contented mind, to confine my desires to my present
fortune. To do good shall be my greatest gain; more than this I little need,
and to obtain this shall be mine highest aim. And so turning him toward
Epimonos, who all this while sat bolt upright in a chair, without any
sensible appearance of pain, he freely imparted his mind unto him, in this
manner.

I am not ignorant, Epimonos, what danger you are in; yet let not this amate
you: the more danger in the Cure, the more shall be my Care. Be you confident
in hope, as I constant with my best help. My directions shall be useful, and
withal, so experimental, as being carefully observed, they shall in very
short time, become (in your particular) sovereign and healthful.

First then, forasmuch as I very well know the pertinacy of your humor to be
such, as it must be corrected, before any medicine can be properly applied, or
usefully ministered: I am of necessity to take this course (for milder receipts
might prove worse) that Lenitive and mollifying plasters be used to foften the
1. Stiffness of your arteries; to lay Cantarides to your neck, to suck away
those 2. Crude humors, which by concretion so benumme and stiffen your neck,
as you cannot bow it. I am to apply likewise, Goats blood, to dissolve that 3
adamantine humor congealed within the Membrane or thin skin which
incloseth your heart. And because, diseases insensible are most incurable, I
must use a little s^arifying, to bring you to a 4. feeling of your grief, and
perfecting my Cure Nor is this all, sundry other ingrediences are to be
prepared, before a Cure of this difficulty can be possibly effected. I am
therefore to prescribe you a diet drink, strongly tempered with the juice of
Morphasmos and Aisthema, herbs of sovereign virtue for your Malady. These
must be daily applied, and as hot as you may suffer them: Wherein I intend to be
personally employed, that nothing may be omitted, for the expediting of your
Cure. Neither let the long continuance of your Physic any way dishearten you;
it is a constant Maxim amongst us; "No task of difficulty can be effected
speedily. Though our course be slow, it will prove more sure. Our running
Empirickes, who kill an hundred e're they come to so much experience as to cure
one, would hold you in hand that this were but an easy Cure; yet twenty to
one, they would kill you before they cured you. For their art is to heal the
wound, but never search the Cause: so the skin be whole, they never think of
rankling within: But to the honor of your Princess, to whose service I have
devoted my best art, and the benefit of my Patient whom I take in hand, you
shall receive a more safe and sovereign Cure from me. For I may assure you,
out of my confiden^e of art, and his assistance, who gives prosperous success
to all arts, that by observing my directions, you shall not only prevent
falling into an Apoplexy, (a spice whereof you have already) but Cure any other
infirmity that has befalne you, through your own opinionate pertinacy. For
the Physician conceives hope in Cures most difficult, where he has to deal
with a temperate Patient. Whereas, if you will not freely submit to my
prescriptions, but with a violent swinge decline from my directions, look upon
the danger you incur, and then thank your own opinionate error. Small
griefs in an untoward Patient, become in short time mortally desperate: which
might be instanced in the misfortunes of M. Caelius; the relation whereof, that
his fate may be your Caveat, I recommend to you Harmonius.

Argument.
Ha^monius reports in these Musical dimensions, how M. Caelius, because he
could not endure any one to speak but himself, nor hear any ones opinion but
his own, nor use his hand in the pleading of any ones cause but his friends,
became dombe, deaf, and lame: And being advised before, he fell into the
height of this extremity, to seek for remedy, refused all advice, and so by
being deprived of all sense, (...) into an Apoplexy.

POESY II.
THose, who their opinion prize
By their esteem, not others eyes;
Those, who prefer their own conceit,
And hold all other judgments weak:
Do run their ship upon such shelves,
They still bring ruin to themselves.
So Caelius to opinion tide
Could scorn all other men beside,
And rudely interrupt their speech,
And treat of things above his reach.
None their disourse could so contrive,
Nor their opinion freely give,
Nor ought determine, but his wit
Must newly form and alter it.
But see the issue of this man,
And to what end he after came!
He, who himself would only hear^,
And to another stop his Ear;
Who was to that perverseness grown,
He Would slight aliudgments but his own;
Who would no good man's cause inte^d,
Nor plead for any but his friend;
See heavens just judgment! he became
By sacred doom, domb^, deaf and lame.
And being advised to look betime
Ere strength of Nature did decline,
Still solely-wise he would despise
Their wholesome council and advice:
Till at the last deprived of sense
And Reasons sacred influence,
An Apoplexy seaz'd each part,
Till death besieged and took his heart.
"The way to purchase wisedom^s prize
"Is never to be overwis^,
"And will appear diviner still
"By the resigning of our will.
Argument.
Aesculapius acquaints Vperephanos with the difficulty of his Cure; the quality
and variety of his receipts; He exhorts him to patience, or his grief will grow
to more violence: This he instanceth in Py^heas, whose heavy fate he leaves
to the quick touch and descant of Harmonius.

PROSE III.
SVrely (said Aesculapius to Harmonius) thou have deblazoned the Tragic Scene
of Caelius misfortunes in right colors: for he was ever said to have a good
right hand, but an ill left hand, because he could plead against a man better
than for him. Which procured him no less hate, than his mercenary Eloquence
purchased him gain. But our Cures are many, and the day runs on: we must now
address our best endeavors for your recovery (quoth he to Vperephanos:)
wherein I must tell you freely (nor would I have it to discourage you) that
your Cure is of greatest difficulty. Your very action, gesture, and discourse
puts me in mind of Rhemnius Palaemon, that arrogant Grammarian, or rather
Grammatist; who vaine-gloriously boasted, that good Literature had first life
by him, and should after dye with him. Or like Gorgias the Orator, who ever
advanced himself to the highest place, and arrogated to himself the
deservingst praise. You have hit his humor rightly (answered Themista) heavens
grant you may fit him with as proper a remedy: but in good sadness, Sir, how
do you find him affected? Distracted, you would say, Madam, (replied
Aesculapius.) The Oetean Hercules had never a more violent beating pulse, after
he had put on that empoisoned shirt of Nessus. Observe the madding motion of
his Eyes; how wildely he looks! In what a disioynted Circuit his discourse
runs on! I can assure you, Madam, for all his silence, he verily conceits at
this instant, that the wisdom of all politic States is confined within the
empty circumference of his brain. A dangerous headpiece, trust me! This I am
sure of, were the government of the Universe left to the guidance of his
Sconce, we should have a mad State. Yet I can tell you Sir, (said Themista)
that since our unhappy absence from these parts, he was held the only Oracle
of our Court. Nothing was definitely decre^d; no Censure pronounced; no
judgment delivered; nor any public Act promulgated; unless it were first by
him approved: so universally was he reputed. This it is, and only this
(answered Aesculapius) that has madded him. Had he been opposed in his will,
we had never been put to this work. So dangerous it is to sooth or second
some humors, as it fares with these, as the Ape dealt with her darling: They
kill them, while they coll them. Shady honors are their beauties; applause is
their minion; nor do they care so much for desert, as opinion. This humor is
long rankling before it come to burst out: but this Ery^ipelas or wild fire
being once kindled, the flame is not so soon to be quenched.

All this time, sat Vperephanos upright in his Chair, showing a Supercilious
kind of State: and expressing a kind of humorous action or apish formality, in
wink^, noddes, and other strange gesticulation: which ^lapius well observing,
and drawing near him; ask't him how he did?

Excellently well (quoth Vperephanos) for how is it possible I should do
otherwise? The greedy eyes of the vulgar are fixed upon me; The whole
CounsellChamber relyes on me; The public State, has recommended the helm of
her government unto me. If I fail, she falls; her grandeure lies on my
shoulder; in the wounding of whose honor I suffer equally. Go to (quoth
Aesculapius) you know not what you suffer: you are madded with an overweening
opinion of your own wisdom. Assure your self, the State stands in no such
need of you; should you perish, she would flourish. She has other shoulders
to support her; other Lights to direct. her than your addle brain. Go to Sir,
would you have your self displayde in your own native color? I must do it,
and roundly too, or I shall never bring you to a discovery of your self. I
will tell you then what I fear, though you feel no such occasion of fear in
your self.

I find as well by your Cra^is as Chri^is (with the graduall courses of your
Paroxysmes, Symptoms, and other concurring distempers) that you have been bit
by a man dog; so as you must 1. eat a piece of his Liver: which must be
stuffed with the leaves of the low shrub Tapeinotes. You are like wise for
certain days together to be 2. tied Chinne-deepe in Lazarello's poole; where
you are to be kept to a low diet. Neither can I find any means better to
cure your distemper, than to 3. remain there, till all those Bedlam fools
laugh you out of your humor. Howsoever, you must be patient, or your grief
will grow more violent, as it fell out with Pytheas; whose heavy fate I leave
to you Harmonius, to descant on in your wonted manner.

Argument.
Harmonius chants out the misfortune of the Athenian Pytheas; who became so
selfeconceited, as he was wont to lay his Ear to Cranies in walls and
portells, to hear himself applauded: to weane him from this humor, he was
often advised; but being deaf to counsel, and growing as in years, so ever
higher blown with the bladder of arrogance, he declined at last to a Frenzy.

POESY III.
HOw blind is he, who labors to be known
To all men's imperfections but his own?
How can he have an Ear to any cause,
That is engag't to popular applause?
This, Pytheas found, who grew in time so strong
Through self-conceit in Eloquence of tongue,
As he supposed, each place that he came in,
There was no other talk but praising him.
To walls and portels would he lay his ear,
Through creeks, and cranies too, that he might hear
His much desired applause, which having done
And heard his praise, he held his prize halfe-won.
Many disswad't him from this madding course,
But all in vain, his humor still grew worse,
Deaf was his Ear to counsel, all his art
Was to gain praise, no matter for desert.
Ripe were his years and mellow, yet age-grown,
With arrogance was he bladder-blowne:
So as, when neither reason could persuade,
Nor he by wholesome counsel would be swaide,
But so admired his selfe-conceited worth,
As he had been some Deity on Earth:
He, as I Have heard some of his Nation tell,
Into a fearful frensy, after fell.
Whence I conclude, "'it is better far to want
"Wit, and to know it, than to be arrogant.
Argument
Aesculapius prescribes Meilixos cordial and comfortable things, to restore
Nature so much decayed in him. He gives him assured hope of his recovery, for
that he finds him of so tractable a nature, so pliable a quality. He wills him
to keep home, till he be perfectly restored to his health; And that those
Epilepticke passions, to which he is subject, might endanger him, by coming
abroad, or walking near any steep place, as it fell out with Melotes, which
Story he commends to Harmonius.

PROSE IV.
MAdam (said Ae^culapius, turning himself to Themista) this was a mad piece to
make a Consul of; but there was never any good wit without some egregious
folly. They that would suffer themselves to be troubled at the sight of every
mad Statist, would have some thing to think on. Wise men can never be
discovered, but by others folly. Venus never showed more beauty, than when Nais
sat by her, and showed her deformity.

All this is true (answered Themista) but nothing troubles us so much, as to
see one, whose judgment should have ministered advice to others, so bleered and
blemished in his own. Surely, had you known this Vperephanos, when we first
knew him, you would have admired him for pregnancy of wit, solidity of
judgment, and generality of worth. Nothing was spoke by him, but infinitely
became him; ripe he was of conceit, and rich in fancy.

And it was that (said Aesculapius) and nothing but that (as I said before
which brought him to this dangerous Frensy. I must tell you, Madame, for mine
ancient experience has found it true: That person had need of a composed
spirit, and to have a constant and staid wit, who preserves it untainted, when
he is hugged in the Court, honored by the State, and humoured with applause.
The axiom is, "it is rare to be great and good; but no less authentic is
this, rare it is to be popular and wise. Many have been As Sergius Galba.
thought fit to govern, before they came to govern; wise they were in
mannaging, constant in pursuing, and prosperous in atchieving, but all this,
while they were private men. The Bowl^ changed her Byas, when it came to run
on more steep grounds.

Promotion is the Touchstone, Chi ha bianco ^avallo, and bella moglie No viue
may sansa doglie.
which tryes every man's metal. These pregnant-piercing wits, have commonly
dangerous diving conceits: which become subject to crackes or flawes, if they
be either by competition opposed, or by arrogance and applause too much
tickled. I could instance you many eminent Personages here in Arcady, who
became subject to this distemper, though during their time of privacy, most
sober. The wise Ithacus had the herb Moli in store, for an antidote against
such Sirenes.

But let this nothing amate you (Madame;) we have so disposed of him; as we
hope to leave him in far better temper, than we found him.

He had no sooner spoken this, then Meilixos was presented to him, whom he
received with an affable entertain; and drawing near him, and gently
stroaking his temples with his hand; Take heart of grace to you (quoth he to
Meilixos) my life for yours; there is no such violence of distemper, but I
shall quickly allay the decreasing heat of this humor. I could wish that my
Patient, whom I had last in hand, were in no greater danger. Look up man, be
not dejected; within few days I doubt not, but to set you on your feet. Mild
and moderate has been your humor, and I shall fit you with Receipts of like
nature. Alas, good man, how he trembles before ever ought be applied unto him!
These be Symptoms of a weak and pusillanimous spirit. I am verily persuaded,
one might work strange conclusions on such a subject: So easily were he to be
deluded, if any one would bestow so much time, as to practice upon his
weakness: Such strong impressions may conceit work upon a feeble Subject.

It is not to be doubted (answered Themista) but very many have been brought
to their graves through conceit, before ever they came to be sick: as might be
instanced in that white-livet'd Emperor Dioclesian, one Diocl^sia^ Dalmata.
unworthy of so imperial a title; with other persons of inferior quality.

To confirm this (said Aesculapius) I have heard (Madam) of some rare
conclusions tried upon condemned persons: who were hoodwinckt, with their arms
laid bare for incision, as if they had been to be blooded to death. Luke
warm water was applied and sprinkled upon their untoucht veins, by the
supposed Surgeon; a strange kind of whispering or muttering was used about
him, as if the delinquent were even then expiring. Nothing left undone to
delude him: Nor were their endeavors fruitless; for conceiving this to be
true, as they surmized, with an easy credulity vanquished, meekely but simply
he expired. Or like that Cobbler of Mantua, who was brought to be sick by
persuasion, when there was no distemper nor weakness at all in his
constitution.

As they were thus discoursing, Meilixos (whether through conceit of his own
distemper, or long fasting, I know not) became sensibly fainting* which,
Aesculapius quickly perceiving, run to him: and ministering to him out of an
Amethist box, which he held in his hand, two or three small pellets of
sovereign virtue to break wind, and give way to respiration; used these
words unto him.

What Is the matter, Meilixos; will you dye in despite of Physic? you should
wrong Nature much, to enfeeble that by conceit, which she has so well
strengthened and fortifide for your content. Will you dye, because you are not
sick? Or, will you be sick, because a groundless fear tells you, you are
not well? Fie Sir, reflect upon your self, and tender your own estate!
Children can play, till their heads ache; and will you lie down and dye, and
feel nothing? But admit you were subject to some exuberant humors, or
dangerous distempers (as all humane respiration passing through such earthen
pipes, cannot but by their rubbish receive sometimes* obstruction, or some
moldy, and earthly infection) these being seasonably disclosed, may be no
less speedily prevented, than perfectly cured; e^pecially, to such easy Cures
as yours, which are not grown indurate nor habituate, and consequently with
more facility salved. Give good attention then to my directions, and hold your
self for safe, if you observe them.

My purpose is ( Meilixos) to prescribe you cordial and comfortable things; to
restore Nature, rather weakened than decayed in you. I perceive your sight
likewise, by too much depression of the Op^icke part, to be much darkened, so
as I must wash your eyes with Eye bright water, to 1. ^ecover your sight.
Bleeding you are ^ubject to, which I must stench. 2. Anointed must your
sinews be with Nerveoyle, to 3. supple and strengthen them; and all this, to
bring you to a better feeling of your self. I am likewise, to apply certain
(...) to your temples, and other affected places, to 4. keep you from cold
faint sweats and swounings, to which I find you naturally subject. Nor (to
your comfort) am I any way doubtful of your recovery, for that I find a
tractablenesse in you, to follow my directions. Yet withal Sir, observe this
Caveat, (for declining from it may highly endanger you;) keep home, for these
Epileptick passions, to which you are subject, might engage you to manifest
perils by coming a broad, or walking near any steep place, as it fell out
with Melotes; the discovery of which Story I commend to Harmonius.

Argument.
Harmonius rehearses, how Melotes one of Consul-order, of a weak
constitution, weaker apprehension, but weakest in dispatch, became much subject
to swounings, and in the end by a weakening or failing of the vital spirits, to
Epileptick passions. He was enjoined by his Physician, to keep himself close
for aseason, for the air was too subtle, and piercing for his weak
constitution: but especially, to avoid walking alone near any steep or
precipitious place: but he, either forgetting, or neglecting this direction,
being one day walking on an high Mount in his Garden, untimely perished.

POESY IV.
HE that can instructions give,
And will no directions take,
He Is not worthy for to live,
Nor himself a Censor make.
Such an one Melotes was,
To a Consul order raised,
Who for weakness did surpass,
And for nothing truly praised.
Of a constitution weak,
Apprehension weaker too;
Nothing could he undertake
But dispatch did weakness show.
Subject was he often to Swo^nes,
Till his vital spirits failed,
And Epileptick passions
Him incessantly assailed.
His Physicians, artists rare,
Did injoyne him to keep close
For a season out o'th air,
And a private Stove to chose:
Subtile-piercing (would they say)
Is the air, and it will make
Strange impressions many way
On a constitution weak.
But you are specially to shun,
We advise in any case,
To walk private or alone
Near a precipitious place.
But hows ere he was directed,
By these rules of art to do,
He forgot or else neglected,
Which procured Melotes woe.
For h^e walking on a day,
(As I Have heard it often times sai^d)
On a Mount ranke-set with Bay,
He untimely perished.
For deprived of all s^nse,
While the vertigo took his brain,
He fell headlong down from thence,
And did never revive again.
Well deserves that man, like fate,
Who knows to prevent all ill,
In a steep and slippery state,
Leaves advice and loves self-will.
"Such one may conceit him strong,
"But his safety holds not long.
Argument.
Aesculapius causes Vpotomos to be bound: He tells him, he must use the art
of Surgery as well as Physic, in the dispatch of his Cure: He wills him by all means to avoid the company of Eris, whose familiarity had so infected him;
And the renewall of whose acquaintance, would bring him to a relapse, and make
his disease desperate: ^his he confirms with the Story of Aeacus, the relation
whereof he leaves to Harmonius.

PROSE V.
YOu see, Madame, (said Aesculapius to Themista) what dangers hence occur, by
means of a remiss Patient. Who, albeit, he holds nothing more precious than
health, and seemingly neglects all outward respects for purchasing of it: yet
are directions of health no sooner given, than forgot, no sooner prescribed,
than neglected. So apt is man to forget what most imports him, and entertain
that with delight, which fruitlesly delights him; and in the end destroys him.

It is true (said Themista) present delights so captivate the Sense, as it will
seldom or never suffer us to converse with Reason. We love nothing better than
life, yet by living ill we prevent all means of living long.

Nature dictates this unto us (answered Aesculapius) that we should tender
nothing more than health, nor value any directions like those which tend to the
conservation of it; yea, the Poet himself could sing:

Nor house, nor ground, nor any store of wealth,

Can relish his distaste, that h'as no health.

What a miserable thing is a rich sick man? His gold (which he made his god)
cannot allay his distemper, nor afford him one minutes ease ^or all his
treasure. Yet see deluded souls! How they prize the end, and slight the
means! How Self-will exposes them to millions of extremes! Live they would;
and to lengthen their hopes of living, they express their bounty to their
Physician, by endowing him with an ample pension; his Receipts, so long as they
relish their sickly appetite, they receive: but stricter Directions they
utterly reject, at least, intermit, because they comply not with their humors.
Much like that fool of Millain, who preferred a sugar pil before his life.

These may be truly said (answered Themista) to have their whole understanding
placed in their Sense. They prefer what may please, before what may ease;
their will before their weal.

And such is the desperate state of your distempered Statists (said
Aesculapius.) Infinitely credulous (besides all this) they are apt to be
deluded, by whatsoever shall be (though never so improbable) to their blinded
affections suggested. So as they may well seem to be ranked, and endenized
amongst that credulous Plebeian Society of Margant; who were made
to believe, upon the ruins of a sumptuous and magnificent Abbey-spire, that
the State intended their Spire (though many miles distant) should supply it: to
divert which intendment, in all humble and petitionary manner, with joint
consent, according to their weak conceit, they beseeched the State (with ample
gratuities to some interceding favorites for their better success) to
commiserate their case, and spare their Spire. To which the State, pretending
them all favor, after much laughter, pleasantly condescended.

Is it possible (said Themista) that any rational Society should be so
deluded? Very easily (answered Aesculapius) as I could instance with many
modern examples: but (Madame) I must crave your patience a little; for I have
now to deal with a violent Patient: One, whose imperious* disposition has at
all times made his will his law.

Which Aesculapius had no sooner spoke, than he forthwith caused Vpotomos to
be called forth: full of fire and fury were his eyes; fierce and revengefull
were his threats; bloody and truculent were his hands; rigid and relentlesse
was his heart; full of passionate distemper were his answers. Which
Aesculapius well observing, willed Vpotomos to be bound; for till such time as
he were fast tied, he could neither practice upon him, nor the Patient suffer
such experiments, as were to be practiced on him. All which being done,
according to his command, and taking him by his strong-beating pulse, he used
these words unto him.

Sir, I must freely tell you, that such is the nature of your distemper, that I
must use the art of Surgery as well as Physic, in the performing of this
Cure. For you must be 1. opened, and a Worm taken out of your gall; the maine
cause of your distemper. I am likewise to prepare Cupping-glasses to 2. cool
and temper your brain. Then, make a drink well-mixt with the juice of Metriot
and Euchrasia, to 3. remove your Pluriticall stitches. Which done, I am to
apply Oppian plasters, with a certain quantity of the juice of Sunneidesis
infused, (...)
to 4. repel those fearful dreams which so startle and distract you.

But what avails it to minister these Receipts, if you do not observe them?
or to bring you to your feet, if you, through neglect of what is here
prescribed you, make way to recidivation, and consequently to your own
undoing? Though Physicians have the body in cure, if the Patient second not
their Cure with his care, the Cure is lost, and all those Receipts they so
artfully prescribed, reduced to nothing. It is one of our Maxims; Art is long
in purchasing; Life short in continuing; and Experience subject to deceiving.
But Art is never more lost, than when bestowed on a careless Patient; nor Life
more short, than with a Recreant; nor Experience more deceiving, than when
exercised on him, who admits no government. For, to use the proverb of that
ignorant man, had you as many lives as Plutarch, all would be quickly lost,
where directions are not observed. How many have we known fall back
irrecoverably ill, because they presumed they were well: saving their Physician
a labor, by their too speedy payment of their debt to Nature! The only means
to preserve health recovered, is to avoid all occasions of incurring a relapse.

I remember, there were (...) hominem fragilem non faciu^t, sed qualis si^,
ostendunt. Kemp.
two Philosophers of sev^rall opinions in this kind: the one irrefragably,
though paradoxal^y, held, and set his rest upon it, That he, who would shun
occasion, was less than a man: concluding, that he, who could not see Beauty
without tempting, nor Honor without aspiring, nor Gold without coveting, came
far short of a Reasonable man; because Sense was his guide, and the
acquisition thereof his goal. Therefore would he expose himself to the
liberty of all occasions, that he might better soveraignize over Sense by the
government of Reason.

But the other was of a far more cautelous nature, and (perhaps) of as
resisting a temper: for he would not presume too much upon his own strength,
nor grapple with tentation in her height, but wisely standing on his own guard,
prevent the means of being tempted, lest temptation might chance to give him
the foil in the end. Playing too long with the Candle, ^ver ends with a cinged
wing. All this I mean to cloze up in one word, by way of application to your
own particular.

Upon your recovery (as I cannot promise it, lest you become too secure in the
purchase of it, yet shall my best art labor it) I could wish you by all means
to avoid the company of Eris, whose familiarity has so infected you. For I
must tell you, such acquaintance upon renewall, will bring you to a relapse,
and make your disease desperately mortal. Which might be confirmed by the
Story of Aeacus, the relation whereof I leave to Harmonius.

Argument.
Harmonius shows, how Aeacus son to Jupiter and Europa, not only for his
own natural severity, but through his ancient acquaintance and near
familiarity with Eris, was made one of the three Judges in hell.

POESY V.
Stern Aeacus, Jove's and Europa's son,
Who once as Judge sat on an ear^hly throne,
In all his acts of justice did appear
So per^mptory-rigid and severe,
As all that he pronounced to the worlds wonder,
Resolved itself to naught but threats and thunder.
One comes before him, and he was his hrother,
Who had but stollne a judgment against another,
And he was hanged for it; and the Attorney too,
For stealing judgment before the Defendant knew.
Celsus a theevish Poet brought to bar,
And was arraigned as other Felons are,
Sans bail, without least hope of his r^prive,
For stealing Suckets from an others hive.
Cacus an arrand Thief, was judged to dye,
Which judgment suited well with equity;
Where Aeacus then sitting on the Bench
Vttred these words, recorded ever since.
"Sirrah, to you I speak, ere I have done,
"I Will cause all falsehood to that period come,
"That the Grazer shall not need his Herds to keep,
"A very bush shall serve to shield his sheep.
Yet f^r all this, Cacus that theevish knave
Broake out of Iayle, and hid him in his Cave,
To which ^arke r^cluse there repaired such restore,
As there increa'st more Thieves, then e're before.
^xions wheel, and Sisyphus his stone,
Pro^etheus Eagle, were the proper doom
Of this rough Judge; with Tantalus his thirst,
Who might not drink, although his gall should burst:
For his degree of punishment was such,
He might not tast^ that which h^ lips did touch.
Nor was h^ only thus ^y nature cruel,
For he a Consort had, who plide fresh ^uell
To his enraged Spleen; Eris was she,
One, who was full as furious as he:
And in her House he lodged, and her he loved,
Nor would do ought, unless by her approved.
Till taxed in th end for to this end it came)
Of being naught with that cursed Curtezan,
As much familiarity did show,
(Though I Will not say if this be true or no)
He was deprived of honor and of favor,
And made one of Hels Judges for his labor.
Thus 'cause he bore himself on earth so well,
He became reft of Earth, and thrust to Hell:
That as he had expressed his rigor here,
He might continue the practice of it there.
Much good may't do him! but for all his reign,
He might be moved, I think, to come again.
Argument.
Aesculapius wills Amerimnos to rouse himself up. He compares him to the
Ostridge, both for stomach and action. He prescribes him a diet. He paralels
him to Messala Corvinus, and Margites; the report of whose State he recommends
to Harmonius.

PROSE VI.
NO doubt of that, an^wered Aes culapius, in ^eply to the last Stanza o^
Harmonius: but he is now in for all the week. These be the fruits of all
severe Mammothrepts, who relish nothing but justice, justice; but never supples
it with oil of mercy. Now, if I should be judge, all these fiery incendiaries
or Lawrackers should be all made Readers of the Anat^my Lecture in Pluto's
Court. There might they find subjects fit to work on, and to exercise their
relentlesse spirits withal. There might the Stage-scourger lash poor Roscius
till he smoak't again, and he himself choked again with the steame of
sulphurous powder, to gratify him for his thanklesse labor. There might he
spend his spirits in the survey and display of others miseries.

Here, a slye Symonist poring through a window, impained with flaming Lights,
and seering his nose with drops of scalding Cement. There, an ambitious
fire-flye, catching at an empty clowd, which resolving it self into a flashing
vapor, falls down, and cingeth his braving Mouchato's for his labor. Here, a
frisking flesh-flye, leaping at a painted Leg of Mutton, and falling back,
drencheth himself over head and ears in a Cornelian tubbe, where he leaves
all his hair. There, a prodigal Land-gull playing at Ducke and Drake in
Acheron with his imaginary pieces; till his fathers Ghost haunt him, and the
Furies find him, and so ends his pastime. Here, an hydropicke Earthmoale, who
being made Tankard-bearer to that forlorn family, is put to an endless task,
by filling Danaus tubs with water, wherein he consumes his endlesse-dying life
to a fruitl^sse labor. There, a light liquorish luscious Landresse, who set a
bucking Pluto's and Proserpina's linen, and found* faulty with one of the
Scullery, is enjoined this Penance, by a judicial ^entence; to be publicly
whipped with knotted rods of glowing steel in Phaetons Cart, till she entered
suerties to furnish with fresh and clean Napery, all the infernal Court.

Surely (said Themista) you have made such a free discovery of Pluto's family,
and those proper penalties which are inflicted on the whole Livery, as they
shall need no better survey for their society: yea, we should verily think,
but that we are better conceited of your temper, that you have now and then a
months mind to play the Satyr: not that it complyes with your nature, but
purposely to allay more serious studies with the pregnancy o^ so piercing an
humor.

No surely (answered Aesculapius) I could never much affect that Study: It was
my desire rather (Madame) to intimate unto your Grace, the remorselesse natures
of such, as my last Patient was: who ever mixed wormwood with Justice; racking
up your Laws to the highest pin: and in a word, preferring Execution before
Judgment. These I hold fittest for those Places, where there inhabits none but
notorious Delinquents, and exquisite punishments. Nor do I miss their humor
far: for one of this Rank, as I remember, stickt not publicly to profess,
and confirm it too with a solemn protest, "That it was his Iubile to "hang
many: and that a great Execution, was his Recreation.

It was great pity (said Themista) but he should make one of the number,
seeing an action of that nature, afforded him such infinite pleasure.

It is observed by our Physicians (answered Aesculapius) that none die of an
ague, nor without an ague. But sure I am, that these fiery and furious Spirits
are ever possessed of an hot fever: and such an one, as partakes no
intermissions. So as, in my opinion, these may be in some respect resembled to
Aristides, (though one more temperately just, and judiciously temperate) who
dying of the bite of a Weasell, exceedingly lamented it was not a Lion.

As their ambitious spirits are unbounded, and with fury ever distempered; they
can endure nothing worse than a contemptible affront, nor receive ought better
than a foil from an imperious foe. With what a braving domine^ing command,
have I observed some of these bear themselves, amongst their Inferiors! How
prompt were these to command; and how ready those to obey? So highly had their
purple transported them, as they assumed more than could become them. Whereas,
no sooner had they put off their Lions case, and adjourned the Court, then they
would daigne to embrace those, whom before they contemned; and communicate
themselves to such, as before they slighted. Especially, where either private
ends, or some other particular respects wrought upon the copy of their
countenance. But admit, these were to their inferiors never so soveraignizing,
they knew well when to be supple, and how to veil to the shadow of
Greatness. No surly look, nor clowdy aspect; no bended brow, nor contracted
front, were then to be seen. Low Congies, humble Salutes, Earth-touching
ducks, gave these powerful Magnifico's all promising entertain.

Now, what poor Protean Patriots are these! Mere slaves to the time, and
stains to the face of Justice. How easy were these to be wrought to any
impression! And these V^cers must be launced, or the whole Body must be
necessarily distempered.

It is most true (said Themista!) and hence a^e our tears! For, when a precious
or gorgeous Case alters the equity of the Cause, what a case are we in? These
were not the directions which we gave them, when we last left them. Nor were
these, those Conscript fathers we left sitting, when we took leave of Earth,
to mount to Heaven. For what a sweet union of minds; what fixed resolves for
advancing Justice; what a discreet temper in the whole current of all their
actions, appeared then amongst them? No powerful adversary could over-beare
our Sage and impartial Senate. Blind was she in respect of person; lame in
respect of Bribes. Constant was she in executing what was right; resolute in
suppressing what was unjust. Choice was that harmony, where neither affection
could draw, nor power overawe, nor any sinister respect deprave.

Would your Grace (answered Aesculapius) have your IVSTIARIES blind and lame?
you need not wish it, Madame, for you shall find variety of defects among
them. For some of these grave Senators, your Grace shall perceive to be so
blind, as they can hardly find the right way to the Bench, during all your
Sessions. Others so lame, as they will vouchsafe to go hand in hand with their
Constables, and both go down of one side, and hal^ in their office.

You make your self pleasant (said Themista) with our Cr^pples: but all this
applies no salve to our soar; no Cure to our Care.

But in convenient time, doubt it not, Madam (answered Aesculapius) but my art
shall produce some sovereign effect: I have hitherto gone through all your
diste^pred Statists, One only excepted; to whom, as I have done to the rest, I
shall apply such Receipts, with such useful directions for preserving health,
as the Cure may every way answer your Expectance, and restore them to their
former temper, to your honor, and the advancement of Justice.

Which Aesculapius had no sooner spoken, than he bids Amerimnos (the last,
though not least of all this distemperd Tribe) to rowse himself up for shame.
And the sooner to awake that drowsy and remiss spirit of his, wherewith he
was so much depressed, as nothing sounded well in his ear, that might put his
body to any toil; he caused one to play upon a Jew Trumpe, and to apply the
instrument close to his ear, purposely to keep him awake: which done, he
used these words unto him.

Sir, I must tell you, I can compare you to no one thing more fi^ly, than to
the Ostridge, both for stomach and action. For the Ostridge can digest ought,
yet neither fatter nor fuller: and for action, though he seem to have the
wings of an Eagle, yet he never flies up. This is just your condition, whose
long habituate sloth has made you the very Emblem of a Snayle, who leaves no
other print nor impression of pace nor place, but a little slime. But to
prevent all growing occasions of a further malady, and apply a seasonable Cure
to your stupid and insensible infirmity, I must prescribe you this diet. Your
broth every morning before you go to Hall, must be made of Spinach,
Day-nettles, and Burdocks, to 1. sharpen your intellect. And to 2. keep you
after noone awaking, I will prepare for you an Antiopian plaster, with an
Epimeleian julip, to lay warm unto your temples. I must enjoyne you at all
hands to 3. abstain from all strong drinks; and never to drink betwixt
meals, but with your teeth shut. I mean to provide you a Nightcap strongly
chafed with the perfume of Cornu-copia; purposely to 4. make your sleeps
shorter, and your conceit sharper. And because I find by your Urine, and other
soporiferous symptoms, that your kidneys are over-larded with oil of Dormise,
I mean by sweatings and suffumigations to 5. extract all those viscid and oily
humors; for these, by arising from the stomach, and fuming up into the brain,
caused Messala Corvinus, by acquainting himself with Amnestes, to forget his
own name; And Margites, through a careless security, to fall by degrees into
a curelesse Lethargy. The report of whose state, I recommend to Harmonius
strain.

Argument.
Harmonius, after he has touched a little upon Corvinus his want of memory,
with the supposed occa^ion of his infirmity, displayes the retchlesse condition
of Margites; whose discourse was fruitless, life useless, end ruthlesse. He
slept till he eat, and eat till he slept; till such time, as falling asleep
with meat in his mouth, he was choked.

POESY VI.
COrvinus was a Roman borne,
And to the Consul order sworn,
One of such fame, as only he
Had then the art of memory.
Each Sign from th'mount Capitoline
Unto the mountain Exquiline,
He could their names distinctly tell,
With what occurrents as befell;
No Table-booke he used at all,
His Brain was his Memorial:
So as to style him, some did please,
The Ages Ephemerides.
But note th'Catastrophe of this,
All Is frail what^ ever humane is^
Walking alone upon a time
Near to the Mountain Aventine,
Where Choughs and Fuskites bui^ their nest,
He there reposed to take his rest;
One of these Birds at this same time
Gathering leaves, sticks, stones, moss^ and lime
With other like materials,
To build her nest; a stone let falls
From her injurious hapless claw,
Which gave Corvinus such a blow,
As one day when the Censor came,
With others to enroll his name,
Corvinus had his na me forgot,
And did confess he knew it not.
But some say, his infirmity
Came by Amnestes company,
With whom he was acquainted long;
"But I must not forget my Song.
More retchlesse was Margites st ate,
His came by sloth, but this by fate:
His forenoon questions were these two; 1. First, whar's a clock, I feign would
know. 2. Next, what provision? I would dine.

Then would he sleep till supper time.
So as, that character of his,
In my opinion, might be this:
"A fruitless tongue, a^ useless life,
"A ruthlesse end, a tearelesse wife.
Cambletes that loose Lydian King,
Who spent his time ^n ryoting,
Was sober, if compared to him,
A very slave unto his skin;
(...), he, of whom'tis s'ed
That lying with his wife in bed,
He in a dream devour'^ his Bride,
While she poor soul, slept by his side;
But waking from his ravenous sloth,
Finding his wives hand in his mouth,
And naught of all but that left on her,
He slew himself to shun dishonor.
But This was worser far than he,
Devouring wife and family;
So as two such would cause a dearth,
To glut themselves, and starve the earth.
Ericthous bowels they were vast,
Yet were they far by Him surpast;
His would be fi^'d, these could be never;
From such ^ Gulf the State deliver.
But see! he who no measure kept,
But sle^ing a^e, and eating slept,
A^ ^naw ^res was ^apping t'ane,
And (...) to (...) worlds gain:
"For eat^ng-sleeping (this is troth)
"He was found choked with meat in's mouth.
Fared Lollards in each Country so,
I wot well how the world would go.
Argument.
Themista returns Aesculapius thanks for his care, with a confident expectance
of his cure: to whose diligence and success she vows (as she is just) an
ample recompense: She exhorts them to have patience in their Cure: Mean time,
she resolves, with her own presence, to discharge the place of Justice, till
their recovery shall better enable them for that service.

PROSE VII.
Rendering of thanks is but a naked tribute (said Themista) for so ample and
extended a curtsie, as you have offered us; for your known Experience has
laid on us so confident an Expectance, that nothing less than a fair and
promising Cure may be expected from one of such exquisite art, seconded with
such constant care. Yet shall not thanks be all; we have a mind as ready to
requite, as to receive: So that we vow, as we are just, (for so our title and
actions shall ever render us) to return an ample recompense to your successive
diligence. Arts deserve their rewards: for else should their edge be rebaited,
and their spirits amated, who do profess them.

Madame (answered Aesculapius) I am neither so weak in fortunes, nor servile
in my thoughts, nor remiss in my desire of doing good, as to make reward my
Object: for my part, I never yet reared a Stage to vaunt my self, or vent my
stuff. Doing good shall be ever my goal; and the health of my Patient, my
gain. Neither is that fame deservingly purchased, which is got by mere
Ostentation, or desire of popular praise; Nor that gain well grounded, nor
that art well employed, which exposes it self to a price.

O that we had many Professants of your art and of your mind (said Themista to
Aesculapius!) Then should not mercenary Artists so delude the State, nor
asperse upon the Republike so foul a stain. Where Experiments generally take
life from the death of their Patients.

But we must withdraw our self, and address our discourse to these our
distempred Statists; whose present infirmity, as it requires your help, so it
rests that we use our exhortation to move them to patience in their Cure, with
hope of recovery by submitting themselves to your Care.

Wherewith, she presently caused her sicke-languishing Consuls to be brought
forth; and being disposed in several Couches, according to their degrees,
imparted her self unto them in this sort.

Servants, and you our sometimes Deputed Assistants in the Execution of
Justice: Even of that Justice, which is the Summarie and absolute beauty of all
Cardinal virtues. But alas! how much have you detracted from the glory of so
divine a Sovereign? How far have you run astray? yea, how foulely have you
abused our Commission? When the wronged Widow with tear swollen eyes cride for
relief; you either slept and could not hear; or were Corrupt and would not
hear; or sensel^sse of an higher judgment, and did not fear; what your
^isguided course had given you just occasion to fear.

But see the fruits of your labor! Observe what you suffer! A fearful
distemper for your precipitate Error! Now are you fallen into the hand of the
Physician, by making so continued a league with* your transgression: But far
be it from us to insult upon distress, or enliven your griefs with fresh
repetition of your crimes. As we have hitherto intended our best Care for your
Cure, so it rests that we exhort you to suffer with patience the hand of so
experienced an Artist, that he may the better perfect his Cure.

The resigned will of a Morigerous Patient makes that Cure easy, which to a
perverse Patient would become desperate. Your Physician, whose dispersed fame
ha^h made him admired, where he was never kno^ne, gives us good hope of your
recovery; albeit your distempers are of several quality; which implies, that
some of your Cures will be more easy, others of more difficuly. Now as our
Exhortation tends to this purpose, to move you to patience, so our desire shall
be that upon your recovery, you redeem your lost time with redoubled
diligence. For should you become remiss in your Care, upon the perfecting of
your Cure, it had been much better that you had continued still in your
distemper, than to recover health to your more dishonor. Plutarch reports*
that Antigonus had in his Army a valiant Soldier, but of a sickly body.
Antigonus observing his valor, and grieving that so stout a resolution should
be seconded by so weak a constitution, procured his Physicians to take him in
hand; and he was healed. Now, being sound, he began to fight in some fear, to
keep himself a good distance from danger, no more venturing into the Vanne or
forlorn place of the battle. Antigonus noting and wondering at this
alteration, asked him the cause of this new cowardice. He answers, O
Antigonus, thou art the cause. Before, I ventured nothing but a diseased corpse,
and then I choose rather to dye quickly, than to live sickly: I invited death
to do me a kindness: Now it is otherwise with me, for I have somewhat to
loose. Be not you, like this recreant Soldier; upon recovery of your health:
improve it to the public wealth. You have lost much time; bewail that loss
with numerous tears; the most precious and propitious tribute for misspent
hours. Feed not on a diseased State; neither rear your foundation on others
ruins. It has been the condition of many of your Profession (with grief we
speak it) so they fatned themselves, they cared little how lean their starved
Clients were. Which moov'd that Country Boor, far more wittily, than could be
well expected from one of his breeding, to answer one of your rank, yet of far
more integrity, in this manner. It happened that this Boore driving a Teame of
Horses upon the high way, was encountered by a pregnant Practitioner in your
Profession: who observing his foremost Horse fat and fair, and bravely
Caparison'd, with a garland in his topping, the more to beautify him; demanded
of this conceited Boore, why his fore-horse was so gaily decked, and so fat,
and those that came behind, so poor and lean? O Sir, (answered the Boore!)
my forehorse is a Lawyer, and these lean jades that follow him, his Clients.

But such difference of feeding brings a flourishing State to ruin. Be it
your care to neglect no means for recovery of your enfe^bled health; nor to
omit no time, wherein you may benefit the State by your health.

Mean time, it shall be our resolution, with our own presence to discharge the
place of Justice, till your recovery shall better enable you for that service.
So every one of you to his Couch, we to our Judicial Seat: where we must
first play Alcides part, by purging that Augean Stable of the State. Prune the
luxurious Vine, that it may thrive the better, and vendicate Arcadia's late
blemished honor.

THE CONSVLS CHARGE
The fourth Book.
Argument.
Harmonius brings tidings to Themista of her Consuls recovery; the sundry
symptoms and effects of every malady; the rare experiments used by Aesculapius
in the cure of their infirmity; closing with a triumphant Paean in the honor
of his memory.

POESY I.
HEalth to Themista, solace and content!
To whom I am by Aesculapius sent,
In humble manner briefly to relate
Her late distempered Consuls good estate.
A timely salve's applied to their wound,
Their brains recovered, and their senses sound;
What they admired before, they now despise,
In each point grave, judicious and wise.
They solely prize what gains them just esteem,
All else they hold a mere deluding dream.
O heavens to see, what I might oft-times see,
What strange effects sprung from each maladye!
What various symptoms from one Patient!
Now was he jocund, streight-way disc^ntent.
Now fierce as any Lion, strait would he
Become as tame as any Lamb could be.
With what an appetite Metoxos would
Gape, if he chanced to see a piece of gold?
And as't had sympathized with his nature,
He never could eye it but his teeth would water.
His hand stretched out he used still to have,
Never shut but open, hopeful to receive.
Short was his breath, his Lungs decaid and wasted,
Swollen was his neck, his corrupt breath distasted.
A Migrim seized his brain, no cure was found,
Where e're he went, the world turned round.
Yet though this Chrone could neither sleep nor feed,
He had a wanton Colts-tooth in his head:
And where some youths with one contented be,
This useless Trunk was still in fee withthree.
Philia. Dusnoia. Aneleuteria.
Three famous Curtezaus, where he resorted,
And more than age could promise, nimbly sported.
Yet lo! what divine art can bring to pass!
You would not know him for the man he was.
Such choice receipts my famous Master used,
As now he is unto himself reduced.
His wandering eye is fixed, his fancy clear,
No roving passion^ in his mind appear:
Yea, his composed temper it is such,
Naught can be spoke in's praise, may seem too much.
But now it may be you desire to hear
The manner of his cure! Lend but your ear,
And I Will acquaint your Grace; though men of art
Be oft-times loath such secrets to impart:
But Aesculapius is not such an one,
What he professes, he would have it known.
To weane this Consul from desire of gold,
He first contrived a curious antique mold,
Wherein was pe^sonate a man of note,
With golden Laddles haling down hi^ throat;
Which sight so terrified this Peer of State,
A^ the mere object bred in gold an hate.
Next, artfull pills of gold, which gave delight
Far less unto the palate than the sight:
For though the golden color made him taste i^,
The bitter paste within did make him cast it:
So as within short time, he could behold
Nothing less pleasing to his eyes than gold.
Can we then too much glory attribute
To HIM, who having heard your Graces suit,
Emploid his art, (an art which heavens affect)
And to his art conferred such rare effect?
I know not, I, for I am but a Boy,
What may impart to Mortals highest joy;
But sure I am, if benefit of health
Preferred be before honor, pleasure, wealth,
"All Sacred Paeans we are bound to give
"To HIM, by whom we love, by whom we live.
NEXT him, Epimonos, one of such awe,
He ever used to make his Will his Law;
Inopposition both with Earth and Heaven,
He ever stood, nor would be led nor driven.
Stiff and unpliant were his Arteries,
His acts to others mere Antipodes.
The more you moved him, lesser did he feel,
And wished his head had stood upon his heel.
Such a strange buzzing in his ears was grown,
He Would hear no man's opinion but his own.
Nay, now and then he would not stand upon it,
But to call Nature to a strict account,
And tax her too for some supposed crime,
Which was not Natures, but the fault of time.
"I muse (quoth he) what Wood-cocke could prevail
"With Nature so, to deck the Peacocks tail
"With such a various luster, beauteous pall,
"And to the Ostritch give no tail at all.
"And why the Oxes horns so bravely spread,
"Should not stand on his shoulders bu^ his head,
"Being the stronger part, as all may see;
"Far sitter then his armor there should be^.
N^r could he e're this Critic humor smother,
But still find fault with one thing or another.
But this rare Artist, when he had discride
This strange distemper, and receipts applide
To cure his malady, resolv*d to frame
A Shrine, t'enforce Epimonos to shame.
And his device was this: One Demophon,
Who used to sweat in the shade, to shake it h' Sun;
Was in an artfull Model featured,
And in each part so nearely shadowed
To this Epimonos, so like was he,
As he himself unto himself could be.
The more he eyed this model wrought so fit,
The more he saw himself displaid in it;
All jeered him to his face, to hear him hold
Opinions which reason had controlled:
So as to chastise this Opinionate,
He was adjudg'd by censure of the State,
Till he his perverse humor should disclaim,
T'expose his person to a public shame.
Which censure past, like birds about an Owl,
The rabble rout enclose this humorous fool;
Some strip him naked, some twitch him by the nose,
Others do crampe him by the thighs or toes;
Each has an hand in his just punishment,
As if they had been by the Furies sent.
All this Epimonos no sooner eyes,
Than to himself with winged speed he flies.
"Art sleep or wake, Epimonos, said he?
"Or seeing, not observ'st what thou do see?
"Can thou forget thy self, and see this shape?
"Or to thy self thy self a stranger make?
"Thy form and feature are (with this) the same,
"Thy actions too do merit equal shame.
"Who ever wedded more to his opinion?
"Who to himself a more deluded Minion?
"Who more averse from that which others thought?
"Who more esteem from disesteeme e're sought?
"Who less conceiving and perversely vain?
"Who less admired, and higher hopes retain?
"Who lives to be less loved, and more selfe-priz'd?
"Who ever less affected, more dispis'd?
"Fie then recant; he has the happi^st wit,
"Who has discretion to attemper it.
"And of all others, those the least do err,
"Who in opinion are least singular.
"Let Stoics be to opposition given,
"Who to extremes in arguments are driven;
"Submit thy judgment to another will
"Ifit begood; oppose it mildly, ill.
"Discreetest tempers passion will forbear,
"And make good use of what they see or hear.
"These, strifes compose, but difference seldom stir,
"Nor by rash answers, censurings incur.
"Be thou the same, so may thou ever be,
"While others suffer, from all censure free.
Such rare effects this Model in him wrought,
As affability did steer his thought;
All his desires were how to give content,
And frame his actions to another bent
Than what he er'st affected; as in fine,
He was the choicest mirror in his time.
If then t* extol their Patrons, many please,
Wh^ store them with inferior gifts to these;
"All Sacred Poeans we are bound to give
"To HIM, by whom we love, by whom we live.
NEXT, vain Uperephanos, who still thought
That the world without him would be brought tonought;
For when the Dogge-starre raged, he used to cry,
"No other Atlas has the world but I.
"I am that only He supports the State;
"Cements division, shut^ up Ja^us gate;
"Improves the public f^me, chalks out the way
"How Princ^s should command, Subjects ob^y.
"I am that Lesbian rule directs each action,
"And rectifies the crooked line of faction.
"Naught passes my discovery, for my sense
"Exten^s it self to all intelligence.
"Yea, I mperswaded, whensoe're I die,
"(As wisest men cope with mortality)
"The greatest Statists that s^rvivors b^e
"Will make an Idoll-D^ity of m^e.
"For quickly would (...) fabri^ke quail,
"If my Atlanticke shoulder^ should ^ut f^ile
"To give't supportance: this's the very cause
"They s^ile me the Lycurgus of just laws;
"Fame my renown, consume whole Summer-d^yes
"In the relation of my Consul-praise.
This Aesculapius finds, and straight applies
Receipts unto his temples and his eyes;
A flatuous humor forthwith he extracts
From his enflamed stomach, which distracts
His intellect: and to recall ^is wit,
(For by a mad Dog he was lately bit)
He makes the Liver of the Dog be min^'d,
And in a silver-valley-fountaine rin^'d;
Which he prescribes him drink from day to day,
So by degrees his fury to allay.
This done, exactly done, he causes one
This Story is raised to his full height and postu^e, in that Historical
discourse, entitled, The Politic Leader.
To paint the plot of Tarquin and his Son;
When he in hidden Characters did show
How he should act the Gabian overthrow.
Where the highest Poppies in his Garden stood
He politikely pruned with his rod:
Implying the ablest Statesmen that had watched
Over the State the m^st* should soonest be dispatched.
But for such Poppies as did under-g^ow,
Those Poppies were but Puppies, let them go.
Under this Story he an Emblem made
Of Atlas by the world overlaide;
Who bore it up, but being out of breath,
The world and her Supporter fell therewith.
This Story having read, with th'Embleme too,
He found himself displaid, but knew not how.
Yet more he read, the more he might perceive
Himself so formed, no Artist could engrave
His Sculpture to more life; which to discuss,
He with himself in private argued thus.
"What might this Story mean by Poppy flowers?
"Or by those High-ones lopt by higher powers?
"By Poppies, Consuls (sure) implied be,
"And those pruned first, are highest in degree.
"These tender-rising flowers which lowest are,
"Imperious Tarquin bids his Sextus spare,
"They are below his censure; those who were
"Great in the worlds esteem, and popular,
"Must hop without an head, and learn to try
"The fate of greatness being doomed to die.
"Again, peruse this Emblem, and in it
"The ruin of an overweening wit.
"These, who presume in others disesteeme,
"To bring to pass whats'ere they vainly dream;
"Or to partake with others hold a scorn,
"Boasting that the State is on their shoulders borne;
"Are here by Atlas lively shadowed,
"And in them thy vainglory censured.
"See, see Uperephanos, thy condition
"Debl^zon'd in this Emblem of ambition!
"Thou held thy shoulders only fit to bear
"The State, and her declining body rear,
"Thou deemed no action meriting applause,
"Wherein thou were not styled the moving cause.
"Thou thought the public State could not subsist,
"Unless it did on thy supportance rest.
"Thus to thy self thy self an Idol was,
"And more adored than Ifis golden Ass:
"Whereas Themista well perceived by thee,
"Thy private crimes were not from censure free.
So well this Story and this Emblem wrought,
Uperephanos was so humble brought,
As he on Earth disvalu'd nothing more
Than what his vainest humor prized before.
More wise, but less conceited of his wit;
More pregnant, but less apt to humor it;
More worthy, 'canse he could agnize his want;
More eminent, because less arrogant.
In brief, so humbly-morally-divine,
He was esteemed the Non-such of his time.
If then for him who does us outward good,
We will not stick to hazard state and blood,
"All Sacred Paeans we are bound to give
"To HIM, by whom we love, by whom we live.
Next him Meilixos, such a starved one,
As he had nothing left but skin and bone.
The shady substance of aliving man,
Or object of contempt where er'e he came.
Yet had he able parts, and could discourse,
Press moving reasons, arguments enforce,
Expr^sse his readings with a comely grace,
And prove himself a Consul in his place.
But weak he was, though for his judgment strong,
And would not hold in any reason long:
For though he could to secret'st notions dive,
He held himself the simplest man alive.
So as in arguments he still would yield,
And to one mean in judgment leave the field.
Weak was his constitution, small his feature,
Ofeasie-pliant temper, facile nature;
Cold, aguish, and subject unto bleeding,
His radical humor dried with too much reading;
Yea, his weak health run on that dangerous shelfe,
His fe^ble corpse could scarce support it self.
And for his eyes, they did so ill bested him,
He could go no way but as others led him.
So as, often privately he would complain,
And tax his weakness too, but all in vain,
Why his desires in action fell so short,
Which to himself he questioned in this s^rt.
"How is it Meilixos? must thou ever fall
"From worse to worse by being Physical?
"Is there no hope of Cure, no help to Care,
"But still be ranked amongst those who weakest are?
"Must thou in silence live, retired die,
"And cloze thy days with this infirmity?
"Others can walk, discourse and reason too,
"And other noble actions bravely do:
"Thou none of all these Offices retains,
"But sitt'st Bench-mute with thy decayed brains.
"Where Is that Delinquent thou e're censured yet,
"That thou by Justice might opinion get?
"Nay, wherein has thy doom made defference
"'Twixt deepe-dyde guilt, and spotless innocence?
"Put out thy lamp then* which her light so smothers,
"It gives no luster to thy self nor others.
Great Aesculapius forthwith to prevent
Occasion of ensuing detriment,
Prepares his choice receipts to cheer his blood,
Extracts what is ill, and renovates the good.
Naught he omits to expedite his cure,
Whereof such may despair, are most s^cure.
All which performed (what cannot art effect?)
H^e shows himself a curious Architect:
Structures he frames, and in them Statues too
Of Inus, Iphiclus and many mo;
Where he devises Iphiclus to stand
On Inus shoulders; and at his command
To steer the Pinnace of a troubled State;
Meilixos looks, and laughs at this conceit;
Consults with reason, questions every doubt,
And longs to sift this Statue-morall out.
At last he finds the morall's meant by him,
And represents the state that he is in.
Which found, he makes a moral application
Unto himself, discoursing in this fashion.
"What Is meant, Meilixos, by this Statue here,
"Where dwarfish Inus does a Giant bear,
"The nervie Iphiclus? O be not blind!
"Thy feature in this Picture thou shall find.
"Each Consul is an Iphiclus of State,
"Who, when by weakness he will derrogate
"From the honor ^e retains; or judgment wave
"What his own mouth definitively gave;
"Or bend the model of impartial law,
"To the imperious frown of fear or awe;
"Or to Plebeian censure, ever rude,
"Give way, because there is a multitude:
"Then, then a Pigmeis shoulders him support,
"Because he falls in estimation short
"Of what the State expected at his hands,
"By giving way to popular commands.
"Lay off this weakness then; know thine own place;
"Let thine own actions give degree a grace.
"Prefer the just man's cause; advance his right;
"And censure favorites in Caesar's sight.
"Poize thy opinion; if it with justice stand,
"Maintain't against the Chieftaines of the Land;
"But if it want in weight, incline to his
"Whose scale more equal and impartial is.
"For as great weakness in that man appears,
"Who credulous, believes whats'ere he hears:
"So do we hold him too opiniona^e,
"Who deemes all wisdom treasured in his pate.
"Be humbly modest, and discreetly wise,
"Nor foolish, nor too prudent in thine eyes.
"For ^s the former strengthens ignorance,
"So does the latter taste of arrogance.
Twere rare now to imagine how this wrought
Upon Meilixos, and how soon it brought
His weak-inclining spirit to aspire
To reputation, and with strong desire
To feed more noble thoughts than he e'^e knew,
Before this Artist his presentment drew.
If we hi^ praises then so much display,
Who gives us health, or adds to life a day,
Or helps decayed beauty, or repaires
Our chop-falne cheeks, or Winter-molted hairs:
"All Sacred Paeans we are bound ^o give
"To HIM, by whom we love, by whom we live.
NEXT him Upotomos, one more severe,
Never purple wore in this inferior sphere;
Rough and distastefull was his nature still,
His life unsociable, as was his will.
Eris and Enio his two Pages were,
His train stern Apuneia used to bear.
Terror and thunder E^eho'd from his tongue,
Though weak in judgment, in opinion strong.
A fiery inflammation seized his eyes,
Which could not well be tempered any wise:
For they were bloud-shot, and so prone to ill,
As Basiliske-like, where e're they looked, they kill.
No Laws but Draco's with his humor stood,
For they were writ in Characters of blood.
His stomach was distempered in such sort,
Naught would digest; nor could he relish sport.
His dreams were full of melancholy fear,
Bolts, Halters, Gibbets hallowed in his Ear:
Fury fed nature with a little food,
Which ill concocted did him lesser good.
"I Will purge these Augean stables of the state,
"(Thus would he say) and make these Locusts shake
"Who hold themselves secure: where if our laws
"Cannot detect them, I shall mint some cause
"To bring them within lash of punishment;
"Admit they be sincerely innocent.
"If none should but Delinquents censured be,
"Good would turn bad through much impunitie.
"Beside^, that witty fable of the Cranes
"Implies no less than what our purpose aims:
" "If good be found in bad men's company,
" "The good with bad must suffer equally.
"For pregnant proofs, presumptions I will take,
"And open guilt of mere suspicion make.
"For trembling captives who are doomed to die,
"I mean to triumph over their misery.
"No word of comfort from my mouth shall come,
"But domineering language to their doom.
"For why! old age with new infirmities
"Upon my crazie joints so strongly seize,
"As long I cannot live: lose then no time,
"But of an error m^ke an heinous crime:
"That these Decoys who hope to trample over thee,
"May by thy rigid judgment go before thee.
"I muse at his relenting spirit sheds tears,
"When he the doom of any felon hears:
"My brest's of stronger temper; I would see
"A subject work so strange effects on me.
"No, no; my flaming eyes delighted are
"To see a troop of Rake-hels stand at bar
"Accused for odious facts, and hear them frame
"Fruitless excuses to their dying shame.
"Wherefinde I none through the circuit where I go
"Or in those Counties I Am deputed to,
"Want of employment does me much displease,
"Which makes me tax these supine Justices
"Of their remissness; or to their disgrace,
"They know not what belongs unto their place.
"Or, as I Am wont t'interpret actions still,
"People be there too simple to do ill.
"For loath would I be attributes to give
"Of doing good to the purest men that live.
"Nor be they worthy of those roabs they wear,
"Who in their office will not be severe.
This our experien'st Herbist having found,
And searched his strong distemper to the ground;
Salves he applies to cure his rankling wound,
And clear those vicious humors which abound.
Amongst which, the rar'st experiment of all,
Was taking of a red-worme from his gall,
Which fretted with such fury night and day,
As no receipt this passion could allay,
Till he h dop'ned him, and wrought his cure,
While he impatient, would no art endure.
No Parthian Tigre, mountain Lioness
Who hunts for him, who made her issulesse,
Could show more boundless fury; but in vain
Did this enchained Patient complain:
For to be cured although he did refuse,
Being fast bound, he could not will nor choose.
This done, and his distemper well allaid,
He caused a curious Orbell to be made,
Where Syracusan tyrants were portrai'd
And all their cruelties to life displayed.
Next this, Argestes in a frame lay under,
By divine justice struck from heaven with thunder;
One, who was thunder all, and never could give
Hope to an humhle penitent to live:
But held this irrelenting Tenet still,
"The way to cure a corrupt State s to kill.
In curious artfull manner these were drawn,
And to Upotomos awaking shown:
Whose now more piercing eye straight apprehends
Both what the Story and the Shrine intends;
Which to himself applied, he thus began
To tax himself, clean l ke another man.
"Heavens bless me! I have had a fearful dream,
"For I was swimming in a p^rple sterame
"Of blood which I have shed, and s^ill me thought,
"The more I sunk, the more I upward sought.
"Peering at last a shore, from th'curled Maine,
"A flash of fire straight pasht ^ee down again.
"And now awake, what see I but the same,
"My self displ^yed in Argestes, frame!
"Here Syracusan tyrants show to me
"What they affected, brutish cruelty.
"There, stern Argestes tells me by his fate,
"That cruelty's the object of Joves hate.
"O then Upotomos, in time repent,
" Ista liquescens pluvia, lavet peccati diluvia. Doleat reus, ut deleat Deus.
And grieve thou art not thoroughly penitent!
"Drench thy dry soul in rivolets of tears,
"Enhearse thy sable soul in lasting fears,
"Embathe thy panting heart in floods of grief,
"Enroll thy self amongst all mourners, chief;
"Water thy bed with penitential showers,
"And for wild weeds, bring forth delicious flowe^
"For never did the Sun yet shine upon
"That wretch, who sinned more than thou have do^
""Thus for each drop of blood unjustly shed,
""Let sighs for sins with sands be numbered.
Such were the fruits these choice receipts produc'^
He holds himself by Eris much abused:
Her therefore he discards, and vows to be
A p^sident of affability.
A milde-sweet presence forth with he puts on,
And with that presence a delightful tongue;
A melting heart, a moist distilling eye,
An open ear to hear a Plaintiffes cry.
If a Physician then such bounties have,
From whom we hope we may some health receive;
That if his purges do us any good,
He means to purge our purse as well as blood:
"All Sacred Paeans we are bound to give
"To HIM, by whom we purely love, and live.
NEXT Amerimnos, not the least, though last,
Amongst these active spirits slept fo f^st,
As the drowsy Dormouse in her shady cave
Could more secure retirement never have.
Two holes in's siege the Hedge-hogge reareth forth,
One to the South, the other to the North:
Now when the South Wind blows he stops that hole,
And turns him Northward, to the Northern pole;
Again, when the North Wind blows, he leaves his booth,
Steps up that hole, and turns him to the South.
And such an Urchin Amerimnos was,
Who little cared how precious time did pass,
So he might sleep secure, his palate please,
And for his Honor get a Writ of ease.
But so addicted was he unto sloth,
He Would fall sometimes a sleep with meat in's mouth.
His driveling chin did with his bosom meet,
With beard to belly, belly to his feet:
Which was stretched forth to that extensive breed,
His two Supporters did no Pent-house need.
So as, none would have taken him at that time
F^r any other than a Porcupine.
Wise Aesculapius caused his man to shake him,
But no exte^nall motion could awake him;
So as he found all such enticements vain,
For if he waked, ^e fell asleep again.
An Ep^meilian Julip he applies
Unto his breasts, his temples, and his eyes,
With cheerful perfumes, wrought by choicest art,
To re-dispose the intellectual part.
All viscid humors he extracted quite,
To give his understanding cleerer light.
And that his practice more success might have,
He formed Silenus sleeping in a Cave;
Fruits and delicious Liquours touched his lip,
Yet would he not bow down his neck to sip.
Near to Cave a speckled Aspicke came
With poisonous sting to wound the sleeping man,
But an industrious Emmet did prevent
The envious Aspicks venomous intent:
For she awaked him with a cheerful charm,
So as the Aspicke did him little harm.
This Amerimnos eyes; which makes him see
Into himself and his stupidity.
This he finds meant by him, for now his sense
Had shaken off her former drowsiness:
Thus to himself then his discourse he fits
By recollecting his dispersed wits.
" Silenus and an As^icke! pray thee eye
"This quaint device, and see what't may imply.
"Slothful Silenus while he sleeps in sin,
"Becom^s assaulted by an Aspicks sting.
"But the Emmet, by which diligence is meant,
"Awakes Silenus, foiles the Asps intent.
"Apply this to thy self, let industry
"Be still thine Harbinger to Usher thee;
"Hate what thouer'st affected, barraine sloth,
"Take no delight in a delicious tooth;
"Let State-employment reave thee of thy rest,
"That thou with honor may repair thy nest;
"Think thy self richest when thou live best,
"So shall this conscience be a cheerful guest.
And his resolves he brought to such success,
As all his actions famed his worthiness:
Rich was the treasure of his well-spent time,
Wherein no day without a virtuous line.
Pure the composure of his well wrought mind,
To public works of piety confined.
What Trophies are we then for HIM to rear,
Whose care has cured these Statists we have here:
And of distempered men brought them to feel
Both their own griefs, and of the Commonweal?
For if we them reward who have a care
T'intend our bodies, or our States repair;
Far ampler bounties wee*re to render HIM,
Who gives repair unto our state within.
"T^iumphant Paeans then wee're bound to give
"To HIM, by whom we love, subsist, and live.
Argument.
Themista seems at first not to be persuaded that Cures of such difficulty
could so expeditely be effected; She falls into an admiration of her own
happiness, with a resolved tender of thankfulness, if Harmonius relation
become seconded by success; She gives especial direction, that her Consuls
be admitted to her presence, to express by their discourse, apparent
arguments of their Cure; Metoxos, the ancientest of her Consuls, is called
forth, and declares the manner of his Cure, which he ascribes to Aesculapius
incessant Care; He disclaimes his former folly, and appeals to Isotes, whose
company he only admits to relate his recovery.

PROSE I.
Do I sleep? or waking, am I deluded? Is it possible that our Metoxos should
be recovered? Is that Sacred thirst of gold in him so soon quenched? Surely,
cures so difficult and habitually inveterate, cannot so speedily be effected.
We say, "No task of importance may admit a speedy dispatch: Yet this, of all
others, most intricate, is to a short limit confined. That he, who could
distinguish of no other color but gold; and held no other color worthy use in
Heraldry; should now hold it adulterate for abusing the State.

Rare experiments, trust me, so they be ^eall, and not delude me. We know not
what to think of it, lest we should perplex our thoughts too much by
embarking our self upon it. Yet, we have heard, if any one infected with the
Iaundise, shall but look upon the bird Icterus, he forthwith recovers and
regaines his former beauty and color; why should I then doubt, but upon these
experiments, which the sacred secrecy of art has discovered, that my long
distempered Consul Metoxos should despair of recovery? Why may not these
terrible Presentiments work so much upon his fancy, as the impression of them
may avert him from what he most affected; and adhere to tha^ which before he
least relished? which effect, should we see produced, to what height of
admiration might we be raised? Nor should we close our receipt of happiness,
without a resolved tender of thankfulness; could Harmonius relation (seconded
with such native action) become seconded by an answerable succes^e. But fit it
were, that what we hear confirmed by report, we see made good by intercourse
to those, with whom we are to address our discourse. We purpose therefore to
give especial direction, that these our Consuls be admitted to our presence,
to express by their discourse, apparent arguments of their Cure, and
sovereign effects of our Care. And that this may be done the better, we will
call each of our Consuls personally in their order.

Having said thus, she gave especial directions, tha^ Metoxos, the ancien^est
of all her Consuls, should be called forth; whom she no sooner saw
approaching, than she i^agined how it was with him. For his very outward
posture expressed an alteration in his temper. And al^ ^he better to try
conclusions on her recovered Patritian; she caused sundry pieces of gold to
be scattered in the way as he ascended up to their Judicial Throne;
purposely to see whether that metal, wherewith his captived af^ections were
^ormerly so much; not only restrained, but enchained, would take his eye or
no; but all these were too inferior baits for so rectified a spirit. These he
valued equally as dust; and with a noble command, or princely contempt of all
despicable objects, advancing himself with a graceful presence toward
Themista, applied himself to her command. Who desirous to gather by his
discourse, what she had collected by his presence, willed him to declare the
manner of his cure, to the e^d ^he might render a more ample requital of
Aesculapius care.

Madam (quoth Metoxos) to relate every particular ingredience used by this
divine Artist, would so enlarge the extent of my discourse, as the relation
would appear no less useless to the Hearer, than tedious to the Relator. To
avoid then all frivolous and fruitless ambages, which are usually so far from
dir^cting or enlightening the understandi^g, as they are made rather for
distracting or burthening our apprehension, I shall (...) return unto your
Grace ^ just account of the benefits I have received, the incomparable comforts
I have conceived; all which may be easily gathered by those many infirmities
whereto before I stood engaged, and whereof, (thanks to the Supreme Deity) I
am now perfectly cured.

It is not unknown unto my Soveraigness^, with what distempers I was seized;
insomuch as, I never came to the Bench of Justice, but I showed some apparent
argument or other of my weakness: Which caused some of my nearest to imagine,
that I was surely either bewitched or possessed. Your Sacred Medall (the
exquisitest Masterpiece of art that ever Arcady produced) being molded of
pure gold did so sympathize with my partiall-gilt nature, as I could never
look upon the Statue, but my teeth did water: No other Object could take me,
so much was I devoted to that Plebeian Idolatry. As for my hands, I could never
shut them, so much had hope of gain enlarged them: for I imagined, if they
were shut, how could they partake in any booty, or receive any competible share
in a Clients enforced bounty. For my Lungs, they were so decayed, as an
Asthmaticall Apnaea had surprised them. Besides, a dangerous swelling in my
throat, when Saturn had predominance over the Clientall regiment; with a
desperate Migrim, which averted mine Ear from the Suit of a just, but poor
Complainant, daily threatened a dissolution to this my weak earthly Structure.
Yet could these constant Nuntio's of my frailty, little weane me from mine
accustomed folly. For though age had wrought many deep furrows in my face; and
sundry growing infirmities incident to age, had enfeebled nature, and engaged
me to a continuate distemper: ye^ in this my decrepit doting ag^, was I
infinitely taken with three impudent Curtezans; whose wooing-winning
enticements had so far prevailed with me, as that day seemed tedious, which I
spent not in Philia's, Du^noia's, or Analeutheria's company. Which, though some
thought I did purposely to improve and enrich my state; sure I am, their
amorous embraces, and incessant attendance, much weakened and impaired my
strength. Now observe the rare effects of this divine art! By the benefit I
received from Aesculapius, to whose especial Care your Grace recommended our
Cure, I loath nothing more than what I did formerly love; my thirst, which
before was only for Gold, now extends solely to the public good. Now, would
your Ladyship know the means which brought me first to an hate of this fury!
Be pleased ^o hear me, and you shall receive a true relation from me. After
such time, as this divine Artist Aesculapius had prepared my body, and applied
diverse sovereign receipts for my more speedy recovery; and amongst others,
certain gilded pills, which procured in me so violent a vomit, as I could not
for long time aft^r look upon that Object, but I did highly distaste it: He
bethought himself by what means he might work the deepest impression upon
my imagination; which he observed to be so clouded and troubled, as nothing
came from me, but distractedly and indisposedly uttered. He observed, as the
Eyes were the members of the body, so they were the windows of the mind; nay,
that the Eye was a living glass, or such a representative mirror, as by
reflection of conceit, the Delinquent might soonest come to the knowledge,
acknowledgement and amendment of his error. For this end he d^vised and
artfully contrived certain curious Emblemes presented to life; which were
discovered unto me in an Ovall; where I might apparently see a Picture, as
near resembling mine own person, in favor and feature, as could be imitated
by art, or first initiated by nature. No part of all mine habit undisplayed; no
action or gesture by me used, but there presented. So as, in very truth, I
either thought that there was some other Metoxos besides* me; or else that
some had assumed Metoxos habit and person, purposely to delude me. But how do
you think was the posture of this picture framed? In what manner disposed?
This Metoxos, as he was thus portrayed and personated, seemed to me bound to
a flaming stake; and those three Curtezans, on which I so much doated while I
was distempered, standing there like distracted Furies, haled down whole
Laddles of moulten Gold down his throat; ever and annon bellowing forth these
words with a fearful voice; Quench thy thirst Metoxos; here is gold for thee;
partiality deserves such a partiall-gilt bounty. This Presentment did not a
little startle me; so as comparing this feature with mine own; his action
gesture and posture with mine own; those three Curtezans, which I tendered as
mine own, with those exquisitest torments inflicted upon that Image which
resembled mine, as nearly as I mine own; I begun to recollect my discatered
senses, and in this manner to expostulate with my self.

Metoxos so fully to life portrayed! And my whole life in this image of Metoxos
so lively displayed? Sure there is something in it, which, as yet, I little
dream of. There is, questionless, some secret mysterious Moral cov^rtly
shadowed in this Presentment: well, I purpo^e to dive farther yet into the
depth of this Aenigmaticall Riddle. Discuss then each particular, to the end
thou may become the more authenticke Expositor. What may seem to be meant
by these three Curtezans, and those Laddles of moulten gold, which they are
incessantly pouring down the throat of this personated Metoxos? Are not these
the real personages of those amorous Curtezans, which thou sometimes so
miserably affected? Yet, are these they, by whom Metoxos becomes woefully
tormented. But whence the cause? Eye the impreze, and it will inform thee: FOR
PARTIALITY. Examine then every circumstance, and see if the shadow agree not
with the substance. Reflect upon thy self, Metoxos, and observe well if these
have not proper allusion to thee! Thine own form thou here see
undistinguishably co^curring; thy three amorous Dalilahs attending and
tormenting; with Partiality, the cause producing, why these torments are
inflicting. Consider likewise, how torments are ever inflicted, by that subject
whereon we stand most affected. And what was it Metoxos, that in the whole
course of thy distempered justice, thou most affected? What was it whereto thou
stood most engaged? Was it not Gold, Metoxos? yes sure; that was the bait which
did only take me: It was my use to poise the worth of the cause, by the weight
of the purse. Gold was the Cement, which souldred Partiality with Judgment. O
divine Emblem! This shall work more rare effects upon my corrupted sen^e,
than any other Physical ingredience. It shall be my constant resolve to
loath, what I did so miserably love; that I may fall in love, with what I did
so desperately loath. Discretion shall give direction to my affection; I
purpose henceforth never so intentively to fix upon the bye, as to become
forgetful of the maine. These presentiments tendered me by so judicious and
exquisite an Artist, shall by the power of him that made me, work such
impr^srons in me, as no time shall raze out the memory of so impressive a
character; nor decline me from being just, for either lucre, fear or favor.

Nor was this Emblem only there expressed; but Midas likewise, with his Asses
ears, to life presented; who desiring whatsoever he touched, might to Gold be
turned, received his wish in his dish, and so for want of natural nourishment,
became famished. But this wrought no such effect upon my conceit, as did the
former: for so strangely was I unnaturalized, or estranged rather from my
na^ive and inbred disposition, as nothing appeared more distasteful to my
sight, than the Object of Gold* ever dreaming of those fearful torments,
which those my darling Dalilahs, complete Curtezans, inflicted upon tha^
Picture, which so nearly re^embled Metoxos feature.

These sovereign effects partly derived from those precedent Receipts, partly
from these impressive Emblemes; made me remember that Physical Maxim so
often delivered, by Aesculapius our great Professor: When a man bleeds at the
nose, and through abundance of blood, is brought in danger of his life, the
Physician lets him blood in his arm, to turn the course of the blood another
way: If love issue out in too violent a stream, it is to be cooled by a
temperate expostulation with fancy: or else, by fixing our eye upon some more
at^ractive Object, divert the course of that madding Passion.

Now Madam, such shall ever be my constant humility, as I must solely ascribe
this incomparable benefit of my Cure, to Aeculapius incessant Care: Whose
exquisite art produced this incredible work. It rests then, that howsoever my
Soveraignesse be pleased to dispose of me, i^ shall be my fixed intention,
utterly to di^claime my former folly: While I appeal to Isotes whose company I
only admit to rela^e my discovery.

Argument.
Isotes in musical airs relates the incredible effects of Metoxos Cure; the
modera^i on or attemperature of his desires; his distaste of all such meats as
bred in him any distemper; And how much The mista might improve her own, by
advancing his honor.

POESY II.
SEE, Lady, see, Metoxos state
Transformed from what it was of late!
That J^undise eye, which could behold
No object but refined gold;
That hand, which like a thirsty grave,
Was ever open to receive;
That heart, whose native tincture spilt,
Was changed into a partiall-gilt;
That tongue, which knew not how to speak,
Till chinke made way the string to break:
Can look, touch, like, and make discourse,
With free and unconstrained force.
Such rare effects your Grace shall find^
In cure of your Me^oxos mind.
Virtue his spotless breast inspires
With moderation of desires;
Poor though in state, his mind is pu^e,
Stored with the sweet attemp'rature
Of choice st graces that can suit
A man to make him absolute.
What meats in him distemper bred,
His taste has quite dis-relished.
Naught he affects but what may give
Means to direct him how to live.
Receive him then into your grace,
His virtues will deserve his place.
Nor can you ever more improve
Your honor, than by good men's love:
For when your grace to these is shown,
You give improvement to your own.
Advance him then; it is not chance
But choice which merit should advance.
Argument.
Themista, sufficiently persuaded by what she hears, joys much in M^toxos
recovery; She causes Epimo^os, her second Consul, to advance himself before
her; he returns an ample testimony of Aescul^pius divine Theorie; in a
sensible and passionate manner, he discovers the effects of his former
infirmity, with pregn^nt demonstrances of his recovery; and appeals to
Epieices, whose society he only affects, to return his opinion.

PROSE II.
NO more, Isotes, (said Themista) we are now altogether confident of Metoxos
successive Cure; whom to adva^ce, (if his infirmity admit no relapse) shall be
our especial Care. Nor can we joy in any melody comparable to this of Metoxos
recovery. But we will see (quoth she) whether this happy effect has befallen
the rest of our Consuls; and with that, causing Epimonos, her Secondary, to
advance himself before her; She willed him to return the manner of his
recovery; with what especial receipts were applied to cure his Malady.
Epimonos, whose long* grounded pertinacy, hade made most of his friends
despair of remedy; in an affable and generous manner, making three low Congies
before he approached Themista's presence, addressed himself in this discourse
unto his Soveraignnesse.

Do not (imparalleld Princess) take me now for that peevish and perverse
Epimonos, whom I did once too actually personate; which Presentment made me
most unfortunate. I have now put off that habit; nor will I ever (by divine
assistance) reassume it. I confess, Madam; nor shall it repent me to confess
it, so I repent me of it, and resolve never to incur it, that my long
habituate infirmity, by continuance, had brought me to a mere insensiblity.
Such a stiffnesse, or unpliablenesse I found in every part: that though I felt
my self unwealdly; every faculty most averse from performing her proper duty:
yet in ^his case (see my prevaricate misery!) would not I either be led or
driven by any. The more I was moved, the less I felt; so insensible grew I of
my present estate. An incessant buzzing I had got in my head, which barrocadoed
mine Ear from inclining to any ones opinion but mine own. This that
ever-living Artist, to whose divine Cure we were all recommended, had no
sooner observed, than he prescribed such choice Physical directions to cure
my growing infirmity, that I became within short space to have some little
feeling of my self, from which I was before so estranged, as I held my self
most healthful, when most distempered; best resolved, when most distracted;
and seemingly in my perplexed estate most happy, when most distressed.

My Morning draughts, which used to be F^ntineake, were resolved into
Diet-drinks, strongly tempered with the cooling juice of Eucampes, with other
simples immixed ^o allay the distempered heat of my blood; and to restore
nature so much weakened. Having made this introduction to his Cure, and now set
me on my feet, by the continuance of his diligence and care; to the end I
might come to a more full survey and discovery of mine own folly, he framed
this device: That one Demophon, who was naturally of an humor different to all
others, should be in a Shrine portrayed, and in a window presented, where I
made my Prospect. But so nearely resembling mine own Person, was this featu^e,
as I should disclaim mine own P^ysiognomy, to confess any resemblance liker.
Long and intentively did I eye the Picture. Nothing could I find in it, but
might personate my self; nor ought in my self, which might not allude to it.
So as, not able to contain my self any longer; nor to conceal my thoughts
from my picture; like another Narcissus, not doting but doubting, or
perplexedly discoursing with his shadow, I address my demands in this manner.

How Is this? One sweating in ashade, and shaking in the Sun! This sure, is
meant by Demophon, yet does the Emblem bear the figure of Epimonos. And
rightly so it may; for who ever, being man, was more averse from the nature,
more contrary to the humor of man? What was it that eve^ yet plea^ thy
conceit, which thou saw pleasing to another? Or what ever afforded thee
delight, and complide wi^h another conceit? Nay, un rivet the secret Cabine^
of thy retired'st thoughts, and observe how much thou have abused the State,
depraved thy Consul-sea^ by adhering too much to thy self, and perverting
justice, by opposing others to please thy self? What Edict did thou ever
hear published? What Direction for State government ever divulged? What
Judgment upon a convicted Delinquent pronounced? Or what Act soever publicly
concluded, which thou traduced not, because by others more wise, but less
opinionate, approved? What a strange Mould, Epimonos, was this, wherein thou
were casten, thus to dislike, what others liked; thus to affect, what others
hated? was thy wit either so quick and pregnant? or thy judgment so strong
and constant? Or thine experience so transcendent? Or thy person so precedent,
as all others (...) to (...) to thin^ (...)? No, this was not it, but thine
own^ (...)-will which made th^thus opion^te. O how harshis his condition, whose
sole delight is Opposition! What can h^ (...) that (...) give content; when
nothing but his own dev^e pleases his con^it? O the folly of a poor wo^mlin?
Who, i^ ^ise, can ^teeme thee for more wise, in seeing thee so desi^ous to
oppose? Woman's strength consists in Tongue; should a man's consist in Will?
Protogenes could never hold his hand from the Picture; nor thou an envious eye
from another labor. Is it wisdom enough to traduce, or to oppose what others
approve? Be the Antipodes in this only happier than we, because they walk in
an opposite course against us? Say, say, Epimonos, how many poor Delinquents;
nay, mere innocents, has thy pertinacy doomed to death; for no other cause,
but that thy Colleague^ lenity (...) life? Again, to how many has thy
averseness breathed life, to whom Consuls vote, Commons voice, and the mouth of
Justice had doomed death? It is the saying of a Philopher, that every one
should have a f^iend, and an enemy; that his friend may tell him the truth;
and hi^ enemy make him more observant of his ways. Yea, that his friend might
seasonably correct him; and his enemy by his indig^ities exercise him. Bu^ how
^arre became I e^tranged from this Philosophical Tenet! for as he^ could not
possibly be my friend, who applied not himself to my opinion; so could he
be no less than mine enemy, who sought to mould me to his instruction. My
friend and Monitor he could not be; how might he then correct me? My Enemy
and improver he could not be; how might he then exercise me? It is true,
that the Prienean Sage wished rather to be a Judge amongst ^is ^oes (...) his
friends: and his reason was, that the affection, and intimacy, he bore to his
friends, might incline him to connivence; whereas, the jealousy h^e had of his
foes, would cause him to be more cautious in the ex^cution of Justice. But
what power had these respects with me? It was neither friend that I esteemed,
nor foe that I feared, but my darling Will, whereto I beoame solely wedded; and
which to second, my best endeavors were ever addressed. I have oftentimes
wondered at the patience of an indulgent Magistrate, to give such (...) of
speech even to a pretended Delinquent: or to suffer himself to be opposed by
way os reason; as if his place were not of sufficient strength to exercise his
power without farther reason. And as children are tied to rules in their
arguing; so I held them childish Consuls, who stood confined to these
restrictions in their judging. But now, (thanks to Aesculapius d^vinest
Theorie!) my outward conformity closing so sweetly wi^h inward unity, may
assure my Soveraignesse of an infallible recovery. I am taught now, how to
sweat in the Sun, and shake in the shade; to submit my opinion to others
judgment; to disclaim mine own for insufficient; to desist from standing too
long in argument, and to incline to reason, whenever produced. All which, as
ample testimonies of Aescul^pius Care, and pregnant demonstrances of my Cu^; I
have here no less briefly, than plainly returned* to you, divine Lady, with
the manner of my recovery, the benefit whereof I freely ascribe to your
furtherance and bounty.

Nor shall you ever have cause to tax me (if so you please to employ me)
either of pertinacy, or of any il^egality; for by all my hopes I vow, since
these incredible effects were wrought on me; I have disvalued mine own
opinion; been so jealous of mine own weakness; as I ^ave applied my self to
nothing more, than a seeming privacie or retiredness from business. Howbeit,
as I am not borne for my self, but for her honor, by whose means I am now
come to myself, Madam engage me, wherein, if you shall conceit that my
employments may fall short from perfecting ought which may redound to your
reputation: I shall here become silent, by a modest restraint of
selfeapprovement, and ingeniously appeal to Epieices opinion.

Argument.
Epieices reports how much Epimonos is altered; how his unsociable nature is
attempered; how observant he is to all, and how desirous to improve the good
of all; and admiring how Art could possibly season pertinacy with so much
Lenity: He assures Themista, that she may rest confident in the affiance of
so constant a servant.

POESY III.
MAdam observe, if you can find a purer mind!
Or with selecter graces filled or less selfe-will'd!
How much he is altered in state from that of late!
Harsh was his nature, now as mild as any child;
Unsociable once was he as one could be;
Now he is full of sweet remorse and choice discourse,
And of such a temper too as I may vow;
None would take him, to see him pass, for the man he was.
Observant is he unto all that deigne to call,
Naught here on Earth more wins his love than to improve
The good of all, which if be gain h^ h' (...) his aim.
Much I admire how Art could season want of reason,
Or that pertinatious spirit should inheris
Such a true Candor by mere art as to impart
Such rich rays to mortal man as he now can.
Accept him then, dread Soveraignesse, for Countreye bless,
F^ now you may affi^ce have naught can dep^ave
This constant confidence in him, who weaned from sin,
"His noble temp'^ature will show
"His service to the State and You.
Argument.
Themista over-joyed to hear such a successive change; and wishing the like
effect in the rest of her patient Consuls, wi^s Vperephanos to appear in
public presence; whose humble obeisance infinitely takes her. He is so far
from preferring himself before others, as he esteems himself the
unworthiest of all others. He blusheth at his former impertinences, and
strengthens his intentions with Divine resolves; He vows to admit none but
Tapeinos into his company, to whose judgment he appeals in his recovery.

PROSE III.
A Maxim there is (said Th^mista) and we find it now fitly closing with our
conceit: "what we affect, exceeds all estimate; Now, what was it on Earth we
more affected, than to see this our selfe^pinionate and distempered Epinomos so
rectified. as to conform his will to another bent? What might comparably so
overjoy us as to become an ocular witn^sse of such a successive, but unexpected
change? Never did teeming moth^r conceive more comfort in the view of ^er long
labored birth; nor the hazardou^ Merchant in his safe arrival to land; nor
the industrious Husbandman, who is frui^full in hope, before he partake the
benefit or fruit of his Crop, than we in the apprehension of this so much
desired change. It is most true* that without the influence of divine grace, we
can do nothing, no more than the bird can fly without wings, the ship sail
without wind or tide, the body move without the soul. From which* how much is
he estranged, whose opinionate pertinacy him confident of his own makes
strength, and consequently a dangerous Pione^ to his own estate. We know right
well, that it is one thing to fall into light sins through occasion only, or
human^ frailty: and another thing ^o fall through affected negligence and
security: bu^ worst of all to fall through a precipitate will, and malltious
obstinacy.

Needs then must it overjoy us, to ^ee one (and one whom we held so tender)
after so perilous a fall to recover, and in his recovery, quite to shake off
his distemper. And may heaven so propitiously smile on our wishes, that the
like effect my be produced from the rest of these our patientConsuls; whose
late infirmities, as they did much afflict us, so shall the visible arguments
of their recovery, no less entrance us.

This said, she willed Vperephanos, (whose Cure was conceived to be of
greatest difficulty) to appear in public presence, and show some apparent
effects of his attempered malady. Whose humble Obeisance, at the very first
blush, infinitely took her: Wondering more at his lowly carriage, affable
countenance, and winning observance, than at any of all her recovered Patients.
But being again required by his Soveraignesse to relate the mediate or
effectual means for cure of his distemper; with a composed gravity, and
well-seasoned humility, he proceeded in this manner.

It is not unknown (Madam) to any personage o^ quality within your whole
State, how that my distemper was not natural but accidental; for a long time
did I sit in the seat of Justice; du^ing which time I appeal to such as then
knew me, whether I discharged not my Place with all integrity and
uprightness. Virtue I ever cherished; Vice I chastised; the good I encouraged;
the evil I disheartened, and the public good secured. But being in that
populous State where I was, retaining that name which I had, and transported
with that applause I heard; one morning walking forth to take the air, (no
common air, but the breath of popular applause) it chanced that I was bit by a
mad Dog, (a prick eared Cur of Phro^ema's Litter) whose poisonous fang begun
so to rankle, as the venom dispersed it self through every part, till at last
it seized on my very brain; and so drove me into a miserable distraction. "I
thought every shady-tufted branch, forced by a pleasing gale, bowed it self
with a low salute to give me a Congie. Those ayerie Quiristers, the Birds,
chanted and chirped out my praise. In a word, so terribly was I madded, so
highly distempered, as my fellow-Consuls forbore to sit with me; my
intimately-professed friends withdrew themselves from me, after such time as
they had labored to win and weane me, but could not prevail with me.
Only some Alleyes of Thopeias, meer^ insinuating Foists, (as I afterward well
perceived) clunge near me, feeding, like Horseleaches, on my distemper; and
raising themselves by my ruin and dishonor. Yet were these my friends on
which I fawned; the shadows which I followed; the Snakes I fostered: all which
found fresh fuel to my fury; new matter to my humor, to feed my distemper.
Thus did I rove; thus did I range; no constant nor settled thought lodged in
me. I was so blown up with the bladder of Alazoneuma, as I mounted aloft with
the wings of self-conceit; imagining this inferior Orb to be a Spheere too
low for my unconfined spirit. What others (were it never so useful to State,
or conducing to public good) propounded, my irreiragable opinion slighted.
For that dear Minion whom I so religiously served, and to whose observance I
had endeered my nearest resolves, had so bewitched me, as no power could
countermand the power of my will; or encroach so far on the bounds of my
irresistible authority; as those whose better tempered thoughts well deserved
priority in opinion, were disesteemed by the precipitate torrent of my ambition.

Being thus carried on the wings of the wind, I became so hardened through the
habit of mine infirmity, as nothing better relished me, than to feed my
distemper with whatsoev^r might best agree with the quality of mine indisposed
humor. But this had our exquisite, and fame-eternized. Artist no sooner
discovered in me, than according to your directions (most divine Soveraignesse)
he addressed himself to my Cure. Which to effect the better, he first sought
out the cause of my distemper: this found, he applied such sovereign receipts
to my long exulcerate sore, as the expeditenesse of his Cure, expressed the
infiniteness of his Care: all which (to observe in my discourse some
methodicall decency or order) was performed in this manner. He first applied
to me certain medicines of a corrading quality, to bring me to a more
sensible feeling of my self; for all that time, wherein I labored of my
distemper, I had no feeling at all of my infirmity, and therefore indifferent,
or rather secure for any remedy. For being bit (as I said before) by a mad
Dog, whose rancorous and envenomed tooth had spread a dangerous malignant
humor through every vein of mine infected body; that uncomparable Artist
caused the Dogs liver to be smally minced, and with the prime leaves of the
low shrub Tapeinotes, to be mixed: which was my breakfast for many Mornings
together, till I begun to have some little feeling of my distemper. But
subject I was ever and anon to fearful relapses and recidivations: Which my
Physician soon perceiving, caused me for certain days together to be tied
chi^ne deep in Lazarllio's Poole, where I was kept to a low Diet, purposely to
cool my inflamed blood, and qualify my violent distemper, occasioned by the
infection of my Liver. For I must freely confess, that an ill Liver was the
only occasion o^ all my distemper. By this time had I suffered many a cold
Bath: so as my blood became cooled; my inflammation ceased, my corrupt Liver
restored; while one day, in a private Arbor where I usually reposed, after my
time of recovery, I might behold a curious Tablet, purposely devised by
Aesculapius especial direction, as I afterward perceived. Wherein was
engraven Tarquinius Superbus, to his full body; in his posture walking, and
with a little rod lopping the tops of Poppies: while on the other side of this
Tablet, stood Atlas supporting the world; but under his burden, at the first
seemingly fainting, and afterward utterly failing and falling.

Having seriously fixed mine eye on these Statues, I begun to reflect upon my
self, and to examine mine own thoughts, whether there were not something that
might have proper relation to my self in the delineature of those features:
And thus I privately conversed with mine own affections.

Say, Vperephanos, is there nothing here presented to thine eye, which thou
may not u^efully convey to thine heart! Is not this very Tablet, a mirror of
thy late distempered humor? Can thou eye this Tablet, and not discern thy
self in it? Or observe this Emblem, and peruse it without a blush, seeing it
displayes thine own shame? Can thou eye these mounting Poppies, whose height
surpass others, how soon they are pruned; and can thy boundless ambi^ion or
selfe-admiring hold it self secured? By these Poppies were shadowed eminent
Peers, whose rising height was Tarquins eternal hate; so as, their height was
the sole occasion of their sinister fate. Inferiors were secure, while these
^uffered; exempt from danger, while these perished. Had their heads never
mounted above others, they had been as safe from peril as others. Apply this
Emblem to thy self; for Narcissus never had a fuller view of his own beauty
in the Fount, by which he perished; than thou have here of thine own
deformity, by which thou may be truly cautioned. For say, Vperephanos, who
ever mounted higher in self-conceit? Who more selfe-admiring, or others less
esteeming? yet in this thou fell short of their goodness and happiness, whom
thou observest in this Emblem shadowed. For the^e Pe^res whom Tarquin gave
direction to his Sextus, in so covert and dark a manner to cut off, were not
only great, but good. Their glory was their Countries honor, which they ever
labored to advance by their own danger. Their desires had a more glorious
Object, than popular praise: so as, with a sweet, though a sad Evening, they
closed their days. Whereas, they delight was not to be really good, nor
improve the State, but to be great, though it were to the ruin and subversion
of the State. O the misery of an hot and high spirit! Where our own aims are
merely titular, affecting nothing more than to be popular. Reflect then,
unhappy Vperephanos upon thine own disposition, and in this Emblem, eye the
discovery of thine own person. Desire rather to be ranked amongst those low
Tamrisks, than rising Poplars. But if this Embl^me, or historical allusion can
work no deep impression on thee; observe that por^raiture of Atlas, and then
see if thy life be not personated in that Fable. Atlas is here shrinking
under his burden: and to whom may this allude more properly than thy self? For
how long, (miserably-deluded soul) have thou supposed out of thine arrogant,
and selfe-admiring conceit, that the whole Fabric of this Universe solely
leaned on thy shoulders; and that it could not subsist without thy supportance?
Resolve then into tears; Pride not thy self in thy distemper, seeing fools
and madmen laugh at thine humor. Be so far now from preferring thy self
before ot^rs, that thou esteem thy self the worst of all others. Blush at thy
former folly; and those friends which thou have lost by pride, regaine by
humility. Strengthen thy intentions with divine resolves; that nothing may
work more on thy mind, than redeeming of time: which, by how much more
precious, by so much more carefully employed. In a word, seem not to be good,
unless thou be that which thou ^eemest: for semblance of goodness,
howsoever it deceive the eye of the beholder, it ever asper seth most blemish
on the owner, when Policy hat^ lost her vizard, hypocrisy her color.

Thus, Madam, to my self I discoursed; and thus eve^ since have I resolved.
Nor is it my desire, that your Grace should only rely on my relation; or give
such easy credit to my pretended conversion, as to receive no other
approvement: for I shall no less humbly than f^eely appeal to Tapeinos his
judgment, whom I religiously vow, only to admit into my company, to deliver
his opinion touching my recovery.

Argument
Tapeinos proves how happy it is to be humbled, that they may more sensibly
feel the maladies to which they are affected; None more unhappy than he who
never felt adversity; The way to weal, is ingeniously to acknowledge our own
want; Cedars will never remember that they were once Shrubbes; Promotion
declares what men be, and humility informs them what they should be. He
concludes Vperephanos happy by his fall: being thereby made apt to supply
wherein before he did most fail. He admires his temper, and commends him to
Themista's service, as one deserving honor.

POESY IV.
HOw happy is his fate
Who humbled, becomes wise,
Contented with his state,
He seeks no more to rise?
His fall has made him feel
Those maladies he, had,
And sensibly to ^eale
Those humors which were bad:
Else would they never correct
Those humors they affect.
More hapless none (...) he,
Who Swims in worldly bliss,
And holds adversity
Estranged from him and his;
The way to weal, is then
In plenty and in scant
By curbing Selfe-esteeme
T'acknowledge our own want*
But Cedars brook the worst
To hear thei'r Shrubs at first.
Promotion is the glass
Declares what mortals be,
But how they hence should p^sse
Informs humility.
Then rightly may I call
Uperephanos State
More happy by his fall
Than he appeared of late;
Made apter to reform
What others held in s^rne.
It rests then I admire
His temper, and commend
His service to your Quir^
That Is styled Virtues friend.
And take this of my Word,
His m^re deserving parts
Will such content afford
They Will win the knowing'st hearts,
And think him worthy too
Of the Honor you bestow.
Argument.
Themista commands Meilixos to be brought forth into the Presence Chamber;
where he relates the manner of his Cure; He repents him of his time so
remissely lost, and resolves to regaine, what his Security had lost by neglect;
He appeals to Iscuros, to deliver his opinion to his Soveraignesse touching
his Cure: and intends to redeem his many misspent hours with a redoubled Care.

PROSE IV.
PERPLEXED, and 'twixt hope and fear divided, stood all this time Themista, as
one ^earefull whether these so pleasing Objects were not mere Fantasies and
deceptions of sight: but no one of all these enforced in her so impressive a
motive of wonder and amazement as the strangely altered and me^amorphos'd
Condition of Vperephanos: the more she^ observed him, the less she believed
what she saw in him: for she thought, how the Wolf might probably change his
hair, but hardly his condition: especially, having been so strengthened by
custom, and an in nate malevolency of disposition, as it promised less hope
of recovery, by reason of the continuance of his infirmity. Wonder she could
not sufficiently at his lowly Carriage, assable Countenance, and winning
observance; wherewith she was more taken than with any of all her recovered
Patients. For to see one, whose ambition had mounted the Clouds, and whose
Self-conceit exceeded the confidence of Mortals, fall so far off from
preferring himself before others, as to esteem himself the unworthiest of
all others; Nay, to avert his Ear from his own praise, and make Humility his
only prize; to knit his discourse so firmly with the Cement of discretion;
and so sweetly sea^on it with Moderation, as in a wise diffidence, to submit
himself ever to others Opinion; to blush at his former impertinences, and
strengthen his well-disposed intentions with divine re^olves; Briefly, to
relinquish all such infectious Consorts, as fed him most in his humor, and
with the b^llowes of Sycophancy, kindled the Flame of his distemper; and to
supply them with the virtuous society of Tapeinos; one, whole humility well
deserved esteem in the eminenst Family. I say, to see all these concurring in
One, and one of whom there was least hope, could not choose but much transport
her, and so much the more over joy her, as it was least expected by her.
Desirous then to hear the happy iss^e of this general Cure, after she had
infinitely rejoiced in this unexpected recovery of her Consul Vperephano^,
which Cure she held to be of greatest difficulty, she forthwith commanded
that Melixos should be brought into the Presence Chamber; Who, upon his
Princess command, related the issue of his Cure, after this mann^r.

How weak I was of constitution; how unconstant in my resolves; how
desperately-diffident of mine own abilities; how flexiblyyeelding to any ones
proposition, were it never so averse nor devious from reason, your Grace cannot
be ignorant. Meagre, lea^e and exhausted was my consumed body; no Faculty but
desisted from preforming her due office, because in each of them I had a
diffid^nce. Go upon mine own legs I could not, for they would not support
me; nor direct my course any way, but as others led me, I would not, so much
had distrust wroght on me. Bleed I would, if I should but see any Spectacle
of grief, for a whole day together: and with an effeminate effluence o^
tears, d^cover my childish nature. This our Fame-crowned Artist, Aesculapius
observed, and with Receipts duly applied, labored by all means to effect, what
his divine art has now perfitted. Cordial and Comfortable things he
prescribed, to restore Nature so much decayed; mine Eyes with Eyebright water
he daily washed, to recover my Sight almost perished; He stanched my
incessant bleeding; strengthened my sinues weak and declining; And applied
certain Fomentations to keep me from cold Sweats and Swouning. Naught was
wanting to b^ing my Cure to perfection. Patient I was of idleness, impatient
of business. Nothing so relished me, so distempered was my Palate; nothing
digested with me, so raw was my Stomach. But having now at last by his
especial Care, been brought to a Sense of my grief, and probable expectance
of Cure; I was permitted, at certain seasons, to walk abroad and take the
air; but never without a Guide, who still attended me, lest by being left
unto my self, some disaster might befall me. One day, as I was walking in an
open Gallery, my Keeper showed me an excellent piece in Porphyrite Marble;
wherein was portrayed the dwarf Inus, bearing the Giant Iphiclus on his
shoulders. Which Statue as I intentively eyed, so I personally applied, for I
found my self presented in it: being purposely invented and erected by my
Physician, that in it, as in a Mirror, I might see mine own Condition.
Requesting therefore my Guardian to retire a little, and to leave me to my
self: in a private and familiar discourse, after this sort I uttered mine own
thoughts, wishing no Ear but the subtle Air to partake my complaints.

A Picture! yes Meilixos; and in it thine own feature. How! Inus supporting
Iphiclus! a weak Column for such a Colosse. The Moral without inversion may
be thus applied. When a Statist suffers himself to be overswayed by a
Pleibeian; or out of a settled jealousy of his own Weakness, inclines to
every vulgar opinion; or out of a various wandering Conceit what he now decrees,
he presently revokes; or out of a disesteeme of his own judgment, will not
maintain what he usefully propounds; he in his own person presents this
Emblem.

Now reply to thine own thoughts, Meilixos, and observe, if thou be not the
Person here shadowed! How much have thou ever relied on others opinions, were
their judgments never so shallow nor defective; their Conditions never so
obscure nor Plebeian? What judgment did thou ever pronounce, which thine
own Weakness did not make thee repent; or some inferior opposition did not
cause thee recant? Tell me then, if thou see not here the Giant Iphiclus borne
a loft on the dwarfish Inus his shoulders? Who ever more confident of another
opinion, or more diffident of his own? Who ever depended more on others
Supportance, or trusted less his own strength; occasioned merely by his own
remissness? Who ever managed a State with more coldness, or censured
Delinquents with more indulgence? Who ever suffered himself to be more deluded
by the advice of weakness, or misguided by simple directions? And what else
was this, but to be borne on dwarfish shoulders? Irresolute was I ever in my
designs; nothing could I do which seemed not better undone than done. For,
whatsoever the preceding day effected, the following day ever distasted. In
competition for offices, I stood ever divided, which to adhere to.

Such a Newter among the Romans, was that famous, but various Orator, who could
not resolve, whether he should take Caesar's or Pompeies part. Such among the
Grecians, was Titides, who could not determine whether he should join himself
with Achilles or Hector.

Thus like a Top which always rnnnes round, and never goes forward unless it
be whipped, traversed I my ground in a doubtful Circuit: never less resolved
then when I had least occasion to doubt.

But lest I, should become too tedious to your Grace, by too much enlarging my
discourse, you may understand by the effects, the proficience of his care. For
as his Receipts, had prepared me, so these moving Emblemes wrought such deep
impression on me, as I now hate nothing more than Pusillanimity, to which I
was formerly engaged, ^steeming resolution and constancy the highest honor of
a Consul. I neither approve of Draeco's Laws, writ in blood, nor Theano's writ
in Sand. In all Politic States, I shall ever hold Law to be the Line,
Execution the Life: but Law without Execution a Leaden sword in a Golden sheath.

It now repents me of my time so remissely lost; nor shall the remainder of my
time be wanting in resolves, to regaine by some industrious act, what my
Security or Childish Lenity has lost by neglect.

But what are golden promises, but fair flourishes, being coldly seconded by
actual performance? It shall be my constant task rather to practice than to
talk. As your Graces Care has brought me to partake in the benefit of this
Cure; it shall be my continued Endevourto address my employments wholly to your
Honor. The infirmity of mine age may make me ^aint, but my integrity shall
never fail.

Now to strenthen your conceit in my recovery; I shall willingly disclaim my
self, and ingenuously appeal to Iscuros, to deliver his opinion to you my
Soveraignesse, touching my Cure; with an immutable resolve to redeem my many
misspent hours with a redoubled Care.

Argument.
Iscuros imparts himself to Themista; He on firms her in the opinion of
Meilixos conversion; he persuades her to encourage him in his virtuous
designs; Good dispositions are rather to be cheered than checked, cherished
than chastised; A sweet and well-disposed temper allayes the sharpness of a
rigid censure: He assures Themista with much confidence of Meilixos fidelity
and diligence: and that his late alteration well deserves both her affection
and estimation.

POESY V.
MAdam know
Meilixos Cure is not in show;
Then begin,
Sweetly to encourage him
With these times
In hi^ virtuous de^ignes.
Good dispositions ^heer'd, n^ (...),
Cherished not chastic'd, for pro^ciencie.
A sweet temper
Sweet^ns sharpeness^ of rough (...).
Rest assured
Of Meilixos safely cured,
That his care
Will supply th^se ^ants that were;
And with fidelity and diligence
Regaine his honor and your confidence.
For of late
Choice receipts have cured his state;
Do^ not then
Fear but he will deserve esteem,
Andrestore
What depraved his life before.
"Such d^serve best who knowing good and ill,
"Shunn^ ill, do good with a resolved will.
Adverbs crown all our actions, which excel
When we perform good acts, and act them well.
Argument.
Themista becomes infinitely taken with the ^opefull recovery of her late
distempered Consuls; She causes Vpotomos to be called forth; who discovers
himself by sundry arguments, to be much changed from what he was; He
disclaimes all familiarity with Eris, whose malicious nature had corrupted his
blood; After much importunity he prevails with Elecmon, who attended on him
during his infirmity, to relate to Themista the manner of his distemper, and
grounds of his recovery.

PROSE V.
Receipts, said Themista! yes; these are choice receipts indeed, and such as
minister no less comfort to the Agent than Patient. What exquisite Cures are
effected, where art is by discretion seasoned? How variously were these our
Languihing Consuls distempered? ^d by what (...) Experiments recovered? I^alous
we were (and Love it ^as that made us jealous) of their recovery: wherein Art
has performed more than our hopes could expect; by making wisemen of Fools,
and such as were utterly lost in an overweening Concei^ of their own wit, to
becom^ sensible of their own^ want Sundry effects were produced from these
distempers, and no less sundry recei^s applied to cure their distempered
humou^s. Some were wise enough, had they no^ hrough too much arrogance, known
it too well; others ^oo were wise enough, but through too much diffidence, they
knew it not well. Some so selfe-opinionate, as they could never brook
opposi^ion; others so selfe-diffident, as they ever appealed from their own
opinion. Some were conceited of ^aving what they had not; others of not-having
what they had. Some contemned all dangers, and death it self, with more
courage, than judgment; others trembled at the shaking of a Reed, preferring
the shadow of an opinionate fear^ before all judgment. But to what and do we
spend the time in repetition of their distempers? That dark Cloud of our
Sorrow i* now dispelled, those duski^ vapors of ^ur discomfor^ dispersed. Now
may we cheerfully breath, when we live in them, in whom the State may
prosperously breath. All other are bu^ Secondaries to these comforts. Yet,
howbeit we are persuaded of the recovery of some, we are not altogether
confident of all. We are yet to take Survey of other two; the one whereof, for
Severity, the other for Security, may equal if not surpass the Examples of
any. Upon which words, turning her Eye aside, she caused Vpotom^s to be
celled forth: whom at his first approach, she thus encountered.

Now Vpotomos, how goes the world with you? is your boundless fury ought
attempered? your dispassi^nate violence allayed? Can you converse with
patience; or teach your unconfined spirit obedience? Can you suffer in another
woe; or rejoice in a^others weal? Can you drop a tear with a sorrowful
deli^quent; or wi^h that a poor arraig^ed Captive may prove innocent? Can you
favor life with a candide censure; and take no felicity in denouncing a
sentence of rigor. Are you so far from insulting over a dejected offender,
as you can partake in compassion with such a sufferer? Can you cheerfully
brea^h on the face of innocence* and with an attentive Ea^e* hear a wronged
Planti^e without roughness? Can you put off the dress of an imperious
presence; and enterteine your Equals with mildness? Could you wish; while you
sit on your judicia^l Bench, to your prisoners a solemn Iubile; so the State
might not suffer through such impunity? Could you find in your heart,
personally to suffer for the State; so the State might not suffer for impiety?
In one word, could you wish rather to be private and retired; than to
prejudice the State by being eminent or public? Could you forgo all honor,
to improve your Countries fame by your dishonor? If so, then happy is Themista
in her Vpotomos; if otherwise, she must cheerfully content herself with the
hopeful recovery of the rest of her Patients.

Vpotomos all this while with a grave and well-composed behavior, gave all
attention to his Soveraignesse; and now with a low andre verend Salute,
kneeling on his knee, as became the Majesty of such a Person, before w^om he
was to (...) his discourse, he begun to relate the happy disposure and
attemperature of his distem pered humor, after this manner.

It is most true, Madam, that never any who sat a^ the helm, or st^r'd the
rudder of so ^lourishing an estate (...) a ever subject to more un^uff rabble
enormities than I have been. Never I say, was Stat^sman more distempered and
in his distemper more domineered, for what wa^ it I more affected, than t^ have
mine own humor satisfied: which to effect, how much has the line and level
of justice been made crooked. The course of equity perverted? Hence proceed my
tears! Hence my fears! Tears, in a sensible remorse of my guilt; fears, lest
the remainder of mine hours should no^ regaine what my former foliies have
lost. Nor is the remembrance, Madam, of mine actions to any on^ more
distastefull, than they are to me hateful. Worthy was that answer of the
invincible Alexander to his Mother; who desirous to execute an
innocent-harmelesse man, the better to prevail with him, remembered him that
herself for the space of nine months had carried him in her womb, nourished
him with her own blood, and painfully labored in his birth; and for these
reasons he must not say her nay. Ask (says he) good mother, some other gift
of me, and I will grant it: for the life of a man can by no benefit be
recompensed.

But how far was this sentence of just compassion from me estranged; when I
desired nothing more than to inflict punishment equally upon the innocent as on
the delinquent? Julian the Apostata once answered very wittily touching the
liberty given accusers; If only to accuse, it were sufficient, who could be
innocent? But wha^ a free ^are have I ever given to accusers? What liberty to
their suggestions? An^ how easily have I credited their improbable surmises?
Nothing relished better than thunder and torture. Nor did I read any discourse
with more delight, than the ex^ inventions o^ those Tyrants, who bestowed the^r
time, or allo^ted large Pensions on others in their time, for contriving rare
and unheard of torments, for their supposed Delinquents.

Phereclus, and Perillus were ^y Minions; their projects were my parternes
Dennis the ^yrant (as Plutarch witnesses) gave his Enemies no other torment,
but salt meat to eat, and no drink to drink; and made them labor hard and
not sleep. And these relations were my choicest Recreations at retired hours:
When either business, or State gave way; or mine own desires affected repose.
Yet see! Whatsoever affected me most by day, ever affrighted me most by
night. Those two severe and cruel sentences which my fury had pronounced, were
ever to me in my sleep in bloody Characters presented. Not withstanding all
this, Demadis I ever taxed, for finding faul^ with Draco's laws, for being
writ in blood: For (said I) if Offenders cover their foul actions with ink,
why should not justice color them with blood? But as the Sicut pro^ probitas
ipsa est prae^ium: ita impro^ nequitia ipsa est supplici^m. (...). de Con^ol
Philos.
Scorpion has in her the remedy of her own poison, by natures secret
infusion; so the evil man carries always with him the punishment of his own
wickedness, which never leaves to torment and afflict his surprised mind,
both sleeping and waking: all which in numerous instances occurred to me (if I
could have made use of what was presented to me) in the tragic stories of
Appollodorus, Hipparohus, Pausanias, and many others, recommended to the memory
of approved Historians. Night ^y night was I startled with fearful visio^s;
presenting the persons of such as had received any cruel censure from me. Yet
did I fleight all these visions, as children dreams; the next day begot a new
doom; the Scene wherein I acted, was ever tragical to the Delinquent. Thus I
reigned, ranged and raged, till mine eyes grew inflamed, my stomach swollen up
and puffed; my blood, by too much familiarity with Eris, a waspish Sorceresse,
infected. All out of temper; thus I continued for many months together: till
your fame-spred Artist, to whose especial care, and effectual cure, we were
all commended, sought out the grounds of my distemper. Intolerable pain I
suffered, yet was I scarce sensible of the causeless which I suffered. All
which time, he omitted no opportunity to restore me to my self; who,
howsoever I was seldom drunk, yet was I never mine own man.

Nor did he profess less Art i^ Chyrurgery than Physic: for having by way
of incision opened me, he took a worm out of my gall; the mainest cause of
my distemper. Then he applied Cupping-glafses ^o cool and temper my brain;
the heat whereof had so enraged me, as no object, were it never so pleasi^g
no^ eye-taking, could delight me. A Diet-drinke too, he prepared me, well
mixed with ^he Sovereign ju^ce of Me triot and Euchrasia, to remove those
Pluriticall stitches, wherewith I was incessantly annoyed: ^pplying withal,
Oppian Plaist^rs, with a proportionable quan^ity of the juice of Sunneidesis
infused to my stomach, to repel those fearful dreams, which so migh^ly
start^ed and affrighted me, as not one hours rest could secure me, one
minutes quiet solace me. These receipts by degrees brought me to some little
conceit or apprehension of mine own distemper; So as, in short time I was
suffered to walk abroad, and to refresh my crazie-co^sumed body with moderate
recreation; of which I was before debarred, being fast tied, and t^ such strict
restraint confined* as I was neither permitte^ to take the benefit of the fresh
air, nor to enjoy the society of any; so intolerable was my rage, so
boundless my fury.

And being now in good hope of recovery, which enlarged my late restraint to
more liberty; it happened one day as I walked in a private Garden, purposely
a^lotted me (for each of us had ou^ distinct walks, lest our distracted and
distempere^ ^umours, upon our encoun^ring one another, might beget some
fearful inconvenience) that in the lowest border of the Garden, I might see a
curious Orbell, all of Touch, wherein the Sy racusan tyrants were no less
artfully portrayed, than their several cruelties to life dsi played: Nothing
was omitted, to discover Tyranny in her own naked feature; nor express
cruelty in her truest nature. Diamater-wis^ on the other side of the Column
stood Argestes struck with thunder, just as he was pronouncing his bloody
censure.

Twice had I path'd my border-walke, when this Statue first presented it self
unto me; yet with a slight and careless eye I passed by it, as if the act of
mine own li^ had no relation at all unto it. But in the end, being always in
mine eye, which could not choose but convey some impressive conceit to mine
heart; I began t^ discuss, by way of conjecture, the allusive meaning of
these Emblemes: which, a^er some more serious expostulation with mine own
thoughts, I returned in these words.

What should this mean Vpotomos? Do thou feel any shaking or shuddering in
thine own flesh, that it should intend any relation to thy self? Eye thine
own nature, and compare it with the feature. Say, say, Vpotomos, what were
these Syracusan tyrants? Cruel to their foes, and scarce constant to their
friends. Exquisite for inventing torments to sat their (...), but unapt to
incline their ear to a sui^ of mercy. Prone to sp^ll, but slow to spare. Such,
as never joyed but in a bloody banquet. The Stage, where these acted their
inhumane parts, was ever hung about with Blacks; their very private Arbours
stuck with Ebon sprigges, to put them in mind of their black designs. But
what are all these to thee? yes, Vpotomos, reflect upon thine own inhumanity,
and in these thou shall find thine own A^atomie. Then actions, with change
only of time and person, were thine. Indeed, they were more eminent, because
advanced to an higher Orb of government. But this leffeneth nothing thy guil^,
but rather aggravates thy shame. The higher these werein honor, the more they
had to follow their humor. The body o^ greatness never walks without an
extensive shadow. But thy command had no such boundier. Thy power was confined
yet to the highe^t pin o^ extremity screwed. Read then thy self in this
Syracusan piece. But if this work not effectually with thee, nor enforce those
bloudshot eyes to view thy insatiate cruelty; then look on that Statue of
Argestes. Wherein observe his quality and vocation; and thou shall find it to
side with thine; his Ca^astrophe and utter ruin, and beware it be not seconded
by thine.

Polo the Tragedian (whose living memory breaths yet to posterity) acting the
part of Electra upon the Stage, and being mournfully to bring in the bones of
her brother Orestes in a Pot, he brought in the bones of his own son lately
buried, that the sight of them might wring forth true tears indeed, and by the
passionate presentment of them, act it more famously. For objects of ocular
passion, cannot choose but work in the Actors person.

Apply this, Vpotomos, and that impartially; here thou see thine own life
acted in an Emblem. Let it work so much true passion in thee, as the
fore-past memory of thy self may make thee hateful to thy self. Let that
which thou here see occularly presented, and to thy self properly applied,
become a motive to d^terre thee from what thou formerly so much affected, an
inducement to allure thee to what thou lately so much distasted; a wile to
weane thee from what thou so dearly loved; a Lure to win thee to what thou so
deeply loathed. Delay may b^get dang^r; take hold then of opportunity to
prevent this danger.

Nor did I remit what my resolution had fixed: for so well had Physic
corrected mine h^mour; and so strongly had these Emblemes wrought on my
conceit, as I forth with disclaimed all familiarity with Eris, from whom arose
the very first ground of mine unhappiness. For her malicious nature it was,
had corrupted my blood, infected my vital parts, and wholly estra^ged me from
the sensible ^eeling or compassionating the infirmities of man. Since the
sleighting of whose favor, merely proceeding from ^he correction of mine
humor, I feel my self clear changed, and quite of another temper: for I am
turned all Niobe, so as my la^e relentles spirit is now resolved into tears; I
can wish unto others as to my self: Commiserate others griefs, as if they had
relation unto my self: truly imagining, that as I see ^he image of every man
in my self, so I am to partake i^ their affections, as if they were presented
in my self. (...) I conceit, nor shall any pleasing pride, sprung from the
knowledge of mine own weakness, make me less cautious in shunning all
occasion of falling into like infirmities.

Now Elecmon, to you I appeal, with whom friendly importunity is hopeful to
prevail; that as you are best acquainted with these passages by me delivered,
(seeing you attended on me during my infirmity) so to relate to Themista the
manner of my distemper, and grounds of my recovery.

To which Elecmon at the first seemed altogether unwilling, till long
importunity had so won him, as addressing himself to Themista, in
Aesc^lapius honor, he related the circumstances of Vpotomos recovery, in this
manner.

Argument.
Elecmon reports what apparent danger he incurred, so long as Vpotomos was
distempered: and in his recove ry how much he was comforted; He holds the
time bestowed on his attendance, to be a task of incomparable happiness: and
his absolutest solace, to live and die in his service, He much fears his
desire of retirement from affairs of State; He could wish theref^re Themista,
as she tenders the fame and honor of her Court, to re-advance him to his
former charge, which might conduce to the strength of the State, and her
recovery.

POESY VI.
Just like Sea-tossed Port-encountred men,
Recount those dangers which secured them,
The n^m'rous She^ves, and fate-divining sands,
Their strange delivery from Pirates hands;
So I now fr^ed from danger, may relate
Those perils which environed me of l^te.
See HIM, whose boundless fury once as strong
As any Tigresse robbed of her young;
Or like a raving Dog, if any vexed him,
Without distinction bit at him stood next him,
Till quite bereftof reason, sense and brains,
Deprived of Liberty, confined to Chains,
He might not feed of commonaire, nor eye
That glorious Sun which cheeres mortal^ty!
I brought him still to bed, and up again,
And to afford him ease, refused no pain.
The rank distemper of his strong disease
I strove to curb, hi^ fury to appease:
Thus grapled I with danger, to allay
What Art and Physic now has taken away.
Nor am I l^sse cheered in's recovery,
Than grief enthralled through his infirmity.
'The darker that our Critic days appear,
"When Sun shuts out, do ever ^hine most clear.
For n^w I hold the time which I bestowed
On ^is attendance (for so much I owed)
To be a task of higher happiness,
Than I in outward accents may express.
Nor can there be more solace, still ^ay I,
Then in his service both to live and die.
For lo! how his affections are disposed?
How sweetly tempered, and how well composed!
His boundless fury now h'as lost her sting,
Triumphing in a glorious suffering
Of injuries; which his conceiving heart
Bears for improvement of his better part.
His sole desires on goodness grounded are;
His patience crowned; none in his wrongs must share;
While he disvalues with a smiling please
The pressing burden of his injuries.
How sensibly it grieves him to retain
The memory of Delinquents he has slain
By tyrannizing c^usure! which appe^res
By this, "No minute but affords some tears.
No walks but private solitary Groves
Shut from frequent; his Contempl^tion loves;
No Treatise nor discourse so sweetly please
As sacred-secret soul Soliloquies.
No other resolution h^e retains
Then what proceeds from firm and setl^d brains;
Nor is there ought which can distaste him more
Than to affect what he admired before. (temp^sts send
"The Even crowns the d^y; cl^re M^rnes may
"And Comic shows may have a Tragic end:
But the sentence is inverted quite with him,
Whose blosso^s ever were less promising
In's youth, which his distempered bound^esse rage
Brings to mature perfection in his age.
Those choice chief v^rtues which adorn a State,
Should I with M^rallistse numerate,
I might conclude Upotomos hi^ breast
The Cabbinet, where rarest virtues rest:
Confirmed by his av^sion from those
Who style them vices friends, but virtues foes.
But much I fear he has a fixed desire
From State-affaires in private to retire;
Which to prevent, Themista, as you tender
Your fa^'d-Courts honor, and her ancient splendour,
So re-advance him to his former place,
And cheer his grief with p^offer of your grace:
Which may conduce to make the w^rld known
Unto your trophies, triumphs and renown:
For a more knowing Sage you cannot crave,
To store a State with what a State should have.
Argument.
Themista in this discourse of Vpotomos, conceives no small pleasure; She
wonders at the strange alteration of his temper; She calls Amerimnos to come
before her: Whom her servant Euphorbus found sometime sleeping in a corner; He
acquaints her, how his decayed memory is restored; his dull and unactive
spirits revived. He appeals to Epimedes, to deliver his opinion to his So
veraignesse Themista, personally, and po^itively* touching his nature, temper
and recovery

PROSE V.
QVestionlesse (said Themista) under favor, this is not Vpotomos, whom you
describe after this manner. Can a relentlesse disposition be so soon tamed,
as to affect what he before so mortally hated? Who would not conceive infinite
pleasure in the alteration of such a temper? What a glorious liberty that
infranchised mind enjoyes, who puts off man to converse more freely with
heaven? But if we must believe Vpotomos nature to be th^s altered, we would
feign know where his old condition is now seated. Sure, if that ancient
Pythagorean opinion hold firm, that there is a transmigration of souls into
other bodies, there is some body much distempered with his humor: having
either left what he had unto another, or made an exchange with another
nature. But happy is such a loss, which brings the Los^r gain! Precious such
a change, which admits no change, but to the Republike a constant choice!
Redoubled is our joy, to re-possesse what our conceit had utterly lost: and to
find in him whom we held for lost, what we before all others incomparably
prize.

But let us not forget our last Consul, though (perchance) security has made
him to forget himself.

Which said, she calls Amerimnos to come before her, whom her servant Euphorbus
had sometimes found sleeping in a corner: whom she no soo^er beheld
approaching toward her presence, then she thus accoasted him.

Amerimnos, we should willingly address our discourse unto you, all the
better to satisfy our selves how those artfull experiments have wrought with
you; which have already produced such admirable effects in the rest of our
Consuls, who labored of no less dangerous distemper than your self. But much
we doubt your drousie attention would dampe our discourse with a sleepie
conclusion. Much like that overwatcht Epicureall (...), who being to give his
opinion in a business of high consequence, betwixt Plaintiff and Defendant,
but slept all the time it was in pleading; as one suddenly awakt, but
unprepared of a discreeter answer; returned his opinion in the selfsame
Element, whereof he had probably dreamed, in this manner: All Cumaea has not
a piece of sounder Ra^ie wine.

This smooth, but smart conceit, caused all such as were there present to bite
the lip, but with a secret silent smile to pass the j^st over, for the
reverence of their Soveraignnesse, and civil fear, lest they might dash
Amerimnos out of countenance. But he little amated, though conscious enough of
the quickness of the conceit, with a decent and well-composed gesture, after
three low Congies made to her Honor, delivered his mind in these expressions
unto her.

It is said of the silk-worme (Madam) that she surceaseth from spinning for
certain days together, that she might after so retired a rest, spinne the
better. And Charity will judge that I have slept all this time, purposely to
watch the longer.

Though Endimion kissed He made recourse to the M^one, to kn^w the course of
the Moon.
Luna on Latmos Mount, and for a long time together slept in her lap, yet did
this sleepy Swain at last return to his flock, and redeem the time by
redoubling his care, which his security had lost.

I confess, Madam, the whole Progress of my life, has been a continued
sleep. Nothing was ever more opposite to my nature, than to impose my self a
task, or some diurnall ^abour. Long Epicur^all feasts were my only
delightful repasts; my sole task was to please my taste; which made me
ofttimes sleep, when I should have watched for the public State: So as, those
very Geese, who with their gagling preserved the Capitol, were more praise
worthy in their generation, than the security of my remiss and state retired
condition. In cases of Judicature, such as were of necessity to make repair to
my Bench, sticked not to say that they came thither as to a Lottery; ^or causes
were there determined at haphazzard, not by equity. For as Lawyers pleaded,
while I slept and heard not; so awaking I gave sentence in what I understood
not. In a word, the whole State both of my mind and body was grievously
distempered. For though mine appetite increased, my digestion failed; my
judgment became weakened; my memory decayed; and the whole fabrike of this
little man fearfully languished. All which Aesculapius, that inimitable Artist
no less observed, and by your Graces direction, seasonably prevented. For
first, h^e regulates me to a prescript diet, with Elixir'd broaths every
morning to sharpen mine understanding; He prepares me next, Antiopian
plasters to keep me the afternoon awaking; After these, Epimeleian julips
laid warm to my temples; whieh with fumes of strong liquor, were ever aching.
These applied, he enjoined me to abstain from all strong drinks, and (what
was most averse from mine hydropick nature) never to drink betwixt meals, b^
with my Teeth shut. Which prescription I no less cu^ ningly eluded than
evaded, for I practiced with a profe^ Tooth-drawer, to pull m^ out two of my
broadest teeth: by means whereof, and the benefit of a Can^ though my teeth
were shu^* to observe his direction, I plenteously flowed in mine afternoones
potation. He provides too a Night Cappe strongly chafed with the Lemnian
powder of Cornu copia; purposely to make my sleeps shorter, and my conceit
stronger. And because he found by my Urine, and other soporiferous symp^omes,
that my kidneye were overlarded with oil of Dormise (whose society I ever so
much affected, as I admired their condition) by means of Sweatings and
Suffumigations, he extracted all those viscid and oily humors.

By means of these receipts so physically applied, I begun to have some little
feeling of my self; and to hold up my head, which before, like a perpetual
Penthouse, hung drilling and dropping over my breast, leaving ever some
asper^ions on my venerable skirts. My Physician, who never tyrannized over his
Patients, but upon their recovery, enlarged their restraint, to solace their
weakened spirits with a discreet liberty; gave directions to my Keeper, that I
should take the air, and refresh mine over-wasted, and wearied body with some
temperate recreation. This granted me, and walking one day in a delightful
Spinet, beautified with shady Poplars, I might se^ a curious piece of antique
work, seemingly cut out of a natural rock, and over-growne with Ivy, to
prove her antiquity. The Device was this; An aged man, bearing the name of
Silenus, sleeping in a Cave, matted round with Moss; round about him were
shadowed fruits of all kinds; and below him silver springs flowing with
delicious liquours; yet still so desirous seemed he of rest, and so infinitely
addicted to sleep, as he would not so much as heave up his head either to
those luscious fruits, tha^ grew so delightfully dangling above him, nor
inclin^ it to those delicious liquours that flowed so plentcously playing under
him. Near to this Cave was por^rayed a speckled Aspick, with a
winding-circling pace, creeping toward him, and shooting out his venomous
sting to wound him; which an industrious Emmet obse^ving, seeks to prevent, by
awaking him with a gentle touch, to preserve him from the Aspicks mortal
sting. Long I mused on the depth of this Emblem; wherein I found such
intricacy, the more I dived into it, the shorter I came of it. Till one morning
(whom we no less truly than properly cal^ the Muses Minion, the conceits
pregnantest Da^ling) expostula^ing with my self no less seriously than
secretly, what this might mean; I fell into a parley with mine own thoughts,
which I digested and dilivered in this sort.

Awake, Amerimnos, for thou see here Silenus (and in him thine own Emblem)
long since awaked. How! Silenus! in a Cave sleeping, with fruits growing above
him* Fountains flowing under him; an Aspick creeping toward him; and a wary
Emmet with a friendly smart awaking him! What may all this mean? Thou can
not see thy self, Amerimnos, but thou must needs understand it.

Silenus, that mirror o^ Security, whose whole life was an incessant sleep;
whose Cave was his Commonweal; and whose sole delight was in a senseless
sur^er.

Silenus, who neither thought of combustions abroad, nor factions at home;
desiring nothing more than to fare well without care taking; reap without
laboring; live without loathing; enjoy without ^uffering. Now reflect upon thy
self, Am^rimnos, and see what affinity thou have with Silenus! What have thou
done but spent thy time in a car^lesse slumber? how remiss in thy charge? how
respectlesse of thine honor? Did thou ever (to unrivet this Emblem) partake
of those rich fruits growing ab^ve thee; Stateaffaires, employments o^ public
safety? Or sip o^ those Chrystall-gliding Rivolets flowing under thee, those
Low Rils, humble souls, objects of compassion and pity? No; these were
estranged from thee; thy only task was fruitless security. Thus thou slept,
while the subtle Aspick takes advantage on thy mis-employed privacy. For lo!
with a snakie pace he draws toward thee, purposely to sting thee, and that
mortally: did not the Emmet (that native Emblem of industry) with a friendly
remembrance raise and rouse thee. Make use of this then to thy benefit, lest by
neglecting the opportunity offered, thou become irreparably lost and ruined.
Which, the better to effect, make industry thine Harbinger; Temperance thy
Caterer; Moderation thy Monitor: so shall thou not only redeem the time thou
have lost; but bestow the remainder that is left, to the benefit of the State,
and improvement of thine honor.

Nor did the impression of this Emblem work on me, as other Presentiments
usually do; which, as in eying objects in a glass, are no sooner left than
lost: for as by those Receipts formerly applied, my decayed memory became
restored; my dull and unactive spirits revived; my love to employment inflamed:
so the sight of tha^ ^bleme has so powerfully wrought on my thoughts, as I am
rosolved (nor do I fear but Heaven will ever breath on such divine resolves)
with this small remainder of days that are left, to redeem the time I have
lost. For I hold nothing less seemly than one who is ancient in years, and
has no other argument to show for his age, but his years. This then, seeing
practice is the lise of knowledge, shall be my Position. "No day without a
line; no line without a rule. This my couclusion: "I could wish, that as I
spent my former time in sleep, I might now address me to continuate action
without sleep: if it might stand with the conservation of nature, without rest
to endure labor.

But modesty bids me to be spare in mine own approvement, being to r^ceive
life and light, not from ours but others judgment. I appeal then ^o Epimeles,
to d^liver his opinion to you my Soveraignesse, personally, positively, and
impartially, touching my nature, temper, and recovery.

Argument.
Epimeles appointed Amerimnos K^eeper, declares what long sleeps he had before
he could be awakt, during his distemper; how shortly after his recov^ry, he
was a Cock to all the family; Lastly, in all submission upon reflex had to his
diligence and discretion, he holds Amerimnos service not any way derogating
from Themista's reputation.

POESY VII.
NAture bids us sleep and wake,
Amerimnos did not thi^,
He a lasting nap would take,
And to sleep^ confine his bliss:
Long coutinued were his dreams,
"Uices ever hunt extremes.
In a silent shadie Bower,
Usually would he repose,
Clad with sweet-breathed Sycomour,
Chafed with buds of Damask Rose:
Where secure, he quite forgate
Both his own and public State.
Till of late by secret art
And inimitable skill,
His Physician did impart
Such a prom^tnesse to his will;
As it is rare what he attempts
By his rich experements.
For rest^r'd security
From all business estranged,
Ranking now with industry
Is to vigilancie changed:
Crane nor Hind can either be
Watchfuller in Launes, than he.
Resty and unactive once
Was his body Earth-opprest,
Clotted was his aged sconce,
For employment now addres^:
For since his rec^very,
He Is a Cock to th'family.
Lastly, lowly with submission*
And reflex to diligence,
I do hold that h^ discretion,
Constance service, vigilance
Shall no way detract but sut^
With Themista's high repute.
Argument.
Themista with a Princely affectionate grace receives her late distempered, but
now recovered Consuls into her favor: and recalling Parthenius from exile,
creates him prime Consul. She gives the CHARGE; wherein she declares what the
State requires at their hands; and how they may advance their Countries glory
by this their restauratio^ and recovery; Closing, she vows to erect a lasting
Trophy to Aesculapius memory.

An Epitome of the whole.
This Section trencheth mainly upon these two Subjects; The CONSVLS CHARGE,
With THEMISTA'S TRIVMPH; In the expression of her Consuls recovery and
restoration.

With PARTH^NIVS his reduction from exile and reauguration.

PROSE VII.
CLouds so clearly dispersed; distempers* so soundly cured joys so
unexpectedly tendered (said Themista) cannot Eo N oganti fi^ p* r^us (...), quo
tractas maris (...). Niobis effi^ies. 8.
not choose but work strange effects upon our conceit. For as griefs before
thought lessen their burden; so (...) reduced to joys, (...) our affection. To
find what probability tells us we may find, can never overjoy us; but to
find what all possibili^y discourageth us to find, must needs infinitely
in^rance us.

Which spoke, with a Princely affectionate grace, she received her late
distempered, but now recovered Consuls into her favor: conferring upon them,
according to their distinct qualities, distinct honors. Which conferred,
making a sudden stop, as if somewhat had been left undone, which she intended,
she unfolded her resolves in this sort.

We have read (quoth she) that an experienced General is worth a whole Army;
an expert Mariner the succor of a Navy; a discreet Master the honor of his
Family. Yea, that an Army of Hearts with a Lion to their Leader, is better than
an Army of Lions with an Heart to their Commander. Lest therefore, you my revived
Consuls, should like the Bird Ibis, receive the excrement you have egested, by
returning to the vomit you have relinquished, our purpose is to recall our
trusty and welbeloved Parthenius from exile, where he has been too long
de^ained; and to create him Prime-Consul, as his actions have ever merited:
seeing his defense of goodness was the only cause he became proscribed.

Which directions given, that he should be forthwith called home, to the end,
her late-reformed Senators might be better informed, and in their good
resolves confirmed; with a graceful reverend aspect mounting her judicial
Throne (having first commanded Cletor the Pretorian Crier, with three O's Ace
to command silence) she addressed herself to a public prepared CHARGE, in
the assembly of her Consuls, with an huge confluence of other Plebeians, after
this manner.

It is not unknown (grave Iusticiaries) how upon our especial trust reposed
in you, we did sometimes make choice of you to be of our Commission, to
execute justice, and to do your Country and us all faithful service. But how
remiss you were in your Care, how neglectfull of your Charge, we will not
here relate: for it shall be our glory to see our perishing hopes revive in
your recovery. But what is it to suffer incision, corroding powders, or
experiments above humane sufferings; and through distemper to make all these
receipts useless, by giving free issue to those rancorous wounds, which before
were closed. If Statues be not daily wiped, they will with dust become
blemished: so, if those impressures of manly virtues, which you now seemingly
retain, be not afresh revived, and by all industrious means preserved, your
glory will become darkened, your memory obscured.

You hold it unseemly to stamp your Princes image in base metal: And what
less do you, when you stain our purest robes of justice, with your impurest
actions? O my Patritians; should you but consider how much we tender our
honor, which receives not her beauty from any outward luster, but from the
inward purity of her divinest nature; no doubt but you would suffer the worst
of all extremes, before you would incline by the crooked line of your actions,
to blemish so royal and real a beauty. Yea, should you but think in what
near obligements you stand engaged to ou^ bounty, (...) whence, after your
first-being, you ^ave received your well-being; no doubt but you would ing
nuously agnize (if thankfulness retained the least touch or tincture in you)
that you stood more bound ^o our Grace for your breeding, than to your natural
(...) for your first-being. For if any one love his carnal father, from whom
he only had a mortal body, how much ought he to love such an one, from whom
he shall receive immortal glory? If so much a mother, who brought him a man
full of miseries into this world; how much more one, who shall conduct him full
of joys into another world? If so much your carnal brethren, who by partaking
with you in an earthly inheritance, make you poorer; how much more on^, who by
conferring on you a^ heavenly inheritance, shall make you richer? If so much a
son, for whom you so much labor, not knowing whether you may perfect ought
in him that may deserve your favor; or whether he will hereafter reverence
you as a father; or whether he will oppose you, or render evil unto you for
the good he has received from you; how much more one, who will eternally
reward and recompense you, for a few hours service received from you? If so
much a Wife, who (perchance) loves another better than you; how much more such
an one, who will never estrange her from that love she bears you? For us, you
are especially to love, without whom no civil society can either subsist or
live. All which may be easily proved by this necessary consequence. For if you
love him so much, who bestows a portion of his estate on you; how much more
such an one, who could find in his heart to leave friends and kinsfolks, and
to go into a strange Country; yea, to engage their own body to gain you
liberty? Now have not we expressed our love amply in arguments of this nature?
Have we not left our own native Country (those beauteous Mansions of
Astraeas glory) for your succo^r, sa^ety and security? Have you not recovered
through us, what you had once lost; to the end you might become happy through
that, which you valued least? But we will not upbraid you with our courtesies;
be it your care now after the dispatch of your cure, that this judicial
place, whereto you are now restored, may be by your actions dignified; the
pulike State, where you are deputed, rectified; and your many neglected hours,
with a numerous supply of virtues, carefully redeemed, which the better to
effect, two things be solely necessary: an unspotted conscience toward your
selves; and an untainted fame in respect of others. By which means, you may
not only redeem^ time, but improve your own fame, to the imitable example of
others.

Nothing, you know, more precious than time; ye^ what more disvalued? No thing
more perilous than neglect of opportunity; yet how easily incurred? Be the
expense then of your hours, your constantest cares. And because medicines ever
work best by their contraries; and vices are ever best cured by their contrary
virtues: Whatsoever you shall find in you irregular, prevent the growth by a
seasonable remover. Vices can never possibly be cured, unless they be
curbed: nor ever supplanted, unless they be timely weeded. Which the better
to effect, it shall be now ou^ task briefly and plainly to address our
discourse to each of you in particular; that by a more free survey or discovery
of your nature, you may become Masters of your own passions, and better
rectifi^rs of your errors.

And to you first, Metoxos, (to observe order) whose very name renders
partiality, a vice whereto you have been addicted naturally. Lysanders saying
was this, C^ildren must be deceived by Dice and Blanks, men by oaths. Now Sir,
open your own naked bosom, and there examine your self, how your behavior
has been in the management of your place! How many have you deluded with
promises; nay, seconded those bare promises with bold oaths, that you would
stand for them in the justness of their cause, by defending them against the
enmity of powerful Opponents? But how soon were those golden promises
dissolved, when apparent hope of reward was presented? So prevalent was the
power of gain, as it caused innocence to give place to guilt. Now reflect
upon this, Metoxos, with your clear eyes; for before they were bleared with
rewards: and stretch out your hand to the relief of the poor, but draw it in
from receipt of bribes. And take ever along with you those two sayings o^ two
grave Sages; Do no thing for love of money: and, Stain not justice with
partiality. Periand. Se^c.
What untimely, but deserving fates, some, even of your Profession have
encountered, whose tongues were ^ipt with gold, and mad^ gain their goal;
might be^ instanced in sundry Personages of eminent rank, bu^ ignominious
life. Some whereof have b^ene suddenly stabbed; others privat^ly strangl^d;
others openly pistoled by their injured Plaintiffes, whose unredressed wrongs
winged their enraged fury with too speedy revenge. Nor were these scarce
bemoaned while they perished. And of these our Roman Annals are plenteous in
examples. Amongst which, nothing more bloody than that slaughter which was made
by the Germans upon their revolt from the Roman Empire, through the Woods and
Marshes; nothing more intolerable than the insultings of the barbarous, speci
ally (to instance the evenging aims of popular fury) against the Pleaders at
the Bar, plucking out the eyes of some, and lopping off the hands of
othersome; one had his mouth stitcht up, after his tongue was first cut out,
which the savag^ Actor grasping in his hand, said to it; Thou Viper, at last
give over hissing. So implacable was the fury of a barbarous Nation, upon
innovation of government, against persons of your profession. Which, as it is
an honor to that State, where justice is equally administered; so it detracts
from her, where partiality is privileged.

But admit, these foreign instances should not work strongly enough upon your
conceit, Metoxos; Draw homeward, by recalling to mi^de that tragic Story of
Sisambres, so m^sically descanted by Harmonius: with those pleasing Paeans of
thankfulness delivered by Isotes.

Now to you, Epimonos, whose very name displayes your pertinacious nature; be
never so tied to your own opinion, as to avert your ^are from reason. How can
he ever possibly improve himself, who shuts his attention from all but
himself? To what purpose were Counsels or Assemblies of State, if one man's
private opinion should be only delivered, and all others silenced? Learn
then (for this lesson will infinitely profit you) to submit your self to
others judgment, to humble your self in others approvement; for so by hearing
others, you may become enabled in that wherein you are naturally most
defici^nt. Nor will it be amiss, while others read Books, for you to read
Men; even that unhappiest of men, M Caelius, so passinately described by
Harmoniu^: with those soule-reviving Epods of your Epieicies.

For you, Vperephanos, whose Name suited well with your thoughts; as your cure
seemed to us of greatest difficulty, so you give us no less occasion to joy in
your recovery. The foolish are ever taken most with arrogance and applause; and
such was your condition. Whose unconfined greatness could not want his
parallel shadows to follow it. But these deceitful Sycophants, who make
pretenses Employers of all their senses, are not unlike the Herb Sardonius, of
which Solinus reports, that it makes the eaters thereof to look as if they
laughed, but in laughing die. Properly may we style them Brokers of old
stuff, or Barterers of contemptible ware: who sell their Masters at any rare
for their own advantage. Antisthenes said truly of them, that it was better to
fall into the claws of Ravens, than such ^ame Rooks: for Ravens feed only
upon dead Carcasses, but flatterers upon living men. Alexander Severus (a great
enemy to these) caused his corrupt Courtier Turinus in the open Market to be
fastened to a stake, and and stifled with smoke; the Crier thus crying to the
people, Let him perish with that he sold to the Parish. So dealt Dionysius
with his Damocles, by ever putting him in peril of his life; lest his
perilous practices should endanger the State.

But a kind Physician ever contends with the disease, but never contests with
his Patient; beware of these, Vperephanos; you are now set again on your feet:
for inclining to them may bring you to an untimely fate. " Dear are ever most
fearful in their best Laires: do not in the fatness of your estate feed
them, lest they feed on you, whose immeriting favor did first raise them. Lay
aside the presence of contempt and disdain; put on an affable and humble
countenance; be full of comfort to an oppressed Client: So shall these honors
re-conferred on you, become permanent. Envy, the souls impostume, eating up
the heart and marrow of her Master, let it never nestle in your bosom: Rejoice
ever in others risings; so may princely compassion steer your course, and
shield you from ruin. In a word, demean your self thus, and good men will
love you; the evil stand in fear o^ you; and the whole State, upon
acknowledgement of your integrity, honor you. Mean time, be not forgetful
of the heavy fate of Pytheas, so pithily chanted by Harmonius: which, if it
taste of too much heaviness, allay it with those divine aires of your Tap^inos.

For you, Meilixos, whose very name resolves it self into Pusillanimity, the
only ground of your infirmity, raise your self from earth, and eye the place
to which you are advanced. The Quail (a bird on whose nature reflect sundry
mysterious Emblemes) as he flies over the Sea, feeling himself begin to be
weary, lights by the way into the Sea: then lying at one* side, he lays down
one wing upon the water, and holds up the other wing toward Heaven: lest he
should presume to take too long a flight at the first, he wets one wing: lest
he should despair of taking a new flight afterward, he keeps the other
wing dry. Apply the moral to your self; so shall you neither faint too much,
by distrusting your weakness: nor pride your self too much in the discharge
of this public service. Which done, as we are confident of you, so shall you
find us none of those unthankful ones, to suck your milk like Mules, and
then to kick you with our heels. We know well how to bestow our favor to
the proportionable merit of every ones labor. Look up cheerfully then
Meilixos! Let not an imperious Grande, who sets his face in his ruff; knits
his brows; and with winks and nods deciphers his command, overawe you; nor
make your tongue falter in pronouncing his distastefull censure. For in any
Cause wherein you desire to please us, you are not to fear evil men; whose
course has been ever opposite unto us.

Thales compared Laws to Spider-webs: but such are ever to be spunne in a
corrup^ State. Ours are (...).
Speaking Laws, that dare tax a Delinquent, be he never so potent* And
herein show you^ resolution: that our State may see you truly changed, and
worthy the supportance of that charge wherein you are entrusted. But especially
retain in mind the sad Story of Melotes, sung so lately to you in such apt
measures by Harmonius: whose pensive strains you may sweeten with those
musical measures, of Iscuros.

Now, for you, Vpotomos, in whose very Name was portrayed the rough Scene of
your life; and whose steeled heart could sometimes, like a Spring-locke, shut
it self, but never open to the least thought of compassion: as you have go^ a
Niobe in your eye, and a Philomels thorn to your breast: So address your self
to mercy, and never hereafter give receipt to cruelty.

Demosthenes being demanded what men had, that most resembled God? He answered,
To be charitable, and embrace the truth. Retain in you this resemblance, so
shall your place receive more honor from you, than you from it. For as justice
is (as all other virtues be) a mean betwixt two extremes; Lenity and
Severity: So we rather incline to his censure, who mixeth justic^ with favor,
than his, who thundreth nothing but Judgment and Rigo^. O how hateful has
the very name of Cruelty bin in all ages! Which, howsoever some Parasites, for
the Tyrants sake, have sometimes applauded, they as soon condemned? Antiochus
was at one time saluted (...) and (...), a glorious Prince, and a furious
Tyrant. And Plutarch reports, that when Dionysius the Tyrant, asked the Wise
men of his Court which Copper was the best; Antiphon answered very readily,
that in his opinion that was the most excellent, whereof the Athenians had made
the Pictures of the two Tyrants, Others report, that two Statues were erected
in honor of these two Persons, for doing their Country such good service, as
ridding her from the unsufferable tyranny of Pisistratus.
Armodius and Aristogiton: implying, that their Statues were to be preferred
before their Persons; their Burial before their Government.

There is nothing that may more highly content us, than to see the members of
our Nostra sit familia candide ^ucunda, condite secunda, prospere faecunda,
modice iracunda, Crit^l Oeconom.
family, affably pleasing, seasonably thriving, prosperously succeeding, mildly
reproving.

Yea, know Vpotomos, that it is the part of a good man, to be able to say,
that he has rather spared, where he might have spilled; than to have spilled,
where he might have spared. Especially, where good natures are brought on the
Stage, who are commonly won more by clemency, than severity; by affabilit y
and favor, than extr^mity and rigor. Put on then a more lovely look; ^uit
your self with a more lightsome dress. Show l^sse fire in your eye; less
fury in your heart. Estrange your self from the company of Eris; Inure your
memory to the censorious fate of Aeacus, so lively chanted by Harmonius: Ever
now and then refreshing your rectified disposition with those ^ree and friendly
expressions of Elecmon.

Lastly, to you Amerimnos, a drowsy name for a watchful Centinell; whose
secure sleep would have ruined the most flourishing State. After so long a
sleep, you must now prepare your self for as long a Watch. Better were it
never to enjoy life, than to make life a continued image of death. Now sleep
and death are termed two sisters; and Night the Mother of them both. The Poet
called one of the sons of sleep, (...), a terrifier of men. What then might
you bestiled, Amerimnos, whose ^ole felicity was security; and in a lasting
dream, summed up the days of your mortality? What was this else, but to make
a trifle of time; and to bestow the precious oyl^ of your life, on the (...)
delights of Sloth? Much better it were not to be, than fruitlesly to be. But
where the Evening can make no good account of the day, Youth must needs run
in great arrerages with Age. Now, such an one may more properly be said to have
slept a long sleep, than to have led a long life. For what should life be but
a continued day-taske? Where, as eternity depends on a moment; so should this
moment of time ever address it self to eternity. For know, howsoever this
temporal Sun which you here see with your eyes; and directs you in your
journals and ways, after it has set, may rise again: yet when the Sun of
your life shall once set, never look for a rising of it here again: being
once closed, it becomes for ever to this life darkened and benighted. Time lost
cannot then be redeemed; nor the fruitless ex^nce of your profuser hours
regained.

It is said of Demonax, a Philosopher who flourished in the time of Adrian,
that he naturally eschewed money and solitariness: which we never remember,
but we wish that Metoxos our first Consul, and you Amerimnos the last in
order, had equally partaked of his nature: that as disesteeme of the one might
have begotten in him an hate to cove^ousnesse: so your dislike of the other
might sharpen your desires to a love of business.

But as in him an^ ^he rest, so in you, Amerimnos, be our wishes crowned; for
we see your desires how much they are to employment enflamed; and how your
lateunactive spirits become now quickened. Nor do we doubt, but that these
good re^olves by your constant endeavors, will grow so richly improved, as we
shall have cause to apply the saying o^ that famous Athe^ian to you; You had
perished, had you not perished. For as his youth was exposed to all sensuality,
wantonness and lib^rtie, so he excelled in the maturitie of his time, in
policy, martial prowess and virtue.

Be it then your honor ^o shun whatsoever may redound to your dishonor.
Neglect no opportunity, whereby you may any way benefit the state. Apply you^
self to that public service; the discharge whereof may produce in you
incomparable solace. Make choice only of such for your acquaintance, where you
have hope either to better them, or to be bettered by them. And be not too
familiarly versed in the works of Aristom^chus: they treat too much of Wine,
but too little of wit. Lastly, remember that fearful distemper of Messala
Corvinus, with the dishonor of lazy Margites, rendered in that dainty Canto of
Harmonius: which you may discreetly temper with those industri ous dimensions
of Epimel^s.

Now, as out of our Princely and affectionate grace, we have received you our
late distempered, but now recovered Consuls, into our favor: and here given
you in CHARGE, how you are to demean your selves in affairs of State; with a
free declaration of what the State requires at your hands: and justified
^ithall, upon all and every such particular defects, whereto you were formerly
subject: so now our exhortation shall be, that you be cautious of a relapse.
And to the end you may less err in your affairs, ever submit your selves to
the discreet advice of Parth^nius; whom I have purposely placed over you, not
only in matters of doubt and difficulty to resolve you, but in all your
deportments of State, to inform you. Experience is a good Mistress; and so
anciently and irreproveably has he borne (...) in business of State, wherein
we have ever employed him (till in our absence some Libertines of our time had
exiled him) to his honor, and our improvement; as none ever yet knew him, were
they never such rigid Censors of others actions, who could justly tax him,
either of partiality to friend, or pas sion toward his foe. Receiv^ him then;
for it shall not derogate from your wisdoms It is the highest glory of a
flourishing State, to reward a deserving Patriot.
to have embraced such a Patriot, who makes the public good his highest object.

Now, whereas we have here set you as Beacons or Watch-to^ers to foresee
danger from a far, and timely ^o prevent it before it come to our doors, you
are hence to understand, how all men's eyes are on you; and how light errors in
you are most irregular, because exemplar.

Drops are but small things, yet joined together, they will in time rise to a
River. Grains of Sand are but small bodies, yet if much Sand be heaped
together, it not only presses, but oppresses the under-lyer. Y^e say, you
have a voided grand crimes; take heed ye be no^ overwhelmed with small Sands.
Time is precious unto all, but most unto age: for where few hours are
allotted, fit it were that they were well bestowed. Be ye then men of that
settled* seasoned, and well-composed temper, as to fix and terminate your
thoughts on that sole-Soveraigne good, which may fully close, s^ale and sat
your desires. For tell us, good fathers, what can be a more contemptible thing
than man, if he erect not his thoughts above man! So, as the very Locust or
Grasshopper (creatures of emptiness and fear) are no greater slaves to the
wind than man. How varying in his resolves; how delaying in his performance;
being ofttimes prevented by death, before he begin what he so long
resolved? But of all ages, most varying is he in age: which we may properly
illustrate by this similitude: when the Sun is in the Meridian, and the
beams of it perpendicular to our bodies, shadows change not suddenly; but
when it begins to decline to the fall, every moment almost, they vary. Man's
life is a spanne; a narrow spanne, which he shall neither fall short off, nor
exceed; no, not one little or point of it; not the br^adth of the smallest
hair, or atome; no, not the (...) Gothsimere* or any other extenuate or
imaginary thi^nesse whatsoever. Now, how should any man, if endued with
natural capacity, think but this vapor of Smoke, this light-vading breath,
may promise to it self any long continuance; especially, when the thread of
life is not only spunne thin, but worn small? When Age goes poring on the
ground, as if he were looking for some place where he should lie? But hope of
living long is that universal Antidote, that makes many a Mithridates venture
on poison. Of this both Age and Youth do equally surfeit. For no decrepit
groundling is so old, but he hopes he may live one year longer.

But higher be our hopes in you, who hold that life to be most blessed,
wherein whatsoever is best, is both loved and enjoyed. These, as most deluded
Mor^alls commonly be, being fed with a deceiving hope of living long, become
altogether secure of living well: whereas you, who prefer a good life before
a long life, and esteem nothing worthy prizing here, but what may highly
conduce to your safe conduct elsewhere: make no other aestimate of life, then
as of a Scene; which being well and bravely performed, crowns the Exit with an
applause.

The best and principallest Blessing confirmed by the authority of Herodotus in
Cleobulus and Biton, Trophonius and Agamedes? and that pithy conclusion of
Silenus, who being taken Prisoner by King Midas, pai^d this ransom, teaching
the King the best thing, that might chance any man, was never to be borne, the
next to die as soon as might be.

What are we then to think of you, who being borne to the State, live to
support it, love to advance it, and rejoice to see it? implying an auspicious
birth, a gracious life, ever expiring with a glorious cloze. Be your lives
then long or short, they cannot redound to your shame, because employed to the
improvement of the State. Live you would not, but for it; and dye you would
willingly to secure it.

The most potent Princes that ever breathed, have shown but weak prerogatives
against fate; Naught but vanity was to be attributed to them, retained they
never so much earthly glory on them, who dwelled in houses of clay, whose
foundation was in the dust, which are crushed before the Moath. Were they never
so numerously attended; with the banks and bars of the Sea surrounded; at
home and abroad secured; yet could they not from mortality be^ exempted. Which
no sooner seized on them, than they were soonest left by those, who seemingly
clove the closest to them. Now, what were these temporizing Fawnes, but such as
made Dialls of their Masters? So long as the Sun shone on them, and could
afford them a shadow, they looked on them; but no sooner had the Sun left them,
than they were left by them. So quickly they past by them with a careless
neglect, from whom they expected no further benefit. But virtues are your
attendants, which will survive the memory of all monumentall structures.

Thus you have heard (to draw in our Sails, and apply our Oars to the shore)
how the reputation of a State is preserved by a wise Council; and how you may
advance your Countries glory by this your restoration and recovery: Pacis
olivam, Palladis palmam Parthenopis lauream quas omnes fluctuantis Status Hyems
decerpserat, amae, niore cultu sereniore condition, Aestus restituerit
Hyacinth.
be it then your task to put in practice what you have heard. Never was their
fairer opportunity offered: nor an ampler reward for a shorter service,
t^ndred. Now then, in this your Evening send out some beamelins of your
deserving. That as Justice, whom you serve, is compared in beauty to the
Evening star, so you may show your selves beautiful stars in the Evening.
Short is your labor, perpetual shall be your honor. Cheerfully then
entertain the one that you may more happily enjoy the other.

Now to cloze with thankfulness (for ungrateful are they who will not
ingenuously acknowledge such ample courtesies) we vow by Themista's Throne, to
erect a lasting Trophie to Aesculapius memory; that succeeding ages may record
how ready we were to requite. So we leave you, but never leave to love you,
so you love the State, for whose Service and Solace we have re-advanced you.

So Themista ascended; her Senators descended; where their Office of Justice
became so well discharged, as it was well for the State that her Consuls
madded, being ever after better managed, than before such time as they fell
first distempered.

FINIS.
Oper^ de nobis testantur nostra, etiamsi taceant nostri.
The life of MARIANO SILESIO, the approved Author of this Work.
EXcellence of spirit is best expressed when most opposed; nor is there any
better exercise than opposition, to set a true edge on resolution. This might
be instanced to life in the life of MARIANO SILESIO; who ever armed himself
with the smoothest brow against the roughest braves of fortune.

A Florentine borne; generously descended; and gracefully endowed. Seasoned he
was with the elements of all Learning; wherein he became so highly improved, as
his rare expressions, relishing of no inferior spirit, rendered ^im both
admired and loved. Yet in that affluence of friendly observe^s, He^ wanted not
some priva^e detractours; wh^ the more they labored to dirk^n his luster, the
more they lost their labor: and (what they least expected) gave spreading
wings to hi^ fame and honor. Much of his youth he spent in Court-attendince;
where he bestowed more pretiou^ hours in useful observance, than youthful
dalliance. So as that very As may likewise appea^e by ^is free reproof of
Madam AlisiaLensona for her incontine^t l^fe: though at that time a Mistress to
the Dukes especial favorite.
place, which commonly becomes an effeminatour of others, bec^me an improver
and rectifier of his manner^. Complie he could not with corruption; nor affect
that, which in the eye of virtue deserved not approbation. Insomuch as, being
one day in the Court of Florence, and hearing a Lady of suspected fame much
admired for her agility and quickness in dan^ing, replied, my admiration shall
cloze in this; O that a Soul so heavy, should present so light a body!

An inimit able faculty he had for elegance of Phrase in prose and an
incomparable facillity for neateness^ of invention and ^weetnesse of dimen^onin
v^rse. Both which with such a free-streaming Current naturally flowed, as with
a pleasing disdain they scorned to be forced. Which caused him to he^ much
employed in hi^ yo^nger years, in the invention and setting forth of
Court-maskes and other Princely presentiments (impressiv^ objects of i^finite
d^light to refined Spirit^) all which he perf^rmed with (...) of Art; as no
place but hold it self honored by his person; nor, no (...) too amply
extended, to ^nlarge hi^ pe^sion. Albeit, o^t of the freedom and largeness of
his mind, He would ever re^urne this ans^r ^o such liberal b^stowers: It will
d^raact from the Muses to be Mercinari^s: And, Liberal Art^ should have
lib^all Hearts* and slow re^eivers. He could never (...) vulgar prais^, nor
titular applause, drawn from selfe-^ffectation or that ambiti^us gro^nd of
g^ining opinion. The he styled Opini^e Idol^try, which transformed selfe*^y
into a desperate Frenzy. (...) w^nt t^ say of Poggius and Pierus, two reputed
Wits in those days; that he could not endure Poggius conceit, because it made
too bold with Heaven; nor Pierus, because he ^sted to much of Earth.

Son after his retire from Court, He matched himself in a Noble family. A
Consort so exquisitely accomodated, and richly adorned with all graceful
perfections, as her Name, like some precious perfume, still preserves her
memory in Florence. But see the mut^bility of humane happiness! Shortly made
death an exchange with his choice: to whose vertuo^s memory he addressed his
continuate Anniversaries. Poems of an high and enlivened Spirit: where every
Stanza reteines his own native weight; and expresses its own th^ught without
an enforced state. With such obs^quious tears, and choice funeral composures,
He discharged that ex^quiall office, which He, devoted to her memory, was
owing, and of whose divine virtues he was so much enamoured, living: as h^
expressed (nor were his expressions feag^d) in these lines by him addressed to
her, during his remove from ^er:

Health crown mine hop^s in thee, for in thine health,
Mine health, help, hope consist; my weal, my wealth.
After her death, he became a Recluse near to the Cliffs of Arpina,
North-west from Corcyra; where his friends resorted to him, in hope to weine
him from that course, by propo^ing to him many eminent favorites in Court, and
to bring him back to Florence: but his fixed resolves on retirement, returned
them this answer:

Diswade me not; for never could I bestow
Such freedom on my better part as now;
Where th'Duke himself, were he not th'man he is,
Would wish in's heart but to enjoy my bliss:
Whose choice content affords me so much power,
As I may vye with greatest Emperor.
But fearing the solicitous importunity of such prevalent friends, (powerful
Advocates to a relenting Nature) with much secrecy, ^ee removed into a part
more desert and remote, wherewith a selfe-contenting privacy, he bestowed the
remainder of his days in Contemplation: s^ling his portell with this
inscription: INVISVS VIDEO.

To describe him, ^ee was of a middle stature; plea^ing Countenance; grateful
pres^nce; present discourse; pregnant wit; rich fancy; rare memory; an affable
disposition, though naturally a little subject to passion; which he ever so
sweetly tempered with discretion, as it never overmastered reason. To such an
excellent Soveraingty in the Command of his affections had he aspired, as his
innerhouse to no disquiets stood engaged.

Sundry works* during the time of his retire; He composed; wherein were
expressed such height of wit and clearenesse of judgment, as they received the
Character of diverse tongues. Amongst which, He took especial care, that this
Work should be fairly transcribed, and sent to Florence; where it was
entertained with such esteem, as it received a double honor, both for its
own Worth, and memory of the Author.

His last dying words, or invitation of Death (as is reported) were these: I
have got my-Selfe, as much out of the world as I could, though not so much as I
would; Come then my friendly Messenger, and take me out of this Creek, where I
have hitherto retired, that after so long bondage, I may be freed.

He lived to a ripe age; being both in years and virtues numerous.

Upon the Errata's.
THe genuine Translator of this ingenio^ Author, was wholly absent from this.
(...). For Themista's Court, whereof this Subject tr^ats, excluded these Errors
from all cure. This may serve for his excuse. Besides, it was divided upon
several Presses; no marva^le if ^e suffer in the one or (...). Be it your
Cand^r to clear it; upon this ingenious condition, that the next Impression
shall redeem it.

Praelia militibus constant, and prela figuris; Hinc indispositis Error vbique
lo^is.

Errata.

IN ter. Test. Auth. in some Coppies, for Fam^. read Fawn. Lib. 1. page 35.
lin. vlt. for the r. your. ib. p. 42. ^* p^nult. for rumerous r. numerous. Lib
2. p 84. l. 15. for incapably r. incapable. ib. p. 86. l. 1. for he, r. be.
ib. p. 88 for Theotmius, r. Th^otimus. ib. p. 117 l. 8 for to, r. of. ib. p.
124. and 125. figures misplaced. Lib. 3. p. 130 l. 14 for Treopagus, r.
Are^pagus. ib. p. 135. l. 10. a word undivided. ib p. 159. and 160. figures
misplaced. Lib 4. p 78. l. 10. for Epimomos, r. Epimonos, ib. p. 80. l. ^. a
line transposed. ib. p. 97. l. 12. for they, r. thy. ib p. 126. Stanza's
undivided. ib. p. 144. l. 11. for causeless, r. cause for (a mere inversion
of Sense.) ib. p. 162. letters in sundry lines disjoynted. ib. p. 214. l. 21.
for Epieicies, r. Epieices. ib. p. 211. l. 3: for. evenging, r. revenging. ib.
235. l. 15. for justified, r. insisted.

For the litterall errors, I leave them to the pen of the Candide Reader to
amend them.


