THE COUNTESS OF PEMBROKES ARCADIA, WRITTEN BY SIR PHILIPPE SIDNEI.

LONDON Printed by John Windet for william Ponsonbie. Anno Domini, 1590.

TO MY DEAR LADY AND SISTER, THE CONVNTESSE OF PEMBROKE.
HEre now have you (most dear, and most worthy to be most dear Lady) this
idle work of mine: which I fear (like the Spiders web) will be thought
fitter to be swept away, then worn to any other purpose. For my part, in very
truth (as the cruel fathers among the Greeks, were wont to do to the babes
they would not foster) I could well find in my heart, to cast out in some
desert of forgetfulness this child, which I am loath to father. But you desired
me to do it, and your desire, to my heart is an absolute commandment. Now, it
is done only for you, only to you: if you keep it to your self, or to such
friends, who will weigh errors in the ballaunce of good will, I hope, for the
fathers sake, it will be pardoned, perchance made much of, though in it self
it have deformities. For indeed, for seuerer eyes it is not, being but a
trifle, and that triflinglie handled. Your dear self can best witness the
manner, being done in loose sheets of paper, most of it in your presence, the
rest, by sheets, sent unto you, as fast as they were done. In sum, a young
head, not so well stayed as I would it were, (and shall be when God will)
having many many fancies begotten in it, if it had not ben in some way
delivered, would have grown a monster, and more sorry might I be that they
came in, then that they gat out. But his chief safety, shall be the not walking
abroad; and his chief protection, the bearing the liuerye of your name; which
(if much much goodwill do not deceive me) is worthy to be a sa^ctuary for a
greater offender. This say I, because I know the virtue so; and this say I,
because it may be ever so; or to say better, because it will be ever so. Read
it then at your idle times, and the follyes your good judgment will find in
it, blame not, but laugh at. And so, looking for no better stuff, then, as in
an Haberdashers shop, glasses, or feathers, you will continue to love the
writer, who does excedinglie love you; and most most hartelie prays you may
long live, to be a principal ornament to the family of the Sidneis.

Your loving Brother Philip Sidnei.

THe division and summing of the Chapters was not of Sir Philip Sidneis doing,
but adventured by the ouer-seer of the print, for the more ease of the Readers.
He therefore submits himself to their judgment, and if his labor answer not
the worthiness of the book, desires pardon for it. As also if any defecct be
found in the Eclogues, which although they were of Sir Phillip Sidneis writing,
yet were they not perused by him, but left till the work had been finished,
that then choice should have been made, which should have been taken, and in
what manner brought in. At this time they have been chosen and disposed as the
ouer-seer thought best.

THE COUNTESS OF PEMBROKES ARCADIA, WRITTEN BY SIR PHILIP SIDNEI. THE FIRST
BOOK.
CHAP. 1.
1 The sheperdish complaints of the absented lovers Strephon and Claius. 2 The
second shipwreck of Pyrocles and Musidorus. 3 Their strange saving, 4
enterview, and parting.

IT was in the time Strephon was come to the sands, which lie against the
Island of Cithera; where viewing the place with a heavy kind of delight, and
sometimes casting his eyes to the Ileward, he called his friendly rival, the
pastor Claius unto him, and fetting first down in his darkened countenance a
doleful copy of what he would speak: O my Claius, said he, hither we are now
come to pay the rent, for which we are so called unto by ouer-busie
Remembrance, Remembrance, restless Remembrance, which claymes not only this
duty of us, but for it will have us forget our selves. I pray you when we
were amid our flock, and that of other shepeheardes some were running after
their sheep strayed beyond their bounds, some delighting their eyes with seeing
them nibble upon the short and sweet grass, some medicining their sick ewes,
some setting a bell for an enfigne of a sheepish squadron, some with more
leisure inuenting new games of exercising their bodies and sporting their wits:
did Remembrance grant us any holiday, either for pastime or devotion, nay
either for necessary food or natural rest? but that still it forced our
thoughts to work upon this place, where we last (alas that the word last
should so long last) did gaze our eyes upon her ever flourishing beauty: did it
not still cry within us? Ah you base minded wretches, are your thoughts so
deeply bemired in the trade of ordinary worldlings, as for respect of gain
some paultry wool may yield you, to let so much time pass without knowing
perfectly her estate, especially in so troublesome a season? to leave that
shore unsaluted, from whence you may see to the Island where she dwells? to
leave those steps vnkissed wherein Urania printed the farewell of all beauty?
Well then, Remembrance commanded, we obeyed, and here we find, that as our
remembrance came ever clothed unto us in the form of this place, so this
place gives new heat to the fever of our languishing remembrance. Yonder my
Claius, Urania lighted, the very horse (me thought) bewailed to be so
disburdned: and as for thee, poor Claius, when thou wentst to help her down,
I saw reverence and desire so divide thee, that thou did at one instant both
blushe and quake, and in stead of bearing her, weart ready to fall down thy
self. There she sat, vouchsafing my cloak (then most gorgeous) under her:
at yonder rising of the ground she turned her self, looking back toward her
woonted abode, and because of her parting bearing much sorrow in her eyes, the
lightsomnes whereof had yet so natural a cherefulnesse, as it made even sorrow
seem to smile; at that turning she spoke unto us all, opening the cherrie of
her lips, and Lord how greedily mine ears did feed upon the sweet words she
uttered? And here she laid her hand over thine eyes, when she saw the tears
springing in them, as if she would conceal them from other, and yet her self
feel some of thy sorrow: But woe is me, yonder, yonder, did she put her foot
into the boat, at that instant as it were dividing her heavenly beauty,
between the Earth and the Sea. But when she was embarked, did you not mark
how the winds whistled, and the seas daunst for joy, how the fails did swel
with pride, and all because they had Urania? O Urania, blessed be thou Urania,
the sweetest fairness and fairest sweetness: with that word his voice brake
so with sobbing, that he could say no further; and Claius thus answered. Alas
my Strephon (said he) what needs this skore to reckon up only our losses?
What doubt is there, but that the light of this place does call our thoughts
to appear at the court of affection, held by that racking steward,
Remembrance? As Well may sheep forget to fear when they spy woolues, as we
can miss such fancies, when we see any place made happy by her treading. Who
can choose that saw her but think where she stayed, where she walked, where she
turned, where she spoke? But what is all this? truly no more, but as this
place served us to think of those things, so those things serve as places to
call to memory more excellent matters. No, no, let us think with
consideration, and consider with acknowledging, and acknowledge with
admiration, and admire with love, and love with joy in the midst of all woes:
let us in such sort think, I say, that our poor eyes were so enriched as to
behold, and our low hearts so exalted as to love, a maid, who is such, that as
the greatest thing the world can show, is her beauty, so the least thing that
may be praised in her, is her beauty. Certainly as her eyelids are more
pleasant to behold, then two white kiddes climing up a fair tree, and browsing
on his tendrest brauches, and yet are nothing, compared to the day-shining
stars contained in them; and as her breath is more sweet then a gentle
South-west wind, which comes creeping over flowrie fields and shaddowed waters
in the extreme heat of summer, and yet is nothing, compared to the honey
flowing speech that breath does carry: no more all that our eyes can see of
her (though when they have seen her, what else they shall ever see is but dry
stuble after clouers grass) is to be matched with the flock of unspeakable
virtues laid up delightfully in that best builded fold. But in deed as we
can better consider the suns beauty, by marking how he guildes these waters,
and mountains them by looking upon his own face, too glorious for our weak
eyes: so it may be our conceits (not able to bear her sun-stayning
excellency) will better way it by her works upon some meaner subject
employed. And alas, who can better witness that then we, whose experience is
grounded upon feeling? has not the only love of her made us (being silly
ignorant shepherds) raise up our thoughts above the ordinary level of the
world, so as great clearkes do not disdain our conference? has not the
desire to seem worthy in her eyes made us when others were sleeping, to sit
vewing the course of heavens? when others were running at base, to run over
learned writings? when other mark their sheep, we to mark our selves? has
not she thrown reason upon our desires, and, as it were given eyes unto
Cupid? has in any, but in her, loue-fellowship maintained friendship between
riuals, and beauty taught the beholders chastity? He was going on with his
praises, but Strephon bad him stay, and look: and so they both perceived a
thing which floted drawing nearer and nearer to the bank; but rather by the
favorable working of the Sea, then by any self industry. They doubted a
while what it should be; till it was cast up even hard before the^: at which
time they fully saw that it was a man: Whereupon running for pity sake unto
him, they found his hands (as it should appear, constanter friends to his life
then his memory) fast griping upon the edge of a square small coffer, which
lay all under his breast: else in him self no show of life, so as the board
seemed to be but a beer to carry him a land to his Sepulcher. So drew they up
a young man of so goodly shape, and well pleasing favor, that one would think
death had in him a lovely countenance; and, that though he were naked, nakedness
was to him an apparel. That sight increased their compassion, and their
compassion called up their care; so that lifting his feet above his head,
making a great deal of salt water to come out of his mouth, they laid him upon
some of their garments, and fell to rub and chase him, till they brought him to
recover both breath the servant, and warmth the companion of living. At length,
opening his eyes, he gave a great groan, (a doleful note but a pleasant
dittie) for by that, they found not only life, but strength of life in him.
They therefore continued on their charitable office, until (his spirits being
well returned,) he (without so much as thanking them for their pains) gate
up, and looking round about to the uttermost lymittes of his sight, and crying
upon the name of Pyrocles, nor seeing nor hearing cause of comfort: what (said
he) and shall Musidorus live after Pyrocles? by his calling and looking, that
the loss ofsome dear friend was great cause of his sorrow; told him they were
poor men that were bound by course of humanity to prevent so great a
mischief; and that they wished him, if opinion of some bodies perishing bred
such desperate anguish in him, that he should be comforted by his own proof,
who had lately escaped as apparent danger as any might be. No, no (said he) it
is not for me to attend so high a blissefulnesse: but since you take care of
me, I pray you find means that some Bark may be provided, that will go out
of the haven, that if it be possible we may find the body far far too
precious a food for fishes: and for the hire (said he) I have within this
casket, of value sufficient to content them. Claius presently went to a
Fisherman, and having agreed with him, and provided some apparel for the
naked stranger, he embarked, and the Shepherds with him: and were no sooner
gone beyond the mouth of the haven, but that some way into the sea they might
discern (as it were) a stayne of the waters color, and by times some sparks
and smoke mounting thereout. But the young man no sooner saw it, but that
beating his breast, he cried, that there was the beginning of his ruin,
entreating them to bend their course as near unto it as they could: telling,
how that smoke was but a small relic of a great fire, which had driven both
him and his friend rather to committee themselves to the cold mercy of the
sea, then to abide the hot cruelty of the fire: and that therefore, though
they both had abandoned the ship, that he was (if any where) in that course to
be met withal. They steared therefore as near thetherward as they could: but
when they came so near as their eyes were full masters of the object, they saw
a sight full of piteous strangenes: a ship, or rather the carkas of the ship,
or rather some few bones of the carkas, hulling there, part broken, part
burned, part drowned: death having used more then one dart to that destruction.
About it floted great store of very rich things, and many chestes which might
promise no less. And amidst the precious things were a number of dead bodies,
which likewise did not only testify both elements violence, but that the
chief violence was grown of humane inhumanitie: for their bodies were full of
grisly wounds, and their blood had (as it were) filled the wrinekles of the
seas visage: which it seemed the sea would not wash away, that it might witness
it is not always his fault, when we condemn his cruelty: in sum, a
defeat, where the conquered kept both field and spoil: a shipwreck without
storm or ill footing: and a wast of fire in the midst of water.

his head up full of unmoved majesty, he held a sword alost with his fair
arm, which often he waued about his crown as though he would threaten the
world in that extremity. But the fishermen, when they came so near him, that
it was time to throw out a rope, by which hold they might draw him, their
simplicity bred such amasement, and their amasement such a superstition, that
(assuredly thinking it was some God begotten between Neptune and Venus, that
had made all this terrible slaughter) as they went under sail by him, held up
their hands, and made their prayers. Which when Musidorus saw, though he were
almost as much ravished with joy, as they with astonishment, he lept to the
Mariner, and took the rope out of his hand and (saying, do thou live, and
art well? who answered, thou can tell best, since most of my well being
stands in thee,) threw it out, but already the ship was past beyond
Pyrocles: and therefore Musidorus could do no more but persuade the Mariners
to cast about again, assuring them that he was but a man, although of most
divine excellencies, and promising great rewards for their pain.

And now they were already come upon the stays; Pyrocles so near to be
reskewed. But what did not Musidorus say? what did he not offer to persuade
them to venture the fight? But fear standing at the gates of their ears, put
back all persuasions: so that he had nothing to accompany Pyrocles, but his
eyes; nor to succor him, but his wishes. Therefore praying for him, and
casting a long look that way he saw the Galley leave the pursuit of them, and
turn to take up the spoils of the other wrack: and lastly he might well see
them list up the young man; and alas (said he to himself) dear Pyrocles shall
that body of thine be enchayned? shall those victorious hands of thine be
commanded to base offices? shall virtue become a slave to those that be slaves
to viciousnes? Alas, better had it been thou had ended nobly thy noble days:
what death is so evil as unworthy servitude? But that opinion soon ceased
when he saw the gallie setting upon an other ship, which held long and strong
fight with her: for then he began a fresh to fear the life of his friend, and
to wish well to the Pirates whom before he hated, least in their ruin he
might perish. But the fishermen made such speed into the haven, that they
absented his eyes from beholding the issue: where being entered, he could
procure neither them nor any other as then to put themselves into the sea: so
that being as full of sorrow for being unable to do anything, as void of
counsel how to do anything, besides, that sickness grew something upon him,
the honest shepherds Strephon and Claius (who being themselves true friends,
did the more perfectly judge the justness of his sorrow) advise him, that he
should mitigate somewhat of his woe, since he had gotten an amendment in
fortune, being come from assured persuasion of his death, to have no cause to
despair of his life: as one that had lamented the death of his sheep, should
after know they were but strayed, would receive pleasure though readily he
knew not where to find them.

CHAP. 2.
1 The pastors comfortes to the wracked Musidorus. 2 His passage into Arcadia.
The descriptions of 3 Laconia, 4 Arcadia, Kalanders 5 person, 6 house, and 7
entertainment to Musidorus, now called Palladius. His 8 sickness, recovery, 9
and perfections.

NOw sir (said they) thus for our selves it is. We are in profession

There dwells a Gentleman, by name Kalander, swaie, not only in his own
Arcadia but in all these countries of Peloponnesus: and (which is worth all) all
these things give him not so much power, as his nature gives him will to
benefit: so that it seems no Music is so sweet to his ear as deserved
thanks. To him we will bring you, and there you may recover again your health,
without which you cannot be able to make any diligent search for your friend:
and therefore but in that respect, you must labor for it. Besides, we are sure
the comfort of courtesy, and ease of wise counsel shall not be wanting.

Musidorus (who besides he was merely unacquainted in the country had his wits
astonished with sorrow) gave easy consent to that, from which he saw no reason
to disagree: and therefore (defraying the Mariners with a ring bestowed upon
the^) they took their journey together through Laconia; Clauis and Strephon by
course carrying his chest for him, Musidorus only bearing in his countenance
evident marks of a sorowfulmind supported with a weak body, which they
perceiving, and knowing that the violence of sorrow is not at the first to be
striue^ withal: (being like a mighty beast, sooner tamed with following, tha^
overthrown by withstanding) they gave way unto it for that day and the next;
never troubling him, either with asking questions, or finding fault with his
mela^cholie, but rather fitting to his dolor dolorous discourses of their own
and other folks misfortunes. Which speeches, though they had not a lively
entrance to his se^ces shut up in sorrow, yet like one half asleep, he took hold
of much of the matters spoken unto him, so as a man may say, ere sorrow was
aware, they made his thoughts bear away something else beside his own sorrow,
which wrought so in him, that at length he grew content to mark their speeches,
then to marvel at such wit in shepheardes, after to like their company, and
lastly to vouchsafe conference: so that the 3 day after, in the time that the
morning did strew roses and violets in the heavenly floor against the coming
of the Sun, the nightingales (striving one with the other which could in most
dainty variety recount their wrong-caused sorrow) made the^ put of their sleep,
and rising from under a tree (which that night had bin their pauilio^) they
went on their journey, which by and by welcomed Musidorus eyes (wearied with the
wasted soil of Laconia) with delightful prospects. There were hills
Musidorus, then first vnsealing his long silent lips) what countries be these
we pass through, which are so diverse in show, the one wanting no store,
the other having no store but of want.

The country (answered Claius) where you were cast a passing fertile) as by a
civil war, which being these two years within the bowels of that estate,
between the gentlemen and the peasants (by them named Helots) has in this
sort as it were disfigured the face of nature, and made it so vnhospitall as
now you have found it: the towns neither of the one side nor the other,
willingly opening their gates to strangers, nor strangers willingly entering for
fear of being mistaken.

Kalander whether we lead you: this country being thus decked with peace, and
(the child of peace) good husbandry. These houses you see so scattered are of
men, as we two are, that live upon the commodity of their sheep: and
therefore in the division of the Arcadian estate are termed shepherds; a
happy people, wanting little, because they desire not much. What cause then,
said Musidorus, made you venture to leave this sweet life, and put your self
in yonder unpleasant and dangerous realm? Guarded with poverty (answered
Strephon) and guided with love: But now (said Claius) since it has pleased you
to ask any thing of us whose baseness is such as the very knowledge is darkness:
give us leave to know something of you, and of the young man you so much lament,
that at least we may be the better instructed to inform Kalander, and he the
better know how to proportion his entertainment. Musidorus (according to the
agreement between Pyrocles and him to alter their names) answered, that he
called himself Palladius, and his friend Daiphantus; but till I have him again
(said he) I am in deed nothing: and therefore my story is of nothing, his
entertainment (since so good a man he is) cannot be so low as I account my
estate: and in sum, the sum of all his courtesy may be to help me by some
means to seek my friend.

They perceived he was not willing to open himself further, and therefore
without further questioning Kalander knew that provision is the foundation of
hospitality, and thrist the fuel of magnificence. The house it self was
built of fair and strong stone, not affecting so much any extraordinary kind
of finenes, as an honorable representing of a firm statelines. The lights,
doors and stairs, rather directed to the use of the guest, then to the eye of
the Artificer: and yet as the one chiefly heeded, so the other not neglected;
each place handsome without curiosity, and homely without lothsomnes: not so
dainty as not to be trod on, nor yet slubberd up with good fellowship: all
more lasting then beautiful, but that the consideration of the exceeding
lastingneffe made the eye believe it was exceeding beautiful. The servants not
so many in number, as cleanly in apparel, and feruiceable in behavior,
testifying even in their countenaunces, that their master took as well care to
be served, as of the^ that did serve. One of them was forthwith ready to
welcome the shepherds; as men, who though they were poor, their master
greatly favored: and understanding by them; that the young man with them was
to be much accounted of, for that they had seen tokens of more then common
greatness, how so euernow eclipsed with fortune: He ran to his master, who
came presently forth, and pleasantly welcomming the shepheardes, but
especially applying him to Musidorus, Strephon privately told him all what he
knew of him, and particularly that he found this stranger was loath to be
known.

No said Kalander (speaking alowd) I am no herald Strephon by the sleeue,
delivered him a letter, written jointly both to him and Claius from Urania:
which they no sooner had read, but that with short leaue-taking of Kalander
(who quickly ghest and smiled at the matter) and once again (though hastily)
recommending the young man unto him, they went away, leaving Musidorus even
loathe to part with them, for the good conversation he had of them, and
obligation he accounted himself tied in unto them: and therefore, they
delivering his chest unto him, he opened it, and would have presented the^ with
two very rich jewels, but they absolutely refused them, telling him they were
more then enough rewarded in the knowing of him, and without herkening unto a
reply (like men whose hearts disdained all desires but one) gate speedely away,
as if the letter had brought wings to make them fly. But by that fight
Kalander soon judged that his guest was of no mean calling; and therefore the
more respectfully entertaining him, Musidorus found his sickness (which the
fight, the sea, and late travel had laid upon him) grow greatly: so that
fearing some sudden accident, he delivered the chest to Kalander; which was
full of most precious stones, gorgeously and cunningly set in diverse ma^ners,
desiring him he would keep those trisles, and if he died, he would bestow so
much of it as was needful, to find out and redeem a young man, naming
himself Daiphantus, as then in the hands of Laconia pirates.

But Kalander seeing him saint more and more, with Kalander: who, as in this
time he had by certain friends of his that dwelt near the Sea in Messenia,
set forth a ship and a galley to seek and succor Daiphantus: so at home
did he omit nothing which he thought might either prosite or gratify
Palladius.

For having found in him (besides his bodily gifts the bonds such virtue laid
upon him; once he acknowledged him self so to be, by the badge of diligent
attendance.

CHAP. 3.
The 1 pictures of Kalanders dainty garden-house. His narration of the 2
Arcadian estate, 3 the King, 4 the Queen, 5 their two daughters, and 6 their
gardians, with their qualities, which is the ground of all this story.

But Palladius having gotten his health, and only staying there to be in
place, where he might hear answer of the ships set forth, Kalander one
afternoon led him abroad to a welarayed ground he had behind his house, which
he thought to show him before his going, as the place him self more then in
any other delighted: the backeside of the house was neither field, garden, nor
orchard; or rather it was both field, garden, and orcharde: for as soon as
the descending of the stayres had delivered them down, they came into a place
cunningly set with trees of the most tastpleasing fruits: but scatcelie they
had taken that into their confideration, but that they were suddenly stepped
into a delicate green, of each side of the green a thicket bend, behind the
thickets again new beds of flowers, which being under the trees, the trees
were to them a Pauilion, and they to the trees a mosaical floor: so that it
seemed that art therein would needs be delightful by counterfaiting his
enemy error, and making order in confusion.

In the midst of all the place, was a fair ponde, Venus of white marble,
wherein the grauer had used such cunning, that the natural blew veins of the
marble were framed in fit places, to set forth the beautiful veins of her
body. At her breast she had her babe AEneas, who seemed (having begun to suck)
to leave that, to look upon her sayre eyes, which smiled at the babes folly,
the mean while the breast running. Hard by was a house of pleasure builte for
a Summer retiring place, whether Kalander leading him, he found a square room
full of delightful pictures, made by the most excellent workman of Greece.
There was Diana when Actaeon saw her bathing, in whose cheeks the painter had
set such a color, as was mixed between shame and disdain: and one of her
foolish Nymphs, who weeping, and withal lowering, one might see the workman
meant to set forth tears of anger. In another table was Atalanta; the posture
of whose lims was so lively expressed, that if the eyes were the only judges,
as they be the only seers, one would have sworn the very picture had run.
Besides many mo, as of Helena, Omphale, Iole: but in none of them all beauty
seemed to speak so much as in a large table, which contained a comely old man,
with a lady of middle age, but of excellent beauty; and more excellent would
have been deemed, but that there stood between the^ a young maid, whose
wonderfulnesse took away all beauty from her, but that, which it might seem
she gave her back again by her very shadow. And such difference being known
that it did in deed counterfeit a person living, was there between her and all the other, though Goddesses, that it seemd the skill of the painter bestowed on
the other new beauty, but that the beauty of her bestowed new skill of the
painter. Though he thought inquisitiuenes an uncomely guest, he could not
choose but ask who she was, that bearing show of one being in deed, could with
natural gifts go beyond the reach of invention. Kalander answered, that it was
made by Philoclea, the younger daughter of his prince, who also with his wife
were contained in that Table: the painter meaning to represent the present
condition of the young Lady, who stood watched by an ouer-curious eye of her
parents: and that he would also have drawn her eldest sister, esteemed her
match for beauty, in her shepheardish attire; but that the rude clown her
gardia^ would not suffer it: nether durst he ask leave of the Prince for fear
of suspision. Palladius perceived that the matter was wrapped up in some
secrefie, and therefore would for modesty demand no further: but yet his
countenance could not but with dumme Eloquence desire it: Which Kalander
perceauing, well said he, my dear guest, I know your mind, and I will
satisfy it: neither will I do it like a niggardly answerer, going no further
then the bounds of the question, but I will discover unto you, as well that
wherein my knowledge is common with others, as that which by extraordinary
means is delivered unto me:knowing so much in you, though not long acquainted,
that I shall find your ears faithful treasurers. So then sitting down in two
chaires, and sometimes casting his eye to the picture, he thus spoke.

This country Arcadia among all the provinces of

Here dwells, and reigns this Prince (whose picture Basilius, a Prince of
sufficient skill to govern so quiet a country, where the good minds of the
former princes had set down good laws, and the well bringing up of the people
does serve as a most sure bond to hold the^. But to be plain with you, he
excels in nothing so much, as in the zealous love of his people, wherein he
does not only pass al his own fore-goers, but as I think all the princes
living. Whereof the cause is, that though he exceed not in the virtues which get
admiration; as depth of wisdom, height of courage and largeness of
magnificence, yet is he notable in those which stir affection, as truth of
word, meekness, courtefie, mercifulness, and liberality.

Gynecia, daughter to the king of Cyprus, of notable beauty, as by her picture
you see: a woman of great wit, and in truth of more princely virtues, then her
husband: of most unspotted chastity, but of so working a mind, and so
vehement spirits, as a man may say, it was happy she took a good course: for
otherwise it would have been terrible.

Pamela; by many men not deemed inferior to her sister: for my part, when I
marked them both, me thought there was (if at least such perfections may
receive the word of more) more sweetness in Philoclea, but more majesty in
Pamela: me thought love plaide in Philocleas eyes, and threatened in Pamelas:
me thought Philocleas beauty only persuaded, but so persuaded as all hearts
must yield: Pamelas beauty used violence, and such violence as no heart could
resist: and it seems that such proportion is between their minds; Philoclea
so bashful as though her excellences had stolen into her before she was
aware: so humble, that she will put all pride out of countenance: in sum,
such proceeding as will stir hope, but teach hope good ma^ners. Pamela of
high thoughts, who auoides not pride with not knowing her excellencies, but by
making that one of her excellencies to be void of pride; her mothers wisdom,
greatness, nobility, but (if I can guess aright) knit with a more constant
temper. Now then, our Basilius being so publicly happy as to be a Prince, and
so happy in that happiness as to be a beloved Prince, and so in his private
blessed as to have so excellent a wife, and so ouerexcellent children, has of
late taken a course which yet makes him more spoken of then all these
blessings. For, having made a journey to Delphos, and safely returned, within
short space he brake up his court, and retired himself, his wife, and
children into a certain Forest hereby, which he calls his desert, where in
(besides a house appointed for stables and lodgings for certain persons of
mean calling, who do all household services,) he has builded two fine
lodges. In the one of them him self remains with his younger daughter
Philoclea, which was the cause they three were matched together in this
picture, without having any other creature living in that lodge with him.

Which though it be strange, yet not so strange, Pamela, whom he has
placed in the other lodge: but how think you accompanied? truly with none
other, but one Dametas, the most arrant doltish clown, that I think ever was
without the privilege of a babble, with his wife Miso, and daughter Mopsa, in
whom no wit can devise any thing wherein they may pleasure her, but to
exercise her patience, and to serve for a foil of her perfections. This
loutish clown is such, that you never saw so ill favored a visar; his
behavior such, that he is beyond the degree of ridiculous; and for his
apparel, even as I would wish him: Miso his wife, so handsome a beldame, that
only her face and her splaysoote have made her accused for a witch; only one
good point she has, that she observes decoru^, having a froward mind in a
wretched body. Between these two personages (who never agreed in any humor,
butin disagreeing) is issued forth mistress Mopsa, a fit woman to
participate of both their perfections: but because a pleasant fellow of my
acquaintance set forth her praises in verse, I will only repeat them, and
spare mine own tongue, since she goes for a woman. These verses are these,
which I have so often caused to be song, that I have them without book.

What length of verse can serve brave Mopsas good to show?
Whose virtues strange, and beuties such, as no ma the^ may know
Thus shrewdly burdned the^, how ca^ my Muse escape?
The gods must help, and precious things must serve to show her shape.
Like great god Saturn fair, and like fair Venus chaste:
As smothe as Pan, as Juno mild, like goddess Iris fast.
With Cupid she fore-sees, and goes god Vulcans pace:
And for a taste of all these gifts, she steals god Momus grace.
Her forhead iacinth like, her cheeks of opall hue,
Her twinkling eyes bedeckt with pearl, her lips as Saphir blew:
Her hair like Craple-stone; her mouth O heavenly wide;
Her skin like burnisht gold, her hands like silver ure vntryde.
As for her parts unknown, which hidden sure are best:
happy be they which well believe, and never seek the rest.
Now truly having made these descriptions unto you, me thinks you should
imagine that I rather feign some pleasant devise, then recount a truth, that a
Prince (not banished from his own wits) could possibly make so unworthy a
choice. But truly (dear guest) so it is, that Princes (whose doings have
been often soothed with good success) think nothing so absurd, which they
cannot make honorable. The beginning of his credit was by the Princes
straying out of the way, one time he hunted, where meeting this fellow, and
asking him the way; and so falling into other questions, he found some of his
aunswers (as a dog sure if he could speak, had wit enough to describe his
kennell) not insensible, and all uttered with such rudenes, which he
enterpreted plainness (though there be great difference between them) that
Basilius conceauing a sudden delight, took him to his Court, with apparent
show of his good opinion: where the flattering courtier had no sooner taken the
Princes mind, but that there were straight reasons to confirm the Princes
doing, and shadows of virtues found for Dametas. His silence grew wit, his
bluntness integrity, his beastly ignorance virtuous simplicity: and the
Prince (according to the nature of great persons, in love with that he had done
himself) fancied, that his weakness with his presence would much be mended.
And so like a creature of his own making, he liked him more and more, and thus
having first given him the office of principal heardman, lastly, since he
took this strange determination, he has in a manner put the life of himself
and his children into his hands. Which authority (like too great a sail for
so small a boat) does so ouer-sway poor Dametas, that if before he were a
good fool in a chamber, he might be allowed it now in a comedy: So as I doubt
me (I fear me in deed) my master will in the end (with his cost) find, that
his office is not to make men, but to use men as men are; no more then a horse
will be taught to hunt, or an ass to manage. But in sooth I am afraid I have
given your ears too great a sursette, with the gross discourses of that
heavy piece of flesh. But the zealous greese I conceue to see so great an
error in my Lord, has made me bestow more words, then I confess so base a
subject deserves.

CHAP. 4.
The 1 cause of Basilius his discourting. 2 Philanax his disswasiue letter. 3
Basilius his privileged company. 4 Four causes why old men are discoursers.
5 The state, the skill, and exercise of the Arcadian shepherds.

Clitophon, who is now absent, preparing for his own marriage, which I mean
shortly shall be here celebrated. This son of mine (while the Prince kept his
Court) was of his bedchamber; now since the breaking up thereof, returned
home, and showed me (among other things he had gathered) the copy which he had
taken of a letter: which when the prince had read, he had laid in a window,
presuming no body durst look in his writings: but my son not only took a
time to read it, but to copy it. In truth I blamed Clitophon for the
curiosity, which made him break his duty in such a kind, whereby kings
secrets are subject to be reucaled: but since it was done, I was content to
take so much profit, as to know it. Now here is the letter, that I ever since
for my good liking, have carried about me: which before I read unto you, I must
tell you from whom it came. It is a nobleman of this country, named Philanax,
appointed by the Prince, Regent in this time of his retiring, and most worthy
so to be: for, there lives no man, whose excellent wit more simply imbraseth
integrity, besides his unfeigned love to his master, wherein never yet any
could make question, saving, whether he loved Basilius or the Prince better: a
rare temper, while most men either seruile-ly yield to al appetites, or with an
obstinate austeritie looking to that they fancy good, in effect neglect the
Princes person. This then being the man, whom of all other (and most worthy)
the Prince chiefly loves, it should seem (for more then the letter I have not
to guess by) that the Prince upon his return from Delphos, ( Philanax then
lying sick) had written unto him his determination, rising (as evidently
appears) upon some Oracle he had there received: whereunto he wrote this
answer. Philanax his letter to Basilius.
MOst redouted and beloved prince, if as well it had pleased used my humble
service, both I should in better season, and to better purpose have spoken: and
you (if my speech had prevailed) should have been at this time, as no way more
in danger, so much more in quietness; I would then have said, that wisdom, and
virtue be the only destinies appointed to man to follow, whence we ought to
seek al our knowledge, since they be such guydes as cannot fail; which,
besides their inward co^sort, do lead so direct a way of proceeding, as either
prosperity must ensue; or, if the wickedness of the world should oppress it,
it can never be said, that evil happens to him, who falls accompanied with
virtue: I would then have said, the heavenly powers to be reverenced, and not
searched into; and their mercies rather by prayers to be sought, then their
hidden councels by curiosity. These kind of soothsayers (since they have left
us in our selves sufficient guides) to be nothing but fancy, wherein there
must either be vanity, or infalliblenes, and so, either not to be respected,
or not to be prevented. But since it is weakness too much to remember what
should have been done, and that your commandment stretches to know what is
to be done, I do (most dear Lord) with humble boldness say, that the manner of
your determination does in no sort better please me, then the cause of your
going. These thirty years you have so governed this Region, that neither your
Subjects have wanted justice in you, nor you obedience in them; and your
neighbors have found you so hurtlesly strong, that they thought it better to
rest in your friendship, then make new trial of your enmity. If this then
have proceeded out of the good constitution of your state, and out of a wise
providence, generally to prevent all those things, which might enco^ber your
happiness: why should you now seek new courses, since your own ensample
comforts you to continue, and that it is to me most certain (though it please
you not to tell me the very words of the Oracle) that yet no destiny, nor
influence whatsoever, can bring man's wit to a higher point then wisdom and
goodness? Why should you deprive your self of government, for fear of loosing
your government? like one that should kill himself for fear of death? nay
rather, if this Oracle be to be accounted of, arm up your courage the more
against it: for who will stick to him that abandones himself? Let your subjects
have you in their eyes; let them see the benefits of your justice daily more
and more; and so must they needs rather like of present sureties, then
uncertain changes. Lastly, whether your time call you to live or die, do both
like a prince. Now for your second resolution; which is, to suffer no worthy
prince to be a suitor to either of your daughters, but while you live to keep
the^ both unmarried; and as it were, to kill the joy of posterity, which in
your time you may enjoy: moved perchance by a mis-understoode Oracle. What
shall I say? if the affection of a father to his own children, cannot plead
sufficiently against such fancies: once certain it is, the God, which is God
of nature, does never teach unnaturalness: and even the same mind hold I
touching your banishing them from company, least, I know not what strange
loves should follow. Certainly Sir, in my ladies, your daughters, nature
promises nothing but goodness, and their education by your fatherly care, has
been hitherto such, as has been most fit to restrain all evil: giving
their minds virtuous delights, and not grecuing them for want of wel-ruled
liberty. Now to fall to a sudden straightning them, what can it do but argue
suspicion, a thing no more unpleasant, then unsure, for the preserving of
virtue? Leave women's minds, the most untamed that way of any: see whetherany
cage can please a bird? or whether a dog grow not fierce with tying? what
does jealousy, but stir up the mind to think, what it is from which they
are restrained? for they are treasures, or things of great delight, which men
use to hide, for the aptness they have to catch men's fancies: and the
thoughts once awaked to that, harder sure it is to keep those thoughts from
accomplishment, then it had been before to have kept the mind (which being the
chief part, by this means is defiled) from thinking. Lastly, for the
recommending so principal a charge of the Princess Pamela, (whose mind goes
beyond the governing of many thousands such) to such a person as Dametas is
(besides that the thing in it self is strange) it comes of a very evil ground,
that ignorance should be the mother of faithfulness. O no, he cannot be good,
that knows not why he is good, but stands so far good, as his fortune may
keep him unassayed: but coming once to that, his rude simplicity is either
easily changed, or easily deceived: and so grows that to be the last excuse of
his fault, which seemed to have been the first foundation of his faith. Thus
far has your commandment and my zeal drawn me; which I, like a man in a
valley that may discern hills, or like a poor passenger that may spy a rock,
so humbly submit to your gracious consideration, beseeching you again, to
stand wholly upon your own virtue, as the surest way to maintain you in that
you are, and to avoid any evil which may be imagined.




By the contents of this letter you may perceive, that the cause of all, has
been the vanity which possesses many, who (making a perpetual mansion of
this poor baiting place of man's life) are desirous to know the certainty of
things to come; wherein there is nothing so certain, as our continual
uncertainty. But what in particular points the oracle was, in faith I know
not: nether (as you may see by one place of Philanax letter) he himself
distinctly knew. But this experience shows us, that Basilius judgment,
corrupted with a Princes fortune, has rather heard then followed the wise (as
I take it) counsel of Philanax. For, having lost the stern of his government,
with much amazement to the people, among whom many strange bruits are received
for current, and with some appearance of danger in respect of the valiant
Amphalus his nephew, and much envy in the ambitious number of the Nobility
against Philanax, to see Philanax so advanced, though (to speak simply) he
deserve more the^ as many of us as there be in Arcadia: the prince himself has
hidden his head, in such sort as I told you, not sticking plainly to co^sesse,
that he means not (while he breathes) that his daughters shall have any husband,
but keep the^ thus solitary with him: where he

And now you know as much as my self: wherein if I exercise that part most,
which is least decayed, and that is our tongue: or, that knowledge being the
only thing whereof we poor old men can brag, we cannot make it known but by
utterance: or, that mankind by all means seeking to eternize himself so much
the more, as he is near his end, does it not only by the children that come
of him, but by speeches and writings recommended to the memory of hearers and
readers. And yet thus much I will say for my self, that I have not laid these
matters, either so openly, or largely to any as your self: so much (if I much
sail not) do I see in you, which makes me both love and trust you. Never may
he be old, answered Palladius, that does not reverence that age, whose
heaviness, if it way down the frayl and fleshly balance, it as much lifts up
the noble and spiritual part: and well might you have alleged another reason,
that their wisdom makes them willing to prosite others. And that have I
received of you, never to be forgotten, but with ungratefulness. But among many
strange conceits you told me, which have showed effects in your Prince, truly
even the last, that he should conceive such pleasure in shepherds discourses,
would not seem the least unto me, saving that you told me at the first, that
this country is notable in those wits, and that in deed my self having been
brought not only to this place, but to my life, by Strephon and Claius, in
their conference found wits as might better become such shepherds as Homer
speaks of, that be governors of peoples, then such senators who hold their
council in a shepecoate: for them two (said Kalander) especially Claius, they
are beyond the rest by so much, as learning commonly does add to nature: for,
having neglected their wealth in respect of their knowledge, they have not so
much empayred the meaner, as they bettered the better. Which all
notwithstanding, it is a sport to hear how they impute to love, which has
indewed their thoughts (say they) with such a strength.

But certainly, all the people of this country from Dametas will stumble
sometimes upon some Songs that might become a better brain: but no sort of
people so excellent in that kind as the pastors; for their living standing but
upon the looking to their beasts, they have ease, the Nurse of Poetry.
Neither are our shepherds such, as (I hear) they be in other countries; but
they are the very owners of the sheep, to which either themselves look, or
their children give daily attendaunce. And then truly, it would delight you
under some tree, or by some rivers side (when two or three of them meet
together) to hear their rurrall muse, how pretely it will deliver out,
sometimes joys, sometimes lamentations, sometimes chalengings one of the
other, sometimes under hidden forms uttering such matters, as otherwise they
durst not deal with. Then they have most commonly one, who judges the price
to the best doer, of which they are no less glad, then great Princes are of
triumphs: and his part is to set down in writing all that is said, save
that it may be, his pen with more leisure does polish the rudeness of an
vnthought-on song. Now the choice of all (as you may well think) either for
goodness of voice, or pleasantness of wit, the Prince has: among whom also
there are two or three strangers, whom inward melancholies having made weery
of the worlds eyes, have come to spend their lives among the country people
of Arcadia; and their conversation being well approved, the prince vouchsaseth
them his presence, and not only by looking on, but by great courtesy and
liberality, animates the Shepheardes the more exquisitely to labor for his
good liking. So that there is no cause to blame the Prince for sometimes hearing
them; the blame-worthinesse is, that to hear them, he rather goes to
solitariness, then makes them come to company. Neither do I accuse my
master for aduauncing a countriman, as Dametas is, since God forbid, but where
worthiness is (as truly it is among diverse of that fellowship) any outward
lowness should hinder the hiest raising, but that he would needs make
election of one, the baseness of whose mind is such, that it sinckes a
thousand degrees lower, then the basest body could carry the most base
fortune: Which although it might be answered for the Prince, that it is
rather a trust he has in his simple plainness, then any great advancement,
being but chief heardman: yet all honest hearts feel, that the trust of their
Lord goes beyond all advancement. But I am ever too long upon him, when he
crosses the way of my speech, and by the shaddowe of yonder Tower, I see it
is a fitter time, with our supper to pay the duties we owe to our stomachs,
the^ to break the air with my idle discourses: And more wit I might have
learned of Homer (whom even now you mentioned) who never entertained either
guestes or hosts with long speeches, till the mouth of hunger be thoroughly
stopped. So withal he rose, leading Palladius through the gardeine again to
the parler, where they used to suppe; Palladius assuring him, that he had
already been more fed to his liking, then he could be by the skilfullest
trencher-men of Media.

CHAP. 5.
The 1 sorrow of Kalander for his son Clitophon. The 2 story of Argalus and
Parthenia, their 3 perfections, their 4 love, their 5 troubles, her 6
impoysoning, 7 his rare constancy, 8 her strange refusal, 9 their
pathologies, her 10 flight, his 11 revenge on his rival the mischiefe-worker
Demagoras, then Captain of the rebel Helots, who 12 take him, and 13
Clitophon that sought to help him: but 14 both are kept alive by their new
captain.

But being come to the supping place, one of Kalanders servant Palladius,
and to excuse his absence with some necessary business he had presently to
dispatch. Which they accordingly did, for some few days forcing themselves
to let no change appear: but though they framed their countenaunces never so
cunningly, Palladius perceived there was some il-pleasing accident fallen out.
Whereupon, being again set alone at supper, he called to the Steward, and
desired him to tell him the matter of his sudden alteration: who after some
trifling excuses, in the end confessed unto him, that his master had received
news, that his son before the day of his near marriage, chaunst to be at a
battle, which was to be fought between the Gentlemenne of Lacedaemon and the
Helots: who winning the victory, he was there made prisoner, going to deliver
a friend of his taken prisoner by the Helots; that the poor young Gentleman
had offered great ransom for his life: but that the hate those paysaunts
conceived against all Gentlemen was such, that every hour he was to look
for nothing, but some cruel death: which hether-vnto had only been delayed
by the Captains vehement dealing for him, who seemed to have a heart of more
manly pity then the rest. Which loss had stricken the old Gentleman with
such sorrow, as if abundance of tears did not seem suffciently to witness
it, he was alone retired, tearing his bearde and hair, and cursing his old
age, that had not made his grave to stop his ears from such aduertisements:
but that his faithful servant had written in his name to all his friends,
followers, and tenants ( Philanax the governor refusing to deal in it, as a
private cause, but yet giving leave to seek their best redress, so as they
wronged not the state of Lacedaemon) of whom there were now gathered upon the
frontiers good forces, that he was sure would spend their lives by any way, to
redeem or revenge Clitophon. Now sir (said he) this is my masters nature,
though his grief be such, as to live is a grief unto him, and that even his
reason is darkened with sorrow; yet the laws of hospitality (long and holily
observed by him) give still such a sway to his proceeding, that he will no way
suffer the stranger lodged under his roof, to receive (as it were) any
infection of his anguish, especially you, toward whom I know not whether his
love, or admiration be greater. But Palladius could scarce hear out his tale
with patience: so was his heart torn in pieces with compassion of the case,
liking of Kalanders noble behavior, kindness for his respect to himwarde, and
desire to find some remedy, besides the image of his dearest friend
Daiphantus, whom he judged to suffer eythera like or a worse fortune: therefore
rising from the boorde, he desired the steward to tell him particularly, the
ground, and event of this accident, because by knowledge of many
circumstaunces, there might perhaps some way of help be opened. Whereunto the
Steward easily in this sort condiscended.

My Lord (said he) when our good king Basilius, with Cynccia; there came with
her a young Lord, cousin german to her self, named Argalus, led hither, partly
with the love and honor of his noble kinswoma^, partly with the humor of
youth, which ever thinks that good, whose goodness he secs not: and in this
court he received so good increase of knowledge, that after some years spent,
he so manifested a most virtuous mind in all his Arcadia gloried such a plant
was transported unto them, being a Gentleman in deed most rarely accomplished,
excellently learned, but without all vain glory: friendly, without
factiousnes: valiant, so as for my part I think the earth has no man that
has done more heroical acts then he; how soever now of late the same flies
of the two princes of Thessalia and Macedon, and has long done of our noble
prince Amphialus: who in deed, in our parts is only accounted likely to
match him: but I say for my part, I think no man for valor of mind, and
ability of body to be preferred, if equalled to Argalus; and yet so valiant
as he never durst do any body injury: in behavior some will say ever sad,
surely sober, and somewhat given to musing, but never discourteous; his word
ever led by his thought, and followed by his deed; rather liberal then
magnificent, though the one wanted not, and the other had ever good choice of
the receiver: in sum (for I perceive I shall easily take a great draught of
his praises, whom both I and all this country love so well) such a man was
(and I hope is) Argalus, as hardly the nicest eye can find a spot in, if the
ouer-vehement constancy of yet spotles affection, may not in hard wrested
constructions be counted a spot: which in this manner began that work in him,
which has made both him, and it self in him, over all this country famous.
My masters son Clitophon (whose loss gives the cause to this discourse, and
yet gives me cause to begin with Argalus, since his loss proceeds from
Argalus) being a young Gentleman, as of great birth (being our kings sisters
son) so truly of good nature, and one that can see good and love it, haunted
more the company of this worthy Argalus, then of any other: so as if there
were not? friendship (which is so rare, as it is to be doubted whether it be
a thing in deed, or but a word) at least there was such a liking and
friendlines, as has brought forth the effects which you shall hear. About
two years since, it so fell out, that he brought him to a great Ladies house,
sister to my master, who had with her, her only daughter, the fair
Parthenia; fair in deed (same I think it self daring not to call any
fayrer, if it be not Helena queen of Corinth, and the two incomparable sisters
of Arcadia) and that which made her fairness much the fayrer, was, that it
was but a fair ambassador of a most fair mind, full of wit, and a wit which
delighted more to judge it self, then to show it self: her speech being is
rare as precious; her silence without sullenness; her modesty without
affectation; her shamefastnes without ignorance: in sum, one, that to praise
well, one must first set down with himself, what it is to be excellent: for
so she is.

I think you think, that these perfections meeting,

There had been a good while before, and so continued, of Laconia, yet near
neighbor to Parthenias mother, named Demagoras: A man mighty in riches and
power, and proud thereof, stubbornly stout, loving no body but himself, and
for his own delights sake Parthenia: and pursuing vehemently his desire, his
riches had so gilded over all his other imperfections, that the old Lady
(though contrary to my Lord her brothers mind) had given her consent; and
using a mothers authorities upon her fair daughter, had made her yield
thereunto, not because she liked her choice, but because her obedient mind
had not yet taken upon it to make choice; and the day of their assurance drew
near, when my young Lord Clitophon brought this noble Argalus, perchance
principally to see so rare a fight, as Parthenia by all well judging eyes was
judged.

But though sewe days were before the time of assurance appointed, yet love
that saw he had a great journey to make in short time, hasted so him self,
that before her word could tie her to Demagoras, her heart has vowed her to
Argalus, with so grateful a receipte in mutual affection, that if she
desired above all things to have Argalus, Argalus feared nothing but to miss
Parthenia. And now Parthenia had learned both liking and misliking, loving and
lothing, and out of passion began to take the authority of judgment; in so
much, that when the time came that Demagoras (full of proud joy) thought to
receive the gift of her self, she with words of resolute refusal (though
with tears showing she was sorry she must refuse) assured her mother, she
would first be bedded in her grave, then wedded to Demagoras. The change was
no more strange, then unpleasant to the mother: who being determinately (least
I should say of a great Lady wilfully) bent to marry her to Demagoras, tried
all ways which a witty and hard-harted mother could use, upon so humble a
daughter: in whom the only resisting power was love. But the more she
assaulted, the more she taught Parthenia to defend: and the more Parthenia
defended, the more she made her mother obstinate in the assault: who at length
finding, that Argalus standing between them, was it that most eclipsed her
affection from shining upon Demagoras, she sought all means how to remove him,
so much the more, as he manifested himself an unremovable suitor to her
daughter: first, by employing him in as many dangerous enterprises, as ever the
evil stepmother Juno recommended to the famous Hercules: but the more his
virtue was tried, the more pure it grew, while all the things she did to
overthrow him, did set him up upon the height of honor; enough to have moved
her heart, especially to a man every way so worthy as Argalus: but she
struggling against all reason, because she would have her will, and show her
authority in matching her with Demagoras, the more virtuous Argalus was, the
more he hated him: thinking her self conquered in his co^quests, and therefore
still employing him in more and more dangerous attempts: mean while, she used
all extremities possible upon her fair daughter, to make her give over her
self to her direction. But it was hard to judge, whether he in doing, or she
in suffering, showed greater constancy of affection: for, as to Argalus the
world sooner wanted occasions, then he valor to go through them; so to
Parthenia, malice sooner ceased, the^ her unchanged patience. Lastly, by
treasons, Demagoras and she would have made away Argalus: but he with
providence and courage so past over all, that the mother took such a spiteful
grief at it, that her heart brake withal, and she died.

Demagoras assuring himself, that now Parthenia was her own, she would never
be his, and receiving as much by her own determinate answer, not more
desiring his own happiness, then envying Argalus, whom he saw with narrow eyes,
even ready to enjoy the perfection of his desires; strengthening his conceit
with all the mischievous counsels which disdayned love, and envious pride could
give unto him; the wicked wretch (taking a time that Argalus was gone to his
country, to fetch some of his principal friends to honor the marriage, which
Parthenia had most joyfully consented unto,) the wicked Demagoras (I say)
desiring to speak with her, with unmerciful force, (her weak arms in vain
resisting) rubd all over her face a most horrible poison: the effect whereof
was such, that never leaper looked more ugly the^ she did: which done, having
his men and horses ready, departed away in spite of her servants, as ready to
revenge as they could be, in such an unexpected mischief. But the
abhominablenes of this fact being come to my L. Kalander, he made such means,
both by our kings intercession, and his own, that by the king, and Senate of
Lacedaemo^, Demagoras was upon pain of death, banished the country: who
hating the punishment, where he should have hated the fault, ioynde himself,
with all the powers he could make, unto the Helots, lately in rebellion against
that state: and they (glad to have a man of such authority among the^) made him
their general: and under him have committed diverse the most outrageous
villainies, that a base multitude (full of desperate revenge) can imagine.

But within a while after this pitiful fact committed Parthenia, Argalus
returned (poor gentleman) having her fair image in his heart, and already
promising his eyes the uttermost of his felicity, when they (no body else
daring to tell it him) were the first messengers to themselves of their own
misfortune. I mean not to move passions with telling you the griese of both,
when he knew her, for at first he did not, nor at first knowledge could
possibly have Virtues aid so ready, as not even weakly to lament the loss of
such a jewel, so much the more, as that skilful men in that art assured it
was unrecoverable: but within a while, truth of love (which still held the
first face in his memory) a virtuous constancy, and even a delight to be
constant, faith given, and inward worthiness shining through the foulest mistes,
took so full hold of the noble Argalus, that not only in such comfort which
witty arguments may bestow upon adversity, but even with the most abundant
kindness that an eye-rauished lover can express, he labored both to drive
the extremity of sorrow from her, and to hasten the celebration of their
marriage: whereunto he vnsainedly showed himself no less cherefully earnest,
then if she had never been disinherited of that goodly portion, which nature
had so liberally bequeathed unto her: and for that cause deferred his intended
revenge upon Demagoras, because he might continually be in her presence;
showing more humble seruiceablenes, and joy to content her, then ever before.

But as he gave this rare ens^aple, not to be hoped for of any other, but of an
other Argalus: so of the other side, she took as strange a course in
affection: for, where she desired to enjoy him, more then to live; yet did she
overthrow both her own desire, and his, and in no sort would yield to marry
him; with a strange encounter of loves affects, and effects: that he by an
affection sprung from excessive beauty, should delight in horrible soulnesse;
and she, of a vehement desire to have him, should kindly buyld a resolution
never to have him: for truth is, that so in heart she loved him, as she could
not find in her heart he should be tied to what was unworthy of his presence.

other answer but this: my Lord (said she) God knows Iloue you: if I were
Princess of the whole world, and had withal, all the blessings that ever the
world brought forth, I should not make delay, to lay my self, and them, under
your feet: or if I had continued but as I was, though (I must co^sesse) far
unworthy of you, yet would I, (with too great a joy for my heart to think of)
have accepted your vouchsasing me to be yours, and with faith and obedience
would have supplied all other defects. But first let me be much more miserable
then I am, ere I match Argalus to such a Parthenia: Live happy, dear Argalus,
I give you full liberty, and I beseech you take it; and I assure you I shall
rejoice (whatsoever become of me) to see you so coupled, as may be sit, both
for your honor, and satisfaction. With that the burst out in crying and
weeping, not able longer to contain her self from blaming her fortune, and
wishing her own death.

But Argalus with a most heavy heart still pursuing

Argalus sought her long, and in many places: at Demagoras, he went alone
disguysed into the chief town held by the Helots: where coming into his
presence, guarded about by many of his soldiers, he could delay his fury no
longer for a fitter time: but setting upon him, in despite of a great many
that helped him, gave him diverse mortal wounds, and himself (no question) had
been there presently Demagoras himself desired he might be kept alive;
perchance with intention to feed his own eyes with some cruel execution to
be laid upon him, but death came sooner then he looked for; yet having had
leisure to appoint his successor, a young man, not long before delivered out of
the prison of the King of Lacedoemon, where he should have suffered death for
having flaine the kings Nephew: but him he named, who at that time was absent,
making roades upon the Lacedaemonians, but being returned, the rest of the
Helots, for the great liking they conceived of that young man, (especially
because they had none among themselves to whom the others would yield) were
content to follow Demagoras appointment. And well has it succeeded with them,
he having since done things beyond the hope of the youngest heads; of whom I
speak the rather, because he has hitherto preserved Argalus alive, under
pretense to have him publicly, and with exquisite torments executed, after
the end of these wars, of which they hope for a soon and prosperous issue.

And he has likewise hitherto kept my young Lord Clitophon alive, who (to
redeem his friend) went with certain other noblemen of Laconia, and forces
gathered by them, to besiege this young and new successor: but he issuing out
(to the wonder of all men) defeated Laconians, flew many of the noblemen, and
took Clitophon prisoner, whom with much a do he keeps alive: the Helots
being villanously cruel; but he tempereth the^ so, sometimes by following their
humor, sometimes by striving with it, that hitherto he has faued both their
lives, but in different estates; Argalus being kept in a close and hard prison,
Clitophon at some libertic. And now Sir, though (to say the truth) we can
promise our selves little of their safeties, while they are in the Helots hands,
I have delivered all I understand touching the loss of my Lords son, and
the cause thereof: which, though it was not necessary to Clitophons case, to be
so particularly told, yet the stra^genes of it, made me think would not be
unpleasant unto you.

CHAP. 6.
1 Kalanders expedition against the Helots. 2 Their estate. 3 Palladius his
stratageme against them: 4 which preuayleth. 5 The Helots resistance,
discomfiture, and 6 reenforce by the return of their new captain 7 The combat
and 8 enterknowledge of Daiphantus and Palladius, and by their 9 means a
peace, with 10 the release of Kalander and Clitophon.

PAlladius thanked him greatly for it, being even passionatly delighted with
hearing so strange an accide^t of a knight so famous over the world, as
Argalus, with whom he had himself a long desire to meet: so had same poured a
noble emulation in him, toward him.

But the^ (well bethinking himself) he called for armor, Kala^der, whom he
found lying upon the ground, having ever since banished both sleep and food,
as enemies to the mourning which passion persuaded him was reasonable. But
Palladius raised him up, saying unto him: No more, no more of this, my Lord
Kalander; let us labor to find, before we lament the loss: you know my
self miss one, who, though he be not my son, I would disdayn the favor of
life after him: but while there is hope left, let not the weakness of sorrow,
make the strength of it languish: take comfort, and good success will follow.
And with those words, comfort seemed to lighten in his eyes, and that in his
face and gesture was painted victory. Once, Kalanders spirits were so revived
withal, that (receiving some sustenance, and taking a little rest) he armed
himself, and those few of his servants he had left unsent, and so himself
guyded Palladius to the place upon the frontiers: where already there were
assembled between three and four thousand men, all well disposed (for Kalanders
sake) to abide any peril: but like men disused with a long peace, more
determinate to do, then skillful how to do: lusty bodies, and brave armours:
with such courage, as rather grew of despising their enemies, whom they knew
not, then of any confidence for any thing, which in them selves they knew; but
neither cunning use of their weapons, nor art showed in their marching, or
incamping. Which Palladius soon perceiving, he desired to understand (as much
as could be delivered unto him) the estate of the Helots.

they had long borne; till of late the Lacedoemonians through greediness
growing more heavy then they could bear, and through contempt less careful
how to make them bear, they had with a general consent (rather springing by
the generalnes of the cause, then of any artificial practice) set themselves
in arms, and whetting their courage with revenge, and grounding their
resolution upon despair, they had proceeded with vnloked-for succes: having
already taken diverse Towns and Castles, with the slaughter of many of the
gentry; for whom no sex nor age could be accepted for an excuse. And that
although at the first they had fought rather with beastly fury, then any
souldierly discipline, practice had now made then comparable to the best of the
Lacedoemonians; and more of late then ever; by reason, first of Demagoras a
great Lord, who had made him self of their party, and since his death, of an
other Captain they had gotten, who had brought up their ignorance, and brought
down their fury, to such a mean of good government, and withal led them so
valorously, that (besides the time wherein Clitophon was taken) they had the
better in some other great co^flicts: in such wise, that the estate of
Lacedoemon had sent unto them, offering peace with most reasonable and
honorable conditions. Palladius having gotten this general knowledge of the
party against whom, as he had already of the party for whom he was to fight,
he went to Kalander, and told him plainly, that by plain force there was
small apparaunce of helping Clitophon: but some device was to be taken in hand,
wherein no less discretion then valor was to be used.

Whereupon, the council of the chief men was called and at last, this way
Palladius (who by some experience, but especially by reading Histories, was
acquainted with stratagemes) invented, and was by all the rest approved: that
all the men there should dress themselves like the poorest sort of the
people in Arcadia, having no banners, but bloody shirtes hanged upon long
staves, with some bad bag pipes in stead of drum and fife, their armor
they should as well as might be, cover, or at least make them look so rustilie,
and ill-fauouredly as might well become such wearers; and this the whole number
should do, saving two hundred of the best chosen Gentlemen, for courage and
strength, whereof Palladius him self would be one, who should have their arms
chayned, and be put in carts like prisoners. This being performed according to
the agreement, they marched on toward the town of Cardamila where Clitophon
was captive; and being come two hours before Sunne-set within vewe of the
walls, the Helots already descrying their number, and beginning to found the
Allarum, they sent a cunning fellow, (so much the cunninger as that he could
mask it under rudenes) who with such a kind of Rhetorike, as weeded out all
flowers of Rhetorike, delivered unto the Helots assembled together, that they
were country people of Arcadia, no less oppressed by their Lords, and no
less desirous of liberty then they, and therefore had put themselves in the
field, and had already (besides a great number slain) taken nine or ten skore
Gentlemen prisoners, who^ they had there well and fast chained. Now because
they had no strong retiring place in Arcadia, and were not yet of number enough
to keep the field against their Princes forces, they were come to them for
succor; knowing, that daily more and more of their quality would flock unto
the^ but that in the mean time, left their Prince should pursue the^, or the
Lacedaemonian King and Nobility (for the likeness of the cause) fall upon them,
they desired that if there were not room enough for them in the town, that
yet they might encampe under the walls, and for surety have their prisoners
(who were such me^ as were ever able to make their peace) kept within the town.

The Helots made but a short consultatio^, being glad Arcadia, and making
account that if the peace did not fall out between them and their King, that
it was the best way to set fire in all the parts of Greece; besides their
greediness to have so many Gentlemen in their hands, in whose raunsoms they
already meant to have a share; to which have of concluding, two things well
helped; the one, that their Captain with the wisest of them, was at that time
absent about confirming or breaking the peace, with the state of Lacedaemon:
the second, that ouer-many good fortunes began to breed a proud recklesnesse
in them: therefore sending to view the camp, and finding that by their speech
they were Arcadians, with whom they had had no war, never suspecting a
private man's credit could have gathered such a force, and that all other
tokens witnessed them to be of the lowest calling (besides the chains upon the
Gentlemen) they granted not only leave for the prisoners, but for some others
of the company, and to all, that they might harbor under the walls. So
opened they the gates, and received in the carts; which being done, and
Palladius seeing fit time, he gave the sign, and shaking of their chains,
(which were made with such art, that though they seemed most strong and fast,
he that ware them might easily loose them) drew their swords hidden in the
carts, and so setting upon the ward, made them to fly either from the place,
or from their bodies, and so give entry to all the force of the Arcadians,
before the Helots could make any head to resist them.

Helots being men hardened against dangers, gathered as (well as they could)
together in the market place, and thence would have given a shrewd welcome to
the Arcadians, but that Palladius (blaming those that were slow, hartning the^
that were forward, but especially with his own ensample leading them) made
such an impression into the squadron of the Helots, that at first the great
body of them beginning to shake, and stagger; at length, every particular
body recommended the protection of his life to his feet. Then Kalander cried
to go to the prison, where he thought his son was, but Palladius wished him
(first scouring the streates) to house all the Helots, and make themselves
masters of the gates.

Helots had gotten new heart, and with diverse fortes of shot from corners of
streats, and house windows, galled them; which courage was come unto them by
the return of their Captian; who though he brought not many with him (having
dispersed most of his companies to other of his holds) yet meeting a great
number running out of the gate, not yet possessed by the Arcadians, he made them
turn face, and with banners displayed, his Trumpet give the lowdest testimony
he could of his return, which once heard, the rest of the Helots which were
otherwise scattered, bent thetherward, with a new life of resolution: as if
their Captain had been a root, out of which (as into branches) their
courage had sprung. Then began the fight to grow most sharp, and the
encounters of more cruel obstinacy. The Arcadians fighting to keep that they
had won, the Helots to recover what they had lost. The Arcadians, as in an
unknown place, having no succor but in their hands; the Helots, as in their
own place, fighting for their livings, wives, and children. There was victory
and courage against revenge and despair: safety of both sides being no
otherwise to be gotten, but by destruction.

At length, the left winge of the Arcadians began to Palladius seeing, he
straight thrust himself with his choice band against the throng that
oppressed the^, with such an ouerflowing of valor, that the Captain of the
Helots (whose eyes soon judged of that wherewith themselves were governed) saw
that he alone was worth all the rest of the Arcadians. Which he so wondered at,
that it was hard to say, whether he more liked his doings, or misliked the
effects of his doings: but determining that upon that cast the game lay, and
disdaining to fight with any other, fought only to join with him: which mind
was no less in Palladius, having easily marked, that he was as the first mouer
of all the other hands. And so their thoughts meeting in one point, they
consented (though not agreed) to try each others fortune: and so drawing
themselves to be the uttermost of the oneside, they began a combat, which was
so much inferior to the battle in noise and number, as it was surpassing it
in bravery of fighting, and (as it were) delightful terriblenes. Their courage
was guided with skill, and their skill was armed with courage; neither did
their hardiness darken their wit, nor their wit cool their hardines: both
valiant, as men despising death; both confident, as unwonted to be overcome;
yet doutefull by their present feeling, and respectfull by what they had
already seen. Their feet stedy, their hands diligent, their eyes watchful,
and their hearts resolute. The parts either not armed, or weakly armed, were
well known, and according to the knowledge should have been sharply visited,
but that the answer was as quick as the objection. Yet some lighting; the
smarte bred rage, and the rage bred smarte again: till both sides beginning to
wax faint, and rather desirous to die accompanied, then hopeful to live
victorious, the Captain of the Helots with a blow, whose violence grew of
fury, not of strength, or of strength proceeding of fury, struck Palladius
upon the side of the head, that he reelde astonished: and withal the helmet fell
of, he remaining bare headed: but other of the Arcadians were ready to shield
him from any harm might rise of that nakedness.

Palladius standing upon him self, and misdoubting some craft, and the Helots
(that were next their captain) wavering between looking for some stratageme,
or fearing treason, What, said the captain, bath Palladius forgotten the
voice of Daiphantus?

By that watch word Palladius knew that it was his only friend Pyrocles,
whom he had lost upon the Daiphantus by authority, and Palladius by
persuasion; to which helped well the little advantage that was of either side:
and that of the Helots party their Captains behavior had made as many amazed
as fawe or heard of it: and of the Arcadian side the good old Kalander
striving more then his old age could atchieue, was newly taken prisoner. But in
deed, the chief parter of the fraye was the night, which with her black
arms pulled their malicious sightes one from the other. But he that took
Kalander, meant nothing less then to save him, but only so long, as the
Captain might leanre the enemies secrets: toward whom he led the old
Gentleman, when he caused the retreit to be founded: looking for no other
delivery from that captivity, but by the painful taking away of all pain:
when whom should he see next to the Captain (with good tokens how valiantly
he had sought that day against the Arcadians) but his son Clitophon? But
now the Captain had caused all the principal Helots to be assembled, as well
to deliberate what they had to do, as to receive a message from the Arcadians;
Among whom Palladius virtue (besides the love Kalander bare him) having gotten
principal authority, he had persuaded them to seek rather by parley to
recover the Father and the Son, then by the sword: since the goodness of the
Captain assured him that way to speed, and his value (wherewith he was of old
acquainted) made him think any other way dangerous. This therefore was done in
orderly manner, giving them to understand, that as they came but to deliver
Clitophon, so offering to leave the footing they already had in the town, to
go away without any further hurt, so as they might have the father, and the
son without ransom delivered. Which conditions being heard and conceived by
the Helots, Daiphantus persuaded them without delay to accept them. For first
(said he) since the strife is within our own home, if you loose, you loose all
that in this life can be dear unto you: if you win, it will be a blouddy
victory with no profit, but the flattering in our selves that same badde
humor of revenge. Besides, it is like to stir Arcadia upon us, which now,
by using these persons well, may be brought to some amity. Lastly, but
especially, least the king and nobility of Laconia (with whom now we have made
a perfect peace) should hope, by occasion of this quarrel to join the
Arcadians with them, and so break of the profitable agreement already
concluded. In sum, as in all deliberations (waying the profit of the good
success with the harm of the evil success) you shall find this way most
safe and honorable.

Helots as much moved by his authority, as persuaded by his reasons, were
content therewith. Whereupon, Palladius took order that the Arcadians should
presently march out of the town, taking with them their prisoners, while the
night with mutual diffidence might keep them quiet, and ere day came they
might be well on of their way, and so avoid those accidents which in late
enemies, a look, a word, or a particular man's quarrel might enge^der. This
being on both sides concluded on, Kalander and Clitophon, who now (with
infinite joy did know each other) came to kiss the hands and feet of
Daiphantus: Clitophon telling his father, how Daiphantus (not without danger to
himself) had preserved him from the furious malice of the Helots: and even
that day going to conclude the peace (leaft in his absence he might receive
some hurt) he had taken him in his company, and given him armor, upon promise
he should take the part of the Helots; which he had in this fight performed,
little knowing that it was against his father: but (said Clitophon) here is he,
who (as a father) has new-begotten me, and (as a God) has faued me from many
deaths, which already laid hold on me: which Kalander with tears of joy
acknowledged (besides his own deliverance) only his benefit. But Daiphantus,
who loved doing well for it self, and not for thanks, brake of those
ceremonies, desiring to know how Palladius (for so he called Musidorus) was
come into that company, and what his present estate was: whereof receiving a
brief declaration of Kalander, he sent him word by Clitophon, that he should
not as now come unto, because he held himself not so sure a master of Helots
minds, that he would adventure him in their power, who was so well known with
an unfriendly acquaintance; but that he desired him to return with Kalander,
whether also he within few days (having dispatched himself of the Helots)
would repair. Kalander would needs kiss his hand again for that promise,
protesting, he would esteem his house more blessed the^ a temple of the gods,
if it had once received him. And then desiring pardon for Argalus, Daiphantus
assured them that he would die, but he would bring him, (though till then
kept in close prison, indeed for his safetic, the Helots being so animaated
against him as else he could not have lived) and so taking their leave of him,
Kalander, Clitophon, Palladius and the rest of the Arcadians swearing that they
would no further in any forte molest the Helots, they straight way marched out
of the town, carrying both their dead and wounded bodies with them; and by
morning were already within the limits of Arcadia.

CHAP. 7.
1 The articles of peace between the Lacedaemonians and Helots, 2 Daipha^tus
his departure from the Helots with Argalus to Kalanders house. 3 The offer of a
strange Lady to Argalus 4 his refusal, and 5 who she was.

THe Helots of the other side shutting their gates, gave them selves to burye
their dead, to cure their wounds, and rest their weeried bodies: till (the
next day bestowing the chereful use of the light upon them) Daiphantus making a
general canuocation spoke unto them in this manner. We are first (said he) to
thank the Gods, that (further then we had either cause to hope; or reason to
imagine) have delivered us out of this gulf of danger, wherein we were
alredie swallowed. For all being lost, (had they had not directed, my return so
just as they did) it had been too late to recover that, which being had, we
could not keep. And had I not happened to know one of the principal men among
them, by which means the truce began between us, you may easily conceive,
what little reason we have to think, but that either by some supply out of
Arcadia, or from the Nobility of this Country (who would have made fruits of
wisdom grow out of this occasion,) we should have had our power turned to
ruin, our pride to repentance and sorrow. But now the storm, as it fell out,
so it ceased: and the error committed, in retaining Clitophon more hardly then
his age or quarrel deserved, becomes a sharply learned experience, to use in
other times more moderation.

Now have I to deliver unto you the conclusion between Lacedaemon, and you;
which is in all points as your selves desired: as well for that you would have
granted, as for the assurance of what is granted. The Towns and Fortes you
presently have, are still left unto you, to be kept either with or without
garrison, so as you alter not the laws of the Country, and pay such ducties
as the rest of the Laconians do. Your selves are made by public decree, free
men, and so capable both to give and receive voice in election of Magistrates.
The distinction of names between Helots and Lacedoemonians to be quite taken
away, and all indifferently to enjoy both names and privileges of Laconians.
Your children to be brought up with theirs in Spartane discipline: and so you
(framing your selves to be good members of that estate) to be hereafter
fellows, and no longer servant. which conditions you see, carry in themselves
no more contentation then assurance. For this is not a peace which is made
with them, but this is a peace by which you are made of them. Lastly, a
forgetfulness decreed of of all what is past, they showing themselves glad to
have so valiant men as you are, joined with them: so that you are to take
minds of peace, since the cause of war is finished; and as you hated them
before like oppressors, so now to love them as brothers; to take care of their
estate because it is yours, and to labor by virtuous doing, that the
posterity may not repent your joining. But now one Article only they stood
upon, which in the end I with your commissioners have agreed unto, that I
should no more tarry here, mistaking perchance my humor, and thinking me as
sedicious as I am young, or else it is the king Amiclas procuring, in respect
that it was my il hap to kill his nephew Eurileon; but how soever it be, I have
condiscended. But so will not we cried almost the whole assembly, cou^celling
one an other, rather to try the uttermost event, then to loose him by who^
they had been victorious. But he as well with general orations, as particular
dealing with the men of most credit, made them thoroughly see how necessary it
was to preferree such an opportunity before a vain affection; but yet could
not prevail, til openly he swear, that he would (if at any time the
Lacedoemonians brake this treaty) come back again, and be their captain.

to a demi-God: thinking it beyond the degree of humanity to have a wit so
far ouergoing his age, and such dreadful terror procced from so excellent
beutie. But he for his sake obtained free pardon for Argalus, whom also (upon
oath never to bear arms, against the Helots) he delivered; and taking only
with him certain principal Jewels of his own, he would have parted alone
with Argalus, (whose countenance well showed, while Parthenia was lost he
counted not himself delivered) but that the whole multitude would needs guard
him into Arcadia. Where again, leaving the all to lament his departure, he by
inquiry got to the wel-knowne house of Kalander: There was he received with
loving joy of Kalander, with joyful love of Palladius, with humble (though
doulful) demeanor of Argalus (whom specially both he and Palladius regarded)
with grateful seruisablenes of Clitophon, and honorable admiration of all.
For being now well veiwed to have no hair of his face, to witness him a man,
who had done acts beyond the degree of a man, and to look with a certain
almost bashefull kind of modesty, as if he feared the eyes of men, who was
unmoved with sight of the most horrible countenaunces of death; and as if
nature had mistaken her work to have a Marses heart in a Cupides body: All
that beheld him (and all that might behold him, did behold him) made their eyes
quick messengers to their minds, that there they had seen the uttermost that
in mankind might be seen. The like wonder Palladius had before stirred, but
that Daiphantus, as younger and newer come, had gotten now the advantage in the
moist and sickle impression of eyesight. But while all men (saving poor
Argalus) made the joy of their eyes speak for their hearts toward Daiphantus:
Fortune (that belike was bid to that banquet, and meant then to play the good
fellow) brought a pleasant adventure among the^.

Kalander a messenger, that brought him word, a young noble Lady, near
kinswoman to the fair Helen Queen of Corinth; was come thither, and then
desired to be lodged in his house. Kalander (most glad of such an occasion)
went out, and all his other worthy guests with him, saving only Argalus, who
remained in his chamber, desirous that this company were once broken up, that
he might go in his solitary quest after Parthenia. But when they met this
Lady; Kalander straight thought he saw his niece Parthenia, and was about in
such familiar sort to have spoken unto her: But she in grave and honorable
manner giving him to understand that he was mistaken, he half ashamed, excused
himself with the exceeding likeness was between them, though indeed it seemed
that his Lady was of the more pure and dainty complexion; she said, it might
very well be, having been many times taken one for an other. But as soon as she
was brought into the house, before she would rest her, she desired to speak
with Argalus publicly, who she heard was in the house. Argalus came in
hastily, and as hastily thought as Kalander had done, with sudden chaunges of
joy into sorrow. But she when she had stayed their thoughts with telling them
her name, and quality in this sort spoke unto him. My Lord Argalus, said she,
being of late left in the court of Queen Helen of Corinth, as chief in her
absence (she being upon some occasion gone thence) there came unto me the Lady
Parthenia, so disguysed, as I think Greece has nothing so ougly to behold.
For my part, it was many days, before with vehement oaths, and some good
proofs, she could make me think that she was Parthenia. Yet at last finding
certainly it was she, and greatly pitying her misfortune, so much the more, as
that all men had ever told me, (as now you do) of the great likeness between
us, I took the best care I could of her: and of her understood the whole
tragical history of her undeserved adventure: and therewithal, of that most
noble constancy in you my Lord Argalus: which whosoever loves not, shows
himself to be a hater of virtue, and unworthy to live in the society of
mankind. But no outward cherishing could salve the inward fore of her mind,
but a few days since she died: before her death earnestly desiring, and
persuading me, to think of no husband but of you; as of the only man in the
world worthy to be loved, with-all, she gave me this Ring to deliver you;
desiring you, and by the authority of love commanding you, that the affection
you bare her you should turn to me: assuring you, that nothing can please her
soul more, then to see you and me matched together. Now my L. though this
office be not (perchance) suitable to my estate nor sex, who should rather look
to be desired; yet, an extraordinary desert requires an extraordinary
proceeding: and therefore I am come (with faithful love built upon your
worthiness) to offer my self, and to beseech you to accept the offer: and if
these noble ge^tleme^ present will say it is great folly, let the^ withal, say
it is great love. And then she staid, earnestly attending Argalus his answer,
who (first making most hearty sighs do such obsequies as he could, to
Parthenia) thus answered her.

Parthenia, (with that the tears ran down his eyes; but he followed on) and
as much as so unfortunate a man, sit to be the spectacle of misery, can do
you service; determine you have made a purchase of a slave (while I live) never
to sail you. But this great matter you propose unto me, wherein I am not so
blind, as not to see what happiness it should be unto me; Excellent Lady,
know, that if my heart were mine to give, you before al other, should have it;
but Parthenias it is, though dead: there I began, there I end all matter of
affection: I hope I shall not long tarry after her, with whose beauty if I had
only been in love, I should be so with you, who have the same beauty: but it
was Parthenias self I loved, and love; which no likeness can make one, no
commandment dissolve, no soulnes desile, nor no death finish. And shall I
receive (said he) such disgrace, as to be refused? Noble Lady (said he) let
not that hard word be used; who know your exceeding worthiness far beyond
my desert: but it is only happiness I refuse, since of the only happiness I
could and can desire, I am refused.

Argalus (said she) take thy Parthenia; and Parthenia it was in deed. But
because sorrow forbad him too soon to believe, she told him the truth, with all
circumstances; how being parted alone, meaning to die in some solitary place,
as she happened to make her complaint, the Queen Helen of Corinth (who likewise
felt her part of miseries) being then walking also alone in that lovely place,
heard her, and never left, till she had known the whole discourse. Which the
noble Queen greatly pitying, she sent her to a Physician of hers, the most
excellent man in the world, in hope he could help her: which in such sort as
they saw performed, and she taking with her of the Queens servants, thought
yet to make this trial, whether he would quickly forget his true Parthenia, or
no. Her speech was confirmed by the Corinthian Gentlemen, who before had kept
her counsel, and Argalus easily persuaded to what more then ten thousand
years of life he desired: and Kalander would needs have the marriage
celebrated in his house, principally the longer to hold his dear guestes,
toward whom he was now (besides his own habit of hospitality) carried with
love and duty: and therefore omitted no service that his wit could invent, and
his power minister.

CHAP. 8.
The adventures 1 first of Musidorus, 2 then of Pyrocles Since their
shipwreck, to their meeting. 3 The marriage of Argalus and Parthenia.

Palladius recounted unto him, that after they had both aba^doned the burning
ship (and either, of them taken some thing under him the better to supporte him
to the shore) he knew not how, but either with ouer-labouring in the fight and
sudden cold, or the too much receiving of salt water, he was past himself:
but yet holding fast (as the nature of dying men is to do) the chest that was
under him, he was cast on the sands, where he was taken up by a couple of
Shepherds, and by them brought to life again, and kept from drowning him
self, when he despaired of his safety. How after having failed to take him
into the fisher boat, he had by the Shepherds persuasion come to this
Gentleman's house; where being dangerously sick, he had yielded to seek the
recovery of health, only for that he might the sooner go seek the delivery
of Pyrocles: to which purpose Kalander by some friends of his in Messenia, had
already set a ship or two abroad, when this accident of Clitophons taking had
so blessedly procured their meeting. The^ did he set forth unto him the noble
entertainment and careful cherishing of Kalander toward him, and so upon
occasion of the pictures present delivered with the franknesse of a friends
tongue, as near as he could, word by word what Kalander had told him touching
the strange story (with all the particularities belonging) of Arcadia, which
did in many sorts so delight Pyrocles to hear; that he would needs have much
of it again repeated, and was not contented till Kalander himself had
answered him diverse questions.

Musidorus request, though in brief manner, his mind much running upon the
strange story of Arcadia, he did declare by what course of adue^tures he was
come to make up their mutual happiness in meeting. When (cousin, said he) we
had stripped ourselves, and were both leapt into the Sea, and swom a little
toward the shore, I found by reason of some wounds I had, that I should not be
able to get the land, and therefore turned back again to the mast of the
ship, where you found me, assuring my self, that if you came alive to the
shore, you would seek me; if you were lost, as I thought it as good to perish
as to live, so that place as good to perish in as an other. There I found my
sword among some of the shrowds, wishing (I must confess) if I died, to be
found with that in my hand, and withal wauing it about my head, that sailors
by it might have the better glimpse of me. There you missing me, I was taken up
by Pirates, who putting me under boorde prisoner, presently set upon another
ship, and mainteining a long fight, in the end, put them all to the sword.
Amongst whom I might hear them greatly praise one young man, who fought most
valiantly, whom (as love is careful, and misfortune subject to doubtfulnes) I
thought certainly to be you. And so holding you as dead, from that time till
the time I saw you, in truth I sought nothing more then a noble end, which
perchance made me more hardy then otherwise I would have been. Trial whereof
came within two days after: for the Kings of Lacedaemon having set out some
Galleys, under the charge of one of their Nephews to skowre the Sea of the
Pirates, they met with us, where our Captain wanting men, was driven to arm
some of his prisoners, with promise of liberty for well fighting: among whom I
was one, and being boorded by the Admiral, it was my fortune to kill Eurileon
the Kings nephew: but in the end they prevailed, and we were all taken
prisoners: I not caring much what became of me (only keeping the name of
Daiphantus, according to the resolution you know is between us,) but being
laid in the iayle of Tenaria, with special hate to me for the death of
Eurileon, the popular sort of that town conspired with the Helots, and so by
night opened them the gates; where entering and killing all of the gentle and
rich faction, for honesty sake brake open all prisons, and so delivered me;
and I moved with gratefulness, and encouraged with carelessness of life, so
behaved my self in some conflictes they had in few days, that they
barbarously thinking insensible wonders of me, and with all so much they
better trusting me, as they heard I was hated of the King of Lacedoemon,
(their chief Captain being slain as you know by the noble Argalus, who
helped thereunto by his persuasion) having borne a great affection unto me, and
to avoid the dangerous emulation which grew among the chief, who should
have the place, and all so affected, as rather to have a stranger then a
competitour, they elected me, (God wotte little proud of that dignity,)
restoring unto me such things of mine as being taken first by the pirates,
and then by the Lacedoemonians, they had gotten in the sack of the town. Now
being in it, so good was my success with many victories, that I made a peace
for them to their own liking, the very day that you delivered Clitophon,
whom I with much adoo had preserved. And in my peace the King Amiclas of
Lacedoemon would needs have me bannished, and deprived of the dignity
whereunto I was exalted: which (and you may see how much you are bound to
me) for your sake I was content to suffer, a new hope rising in me, that you
were not dead: and so meaning to travail over the world to seek you; and now
here (my dear Musidorus) you have me. And with that (embracing and kissinge
each other) they called Kalander, of whom Daiphantus desired to hear the full
story, which before he had recounted to Palladius, and to see the letter of
Philanax, which he read and well marked.

But within some days after, the marriage between Argalus and the fair
Parthenia being to be celebrated, Daiphantus and Palladius selling some of
their jewels, furnished themselves of very fair apparel, meaning to do
honor to their loving host; who as much for their sakes, as for the marriage,
set forth each thing in most gorgeous manner. But all the cost bestowed did
not so much enrich, nor all the fine deckinges so much beautify, nor all the
daintic devises so much delight, as the fairness of Parthenia, the pearl of
all the maids of Mantinoea: who as she went to the Temple to be married, her
eyes themselves seemed a temple, wherein love and beauty were married: her
lips, although they were kept close with modest silence, yet with a pretty
kind of natural swelling, they seemed to inuit the guestes that looked on
them; her cheeks blushing, and withal when she was spoken unto, a little
smilyng, were like roses, when their leaves are with a little breath stirred:
her hair being laid at the full length down her back, bare show as if the
voward failed, yet that would conquer. Daiphantus marking her, O Jupiter (said
he speaking to Palladius) how happens it, that Beauty is only confined to
Arcadia? But Palladius not greatly attending his speech, some days were
continued in the solemnising the marriage, with all conceits that might deliver
delight to men's fancies.

CHAP. 9.
1 Pyrocles his inclination to love. 2 His, and Musidorus disputation
thereabouts 3 broken of by Kalander.

Daiphantus, that (as if cheerfulness had been tediousness, and good
entertainment were turned to discourtesie) he would ever get him self alone,
though almost when he was in company, he was alone, so little attention he
gave to any that spoke unto him: even the color and figure of his face began
to receive some alteration; which he showed little to heed: but every morning
early going abroad, either to the garden, or to some woods toward the desert,
it seemed his only comfort was to be without a co^forter. But long it could not
be hid from Palladius, whom true love made ready to mark, and long knowledge
able to mark; and therefore being now growe^ weary of his abode in Arcadia,
having informed himself fully of the strength and riches of the country, of
the nature of the people, and manner of their laws: and, seeing the court
could not be visited, prohibited to all men, but to certain sheapheardish
people, he greatly desired a speedy return to his own country, after the many
mazes offortune he had trodden. But perceauing this great alteration in his
friend, he thought first to break with him thereof, and then to hasten his
return; whereto he found him but smally inclined: whereupon one day taking
him alone with certain graces and countenances, as if he were disputing with
the trees, began in this manner to say unto him.

A mind well trained and long exercised in virtue (my Pyrocles) the excellency
of whose mind and well chosen course in virtue, if I do not sufficiently
know, having seen such rare demonstrations of it, it is my weakness, and not
your unworthiness. But as in deed I know it, and knowing it, most dearly love
both it, and him that has it; so must I needs say, that since our late
coming into this country, I have marked in you, I will not say an alteration,
but a relenting truly, and a slacking of the maine career, you had so notably
begone, and almost performed and that in such sort, as I cannot find
sufficient reason in my great love toward you how to allow it; for (to leave of
other secreter arguments which my acquaintance with you makes me easily find)
this in effect to any manne may be manifest, that whereas you were wont in all
places you came, to give your self vehemently to the knowledge of those
things which might better your mind; to seek the familiaritye of excellent
men in learning and soldiery: and lastly, to put all these things in practice
both by continual wise proceedinge, and worthy enterprises, as occasion fell
for them; you now leave all these things undone: you let your mind fall a
sleep: beside your countenance troubled (which surely comes not of virtue;
for virtue like the clear heaven, is without clouds) and lastly you subject
your self to solitarines, the slye enemy, that does most separate a man from
well doing. Pyrocles mind was all this while so fixed upon another devotion,
that he no more attentively marked his friends discourse, then the child that
has leave to play, marks the last part of his lesson; or the diligent Pilot
in a dangerous tempest does attend the unskillful words of a passinger: yet the
very sound having imprinted the general point of his speech in his heart,
pierced with any mislike of so dearly an esteemed friend, and desirous by
degrees to bring him to a gentler consideration of him, with a shamefast look
(witnessing he rather could not help, then did not know his fault) answered
him to this purpose. Excellent Musidorus, in the praise you gave me in the
beginning of your spech, I easily acknowledge the force of your good will unto
me, for neither could you have thought so well of me, if extremity of love
had not made your judgment partial, nor you could have loved me so intierlie,
if you had not been apt to make so great (though undeserved) judgments of me;
and even so must I say to those imperfections, to which though I have ever
through weakness been subject, yet you by the daily me^ding of your mind have of
late bin able to look into them, which before you could not discern; so that
the change you speak of, falls not out by my impairing, but by your betring.
And yet under the leave of your better judgment, I must needs say thus much,
my dear cousin, that I find not my self wholye to be condemned, because I do
not with continual veheme^cy follow those knowledges, which you call the
bettering of my mind; for both the mind it self must (like other things)
sometimes be unbent, or else it will be either weakened, or broken: And these
knowledges, as they are of good use, so are they not all the mind may stretch
it self unto: who knows whether I feed not my mind with higher thoughts?
Truly as I know not all the particularities, so yet I see the bounds of all
these knowledges: but the workings of the mind I find much more infinite,
then can be led unto by the eye, or imagined by any, that distract their
thoughts without themselves. And in such contemplation, or as I think more
excellent, I enjoy my solitarines; and my solitarines perchance is the nurse
of these contemplations. Eagles we see fly alone; and they are but sheep,
which alvvaies heard together; condemn not therefore my mind sometime to enjoy
it self; nor blame not the taking of such times as serve most fit for it.
And alas, dear Musidorus, if I be sad, who knows better then you the just
causes I have of sadness? And here Pyrocles suddenly stopped, like a man
unsatisfied in himself, though his wit might well have served to have
satisfied another. And so looking with a countenance, as though he desired he
should know his mind without hearing him speak, and yet desirous to speak,
to breath out some part of his inward evil, sending again new blood to his
face, he continued his speech in this manner. And Lord (dear cousin, said he)
does not the pleasauntnes of this place carry in itself sufficient reward for
any time lost in it? Do you not see how all things conspire together to make
this country a heavenly dwelling? Do you not see the grass how in color they
excel the Emeralds, every one striving to pass his fellow, and yet they are
all kept of an equal height? And see you not the rest of these beautiful
flowers, each of which would require a man's wit to know, and his life to
express? Do not these stately trees seem to maintain their flourishing old
age with the only happiness of their seat, being clothed with a continual
spring, because no beauty here should ever fade? Does not the air breath
health, which the Birds (delightful both to ear and eye) do daily solemnize
with the sweet consent of their voices? Is not every echo thereof a perfect
Music? and these fresh and delightful brooks how slowly they slide away, as
loath to leave the company of so many things united in perfection? and with how
sweet a murmr they lament their forced departure? Certainly, certainly,
cousin, it must needs be that some Goddess enhabiteth this Region, who is the
soul of this soil: for neither is any, less then a Goddess, worthy to be
shrined in such a heap of pleasures: nor any less the^ a Goddess, could have
made it so perfect a plotte of the celestial dwellings. And so ended with a
deep sigh, rufully casting his eye upon Musidorus, as more desirous of pity
the^ pleading. But Musidorus had all this while held his look fixed upon
Pyrocles countenance; and with no less loving attention marked how his words
proceeded from him: but in both these he perceived such strange diversities,
that they rather increased new doubts, then gave him ground to settle any
judgment: for, besides his eyes sometimes even great with tears, the often
cha^ging of his color, with a kind of shaking vnstayednes over all his body,
he might see in his countenance some great determination mixed with fear; and
might perceive in him store of thoughts, rather stirred then digested; his
words interrupted continually with sighs (which served as a burden to each
sentence) and the tenor of his speech (though of his wo^ted phrase) not knit
together to one constant end, but rather dissolved in it self, as the
vehemency of the inward passion prevailed: which made Musidorus frame his
answer nearest to that humor, which should soonest put out the secret. For,
having in the beginning of Pyrocles speech which defended his solitarines,
framed in his mind a reply against it, in the praise of honorable action, in
showing that such a kind of co^te^platio^ is but a glorious title to idleness;
that in actio^ a man did not only better himself, but benefit others; that the
gods would not have delivered a soul into the body, which has arms and
legs, only instruments of doing, but that it were intended the mind should
employ the^; and that the mind should best know his own good or evil, by
practice: which knowledge was the only way to increase the one, and correct
the other: besides many other arguments, which the plentifulnesse of the
matter yielded to the sharpnes of his wit. When he found Pyrocles leave that,
and fall into such an affected praising of the place, he left it likewise, and
joined with him therein: because he found him in that humor utter more store of
passion; and even thus kindly embrasing him, he said: Your words are such
(noble cousin) so sweetly and strongly handled in the praise of solitariness,
as they would make me likewise yield my self up into it, but that the same
words make me know, it is more pleasant to enjoy the company of him that can
speak such words, then by such words to be persuaded to follow solitarines.
And even so do I give you leave (sweet Pyrocles) ever to defend solitarines;
so long, as to defend it, you ever keep company. But I marvel at the
excessive praises you give to this country; in truth it is not unpleasant:
but yet if you would return into Macedon, you should see either many heavens,
or find this no more then earthly. And eue^ Tempe in my Thessalia, (where you
and I to my great happiness were brought up together) is nothing inferior
unto it. But I think you will make me see, that the vigor of your wit can
show it self in any subject: or else you feed sometimes your solitarines with
the conceits of the Poets, whose liberal pens can as easily travail over
mountains, as molehils: and so like well disposed men, set up every thing to
the highest note; especially, when they put such words in the mouths of one of
these fantastical mind-infected people, that children and Musitia^s call
Lovers. This word, Lover, did no less pearce poor Pyrocles, then the right
tune of music touches him that is sick of the Tarantula. There was not one
part of his body, that did not feel a sudden motion, while his heart with
panting, seemed to dance to the sound of that word; yet after some pause
(lifting up his eyes a little from the ground, and yet not daring to place them
in the eyes of Musidorus) armed with the very countenance of the poor
prisoner at the bar, whose answer is nothing but guilty: with much a do he
brought forth this question. And alas, said he, dear cousin, what if I be not
so much the Poet (the freedom of whose pen can exercise it self in any
thing) as even that miserable subject of his conning, whereof you speak? Now
the eternal Gods forbid (mainely cried out Musidorus) that ever my ear should
be poisoned with so evil news of you. O let me never know that any base
affection should get any Lordship in your thoughts. But as he was speaking more,
Kalander Daiphantus melancholy. They condiscended, and so going to their
lodgings, furnished the^ selves as liked them Daiphantus writing a fevv words
which he left in a sealed letter against their return.

CHAP. 10.
1 Kalanders hunting. 2 Daiphantus his close departure, 3 and letter 4
Palladius his care, and 5 quest after him, 6 accompanied with Clitophon. 7 His
finding and taking on Amphilus his armor 8 Their encounter with Queen Helens
attendants. 9 Her mistaking Palladius.

THen went they together abroad, the good Kalander how much in the comparison
thereof he disdained all chamber delights; that the Sun (how great a iornie
soever he had to make) could never prevent him with earlines, nor the Moon
(with her sober countenance) dissuade him from watching till midnight for the
deeres feeding. O, said he, you will never live to my age, without you keep
your selves in breath with exercise, and in heart with ioyfullnes: too much
thinking does consume the spirits: and often it falls out, that while one
thinks too much of his doing, he leaves to do the effect of his thinking.
Then spared he not to remember how much Arcadia was changed since his youth:
actiuitie and good fellowship being nothing in the price it was then held in,
but according to the nature of the old growing world, still worse and worse.
The^ would he tell them stories of such gallaunts as he had known: and so with
pleasant company beguiled the times have, and shortened the ways length, till
they came to the side of the wood, where the hounds were in couples staying
their coming, but with a whining Accent craving liberty: many of them in
color and marks so resembling, that it showed they were of one kind. The
huntsmen handsomely attired in their green liucries, as though they were
children of Summer, with staves in their hands to beat the guiltless earth,
when the hounds were at a fault, and with horns about their necks to sound
an alarm upon a silly fugitive. The hounds were straight uncoupled, and ere
long the Stagge thought it better to trust the nimblenes of his feet, then to
the slender fortification of his lodging: but even his feet betrayed him; for
howsoever they went, they themselves uttered themselves to the sent of their
enemies; who one taking it of an other, and sometimes believing the winds
aduertisements, sometimes the view of (their faithful counselors) the
huntsmen, with open mouths then denounced war, when the war was already
begun. Their cry being composed of so well sorted mouths, that any man would
perceive therein some kind of proportion but the skillful woodmen did find a
music. Then delight and variety of opinion drew the horsemen sundry ways;
yet cheering their hounds with voice and horn, kept still (as it were)
together. The wood seemed to conspire with them against his own citizens,
dispersing their noise through all his quarters; and even the Nymph Echo left
to bewail the loss of Narcissus, and became a hunter. But the Stagge was in
the end so hotly pursued, that (leaving his flight) he was driven to make
courage of despair; and so turning his head, made the hounds (with change of
speech) to testify that he was at bay: as if from hot pursuit of their
enemy, they were suddenly come to a parley.

But Kalander (by his skill of coasting the Country) was among the first that
came in to the besiged Dear; whom when some of the younger sort would have
killed with their swords, he would not suffer: but with a Crossebowe sent a
death to the poor beast, who with tears showed the unkindness he took of
man's cruelty.

But by the time that the whole company was assembled, Daiphantus was mist,
for whom Palladius carefully enquiring, no news could be given him, but by one
that said, he thought he was returned home; for that he marked him, in the
chief of the hunting, take a by-way, which might lead to Kalanders house. That
answer for the time satisfying, and they having performed all duties, as well
for the Stagges funeral, as the hounds triumph, they returned: some talking of
the fatnes of the Deeres body; some of the fairenes of his head; some of the
hounds cunning; some of their speed; and some of their cry: til coming home
(about the time that the candle begins to inherit the Suns office) they found
Daiphantus was not to be found. Whereat Palladius greatly maruailing, and a
day or two passing, while neither search nor inquiry could help him to
knowledge, at last he lighted upon the letter, which Pyrocles had written
before he went a hunting, and left in his study among other of his writings.
The letter was directed to Palladius himself, and contained these words.

Thessalia, I pray you, as full of good fortune, as I am of desire: and if I
live, I will in short time follow you; if I die, love my memory.

Palladius read twice or thrice over. Ah (said he) Pyrocles, what means this
alteration? what have I deserved of thee, to be thus banished of thy counsels?
Hereto fore I have accused the sea, condemned the Pirates, and hated my evil
fortune, that deprived me of thee; But now thy self is the sea, which drounes
my comfort, thy self is the Pirat that robbes thy self of me: Thy own will
becomes my evil fortune. The^ turned he his thoughts to al forms of ghesses
that might light upon the purpose and course of Pyrocles: for he was not so
sure by his words, that it was love, as he was doubtful where the love was.
One time he thought, some beauty in Laconia had laid hold of his eyes; an
other time he feared, that it might be Parthenias excellency, which had broken
the bands of all former resolution. But the more he thought, the more he knew
not what to think, armies of objections rising against any accepted opinion.

Then as careful he was what to do himself: at length determined, Kalander,
and told him, that he had received a message from his friend, by which he
understood he was gone back again into Laconia, about some matters greatly
importing the poor men, whose protection he had undertaken, and that it was in
any forte fit for him, to follow him, but in such private wise, as not to be
known, and that therefore he would as then bid him farewell: arming him self
in a black armor, as either a badge, or prognostication of his mind: and
taking only with him good store of money, and a few choice jewels, leaving
the greatest number of them, and most of his apparel with Kalander: which he
did partly to give the more cause to Kalander to expect their return, and so to
be the less curiously inquisitiue after the^: and partly to leave those
honorable thanks unto him, for his charge and kindness, which he knew he would
no other way receive. The good old man having neither reason to dissuade, nor
hope to persuade, received the things, with mind of a keeper, not of an owner;
but before he went, desired he might have the happiness, fully to know what they
were: which he said, he had ever till then delaid, fearing to be any way
importune: but now he could not be so much an enemy to his desires as any
longer to imprison the^ in silence. Palladius told him that the matter was not
so secret, but that so worthy a friend deserved the knowledge, and should have
it as soon as he might speak with his friend: without whose consent (because
their promise bound him otherwise) he could not reveal it: but bad him hold
for most assured, that if they lived but a while, he should find that they
which bare the names of Daipha^tus and Palladius, would give him and his cause
to think his noble courtesy well employed. Kala^der would press him no
further: but desiring that he might have leave to go, or at least to send his
son and servant with him, Palladius brake of all ceremonies, by telling
him; his case stood so, that his greatest favor should be in making lest adoo
of his parting. Wherewith Kalander knowing it to be more cumber then courtesy,
tostriue, abstained from further urging him, but not from hearty mourning the
loss of so sweet a conversation.

Clitophon by vehement in portunitie obtained to go with him, to come again to
Daiphantus, whom he named and accounted his Lord. And in such private guise
departed Palladius, though having a companion to talk with all, yet talking
much more with unkindness. And first they went to Mantinaea; whereof because
Parthenia was, he suspected there might be some cause of his abode. But finding
there no news of him he went to Tegaea, Ripa, Enispae, Stimphalus, and
Pheneus, famous for the poisonous Stygian water, and through all the rest of
Arcadia, making their eyes, their ears, and their tongue serve almost for
nothing, but that enquire. But they could know nothing but that in none of
those places he was known. And so went they, making one place succeed to an
other, in like uncertainty to their search, many times encountering strange
adue^tures, worthy to be registered in the roulles of fame; but this may not be
omitted. As they past in a pleasant valley, (of either side of which high hills
lifted Clitiphon espied a piece of armor, and not far of an other piece: and
so the sight of one piece teaching him to look for more, he at length found
all, with headpeece and shield, by the devise whereof, which was (...) he
straight knew it to be the armor of his cousin, the noble Amphialus. Whereupon
(fearing some inconvenience happened unto him) he told both his doubt, and his
cause of doubt to Palladius, who (considering thereof) thought best to make no
longer stay, but to follow on: least perchance some violence were offered to so
worthy a Knight, whom the fame of the world seemed to set in balance with any
Knight living. Yet with a sudden conceit, having long borne great honor to
the name of Amphialus, Palladius thought best to take that armor, thinking
thereby to learn by them that should know that armor, some news of
Amphialus, and yet not hinder him in the search of Daiphantus too. So he by the
help of Clitophon quickly put on that armor, where of there was no one piece
wanting, though hacked in some places, bewraying some fight not long since
passed. It was something too great, but yet served well enough.

Palladius not accustomed to grant over the possession of him self upon so
unjust titles, with sword drawn gave them so rude an answer, that diverse of
the^ never had breath to reply again: for being well backed by Clitophon, and
having an excellent horse under him, when he was ouerprest by some, he avoided
them, and ere the other thought of it, punished in him his fellows faults: and
so, either with cunning or with force, or rather with a cunning force, left none
of them either living, or able to make his life serve to others hurt. Which
being done, he approached the coach, assuring the black boys they should have
no hurt, who were else ready to have run away, and looking into the coach, he
found in the one end a Lady of great beauty, and such a beauty, as showed
forth the beams both of wisdom and good nature, but al as much darkened, as
might be, with sorrow. In the other, two Ladies, (who by their demeanure showed
well, they were but her servants) holding before them a picture; in which was a
goodly Ge^tleman (whom he knew not) painted, having in their faces a certain
waiting sorrow, their eyes being infected with their mistres weeping.

But the chief Lady having not so much as once Amphialus the Lord of her
desires, (blood coming more freely into her cheeks, as though it would be
bold, and yet there growing new again pale for fear) with a pitiful look
(like one unjustly condemned) My Lord Amphialus (said she) you have enough
punished me: it is time for cruelty to leave you, and evil fortune me; if not I
pray you, (and to grant, my prayer fitter time nor place you can have)
accomplish the one even now, and finish the other. With that, sorrow impatient
to be slowly uttered in her often staying speeches, poured it self so sast in
tears, that Palladius could not hold her longer in error, but pulling of his
helmet, Madame (said he) I perceive you mistake me: I am a stranger in these
parts, set upon (without any cause given by me) by some of your servants, whom
because I have in my just defense evil entreated, I came to make my excuse to
you, whom seeing such as I do, I find greater cause, why I should crave pardon
of you. When she saw his face, and heard his speech, she looked out of the
coach, and seeing her men, some slain, some lying under their dead horses, and
striving to get from under them, without making more account of the matter,
Truly (said she) they are well served that durst lift up their arms against
that armor. But Sir Knight, (said she) I pray you tell me, how come you by
this armor? for if it be by the death of him that owed it, then have I more to
say unto you. Palladius assured her it was not so; telling her the true manner
how he found it. It is like enough (said she) for that agrees with the manner
he has lately used. But I beseech you Sir (said she) since your prowes has
bereft me of my company: let it yet so far heal the wounds it self has
given, as to guard me to the next town. How great so ever my business be
fair Lady (said he) it shall willingly yield to so noble a cause: But first
even by the favor you bear to the Lord of this noble armor, I conjure you
to tell me the story of your fortune herein, lest hereafter when the image of
so excellent a Lady in so strange a plight come before mine eyes, I condemn
my self of want of consideration in not having demanded thus much. Neither
ask I it without protestation, that wherein my sword and faith may avail
you, they shall bind themselves to your service. Your coniuration, fair
Knight (said she) is too strong for my poor spirit to disobey, and that shall
make me (without any other hope, my ruin being but by one vnrelieueable) to
grant your will herein: and to say the truth, a strange niceness were it in
me to refrain that from the ears of a person representing so much
worthiness, which I am glad even to rocks and woods to utter.

CHAP. 11.
1 The story of Queen Helen 2 Philoxenus her suitor 3 Amphialus an intercessor
for his friend. 4 His praises, 5 birth, and 6 education. 7 Her love won to
himself 8 His refusal and departure 9 Philoxenus wronge-rage against him. 10
Their fight. 11 The death of son and father. 12 Amphialus his sorrow and
detestation of the Queen. 13 A new onset on Palladius for Amphialus his
Armor: 14 whose grief is amplified by meeting his dead friends dog. 15
Palladius his parting with Helen and Clitophon.

KNow you then that my name is Helen, Corinth. I can say no more of my self,
but beloved of my people: and may justly say, beloved, since they are content
to bear with my absence, and folly. But I being left by my fathers death, and
accepted by my people, in the highest degree, that country could receive;
as soon, or rather, before that my age was ripe for it; my court quickly
swarmed full of suitors; some perchance loving my state, others my person, but
once I know all of them, howsoever my possessions were in their hearts, my
beauty (such as it is) was in their mouths; many strangers of princely and
noble blood, and all of mine own country, to whom either birth or virtue gave
courage to avowe so high a desire.

Philoxenus, son and heir to the virtuous noble man Timotheus: which
Timotheus was a man both in power, riches, parentage, and (which passed all
these) goodness, and (which followed all these) love of the people, beyond any
of the great men of my country. Now this son of his I must say truly, not
unworthy of such a father, bending himself by all means of seruiseablenes to
me, and setting forth of himself to win my favor, wan thus far of me,
that in truth I less misliked him then any of the rest: which in some
proportion my countenance delivered unto him. Though I must protest it was a
very false ambassador, if it delivered at all any affection, where of my heart
was utterly void, I as then esteeming my self borne to rule, and thinking
foul scorn willingly to submit my self to be ruled.

Philoxenus in good forte pursued my favor, and perchance nourished himself
with over much hope, because he found I did in some sort acknowledge his
value, one time among the rest he brought with him a dear friend of his. With
that she looked upon the picture before her, and straight sighted, and straight
tears followed, as if the Idol of duty ought to be honored with such
oblations, and the^ her speech stayed the tale, having brought her to that
look, but that look having quite put her out of her tale. But Palladius
greatly pitying so sweet a sorrow in a Lady, whom by fame he had already
known, and honored, besought her for her promise sake, to put silence so
long unto her moning, til she had recounted the rest of this story.

Amphialus: what need I say more to you? what ear is so barbarous but has
hard of Amphialus? who follows deeds of Arms, but every where finds monument
of Amphialus? who is courteous, noble, liberal, but he that has the example
before his eyes of Amphialus? where are all heroical parts, but in Amphialus?
O Amphialus I would thou were not so excellent, or I would I thought thee not
so excellent, and yet would I not, that I would so: with that she wept again,
til he again folliciting the conclusion of her story. Then must you (said she)
know the story of Amphialus: for his will is my life, his life my history: and
indeed, in what can I better employ my lips, then in speaking of Amphialus?

This knight then whose figure you see, Basilius King of Arcadia, and in his
childhood esteemed his heir: till Basilius in his old years marrying a young
and a fair Lady, had of her those two daughters, so famous for their
perfection in beauty: which put by their young cousin from that expectation.
Whereupon his mother (a woman of a hauty heart, being daughter to the King of
Argos, either disdaining, or fearing, that her son should live under the
power of Basilius sent him to that Lord Timotheus (between whom and her dead
husband there had passed straight bands of mutual hospitality to be brought up
in company with his son Philoxenus?

A happy resolution for Amphialus, Timotheus) no less loving him then his
own son: well they grew in years; and shortly occasions fell aptly to try
Amphialus, and all occasions were but steps for him to clime same by. Nothing
was so hard, but his valor overcame: which yet still he so guided with true
virtue, that although no man was in our parts spoken of but he, for his
ma^hood, yet, as though therein he excelled him self, he was commonly called
the courteous Amphialus. An endless thing it were for me to tell, how many
adventures (terrible to be spoken of) he achieved: what monsters, what Giants,
what conquest of countries: sometimes using policy, sometimes sorce, but
always virtue, well followed, and but followed by Philoxenus: between whom,
and him, so fast a friendship by education was knit, that at last Philoxenus
having no greater matter to employ his frindship in, then to win me, therein
desired, and had this uttermost furtheraunce: to that purpose brought he him to
my court, where truly I may justly witness with him, that what his wit could
conceive (and his wit can conceive as far as the limits of reason stretch) was
all directed to the setting forward the suite of his friend Philoxenus: my
ears could hear nothing from him, but touching the worthiness of Philoxenus,
and of the great happiness it would be unto me to have such a husband: with many
arguments, which God knows, I cannot well remember because I did not much
believe.

so full of beauty, sweetness, and noble conversation, had entered there before
he vouchsafed to call for the keys. O Lord, how did my soul hang at his
lips while he spoke! O when he in feeling manner would describe the love of
his friend, how well (thought I) does love between those lips! when he would
with daintiest eloquence stir pity in me toward Philoxenus, why sure (said I
to my self) Helen, be not afraid, this heart cannot want pity: and when he
would extol the deeds of Philoxenus, who indeed had but waited of him therein,
alas (thought I) good Philoxenus, how evil does it become thy name to be
subscribed to his letter? What should I say? nay, what should I not say (noble
knight) who am not ashamed, nay am delighted, thus to express mine own
passions?

Days paste; his eagernes for his friend never decreased, Amphialus, I fear
that I shall ever enjoy: and grown bolder, or madder, or bold with madness, I
discovered my affection unto him. But, Lord, I shall never forget, how anger
and courtesy, at one instant appeared in his eyes, when he heard that motion:
how with his blush he taught me shame. In sum, he left nothing unassayed,
which might disgrace himself, to grace his fre^d; in sweet terms making me
receive a most resolute refusal of himself. But when he found that his presence
did far more persuade for himself, then his speech could do for his friend,
he left my court: hoping, that forgetfulness (which commonly waits upon
absence) would make room for his friend: to whom he would not utter thus
much (I think) for a kind fear not to grieve him, or perchance (though he
cares little for me) of a certain honorable gratefulnes, nor yet to discourse
so much of my secrets: but as it should seem, meant to travel into far
countries, until his friends affection either ceased, or prevailed.

Philoxenus came to see how onward the fruits were of his friends labor, when
(as in truth I cared not much how he took it) he found me sitting, beholding
this picture, I know not with how affectionate countenance, but I am sure with
a most affectionate mind. I straight found jealousy and disdain took hold of
him: and yet the froward pain of mine own heart made me so delight to punish
him, whom I esteemed the chiefest let in my way; that when he with humble
gesture, and vehement speeches, sued for my favor; I told him, that I would
hear him more willingly, if he would speak for Amphialus, as well as
Amphialus had done for him: he never answered me, but pale and quaking, went
straight away; and straight my heart misgaue me some evil success: and yet
though I had authority enough to have stayed him (as in these fatal things it
falls out, that the hie-working powers make second causes unwittingly
accessarie to their determinations) I did no further but sent a footman of
mine (whose faithfulness to me I well knew) from place to place to follow him,
and bring me word of his proceedings: which (alas) have brought forth that
which I fear I must ever rewe.

Amphialus, who (by succouring a distressed Lady) had been here stayed: and by
and by called him to fight with him, protesting that one of the^ two should
die: you may easily judge how strange it was to Amphialus, whose heart could
accuse it self of no fault, but too much affection toward him, which he
(refusing to fight with him) would feign have made Philoxenus understand, but
(as my servant since told me) the more Amphialus went back, the more he
followed, calling him Traitor, and coward, yet never telling the cause of this
strange alteration. Ah Philoxenus (said Amphialus) I know I am no Traitor, and
thou well know I am no coward: but I pray thee content thy self with this
much, and let this satisfy thee, that I love thee, since I bear thus much of
thee, but he leaving words drew his sword, and gave Amphialus a great blow or
two, which but for the goodness of his armor would have slain him: and yet so
far did Amphialus contain himself, stepping aside, and saying to him, Well
Philoxenus, and thus much villainy am I content to put up, not any longer for
thy sake (whom I have no cause to love, since thou do iniure me, and wilt not
tell me the cause) but for thy virtuous fathers sake, to whom I am so much
bound. I pray thee go away, and conquer thy own passions, and thou shall make
mesoone yield to be thy servant.

But he would not attend his words, but still struck so fiercely at Amphialus,
that in the end (nature prevailing above determination) he was feign to defend
him self, and with-all to offend him, that by an unlucky blow the poor
Philoxenus fell dead at his feet; having had time only to speak some words,
whereby Amphialus knew it was for my sake: which when Amphialus saw, he
forthwith gave such tokens of true felt sorrow; that as my servant said, no
imagination could conceive greater woe. But that by and by, an unhappy
occasion made Amphialus pass himself in sorrow: for Philoxenus was but newly
dead, when there comes to the same place, the aged and virtuous Timotheus, who
(having heard of his sons so daine and passionate manner of parting from my
Court) had followed him as speedily as he could; but alas not so speedily, but
that he found him dead before he could over take him. Thought my heart be
nothing but a stage for Tragedies; yet I must confess, it is even unable to
bear the miserable representation thereof: knowing Amphialus and Timotheus as
I have done. Alas what sorrow, what amasement, what shame was in Amphialus,
when he saw his dear foster father, find him the killer of his only son?
Timotheus, sorrow of his son and (I think principally) unkindness of Amphialus
so devoured his vital spirits that able to say no more but Amphialus,
Amphialus, have I? he sancke to the earth, and presently dyed.

not used to much tenderness) could not refrain weeping when he told it me. He
once ouertooke him, but Amphialus drawing his sword, which was the only part of
his arms (God knows to what purpose) he carried about him, threatened to kill
him if he followed him, and withal, bad him deliver this bitter message, that
he well enough found, I was the cause of all this mischief: and that if I were a
man, he would go over the world to kill me: but bad me assure my self, that of
all creatures in the world, he most hated me. Ah Sir knight (whose ears I
think by this time are tired with the rugged ways of these misfortunes) now
way my case, if at lest you know what love is. For this cause have I left my
country, putting in hazard how my people will in time deal by me, adue^turing
what perils or dishonors might ensue, only to follow him, who proclaims hate
against me, and to bring my neck unto him, if that may redeem my trespass and
assuage his fury. And now sir (said she) you have your request, I pray you take
pains to guide me to the next town, that there I may gather such of my company
again, as your valor has left me. Palladius willingly co^disce^ded: but ere
they began to go, there came Clitophon, who having been something hurt by one of
them, had pursued him a good way: at length ouertaking him, and ready to kill
him, understood they were servants to the fair Queen Helen, and that the
cause of this enterprise was for nothing, but to make Amphialus prisoner, who^
they knew their mistress sought; for she concealed her sorrow, nor cause of her
sorrow from no body.

But Clitophon (very sorry for this accident) came back of this rashly
undertaken enmity, when in comes another (till that time unseen) all armed,
with his beuer down, who first looking round about upon the company, as soon
as he spied Palladius, he drew his sword, and making no other prologue, let
fly at him. But Palladius (sorry for so much harm as had already happened)
sought rather to retire, and ward, thinking he might be some one that belonged
to the fair Queen, whose case in his heart he pitied. Which Clitophon seeing,
stepped between them, asking the new come knight the cause of his quarrel; who
answered him, that he would kill that these, who had stolen away his masters
armor, if he did not restore it. With that Palladius looked upon him, and saw
that he of the other side had Palladius own armor upon him: truly (said
Palladius) if I have stolen this armor, you did not buy that: but you shall
not fight with me upon such a quarrel, you shall have this armor willingly,
which I did only put on to do honor to the owner. But Clitophon straight
knew by his words and voice, that it was Ismenus, the faithful and diligent
Page of Amphialus: and therefore telling him that he was Clitophon, and willing
him to acknowledge his error to the other, who deserved all honor, the young
Gentleman pulled of his head-peece, and (lighting) went to kiss Palladius
hands; desiring him to pardon his folly, caused by extreme grief, which
easily might bring forth anger. Sweet Gentleman (said Palladius) you shall
only make me this amends, that you shall carry this your Lords armor from me
to him, and tell him from an unknown knight (who admires his worthiness) that
he cannot cast a greater miste over his glory, the^ by being unkind to so
excellent a princess as this Queen is. Ismenus promised he would, as soon as
he durst find his master: and with that went to do his duty to the Queen,
whom in all these encounters astonishment made hardy; but as soon as she saw
Ismenus (looking to her picture) Ismenus (said she) here is my Lord, where is
yours? or come you to bring me some sentence of death from him? if it be so,
welcome be it. I pray you speak; and speak quickly. Alas Madame, said
Ismenus, I have lost my Lord, (with that tears came unto his eyes) for
as soon as the unhappy combat was concluded with the death both of father and
son, my master casting of his armor, went his way: forbidding me upon pain
of death to follow him.

Yet diverse days I followed his steps; Philoxenus. The dog straight fawned
on my master for old knowledge: but never was there thing more pitiful then
to hear my master blame the dog for loving his masters murderer, renewing a
fresh his complaints, with the dumb counceller, as if they might comfort one
another in their miseries. But my Lord having spied me, raze up in such rage,
that in truth I feared he would kill me: yet as then he said only, if I would
not displease him, I should not come near him till he sent for me: too hard a
commandment for me to disobey: I yielded, leaving him only waited on by his
dog, and as I think seeking out the most solitary places, that this or any
other country can grant him: and I returning where I had left his armor,
found an other in steed thereof, and (disdaining I must confess that any
should bear the armor of the best Knight living) armed my self therein to
play the fool, as eue^ now I did. Fair Ismenus (said the Queen) a sitter
messenger could hardly be to unfold my Tragedy: I see the end, I see my end.

Palladius left her to be waited on by Clitophon, at Palladius earnest
entreatie, who desired alone to take that melancholy course of seeking his
friend: and therefore changing armours again with Ismenus (who went withal to a
castle belonging to his master) he continued his quest for his friend
Daiphantus.

CHAP. 12.
1 Palladius after long search of Daiphantus, lights on an Amazon Lady. 2
Her habit, 3 song, 4 and who she was. 5 Objections of the one against women,
and love of them. 6 The answers of the other for them both. 7 Their passionate
conclusion in relenting kindness.

Laconia, as well among the Helots, as Spartans. There indeed he found his fame
flourishing, his monument engraued in Marble, and yet more durable in men's
memories; but the universal lamenting his absented presence, assured him of
his present absence. Thence into the Elean province, to see whether at the
Olympian games (there celebrated) he might in such concourse bless his eyes
with so desired an encounter: but that huge and sportfull assembly grew to
him a tedious loneliness, esteeming no body found, since Daiphantus was
lost. Afterward he passed through Achaia and Sicyonia, to the Corinthians,
proud of their two Seas, to learn whether by the straight of that Isthmus, it
was possible to know of his passage. But finding every place more dumb then
other to his demands, and remembering that it was late-taken love, which had
wrought this new course, he returned again (after two months travail in
vain) to make fresh search in Arcadia; so much the more, as then first he
bethought him self of the picture of Philoclea (in resembling her he had once
loved) might perhaps awake again that sleeping passion. And having already
past over the greatest part of Arcadia, one day coming under the side of the
pleasant mountain Moenalus, his horse (nothing guilty of his
inquisitiveness) with flat tiring taught him, that discrete stays make
speedy iourneis. And therefore lighting down, and vnbrideling his horse, he
him self went to repose him self in a little wood he saw thereby. Where
lying under the protection of a shadie tree, with intention to make forgetting
sleep comfort a sorrowful memory, he saw a sight which persuaded, and
obtained of his eyes, that they would abide yet a while open. It was the
appearing of a Lady, who because she walked with her side toward him, he could
not perfectly, see her face; but so much he might see of her, that was a
surety for the rest, that all was excellent.

Well might he perceive the hanging of her hair in whether nature simply, or
nature helped by cunning, be more excellent: the rest whereof was drawn into a
coronet of gold richly set with pearl, and so joined all over with gold
wiers, and covered with feathers of diverse colors, that it was not unlike to
an helmet, such a glittering show it bare, and so bravely it was held up from
the head. Upon her body she ware a doublet of sky color satin, covered with
plates of gold, and as it were nailed with precious stones, that in it she
might seem armed; the nether parts of her garment was so full of stuff, and
cut after such a fashion, that though the length of it reached to the ankles,
yet in her going one might sometimes discern the small of her leg, which with
the foot was dressed in a short pair of crimson velvet buskins, in some places
open (as the ancient manner was) to show the fairenes of the skin. Over all
this she ware a certain mantell, made in such manner, that coming under the
right arm, and covering most of that side, it had no fastening of the left
side, but only upon the top of the shoulder: where the two ends met, and were
closed together with a very rich jewel: the devise whereof (as he after saw)
was this: a Hercules made in little form, but a distasseset within his hand
as he once was by Omphales commandment with a word in Greek, but thus to be
interpreted, Never more valiant. On the same side, on her thigh she ware a
sword, which as it witnessed her to be an Amazon, or one following that
profession, so it seemed but a needles weapon, since her other forces were
without withstanding. But this Lady walked outright, till he might see her
enter into a fine close arbor: it was of trees whose branches so lovingly
interlaced one the other; that it could resist the stro^gest violence of
eyesight; but she went into it by a door she opened; which moved him as
warely as he could to follow her, and by and by he might hear her sing this
song, with a voice no less beautiful to his ears, then her goodlinesse was
full of harmony to his eyes.

TRansformd in show, but more transformd in mind,
I cease to strive with double conquest soild:
For (woe is me) my powers all I find
With outward force, and inward treason spoild.
For from without came to mine eyes the blow,
Whereto mine inward thoughts did saintly yield;
Both these conspird poor Reasons overthrow;
False in my self, thus have I lost the field.
Thus are my eyes still Captive to one sight:
Thus all my thouhts are slaves to one thought still:
Thus Reason to his servants yields his right;
Thus is my power transformed to your will.
What marvel then I take a woman's hew,
Since what I see, think, know is all but you?
The dittie gave him some suspicion, but the voice Pyrocles thus disguised,
wherewith not receiving so much joy to have found him, as griese so to have
found him, amazedly looking upon him (as Apollo is painted when he saw Daphne
suddenly turned into a Laurel) he was not able to bring forth a word. So that
Pyrocles (who had as much shame, as Musidorus had sorrow) rising to him, would
have formed a substantial excuse; but his insinuation being of blushinge, and
his division of sighs, his whole oration stood upon a short narration, what
was the causer of this Metamorphosis? But by that time Musidorus had gathered
his spirits together, and yet casting a gastfull countenance upon him (as if
he would conjure some strange spirits) he thus spoke unto him.

Pyrocles, the only young Prince in the world, formed by nature, and framed by
education, to the true exercise of virtue? or is it indeed some Amazon that
has counterfeited the face of my friend, in this sort to vex me? for likelier
sure I would have thought it, that any outward face might have been disguised,
then that the face of so excellent a mind could have been thus blemished. O
sweet Pyrocles, separate your self a little (if it be possible) from your
self, and let your own mind look upon your own proceedings: so shall my
words be needless, and you best instructed. See with your self, how sit it
will be for you in this your tender youth, borne so great a Prince, and of so
rare, not only expectation, but proof, desired of your old Father, and
wanted of your native country, now so near your home, to divert your thoughts
from the way of goodness; to loose, nay to abuse your time. Lastly to
overthrow all the excellent things you have done, which have filled the world
with your same; as if you should drown your ship in the long desired haven, or
like an ill player, should mar the last act of his Tragedy. Remember (for I
know you know it) that if we will be men, the reasonable part of our soul, is
to have absolute commandment; against which if any sensual weakness arise, we
are to yield all our sound forces to the overthrowing of so unnatural a
rebellion, wherein how can we want courage, since we are to deal against so
weak an adversary, that in it self is nothing but weakness? Nay we are to
resolve, that if reason direct it, we must do it, and if we must do it, we
will do it; for to say I cannot, is childish, and I will not, womanish. And
see how extremely every way you endaunger your mind; for to take this
womannish habit (without you frame your behavior accordingly) is wholly vain:
your behavior can never come kindly from you, but as the mind is
proportioned unto it. So that you must resolve, if you will play your part to
any purpose, whatsoever peevish affections are in that sex, soften your heart
to receive them, the very first downe-steppe to all wickedness: for do not
deceive your self, my dear cousin, there is no man suddenly excellently
good, or extremely evil, but grows either as he holds himself up in
virtue, or lets himself slide to vitiousnes. And let us see, what power is the
aucthor of all these troubles: forsooth love, love, a passion, and the basest
and fruitlessest of all passions: fear breeds wit, Anger is the cradle of
courage: joy opens and enhableth the heart: sorrow, as it closes, so it
draws it inward to look to the correcting of it self; and so all generally
have power toward some good by the direction of right Reason. But this
bastard Love (for in deed the name of Love is most unworthily apply to so
hateful a humor) as it is engendered betwixt lust and idleness; as the matter
it works upon is nothing, but a certain base weakness, which some gentle
sooles call a gentle heart; as his adjoined companions be unquietness, longings,
fond comforts, saint discomforts, hopes, ielousies, ungrounded rages, causlesse
yeeldings; so is the hiest end it aspires unto, a little pleasure with much
pain before, and great repentance after. But that end how endless it runs to
infinite evils, were fit enough for the matter we speak of, but not for your
ears, in whom indeed there is so much true disposition to virtue: yet thus
much of his worthy effects in your self is to be seen, that (besides your
breaking laws of hospitality with Kalander and of friendship with me) it
utterly subuerts the course of nature, in making reason give place to sense,
and man to woman. And truly I think heere-vpon it first gatte the name of
Love: for indeed the true love has that excellent nature in it, that it does
transform the very effence of the lover into the thing loved, uniting, and as
it were incorporating it with a secret and inward working. And herein do these
kinds of love imitate the excellent; for as the love of heaven makes one
heavenly, the love of virtue, virtuous; so does the love of the world make one
become wordly, and this effeminate love of a woman, does so womanish a man,
that (if he yield to it) it will not only make him an Amazon; but a launder, a
distass-spinner; or what so ever Other vile occupation their idle heads ca^
imagine, and their weak hands perform. Therefore (to trouble you no longer
with my tedious but loving words) if either you remember what you are, what you
have been, or what you must be: if you co^fider what it is, that moved you, or
by what kind of creature you are moved, you shall find the cause so small,
the effect so dangerous, your self so unworthy to run into the one, or to
be driven by the other, that I doubt not I shall quickly have occasion rather
to praise you for having conquered it, then to give you further counsel, how
to do it.

But in Pyrocles this speech wrought no more, but Musidorus striving with it,
he thus, partly to satisfy him, but principally to loose the reins to his
own motions, made him answer. Cousin, whatsoever good disposition nature has
bestowed upon me, or howsoever that disposition has been by bringing up
confirmed, this must I confess, that I am not yet come to that degree of
wisdom, to think light of the sex, of whom I have my life; since if I be any
thing (which your friendship rather finds, the^ I acknowledge) I was to come to
it, born of a woman, and nursed of a woman. And certe^ly (for this point of
your speech does nearest touch me) it is strange to see the vnman-like cruelty
of mankind; who not content with their tyra^nous a^bition, to have brought the
others virtuous patience under them (like to childish masters) think their
masterhood nothing, without doing ininiury to them, who (if we will argue by
reason) are framed of nature with the same parts of the mind for the exercise
of virtue, as we are. And for example, even this estate of Amazons, (which I
now for my greatest honor do seek to counterfaite) does well witness, that if
generally the swetnes of their dispositio^s did not make them see the vainness
of these things, which we account glorious, they nether want valor of mind,
nor yet does their fairnes take away their force. And truly we men, and
praisers of men, should remember, that if we have such excelle^cies, it is
reason to think them excellent creatures, of whom we are: since a Kite never
brought forth a good flying Hawk. But to tell you true, as I think it
superfluous to use any words of such a subject, which is so praised in it
self, as it needs no praises; so withal I fear left my conceate (not able
to reach unto them) bring forth words, which for their unworthiness may be a
disgrace unto the^ I so inwardly honor. Let this suffice, that they are capable
of virtue: and virtue (ye your selves say) is to be loved, and I too truly: but
this I willingly confess, that it likes me much better, when I find virtue in
a fair lodging, then when I am bound to seek it in an ill favored creature,
like a pearl in a dounghill. As for my fault of being an uncivil guest to
Kalander, if you could feel what an inward guest my self am host unto: ye
would think it very excuseable, in that I rather perform the duties of an
host, then the ceremonies of a guest. And for my breaking the laws of
friendship with you, (which I would rather dye, then effectually do) truly,
I could find in my heart to ask you pardon for it, but that your handling of
me gives me reason to my former dealing. And here Pyrocles stayed, as to breath
himself, having been transported with a little vehemence, because it seemed him
Musidorus had ouer-bitterly glaunsed against the reputation of woman-kinde: but
then quieting his countenance (as well as out of an unquiet mind it might be) he
thus proceeded on: And poor Love (said he) dear cousin, is little beholding
unto you, since you are not contented to spoil it of the honor of the highest
power of the mind, which notable me^ have attributed unto it; but ye deiect it
below all other passions, in truth somewhat strangely; since, if love receive
any disgrace, it is by the company of these passions you prefer before it.
For those kinds of bitter objections (as, that lust, idleness, and a weak heart,
should be, as it were, the matter and form of love) rather touch me, dear
Musidorus, then love: But I am good witness of mine own imperfections, and
therefore will not defend my self: but herein I must say, you deal contrary
to your self: for if I be so weak, then can you not with reason stir me up as
ye did, by remembrance of my own virtue: or if indeed I be virtuous, the^ must
ye co^feffe, that love has his working in a virtuous heart: and so no dout has
it, whatsoever I be: for if we love virtue, in whom shall we love it but in a
virtuous creature: without your meaning be, I should love this word virtue,
where I see it written in a book. Those troblesome effects you say it breeds,
be not the faults of love, but of him that loves; as an unable vessel to bear
such a licour: like evil eyes, not able to look on the Sun; or like an ill
brain, soonest overthrown with best wine. Even that heavenly love you speak
of, is accompanied in some hearts with hopes, griefs, longings, and dispaires.
And in that heavenly love, since there are two parts, the one the love it self,
the other the excellencey of the thing loved; I, not able at the first leap to
frame both in me, do now (like a diligent workman) make ready the chief
instrument, and first part of that great work, which is love itself; which
when I have a while practiced in this sort, then you shall see me turn it to
greater matters. And thus gently you may (if it please you) think of me.
Neither doubt ye, because I wear a woman's apparel, I will be the more
womannish, since, I assure you (for all my apparel) there is nothing I desire
more, then fully to prove my self a man in this enterprise. Much might be said
in my defense, much more for love, and most of all for that divine creature,
which has joined me and love together. But these disputations are fitter for
quiet schools, then my troubled brains, which are bent rather in deeds to
perform, then in words to defend the noble desire which possesses me. O
Lord (said Musidorus) how sharp-witted you are to hurt your self? No
(answered he) but it is the hurt you speak of, which makes me so sharp-witted.
Even so (said Musidorus) as every base occupation makes one sharp in that
practice, and foolish in all the rest. Nay rather (answered Pyrocles) as each
excellent thing once well learned, serves for a measure of all other
knowledges. And is that become (said Musidorus) a measure for other things,
which never received measure in it self? It is counted without measure
(answered Pyrocles,) because the workings of it are without measure: but
otherwise, in nature it has measure, since it has an end allotted unto it.
The beginning being so excellent, I would gladly know the end. Enjoying,
answered Pyrocles, with a great sigh. O (said Musidorus) now set ye forth the
baseness of it: since if it end in enjoying, it shows all the rest was
nothing. Ye mistake me (answered Pyrocles) I spoke of the end to which it is
directed; which end ends not, no sooner then the life. Alas, let your own
brain dis-enchaunt you (said Musidorus.) My heart is too far possessed (said
Pyrocles.) But the head gives you direction. And the heart gives me life;
answered Pyrocles.

But Musidorus was so grieved to see his well-beloved Pyrocles own sake (who is
now upon the point of falling or rising) to purge yourselfe of this vile
infection; other wife give me leave, to leave of this name of friendship, as an
idle title of a thing which cannot be, wherevertue is abolished. The length of
these speeches before had not so much cloied Pyrocles, though he were very
impatient of long deliberations, as the last farewell of him he loved as his
own life, did wound his soul, thinking him self afflicted, he was the apter
to conceive unkindness deeply: insomuch, that shaking his head, and
delivering some show of tears, he thus uttered his griefs. Alas (said he)
prince Musidorus, how cruelly you deal with me; if you seek the victory, take
it; and if ye list, triumph. Have you all the reason of the world, and with me
remain all the imperfections; yet such as I can no more lay from me, then the
Crow can be persuaded by the Swanne to cast of all his black feathers. But
truly you deal with me like a Physician, that seeing his patient in a
pestilent fever, should chide him, in steed of ministering help, and bid him
be sick no more; or rather like such a friend, that visiting his friend
condemned to perpectuall prison; and laden with grievous fetters, should will
him to shake of his fetters, or he wuld leave him. I am sick, and sick to the
death; I am a prisoner, neither is any redress, but by her to whom I am slave.
Now if you list to leave him that loves you in the hiest degree: But remember
ever to carry this with you, that you abandon your friend in his greatest
extremity.

And herewith the deep wound of his love being rubbed afresh with this new
unkindness, began (as it were) to bleed again, in such fort that he was not
hable to bear it any longer, but gushing out abundance of tears, and
crossing his arms over his woeful heart, as if his tears had been
out-flowing blood, his arms an ouer-pressing burden, he suncke down to the
ground, which sudden trance went so to the heart of Musidorus that falling
down by him and kissing the weping eyes of his friend, he besought him not to
make account of his speech; which if it had been over vehement, yet was it to
be borne withal, because it came out of a love much more vehement; that he had
not thought fancy could have received so deep a wound: but now finding in him
the force of it, he would no further contrary it; but employ all his service
to medicine it, in such fort, as the nature of it required. But even this
kindness made Pyrocles the more melte in the former unkindness, which his manlike
tears well showed, with a silent look upon Musidorus, as who should say, And
is it possible that Musidorus should threaten to leave me? And this struck
Musidorus mind and senses so dumb too, that for grief being not able to say
any thing, they rested, with their eyes placed one upon another, in such sort,
as might well paint out the true passion of unkindness to be never aright, but
betwixt them that most dearly love.

And thus remained they a time; till at length, Musidorus embrasing him, said,
And will you thus shake of your friend? It is you that shake me of (said
Pyrocles) being for my imperfectness unworthy of your friendship. But this
(said Musidorus) shows you more imperfect, to be cruel to him, that submits
himself unto you; but since you are imperfect (said he smiling) it is reason
you be governed by us wise and perfect men. And that authority will I begin
to take upon me, with three absolute commandments: The first, that you
increase not your evil with further griefs: the second, that you love her
with all the powers of your mind: and the last commandment shall be, ye command
me to do what service I can, toward the attaining of your desires. Pyrocles
heart was not so oppressed with the mighty passions of love and unkindness, but
that it yielded to some mirth at this commandment of Musidorus, that he
should love: so that something clearing his face from his former shows of
grief; Well (said he) dear cousin, I see by the well choosing of your
commandementes, that you are fitter to be a Prince, then a Counselor: and
therefore I am resolved to employ all my endeavor to obey you; with this
condition, that the comandementes ye command me to lay upon you, shall only
be, that you continue to love me, and look upon my imperfections, with more
affection then judgment. Love you? (said he) alas, how can my heart be
separated from the true imbrasing of it, without it burst, by being too full of
it? But (said he) let us leave of these flowers of new begun friendship: and
now I pray you again tell me; but tell it me fully, omitting no circumstance,
the story of your affections both beginning, and proceeding: assuring your
self, that there is nothing so great, which I will fear to do for you: nor
nothing so small, which I will disdain to do for you. Let me therefore receive
a clear understanding, which many times we miss, while those things we
account small, as a speech, or a look are omitted, like as a whole sentence may
fail of his congruitie, by wanting one particle. Therefore between friends,
all must be laid open, nothing being superfluous, nor tedious. You shall be
obeyed (said Pyrocles) and here are we in as fit a place for it as may be;
for this arbor no body offers to come into but my self; I using it as my
melancholy retiring place, and therefore that respect is born unto it; yet if
by chance any should come, say that you are a servant sent from the Q. of the
Amazons to seek me, and then let me alone for the rest. So fate they down,
and Pyrocles thus said.

CHAP. 13.
1 How Pyrocles fell in love with Philoclea. 2 His counsel and course therein.
3 His disguising into Zelmane. 4 Her meeting with Damaetas, 5 Basilius, 6 the
Queen and her daughters, and their speeches. 7 Her abode there over entreated;
8 and the place thereof described.

COusin (said he) then began the Kalanders house, you your self delivered
unto me what you had understood of Philoclea, who much resembling (though I
must say much surpassing) the Lady Zelmane, whom too well I loved: there were
mine eyes infected, and at your mouth did I drink my poison. Yet alas so
sweet was it unto me, that I could not be contented, til Kalander had made it
more and more strong with his declaration. Which the more I questioned, the
more pity I conceived of her unworthy fortune: and when with pity once my
heart was made tender, according to the aptness of the humor, it received
quickly a cruel impression of that wonderful passion which to be definde is
impossible, because no words reach to the strange nature of it: they only
know it, which inwardly feel it, it is called love. Yet did I not (poor
wretch) at first know my disease, thinking it only such a woonted kind of
desire, to see rare sights; and my pity to be no other, but the fruits of a
gentle nature. But eue^ this arguing with my self came of further thoughts;
and the more I argued, the more my thoughts increased. Desirous I was to see
the place where she remained, as though the Architecture of the lodges would
have been much for my learning; but more desirous to see her self, to be
judge, forsooth, of the painters cunning. For thus at the first did I flatter
my self, as though my wound had been no deeper: but when within short time I
came to the degree of uncertain wishes, and that the wishes grew to unquiet
longings, when I could fix my thoughts upon nothing, but that within little
varying, they should end with Philoclea: when each thing I saw, seemed to
figure out some parts of my passions; when even Parthenias fair face became a
lecture to me of Philocleas imagined beauty; when I heard no word spoken, but
that me thought it carried the sum of Philocleas name: then indeed, then I did
yield to the burden, finding my self prisoner, before I had leisure to arm
my self; and that I might well, like the spaniel, gnaw upon the chain that
ties him, but I should sooner mar my teeth, then procure liberty.

against my heart to break any way from you, so did I fear more then any
assault to break it to you: finding (as it is indeed) that to a heart fully
resolute, counsel is tedious, but reprehension is loathsome: and that there is
nothing more terrible to a guilty heart, then the eye of a respected friend.
This made me determine with my self, (thinking it a less fault in frie^dship
to do a thing without your knowledge, then against your will) to take this
secret course: Which conceit was most builded up in me, the last day of my
parting and speaking with you; when upon your speech with me, and my but naming
love, (when else perchance I would have gone further) I saw your voice and
countenance so change, as it assured me, my revealing it should but purchase
your griese with my cumber: and therefore (dear Musidorus) eue^ ran away from
thy well known chiding: for having written a letter, which I know not whether
you found or no, and taking my chief jewels with me, while you were in the
midst of your sport, I got a time (as I think) unmarked, to steal away, I
cared not whether so I might escape you: and so came I to Ithonia in the
province of Messenia; where lying secret I put this in practice which before I
had devised. For remembering by Philanax his letter, and Kaladers speech, how
obstinately Basilius was determined not to Amazon. Therefore in the closest
manner I could, naming my self Zelmane, for that dear Ladies sake, to whose
memory I am so much bound, I caused this apparel to be made, and bringing it
necre the lodges, which are hard at hand, by night, thus dressed my self,
resting till occasion might make me found by them, whom I sought: which the
next morning happened as well, as my own plot could have laid it. For after I
had run over the whole petigree of my thoughts, I gave my self to sing a
little, which as you know I ever delighted in, so now especially, whether it be
the nature of this clime to stir up Poetical fancies, or rather as I think, of
Love; whose scope being pleasure, will not so much as utter his griefs, but in
some form of pleasure.

Dametas with a hedging bill in his hand, chasing, and swearing by the pa^table
of Pallas, and such other oaths as his rusticall bravery could imagine; and
when he saw me, I assure you my beauty was no more beholding to him the^ my
harmony; for leaning his hands upon his bil, and his chin upon his hands, with
the voice of one that plaieth Hercules in a play, but never had his fancy in
his head, the first word he spoke to me, was, Am not I Dametas? why, am not I
Dametas? He needed not name him self: for Kalanders description had set such a
note upon him, as made him very notable unto me, and therefore the height of my
thoughts would not descend so much as to make him any answer, but continued on
my inward discourses: which (he perchance witness of his own unworthiness, and
therefore the apter to think him self conte^ned) took in so heinous manner,
that standing upon his tip-toes, and staring as though he would have a more
pulled out of his eye, Why (said he) thou woman, or boy, or both, what soever
thou be, I tell thee here is no place for thee, get thee gone, I tell thee it
is the Princes pleasure, I tell thee it is Dametas pleasure. Dametas) do
thou think me a spirit, I tell thee I am Basilius officer, and have charge of
him, and his daughters. O only pearl (said I sobbing) that so vile an oyster
should keep thee? By the combe-case of Diana (swear Dametas) this woman is
mad: oysters, and pearls? do thou think I will buie oysters? I tell thee
once again get thee packing, and with that lifted up his bill to hit me with
the blunt end of it: but indeed that put me quite out of my lesson, so that I
forgot al Zelmanes-ship, and drawing out my sword, the baseness of the
villain yet made me stay my hand, and he (who, as Kalander told me, from his
childehood ever feared the blade of a sword) ran back, backward (with his
hands above his head) at lest twenty paces, gaping and staring, with the very
grace (I think) of the clownes, that by Latonas prayers were turned into
Frogs. At length staying, finding himself without the compass of blows, he
fell to a fresh scolding, in such mannerly manner, as might well show he had
passed through the discipline of a Tavern. But seeing me walk up and down,
without marking what he said, he went his way (as I perceived after) to
Basilius: for within a while he came unto me, bearing in deed shows in his
countenance of an honest and well-minded gentleman, and with as much
courtesy, as Dametas with rudeness saluting me, Fair Lady (said he) it is
nothing strange, that such a solitary place as this should receive solitary
persons; but much do I marvel, how such a beauty as yours is, should be
suffered to be thus alone. I (that now knew it was my part to play) looking
with a grave majesty upon him, as if I found in my self cause to be
reverenced. They are never alone (said I) that are accompanied with noble
thoughts. But those thoughts (replied Basilius) cannot in this your lonelines
neither warrant you from suspicion in others, nor defend you from melancholy in
your self. I then showing a mislike that he pressed me so far, I seek no
better warraunt (said I) then my own conscience, nor no greater pleasures,
then mine own contentation. Yet virtue seeks to satisfy others, (said
Basilius.) Those that be good (said I,) and they will be satisfied as long as
they see no evil. Yet will the best in this country, (said Basilius) suspect
so excellent a beauty being so weakly guarded. Then are the best but stark
naught, (answered I) for open suspecting others, comes of secret condemning
themselves; But in my country (whose manners I am in all places to maintain
and reverence) the general goodness (which is nourished in our hearts) makes
every one think the strength of virtue in an other, where of they find the
assured foundation in themselves. Excellent Lady (said he) you praise so
greatly, (and yet so wisely) your country, that I must needs desire to know
what the nest is, out of which such Byrds do fly.

You must first deserve it (said I) before you may obtain it. And by what
means (said Basilius) shall I deserve to know your estate? By letting me
first know yours (answered I.) To obey you (said he) I will do it, although
it were so much more reason, yours should be known first, as you do deserve
in all points to be preferred. Know you (fair Lady) that my name is Basilius,
unworthily Lord of this country: the rest, either fame has brought to your
ears, or (if it please you to make this place happy by your presence) at more
leisure you shall understand of me. I that from the beginning assured my self
it was he, but would not seem I did so, to keep my gravity the better,
making a piece of reverence unto him, Mighty Prince (said I) let my not knowing
you serve for the excuse of my boldness, and the little reverence I do you,
impute it to the manner of my country, whch is the invincible Land of the
Amazons; My self niece to Senicia, Queen thereof, lineally descended of the
famous Penthesilea, slain by the bloody hand of Pyrrhus. I having in this my
youth determined to make the world see the Amazons excellencies, as well in
private, as in public virtue, have passed some dangerous adventures in
diverse countries: till the unmerciful Sea deprived me of my company: so that
shipwreck casting me not far hence, uncertain wandering brought me to this
place. But Basilius (who now began to taste that, which since he has swallowed
up, as I will tell you) fell to more cunning entreating my abode, then any
greedy host would use to well paying passingers. I thought nothing could shoot
righter at the mark of my desires; yet had I learned already so much, that it was
aganst my womanhoode to be forward in my own wishes. And therefore he (to
prove whither intercessions in fitter mouths might better prevail) commanded
Dametas to bring forthwith his wife and daughters thither; three Ladies,
although of diverse, yet all of excellent beauty.

) as if her, daughters had not been by, might with just price have purchased
admiration; but they being there, it was enough that the most dainty eye would
think her a worthy mother of such children. The fair Pamela, whose noble heart
I find does greatly disdain, that the trust of her virtue is reposed in such
a louts hands as Dametas, had yet to show an obedience, taken on shepeardish
apparel, which was but of Russet cloth cut after their fashion, with a
straight body, open brested, the nether part full of pleights, with long and
wide sleeves: but believe me she did apparel her apparel, and with the
pretiousnes of her body made it most sumptuous. Her hair at the full length,
wound about with gold lace, only by the comparison to see how far her hair
does excel in color: betwixt her breasts (which sweetly raze up like two
fair Mountaints in the pleasant valley of Tempe) there honge a very rich
Diamond set but in a black horn, the word I have since read is this; yet
still my self. And thus particularly have I described them, because you may
know that mine eyes are not so partial, but that I marked them too. But when
the ornament of the Earth, the model of heaven, the Triumph of Nature, the
light of beauty, Queen of Love, young Philoclea appeared in her Nimphe-like
apparel, so near nakedness, as one might well discern part of her
perfections; and yet so apparelled, as did show she kept best store of her
beuty to her self: her hair (alas too poor a word, why should I not rather
call the^ her beams) drawn up into a net, able to take Jupiter when he was in
the form of an Eagle; her body (O sweet body) covered with a light Taffeta
garment, so cut, as the wrought smock came through it in many places, enough
to have made your restraind imagination have thought what was under it: with
the cast of her black eyes; black indeed, whether nature so made them, that
we might be the more able to behold and bear their wonderful shining, or that
she, (goddess like) would work this miracle in her self, in giving blacknes
the price above all beauty. Then (I say) indeed me thought the Lillies grew
pale for envy, the roses me thought blushed to see sweeter roses in her
cheeks, and the apples me thought, fell down from the trees, to do homage to
the apples of her breast; Then the clouds gave place, that the heavens might
more freshly smile upon her; at the lest the clouds of my thoughts quite
vanished: and my sight (then more clear and forcible then ever) was so fixed
there, that (I imagine) I stood like a well wrought image, with some life in
show, but none in practice. And so had I been like enough to have stayed long
time, but that Gynecia stepping between my sight and the only Philoclea, the
change of object made me recover my senses: so that I could with reasonable
good manner receive the salutation of her, and of the the princes Pamela, doing
them yet no further reverence then one Prince uses to another. But when I came
to the neuer-inough praised Philoclea, I could not but fall down on my knees,
and taking by force her hand, and kissing it (I must confess) with more then
womanly ardency, Divine Lady, (said I) let not the world, nor these great
princes marvel, to se me (contrary to my manner) do this especial honor unto
you, since all both men and women, do owe this to the perfection of your
beauty. But she blushing (like a fair morning in May) at this my singularity,
and causing me to rise, Noble Lady, (said she) it is no marvel to see your
judgment mistaken in my beauty, since you begin with so great an error, as
to do more honor unto me then to them, whom I my self owe all service. Rather
(answered I with a bowed down countenance) that shows the power of your
beauty, which forced me to do such an error, if it were an error. You are so
well acquainted (said she sweetly, most sweetly smiling,) with your own
beauty, that it makes you easily fall into the discourse of beauty. Beauty in
me? (said I truly sighing) alas if there be any, it is in my eyes, which your
blessed presence has imparted unto them.

Basilius willing her so do, Well (said she) I must needs confess I have
heard that it is a great happiness to be praised of them that are most praise
worthy; And well I find that you are an invincible Amazon, since you will
overcome, though in a wrong matter. But if my beauty be any thing, then let it
obtain thus much of you, that you will remain some while in this company, to
ease your own trauail, and our solitarines. First let me dye (said I) before
any word spoken by such a mouth, should come in vain.

And thus with some other words of entertaining, was my staying concluded, and
I led among them to the lodge; truly a place for pleasantnes, Pamela lives:
so that the Lodge seems not unlike a fair Comete, whose tail stretches it
self to a star of less greatness.

CHAP. 14.
1 The devises of the first banquet to Zelmane. 2 Her crosses in love, 3 by the
love of Basilius 4 and Gynecia 5 The conclusion between Musidorus and Zelmane.

SO Gynecia her self bringing me to my is a banqueting house among certain
pleasant trees, whose heads seemed curled with the wrappings about of Vine
branches. The table was set near to an excellent water-worke; for by the
casting of the water in most cunning manner, it makes (with the shining of the
Sun upon it) a perfect rainbow, not more pleasant to the eye then to the
mind, so sensibly to see the proof of the heavenly Iris. There were birds also
made so finely, that they did not only deceive the sight with their figure,
but the hearing with their songs; which the watrie instruments did make their
gorge deliver. The table at which we sat, was round, which being fast to the
floor whereon we sat, and that divided from the rest of the buildings (with
turning a vice, which Basilius at first did to make me sport) the table, and we
about the table, did all turn round, by means of water which ran under,
and carried it about as a Mill. But alas, what pleasure did it to me, to make
diverse times the full circle round about, since Philoclea (being also set) was
carried still in equal distance from me, and that only my eyes did overtake
her; which when the table was stayed, and we began to feed, drank much
more eagerly of her beauty, then my mouth did of any other licour. And so was
my common sense deceived (being chiefly bent to her) that as I drank the wine,
and withal stale a look on her, me seemed I tasted her deliciousness. But
alas, the one thirste was much more inflamed, then the other quenched.
Sometimes my eyes would lay themselves open to receive all the darts she did
throw, sometimes cloze up with admiration, as if with a contrary fancy, they
would preserve the riches of that sight they had gotten, or cast my lidde as
curtains over the image of beauty, her presence had painted in them. True it
is, that my Reason (now grown a servant to Passion) did yet often tell his
master, that he should more moderatly use his delight. But he, that of a rebel
was become a Prince, disdayned almost to allow him the place of a Counselor:
so that my senses delights being too strong for any other resolution, I did
even loose the raines unto them: hoping, that (going for a woman) my looks
would pass, either unmarked, or unsuspected.

Now thus I had (as me thought) well played my first

At the first sight that Basilius had of me (I think Cupid Arcadia. Do you not
think that this is a sallet of woormwood, while mine eyes feed upon the
Ambrosia of Philocleas beauty.

But this is not all; no this is not the worst; for he (good man) were easy
enough to be dealt with: but (as I think) Love and mischief having made a
wager, which should have most power in me, have set Gynecia Philoclea (which
love forced me unwisely to utter, while hope of my mask foolishly encouraged
me) or that she has taken some other mark of me, that I am not a woman: or
what devil it is has revealed it unto her, I know not; but so it is, that al
her countenances, words and gestures, are miserable portraitures of a desperate
affection. Whereby a man may learn, that these auoydings of company, do but
make the passions more violent, when they meet with fit subjects. Truly it
were a notable dumb show of Cupids kingdom, to see my eyes (languishing with
ouer-vehement longing) direct themselves to Philoclea: and Basilius as busy
about me as a Be, and indeed as cumbersome; making such suits to me, who
nether could if I would; nor would if I could, help him: while the terrible
wit of Gynecia, carried with the beer of violent love, runs through us all.
And so ielious is she of my love to her daughter, that I could never yet
begin to open my mouth to the inevitable Philoclea, but that her vnwished
presence gave my tale a conclusion, before it had a beginning.

And surely if I be not deceived, I see such shows of liking, and (if I be
acquainted with passions) of almost a passionate liking in the heavenly
Philoclea, toward me, that I may hope her ears would not abhor my
discourse. And for good Basilius, he thought it best to have lodged us
together, but that the eternal hatefulnes of my destiny, made Cynecias
jealousy stop that, and all other my blessings. Yet must I confess, that one
way her love does me pleasure: for since it was my foolish fortune, or
unfortunate folly, to be known by her, that keeps her from bewraying me to
Basilius. And thus (my Musidorus) you have my Tragedy played unto you by
myself, which I pray the gods may not in deed prove a Tragedy. And there he
ended, making a full point of a hearty sigh.

Musidorus reco^mended to his best discourse, all which Pyrocles had told him.
But therein he found such intricatenes, that he could see no way to lead him
out of the maze; yet perceiving his affection so grounded, that striving
against it, did rather anger then heal the wound, and rather call his
friendship in question, then give place to any friendly counsel. Well (said
he) dear cousin, since it has pleased the gods to mingle your other
excellencies with this humor of love, yet happy it is, that your love is
employed upon so rare a woman: for certainly, a noble cause does ease much
agrieuous case. But as it stands now, nothing vexes me, as that I cannot see
wherein I can be seruisable unto you. I desire no greater service of you
(a^swered Pyrocles) the^ that you remayn secretly in this country, and
sometimes come to this place; either late in the night, or early in the
morning, where you shall have my key to e^ter, because as my fortune, either
amends or empaires. I may declare it unto you, and have your counsel and
furtheraunce: and hereby I will of purpose lead her, that is the praise, and
yet the stain of all womankinde, that you may have so good a view, as to
allow my judgment: and as I can get the most convenient time, I will come unto
you; for though by reason of yonder wood you cannot see the Lodge; it is hard
at hand. But now, (said she) it is time for me to leave you, and toward
evening we will walk out of purpose hetherward, therefore keep your self
close in that time. But Musidorus bethinking him self that his horse might
happen to bewray them, thought it best to return for that day, to a village
not far of, and dispatching his horse in some sort, the next day early to
come a foot thither, and so to keep that course afterward, which Pyrocles
very well liked of. Now farewell dear cousin (said he) from me, no more
Pyrocles, nor Daiphantus now, but Zelmane: Zelmane is my name, Zelmane is my
title, Zelmane is the only hope of my advancement. And with that word going
out, and seeing that the coast was clear, Zelmane dismissed Musidorus, who
departed as full of care to help his friend, as before he was to dissuade him.

CHAP. 15.
1 The Labyrinth of Zelmanes love. 2 The Ladies exercises. 3 The challenge of
Phalantus in paragon of Artesias beauty. 4 The description of their persons
and affections: 5 and occasion of this challenge. 6 The success thereof abroad.

ZElmane returned to the Lodge, Philoclea, watched by Gynecia, and tired by
Basilius) she was like a horse, desirous to run, and miserably spurred, but
so short rainde, as he cannot stir forward: Zelmane sought occasion to speak
with Philoclea; Basilius with Zelmane; and Gynecia hindered them all. If
Philoclea happened to sigh (and sigh she did often) as if that sigh were to be
waited on, Zelmane sighed also; whereto Basilius and Gynecia soon made up
four parts of sorrow. Their affection increased their conversation; and their
conversation increased their affection. The respect borne bredde due
ceremonies; but the affection shined so through them, that the ceremonies
seemed not ceremonious. Zelmanes eyes were (like children asore sweet meat)
eager, but fearful of their illpleasing governors. Time in one instant,
seeming both short, and long unto them: short, in the pleasingnes of such
presence: long, in the stay of their desires.

But Zelmane failed not to entice them all many times Musidorus (near whom of
purpose she led them) might have full sight of them. Sometimes angling to a
little River near hand, which for the moisture it bestowed upon roots of some
flourishing Trees, was rewarded with their shadow. There would they sit
down, and pretty wagers be made between Pamela and Philoclea, which could
soonest beguile silly fishes; while Zelmane protested, that the fit pray for
them was hearts of Princes. She also had an angle in her hand; but the taker
was so taken, that she had forgotten taking. Basilius in the mean time would
be the cook him self of what was so caught, and Gynecia sit still, but with no
still pensifnesse. Now she brought them to see a feeled Dove, who the blinder
she was, the higher she straue. Another time a Kite, which having a gut
cunningly pulled out of her, and so let fly, called all the Kites in that
quarter, who (as oftentimes the world is deceived) thinking her prosperous
when indeed she was wounded, made the poor Kite find, that opinion of riches
may well be dangerous.

Basilius returned from having forced his thoughts to please themselves in such
small conquests, there came a shepherd, who brought him word that a Gentleman
desired leave to do a message from his Lord unto him. Basilius granted;
whereupon the Gentleman came, and after the dutiful ceremonies observed, in his
masters name told him, that he was sent from Phala^tus of Corinth, to crave
license, that as he had done in many other courts, so he might in his presence
defy all Arcadian Knights in the behalf of his mistres beauty, who would
besides, her self in person be present, to give evident proof what his lance
should affirm. The conditions of his challenge were, that the defendant should
bring his mistress picture, which being set by the image of Artesia (so was
the mistress of Phalantus named) who in six courses should have better of the
other, in the judgment of Basilius, with him both the honors and the pictures
should remain. Basilius (though he had retired him self into that solitary
dwelling, with intention to avoid, rather then to accept any matters of drawing
company; yet because he would entertain Zelmane, (that she might not think the
time so gainefull to him, loss to her) granted him to pitch his tent for
three days, not far from the lodge, and to proclayme his challenge, that what
Arcadian Knight (for none else but upon his peril was licensed to come) would
defend what he honored against Phalantus, should have the like freedom of
access and return.

Zelmane being desirous to learn what this Phalantus was, having never known
him further then by report of his own good, in so much as he was commonly
called, The fair man of arms, Basilius told her that he had had occasion by
one very inward with him, to know in part the discourse of his life, which
was, that he was bastard-brother to the fair Helen Queen of Corinth, and
deerly esteemed of her for his exceeding good parts, being honorably
courteous, and wronglesly valiant, considerately pleasant in conversation, and
an excellent courtier without unfaithfulness; who (finding his sisters
vnperswadeable melancholy, through the love of Amphialus) had for a time left
her court, and gone into Laconia: where in the war against the Helots, he had
gotten the reputation of one, that both durst and knew. But as it was rather
choice the^ nature, that led him to matters of arms, so as soon as the spur of
honor ceased, he willingly rested in peaceable delights, being beloved in all
companies for his lovely qualities, and (as a man may term it) cunning
cherefulnes, whereby to the Prince and Court of Laconia, none was more agreeable
the^ Phalantus: and he not given greatly to struggle with his own disposition,
followed the gentle current of it, having a fortune sufficient to content, and
he content with a sufficient fortune. But in that court he saw, and was
acquainted with this Artesia, whose beauty he now defendes, became her
servant, said him self, and perchance thought him self her lover. But
certainly, (said Basilius) many times it falls out, that these young
companio^s make themselves believe they love at the first liking of a likely
beauty; loving, because they will love for want of other business, not
because they feel indeed that divine power, which makes the heart find a
reason in passion: and so (God knows) as inconstantly lean upon the next
chance that beauty castes before them. So therefore taking love upon him
like a fashion, he courted this Lady Artesia, who was as fit to pay him in
his own money as might be. For she thinking she did wrong to her beauty if
she were not proud of it, called her disdain of him chastity, and placed her
honor in little setting by his honoring her: determining never to marry, but
him, whom she thought worthy of her: and that was one, in whom all
worthiness were harbored. And to this conceit not only nature had bent her,
but the bringing up she received at my sister in law Cecropia, had confirmed
her: who having in her widowhood taken this young Artesia into her charge;
because her Father had been a dear friend of her dead husbands, and taught
her to think that there is no wisdom but in including heaven and earth in
ones self: and that love, courtesy, gratefulness, friendship, and all other
virtues are rather to be taken on, then taken in ones self: And so good
discipline she found of her, that liking the fruits of her own planting, she
was content (if so her son could have liked of it) to have wished her in
marriage to my Nephew Amphialus. But I think that desire has lost some of his
heat, since she has known, that such a Queen as Helen is, does offer so
great a price as a kingdom, to buie his favor; for if I be not deceived in my
good sister Cecropia, she thinks no face so beautiful, as that which looks
under a crown. But Artesia indeed liked well of my Nephew Amphialus; for I
ca^ never deem that love, which in hauty hearts proceeds of a desire only to
please, and as it were, peacock themselves; but yet she has showed vehemency
of desire that way, I think, because all her desires be vehement, in so much
that she has both placed her only brother (a fine youth called Ismenus) to be
his squire, and her self is content to wait upon my sister, till she may see
the uttermost what she may work in Amphialus: who being of a melancholy
(though I must needs say courteous and noble) mind, seems to love nothing
less then Love: and of late having through some adventure, or inward
miscontentment, withdrawn him self from any bodies knowledge, where he is:
Artesia the easier condiscended to go to the court of Laconia, whether she was
sent for by the Kings wife, to whom she is somewhat allied.

And there after the war of the Helots, this Knight Phalantus, (at least for
tongue-delight) made him self her servant, and she so little caring, as not
to show mislike thereof, was content only to be noted to have a notable
servant. For truly one in my court nearly acquainted with him, within these
few days made me(...) Lance, and that age, which my graye hairs (only
gotten by the loving care of others) make seem more then it is, has not
diminished in me the power to protect an undeniable verity. With that he
bustled up himself, as though his heart would feign have walked abroad.
Zelmane with an inward smiling gave him outward thanks, desiring him to
reserve his force for worthier causes.

CHAP. 16.
1 Phalantus and Artesias pompous entrance. 2 The painted muster of an eleven
conquered beauties.

SO passing their time according to their wont, they waited for the coming of
Phalantus, who the next morning having already caused his tents to be pitched,
near to a fair tree hard by the Lodge, had upon the tree made a shield to
be hanged up, which the defendant should strike, that would call him to the
mainteyning his challendge. The Impresa in the shield; was a heaven full of
stars, with a speech signifying, that it was the beauty which gave it the
praise.

Himself came in next after a triumphant chariot, made of Carnatio^ velvet
enriched with purle and peatle, wherein Artesia sat, drawn by four winged
horses with artificial flaming mouths, and fiery wings, as if she had newly
borrowed them of I'haebus. Before her marched, two after two; certain footeme^
pleasantly attired, who between them held one picture after another of them,
that by Phalantus well running had lost the prize in the race of beauty, and at
every pace they stayed, turning the pictures to each side, so leasurely, that
with perfect judgment they might be discerned.

The first that came in (following the order of the time Andromana, Queen of
Iberia; whom a Laconian Knight having sometime (and with special favor)
served, (thoughsome years since returned home) with more gratefulnes then
good fortune defended. But therein Fortune had borrowed wit; for indeed she
was not co^parable to Artesia; not because she was a good deal elder (for time
had not yet been able to impouerish her store thereof) but an exceeding red
hair with small eyes, did (like ill companions) disgrace the other assembly of
most commendable beauties.

Next after her was borne the counterfaite of the Elis, a Lady that taught the
beholders no other point of beauty, but this, that as lyking is, not always
the child of beauty, so whatsoever likes; is beautyfull; for in that visage
there was nether Majesty, grace, favor, nor fairness; y^et she wanted not a
servant that would have made her fairer then the fair Artesia. But he wrote
her praises with his helmet in the dust, and left her picture to be as true a
witness of his overthrow, as his running was of her beauty.

After her was the goodly Artaxia, great Q. of Armenia, Cupid delights in; the
reason whereof might seem a mannish countenance, which overthrew that lovely
sweetness, the noblest power of womankinde, far fitter to prevail by parley,
then by battle.

Erona Queen of Licia, who though of so brown a hair, as no man should have
iniuried it to have called it black, and that in the mixture of her cheeks the
white did so much overcome the red (though what was, was very pure) that it
came near to palenes, and that her face was a thought longer then the exact
Symmetrians perhaps would allow; yet love played his part so well, in every
part, that it caught hold of the judgment, before it could judge, making it
first love, and after acknowledge it fair, for there was a certain delicacie,
which in yielding, conquered; and with a pitiful look made one find cause to
crave help himself.

Baccha, who though very fair, and of a fatnes rather to allure, then to
mislike, yet her breasts ouer-familiarly laid open, with a mad countenance
about her mouth, between simpring and smyling, her head bowed somewhat down,
seemed to la^guish with overmuch idleness, with an inuiting look cast upward,
dissuading with too much persuading, while hope might seem to overcome desire.

Leucippe) was of a fine daintines of beauty, her face carrying in it a sober
simplicity; like one that could do much good, and meant no hurt, her eyes
having in them such a cheerefulnes, as nature seemed to smile in them: though
her mouth and cheeks obeyed that pretty demurenes which the more one marks,
the more one would judge the poor soul apt to believe; and therefore the more
pity to deceive her.

Next came the Queen of Laconia, one that seemed

But she that followed, conquered indeed with being Helen, whose Iacinth hair
curled by nature, and intercurled by art (like a fine brook through golden
sa^ds) had a rope of fair pearls, which now hiding, now hidden by the hair,
did as it were play at fast or loose, each with other, mutually giving and
receiving riches. In her face so much beauty and favor expressed, as if Helen
had not been known, some would rather have judged it the painters exercise, to
show what he could do, the^ cou^terfaiting of any living pattern: for no fault
the most fault finding wit could have found, if it were not, that to the rest
of the body the face was somewhat too little: but that little was such a spark
of beauty, as was able to inflame a world of love. For every thing was full of
a choice finenes, that if it wa^ted any thing in majesty, it supplied it with
increase of pleasure; and if at the first it struck not admiration, it ravished
with delight. And no indifferent soul there was, which if it could resist from
subiecting it self to make it his princess, that would not long to have such a
playfelow. As for her attire, it was costly and curious, though the look (fixed
with more sadness the^ it seemed nature had be stowed to any that knew her
fortune) bewraied, that as she used those ornaments, not for her self, but to
prevail with another, so she feared, that all would not serve.

Parthenia, who next waited on Artesias triumph, though far better she might
have sit in the throne. For in her every thing was goodly, and stately; yet
so, that it might seem that great-mindednes was but the auncient-bearer to
humblenes. For her great graie eye, which might seem full of her own beauties,
a large, and exceedingly fair forhead, with all the rest of her face and body,
cast in the mould of Noblenes; was yet so attired, as might show, the mistres
thought it either not to deserve, or not to need any exquisite decking, having
no adorning but cleanlines; and so far from all art, that it was full of
carelessness: unless that carelessness it self (in spite of it self) grew
artificial. But Basilius could not abstain from praising Parthenia, as the
perfect picture of a womanly virtue, and wiuely faithfulness: telling withal
Zelmane, how he had understood, that when in the court of Laconia, her picture
(maintained by a certain Sycionian Knight) was lost, through want, rather of
valor, then justice: her husband (the famous Argalus) would in a chafe have
gone and redeemed it with a new trial. But she (more sporting then sorrowing
for her undeserved champion) told her husband, she desired to be beautiful
in no bodies eye but his; and that she would rather mar her face as evil as
ever it was, then that it should be a cause to make Argalus put on armor. Then
would Basilius have told Zelmane, that which she alredie knew, of the rare
trial of their coupled affection: but the next picture made the mouth give
place to their eyes.

upon it, as if that little foot could have been the circle of her thoughts;
her apparel so poor, as it had nothing but the inside to adorn it; a she
phooke lying by her with a bottle upon it. But with all that poverty, beauty
played the prince, and commanded as many hearts as the greatest Queen there did.
Her beauty and her estate made her quickly to be known to be the fair
shepherdess, Urania, whom a rich knight called Lacemon, far in love with
her, had vnluckely defended.

The last of all in place, because last in the time of Zelmane, daughter to the
King Plexirtus: who at the first sight seemed to have some resembling of
Philoclea, but with more marking (co^paring it to the present Philoclea, who
indeed had no paragon but her sister) they might see, it was but such a
likeness, as an imperfect glass does give; aunswerable enough in some
feitures, and colors, but erring in others. But Zelmane sighing, turning to
Basilius, Alas sir (said she) here be some pictures which might better become
the to^bes of their Mistresses, then the triumph of Artesia. It is true
sweetest Lady (said Basilius) some of them be dead, and some other captive:
But that has happened so late, as it may be the Knights that defended their
beauty, knew not so much: without we will say (as in some hearts I know it would
fall out) that death it self could not blot out the image which love has
engraue^ in the^. But diverse besides these (said Basilius) has Phalantus won,
but he leaves the rest, carrying only such, who either for greatness of estate,
or of beauty, may justly glorify the glory of Artesias triumph.

CHAP. 17.
1 The overthrow of five Arcadian knights. 2 The young shepherds pretty
challenge. 3 What passions the sixth knights foil bredde in Zelmane. 4
Clitophon hardly ouermatched by Phalantus. 5 The ill arrayed, and the black
knights contention for prioritie agains Phalantus. 6 The halting knights
complaint against the black knight. 7 Phalantus fall by the ill furnished
knight. 8 The crosse-parting of Phalantus with Artesia, 9 and who the victor
was.

Basilius with Zelmane, glad to make any matter subject to speak of, with his
mistress, while Phalantus in this pompous manner, brought Artesia with her
ge^tlewome^, into one Tent, by which he had another: where they both waited who
would first strike upon the shield, while Basilius the Judge appointed
sticklers, and trumpets, to whom the other should obey. But non that day
appeared, nor the next, till already it had consumed half his allowance of
light; but then there came in a knight, protesting himself as contrary to him
in mind, as he was in apparel. For Phalantus was all in white, having in his
bases, and caparison imbroidered a wauing water: at each side whereof he had
nettings cast over, in which were diverse fishes naturally made, and so pretily,
that as the horse stirred, the fishes seemed to strive, and leap in the net.

But the other knight, by name Nestor, by birth an Arcadian, and in affection
vowed to the fair Shepherdess, was all in black, with fire burning both upon
his armor, and horse. His impresa in his shield, was a fire made of Juniper,
with this word, More easy, and more sweet. But this hot knight was cooled
with a fall, which at the third course he received of Phalantus, leaving his
picture to keep company with the other of the same stamp; he going away
remedilesly chasing at his rebuke. The next was Polycetes, greatly esteemed in
Arcadia, for deeds he had done in arms: and much spoken of for the honorable
love he had long borne to Gynecia; which Basilius himself was content, not
only to suffer, but to be delighted with; he carried it in so honorable and
open plainnes, setting to his love no other mark, then to do her faithful
service. But neither her fair picture, nor his fair running, could warrant
him from overthrow, and her from becoming as then the last of Artesias
victories: a thing Gynecias virtues would little have recked at another time,
nor then, if Zelmane had not seen it. But her champion went away as much
discomforted, as discomfited. Then Telamon for Polixena, and Eurimelo^ for
Elpine, and Leon for Zoana; all brave Knights, all fair Ladies, with their
going down, lifted up the balance of his praise for actiuitie, and hers for
fairenes.

Upon whose loss as the beholders were talking, who slubber up matters of
mean account. And well might his proportion be judged; for he had nothing upon
him but a pair of sloppes, and upon his body a Gote-skinne, which he cast
over his shoulder, doing all things with so pretty grace, that it seemed
ignorance could not make him do amiss, because he had a heart to do well,
holding in his right hand a long stasfe, and so coming with a look full of
amiable fiercenes, as in whom choler could not take away the sweetness, he came
toward the king, and making a reverence (which in him was comely because it
was kindly) My liege Lord (said he) I pray you hear a few words; for my heart
will break if I say not my mind to you. I see here the picture of Urania, which
(I cannot tell how, nor why) these men when they fall down, they say is not so
fair as yonder gay woman. But pray God, I may never see my old mother alive,
if I think she be any more match to Urania, then a Goat is to a fine Lamb;
or then the Dog that keeps our flock at home, is like your white Greihounde,
that pulled down the Stagge last day.

And therefore I pray you let me be dressed as they be, and my heart gives me, I
shall tumble him on the earth: for indeed he might as well say, that a Couslip
is as white as a Lilly: or else I care not let him come with his great stasfe,
and I with this in my hand, and you shall see what I can do to him. Basilius
saw it was the fine shepherd Lalus, whom once he had before him in Pastoral
sportes, and had greatly delighted in his wit full of pretty simplicity, and
therefore laughing at his earnestness, he bad him be content, since he saw
the pictures of so great Queens, were feign to follow their champions fortune.
But Lalus (even weeping ripe) went among the rest, longing to see some body
that would revenge Vranias wrong; and praying heartily for every body that ran
against Phalantus, then began to feel poverty, that he could not set him self
to that trial. But by and by, even when the Sun (like a noble heart) began
to show his greatest countenance in his lowest estate, there came in a Knight,
called Phebilus, a Gentleman of that country, for whom hateful fortune had
borrowed the dart of Love, to make him miserable by the sight of Philoclea. For
he had even from her infancy loved her, and was stricken by her, before she was
able to know what quiver of arrows her eyes carried; but he loved and
dispaired; and the more he dispaired, the more he loved. He saw his own
unworthiness, and thereby made her excellency have more terrible aspect upon
him: he was so secret therein, as not daring to be open, that to no creature
he ever spoke of it, but his heart made such silent complaints within it self,
that while all his senses were attentive thereto, cunning judges might perceive
his mind: so that he was known to love though he denied, or rather was the
better known, because he denied it. His armor and his attire was of a Sea
color, his Impresa, the fish called Sepia, which being in the net castes a
black ink about it self, that in the darkness thereof it may escape: his
word was, Not so. Philocleas picture with almost an idolatrous magnificence
was borne in by him. But straight jealousy was a harbinger for disdain in
Zelmanes heart, when she Philoclea: in so much that she wished his shame, till
she saw him shamed: for at the second course he was stricken quite from out of
the saddle, so full of grief, and rage withal, that he would feign with the
sword have revenged it: but that being contrary to the order set down,
Basilius would not suffer; so that wishing him self in the bottom of the
earth, he went his way, leaving Zelmane no less angry with his los, the^ she
would have been with his victory. For if she thought before a riuals praise
would have angered her, her Ladies disgrace did make her much more forget what
she then thought, while that passion reigned so much the more, as she saw a
pretty blush in Philocleas cheeks bewray a modest coffeehouse. But the
night commanded truce for those sportes, and Phalantus (though entreated)
would not leave Artesia, who in no case would come into the house, having (as
it were) suckte of Cecropias breath a mortal mislike against Basilius.

Basilius to play his judges part: which he did, taking his wife and daughters
with him; Zelmane having locked her door, so as they would not trouble her for
that time: for already there was a Knight in the field, ready to prove Helen
of Corinth had received great injury, both by the erring judgment of the
challenger, and the unlucky weakness of her former defender. The new Knight
was quickly known to be Clitophon ( Kaladers son of Basilius-his sister) by
his armor, which al guilt, was so well handled, that it showed like a
glittering sand and gravel, interlaced with silver rivers: his device he had
put in the picture of Helen which he defended. It was the Ermion, with a
speech that signified, Rather dead then spotted. But in that armor since he
had parted from Helen (who would no longer his company, finding him to enter
into terms of affection,) he had performed so honorable actions, (still
seeking for his two friends by the names of Palladius and Daiphatus,) that
though his face were covered, his being was discovered, which yet Basilius
(which had brought him up in his court) would not seem to do; but glad to see
trial of him, of whom he had heard very well, he commanded the trumpets to
sound; to which the two brave Knights obeying, they performed their courses,
breaking their six staves, with so good, both skill in the hitting, and grace
in the manner, that it bred some difficulty in the judgment. But Basilius in
the end gave sentence against Clitophon, because Phalantus had broken more
staves upon the head, and that once Clitophon had received such a blow, that
he had lost the raines of his horse, with his head well nie touching the
crooper of the horse. But Clitophon was so angry with the judgment, (wherein he
thought he had received wrong) that he omitted his duty to his Prince, and
uncle; and suddenly went his way, still in the quest of them, whom as then he
had left by seeking: and so yielded the field to the next commer.

Who coming in about two hours after, was no so that all that looked on,
measured his length on the earth already, since he had to meet one who had
been victorious of so many gallants. But he went on toward the shield, and
with a sober grace struck it; but as he let his sword fall upon it, another
Knight, all in black came rustling in, who struck the shield almost as soon as
he, and so strongly, that he brake the shield in two: the ill appointed Knight
(for so the beholders called him) angry with that, (as he accounted,) insolent
injury to himself, hit him such a sound blow, that they that looked on
said, it well became a rude arm. The other answered him again in the same
case, so that Lances were put to silence, the swords were so busy.

But Phalantus angry of this defacing his shield, came upon the black Knight,
and with the pommell of his sword set fire to his eyes, which presently was
revenged, not only by the Black, but the ill apparelled Knight, who disdained
another should enter into his quarrel, so as, who ever saw a matachin dance
to imitate fighting, this was a sight that did imitate the matachin: for they
being but three that fought, every one had adversaries, striking him, who
struck the third, and revenging perhaps that of him, which he had received of
the other. But Basilius rising himself to part them, the sticklers authority
scarflie able to persuade cholerike hearers; and part them he did.

But before he could determine, comes in a fourth, Basilius, demanding justice
on the black Knight, for having by force taken away the picture of Pamela from
him, which in little form he ware in a Tablet, and covered with silk had
fastened it to his Helmet, purposing for want of a bigger, to paragon the
little one with Artesias length, not doubting but in that little quantity, the
excellency of that would shine through the weakness of the other: as the
smallest star do the through the whole Element of fire. And by the way he had
met with this black Knight, who had (as he said) robbed him of it. The injury
seemed grievous, but when it came fully to be examined, it was found, that the
halting Knight meeting the other, asking the cause of his going thetherward,
and finding it was to defend Pamelas divine beauty against Artesias, with a
proud iollitie commanded him to leave that quarrel only for him, who was
only worthy to enter into it. But the black Knight obeying no such
commandments, they fell to such a bickering, that he gat a halting, and lost
his picture. This understood by Basilius, he told him he was now fitter to
look to his own body, then an others picture: and so (vncomforted therein)
sent him away to learn of AEsculapius that he was not fit for Venus.

But then the question arising who should be the former against Phalantus, of
the black, or the ill apparelled Phalantus; who asking him for it, Certainly
(said he) her liueliest picture, (if you could see it) is in my heart, and the
best comparison I could make of her, is of the Sun and of all other the
heavenly beauties. But because perhaps all eyes cannot taste the Divinity of
her beauty, and would rather be dazeled, then taught by the light, if it be
not clowded by some meaner thing; know you then, that I desend that same Lady,
whose image Phebilus so feebly lost yesternight, and in steed of an other (if
you overcome me) you shall have me your slave to carry that image in your
mistress triumph. Phalantus casilie agreed to the bargain, which already he
made his own.

Phalantus without any extraordinary motion. And at the second gave him such
a couterbusse, that because Phalantus was so perfect a horseman, as not to be
driven from the saddle, the saddle with broken girthes was driven from the
horse: Phalantus remaining angry and amazed, because now being come almost to
the last of his promised enterprise, that disgrace befell him, which he had
never before known.

Phalantus disgrace was ingrieued in lieu of comfort by Artesia; who telling
him she never looked for other, bad him seek some other mistress. He excusing
himself, and turning over the fault to Fortune, Then let that be your ill
Fortune too (said she) that you have lost me.

Nay truly Madame (said Phalantus) it shall not be so: for I think the loss
of such a Mistress will prove a great gain: and so concluded; to the sport
of Basilius, to see young folks love, that came in maskt with so great pomp,
go out with so little constancy. But Phalantus first professing great service
to Basilius for his courteous intermitting his solitary course for his sake,
would yet conduct Artesia to the castle of Cecropia, whether she desired to
go: vowing in himself, that neither heart, nor mouth-loue, should ever any
more entangle him. And with that resolution he left the company.

Whence all being dismissed (among whom the black Pamela) the ill apparelled
knight (who was only desired to stay, because Basilius meant to show him to
Zelmane) pulled of his Helmet, and then was known himself to be Zelmane: who
that morning (as she told) while the others were busy, had stolen out, to the
Princes stable, which was a mile of from the Lodge, had gotten a horse (they
knowing it was Basilius pleasure she should be obeyed) and borrowing that
homely armor for want of a better, had come upon the spur to redeem Philocleas
picture, which she said, she could not bear, (being one of that little
wildernesse-company) should be in captivity, if the cunning she had learned in
her cou^trye of the noble Amazons, could withstand it: and under that pretext
feign she would have given a secret pasport to her affection. But this act
painted at one instant redness in Philocleas face, and palenesse in Gynecias,
but brought forth no other cou^tena^ces but of admiration, no speches but of
co^me^datio^s: al these few (besides love) thinking they honored them selves,
in honoring so accomplished a person as Zelmane: whom daily they sought with
some or other sports to delight, for which purpose Basilius had in a house not
far of, servant, who though they came not uncalled, yet at call were redye.

CHAP. 18.
1 Musidorus disguised. 2 His Song. 3 His love, 4 the cause thereof. 5 His
course therein.

ANd so many days were spent, and many ways used, while Zelmane was like one
that stood in a tree waiting a good occasion to shoot, and Gynecia a
blauncher, which kept the dearest dear from her. But the day being come, which
according to an appointed course, the sheapheards were to assemble, and make
their pastoral sports before Basilius: Zelmane (fearing, lest many eyes, and
coming diverse ways, might hap to spy Musidorus) went out to warn him thereof.

disguised. self went but a kind of languishing pace, with his eyes somewhat
cast up to heaven, as though his fancyes straue to mount higher; sometimes
thrown down to the ground, as if the earth could not bear the burdens of
his sorrows; at length, with a lamentable tune, he song these few verses.

Come shepherds weeds, become your masters mind:
Yield outward show, what inward chance he tryes:
Nor be abasht, since such a guest you find,
Whose strongest hope in your weak comfort lies.
Come shepherds weeds, attend my woeful cries:
Disuse your selves from sweet Menalcas voice:
For other be those tunes which sorrow ties,
From those clear notes which freely may rejoice.
Then power out plaint, and in one word say this:
Helples his plaint, who spoils himself of bliss.
And having ended, he struck himself on the breast; saying, O miserable wretch,
whether do thy destenies guide thee? The voice made Zelmane hasten her pace to
overtake him: which having done, she plainly perceived that it was her dear
friend Musidorus, whereat maruailing not a little, she demanded of him,
whether the Goddess of those woods had such a power to tra^sforme every body,
or whether, as in all enterprises else he had done, he meant thus to match her
in this new alteration.

Alas, (said Musidorus) what shall I say, who am loath (woe is me) do try what
love can do. O Zelmane, who will resist it, must either have no wit, or put
out his eyes? can any man resist his creation? certainly by love we are made,
and to love we are made. Beasts only cannot discern beauty, and let them be
in the role of Beasts that do not honor it. The perfect friendship Zelmane
bare him, and the great pity she (by good trial) had of such cases, could
not keep her from smiling at him, remembering how vehemently he had cried out
against the folly of lovers. And therefore a little to punish him, Why how now
dear cousin (said she) you that were last day so hie in Pulpit against lovers,
are you now become so mean an auditor? Remember that love is a passion; and
that a worthy man's reason must ever have the masterhood. I recant, I recant
(cried Masidorus,) and withal falling down prostrate, O thou celestial, or
infernal spirit of Love, or what other heavenly or hellish title thou list to
have (for effects of both I find in my self) have compassion of me, and let
thy glory be as great in pardoning them that be submitted to thee, as in
conquering those that were rebellious. No, no said Zelmane, I see you well
enough: you make but an interlude of my mishaps, and do but counterfaite thus,
to make me see the deformity of my passions: but take heed, that this jest do
not one day turn to earnest. Now I beseech thee (said Musidorus taking her
fast by the hand) even for the truth of our friendship, of which (if I be not
altogether an unhappy man) thou have some rememberaunce, and by those sacred
flames which (I know) have likewise nearly touched thee; make no jest of that,
which has so ernestly pierced me through, nor let that be light to thee, which
is to me so burdenous, that I am not able to bear it. Musidorus both in words
and behavior, did so lively deliver out his inward grief, that Zelmane found
indeed, he was thoroughly wounded: but there rose a new iclousy in her mind,
lest it might be with Philoclea, by whom, as Zelmane thought, in right all
hearts and eyes should be inherited. And therefore desirous to be cleared of
that doubt, Musidorus shortly (as in have and full of passionate perplexednes,)
thus recounted his case unto her.

The day (said he) I parted from you, I being in mind Menalcas, who seeing me to
be a straying stranger, with the right honest hospitality which seems to be
harbored in the Arcadian breasts, and though not with curious costlines, yet
with cleanly sufficiency, entertained me: and having by talk with him, found
the manner of the country, something more in particular, then I had by
Kalanders report, I agreed to soiourne with him in secret, which he faithfully
promised to observe. And so hither to your arbor diverse times repaired: and
here by your means had the sight (O that it had never been so, nay, O that it
might ever be so) of a Goddess, who in a definite compass can set forth
infinite beauty. All this while Zelmane was racked with jealousy. But he went
on, For (said he) I lying close, and in truth thinking of you, and saying thus
to my self, O sweet Pyrocles, how art thou bewitched? where is thy virtue?
where is the use of thy reason? how much am I inferior to thee in the state of
the mind? And yet know I, that all the heavens cannot bring me to such
thraldom. Scarcely, think I, had I spoken this word, when the Ladies came
forth; at which fight, I think the very words returned back again to strike
my soul; at least, an unmeasurable sting I felt in my self, that I had spoken
such words. At which sight? said Zelmane, not able to bear him any longer. O
(said Musidorus) I know your suspicion; No, no, banish all such fear, it was,
it is, and must be Pamela Then all is safe (said Zelmane) proceed, dear
Musidorus. I will not (said he) impute it to my late solitary life (which yet
is prone to affections) nor, to the much thinking of you (though that called the
consideration of love into my mind, which before I ever neglected) nor to the
exaltation of Venus; nor revenge of Cupid; but even to her, who is the Planet,
nay, the Goddess, against which, the only shield must be my Sepulcher. When
I first saw her, I was presently stricken, and I (like a foolish child, that
when any thing hits him, will strike himself again upon it) would needs look
again; as though I would persuade mine eyes, that they were deceived. But
alas, well have I found, that Love to a yielding heart is a king; but to a
resisting, is a tyrant. The more with arguments I shaked the stake, which he
had planted in the ground of my heart, the deeper still it sanke into it. But
what mean I to speak of the causes of my love, which is as impossible to
describe, as to measure the backside of heaven? Let this word suffice, I love.

here to do you service, have now my self most need of succor. But whereupon got
you your self this aparrel? said Zelmane. I had forgotten to tell you (said
Musidorus) though that were one principal matter of my speech; so much am I
now master of my own mind. But thus it happened: being returned to Menalcas
house, full of tormenting desire, after a while faynting under the weight, my
courage stird up my wit to seek for some releese, before I yielded to perish.
At last this came into my head, that very evening, that I had to no purpose
last used my horse and armor. I told Menalcas, that I was a Thessalian
Gentleman, who by mischaunce having killed a great fauorit of the Prince of
that country, was pursued so cruelly, that in no place, but either by favor,
or corruption, they would obtain my destruction; and that therefore I was
determined (till the fury of my persecutions might be assuaged) to disguise my
self among the shephadrs of Arcadia, and (if it were possible) to be one of
them that were allowed the Princes presence; Because if the woorst should fall,
that I were discovered, yet having gotten the acquaintance of the Prince, it
might happen to move his heart to protect me. Menalcas (being of an honest
disposition) pitied my case, which my face through my inward torment made
credible; and so (I giving him largely for it) let me have this raiment,
instructing me in all the particularities, touching himself, or my self,
which I desired to know: yet not trusting so much to his constancic, as that I
would lay my life, and life of my life, upon it, I hired him to go into
Thessalia to a friend of mine, and to deliver him a letter from me; coniuring
him to bring me as speedy an answeere as he could, because it imported me
greatly to know, whether certain of my friends did yet possess any favor,
whose intercessio^s I might use for my restitution. He willingly took my
letter, which being well sealed, indeed contained other matter. For I wrote to
my trusty servant Calodoulus (whom you know) that as soon as he had delivered
the letter, he should keep him prisoner in his house, not suffering him to have
conference with any body, till he knew my further pleasure: in all other
respects that he should use him as my brother. And thus is Menalcas gone, and I
here a poor shepherd; more proud of this estate, the^ of any kingdom: so
manifest it is, that the highest point outward things can bring one unto, is
the contentme^t of the mind: with which, no estate; without which, all estates
be miserable. Now have I chosen this day, because (as Menalcas told me) the
other shepherds are called to make their sports, and hope that you will with
your credit, find means to get me allowed among them. You need not doubt
(answered Zelmane) but that I will be your good mistress: marry the best way
of dealing must be by Dametas, who since his blunt brain has perceived some
favor the Prince does bear unto me (as without doubt the most servile
flattery is lodged most easily in the grossest capacity; for their ordinary
conceit draws a yielding to their greaters, and then have they not wit to
learn the right degrees of duty) is much more serviceable unto me, then I
can find any cause to wish him. And therefore despair not to win him: for
every present occasion will catch his senses, and his senses are masters of his
silly mind; only reverence him, and reward him, and with that bridle and
saddle you shall well ride him. O heaven and earth (said Musidorus) to what a
pass are our minds brought, that from the right line of virtue, are wryed to
these crooked shifts? But o Love, it is thou that do it: thou changest name
upon name; thou disguisest our bodies, and disfigurest our minds. But in deed
thou have reason, for though the ways be foul, the iourneys end is most fair
and honorable.

CHAP. 19.
1 The means of Musidorus his apprentisage unto Dametas. 2 The preparation and
place of the Pastorals. 3 The Lions assault o Philoclea, and death by Zelmane.
4 The she bears on Pamela, and death by Dorus. 5 The Io Paean of Dametas, 6
and his escape from the bear. 7 The victors praises. 8 Whence those beasts were
sent.

NO more sweet Musidorus (said Zelmane) Dametas. And so he did in deed, with a
sword by his side, a forrest-bill on his neck, and a chopping-knife under his
girdle: in which provided sort he had ever gone, since the fear Zelmane had
put him in. But he no sooner saw her, but with head and arms he laid his
reverence before her; enough to have made any man forswear all courtesy. And
then in Basilius name, he did inuit her to walk down to the place, where
that day they were to have the Pastoralles.

But when he spied Musidorus to be none of the shepherds allowed in that
place, he would feign have persuaded himself to utter some anger, but that he
durst not; yet muttering, and champing, as though his cudde troubled him; he
gave occasion to Musidorus to come near him, and feine this tale of his own
life: That he was a younger brother of the shepherd Menalcas, by name Dorus,
sent by his father in his tender age to Athens, there to learn some cunning
more then ordinary, that he might be the better liked of the Prince: and that
after his fathers death, his brother Menalcas (lately gone thither to fetch
him home) was also deceased: where (upon his death) he had charged him to seek
the service of Dametas, and to be wholly, and ever guyded by him; as one in
whose judgment and integrity, the Prince had singular confidence. For token
where of; he gave to Dametas a good fumme of gold in ready coin, which
Menelcas had bequeathed unto him, upon condition he should receive this poor
Dorus into his service, that his mind and manner might grow the better by his
daily example. Dametas, that of all manners of style could, best conceive of
golden eloquence, being withal tickled by Musidorus praises, had his brain so
turned, that he became slave to that, which he, that showed to be his servant,
offered to give him: yet for countenance sake, he seemed very squeimish, in
respect of the charge he had of the Princess Pamela. But such was the secret
operation of the gold, helped with the persuasion of the Amazon Zelmane, (who
said it was pity so handsome a young man should be any where else, then with
so good a master) that in the end he agreed (if that day he behaved himself
so to the lyking of Basilius, as he might be contented) that then he would
receive him into his service.

And thus went they to the Lodge, where they found Gynecia and her daughters
ready to go to the field, to delight themselves there a while, until the
shepherds coming: whether also taking Zelmane with them, as they went,
Dametas told them of Dorus, and desired he might be accepted there that day, in
steed of his brother Menalcas. As for Basilius, he staicd behind to bring the
shepherds, with whom he meant to co^fer, to breed the better Zelmanes liking
(which he only regarded) while the other beautiful band came to the fair
field, appointed for the shepherdish pastimes. It was indeed a place of
delight; for through the midst of it, there ran a sweet brook, which did
both hold the eye open with her azure streams, and yet seek to close the eye
with the purling noise it made upon the pibble stones it ran over: the field it
self being set in some places with roses, and in all the rest constantly
preserving a flourishing green; the Roses added such a ruddy show unto it, as
though the field were bashful at his own beauty: about it (as if it had been
to enclose a Theater) grew such a sort of trees, as either excellency of fruit,
statelines of grouth, continual greennes, or poetical fancies have made at
any time famous. In most part of which there had been framed by art such
pleasant arbors, that (one tree to tree, answering another) they became a
gallery alost from almost round about, which below gave a perfect shadow, a
pleasant refuge then from the choleric look of Phoebus.

In this place while Gynecia walked hard by them, carrying sat them down,
inquiring many questions of the shepherd Dorus; who (keeping his eye still
upon Pamela) answered with such a trembling voice, and abashed countenance, and
oftentimes so far from the matter, that it was some sport to the young Ladies,
thinking it want of education, which made him so discountenaunced with
unwonted presence. But Zelmane that saw in him the glass of her own misery,
taking the hand of Philoclea, and with burning kisses setting it close to her
lips (as if it should stand there like a hand in the margin of a Book, to
note some saying worthy to be marked) began to speak these words. O Love,
since thou art so changeable in men's estates, how art thou so constant in their
torments? when suddenly there came out of a wood a monstrous Lion, with a she
Bear^e not far from him, of little less fiercenes, which (as they ghest) having
been hu^ted in Forests far of, were by chance come thither, where before such
beasts had never been seen. Then care, not fear; or fear, not for
themselves, altered some thing the cou^tenances of the two Lovers, but so, as
any man might perceive, was rather an assembling of powers, then dismaiednes of
courage. Philoclea no sooner espied the Lio^, but that obeying the commandment
of fear, she lept up, and ran to the lodge-ward, as fast as her delicate legs
could carry her, while Dorus drew Pamela behind a tree, where she stood
quaking like the Partridge, on which the Hawke is eue^ ready to seize. But the
Lion (seeing Philoclea run away) bent his race to her-ward, and was ready to
seize him self on the pray, when Zelmane (to whom danger then was a cause of
dreadlesnes, all the co^positions of her elements being nothing but fiery)
with swiftness of desire crossed him, and with force of affection struck him
such a blow upon his chine, that she opened al his body: wherewith the valiant
beast turning upon her with open jaws, she gave him such a thrust through his
breast, that all the Lio^ could do, was with his paw to tear of the mantle and
sleeue of Zelmane, with a little scratch, rather then a wound; his death-blow
having taken away the effect of his force. But there withal he fell down, and
gave Zelmane leisure to take of his head, to carry it for a present to her
Lady Philoclea: who all this while (not knowing what was done behind her) kept
on her course, like Arethusa when she ran from Alpheus; her light apparel
being carried up with the wind, that much of those beauties she would at
another time have willingly hidden, was present to the sight of the twice
wounded Zelmane. Which made Zelmane not follow her over hastily, lest she should
too soon deprive her self of that pleasure: But carrying the Lions head in her
hand, did not fully overtake her, till they came to the presence of Basilius.
Nether were they long there, but that Gynecia came thither also: who had been
in such a trance of musing, that Zelmane was fighting with the Lion, before
she knew of any Lions coming: but then affection resisting, and the soon
ending of the fight preventing all extremity of fear, she marked Zelmanes
fighting. And when the Lions head was of, as Zelmane ran after Philoclea, so
she could not find in her heart but run after Zelmane: so that it was a new
sight, Fortune had prepared to those woods, to see these great personages thus
run one after the other: each carried forward with an inward violence:
Philoclea with such fear, that she thought she was still in the Lions mouth:
Zelmane with an eager and impatient delight, Gynecioae with wings of Love,
flying they neither knew, nor cared to know whether. But now, being all come
before Basilius amazed with this sight, and fear having such possession in,
the fair Philoclea, that her blood durst not yet to come to her face, to take
away the name of palenesse from hec most pure whitenes, Zelmane kneeled down,
and presented the Lions head unto her. Only Lady (said she) here see you the
punishment of that unnatural beast, which contrary to her own kind would have
wronged Princes blood, guided with such traitorous eyes, as durst rebel
against your beauty. Happy am I, and my beauty both (answered the sweet
Philoclea then blushing, for fear had bequeathed his room to his kinsman
bashfulnes) that you excellent Amazon, were there to teach him good manners.
And even thanks to that beauty (answered Zelmane) which can give an edge to
the bluntest swords? There Philoclea told her father, how it had happened: but
as she had turned her eyes in her tale to Zelmane, she perceived some blood
upon Zelmanes shoulder, so that starting with the lovely grace of pity, she
showed it to her Father and mother: who, as the nurse sometimes with overmuch
kissing may forget to give the babe suck, so had they with too much
delighting, in beholding and praising Zelmane, left of to mark whether she
needed succor. But then they ran both unto her, like a father and mother to an
only child, and (though Zelmane assured them, it was nothing) would needs
see it; Gynecia having skill in surgery, an art in those days much esteemed,
because it served to virtuous courage, which eue^ Ladies would (eue^ with the
contempt of courage) seem to cherish. But looking upon it (which gave more
inward bleeding wounds to Zelmane, for she might sometimes feel Philocleas
touch, whiles she helped her mother) she found it was indeed of no great
importance: yet applied she a precious baulme unto it, of power to heal a
greater grief.

But even then, and not before, they remembered Pamela, Zelmane (thinking of her
friend Dorus) was running back to be satisfied, when they might all see Pamela
coming between Dorus and Dametas, having in her hand the paw of a Bear, which
the shepherd Dorus had newly presented unto her, desiring her to accept it, as
of such a beast, which though she deserved death for her presumption, yet was
her will to be esteemed, since she could make so sweet a choice. Dametas for
his part came piping and dancing, the meriest man in a parish. But when he
came so near, as he might be heard of Basilius, he would needs break through
his ears with this joyful song of their good success.

NOw thanked be the great God Pan,
which thus preserues my loved life:
Thanked be I that keep a man,
who ended has this fearful strife:
For if my man must praises have,
what then must I that keep the knave?
For as the Moon the eyes does please,
with gentle beams not hurting sight:
Yet has sir Sun the greatest praise,
because from him does come her light:
So if my man must praises have,
what then must I that keep the knave?
Pamelas noble heart would needs gratefully make known the valiant mean of her
safety: which (directing her speech to her mother) she did in this manner. As
soon (said she) as ye were all run away, and that I hoped to be in safety,
there came out of the same woods a foul horrible Bear, which (fearing belike
to deal while the Lion was present, as soon as he was gone) came furiously
toward the place where I was, and this youug shepherd left alone by me; I
truly (not guilty of any wisdom, which since they lay to my charge, because
they say, it is the best refuge against that beast, but eue^ pure fear
bringing forth that effect of wisdom) fell down flat of my face, needing not
cou^terfait being dead, for indeed I was little better. But this shepherd
having no other weapon, but that knife you see, standing before the place where
I lay, so behaved him self, that the first sight I had (when I thought my
self nearer Charons ferry,) was the shepherd showing me his bloody knife in
token of victory. I pray you (said Zelmane, speaking to Dorus, whose valor
she was careful to have manifested) in what sort, so ill weaponed, could you
atchiue this enterprise? Noble Lady (said Dorus) the manner of these beasts
fighting with any man, is to stand up upon their hinder feet: and so this
did, and being ready to give me a shrewd imbracement, I think, the God Pan,
(ever careful of the chief blessings of Arcadia) guided my hand so just to
the heart of the beast, that neither she could once touch me, nor (which is the
only matter in this worthy remembrance) breed any danger to the Princess. For
my part, I am rather (withal subjected humblenes) to thank her excellencies,
since the duty thereunto gave me heart to save my self, then to receive
thanks for a deed, which was her only inspiring. And this Dorus spoke,
keeping affection as much as he could, back from coming into his eyes and
gestures. But Zelmane (that had the same Character in her heart) could easily
discern it, and therefore to keep him the longer in speech, desired to
understand the conclusion of the matter; and how the honest Dametas was escaped.

Nay (said Pamela) none shall take that office from Dorus made me assuredly
perceive, that all cause of fear was passed (the truth is) I was ashamed to
find my self alone with this shepherd: and therefore looking about me, if I
could see any body; at length we both perceived the gentle Dametas, lying with
his breast and head as far as he could thrust himself into a bush: drawing
up his legs as close unto him as he could: for, like a man of a very kind
nature, soon to take pity of himself, he was full resolved not to see his
own death. And when this shepherd pushed him, bidding him to be of good
cheer, it was a good while, ere we could persuade him, that Dorus was not the
bear: so that he was feign to pull him out by the heels, and show him the
beast, as dead as he could wish it: which you may believe me, was a very
joyful sight unto him. But then he forgate al courtesy, for he fell upon the
beast, giving it many a manfull wound: swearing by much, it was not well such
beasts should be suffered in a commonwealth. And then my governor, as full of
joy, as before of fear, came dancing and singing before us as even now you
saw him. Well well (said Basilius) I have not chosen Dametas for his fighting,
nor for his discoursing, but for his plainness and honesty, and therein I
know he will not deceive me.

Pamela (not so much because she should know it, as because he would tell it)
the wonderful act Zelmane had performed, which Gynecia likewise spoke off,
both in such extremity of praising, as was easy to be seen, the
constructions of their speech. might best be made by the Grammar rules of
affection. Basilius told with what a gallant grace she ran with the Lions
head in her hand, like another Pallas with the spoils of Gorgon. Gynecia
swear, she saw the face of the young Hercules killing the Nemean Lion, and
all with a grateful assent confirmed the same praises: only poor Dorus
(though of equal desert, yet not proceeding of equal estate) should have been
left forgotten, had not Zelmane again with great admiration, begun to speak
of him; asking, whether it were the fashion or no, in Arcadia, that sheepherds
should perform such valorous enterprises. This Basilius (having the quick
sense of a lover) took, as though his Mistres had given a secret reprehension,
that he had not showed more gratefulness to Dorus; and therefore (as nymblie
as he could) enquired of his estate, adding promise of great rue ards: among
the rest, offering to him, if he would exercise his courage in souldierie, he
would commit some charge unto him under his Lieutenant Philanax. But Dorus
(whose ambition clymed by another stayre) having first answered touching his
estate, that he was brother to the shepherd Menalcas; who among other, was
wont to resort to the Princes presence, and excused his going to souldierie, by
the unaptness he found in himself that way: he told Basilius, that his
brother in his last testament had willed him to serve Dametas; and therefore
(for due obedience thereunto) he would think his service greatly rewarded, if
he might obtain by that mean to live in the sight of his Prince, and yet
practice his own chosen vocation. Basilius (liking well his goodly shape and
handsome manner) charged Dametas to receive him like a son into his house:
saying, that his valor, and Dametas truth would be good bulwarks against such
mischiefs, as (he sticked not to say) were threatened to his daughter Pamela.

Dametas, no whit out of countenance with all that Dorus: and with all, telling
Basilius, that some of the shepherds were come; demanded in what place he
would see their sports: who first curious to know whether it were not more
requisite for Zelmanes hurt to rest, then sit up at those pastimes; and she
(that felt no wound but one) earnestly desiring to have Pastorals, Basilius
commanded it should be at the gate of the lodge: where the throne of the Prince
being (according to the ancient manner) he made Zelmane sit between him and
his wife therein, who thought her self between drowning and burning: and the
two young Ladies of either side the throne, and so prepared their eyes and
ears to be delighted by the shepherds.

But before al of them were assembled to begin their seeming so to be for
haste) with humble hastines told Basilius, that his Mistres, the Lady Cecropia,
had sent him to excuse the mischance of her beasts ranging in that dangerous
fort, being happened by the folly of the keeper; who thinking himself able to
rule them, had carried them abroad, and so was deceived: whom yet (if Basilius
would punish for it) she was ready to deliver. Basilius made no other answer,
but that his Mistres if she had any more such beasts, should cause them to be
killed: and then he told his wife and Zelmane of it, because they should not
fear those woods; as though they harbored such beasts, where the like had
never been seen. But Cynccia took a further conceit of it, mistrusting
Cecropia, because she had heard much of the devilish wickedness of her
heart, and that particularly she did her best to bring up her son Amphialus
(being brothers son to Basilius) to aspire to the crown, as next heir male
after Basilius; and therefore saw no reason, but that she might conjecture, it
proceeded rather of some mischievous practice, than of misfortune. Yet did she
only utter her doubt to her daughters, thinking, since the worst was past,
she would attend a further occasion, least over much haste might seem to
proceed of the ordinary mislike between sisters in Law: only they
marvelled, that Basilius looked no further into it; who (good man) thought so
much of his late conceived common wealth, that all other matters were but
digressions unto him. But the shepherds were ready, and with well handling
themselves, called their senses to attend their pastimes.

The first Eclogues.
BASILIVS, because Zelmane so would have it, used the artificial day of
torches, to lighten the sports their inue^tions could minister. And yet because
many more shepherds were newly come, then at the first; he did in a gentle
manner chastise the cowardice of the fugitive shepherds: with making them (for
that night) the Torch-bearers, and the others later come, he willed with all
freedom of speech and behavior, to keep their accustomed method. Which while
they prepared to do, Dametas, who much disdained (since his late authority) all
his old companions, brought his servant Dorus in good acquaintance and
allowance of the^; and himself stood like a directer over the^, with nodding,
gaping, winking, or stamping showing how he did like, or mislike those things
he did not understand. The first sports the shepherds showed, were full of
such leapes and gambols, as being accorded to the Pipe (which they bare in
their mouths, even as they daunced) made a right picture of their chief god
Pan, and his companions the Satyrs. Then would they cast away their Pipes; and
holding hand in hand, dance as it were in a braule, by the only cadence of
their voices, which they would use in singing some short coplets, whereto the
one half beginning, the other half should answer. As the one half saying,
We love, and have our loves rewarded.
The others would answer. We love, and are no whit regarded.
The first again. We find most sweet affections snare,
With like tune it should be as in quire sent back again. That sweet, but
sower despairefull care.
A third time likewise thus: Who can despair, whom hope does bear?
The answer. And who can hope, that feels despair?
Then all joining their voices, and dancing a faster measure, they would
couclude with some such words:

As without breath, no pipe does move,
No music kindly without love.
Having thus varied both their songs and daunces into diverse sorts of
inventions; their last sport was one of them to provoke another to a more large
expressing of his passions: which Lalus (accounted one of the best singers
amongst them) having marked in Dorus dancing, no less good grace and hansome
behavior, then extreme tokens of a traveled mind; began first with his
Pipe, and then with his voice, thus to challenge Dorus, and was by him answered
in the underwritten sort.

Lalus and Dorus. Lalus. Come Dorus, come, let songs thy sorrows signify:
And if for want of use thy mind ashamed is,
That very shame with Loves high title dignifie.
No style is held for base, where Love well named is:
Each ear suckes up the words, a true love scatters,
And plain speech often, then quaint phrase, better framed is.

Dorus. Nightingales seldom sing, the Pie still chattercth:
The wood cries most, before it thoroughly kindled be,
Deadly wounds inward bleed, each fleight sore mattereth.
Hardly they heard, which by good hunters singled be.
Shallow brooks murmr most, deep silent slide away;
Nor true love loves those loves with others mingled be.

Lalus. If thou will not be seen, thy face go hide away,
Be none of us, or else maintain our fashion:
Who frowns at other feasts, does better bide away.
But if thou have a Love, in that Loves passion,
I challenge thee by show of her perfection,
Which of us two deseructh most compassion.

Dorus. Thy challenge great, but greater my protection:
Sing then, and see (for now thou have inflamed me)
Thy health too mean a match for my infection.
No, though the heavens for high attempts have blamed me,
Yet high is my attempt. O Muse historisie
Her praise, whose praise to learn your skill has framed me.

Lalus. Muse hold your peace: but thou, my God Pan, glorify
My Kalas gifts: who with all good gifts filled is.
Thy pipe, o Pan, shall help, though I sing sorilie.
A heap of sweetes she is, where nothing spilled is;
Who though she be no Be, yet full of honey is:
A Lilly field, with plowe of Rose which tilled is.
Mild as a Lamb, more dainty then a Conie is:
Her eyes my eyesight is, her conversation
More glad to me, then to a miser money is.
What coye account she makes of estimation?
How nice to touch? how all her speeches peized be?

A Nymph thus turnde, but mended in translation. Dorus. Such Kala is: but ah,
my fancies raised be
In one, whose name to name were high presumption,
Since virtues all, to make her title, pleased be.
O happy Gods, which by inward assumption
Enjoy her soul, in bodies fair possession,
And keep it ioynde, searing your seats consumption.
How often with rain of tears skies make confession,
Their dwellers rapt with sight of her perfection
From heavenly throne to her heaven use digression?
Of best things then what world can yield confection
To liken her? Deck yours with your comparison:
She is her self, of best things the collection.

Lalus. How often my doleful Sire cried to me, tarry son
When first he spied my love? how often he said to me,
Thou art no soldier fit for Cupids garrison?
My son, keep this, that my long toil has laid to me:
Love well thine own: me thinks, woolles whitenes passes all:
I never found long love such wealth has paid to me.
This wind he spent: but when my Kala glasseth all
My sight in her fair limbs, I then assure my self,
Not rotten sheep, but high crowns she surpasses all.
Can I be poor, that her gold hair procure my self?
Want I white wool, whose eyes her white skin garnished?
Till I get her, shall I to keep enure my self?

Dorus. How often, when reason saw, love of her harnised
With armor of my heart, he cried, O vanity,
To set a pearl in steel so meanly varnished?
Look to thy self; reach not beyond humanity:
Her mind, beams, state far from thy weak wings banished:
And Love, which lover hurts is inhumanitie.
Thus Reason said: but she came, Reason vanished;
Her eyes so maistering me, that such objection
Seemde but to spoil the food of thoughts long famished.
Her peereles height my mind to high erection
Draws up; and if hope-fayling end lives pleasure,
Of fayrer death how can I make election?

Lalus. Once my well-waiting eyes espied my treasure,
With sleeves turnde up, loose hair, and breast enlarged,
Her fathers corn (moving her fair limbs) measure.
O cried I, of so mean work be discharged:
Measure my case, how by thy beauties filling
With seed of woes my heart brimme-full is charged.
Thy father bids thee save, and chides for spilling.
Save then my soul, spill not my thoughts well heaped,
No lovely praise was ever got by killing.
These bold words she did hear, this fruit I reaped,
That she, whose look alone might make me blessed,
Did smile on me, and then away she leaped.

Dorus. Once, o sweet once, I saw with dread oppressed
Her whom I dread; so that with prostrate lying
Her length the earth in Loves chief clothing dressed.
I saw that riches fall, and fell a crying;
Let not dead earth enjoy so dear a cover,
But deck therewith my soul for your sake dying.
Lay all your fear upon your fearful lover:
Shine eyes on me, that both our lives be guarded;
So I your sight, you shall your selves recover.
I cried, and was with open rays rewarded:
But straight they fled, summond by cruel honor,
Honor, the cause, desert is not regarded.

Lalus. This maid, thus made for joys, o Pan bemone her,
That without love she spends her years of love:
So fair a field would well become an owner.
And if enchantment can a hard heart move,
Teach me what circle may acquaint her sprite,
Affections charms in my behalf to prove.
The circle is my (round about her) sight:
The power I will inuoke dwelles in her eyes:
My charm should be, she haunt me day and night.

Dorus. Far other care, o Muse, my sorrowtries,
Bent to such one, in whom, my self must say,
Nothing can mend that point that in her lies.
What circle then in so rare force bears swaye?
Whose sprite all sprites can spoil, raise, damn, or save:
No charm holds her, but well possess she may;
Possese she does, and makes my soul her slave:
My eyes the bands, my thoughts the fatal knot.
No thralles like them that inward bondage have.

Lalus. Kala at length conclude my lingering lotte:
Disdain me not, although I be not fair.
Who is an heir of many hundred sheep
Does beauties keep, which never Sun can burn,
Nor storms do turn: fairenes serves often to wealth.
Yet all my health I place in your good will.
Which if you will (o do) bestow on me,
Such as you see, such still you shall me find.
Constant and kind: my sheep your food shall breed,
Their wool your weed, I will you Music yield
In flowrie field; and as the day begins
With twenty ginnes we will the small birds take,
And pastimes make, as Nature things has made.
But when in shade we meet of myrtle bows,
Then Love allows, our pleasures to enrich,
The thought of which does pass all worldly pelf.

Dorus. Lady your self, whom nether name I dare,
And titles are but spots to such a worth,
Hear plaints come forth from dungeon of my mind.
The noblest kind reiects not others woes.
I have no shows of wealth: my wealth is you,
My beauties hew your beams, my health your deeds;
My mind for weeds your virtues liuerie wears.
My food is tears; my tunes way menting yield:
Despair my field; the flowers spirits wars:
My day nerve cares; my ginnes my daily sight,
In which do light small birds of thoughts orethrowne:
My pastimes none: time passes on my fall:
Nature made all, but me of do lours made:
I find no shade, but where my Sun does burn:
No place to turn; without, within it fryes:
Nor help by life or death who living dies.

Lalus. But if my Kala this my suite denies,
Which so much reason bears,
Let crows pick out mine eyes, which saw too much:
If still her mind be such,
My earthy moulde will melte in watrie tears.

Dorus. My earthy moulde does melte in watrie tears,
And they again resolve
To air of sighs, sighs to the hearts fire turn,
Which does to ashes burn:
So does my life within itself dissolve,

Lalus. So does my life within it self dissolve,
That I am like a flower
New plucked from the place where it did breed,
Life showing, dead indeed:
Such force has Love above poor Natures power.

Dorus. Such force has Love above poor Natures power,
That I grow like a shade,
Which being naught seems somewhat to the eyes,
While that one body shine.
Oh he is mard that is for others made.

Lalus. Oh he is mard that is for others made.
Which thought does mar my piping declaration,
Thinking how it has mard my shepherds trade.
Now my hoarse voice does fail this occupation,
And others long to tell their loves condition:
Of singing take to thee the reputation.

Dorus. Of singing take to thee the reputation
New friend of mine; I yield to thy ability:
My soul does seek another estimation.
But ah my Muse I would thou had agilitie,
To work my Goddess so by thy invention,
On me to cast those eyes, where shine nobility.
Seen, and unknown; heard, but without attention.

THis Eclogue betwixt Lalus and Dorus, of every one of the beholders received
great commendations. When Basilius called to a young shepherd, who nether had
daunced nor song with the^, but layne all this while upon the ground at the foot
of a cypress tree, in so deep a melancholy, as though his mind were banished
from the place he loved, to be in prison in his body: and desired him he would
begin some Eclogue, with some other of the shepherds, according to the
accustomed guise: or else declare the discourse of his own fortune, unknown to
him; as being a stranger in that country. But he prayed the King to pardon
him, the time being far too joyful to suffer the rehersall of his miseries.
Yet, to satisfy Basilius some way, he sange this song, he had learned before
he had subjected his thoughts to acknowledge no master, but a mistress.

AS I my little flock on Ister bank
(A little flock; but well my pipe they couthe)
Did piping lead, the Sun already sanke
Beyond our world, and ere I got my boothe
Each thing with mantle black the night does scothe;
Saving the glowe worm, which would courteous be
Of that small light often watching shepherds see.
The welkin had full niggardly enclosed
In cofer of dim clouds his silver groates,
Icleped stars; each thing to rest disposed:
The caves were full, the mountains void of goats:
The birds eyes closed closde their chirping notes.
As for the Nightingale woodmusiques King,
It August was, he daynde not then to sing.
Amid my sheep, though I saw naught to fear
Yet (for I nothing saw) I scared sore;
Then fond I which thing is a charge to bear
As for my sheep I dradded mickle more
Then ever for my self since I was bore:
I sat me down: for see to go ne could,
And sange unto my sheep lest stray they should.
The song I sange old Lanquet had me taught,
Lanquet, the shepherd best swift Ister knew,
For clerkly reed, and hating what is naught,
For faithful heart, clean hands, and mouth as true:
With his sweet skill my skillesse youth he drew,
To have a feeling taste of him that sitts
Beyond the heaven, far more beyond your wits.
He said, the Music best thilke powers pleased
Was iumpe concord between our wit and will:
Where highest notes to godliness are raisd,
And lowest sink not down to jot of ill:
With old true tales he wont mine ears to fill,
How sheepheards did of yore, how now they thrive,
Spoiling their flock, or while twixt the they strive.
He liked me, but pitied lustful youth:
His good strong staff my slippry years vpbore:
He still hoped well, because he loved truth;
Till forste to part, with heart and eyes even sore,
To worthy Coriden he gave me ore.
But thus in oaks true shade recounted he
Which now in nights deep shade sheep heard of me.
Such manner time there was (what time I n'ot)
When all this Earth, this damme or mould of ours
Was only won'd with such as beasts begot:
Unknown as then were they that builded towers:
The cattle wild, or tame, in natures bowers
Might freely rome, or rest, as seemed them:
Man was not man their dwellings in to hem.
The beasts had sure some beastly policy:
For nothing can endure where order n'is.
For once the Lion by the Lamb did lie;
The fearful Hind the Leopard did kiss:
Hurtles was Tigers pawe and Serpents hiss.
This think I well, the beasts with courage clad
Like Senators a harmeles empire had.
At which whether the otbers did repine,
(For envy harbreth most in feeblest hearts)
Or that they all to changing did incline,
(As even in beasts their dames leave changing parts)
The multitude to Jove a suite empartes,
With neighing, blaying, braying, and barking,
Roaring, and howling for to have a King.
A King, in language theirs they said they would:
(For then their language was a perfect speech)
The birds likewise with chirpes, and puing could
Cackling, and chattring, that of Jove beseech.
Only the owl still warnde them not to seech
So hastily that which they would repent:
But saw they would, and he to deserts went.
JOVE wisely said (for wisdom wisely says)
O beasts, take heed what you of me desire.
Rulers will think all things made them to please,
And soon forget the swincke due to their hire.
But since you will, part of my heavenly fire
I will you lend; the rest your selves must give,
That it both seen and felt may with you live.
Full glad they were and took the naked sprite,
Which straight the Earthy clothed in his claye:
The Lion, heart; the Ounce gave active might;
The Horse, good shape; the Sparrow, lust to play;
Nightingale, voice, entising songs to say.
Elephant gave a perfect memory:
And Parot, ready tongue, that to apply.
The Fox gave craft; the Dog gave flattery;
Ass, patience; the Mole, a working thought;
Eagle, high look; Wolf secret cruelty:
Monkie, sweet breath; the Cow, her fair eyes brought;
The Ermion, whitest skin, spotted with naught;
The sheep, mild-seeming face; climing, the Bear;
The Stagge did give the harm efchewing fear.
The Hare, her sleights; the Cat, his melancholy;
Ante, industry; and Connie, skill to build;
Cranes, order; Storkes, to be appearing holy;
Camaeleon, ease to change; Ducke, ease to yield;
Crocodile, tears, which might be falsely spilde:
Ape great thing gave, though he did mowing stand,
The instrument of instruments, the hand.
Each other beast likewise his present brings:
And (but they drad their Prince they ought should want)
They all consented were to give him wings:
And aye more awe toward him for to plant,
To their own work this privilege they grant,
That from thenceforth to all eternity,
No beast should frecly speak, but only he.
Thus Man was made; thus Man their Lord became:
Who at the first, wanting, or hiding pride,
He did to beasts best use his cunning frame;
With water drink, herbs meat, and naked hide,
And fellow-like let his dominion slide;
Not in his sayings saying I, but we:
As if he meant his lordship common be.
But when his seat so rooted he had found,
That they now skilld not, how from him to wend;
Then began in guiltless earth full many a wound,
Iron to seek, which against it self should bend,
To tear the bowels, that good corn should send.
But yet the common Damme none did bemone;
Because (though hurt) they never heard her groan.
Then began the factions in the beasts to breed;
Where helping weaker sort, the nobler beasts,
(As Tigers, leopards, bears, and Lions seed)
Disdaind with this, in deserts sought their restes;
Where famine rauine taught their hungry chestes,
That craftily he forced them to do ill,
Which being done he afterward would kill.
For murders done, which never erst was seen,
By those great beasts, as for the weakers good,
He chose themselves his guarders for to been,
Against those of might, of whom in fear they stood,
As horse and dog, not great, but gentle blood:
Blithe were the commons cattle of the field,
Tho when they saw their foen of greatness kilde.
But they or spent, or made of slender might,
Then quickly did the meaner cattle find,
The great beams gone, the house on shoulders light:
For by and by the horse fair bitts did bind:
The dog was in a collar taught his kind.
As for the gentle birds like case might rewe
When falcon they, and gossehauke saw in mewe.
Worst fell to smallest birds, and meanest heard,
Whom now his own, full like his own he used.
Yet first but wool, or feathers off he teard:
And when they were well vs' de to be abused,
For hungry teeth their flesh with teeth he bruised:
At length for glutton taste he did them kill:
At last for sport their silly lives did spill.
But yet o man, rage not beyond they need:
Deem it no gloire to swell in tyranny.
Thou art of blood; joy not to see things bleed:
Thou fear death; think they are ioth to die.
A plaint of guiltless hurt does pierce the sky.
And you poor beasts, in patience bide your hell,
Or know your strengths, and then you shall do well.
Thus did I sing, and pipe eight sulien hours
To sheep, whom love, not knowledge, made to hear,
Now fancies fits, now fortunes balefull stowers:
But then I homewards called my lambkins dear:
For to my dimmed eyes began to appear
The night grown old, her black head waxen gray,
Sure shepherds sign, that morn should soon fetch day.

According to the nature of diverse ears, diverse judgments straight
followed: some praising his voice, others his words fit to frame a pastoral
style, others the strangenes of the tale, and scanning what he should mean by
it. But old Geron (who had borne him a grudge ever since in one of their
Eclogues he had taken him up ouer-bitterly) took hold of this occasion to make
his revenge, and said, He never saw thing worse proportioned, then to bring in
a tale of he knew not what beasts at such a sport-meeting, when rather some
song of love, or matter for joyful melody was to be brought forth. But, said
he, This is the right conceit of young men, who think, then they speak
wiseliest, when they cannot understand themselves. But little did the
melancholic shepherd regard either his dispraises, or the others praises, who
had set the foundation of his honor there; where he was most despised. And
therefore he returning again to the train of his desolate pensiveness, Geron
invited Histor to answer him in Eclogue-wise; who indeed having been long in
love with the fair Kala, and now by Lalus ouergone; was grown into a
detestation of marriage. But thus it was.

Geron. Histor. Geron. In faith, good Histor, long is your delay,
From holy marriage sweet and surest mean:
Our foolish lust in honest rules to stay.
I pray thee do to Lalus sample lean:
Thou see, how friske, and jolly now he is,
That last day seemed, he could not chew a bean.
Believe me man, there is no greater bliss,
Then is the quiet joy of loving wife;
Which who so wants, half of himself does miss.
Friend without change, playfellow without strife.
Food without fulness, counsel without pride,
Is this sweet doubling of our single life.

Histor. No doubt to whom so good chance did betide,
As for to find a pasture strawed with gold,
He were a fool, if there he did not bide.
Who would not have a Phoenix if he could?
The humming Waspe, if it had not a stinge,
Before all flies the Waspe accept I would.
But this bad world, few golden fields does bring,
Phoenix but one, of Crows we millions have:
The Waspe seems gay, but is a combrous thing.
If many Kalaes our Arcadia gave,
Lalus example I would soon ensue,
And think, I did my self from sorrow save.
But of such wives we find a slender crew;
Shrewdnes so stirs, pride so puffes up the heart,
They seldom ponder what to them is due.
With meager looks, as if they still did smart;
Puiling, and whimpring, or else scolding flat,
Make home more pain then following of the cart.
Either dull silence, or eternal chat;
Still contrary to what her husband says;
If he do praise the dog, she likes the cat.
Austere she is, when he would honest plays;
And gamesome then, when he thinks on his sheep;
She bids him go, and yet from journey stays.
She war does ever with his kinsfolk keep,
And makes them fremb'd, who frinds by nature are,
Envying shallow toys with malice deep.
And if forsooth there come some new found ware,
The little coin his sweating brows have got,
Must go for that, if for her lowres he care:
Or else; Nay faith, mine is the lucklest lot,
That ever fell to honest woman yet:
No wife but I has such a man, God wot.
Such is their speech, who be of sober wit;
But who do let their tongues show well their rage,
Lord, what bywords they speak, what spite they spit?
The house is made a very loathsome cage,
Wherein the bird does never sing but cry;
With such a will as nothing can assuage.
Dearly the servants do their wages buy,
Reuil'd for each small fault, sometimes for none:
They better live that in a gaile do lie.
Let other fowler spots away be blown;
For I seek not their shame, but still me thinks,
A better life it is to lie alone.

Geron. Who for each fickle fear from virtue shrinkes,
Shall in his life embrace no worthy thing:
No mortal man the cup of surety drinks.
The heavens do not good haps in handfuls bring,
But let us pike our good from out much bad:
That still our little world may know his king.
But certainly so long we may be glad,
While that we do what nature does require,
And for the event we never ought be sad.
Man often is plag'de with air, is burnt with fire,
In water dround, in earth his burial is;
And shall we not therefore their use desire?
Nature above all things requires this,
That we our kind do labor to maintain;
Which drawne-out line does hold all humane bliss.
Thy father justly may of thee complain,
If thou do not repay his deeds for thee,
In granting unto him a grandsires gain.
Thy commonwealth may rightly grieved be,
Which must by this immortal be preserved,
If thus thou murder thy posterity.
His very being he has not deserved,
Who for a selfe-conceipt will that forbear,
Whereby that being aye must be conserved.
And God forbid, women such cattle were,
As you paint them: but well in you I find,
No man does speak aright, who speaks in sear.
Who only sees the ill is worse then blind.
These fifty winters married have I been;
And yet find no such faults in womankind.
I have a wife worthy to be a Queen,
So well she can command, and yet obey;
In ruling of a house so well she is seen.
And yet in all this time, betwixt us tway,
We bear our double yoke with such consent,
That never past foul word, I dare well say.
But these be your loue-toyes, which still are spent
In lawless games, and love not as you should,
But with much study learn late to repent.
How well last day before our Prince you could
Blind Cupids works with wonder testify?
Yet now the root of him abase you would.
Go to, go to, and Cupid now apply
To that where thou thy Cupid may auowe,
And thou shall find, in women virtues lie.
Sweet supple minds which soon to wisdom bow
Where they by wisdoms rule directed are,
And are not forced fond thraldom to allow.
As we to get are framed, so they to spare:
We made for pain, our pains they made to cherish:
We care abroad, and they of home have care.
O Histor, seek within thy self to flourish:
Thy house by thee must live, or else be gone:
And then who shall the name of Histor nourish?
Riches of children pass a Princes throne;
Which touch the fathers heart with secret joy,
When without shame he faith, these be mine own.
Marry therefore; for marriage will destroy
Those passions which to youthful head do clime
Mothers and Nurses of all vain annoy.

ALl the assembly laughed at the lustines of the old fellow, and easily
perceived in Histor, he liked Lalus fortune better, then he loved his person.
But Basilius to entermixe with these light notes of liberty, some sadder tune,
set to the key of his own passion, not seeing there Strephon or Klaius, (who
called thence by Vranias letter, were both gone to continue their suite, like
two true runners, both employing their best speed, but not one hindering the
other) he called to one Lamo of their acquaintance, and willed him to sing some
one of their songs; which he redily performed in this doble Sestine.

Strephon. Klaius. Strephon. You Gote-heard Gods, that love the grassie
mountains,
You Nymphs that haunt the springs in pleasant valleys,
You Satyrs ioyde with free and quiet forests,
Vouchsafe your silent ears to playning music,
Which to my woes gives still an early morning:
And draws the dolor on till weary evening.

Klaius. O Mercury, foregoer to the evening,
O heavenly huntresse of the savage mountains,
O lovely star, entitled of the morning,
While that my voice does fill these woeful valleys,
Vouchsafe your silent ears to plaining music,
Which often has Echo tired in secret forests.

Strephon. I that was once free-burges of the forests,
Where shade from Sun, and sports I sought at evening,
I that was once esteemed for pleasant music,
Am banished now among the monstrous mountains
Of huge despair, and foul affictions valleys,
Am grown a shrich-owle to my self each morning.

Klaius. I that was once delighted every morning,
Hunting the wild inhabiters of forests,
I that was once the music of these valleys,
So darkened am, that all my day is evening,
Hart-broken so, that molehilles seem high mountains,
And fill the vales with cries in steed of music.

Strephon. Long since alas, my deadly Swannish music
Has made it self a crier of the morning,
And has with wailing strength clim'd highest mountains:
Long since my thoughts more desert be then forests:
Long since I see my joys come to their evening,
And state thrown down to ouer-troden valleys.

Klaius. Long since the happy dwellers of these valleys,
Have praide me leave my strange exclaiming music,
Which troubles their days work, and joys of evening:
Long since I hate the night, more hate the morning:
Long since my thoughts chase me like beasts in forests,
And make me wish my self laid under mountains.

Strephon. Me seems I see the high and stately mountains,
Transform themselves to low dejected valleys:
Me seems I hear in these ill-changed forests,
The Nightingales do learn of Owls their music:
Me seems I feel the comfort of the morning
Turnde to the mortal serene of an evening.

Klaius. Me seems I see a filthy clowdie evening,
As soon as Sun begins to clime the mountains:
Me seems I feel a noisome sent, the morning
When I do smell the flowers of these valleys:
Me seems I hear, when I do hear sweet music,
The dreadful cries of murdered men in forests.

Strephon. I wish to fire the trees of all these forests;
I give the Sun a last farewell each evening;
I curse the fidling finders out of Music:
With cnuie I do hate the lofty mountains;
And with despite despise the humble valleys:
I do detest night, evening, day, and morning.

Klaius. Curse to my self my prayer is, the morning:
My fire is more, then can be made with forests;
My state more base, then are the basest valleys:
I wish no euenings more to see, each evening;
Shamed I have my self in sight of mountains,
And stop mine ears, lest I grow mad with Music.

Strephon. For she, whose parts maintainde a perfect music,
Whose beauty shin'de more then the blushing morning,
Who much did pass in state the stately mountains,
In straightnes past the Cedars of the forests,
Has cast me wretch into eternal evening,
By taking her two Suns from these dark valleys.

Klaius. For she, to whom compared, the Alps are valleys,
She, whose left word brings from the spheres their music,
At whose appraoch the Sun rose in the evening,
Who, where she went, bare in her forhead morning,
Is gone, is gone from these our spoiled forests,
Turning to deserts our best pastur'de mountains.

Strephon. These mountains witness shall, so shall these valleys,

Klaius. These forests eke, made wretched by our music,
Our morning hymn is this, and song at evening.

Zelmane seeing no body offer to fill the stage, as if her long restrained
conceits had new burst out of prison, she thus desiring her voice should be
accorded to nothing but Philocleas ears, laying fast hold on her face with
her eyes, she sange these Sapphiques, speaking as it were to her own Hope.

IF mine eyes can speak to do hearty errande,
Or mine eyes language she do hap to tudge of,
So that eyes message be of her received,
Hope we do live yet.
But if eyes fail then, when I most do need them,
Or if eyes language be not unto her known,
So that eyes message do return rejected,
Hope we do both dye.
Yet dying, and dead, do we sing her honor;
So become our tombs monuments of her praise;
So becomes our loss the triumph of her gain;
Hers be the glory.
If the spheres senseless do yet hold a music,
If the Swannes sweet voice be not heard, but at death,
If the mute timber when it has the life lost,
Yeldeth a lutes tune.
Are then humane minds priuiledg'd so meanly,
As that hateful death can abridge them of power,
With the vow of truth to record to all worlds,
That we be her spoils?
Thus not ending, ends the due praise of her praise;
Fleshly veil consumes; but a soul has his life,
Which is held in love, love it is, that has ioynde
Life to this our soul.
But if eyes can speak to do hearty errande,
Or mine eyes language she do hap to judge of,
So that eyes message be of her received,
Hope we do live yet.

WHat exclaiming praises Basilius gave to Zelmanes song, any man may guess,
that knows love is better then a pair of spectacles to make every thing seem
greater, which is seen through it: and then is it never tongue-tied, where fit
commendation (whereof womankind is so licorous) is offered unto it. Yea, he fell
prostrate on the ground, and thanked the Gods, they had preserved his life so
long, as to hear the very music they themselves used, in an earthly body.
But the wasting of the torches served as a watch unto them, to make them see
the time waste; and therefore the King (though unwilling) rose from the seat,
which he thought excellently settled on the one side: and considering Zelmanes
late hurt, persuaded her to take that farre-spent nights rest. And so of all
sides they went to recommend themselves to the elder brother of death.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE COUNTESS OF PEMBROKES ARCADIA.
CHAP. 1.
The loue-complaintes 1 of Gynecia, 2 Zelmane, 3 and Basilius. 4 Her, 5 and his
wooing of Zelmane, and her shifting of both, 6 to bemone her self

In these pastoral pastimes a great number of days were sent to follow their
flying predecessors, while the cup of poison (which was deeply tasted of this
noble company) had left no sinewe of theirs without mortally searching into
it; yet never manifesting his venomous work, till once, that the night
(parting away angerly, that she could distill no more sleep into the eyes of
lovers) had no sooner given place to the breaking out of the morning light, and
the Sun bestowed his beams upon the tops of the mountains, but that the
woeful Gynecia were full of, going up and down with such unquiet motions, as a
grieved and hopeles mind is wont to bring forth. There appeered unto the eyes
of her judgment the evils she was like to run into, with ougly infamy waiting
upon them: she felt the terrous of her own conscience: she was guilty of a
long exercised virtue, which made this vice the fuller of deformity. The
uttermost of the good she could aspire unto, was a mortal wound to her vexed
spirits: and lastly no small part of her evils was, that she was wife to see
her evils. In so much, that having a great while thrown her countenance
ghastly about her (as if she had called all the powers of the world to
witness of her wretched estate) at length casting up her watrie eyes to
heaven, O Sun (said she) whose unspotted light directs the steps of mortal
mankind, art thou not ashamed to impart the clearness of thy presence to such
a dust-creeping worm as I am? O you heavens (which continually keep the
course allotted unto you) can none of your influences prevail so much upon the
miserable Gynecia, as to make her preserve a course so long embraced by her? O
deserts, deserts, how fit a guest am I for you, since my heart can people you
with wild ravenous beasts, which in you are wanting? O Virtue, where do
thou hide thy self? or what hideous thing is this which does eclips thee? or
is it true that thou weart never but a vain name, and no essential thing,
which have thus left thy professed servant, when she had most need of thy
lovely presence? O imperfect proportion of reason, which ca^ too much forsee,
and too little prevent. Alas, alas (said she) if there were but one hope for
all my pains, or but one excuse for all my faultiness. But wretch that I am,
my torment is beyond all succor, and my evil deserving does exceed my evil
fortune. For nothing else did my husband take this strange resolution to live
so solitarily: for nothing else have the winds delivered this strange guest to
my country: for nothing else have the destinies reserved my life to this time,
but that only I (most wretched I) should become a plague to my self, and a
shame to womankind. Yet if my desire (how unjust so ever it be) might take
effect, though a thousand deaths followed it, and every death were followed with
a thousand shames; yet should not my seplcher receive me without some
contentment. But alas, though sure I am, that Zelmane is such as can answer my
love; yet as sure I am, that this disguising must needs come for some foretake^
co^ceipt. And then, wretched Gynecia, where can thou find any small grou^dplot
for hope to dwell upon? No, no, it is Philoclea his heart is set upon: it is my
daughter I have borne to supplant me. But if it be so, the life I have given
thee (ungrateful Philoclea) I will sooner with these hands bereave thee of,
then my birth shall glory, she has bereaved me of my desires. In shame there
is no comfort, but to be beyond all bounds of shame.

Having spoken thus, she began to make a piteous war with her fair hair, when
she might hear (not far from a lamentable tune is the sweetest music to a
woeful mind) she drew thither neere-away, in hope to find some co^panio^ of
her misery. And as she passed on, she was stopped with a number of trees, so
thickly placed together, that she was afraid she should (with rushing through)
stop the speech of the lamentable party, which she was so desirous to
understand. And therefore setting her down as softly as she could (for she was
now in distaunce to hear) she might first perceive a Lute excellently well
played upon, and then the same doleful voice accompanying it with these verses.

IN vain, mine Eyes, you labor to amend
With flowing tears your fault of hasty sight:
Since to my heart her shape you so did send;
That her I see, though you did lose your light.
In vain, my Heart, now you with sight are burnd,
With sighs you seek to cool your hot desire:
Since sighs (into mine inward furnace turned)
For bellows serve to kindle more the fire.
Reason, in vain (now you have lost my heart)
My head you seek, as to your strongest forte:
Since there mine eyes have played so false a part,
That to your strength your foes have sure resort.
Then since in vain I find were all my strife,
To this strange death I vainly yield my life.
The ending of the song served but for a beginning of new plaints, as if the
mind (oppressed with too heavy a burden of cares) was feign to discharge it
self of al sides, and as it were, paint out the hideousnes of the pain in all
sorts of colors. For the woeful person (as if the lute had evil joined with
the voice) threw it to the ground with such like words: Alas, poor Lute, how
much art thou deceived to think, that in my miseries thou could ease my woes,
as in my careless times thou was wont to please my fancies? The time is changed,
my Lute, the time is changed; and no more did my joyful mind then receive
every thing to a joyful consideration, then my careful mind now makes each
thing taste like the bitter juice of care. The evil is inward, my Lute, the
evil is inward; which all thou do, does serve but to make me think more
freely off, and the more I think, the more cause I find of thinking, but
less of hoping. And alas, what is then thy harmony, but the sweet meats of
sorrow? The discord of my thoughts, my Lute, does ill agree to the concord of
thy strings; therefore be not ashamed to leave thy master, since he is not
afraid to forsake himself.

Gynecia could not refrain to show her self, thinking such griefs could
serve fitly for nothing, but her own fortune. But as she came into the little
Arbor of this sorrowful music, her eyes met with the eyes of Zelmane, which
was the party that thus had indicted her self of misery: so that either of
them remained confused with a sudden astonishment. Zelmane fearing, least she
had heard some part of those complaints, which she had risen up that morning
of purpose, to breath out in secret to her self. But Gynecia a great while
stood still, with a kind of dull amasement, looking steadfastly upon her: at
length returning to some use of her self, she began to ask Zelmane, what
cause carried her so early abroad? But as if the opening of her mouth to
Zelmane, had opened some great flood-gate of sorrow (whereof her heart could not
abide the violent issue) she sanke to the ground, with her hands over her face,
crying vehemently, Zelmane help me, O Zelmane have pity on me. Zelmane ran
to her, maruelling what sudden sickness had thus possessed her: and beginning
to ask her the cause of her pain, and offering her service to be employed by
her: Gynecia opening her eyes wildly upon her, pricked with the flames of love,
and the torments of her own conscience; O Zelmane, Zelmane, (said she) do
thou offer me physic, which art my only poison? Or will thou do me service,
which have alredie brought me into eternal slavery? Zelmane then knowing well
at what mark she shot, yet loath to enter into it; Most excellent Lady (said
she) you were best retire your self into your lodging, that you the better may
pass this sudden fit. Retire my self? (said Gynecia) If I had retired my
self into my self, when thou to me (unfortunate guest) came to draw me from
my self; blessed had I been, and no need had I had of this counsel. But
now alas, I am forced to fly to thee for succor, whom I accuse of all my
hurt; and make thee judge of my cause, who art the only author of my
mischief. Zelmane the more astonished, the more she understood her, Madam
(said she) whereof do you accuse me, that I will not clear my self? Or
wherein may I steed you, that you may not command me? Alas, answered Gynecia,
what shall I say more? Take pity of me, O Zelmane, but not as Zelmane, and
disguise not with me in words, as I know thou do in apparel.

Zelmane was much troubled with that word, finding her self brought to this
straight. But as she was thinking what to answer her; they might see old
Basilius pass hard by them, without ever seeing them: complaining likewise of
love very freshly; and ending his complaint with this song, Love having
renewed both his invention, and voice.

Let not old age disgrace my high desire,
O heavenly soul, in human shape conteind:
Old wood inflam'de, does yield the brauest fire,
When younger does in smoke his virtue spend.
Ne let white hairs, which on my face do grow,
Seem to your eyes of a disgraceful hew:
Since whiteness does present the sweetest show,
Which makes all eyes do honor unto you.
Old age is wise and full of constant truth;
Old age well stayed from raunging humor lives:
Old age has known what ever was in youth:
Old age overcome, the greater honor gives.
And to old age since you your self aspire,
Let not old age disgrace my high desire.
Which being done, he looked very curiously upon himself, sometimes fetching
a little skippe, as if he had said, his strength had not yet forsaken him. But
Zelmane having in this time gotten leisure to think for an answer; looking
upon Gynecia, as if she thought she did her some wrong: Madam (said she) I am
not acquainted with those words of disguising, neither is it the profession of
an Amazon, neither are you a party with whom it is to be used. If my service
may please you, employ it, so long as you do me no wrong in misiudgeing of me.
Alas Zelmane (said Gynecia) I perceive you know full little, how percing the
eyes are of a true lover. There is no one beam of those thoughts you have
planted in me, but is able discern a greater cloud then you do go in. Seek
not to conceal your self further from me, nor force not the passion of love
into violent extremities. Now was Zelmane brought to an exigent, when the
king, turning his eyes that way through the trees, perceived his wife and
mistres together: so that framing the most lovely countenance he could, he came
straightway toward them; and at the first word (thanking his wife for having
entertained Zelmane,) desired her she would now return into the lodge, because
he had certain matters of estate to impart to the Lady Zelmane. The Queen
(being nothing troubled with jealousy in that point) obeyed the kings
commandment; full of raging agonies, and determinatly bent, that as she would
seek all loving means to win Zelmane, so she would stir up terrible
tragedies, rather then fail of her intent. And so went she from them to the
lodge-ward, with such a battle in her thoughts, and so deadly an overthrow
given to her best resolutions, that even her body (where the field was
fought) was oppressed withal: making a languishing sickness wait upon the
triumph of passion; which the more it prevailed in her, the more it made her
jealousy watchful, both over her daughter, and Zelmane; having ever one of
them entrusted to her own eyes.

But as soon as Basilius was rid of his wives presence, falling down on his
knees, O Lady (said he) which have only had the power to stir up again
those flames which had so long layn dead in me; see in me the power of your
beauty; which can make old age come to ask counsel of youth; and a Prince
vnco^quered, to become a slave to a stranger. And when you see that power of
yours, love that at left in me, since it is yours, although of me you see
nothing to be loved. Worthy Prince (answered Zelmane, taking him up from his
kneeling) both your manner, and your speech are so strange unto me, as I know
not how to answer it better then with silence. If silence please you (said the
king) it shall never displease me, since my heart is wholly pledged to obey you:
otherwise if you would vouchsafe mine ears such happiness, as to hear you,
they shall conuary your words to such a mind, which is with the humblest degree
of reverence to receive them. I disdain not to speak to you (mighty Prince
said Zelmane,) but I disdain to speak to any matter which may bring my honor
into question. And therewith, with a brave counterfeited scorn she departed
from the king; leaving him not so sorry for his short answer, as proud in
himself that he had broken the matter. And thus did the king (feeding his mind
with those thoughts) pass great time in writing verses, and making more of
himself, then he was wont to do: that with a little help, he would have
grown into a pretty kind of dotage.

Zelmane being rid of this loving, but little-loued company, Alas (said she)
poor Pyrocles, was there ever one, but I, that had received wrong, and could
blame no body. that having more then I desire, am still in want of that I
would? Truly Love, I must needs say thus much on thy behalf; thou have
employed my love there, where all love is deserved; and for recompense have
sent me more love then ever I desired. But what will thou do Pyrocles? which
way can thou find to rid thee of thy intricate troubles? To her whom I
would be known to, I live in darkness: and to her am revealed, from whom I
would be most secreat. What shift shall I find against the diligent love of
Basilius? what shield against the violent passions of Gynecia? And if that be
done, yet how am I the nearer to quench the fire that consumes me? Well, well,
sweet Philoclea, my whole confidence must be builded in thy divine spirit,
which cannot be ignorant of the cruel wound I haue^ received by you.

CHAP. 2.
1 Dametas-his enstructing of Dorus. 2 Zelmanes discourse to Dorus of her
difficulties; 3 and his to her of his success in love. 4 His loue-suits made
to Mopsa, meant to Pamela: with their answers.

But as sick folks, when they are alone, think company would relieve them,
and yet having company do find it noisome; changing willingly outward objects,
when indeed the evil is inward: So poor Zelmane was no more weery of
Basilius, then she was of herself, when Basilius was gone: and ever the more,
the more she turned her eyes to become her own judges. Tired wherewith, she
longed to meet her friend Dorus; that upon the shoulders of friendship she
might lay the burden of sorrow: and therefore went toward the other lodge:
where among certain Beeches she found Dorus, apparelled in flanen, with a
goats skin cast upon him, and a garland of Laurel mixed with Cypres leaves on
his head, waiting on his master Dametas, Dorus was practicing, one might see
Dametas hold his hand under his girdle behind him, nodding from the wast
upwards, and swearing he never knew man go more aukewardly to work: and that
they might talk of booke-learning what they would; but for his part, he never
saw more vnseatlie fellows, then great clearks were.

But Zelmanes coming saved Dorus from further Arcadia bare the finest wool,
drew him on to follow her in such country discourses, till (being out of
Dametas hearing) with such vehemency of passion, as though her heart would
clime into her mouth, to take her tongues office, she declared unto him, upon
what briers the roses of her affections grew: how time still seemed to forget
her, bestowing no one hour of comfort upon her; she remaining still in one
plight of ill fortune, saving so much worse, as continuance of evil does in
it self increase evil. Alas my Dorus (said she) thou feast how long and
languishingly the weeks are paste over us since our last talking. And yet am
I the same, miserable I, that I was: only stronger in longing, and weaker in
hoping. Then fell she to so pitiful a declaration of the insupportablenes of
her desires, that Dorus ears (not able to show what wounds that discourse
gave unto them) procured his eyes with tears to give testimony, how much they
suffered for her suffering: till passion (a most cumbersome guest to it self)
made Zelmane (the sooner to shake it of) earnestly entreat Dorus, that he also
(with like freedom of discourse) would bestow a Map of his little world,
upon her; that she might see, whether it were troubled with such uninhabitable
climes of cold despaires, and hot rages, as hers was. And so walking under a
few Palm trees, (which being loving in their own nature, seemed to give their
shadow the willinglier, because they held discourse of love) Dorus thus entered
to the description of his fortune.



But thus stands it with me: After that by your means I was exalted to serve
in yonder blessed lodge, for a while I had, in the furnace of my agonies, this
refreshing; that (because of the service I had done in killing of the Bear) it
pleased the Princess (in whom indeed statelines shines through courtesy) to
let fall some gracious look upon me. Sometimes to see my exercises, sometimes
to hear my songs. For my part, my harre would not suffer me to omit any
occasion, whereby I might make the incomparable Pamela, see how much
extraordinary devotion I bare to her service: and withal, straue to appear
more worthy in her sight; that small desert, joined to so great affection,
might prevail something in the wisest Lady. But too well (alas) I found,
that a shepherds service was but considered of as from a shepherd, and the
acceptance limited to no further proportion, then of a good servant. And when
my countenance had once given notice, that there lay affection under it, I saw
straight, Majesty (sitting in the throne of Beauty) draw forth such a sword
of just disdain, that I remained as a man thunder-striken; not daring, no not
able, to behold that power. Now, to make my estate known, seemed again
impossible, by reason of the suspitiousnes of Dametas, Miso, and my young
Mistress, Mopsa. For, Dametas (according to the constitution of a dull head)
thinks no better way to show him self wife, then by suspecting every thing
in his way. Which suspicion Misc (for the hoggish shrewdness of her brain)
and Mopsa (for a very unlikely envy she has stumbled upon, against the
Princesses unspeakable beauti) were very glad to execute. So that I (finding
my service by this means lightly regarded, my affection despised, and my
self unknown) remained no fuller of desire, then void of comfort how to come
to my desire. Which (alas) if these trees could speak, they might well
witness. For, many times have I stood here, bewailing my self unto them:
many times have I, leaning to yonder Palm, admired the blessedness of it, that
could bear Love without sense of pain. Many times, when my masters cattle
came hither to chewe their cudde, in this fresh place, I might see the young
Bull testify his love. But how with proud looks, and ioyfulnes. O wretched
mankind (said I then to my self) in whom wit (which should be the gouerner
of his welfare) becomes the traitor to his blessedness. These beasts, like
children to nature, inherit her blessings quietly; we, like bastards, are laid
abroad, even as foundlinges to be trained up by grief and sorrow. Their minds
grudge not their bodies comfort, nor their senses are let from enjoying
their objects: we have the impediments of honor, and the torments of
conscience. Truly in such cogitatio^s have I sometimes so long stood, that me
thought my feet began to grow into the ground, with such a darkness and
heaviness of mind, that I might easily have been persuaded to have resigned
over my very essence. But Love, (which one time lays burdens, another time
gives wings) when I was at the lowest of my downward thoughts, pulled up my
heart to remember, that nothing is achieved before it be thoroughly attempted;
and that lying still does never go forward: and that therefore it was time,
now or never, to sharpen my invention, to pearce through the hardness of this
enterprise; never ceasing to assemble al my conceits, one after the other, how
to manifest both my mind and estate. Till at last, I lighted and resolved on
this way, which yet perchance you will think was a way rather to hide it.

Mopsa, that might be: and as for the love, so lively it was indeed within me,
(although to another subject) that little I needed to counterfeit any notable
demonstrations of it: and so making a contrariety the place of my memory, in
her fowlnes I beheld Pamelas fayrenesse, still looking on Mopsa, but thinking
on Pamela; as if I saw my Sun shine in a puddled water: I cried out of
nothing but Mopsa: to Mopsa my attendance was directed: to Mopsa the best
fruits I could gather were brought: to Mopsa it seemed still that mine eye
conveyed my tongue. So that Mopsa was my saying; Mopsa was my singing; Mopsa,
(that is only suitable in laying a foul complexion upon a filthy favor,
setting forth both in sluttishnesse) she was the load-starre of my life, she
the blessing of mine eyes, she the overthrow of my desires, and yet the
recompense of my overthrow; she the sweetness of my heart, even sweetning the
death, which her sweetness drew upon me. In sum, what soever I thought of
Pamela, that I said of Mopsa; whereby as I gatte my masters good will, who
before spited me, fearing left I should win the Princess favor from him, so
did the same make the Princess be better content to allow me her presence:
whether indeed it were, that a certain spark of noble indignation did rise
in her, not to suffer such a baggage to win away any thing of hers, how
meanly soever she reputed of it; or rather (as I think) my words being so
passionate; and shooting so quite contrary from the marks of Mopsaes
worthiness, she perceived well enough, whither they were directed: and
therefore being so masked, she was contented, as a sport of wit to attend
them. Whereupon one day determining to find some means to tell (as of a third
person) the tale of mine own love, and estate, finding Mopsa (like a Cuckoo by
a Nightingale) alone with Pamela, I came in unto them, and with a face (I am
sure) full of clowdy fancies, took a harp, and song this song.

Since so mine eyes are subject to your sight,
That in your sight they fixed have my brain;
Since so my heart is filled with that light,
That only light does all my life maintain;
Since in sweet you all goods so richly reign,
That where you are no wished good can want;
Since so your living image lives in me,
That in my self your self true love does plant;
How can you him unworthy then decree,
In whose chief part your worthes implanted be?
The song being ended, which I had often broken of in the midst with grievous
sighs, which ouertooke every verse I sange, I let fall my harp from me; and
casting my eye sometime upon Mopsa, but setting my sight principally upon
Pamela, And is it the only fortune most bewtiful Mopsa (said I) of wretched
Dorus, that fortune should be measure of his mind? Am I only he that because I
am in misery, more misery must be laid upon me? must that which should be
cause of compassion, become an argument of cruelty against me? Alas excellent
Mopsa, consider, that a virtuous Prince requires the life of his meanest
subject, and the heavenly Sun disdaines not to give light to the smallest
worm. O Mopsa, Mopsa, if my heart could be as manifest to you, as it is
uncomfortable to me, I doubt not the height of my thoughts should well
counteruaile the lowness of my quality. Who has not heard of the greatness of
your estate? who sees not, that your estate is much excelled with that sweet
uniting of al beauties, which remains and dwells with you? who knows not,
that al these are but ornaments of that divine spark within you, which being
descended from heaven could notels-where pick out so sweet a mansion.? But if
you will know what is the band that ought to knit all these excellencies
together, it is a kind of mercyfulnesse to such a one, as is in his soul
devoted to those perfections. Mopsa (who already had had a certain smackring
toward me) stood all this while with her hand sometimes before her face, but
most commonly with a certain special grace of her own, wagging her lips, and
grinning in steed of smiling: but all the words I could get of her, was,
wringing her waste, and thrusting out her chinne, In faith you jest with me:
you are a merry man indeed. But the euer-pleasing Pamela (that well found the
Comedy would be marred, if she did not help Mopsa to her part) was content
to urge a little further of me. Master Dorus (said the fair Pamela) me thinks
you blame your fortune very wrongfully, since the fault is not in Fortune, but
in you that cannot frame your self to your fortune: and as wrongfully do
require Mopsa to so great a disparagement as to her Fathers servant; since she
is not worthy to be loved, that has not some feeling of her own worthiness. I
stayed a good while after her words, in hope she would have continued her
speech (so great a delight I received in hearing her) but seeing her say no
further, (with a quaking all over my body) I thus answered her. Lady, most
worthy of all duty, how falls it out that you in whom all virtue shines,
will take the patronage of fortune, the only rebellious handmaide against
virtue? Especially, since before your eyes, you have a pitiful spectacle of
her wickedness, a forlorn creature, which must remain not such as I am, but
such as she makes me, since she must be the balance of worthiness or
disparagement. Yet alas, if the condemned man (even at his death) have leave to
speak, let my mortal wound purchase thus much consideration; since the
perfections are such in the party I love, as the feeling of them cannot come
into any unnoble heart; shall that heart, which does not only feel them, but
has all the working of his life placed in them, shall that heart I say, lifted
up to such a height, be counted base? O let not an excellent spirit do it
self such wrong, as to think, where it is placed, embraced, and loved; there
can be any unworthiness, since the weakest mist is not easilier driven away by
the Sun, then that is chased away with so high thoughts. I will not deny
(answered the gracious Pamela) but that the love you bear to Mopsa, has
brought you to the consideration of her virtues, and that consideration may
have made you the more virtuous, and so the more worthy: But even that then
(you must confess) you have received of her, and so are rather gratefully to
thank her, then to press any further, till you bring something of your own
whereby to claim it. And truly Dorus, I must in Mopsaes behalf say thus much
to you, that if her beauties have so overtaken you, it becomes a true Love to
have your heart more set upon her good then your own, and to bear a tenderer
respect to her honor, then your satisfaction. Now by my hallidame, Madame
(said Mopsa, throwing a great number of sheeps eyes upon me) you have even
touched mine own mind to the quick, forsooth. I (finding that the policy
that I had used, had at lest wise procured thus much happiness unto me, as
that I might even in my Ladies presence, discover the sore which had deeply
festered within me, and that she could better conceive my reasons applied to
Mopsa, then she would have vouchsafed them, whilst her self was a party)
thought good to pursue on my good beginning, using this fit occasion of
Pameleas wit, and Mopsaes ignorance. Therefore with an humble pearcing eye,
looking upon Pamela, as if I had rather been condemned by her mouth, then
highly exalted by the other, turning my self to Mopsa, but keeping mine eye
where it was, fair Mopsa (said I) well do I find by the wise knitting
together of your answer, that any disputation I can use is as much too weak,
as Ivnworthy. I find my love shall be proved no love, without I leave to love,
being too unfit a vessel in who^ so high thoughts should be engraued. Yet
since the Love I bear you, has so joined it self to the best part of my life,
as the one cannot depart, but that the other will follow, before I seek to
obey you in making my last passage, let me know which is my unworthiness, either
of mind, estate, or both? Mopsa was about to say, in neither; for her heart I
think tu^bled with over much kindness, when Pamela with a more favorable
countenance the^ before (finding how apt I was to fall into despair) told me,
I might therein have answered my self; for besides that it was granted me,
that the inward feeling of Mopsaes perfectio^s had greatly beautified my mind,
there was none could deny, but that my mind and body deserved great
allowance. But Dorus (said she) you must be so far master of your love, as
to consider, that since the judgment of the world stands upon matter of
fortune, and that the sex of womankind of all other is most bound to have
regardfull eye to men's judgments, it is not for us to play the philosophers,
in seeking out your hidden virtues: since that, which in a wise prince would be
counted wisdom, in us will be taken for a light-grounded affection: so is not
one thing, one, done by diverse persons. There is no man in a burning fever
feels so great contentme^t in cold water greedily received (which as soon as
the drink cease, the rage renews) as poor I found my soul refreshed with
her sweetly pronounced words; and newly, and more violently again enflamed,
as soon as she had closed up her delightful speech, with no less well graced
silence. But remembering in my self that as well the Soldier dies which
stands still, as he that gives the brauest onset: and seeing that to the
making up of my fortune, there wanted nothing so much as the making known of
mine estate, with a face well witnessing how deeply my soul was possessed, and
with the most submissiue behauior, that a thralled heart could express, eue^ as
my words had been too thick for my mouth, at length spoke to this purpose.
Alas, most worthy Princess (said I) and do not then your own sweet words
sufficiently testify, that there was never man could have a iuster actio^
against filthy fortune, the^ I, since all other things being granted me, her
blindness is my only let? O heavenly God, I would either she had such eyes as
were able to discern my deserts, or I were blind not to see the daily cause of
my misfortune. But yet (said I) most honored Lady, if my miserable speeches
have not already cloied you, and that the very presence of such a wretch
become not hateful in your eyes; let me reply thus much further against my
mortal sentence, by telling you a story, which happened in this same country
long since (for woes make the shortest time seem long) whereby you shall see
that my estate is not so contemptible, but that a Prince has been content to
take the like upon him, and by that only has aspired to enjoy a mighty
Princess. Pamela graciously harkened, and I told my tale in this sort.

CHAP. 3.
1 Dorus-his tale of his own education, 2 travail, 3 enamoring, 4
metamorphosing, 5 saving from sea, 6 and being Musidorus. 7 His octaue. 8
Pamelas and Mopsas answer to his suit. 9 His present to them; 10 and
perplexity in himself.

Thessalia, (alas why name I that accursed country, which brings forth nothing,
but matters for tragedies? but name it I must) in Thessalia (I say) there was
(well may I say, there was) a Prince (no, no Prince, who^ bondage wholly
possessed; but yet accounted a Prince, and) named Musidorus. O Musidorus,
Musidorus; but to what serve exclamations, where there are no cares to receive
the sound? This Musidorus, being yet in the tendrest age, his worthy father
paid to nature (with a violent death) her last duties, leaving his child to
the faith of his friends, and the proof of time: death gave him not such pangs
as the foresight-full care he had of his silly successor. And yet if in his
foresight he could have seen so much, happy was that good Prince in his
timely departure, which barred him from the knowledge of his sons miseries,
which his knowledge could neither have prevented, nor relieved. The young
Musidorus (being thus, as for the first pledge of the destinies good will,
deprived of his principal stay) was yet for some years after (as if the
stars would breath themselves for a greater mischief) lulled up in as much
good luck, as the heedfull love of his doleful mother, and the flourishing
estate of his country could breed unto him.

Musidorus own virtue (see how virtue can be a minister to mischief)
sufficiently provoke him: for indeed thus much I must say for him, although the
likeness of our mishaps makes me presume to pattern my self unto him) that
well-doing was at that time his scope, from which no faint pleasure could
withold him. But the present occasion which did knit all this together, was
his uncle the king of Macedon; who having lately before gotten such victories,
as were beyond expectation, did at this time send both for the Prince his son
(brought up together, to avoid the wars, with Musidorus) and for Musidorus
himself, that his joy might be the more full, having such partakers of it. But
alas, to what a sea of miseries my plaintfull tongue does lead me; and thus out
of breath, rather with that I thought, then that I said, I stayed my speech,
till Pamela showing by countenance that such was her pleasure, I thus continued
it. These two young Princes to satisfy the king, took their way by sea,
toward Thrace, whether they would needs go with a Navy to succor him: he
being at that time before Bizantium with a mighty Army beseeging it; where at
that time his court was. But when the conspired heavens had gotten this Subject
of their wrath upon so fit a place as the sea was, they straight began to
breath out in boystrous winds some part of their malice against him; so that
with the loss of all his Navy, he only with the Prince his cousin, were cast
a land, far off from the place whether their desires would have guided them.
O cruel winds in your vnconsiderte rages, why either began you this fury,
or why did you not end it in his end? But your cruelty was such, as you would
spare his life for many deathfull torments. To tell you what pitiful mishaps
fell to the young Prince of Macedon his cosen, I should too much fill your
ears with strange horrors; neither will I stay upon those laborsome
adue^tures, nor loathsome misaduentures, to which, and through which his
fortune and courage conducted him; My speech hastneth it self to come to the
ful-point of Musidorus his infortunes. For as we find the most pestilent
diseases do gather into themselves all the infirmity, with which the body
before was annoyed; so did his last misery embracein the extremity of itself
all his former mischiefs.

Arcadia, Arcadia was the place prepared to be the stage of his endless
overthrow. Arcadia was, (alas well might I say it is) the charmed circle, where
all his spirits for ever should be enchaunted. For here (and no where else) did
his infected eyes make his mind know, what power heavenly beauty has to throw
it down to hellish agonies. Here, here did he see the Arcadian Kings eldest
daughter, in whom he forthwith placed so all his hopes of joy, and joyful
parts of his heart, that he left in himself nothing, but a maze of longing,
and a dungeon of sorrow. But alas what can saying make them believe, whom
seeing cannot persuade? Those pains must be felt before they ca^ be
understood; no outward utterance can command a conceit. Such was as then the
state of the King, as it was no time by direct means to seek her. And such
was the state of his captiued will, as he could delay no time of seeking her.

that veil there may be hidden things to be esteemed. And if he might with
taking on a shepherds look cast up his eyes to the fairest Princess Nature in
that time created; the like, nay the same desire of mine need no more to be
disdained, or held for disgraceful. But now alas mine eyes wax dim, my
tongue begins to falter, and my heart to want force to help, either with the
feeling remembrance I have, in what heap of miseries the caitise Prince lay at
this time buried. Pardon therefore, most excellent Princess, if I cut off the
course of my dolorous tale, since if I be understood, I have said enough, for
the defense of my baseness; and for that which after might befall to that
pattern of ill fortune, (the matters are monstrous for my capacity) his
hateful destinies must best declare their own workmanship.

Plangus, and particularly of our casting away: which she (following my own
style) thus delicately brought forth. You have told (said she) Dorus, a
pretty tale; but you are much deceived in the latter end of it. For the prince
Musidorus with his cosen Pyrocles did both perish upon the coast of Laconia; as
a noble gentleman, called Plangus (who was well acquainted with the history)
did assure my father. O how that speech of hers did pour joys in my heart? o
blessed name (thought I) of mine, since thou have been in that tongue, and
passed through those lips, though I can never hope to approach them. As for
Pyrocles (said I) I will not deny it, but that he is perished: (which I said,
least sooner suspicion might arise of your being, then your self would have
it) and yet affirmed no lie unto her, since I only said, I would not deny it.
But for Musidorus (said I) I perceive indeed you have neither heard or read the
story of that unhappy Prince; for this was the very objection, which that
peerless Princess did make unto him, when he fought to appear such as he
was before her wisdom: and thus as I have read it fair written in the
certainty of my knowledge he might answer her, that indeed the ship wherein
he came, by a treason was perished, and therefore that Plangus might easily be
deceived: but that he himself was cast upon the coast of Laconia, where he was
taken up by a couple of shepherds, who lived in those days famous; for that
both loving one fair maid, they yet remained constant friends; one of whose
songs not long since was song before you by the shepherd Lamon, and brought by
them to a noble-mans house, near Mantinea, whose son had a little before his
marriage, been taken prisoner, and by the help of this Prince, Musidorus
(though naming himself by another name) was delivered. Now these
circumlocutions I did use, because of the one side I knew the Princess would
know well the parties I meant; and of the other, if I should have named
Strephon, Claius, Kalander, and Clitophon, perhaps it would have rubd some
conjecture into the heavy head of Mistress Mopsa.

easily by those parties be satisfied, that upon that wrack such a one was
taken up: and therefore that Plangus might well err, who knew not of anies
taking up again: that he that was so preserved, brought good tokens to be one
of the two, chief of that wracked company: which two since Plangus knew to be
Musidorus and Pyrocles, he must needs be one of them, although (as I said)
upon a foretaken vow, he was otherwise at that time called. Besides, the
Princess must needs judge, that no less then a Prince durst undertake such
an enterprise, which (though he might get the favor of the Princess) he
could never defend with less the^ a Princes power, against the force of
Arcadia. Lastly, (said he) for a certain demonstration, he presumed to show
unto the Princess a mark he had on his face, as I might (said I) show this of
my neck to the rare Mopsa: and withal, showed my neck to them both, where (as
you know) there is a red spotte, bearing figure (as they tell me) of a Lions
pawe, that she may ascertaine her self, that I am Menalcas brother. And so did
he, beseeching her to send some one she might trust, into Thessalia, secretly
to be advertised, whether the age, the complexion, and particularly that
notable sign, did not fully agree with this Prince Musidorus. Do you not know
further (said she, with a settled countenance, not accusing any kind of inward
motion) of that story. Alas no, (said I) for even here the Historiographer
stopped, saying, The rest belonged to Astrology. And therewith, thinking her
silent imaginations began to work upon somewhat, to mollify them (as the
nature of Music is to do) and withal, to show what kind of shepherd I was, I
took up my Harp, and sang these few verses.


Their pasture is fair hills of fruitless Love:
On barren sweetes they feed, and feeding sterue:
I wail their lotte, but will not other prove.
My sheepehooke is wanne hope, which all vpholdes:
My weeds, Desire, cut out in endless foldes.
What wool my sheep shall bear, whiles thus they live,
In you it is, you must the judgment give.
And then, partly to bring Mopsa again to the matter (lest she should too much
take heed to our discourses) but principally, if it were possible, to gather
some comfort out of her answeares, I kneeled down to the Princess, and
humbly besought her to move Mopsa in my behalf, that she would unarm her
heart of that steely resista^ce against the sweet blows of Love: that since all
her parts were decked with some particular orname^t; her face with beauty, her
head with wisdom, her eyes with maiestic, her countenance with gracefulnes,
her lips with louelines, her tongue with victory; that she would make her
heart the throne of pity, being the most excellent raiment of the most
excellent part.

Pamela, without show either of favor or disdain, either of heeding or
neglecting what I had said, turned her speech to Mopsa, and with such a voice
and action, as might show she spoke of a matter which little did concern her,
Take heed to your self (said she) Mopsa, for your shepherd can speak well:
but truly, if he do fully prove himself such as he faith, I mean, the
honest shepherd Menalchas his brother, and heir, I know no reason why you
should think scorn of him. Mopsa though (in my conscience) she were even
then far spent toward me, yet she answered her, that for all my queint
speeches, she would keep her honesty close enough: And that as for the high
way of matrimony, she would step never a foot further, till my master her
father had spoken the whole word him self, no she would not. But ever and anon
turning her muzzell toward me, she threw such a prospect upon me, as might
well have given a surset to any weak lovers stomach. But Lord what a fool am
I, to mingle that driuels speeches among my noble thoughts? but because she was
an Actor in this Tragedy, to give you a full knowlede, and to leave nothing
(that I can remember) vnrepeated.

Mopsa, but bending to Pamela: The word about it was, By force, not choice; and
still kneeling, besought the Princess that she would vouchsafe to give it
Mopsa, and with the blessedness of her hand to make acceptable unto her that
toye which I had found, followinge of late an acquaintance of mine at the
plowe. For (said I) as the earth was turned up, the plow-share lighted upon a
great stone: we pulled that up, and so found both that, and some other pretty
things which we had divided betwixt us.

Mopsa was benumbed with joy when the Princess gave it her: but in the
Princess I could find no apprehension of what I either said or did, but with
a calm carelessness letting each thing slide, justly as we do by their
speeches, who neither in matter nor person do any way belong unto us: which
kind of cold temper, mixed with that lightning of her natural majesty, is of
all others most terrible unto me: for yet if I found she contemned me, I would
desperately labor both in fortune and virtue to overcome it; if she only
misdoubted me, I were in heaven; for quickly I would bring sufficient
assurance: lastly, if she hated me, yet I should know what passion to deal
with; and either with infinitenes of desert I would take away the fuel from
that fire; or if nothing would serve, then I would give her my hart-bloud to
quench it. But this cruel quietness, neither retiring to mislike, nor
proceeding to favor; gracious, but gracious still after one manner; all her
courtesies having this engraven in them, that what is done, is for virtues
sake, not for the parties; ever keeping her course like the Sun, who neither
for our praises, nor curses, will spare or stop his horses. This (I say)
heauenlines of hers, (for how so ever my misery is I cannot but so entitle it)
is so impossible to reach unto, that I almost begin to submit my self to the
tyranny of despair, not knowing any way of persuasion, where wisdom seems
to be insensible. I have appeared to her eyes, like my self, by a device I
used with my master, persuading him, that we two might put on a certain rich
apparel I had provided, and so practice something thing on horsback before
Pamela, telling him, it was apparel I had gotten for playing well the part of
a King in a Tragedy at Athens: my horse indeed was it I had left at Menalcas
house, and Dametas got one by friendship out of the Princes stable. But how
soever I show, I am no base body, all I do is but to beat a rock and get
some.

CHAP. 4.
1 Basilius his hauking. 2 Gynecias hurt by Dametas ouerturning her coache. 3
Her jealousy over Zelmane. Philocleas 4 louepassions, 5 vow of chastity, 6
reuocation, 7 lamentation.

Dorus was about to tell further, Dametas (who came whistling, and counting
upon his fingers, how many load of hay his seuenteen fat oxen eat up in a
year) desired Zelmane from the King that she would come into the lodge, where
they stayed for her. Alas (said Dorus, taking his leave) the sum is this, that
you may well find you have beaten your sorrow against such a wall, which with
the force of rebound may well make your sorrow stronger. But Zelmane turning her
speech to Dametas, I shall grow (said she) skillful in country matters, if I
have often conference with your servant. In footh (answered Dametas with a
graceless skorne) the Lad may prove well enough, if he ouersoon think not too
well of himself, and will bear away that he hears of his elders. And
therewith as they walked to the other lodge, to make Zelmane find she might
have spent her time better with him, he began with a wild Method to run
over all the art of husbandry: especially employing his tongue about well
dunging of a field: while poor Zelmane yielded her ears to those tedious
strokes, not warding them so much as with any one answer, till they came to
Basilius, and Gynecia, who atte^ded for her in a coach to carry her abroad to
see some sportes prepared for her. Basilius and Gynecia sitting in the one
end, placed her at the other, with her left side to Philoclea. Zelmane was
moved in her mind, to have kissed their feet for the favor of so blessed a
seat: for the narrowness of the coach made them join from the foot to the
shoulders very close together; the truer touch whereof though it were barred by
their envious apparel, yet as a perfect Magnes, though put in an iuorie box,
will through the box send forth his embraced virtue to a beloved needle; so
this imparadised neighborhood made Zelmanes soul cleave unto her, both through
the iuory case of her body, and the apparel which did ouer-clowd it. All the
blood of Zelmanes body stirring in her, as wine will do when sugar is hastily
put into it, seeking to suck the sweetness of the beloved guest; her heart, like
a lion new imprisoned, seeing him that restraines his liberty, before the
grate; not panting, but striving violently (if it had been possible) to have
leapt into the lap of Philoclea. But Dametas, even then proceeding from being
master of a carte, to be doctor of a coach, not a little proud in himself,
that his whippe at that time guided the rule of Arcadia, drauc the coach (the
cover whereof was made with such ioints, that as they might (to avoid the
weather) pull it up close when they listed, so when they would they might put
each end down, and remain as discovered and open sighted as on horseback)
till upon the side of the forest they had both greyhounds, spaniels, and
hounds: whereof the first might seem the Lords, the second the Gentlemen, and
the last the Yeomen of dogs; a cast of Merlins there was besides, which
flying of a gallant height over certain bushes, would beat the birds (that
rose) down unto the bushes, as Faulcons will do wilde-foule over a river. But
the sport which for that day Basilius would principally show to Zelmane,
was the mountie at a Hearne, which getting up on his wagling wings with pain,
till he was come to some height, (as though the air next to the earth were not
fit for his great body to fly through) was now grown to diminish the fight of
himself, and to give example to great persons, that the higher they be, the
less they should show: when a Ierfaulcon was cast of after her, who straight
spying where the pray was, fixing her eye with desire, and guiding her wing by
her eye, used no more strength then industry. For as a good builder to a hie
tower will not make his stayre upright, but winding almost the full compass
about, that the steepnes be the more insensible: so she, seeing the towering of
her pursued chase, went circkling, and co^passing about, rising so with the
less sense of rising; and yet finding that way scantly serve the greedines of
her have, as an ambitious body will go far out of the direct way, to win to a
point of height which he desires; so would she (as it were) turn tail to the
Heron, and fly quite out another way, but all was to return in a higher
pitche; which once gotten, she would either beat with cruel assaults the
Heron, who now was driven to the best defense of force, since flight would not
serve; or else clasping with him, come down together, to be parted by the
ouerpartiall beholders.

Basilius showing to Zelmane, thus was the richesse of the time spent, and the
day deceassed before it was thought of, till night like a degenerating
successor made his departure the better remembered. And therefore (so
constrained) they willed Dametas to drive homeward, who (half sleeping, half
musing about the mending of a vine-presse) guided the horses so ill, that the
wheel coming over a great stub of a tree, it ouerturned the coach. Which
though it fell violently upon the side where Zelmane and Gynecia sat, yet for
Zelmanes part, she would have been glad of the fall, which made her bear the
sweet burden of Philoclea, but that she feared she might receive some hurt.
But indeed neither she did, nor any of the rest, by reason they kept their
arms and legs within the coach, saving Gynecia, who with the only bruze of
the fall had her shoulder put out of ioinet; which though by one of the
Faulkeners cunning, it was set well again, yet with much pain was she brought
to the lodge; and pain (fetching his ordinary companion, a sever with him)
drove her to entertain them both in her bed.

Philoclea, left this time of her sickness might give apt occasion to Zelmane,
whom she misdoubted. Therefore she called Philoclea to her, and though it were
late in the night, commanded her in her ear to go to the other lodge, and
send Miso to her, with whom she would speak, and she lie with her sister
Pamela. The mean while Gynecia kept Zelmane with her, because she would be
sure, she should be out of the lodge, before she licenced Zelmane. Philoclea
not skild in any thing better then obedience, went quietly down; and the Moon
then full (not thinking skorne to be a torche-bearer to such beauty) guided
her steps, whose motions bare a mind, which bare in it self far more
stirring motions. And alas (sweet Philoclea) how has my pen till now forgot
thy passions, since to thy memory principally all this long matter is
intended? pardon the flacknes to come to those woes, which having caused in
others, thou did feel in thy self.

Philoclea was in their degree of well doing, to whom the not knowing of evil
serves for a ground of virtue, and hold their inward powers in better form
with an unspotted simplicity, then many, who rather cu^ningly seek to know
what goodness is, then willingly take into themselves the following of it. But
as that sweet and simple breath of heavenly goodness, is the easier to be
altered, because it has not passed through the worldly wickedness, nor
feelingly found the evil, that evil caries with it; so now the Lady
Philoclea (whose eyes and senses had received nothing, but according as the
natural course of each thing required; which from the tender youth had
obediently lived under her parents behests, without framing out of her own will
the fore-chosing of any thing) when now she came to appoint, wherein her
judgment was to be practiced, in knowing faultines by his first tokens, she
was like a young faune, who coming in the wind of the hunters, does not know
whether it be a thing or no to be eschewed; whereof at this time she began to
get a costly experience. For after that Zelmane had a while lived in the lodge
with her, and that her only being a noble stranger had bred a kind of
heedfull attention; her coming to that lonely place (where she had no body but
her parents) a willingness of conversation; her wit and behavior, a liking and
silent admiration; at length the excellency of her natural gifts, joined with
the extreme shows she made of most devout honoring Philoclea, (carrying thus
in one person the only two ba^ds of good will, louelines and louingnes) brought
forth in her heart a yielding to a most frie^dly affection; which when it had
gotten so full possession of the keys of her mind, that it would receive no
message from her senses, without that affection were the interpreter; the^
straight grew an exceeding delight still to be with her, with an unmeasurable
liking of all that Zelmane did: matters being so turned in her, that where at
first, liking her manners did breed good-wil, now good-wil became the chief
cause of liking her manners: so that within a while Zelmane was not prized for
her demeanure, but the demeanure was prized because it was Zelmanes. The^
followed that most natural effect of co^forming ones self to that, which she
did like, and not only wishing to be herself such an other in all things,
but to ground an imitation upon so much an esteemed authority: so that the
next degree was to mark all Zelmanes doings, speeches, and fashions, and to
take them into herself, as a pattern of worthy proceeding. Which when once it
was enacted, not only by the comminaltie of Passions, but agreed unto by her
most noble Thoughts, and that by Reason it self (not yet experienced in the
issues of such matters) had granted his royal assent; then Friendship (a
diligent officer) took care to see the statute thoroughly observed. Then grew on
that not only she did imitate the sobernes of her countenance, the
gracefulness of her speech, but even their particular gestures: so that as
Zelmane did often eye her, she would often eye Zelmane; and as Zelmanes eyes
would deliver a submissiue, but vehement desire in their look, she, though as
yet she had not the desire in her, yet should her eyes answer in like pearcing
kindness of a look. Zelmane as much as Gynecias jealousy would suffer,
desired to be near Philoclea; Philoclea, as much as Gynecias jealousy would
suffer, desired to be near Zelmane. If Zelmane took her hand, and softly
strained it, she also (thinking the knots of friendship ought to be mutual)
would (with a sweet fastnes) show she was loath to part from it. And if Zelmane
sighed, she would sigh also; when Zelmane was sad, she deemed it wisdom, and
therefore she would be sad too. Zelmanes la^guishing cou^tena^ce with croft
arms, and sometimes cast-vp eyes, she thought to have an excellent grace: and
therefore she also willingly put on the same countenance: til at the last
(poor soul, ere she were aware) she accepted not only the band, but the
service; not only the sign, but the passion signified. For whether it were,
that her wit in co^tinua^ce did find, that Zelmanes friendship was full of
impatient desire, having more the^ ordinary limits, and therefore she was
content to second Zelmane, though herself knew not the limits; or that in
truth, true-loue (well considered) have an infectiue power. At last she fell in
acquaintance with loves harbinger, wishing. First she would wish, that they two
might live all their lives together, like two of Dianas Nymphs. But that wish,
she thought not sufficient, because she knew, there would be more Nymphs
besides them, who also would have their part in Zelmane. The^ would she wish,
that she were her sister, that such a natural band might make her more special
to her. But against that, she considered, that though being her sister, if she
happened to be married, she should be robbed of her. Then grown bolder, she
would wish either her self, or Zelmane a man, that there might succeed a
blessed marriage betwixt them. But when that wish had once displaied his
ensign in her mind, then followed whole squadrons of longings, that so it
might be, with a maine battle of mislikings, and repynings against their
creation, that so it was not. Then dreams by night began to bring more unto
her, then she durst wish by day, whereout making did make her know herself the
better by the image of those fancies. But as some diseases when they are easy
to be cured, they are hard to be known, but when they grow easy to be known,
they are almost impossible to be cured: so the sweet Philoclea, while she
might prevent it, she did not feel it, now she felt it, when it was past
preventing; like a river, no rampires being built against it, till already it
have ouerflowed. For now indeed, Love pulled of his mask, and showed his face
unto her, and told her plainly, that she was his prisoner. Then needed she no
more paint her face with passions; for passions shone through her face; Then her
rosy coulor was often increased with extraordinary blushing: and so another
time, perfect whiteness ascended to a degree of palenesse; now hot, then cold,
desiring she knew not what, nor how, if she knew what. Then her mind (though
too late) by the smart was brought to think of the disease, and her own
proof taught her to know her mothers mind; which (as no error gives so strong
assault, as that which comes armed in the authority of a parent, so) greatly
fortified her desires, to see, that her mother had the like desires. And the
more jealous her mother was, the more she thought the Jewel precious, which
was with so many looks guarded. But that prevailing so far, as to keep the two
lovers from private conference, then began she to feel the sweetness of a
lovers solitariness, when freely with words and gestures, as if Zelmane were
present, she might give passage to her thoughts, and so as it were utter out
some smoke of those flames, wherewith else she was not only burned, but
smothered. As this night, that going from the one lodge to the other by her
mothers commandment, with doleful gestures and uncertain paces, she did
willingly accept the times offer, to be a while alone: so that going a little
aside into the wood; where many times before she had delighted to walk, her
eyes were saluted with a tuft of trees, so close set together, as with the
shade the moon gave through it, it might breed a fearful kind of devotion
to look upon it. But true thoughts of love banish all vain fancy of
superstition. Full well she did both remember and like the place; for there had
she often with their shade beguiled Phoebus of looking upon her: There had she
enjoyed her self often, while she was mistress of her self, and had no other
thoughts, but such as might arise out of quiet senses.

Siluan gods: which she finding there a few days before Zelmanes coming, had
written these words upon it, as a testimony of her mind, against the suspicion
her captivity made her think she lived in. The writing was this.

YOu living powers enclosed in stately shrine
Of growing trees; you rural Gods that wield
Your scepters here, if to your ears divine
A voice may come, which troubled soul does yield:
This vow receive, this vow o Gods maintain;
My virgin life no spotted thought shall stain.
Thou purest stone, whose pureness does present
My purest mind; whose temper hard does show
My tempreed heart; by thee my promise sent
Unto my self let after-liuers know.
No fancy mine, nor others wrong suspect
Make me, o virtuous Shame, thy laws neglect.
O Chastity, the chief of heavenly lights,
Which makst us most immortal shape to wear,
Hold thou my heart, establish thou my sprights:
To only thee my constant course I bear.
Till spotless soul unto thy bosom fly,
Such life to lead, such death I vow to dye.
But now that her memory served as an accuser of

MY words, in hope to blaze my steadfast mind,
This marble chose, as of like temper known:
But lo, my words defaste, my fancies blind,
Blots to the stone, shame to my self I find:
And witness am, how ill agree in one,
A woman's hand with constant marble stone.
My words full weak, the marble full of might;
My words in store, the marble all alone;
My words black ink, the marble kindly white;
My words unseen, the marble still in sight,
May witness bear, how ill agree in one,
A woman's hand,with constant marble stone.
Diana (said she) I would either the cloud that now hides the light of my
virtue would as easily pass away, as you will quickly overcome this let; or
else that you were for ever thus darkened, to serve for an excuse of my
outrageous folly. Then looking to the stars, which had perfitly as then
beautified the clear sky: My parents (said she) have told me, that in these
fair heavenly bodies, there are great hidden deities, which have their working
in the ebbing and flowing of our estates. If it be so, then (O you Stars) judge
rightly of me, and if I have with wicked intent made my self a pray to fancy,
or if by any idle lusts I framed my heart fit for such an impression, then let
this plague daily increase in me, till my name be made odious to womankind.
But if extreme and irresistable violence have oppressed me, who will ever do
any of you sacrifice (o you Stars) if you do not succor me. No, no, you will
not help me. No, no, you cannot help me: Sin must be the mother, and shame
the daughter of my affection. And yet are these but childish objections (simple
Philoclea) it is the impossibility that does torment me: for, unlawful
desires are punished after the effect of enjoying; but impossible desires are
punished in the desire it self. O then, o ten times unhappy that I am,
since where in all other hope kindles love; in me despair should be the
bellows of my affection: and of all despaires the most miserable, which is
drawn from impossibility. The most covetous man longs not to get riches out
of a ground which never can bear any thing; Why? because it is impossible. The
most ambitious wight vexes not his wits to clime into heaven; Why? because
it is impossible. Alas then, o Love, why do thou in thy beautiful sampler
set such a work for my Desire to take out, which is as much impossible? And
yet alas, why do I thus condemn my Fortune, before I hear what she can say
for her self? What do I, silly wench, know what Love has prepared for me?
Do I not see my mother, as well, at left as furiously as my self, love
Zelmane? And should I be wiser then my mother? Either she sees a possibility
in that which I think impossible, or else impossible loves need not misbecome
me. And do I not see Zelmane (who does not think a thought which is not first
wayed by wisdom and virtue) does not she vouchsafe to love me with like
ardour? I see it, her eyes dep ose it to be true; what then? and if she can
love poor me, shall I think scorn to love such a woman as Zelmane? Away then
all vain examinations of why and how. Thou love me, excellent Zelmane, and I
love thee: and with that, embrasing the very ground whereon she lay, she said
to her self (for even to her self she was ashamed to speak it out in words)
O my Zelmane, govern and direct me: for I am wholly given over unto thee.

CHAP. 5.
1 The bedfellow communication of Philoclea and Pamela. 2 Pamelas narration of
her shepheardes making love, 3 of Dorus and Dametas horsemanshippe, 4 of his
hot pursuit, and her cold acceptance. 5 His letter. 6 Her relenting, 7 and
Philocleas sole complaint.

Dametas and Miso (who were round about to seek her, understanding she was to
come to their lodge that night) came hard by her; Dametas saying, That he would
not deal in other bodies matters; but for his part, he did not like that
maids should once stir out of their fathers houses, but if it were to milk
a cow, or save a chicken from a kites foot, or some such other matter of
importance. And Miso swearing that if it were her daughter Mopsa, she would
give her a lesson for walking so late, that should make her keep within doors
for one fortnight. But their iangling made Philoclea rise, and pretending as
though she had done it but to sport with them, went with them (after she had
willed Miso to wait upon her mother) to the lodge; where (being now accustomed
by her parents discipline, as well as her sister, to serve her self) she went
alone up to Pamelas chamber: where meaning to delight her eyes, and joy her
thoughts with the sweet conversation of her beloved sister, she found her
(though it were in the time that the wings of night does blow sleep most
willingly into mortal creatures) sitting in a chair, lying backward, with her
head almost over the back of it, and looking upon a wax-ca^dle which burnt
before her; in one hand holding a letter, in the other her hand-kerchiefe,
which had lately dronk up the tears of her eyes, leaving in steed of them,
crimsen circles, like read flakes in the element, when the weather is hottest.
Which Philoclea finding (for her eyes had learned to know the badges of
sorrows) she earnestly entreated to know the cause thereof, that either she
might comfort, or accompany her doleful humor. But Pamela, rather seeming
sorry that she had perceived so much, then willing to open any further, O my
Pamela (said Philoclea) who are to me a sister in nature, a mother in counsel,
a Princess by the law of our country, and which name (me think) of all other
is the dearest, a friend by my choice and your favor, what means this
banishing me from your counsels? Do you love your sorrow so well, as to grudge
me part of it? Or do you think I shall not love a sad Pamela, so well as a
joyful? Or be my ears unworthy, or my tongue suspected? What is it (my
sister) that you should conceal from your sister, yea and servant Philoclea?
These words wanne no further of Pamela, but that telling her they might talk
better as they lay together, they impouerished their clothes to inriche their
bed, which for that night might well scorn the shrine of Venus: and there
cherishing one another with dear, though chaste embracements; with sweet,
though cold kisses; it might seem that Love was come to play him there without
darte; or that weerie of his own fires, he was there to refreshe himself
between their sweetebreathing lips. But Philoclea earnestly again entreated
Pamela to open her grief; who (drawing the curtain, that the candle might not
complain of her blushing) was ready to speak: but the breath almost formed
into words, was again stopped by her, and turned into sighs. But at last, I
pray you (said she) sweet Philoclea, let us talk of some other thing: and
tell me whether you did ever see any thing so amended as our Pastoral sports
be, since that Dorus came hither? O Love, how far thou feast with blind eyes?
Philoclea had straight found her, and therefore to draw out more, In deed (said
she) I have often wondered to my self how such excelle^cies could be in so
mean a person; but belike Fortune was afraid to lay her treasures, where they
should be stained with so many perfections: only I marvel how he can frame
himself to hide so rare gifts under such a block as Dametas. Ah (said Pamela)
if you knew the cause: but no more do I neither; and to say the truth: but
Lord, how are we fallen to talk of this fellow? and yet indeed if you were
sometimes with me to mark him, while Dametas reads his rusticke lecture unto
him (how to feed his beasts before noone, where to shade them in the extreme
heat, how to make the manger hansome for his oxen, when to use the goade, and
when the voice: giving him rules of a heardma^, though he pretended to make him
a shepherd) to see all the while with what a grace (which seems to set a
crown upon his base estate) he can descend to those poor matters, certainly
you would: but to what serves this? no doubt we were better sleep then talk
of these idle matters. Ah my Pamela (said Philoclea) I have caught you, the
constantnes of your wit was not wont to bring forth such disiointed speeches:
you love, dissemble no further. It is true (said Pamela) now you have it; and
with less adoo should, if my heart could have thought those words suitable for
my mouth. But indeed (my Philoclea) take heed: for I think Virtue it self is
no armor of proof against affection. Therefore learn by my example. Alas
thought Philoclea to her self, your sheeres come to late to clip the birds
wings that already is flowne away.

But then Pamela being once set in the stream of her Mopsa, and saying to
Mopsa what soever he would have her know: and in how passionate manner he had
told his own tale in a third person, making poor Mopsa believe, that it was a
matter fallen out many ages before. And in the end, because you shall know my
tears come not, neither of repentance nor misery, who think you, is my Dorus
fallen out to be? even the Prince, Musidorus, famous over all Asia, for his
heroical enterprises, of whom you remember how much good the stranger Plangus
told my father; he not being drowned (as Plangus thought) though his cousin
Pyrocles indeed perished. Ah my sister, if you had heard his words, or seen
his gestures, when he made me know what, and to whom his love was, you would
have matched in your self (those two rarely matched together) pity and
delight. Tell me dear sister (for the gods are my witnesses I desire to do
virtuously) can I without the detestable stain of ungratefulness abstain
from loving him, who (far exceeding the beautifulness of his shape with the
beautifulness of his mind, and the greatness of his estate with the
greatness of his acts) is content so to abase him self, as to become Dametas
servant for my sake? you will say, but how know I him to be Musidorus, since
the handmaid of wisdom is slow belief? That consideration did not want in me,
for the nature of desire it self is no easier to receive belief, then it is
hard to ground belief. For as desire is glad to embrace the first show of
comfort, so is desire desirous of perfect assurance: and that have I had of
him, not only by necessary arguments to any of common sense, but by sufficient
demonstrations. Lastly he would have me send to Thessalia: but truly I am not
as now in mind to do my honorable Love so much wrong, as so far to suspect him:
yet poor soul knows he no other, but that I do both suspect, neglect, yea
and detest him. For every day he finds one way or other to set forth him self
unto me, but all are rewarded with like coldness of acceptance.

Dametas had furnished themselves very richly to run at the ring before me. O
how mad a sight it was to see Dametas, like rich Tissew furd with lamb skins?
But o how well it did with Dorus, to see with what a grace he presented him
self before me on horseback, making majesty wait upon humblenes? how at the
first, standing still with his eyes bent upon me, as though his motions were
chained to my look, he so staide till I caused Mopsa bid him do something
upon his horse: which no sooner said, but (with a kind rather of quick
gesture, then show of violence) you might see him come toward me, beating the
ground in so due time, as no dance can observe better measure. If you remember
the ship we saw once, when the Sea went hie upon the coast of Argos; so went
the beast: But he (as if Ce^taurlike he had been one piece with the horse) was
no more moved, then one is with the going of his own legs: and in effect so
did he command him, as his own limbs, for though he had both spurs and
wande, they seemed rather marks of soueraintie, then instruments of
punishment; his hand and leg (with most pleasing grace) comma^ding without
threatening, and rather remembering then chastising, at lest if sometimes he did,
it was so stolen, as neither our eyes could discern it, nor the horse with any
chance did complain of it, he ever going so just with the horse, either
forth right, or turning, that it seemed as he borrowed the horses body, so he
lent the horse his mind: in the turning one might perceive the bridle-hand
something gently stir, but indeed so gently, as it did rather distill virtue,
then use violence. Him self (which me thinks is strange) showing at one
instant both steadines and nimblenes; sometimes making him turn close to the
ground, like a cat, when scratchingly she wheels about after a mouse:
sometimes with a little more rising before, now like a Raven leaping from ridge
to ridge, then like one of Dametas kiddes bound over the hillocks: and all so
done, as neither the lusty kind showed any roughness, nor the easier any
idleness: but still like a well obeyed master, whose beck is enough for a
discipline, ever concluding each thing he did with his face to me-wards, as if
thence came not only the beginning, but ending of his motions. The sport was
to see Dametas, how he was tossed from the sadle to the mane of the horse, and
thence to the ground, giving his gay apparel almost as foul an outside, as it
had an inside. But as before he had ever said, he wanted but horse and apparel
to be as brave a courtier as the best, so now bruised with proof, he proclaimed
it a folly for a man of wisdom, to put himself under the tuition of a beast;
so as Dorus was feign alone to take the Ringe. Wherein truly at lest my
womanish eyes could not discern, but that taking his staff from his thigh,
the descending it a little down, the getting of it up into the rest, the
letting of the point fall, and taking the ring was but all one motion, at lest
(if they were diverse motions) they did so stealingly slip one into another,
as the latter part was ever in hand, before the eye could discern the former
was ended. Indeed Dametas found fault that he showed no more strength in
shaking of his staff: but to my conceit the fine cleernes of bearing it was
exceeding delightful.

more I found reason to like him, the more I set all the strength of mind to
suppress it, or at lest to conceal it. Indeed I must confess, as some
Physicians have told me, that when one is cold outwardly, he is not inwardly;
so truly the cold ashes laid upon my fire, did not take the nature of fire
from it. Full often has my breast swollen with keeping my sighs imprisoned;
full often have the tears, I drove back from mine eyes, turned back to
drown my heart. But alas what did that help poor Dorus? whose eyes (being
his diligent intelligencers) could carry unto him no other news, but
discomfortable. I think no day past, but by some on invention he would appear
unto me to testify his love. One time he daunced the Matachine dance in
armor (O with what a graceful dexterity?) I think to make me see, that he
had been brought up in such exercises: an other time he persuaded his master
(to make my time seem shorter) in manner of a Dialogue, to play Priamus while
he plaide Paris. Think (sweet Philoclea) what a Priamus we had: but truly, my
Paris was a Paris, and more then a Paris: who while in a savage apparel, with
naked neck, arms, and legs, he made love to Ocnone, you might well see by
his changed countenance, and true tears, that he felt the part he playde.
Tell me (sweet Philoclea) did you ever see such a shepherd? tell me, did you
ever hear of such a Prince? And then tell me, if a small or unworthy assault
have conquered me. Truly I would hate my life, if I thought vanity led me.
But since my parents deal so cruelly with me, it is time for me to trust
something to my own judgment. Yet hitherto have my looks been as I told you,
which continuing after many of these his fruitles trials, have wrought such
change in him, as I tell you true (with that word she laid her hand upon her
quaking side) I do not a little fear him. See what a letter this is (then
drew she the curtain and took the letter from under the pillowe) which to
day (with an afflicted humbleness) he delivered me, pretending before Mopsa,
that I should read it unto her, to mollify (forsooth) her iron stomach; with
that she read the letter containing thus much.

to whom I am bound for bringing me to your presence; and let me remember him,
who (since he is yours, how mean so ever it be) it is reason you have an
account of him. The wretch (yet your wretch) though with languishing steps
runs fast to his grave, and will you suffer a temple (how poorely-built
soever, but yet a temple of your deity) to be rased? But he dies: it is most
true, he dies; and he in whom you live, to obey you, dies. Whereof though he
plain, he does not complain: for it is a harm, but no wrong, which he has
received. He dies, because in woeful language all his senses tell him', that
such is your pleasure: for since you will not that he live, alas, alas, what
follows, what follows of the most ruined Dorus, but his end? End then,
evil destinyed Dorus, end; and end thou woeful letter, end; for it suffiseth
her wisdom to know, that her heavenly will shall be accomplished.

O my Philoclea, is he a person to write these Pamela (said Philoclea) leave
sorrow. The river of your tears will soon loose his fountain; it is in your
hand as well to stitch up his life again, as it was before to rent it. And so
(though with self-grieued mind) she comforted her sister, till sleep came to
bath himself in Pamelaes fair weeping eyes.

Philoclea found, wringing her hands, O me (said she) indeed the only subject
of the destinies displeasure, whose greatest fortunatenes is more unfortunate,
then my sisters greatest vnfortunatenesse. Alas she weeps because she would
be no sooner happy; I weep because I can never be happy; her tears flow from
pity; mine from being too far lower then the reach of pity. Yet do I not
envy thee, dear Pamela, I do not envy thee: only I could wish that being thy
sister in nature, I were not so far off a kin in fortune.

CHAP. 6.
1 The Ladies vprising, 2 and interrogatories to Dorus concerning Pyrocles and
Euarchus. 3 His historiologie of Euarchus kingly excellencies, 4 his entry on a
most corrupt estate, 5 and reformation thereof by royal arts and actions. 6
His, and Dorilaus crosse-mariage to each others sister, having by each a son;
their mutual defense, with Dorilaus death.

the two sweet sleeping sisters awaked from dreams, which flattered them with
more comfort, then their waking could, or would consent unto. For then they
were called up by Miso; who having been with Gynccia, had received
commandment to be continually with her daughters, and particularly not to let
Zelmane and Philoclea have any private co^fere^ce, but that she should be
present to hear what passed. But Miso having now her authority increased,
came with skowling eyes to deliver a slauering good morrow to the two Ladies,
telling them, it was a shame for them to mar their complexions, yea and
conditions to, with long lying a bed: and that, when she was of their age,
she trowed, she would have made a handkerchiefe by that time of the day. The
two sweet Princes with a smiling silence answered her entertainment, and
obeying her direction, covered their dainty beauties with the glad clothes.
But as soon as Pamela was ready (and sooner she was then her sister) the
agony of Dorus giving a fit to herself, which the words of his letter (lively
imprinted in her mind) still remembered her of, she called to Mopsa, and willed
her to fetch Dorus to speak with her: because (she said) she woule take
further judgment of him, before she would move Dametas to grant her in
marriage unto him. Mopsa (as glad as of sweete-meate to go of such an arrant)
quickly returned with Dorus to Pamela, who intended both by speaking with him
to give some comfort to his passionate heart, and withal to hear some part of
his life past; which although fame had already delivered unto her, yet she
desired in more particular certainties to have it from so beloved an historian.
Yet the sweetness of virtues disposition jealous, even over it self, suffered
her not to enter abruptly into questions of Musidorus (whom she was half
ashamed she did love so well, and more then half sorry she could love no
better) but thought best first to make her talk arise of Pyrocles, and his
virtuous father: which thus she did.

Dorus (said she) you told me the last day, that Plangus was deceived in that
he affirmed the Prince Musidorus was drowned: but withal, you confessed his
cosen Pyrocles perished; of whom certainly in that age there was a great loss,
since (as I have heard) he was a young Prince, of who^ al me^ expected as much,
as man's power could bring forth, and yet virtue promised for him, their
expectation should not be deceived. Most excellent Lady (said Dorus) no
expectation in others, nor hope in himself could aspire to a higher mark, the^
to be thought worthy to be praised by your judgment, and made worthy to be
praised by your mouth. But most sure it is, that as his fame could by no means
get so sweet and noble an air to fly in, as in your breath, so could not you
(leaving, your self aside) find in the world a fitter subject of
commendation; as noble, as a long succession of royal ancestors, famous, and
famous of victories could make him: of shape most lovely, and yet of mind more
lovely; valiant, courteous, wise, what should I say more? sweet Pyrocles,
excellent Pyrocles, what can my words but wrong thy perfections, which I would
to God in some small measure thou had bequethed to him that ever must have
thy virtues in admiration; that masked at least in them, I might have found
some more gracious acceptance? with that he imprisoned his look for a while
upon Mopsa, who thereupon fell into a very wide smiling. Truly (said Pamela)
Dorus I like well your mind, that can raise it self out of so base a fortune,
as yours is, to think of the imitating so excellent a Prince, as Pyrocles was.
Who shootes at the midday Sun, though he be sure he shall never hit the
mark; yet as sure he is, he shall shoot higher, then who aims but at a bush.
But I pray you Dorus (said she) tell me (since I perceive you are well
acquainted with that story) what Prince was that Euarchus father to Pyrocles,
of whom so much fame goes, for his rightly royal virtues, or by what ways he
got that opinion. And then so descend to the causes of his sending first away
from him, and then to him for that excellent son of his, with the discourse
of his life and loss: and therein you may (if you list) say something of that
same Musidorus his cosen, because, they going together, the story of Pyrocles
(which I only desire) may be the better understood.

Incomparable Lady (said he) your commandment Huarchus, he was (at this time
you speak off) King of Macedon, a kingdom, which in elder time had such a
soueraintie over all the provinces of Greece, that eue^ the particular kings
therein did acknowledge (with more or less degrees of homage) some kind of
fealty thereunto: as among the rest, even this now most noble (and by you
ennobled) kingdom of Arcadia. But he, when he came to his crown finding by
his later ancestors either negligence, or misfortune, that in some ages many of
those duties had bin intermitted, would never stir up old titles (how
apparent soever) whereby the public peace (with the loss of many not guilty
souls) should be broken; but contenting himself to guide that ship, wherein
the heavens had placed him, showed no less magnanimity in daungerlesse
despising, then others in dangerous affecting the multiplying of kingdoms:
for the earth has since borne enough bleeding witnesses, that it was no want of
true courage. Who as he was most wise to see what was best, and most just in
the perfourming what he saw, and temperate in abstaining from any thing any way
contrary: so think I, no thought can imagine a greater heart to see and
contemn danger, where danger would offer to make any wrongful threatening
upon him. A Prince, that indeed especially measured his greatness by his
goodness: and if for any thing he loved greatness, it was, because therein he
might exercise his goodness. A Prince of a goodly aspect, and the more goodly by
a grave majesty, wherewith his mind did deck his outward graces; strong of
body, and so much the stronger, as he by a well disciplined exercise taught it
both to do, and suffer. Of age, so as he was about fifty years when his
Nephew Musidorus took on such shepherdish apparel for the love of the worlds
paragon, as I now wear.

ring those that were partially theirs, and oppressing them that would defend
their liberty against them had brought in (by a more felt then seen manner of
proceeding) the worst kind of Oligarchie; that is, when men are governed in
deed by a few, and yet are not taught to know what those few be, to whom
they should obey. For they having the power of kings, but not the nature of
kings, used the authority as men do their farms, of which they see within a
year they shall go out: making the Kings sword strike whom they hated, the
Kings purse reward whom they loved: and (which is worst of all) making the
Royal countenance serve to undermine the Royal soueraintie. For the Subjects
could taste no sweeter fruits of having a King, then grievous taxations to
serve vain purposes; Laws made rather to find faults, then to prevent
faults: the Court of a Prince rather deemed as a privileged place of
unbridled licentiousnes, then as a biding of him, who as a father, should give
a fatherly example unto his people. Hence grew a very dissolution of all
estates, while the great men (by the nature of ambition never satisfied) grew
factious among themselves: and the underlings, glad indeed to be underlings to
them they hated left, to preserve them from such they hated most. Men of virtue
suppressed, lest their shining should discover the others filthiness; and at
length virtue it self almost forgotten, when it had no hopeful end whereunto
to be directed; old men long nusled in corruption, scorning them that would
seek reformation; young men very fault-finding, but very faulty: and so to
newfanglenes both of manners, apparel, and each thing else, by the custom of
selfe-guiltie evil, glad to change though often for a worse; merchandise abused,
and so towns decayed for want of just and natural liberty; offices, even of
judging souls, sold; public defenses neglected; and in sum, (left too
long I trouble you) all awrie, and (which wried it to the most wrie course of
all) wit abused, rather to feign reason why it should be amiss, then how it
should be amended.

Enarchus find his estate, when he took upon him the regiment: which by
reason of the long stream of abuse, he was forced to establish by some even
extreme severity, not so much for the very faults themselves, (which he
rather sought to prevent then to punish) as for the faulty ones; who strong,
even in their faults, scorned his youth, and could not learn to disggest,
that the man which they so long had used to mask their own appetites, should
now be the reducer of them into order. But so soon as some few (but in deed
notable) examples, had thundered a duty into the subjects hearts, he soon
showed, no baseness of suspicion, nor the basest baseness of envy, could any
whit rule such a Ruler. But then shined forth indeed all love among them,
when an awful fear, engendered by justice, did make that love most lovely: his
first and principal care being to appear unto his people, such as he would
have them be, and to be such as he appeared; making his life the example of his
laws, as it were; his actions arising out of his deeds. So that within small
time, he wanne a singular love in his people, and engrassed singular
confidence. For how could they choose but love him, whom they found so truly to
love the^? He even in reason disdayning, that they that have charge of beasts,
should love their charge, and care for them; and that he that was to govern
the most excellent creature, should not love so noble a charge. And therefore,
where most Princes (seduced by flattery to build upon false grounds of
government) make themselves (as it were) another thing from the people; and so
count it gain what they can get from them: and (as if it were two
counter-ballances, that their estate goes hiest when the people goes lowest) by
a fallacy of argument thinking themselves most Kings, when the subject is
most basely subjected: he contrariwise, virtuously and wisely acknowledgeing,
that he with his people made all but one politic body, whereof himself was
the head; even so cared for them, as he would for his own limbs: never
restrayning their liberty, without it stretched to licenciousnes, norpulling
from them their goods, which they found were not employed to the purchase of a
greater good: but in all his actions showing a delight to their welfare, brought
that to pass, that while by force he took nothing, by their love he had all.
In sum (peerless Princess) I might as easily set down the whole Art of
government, as to lay before your eyes the picture of his proceedings. But in
such forte he flourished in the sweet comfort of doing much good, when by an
action of leaving his Country, he was forced to bring forth his virtue of
magnanimity, as before he had done of justice.

Dorilaus, Prince of Thessalia, not so much to make a friendship, as to co^firm
the friendship betwixt their posterity, which between them, by the likeness of
virtue, had been long before made: for certainly, Dorilaus could need no
amplifiers mouth for the highest point of praise. Who has not head (said
Pamela) of the valiant, wife, and just Dorilaus, whose unripe death does yet
(so many years since) draw tears from virtuous eyes?. And indeed, my father
is wont to speak of nothing with greater admiration, then of the notable
friendship (a rare thing in Princes, more rare between Princes) that so
holily was observed to the last, of those two excellent men. But (said she) go
on I pray you. Dorilaus (said he) having married his sister, had his marriage in
short time blessed (for so are folk wont to say, how unhappy soever the
children after grow) with a son, whom they named Musidorus: of whom I must
needs first speak before I come to Pyrocles; because as he was borne first,
so upon his occasion grew (as I may say accidentally) the others birth. For
scarcely was Musidorus made partaker of this oft-blinding light, when there
were found numbers of Southsayers, who affirmed strange and incredible things
should be performed by that child; whether the heavens at that time listed to
play with ignorant mankind, or that flattery be so presumptuous, as even at
times to borow the face of Divinity. But certainly, so did the boldness of
their affirmation accompany the greatness of what they did affirm (even
descending to particularities, what kingdoms he should overcome) that the King
of Phrygia (who ouer-superstitiously thought him self touched in the matter)
sought by force to destroy the infant, to prevent his after-expectations:
because a skilful man (having compared his nativity with the child) so told
him. Foolish man, either vainly fearing what was not to be feared, or not
considering, that if it were a work of the superior powers, the heavens at
length are never children. But so he did, and by the aid of the Kings of Lydia
and Crete (ioining together their armies) invaded Thessalia, and brought
Dorilaus to some behind-hand of fortune, when his faithful friend and brother
Euarchus came so mightily to his succor, that with some enterchanging changes
of fortune, they begat of a just war, the best child, peace. In which time
Euarchus made a cross marriage also with Dorilaus his sister, and shortly left
her with child of the famous Pyrocles, driven to return to the defense of his
own country, which in his absence (helped with some of the ill contented
nobility) the mighty King of Thrace, and his brother, King of Pannonia, had
invaded. The success of those wars was too notable to be unknown to your
ears, to which it seems all worthy same has glory to come unto. But there
was Dorilaus (valiantly requiting his friends help) in a great battle
deprived of his life, his obsequies being no more sole^nised by the tears of
his partakers, th^e the blood of his enemies; with so pearcing a sorrow to the
constant heart of Euarchus, that the news of his sons birth could lighten his
countenance with no show of comfort, although all the comfort that might be in a
child, truth it self in him forthwith delivered. For what fortune only
southsayers foretold of Musidorus, that all men might see prognosticated in
Pyrocles; both Heavens and Earth giving tokens of the coming forth of an
Heroical virtue. The senate house of the planets was at no time to set, for
the decreeing of perfection in a man, as at that time all folks skilful therein
did acknowledge: only love was threatened, and promised to him, and so to his
cousin, as both the tempest and haven of their best years. But as death may
have prevented Pyrocles, so unworthiness must be the death to Musidorus.

CHAP. 7.
1 The education of Pyrocles and Musidorus. 2 Their friendship, 3 navigations, 4
and first shipwreck. 5 The strange gratitude of two brothers to them, upon
their liberality to those two brothers.

Pyrocles (shortly after her childe-birth) dying, was cause that Euarchus
recommended the care of his only son to his sister; doing it the rather because
the war continued in cruel heat, betwixt him and those evil neighbors of
his. In which mean time those young Princes (the only comforters of that
virtuous widow) grew on so, that Pyrocles taught admiration to the hardest
conceats: Musidorus (perchance because among his subjects) exceedingly
beloved: and by the good order of Euarchus (well performed by his sister) they
were so brought up, that all the sparks of virtue, which nature had kindled in
the^, were so blown to give forth their uttermost heat that justly it may be
affirmed, they enflamed the affections of all that knew the^. For almost before
they could perfectly speak, they began to receive co^ceits not unworthy of the
best speakers: excellent devises being used, to make even their sports
profitable; images of battles, and fortificatio^s being then delivered to
their memory, which after, their stronger judgments might dispens, the delight
of tales being converted to the knowledge of all the stories of worthy Princes,
both to move them to do nobly, and teach them how to do nobly; the beauty of
virtue still being set before their eyes, and that taught them with far more
diligent care, then Gra^matical rules, their bodies exercised in all abilities,
both of doing and suffering, and their minds acquainted by degrees with
dangers; and in sum, all bent to the making up of princely minds: no servile
fear used toward them, nor any other violent restraint, but still as to
Princes: so that a habit of commanding was naturalized in them, and therefore
the farther from Tyranny: Nature having done so much for them in nothing, as
that it made them Lords of truth, whereon all the other goods were builded.

Among which I nothing so much delight to recount, Musidorus being elder by
three or four years, it was neither so great a difference in age as did take
away the delight in society, and yet by the difference there was taken away
the occasion of childish contentions; till they had both past over the humor
of such contentions. For Pyrocles bare reverence full of love to Musidorus, and
Musidorus had a delight full of love in Pyrocles. Musidorus, what he had
learned either for body or mind, would teach it to Pyrocles; and Pyrocles was
so glad to learn of none, as of Musidorus: till Pyrocles, being come to
sixtene years of age, he seemed so to ouerrun his age in growth, strength, and
al things following it, that not Musidorus, no nor any man living (I think)
could perform any action, either on horse, or foot, more strongly, or deliver
that strength more nimbly, or become the delivery more gracefully, or employ al
more virtuously. Which may well seem wonderful: but wonders are no wonders in
a wonderful subject.

Euarchus, after so many years war, and the conquest of all Pannonia, and
almost Thrace, had now brought the conclusion of al to the siege of Bizantium
(to the raising of which siege great forces were made) they would needs fall to
the practice of those virtues, which they before learned. And therefore the
mother of Musidorus nobly yielding over her own affects to her childrens good
(for a mother she was in effect to the^ both) the rather that they might help
her beloved brother, they brake of all delays; which Musidorus for his part
thought already had devoured too much of his good time, but that he had once
granted a boon (before he knew what it was) to his dear friend Pyrocles;
that he would never seek the adventures of arms, until he might go with him:
which having fast bound his heart (a true slave to faith) he had bid a tedious
delay of following his own humor for his friends sake, till now finding him
able every way to go through with that kind of life, he was as desirous for his
sake, as for his own, to enter into it. So therefore preparing a navy, that
they might go like themselves, and not only bring the comfort of their
presence, but of their power to their dear parent Euarchus, they recommended
themselves to the Sea, leaving the shore of Thessalia full of tears and vows;
and were received thereon with so smooth and smiling a face, as if Neptune had
as then learned falsely to fawn on Princes. The wind was like a servant,
waiting behind them so just, that they might fill the sails as they listed;
and the best sailors showing themselves less covetous of his liberality, so
tempered it, that they all kept together like a beautiful flock, which so
well could obey their masters pipe: without sometimes, to delight the Princes
eyes, some two or three of them would strive, who could (either by the cunning
of well spending the winds breath, or by the aduantageous building of their
moving houses) leave their fellows behind them in the honor of speed: while
the two Princes had leisure to see the practice of that, which before they had
learned by books: to consider the art of catching the wind prisoner, to no
other end, but to run away with it; to see how beauty, and use can so well
agree together, that of all the trinckets, where with they are attired, there
is not one but serves to some necessary purpose. And (o Lord) to see the
admirable power and noble effects of Love, whereby the seeming insensible
Loadstone, with a secret beauty (holding the spirit of iron in it) can draw
that hard-harted thing unto it, and (like a virtuous mistress) not only make
it bow it self, but with it make it aspire to so high a Love, as of the
heavenly Poles; and thereby to bring forth the noblest deeds, that the
children of the Earth can boast of. And so the Princes delighting their
co^ceats with co^firming their knowledge, seeing wherein the Sea-discipline
differed from Land-seruice, they had for a day and almost a whole night, as
pleasing entertainment, as the falsest heart could give to him he means worst
to.

but were swallowed up in his neuer-satisfied mouth. Some indeed (as since was
known) after long wandering returned into Thessalia; other recovered Bizantium,
and served Euarchus in his war. But in the ship wherein the Princes were (now
left as much alone as proud Lords be when fortune fails them) though they
employed all industry to save themselves, yet what they did was rather for
duty to nature, then hope to escape. So ougly a darkness, as if it would
prevent the nights coming, usurped the days right: which (accompanied
sometimes with thunders, always with horrible noyses of the chasing winds)
made the masters and pilors so astonished, that they knew not how to direct,
and if they knew they could scarcely (when they directed) hear their own
whistle. For the sea straue with the winds which should be louder, and the
shrouds of the ship with a ghastful noise to them that were in it, witnessed,
that their ruin was the wager of the others contention, and the heaven roaring
out thunders the more amazed them, as having those powers for enemies.
Certainly there is no danger carries with it more horror, then that which
grows in those flowing kingdoms. For that dwelling place is unnatural to
mankind, and then the terriblenesse of the continual motion, the dissolutio^
of the fare being from comfort, the eye and the ear having ougly images ever
before it, does still vex the mind, even when it is best armed against it. But
thus the day past (if that might be called a day) while the cunningest mariners
were so conquered by the storm, as they thought it best with striking sails
to yield to be governed by it: the valiantest feeling inward dismayednesse,
and yet the fearefullest ashamed fully to show it, seeing that the Princes (who
were to part from the greatest fortunes) did in their countenances accuse no
point of fear, but encouraging them to do what might be done (putting their
hands to every most painful office) taught them at one instant to promise
themselves the best, and yet not to despise the worst. But so were they carried
by the tyranny of the wind, and the treason of the sea, all that night, which
the elder it was, the more wayward it showed it self toward them: till the
next morning (known to be a morning better by the houre-glasse, then by the
day cleerenesse) having run fortune as blindly, as it self ever was painted,
lest the conclusion should not answer to the rest of the play, they were
driven upon a rock: which hidden with those outrageous waves, did, as it were,
closely dissemble his cruel mind, till with an vnbeleeued violence (but to them
that have tried it) the ship ran upon it; and seeming willinger to perish
then to have her course stayed, redoubled her blows, till she had broken her
self in pieces; and as it were tearing out her own bowels to feed the seas
greediness, left nothing within it but despair of safety, and expectation of
a loathsome end. There was to be seen the diverse manner of minds in
distress: some sat upon the top of the poupe weeping and wailing, till the
sea swallowed them; some one more able to abide death, then fear of death, cut
his own throat to prevent drowning; some prayed, and there wanted not of them
which cursed, as if the heavens could not be more angry then they were. But a
monstrous cry begotten of many roaring vows, was able to infect with fear a
mind that had not prevented it with the power of reason.

But the Princes using the passions of fearing evil, Leucippus, the younger
Nelsus) showed themselves right faithful and grateful servants unto them;
grateful (I say) for this cause: Those two gentlemen had been taken prisoners
in the great war the king of Phrygia made upon Thessalia, in the time of
Musidorus his infancy; and having been sold into another country (though
peace fell after between these Realms) could not be delivered, because of
their valor known, but for a far greater sum, then either all their
friends were able, or the Dowager willing to make, in respect of the great
expenses her self and people had been put to in those wars; and so had they
remained in prison about thirteen years, when the two young Princes (hearing
speeches of their good deserts) found means both by selling all the Jewels
they had of great price, and by giving under their hands great estates when
they should come to be Kings (which promises their virtue promised for them
should be kept) to get so much treasure as redeemed them from captivity. This
remembered, and kindly remembered by these two brothers, perchance helped by a
natural duty to their Princes blood, they willingly left hold of the board,
committing themselves to the seas rage, and even when they went to dye,
themselves praying for the Princes lives. It is true, that neither the pain
nor danger, so moved the Princes hearts as the tenderness of that loving
part, far from glory, having so few lookers on; far from hope of reward,
since themselves were sure to perish.

CHAP. 8.
1 Pyrocles cast on the shore of Phrygia 2 led prisoner to the King. 3 That
suspicious tyrant naturalized. 4 His intent to kill Pyrocles. 5 Musidorus-his
escape from sea, and offer to dye for his friend. 6 Their contention for death.
7 Preparation for Musidorus execution. 8 His strange delivery by Pyrocles, 9
and a sudden mutiny. 10 Their killing the bad King, 11 and creating a better.

Musidorus seeing (as he thought) Pyrocles not well upon the board, as he would
with his right hand have helped him on better, he had no sooner vnfastned his
hold, but that a wave forcibly spoiled his weaker hand of hold; and so for a
time parted those friends, each crying to the other, but the noise of the sea
drowned their farewell. But Pyrocles (then careless of death, if it had come
by any means, but his own) was shortly brought out of the seas fury to the
lands comfort; when (in my conscience I know) that comfort was but bitter unto
him. And bitter indeed it fell out even in it self to be unto him.

For being cast on land much bruised and beaten both

But that no sooner known, with numbers of armed men to guard him (for
mischief, not from mischief) he was sent to the Kings court, which as then
was not above a days journey off, with letters from that officer, containing
his own serviceable diligence in discovering so great a personage; adding with
all more then was true of his conjectures, because he would endeare his own
service.

Phrygia, and it was to the King thereof to whom he was sent, a Prince of a
melancholy constitution both of body and mind; wickedly sad, ever musing of
horrible matters; suspecting, or rather condemning all men of evil, because
his mind had no eye to epsy goodness: and therefore accusing Sycophantes, of
all men did best sort to his nature; but therefore not seeming Sycophantes,
because of no evil they said, they could bring any new or doubtful thing unto
him, but such as already he had been apt to determine; so as they came but as
proofs of his wisdom: fearful and never secure; while the fear he had
figured in his mind had any possibility of event. A tode-like retyrednesse,
and closeness of mind; nature teaching the odiousness of poison, and the
danger of odiousness. Yet while youth lasted in him, the exercises of that
age, and his humor (not yet fully discovered) made him something the more
frequentable, and less dangerous. But after that years began to come on
with some, though more seldom shows of a bloody nature, and that the
prophecy of Musidorus destiny came to his ears (delivered unto him, and
received of him with the hardest interpretation, as though his subjects did
delight in the hearing thereof.) Then gave he himself indeed to full current
of his disposition, espetially after the war of Thessalia, wherein (though in
truth wrongly) he deemed, his vnsuccessings proceeded of their unwillingness to
have him prosper: and then thinking him self contemned, (knowing no
countermine against contempt, but terror) began to let nothing pass which
might bear the color of a fault, without sharp punishment: and when he
wanted faults, excellency grew a fault; and it was sufficient to make one
guilty, that he had power to be guilty. And as there is no honor, to which
impudent poverty cannot make it self serviceable, so were there enough of those
desperate ambitious, who would build their houses upon others ruins, which
after should fall by like practices. So as servitude came mainly upon that
poor people, whose deeds were not only punished, but words corrected, and
even thoughts by some mean or other pulled out of the^: while suspision bred the
mind of cruelty, and the effects of cruelty stirred a new cause of
suspicion. And in this plight (full of watchful fearefulnes) did the storm
deliver sweet Pyrocles to the stormy mind of that Tyrant, all men that did
such wrong to so rare a stranger (whose countenance deserved both pity and
admiration) condemning themselves as much in their hearts, as they did brag in
their forces.

But when this bloody King knew what he was, and Musidorus (so much of him
feared) were come out of Thessalia, assuredly thinking (because ever thinking
the worst) that those forces were provided against him; glad of the perishing
(as he thought) of Musidorus, determined in public sort to put Pyrocles to
death. For having quite lost the way of noblenes, he straue to clime to the
height of terriblenes; and thinking to make all men adread, to make such one an
enemy, who would not spare, nor fear to kill so great a Prince; and lastly,
having nothing in him why to make him his friend, thought, he would make him
away, for being his enemy. The day was appointed, and all things appointed for
that cruel blow, in so solemn an order, as if they would set forth tyranny
in most gorgeous decking. The Princely youth of invincible valor, yet so
unjustly subjected to such outrageous wrong, carrying himself in all his
demeanure so consta^tly, abiding extremity, that one might see it was the
cutting away of the greatest hope of the world, and destroying virtue in his
sweetest grouth.

Musidorus: who being almost drowned, had been taken up by a Fisherman
belonging to the kingdom of Pontus; and being there, and understanding the
full discourse (as Fame was very prodigal of so notable an accident) in what
case Pyrocles was; learning withal, that his hate was far more to him then
to Pyrocles, he found means to acquaint him self with a nobleman of that
Country, to whom largely discovering what he was, he found him a most fit
instrument to effectuate his desire. For this nobleman had been one, who in
many wars had served Euarchus, and had been so mind-striken by the beauty of
virtue in that noble King, that (though not borne his Subject) he even profeste
himself his servant. His desire therefore to him was, to keep Musidorus in a
strong Castle of his, and then to make the King of Phrygia understand, that if
he would deliver Pyrocles, Musidorus would willingly put him self into his
hands: knowing well, that how thirsty so ever he was of Pyrocles blood, he
would rather drink that of Musidorus.

The Nobleman was loath to preserve one by the loss of another, but time
urging resolution: the importunity of Musidorus (who showed a mind not to
ouer-liue Pyrocles) with the affection he bare to Euarchus, so prevailed, that
he carried this strange offer of Musidorus, which by that Tyrant was greedelie
accepted.

And so upon security of both sides, they were Pyrocles, who both in speech
and countenance to Musidorus, well showed, that he thought himself injured,
and not relieved by him: asking him, what he had euerseene in him, why he could
not bear the extremities of mortal accidents as well as any man? and why he
should envy him the glory of suffering death for his friends cause, and (as
it were) rob him of his own possession? But in this notable contention,
(where the conquest must be the conquerers destruction, and safety the
punishment of the conquered) Musidorus prevailed: because he was a more welcome
prize to the unjust King, that wished none well, to them worse then others, and
to him worste of all: and as chearefully going toward, as Pyrocles went
frowardly fromwarde his death, he was delivered to the King, who could not be
enough sure of him, without he fed his own eyes upon one, whom he had begone to
fear, as soon as the other began to be.

Pyrocles, this strange encounter he had.

Pyrocles was no sooner delivered by the kings servants to a place of liberty,
then he bent his wit and courage, (and what would not they bring to pass?)
how either to deliver Musidorus, or to perish with him. And (finding he could
get in that country no forces sufficient by force to rescue him) to bring
himself to die with him, (little hoping of better event) he put himself in
poor raiment, and by the help of some few crowns he took of that nobleman,
(who full of sorrow, though not knowing the secret of his intent, suffered him
to go in such order from him) he (even he, born to the greatest expectation,
and of the greatest blood that any Prince might be) submitted himself to be
servant to the executioner that should put to death Musidorus: a far notabler
proof of his friendship, considering the height of his mind, then any death
could be. That bad officer not suspecting him, being araied fit for such an
estate, and having his beauty hidden by many foul spots he artificially put
upon his face, gave him leave not only to wear a sword himself, to bear
his sword prepared for the justified murder. And so Pyrocles taking his time,
when Musidorus was upon the scaffold (separated somewhat from the rest as
allowed to say something) he stepped unto him, and putting the sword into his
hand not bound (a point of ciuility the officers used toward him, because
they doubted no such enterprise) Musidorus (said he) die nobly. In truth, never
man between joy before knowledge what to be glad of, and fear after
considering his cafe, had such a confusion of thoughts, as I had, when I saw
Pyrocles, so near me. But with that Dorus blushed, and Pamela smiled: and
Dorus the more blushed at her smiling, and she the more smiled at his blushing;
because he had (with the remembrance of that plight was in) forgotten in
speaking of him self to use the therd person. But Musidorus turned again her
thoughts from his cheeks to his tongue in this forte: But (said he) when they
were with swords in hands, not turning backs one to the other (for there
they knew was place of defense) but making that a preservation in nothoping to
be preserved, and now acknowledging themselves subject to death, meaning only
to do honor to their princely birth, they flew amongst the^ all (for all were
enemies) and had quickly either with flight or death, left none upon the
scaffolde to annoy them. Wherein Pyrocles (the excellent Pyrocles) did such
wonders beyond belief, as was hable to lead Musidorus to courage, though he
had been borne a coward. But indeed, just rage and desperate virtue did such
effects, that popular sort of the beholders began to be almost superstitiously
amazed, as at effects beyond mortal power. But the King with angry
threatenings from-out a window (where he was not ashamed, the world should
behold him a beholder) commanded his guard, and the rest of his soldiers to
hasten their death. But many of them lost their bodies to loose their souls,
when the Princes grew almost so weary, as they were ready to be conquered with
conquering.

them, set upon the guard, and soldiers as chief instruments of Tyranny: and
quickly, aided by the Princes, They had left none of them alive, nor any other
in the city, who they thought had in any sort set his hand to the work of
their servitude, and (God knows) by the blindness of rage, killing many
guiltles persons, either for affinity to the Tyrant, or enmity to the
tyrantkillers. But some of the wisest (seeing that a popular license is indeed
the many-headed tyranny) prevailed with the rest to make Musidorus their
chief: choosing one of them (because Princes) to defend them, and him because
elder and most hated of the Tyrant, and by him to be ruled: whom forthwith
they lifted up, fortune (I think) smiling at her work therein, that a
scaffold of execution should grow a scaffold of coronation.

But by and by there came news of more certain Musidorus. Who seeing what
forces were in the city, with them issued against the Tyrant, while they were
in this heat; before practices might be used to disseuer them: and with them
met the King, who likewise hoping little to prevail by time, (knowing and
finding his peoples hate) met him with little delay in the field: where him
self was slain by Musidorus, after he had seen his only son (a Prince of
great courage and beauty, but fostred in blood by his naughty Father) slain
by the hand of Pyrocles. This victory obtained, with great, and truly not
undeserved honor to the two Princes, the whole estates of the country with one
consent, gave the crown and all other marks of sovereignty to Musidorus;
desiring nothing more, then to live under such a government, as they promised
themselves of him.



CHAP. 9.
1 The two brothers escape to the shore of Pontus. 2 Inco^stancy, 3 and envy
purtraied in the King and his Counselor. 4 The advancement and overthrow by
them of those two brothers. 5 The revenge thereof by the two Princes. 6 The
cruelties of two reuengefull Giants, and their death by the Princes. 7 Their
honors, and their honorable minds.

Pontus; the same country upon which Musidorus also was fallen, but not in so
luckie a place.

Phrygia, but (as I may term it) of a wanton cruelty: in constant of his
choice of friends, or rather never having a friend, but a playfellow; of whom
when he was weary, he could not otherwise rid himself, the^ by killing the^:
giving sometimes prodigally, not because he loved them to whom he gave, but
because he lusted to give: punishing, not so much for hate or anger, as because
he felt not the smart of punishment: delighted to be flattered, at first for
those virtues which were not in him, at length making his vices virtues worthy
the flattering: with like judgment glorying, when he had happened to do a
thing well, as when he had performed some notable mischief.



Phrygia destroyed by their two Lords, who having been a near kinsman to this
Prince of Pontus, by this envious Cou^cellour, partly with suspicion of
practice, partly with glory of in-part reue^ging his cousins death, the King
was suddenly turned, (and every turn with him was a downe-fall) to lock them
up in prison, as servant to his enemies, whom before he had never known, nor
(til that time one of his own subjects had entertained and dealt for them) did
ever take heed of. But now earnest in every present humor, and making himself
brave in his liking, he was content to give them just cause of offense, when
they had power to make just revenge. Yet did the Princes send unto him before
they entered into war, desiring their servants liberty. But he swelling in their
hu^blenes, (like a bubble swollen up with a small breath, broken with a great)
forgetting, or never knowing humanity, caused their heads to be stricken off,
by the advice of his envious Councellor (who now hated them so much the more,
as he foresaw the happiness in having such, and so fortunate masters) and sent
them with vnroyall reproaches to Musidorus and Pyrocles, as if they had done
traitorously, and not heroically in killing his tyrannical Cosen.

But that injury went beyond al degree of reconcilement; Phrygia (a kingdom
wholly at their commandment, by the love of the people, and gratefulness of
the King) they entered his country; and wholly conquering it (with such deeds as
at lest Fame said were excellent) took the King; and by Musidorus
commandment ( Pyrocles heart more inclined to pity) he was slain upon the
tomb of their two true Servants; which they caused to be made for them with
royal expenses, and notable workmanship to preserve their dead lives. For his
wicked Servant he should have felt the like, or worse, but that his heart brake
even to death with the beholding the honor done to the dead carcasses? There
might Pyrocles quietly have enjoyed that crown, by all the desire of that
people, most of whom had revolted unto him: but he, finding a sister of the
late Kings (a fair and well esteemed Lady) looking for nothing more, then to
be oppressed with her brothers ruins, gave her in marriage to the noble man
his fathers old friend, and endowed them with the crown of that kingdom. And
not content with those public actions, of princely, and (as it were) governing
virtue, they did (in that kingdom and some other near about) diverse acts of
particular trials, more famous, because more perilous. For in that time those
regions were full both of cruel monsters, and monstrous men: all which in
short time by private combats they delivered the countries of.

Pontus, and in all his affairs (especially of war, whereunto they were only
apt) they had showed, as vnco^quered courage, so a rude faithfulness: being men
indeed by nature apter to the faults of rage, then of deceit; not greatly
ambitious, more then to be well and uprightly dealt with; rather impatient of
injury, then delighted with more then ordinary courtesies; and in injuries more
sensible of smart or loss, then of reproach or disgrace. These men being of
this nature (and certainly Jewels to a wise man, considering what indeed
wonders they were able to perform) yet were discarded by that unworthy Prince,
after many notable deserts, as not worthy the holding. Which was the more
evident to them; because it suddenly fell from an excess offauor, which (many
examples having taught them) never stopped his race till it came to an headlong
overthrow: they full of rage, retired themselves unto this castle. Where
thinking nothing iuster the^ revenge, nor more noble then the effects of anger,
that (according to the nature) full of inward bravery and fiercenes, scarcely in
the glass of Reason, thinking it self fair, but when it is terrible, they
immediately gave themselves to make all the country about them (subject to
that King) to smart for their Lords folly: not caring how innocent they were,
but rather thinking the more innocent they were, the more it testified their
spite, which they desired to manifest. And with use of evil, growing more and
more evil, they took delight in slaughter, and pleasing themselves in making
others wrack the effect of their power: so that where in the time that they
obeyed a master, their anger was a serviceable power of the mind to do
public good; so now unbridled, and blind judge of it self, it made
wickedness violent, and praised it self in excellency of mischief; almost
to the ruin of the country, not greatly regarded by their careless and
louelesse king. Till now these Princes finding them so fleshed in cruelty, as
not to be reclaimed, secreatly undertook the matter alone: for accompanied
they would not have suffered them to have mounted; and so those great fellows
scornefully receiving them, as foolish birds fallen into their net, it pleased
the eternal justice to make the^ suffer death by their hands: So as they were
manifoldly acknowledged the sauers of that country.

and danger, but must be nursed by the like, or else vanishes as soon as it
appears to the world: so the natural hunger thereof (which was in Pyrocles)
suffered him not to account a resting seat of that, which ever either rises,
or falls, but still to make one action beget another; whereby his doings
might send his praise to others mouths to rebound again true contentment to
his spirit. And therefore having well established those kingdoms, under good
governors, and rid them by their valor of such giants and monsters, as before
time armies were not able to subdue, they determined in unknown order to see
more of the world, and to employ those gifts esteemed rare in them, to the good
of mankind; and therefore would themselves (understanding that the King
Euarchus was passed all the cumber of his wars) go privately to seek
exercises of their virtue; thinking it not so worthy, to be brought to
heroycall effects by fortune, or necessity (like Ulysses and Aeneas) as by
ones own choice, and working. And so went they away from very unwilling
people to leave them, making time haste it self to be a circumstance of their
honor, and one place witness to another of the truth of their doings. For
scarcely were they out of the co^fines of Pontus, but that as they rid alone
armed, (for alone they went, one serving the other) they met an adventure;
which though not so notable for any great effect they performed, yet worthy to
be remembered for the vn-vsed examples therein, as well of true natural goodness,
as of wretched ungratefulness.

CHAP. 10.
1 The pitiful state, and story of the Paphalgonian unkind King, and his
kind son, 2 first related by the son, 3 then by the blind father. 4 The three
Princes assaulted by Plexirtus and his train: 5 assisted by their King of
Pontus and his troops. 6 Plexirtus succored and saved by two brothers, that
virtuously loved a most vicious man. 7 Beseeged by the new King, 8 he
submits, and is pardoned. 9 The two Princes depart to aid the Queen of
Lycia.

Galacia,the season being (as in the depth of winter) very cold, and as then
suddenly grown to so extreme and foul a storm, that never any winter (I
think) brought forth a fowler child: so that the Princes were even compelled
by the hail, that the pride of the wind blew into their faces, to seek some
shrowding place within a certain hollow rock offering it unto them, they made
it their shield against the tempests fury. And so staying there, till the
violence there of was passed, they heard the speech of a couple, who not
perceiving them (being hid within that rude canapy) held a strange and
pitiful disputation which made them step out; yet in such sort, as they
might see unseen. There they perceived an aged man, and a young, scarcely come
to the age of a man, both poorly arrayed, extremely weather-beaten; the old
man blind, the young man leading him: and yet through all those miseries, in
both these seemed to appear a kind of nobleness, not suitable to that
affliction. But the firstwords they heard, were these of the old man. Well
Leonatus (said he) since I cannot persuade thee to lead me to that which should
end my grief, and thy trouble, let me now entreat thee to leave me: fear not,
my misery cannot be greater then it is, and nothing does become me but
misery; fear not the danger of my blind steps, I cannot fall worse then I am.
And do not I pray thee, do not obstinately continue to infect thee with my
wretchedness. But fly, fly from this region, only worthy of me. Dear father
(answered he) do not take away from me the only remnant of my happiness:
while I have power to do you service, I am not wholly miserable. Ah my son
(said he, and with that he groned, as if sorrow straue to break his heart,)
how evil fits it me to have such a son, and how much does thy kindness
vpbraide my wickedness? These doleful speeches, and some others to like
purpose (well showing they had not been borne to the fortune they were in,)
moved the Princes to go out unto them, and ask the younger what they were?
Sirs (answered he, with a good grace, and made the more agreeable by a certain
noble kind of pitiousnes) I see well you are strangers, that know not our
misery so well here known, that no man dare know, but that we must be
miserable. In deed our state is such, as though nothing is so needful unto us
as pity, yet nothing is more dangerous unto us, then to make ourselves so
known as may stir pity. But your presence promises, that cruelty shall
not overrun hate. And if it did, in truth our state is soncke below the
degree of fear.

Paphlagonia, by the hard-harted ungratefulness of a son of his, deprived, not
only of his kingdom (where of no foreign forces were ever able to spoil
him) but of his sight, the riches which Nature grau^ts to the poorest
creatures. Whereby, and by other his unnatural dealings, he has bin driven to
such grief, as even now he would have had me to have led him to the top of
this rock, thence to cast himself headlong to death: and so would have made
me (who received my life of him) to be the worker of his destruction. But noble
Gentlemen (said he) if either of you have a father, and feel what duetifull
affection is engraffed in a sons heart, let me entreat you to convey this
afflicted Prince to some place of rest and security. Amongst your worthy
acts it shall be none of the least, that a King, of such might and fame, and
so unjustly oppressed, is in any sort by you relieved.

to have met with such a miser as I am) that whatsoever my son (o God, that
truth binds me to reproach him with the name of my son) has said, is true.
But besides those truths, this also is true, that having had in lawful
marriage, of a mother fit to bear royal children, this son (such one as
partly you see, and better shall know by my short declaration) and so enjoyed
the expectations in the world of him, till he was growe^ to justify their
expectations (so as I needed envy no father for the chief comfort of
mortality, to leave an other ones-selfe after me) I was carried by a bastard
son of mine (if at least I be bound to believe the words of that base woman
my concubine, his mother) first to mislike, then to hate, lastly to destroy, to
do my best to destroy, this son (I think you think) undeserving
destruction. What ways he used to bring me to it, if I should tell you, I
should tediously trouble you with as much poisonous hypocrisy, desperate
fraud, smoothe malice, hidden ambition, and smiling envy, as in any living
person could be harbored. But I list it not, no remembrance, (no, of
naughtines) delights me, but mine own; and me thinks, the accusing his trains
might in some manner excuse my fault, which certainly I loath to do. But the
conclusion is, that I gave order to some servants of mine, whom I thought as
apt for such charities as my self, to lead him out into a forest, and there
to kill him.

But those thieves (better natured to my son then my self) spared his life,
letting him go, to learn to live poorly: which he did, giving himself to be
a private soldier, in a country here by. But as he was ready to be greatly
advanced for some noble pieces of service which he did, he heard news of me:
who (drunk in my affection to that unlawful and unnatural son of mine)
suffered my self so to be governed by him, that all favors and punishments
passed by him, all offices, and places of importance, distributed to his
favorites; so that ere I was aware, I had left my self nothing but the name of
a King: which he shortly weary of too, with many indignities (if any thing may
be called an indignity, which was laid upon me) threw me out of my feat, and
put out my eyes; and then (proud in his tyranny) let me go, nether
imprisoning, nor killing me: but rather delighting to make me feel my misery;
misery indeed, if ever there were any; full of wretchedness, fuller of
disgrace, and fullest of guiltines. And as he came to the crown by so unjust
means, as unjustly he kept it, by force of stranger soldiers in Cittadels,
the nestes of tyranny, and murderers of liberty; disarming all his own
countrymen, that no man durst show himself a wel-willer of mine: to say the
truth (I think) few of the^ being so (considering my cruel folly to my good
son, and foolish kindness to my unkind bastard:) but if there were any who
fell to pity of so great a fall, and had yet any sparks of unstained duty
left in them toward me, yet durst they not show it, scarcely with giving me
alms at their doors; which yet was the only sustenaunce of my distressed
life, no body daring to show so much charity, as to lend me a hand to
guide my dark steps: Till this son of mine (God knows, worthy of a more
virtuous, and more fortunate father) forgetting my abominable wrongs, not
recking danger, and neglecting the present good way he was in doing himself
good, came hither to do this kind office you see him perform toward me, to
my unspeakable grief; not only because his kindness is a glass eue^ to my
blind eyes, of my naughtines, but that above all griefs, it greeues me he
should desperately adventure the loss of his souldeseruing life for mine, that
yet owe more to fortune for my deserts, as if he would carry mudde in a chest of
crystal. For well I know, he that now reigns, how much soever (and with
good reason) he despises me, of all men despised; yet he will not let slip
any advantage to make away him, whose just title (ennobled by courage and
goodness) may one day shake the seat of a never secure tyranny. And for this
cause I craved of him to lead me to the top of this rock, indeed I must
confess, with meaning to free him from so Serpentine a companion as I am. But
he finding what I purposed, only therein since he was borne, showed himself
disobedient unto me. And now Gentlemen, you have the true story, which I pray
you publish to the world, that my mischievous proceedinges may be the glory of
his filial piety, the only reward now left for so great a merit. And if it
may be, let me obtain that of you, which my son denies me: for never was
there more pity in saving any, then in ending me; both because therein my
agonies shall end, and so shall you preserve this excellent young man, who else
wilfully folowes his own ruin.

without seeking remedy. But by and by the occasion was presented: for
Plexirtus (so was the bastard called) came thither with forty horse, only of
purpose to murder this brother; of whose coming he had soon advertisement,
and thought no eyes of sufficient credit in such a matter, but his own; and
therefore came him self to be actor, and spectator. And as soon as he came,
not regarding the weak (as he thought) guard of but two men, commanded some
of his followers to set their hands to his, in the killing of Leonatus. But
the young Prince (though not otherwise armed but with a sword) how safely
soever he was dealt with by others, would not betray him self: but bravely
drawing it out, made the death of the first that assaulted him, warn his
fellows to come more warily after him. But then Pyrocles and Musidorus were
quickly become parties (so just a defense deserving as much as old friendship)
and so did behave them among that company (more injurious, then valiant) that
many of them lost their lives for their wicked master.

Pontus (lately by them made so) had not come unlooked for to their succor.
Who (having had a dream which had fixed his imagination vehemently upon some
great danger, presently to follow those two Princes whom he most dearly
loved) was come in all have, following as well as he could their tracke with a
hundredth horses in that country, which he thought (considering who then
reigned) a fit place enough to make the stage of any Tragedy.

Plexirtus, that his ill-led life, and worse gotten honou should have tumbled
together to destruction; had there not come in Tydeus and Telenor, with forty
or fifty in their suit, to the defense of Plexirtus. These two were brothers,
of the noblest house of that country, brought up from their infancy with
Plexirtus: men of such prowess, as not to know fear in themselves, and yet to
teach it others that should deal with them: for they had often made their
lives triumph over most terrible dangers; never dismayed, and ever fortunate;
and truly no more settled in their valor, then disposed to goodness and
justice, if either they had lighted on a better friend, or could have learned
to make friendship a child, and not the father of Virtue. But bringing up
(rather then choice) having first knit their minds unto him, (indeed crastie
enough, either to hide his faults, or never to show them, but when they might
pay home) they willingly held out the course, rather to satisfy him, then all the world; and rather to be good friends, then good men: so as though they did
not like the evil he did, yet they liked him that did the evil; and though
not counselors of the offense, yet protectors of the offender. Now they having
heard of this sudden going out, with so small a company, in a country full of
euilwishing minds toward him (though they knew not the cause) followed him;
till they found him in such case as they were to venture their lives, or else
he to loose his: which they did with such force of mind and body, that truly
I may justly say, Pyrocles and Musidorus had never till then found any, that
could make them so well repeat their hardest lesson in the feats of arms.
And briefly so they did, that if they overcame not; yet were they not overcome,
but carried away that ungrateful master of theirs to a place of security;
howsoever the Princes labored to the co^tray. But this matter being thus far
begun, it became not the consta^cie of the Princes so to leave it; but in all
have making forces both in Pontus and Phrygia, they had in few days, lest
him but only that one strong place where he was. For fear having been the
only knot that had fastened his people unto him, that once untied by a greater
force, they all scattered from him; like so many birds, whose cage had been
broken.

Leonatus head) with many tears (both of joy and sorrow) setting forth to the
whole people, his own fault and his sons virtue, after he had kissed him, and
forced his son to accept honor of him (as of his newe-become subject) cue^ in
a moment died, as it should seem: his heart broken with unkindness and
affliction, stretched so far beyond his limits with this excess of comfort,
as it was able no longer to keep safe his roial spirits. But the new King
(having no less lovingly performed all duties to him dead, then alive) pursued
on the siege of his unnatural brother, as much for the revenge of his father, as
for the establishing of his own quiet. In which siege truly I cannot but
acknowledge the prowess of those two brothers, then whom the Princes never
found in all their travel two men of greater ability to perform, nor of
habler skill for conduct.

Plexirtus finding, that if nothing else, famine would at last bring him to
destruction, thought better by hu^blenes to creep, where by pride he could not
march. For certainly so had nature formed him, and the exercise of craft
conformed him to all turnings of sleights, that though no man had less goodness
in his soul then he, no man could better find the places whence arguemets
might grow of goodness to another: though no man felt less pity, no man
could tell better how to stir pity: no man more impudent to deny, where proofs
were not manifest; no man more ready to confess with a repenting manner of
aggravating his own evil, where denial would but make the fault fowler. Now he
took this way, that having gotten a pasport for one (that pretended he would
put Plexirtus alive into his hands) to speak with the King his brother, he him
self (though much against the minds of the valiant brothers, who rather wished
to die in brave defense) with a rope about his neck, barefooted, came to offer
himself to the discretion of Lconatus. Where what submission he used, how
cunningly in making greater the fault he made the faultines the less, how
artificially he could set out the torments of his own conscience, with the
burdensome comber he had found of his ambitious desires, how finely seeming to
desire nothing but death, as ashamed to live, he begd life, in the refusing it,
I am not cunning enough to be able to express: but so fell out of it, that
though at first sight Leonatus saw him with no other eye, then as the murderer
of his father; and anger already began to paint revenge in many colors, ere
long he had not only gotten pity, but pardon, and if not an excuse of the
fault past, yet an opinion of a future ame^dment: while the poor villains
(chief ministers of his wickedness, now betrayed by the author thereof,) were
delivered to many cruel sorts of death; he so handling it, that it rather
seemed, he had rather come into the defense of an vnremediable mischief
already committed, then that they had done it at first by his consent.

In such sort the Pricnes left these reconciled brothers Plexirtus in all his
behavior carrying him in far lower degree of service, then the euer-noble
nature of Leonatus would suffer him) and taking likewise their leaves of their
good friend the King of Pontus (who returned to enjoy their benefit, both of
his wife and kingdom) they privately went thence, having only with them the
two valiant brothers, who would needs acco^panie them, through diverse places;
they four doing acts more dangerous, though less famous, because they were
but private chiualries: till hearing of the fair and virtuous Queen Erona of
Lycia, besieged by the puissant King of Armenia, they bent themselves to her
succor, both because the weaker (and weaker as being a Lady,) and partly
because they heard the King of Armenia had in his company three of the most
famous men living, for matters of arms, that were known to be in the world.
Where of one was the Prince Plangus, (Whose name was sweetened by your breath,
peerlesse Lady, when the last day it pleased you to mention him unto me) the
other two were two great Princes (though holding of him) Barzanes and Euardes,
men of Giant-like both hugenes and force: in which two especially, the trust
the King had of victory, was reposed. And of them, those two brothers Tydeus
and Telenor (sufficient judges in warlike matters) spoke so high commendations,
that the two young Princes had even a youthful longing to have some trial of
their virtue. And therefore as soon as they were entered into Lycia they joined
themselves with them that faithfully served the poor Queen, at that time
besieged: and ere long animated in such sort their almost overthrown hearts,
that they went by force to relieve the town, though they were deprived of a
great part of their strength by the parting of the two brothers, who were sent
for in all have to return to their old friend and master, Plexirtus: who
(willingly hood-winking themselves from seeing his faults, and binding
themselves to believe what he said) often abused the virtue of courage to
defend his foul vice of injustice. But now they were sent for to advance a
conquest he was about; while Pyrocles and Musidorus pursued the delivery of
the Queen Erona.

CHAP. 11.
1 Dorus his suite to Pamela interrupted by Mopsas waking. 2 The sisters going
with Zelmane to wash themselves. 3 The pleasantnes of the river. 4 The pleasure
Zelmane had in seeing them, uttered 5 in speech, 6 and song. 7 She led by a
spaniel, to know, and hurt her noble rival. 8 The parting of that fraye.

I Have heard (said Pamela) that part of the story of Plangus when he passed
through this country: therefore you may (if you list) pass over that war of
Eronaes quarrel, lest if you speak too much of war matters, you should wake
Mopsa, which might happily breed a great broile. Mopsa indeed fat swallowing of
sleep with open mouth, making such a noise withal, as no body could lay the
stealing of a nappe to her charge. Whereupon, willing to use that occasion, he
kneeled down, and with humble-hartednesse, and hearty earnestnes printed in his
graces, Alas (said he) divine Lady, who have wrought such miracles in me, as to
make a Prince (none of the basest) to think all principalities base, in
respect of the sheephooke, which may hold him up in your sight; vouchsafe now
at last to hear in direct words my humble suit, while this dragon sleeps,
that keeps the golden fruit. If in my desire I wish, or in my hopes aspire,
or in my imagination feign to my self any thing which may be the lest spot to
that heavenly virtue, which shines in all your doings; I pray the eternal
powers, that the words I speak may be deadly poisons, while they are in my
mouth, and that all my hopes, all my desires, all my imaginations, may only
work their own confusion. But if love, love of you, love of your virtues,
seek only that favor of you, which becomes that gratefulnes, which cannot
misbecome your excellency, O do not: He would have said further, but Pamela
calling aloud Mopsa, she so dainly start up, staggering, and rubbing her eyes,
ran first out of the door, and then back to them, before she knew how she
went out, or why she came in again: till at length, being fully come to her
little self, she asked Pamela, why she had called her. For nothing (said
Pamela) but that you might hear some tales of your servants telling: and
therefore now (said she) Dorus go on.

But as he (who found no so good sacrifice, as obedience) Philoclea came in,
and by and by after her, Miso; so as for that time they were feign to let Dorus
depart. But Pamela) delighted eue^ to preserve in her memory, the words of so
well a beloved speaker) repeated the whole substance to her sister, till their
sober dinner being come and gone, to recreate themselves something, (even tired
with the noysomnes of Misos conversation) they determined to go (while the
heat of the day lasted) to bath themselves (such being the manner of the
Arcadian nymphs often to do) in the river of Ladon, and take with them a
Lute, meaning to delight them under some shadow. But they could not stir, but
that Miso with her daughter Mopsa was after them: and as it lay in their way to
pass by the other lodge, Zelmane out of her window espied them, and so stale
down after them: which she might the better do because that Gynecia was
sick, and Basilius (that day being his birthday) according to his manner, was
busy about his devotions; and therefore she went after, hoping to find some
time to speak with Philoclea: but not a word could she begin, but that Miso
would be one of the audience; so that she was driven to recommend thinking,
speaking, and all, to her eyes, who diligently performed her trust, till they
came to the rivers side; which of all the rivers of Greece seeming arms of the
loving earth, that feign would embrace it; and the River a wanton nymph which
still would stir from it: either side of the bancke being fringed with most
beautiful trees, which resisted the suns darts from overmuch pearcing the
natural coldness of the River. There was the (...) But among the rest a goodly
Cypres, who bowing her fair head over the water, it seemed she looked into it,
and dressed her green locks, by that running River. There the Princesses
determining to bath themselves, though it was so privileged a place, upon
pain of death, as no body durst presume to come thither, yet for the more
surety, they looked round about, and could see nothing but a water spaniell,
who came down the river, showing that he hunted for a duck, and with a
snuffling grace, disdaining that his smelling force could not as well prevail
through the water, as through the air; and therefore waiting with his eye, to
see whether he could epsy the duckes getting up again: but then a little
below them failing of his purpose, he got out of the river, and shaking off the
water (as great men do their friends, now he had no further cause to use it)
in-weeded himself so, as the Ladies lost the further marking his
sportfulness: and inuiting Zelmane also to wash her self with them, and she
excusing her self with having taken a late cold, they began by peece-meale to
take away the eclipsing of their apparel.

Zelmane would have put to her helping hand, but she Miso and Mopsa (like a
couple of foreswat melters) were getting the pure silver of their bodies out of
the ure of their garments. But as the rayments went of to receive kisses of the
ground, Zelmane envied the happiness of all, but of the smock was even
jealous, and when that was taken away too, and that Philoclea remained (for her
Zelmane only marked) like a Dyamond taken from out the rock, or rather like
the Sun getting from under a cloud, and showing his naked becames to the full
view, then was the beauty too much for a patient sight, the delight too strong
for a stayed conceit: so that Zelmane could not choose but run, to touch,
embrace, and kiss her; But conscience made her come to her self, and leave
Philoclea, who blushing, and withal smiling, making shamefastness pleasant,
and pleasure shamefast, tenderly moved her feet, unwonted to feel the naked
ground, till the touch of the cold water made a pretty kind of shrugging come
over her body, like the twinkling of the fairest among the fixed stars. But
the River it self gave way unto her, so that she was straight breast high;
which was the deepest that there-about she could be: and when cold Ladon had
once fully embraced them, himself was no more so cold to those Ladies, but as
if his cold complexion had been heated with love, so seemed he to play about
every part he could touch.

Ladon (said Zelmane) why do thou not stay thy course to have more full taste
of thy happiness? But the reason is manifest, the upper streams make such haste
to have their part of embracing, that the nether (though lothly) must needs
give place unto them. O happy Ladon, within whom she is, upon whom her beauty
falls, through whom her eye perceth. O happy Ladon, which art now an imperfect
mirror of al perfection, can thou ever forget the blessedness of this
impression? if thou do, then let thy bed be turned from fine grauel, to weeds
and mudde; if thou do, let some unjust niggards make weres to spoil thy
beauty; if thou do, let some greater river fall into thee, to take away the name
of Ladon. Oh Ladon, happy Ladon, rather slide then run by her, lest thou
should make her legs slip from her; and then, O happy Ladon, who would
then call thee, but the most cursed Ladon? But as the Ladies played them in the
water, sometimes striking it with their hands, the water (making lines in his
face) seemed to smile at such beating, and with twenty bubbles, not to be
content to have the picture of their face in large upon him, but he would in
each of those bubbles set forth the miniature of them.

But Zelmane, whose sight was gaine-said by nothing Ladon, (like a chamber
where a great fire is kept, though the fire be at one stay, yet with the
continuance continually has his heat increased) had the coals of her
affection so kindled with wonder, and blown with delight, that now all her
parts grudged, that her eyes should do more homage, then they, to the
Princess of them. In so much that taking up the Late, her wit began to be with
a divine fury inspired; her voice would in so beloved an occasion second her
wit; her hands accorded the Lutes music to the voice; her panting heart
daunced to the music; while I think her feet did beat the time; while her
body was the room where it should be celebrated; her foul the Queen which
should be delighted. And so together went the utterance and the invention,
that one might judge, it was Philocleas beauty which did speedily write it in
her eyes; or the sense there of, which did word by word endite it in her mind,
whereto she (but as an organ) did only lend utterance. The song was to this
purpose.

What tongue can her perfections tell
In whose each part all pens may dwell?
Her hair fine threeds of finest gould
In curled knots man's thought to hold:
But that her forehead says in me
A whiter beauty you may see.
Whiter indeed; more white then snow,
Which on cold winters face does grow.
That does present those even brows,
Whose equal line their angles bows,
Like to the Moon when after change
Her horned head abroad does raunge:
And arches be to heavenly lids,
Whose wink each bold attempt forbids.
For the black stars those Spheres contain,
The matchless pair, even praise does stain.
No lamp, whose light by Art is got,
No Sun, which shines, and sees not,
Can liken them without all pcere,
Save one as much as other clear:
Which only thus unhappy be,
Because themselves they cannot see.
Her cheeks with kindly claret spread.
Aurora like new out of bed,
Or like the fresh Queene-apples side,
Blushing at sight of Phoebus pride.
Her nose, her chinne pure inorie wears:
No purer then the pretty ears.
So that therein appears some blood,
Like wine and milk that mingled stood.
In whose Incirclets if ye gaze,
Your eyes may tread a Lovers maze.
But with such turns the voice to stray,
No talk untaught can find the way.
The tippe no jewel needs to wear:
The tippe is jewel of the ear.
But who those ruddie lips can miss?
Which blessed still themselves do kiss.
Rubies, Cherries, and Roses new,
In worth, in taste, in perfitte hew:
Which never part but that they show
Of precious pearl the double row,
The second sweetly-fenced ward,
Her heau'nly-dewed tongue to guard.
Whence never word in vain did flow.
Fair under these does stately grow,
The handle of this precious work,
The neck, in which strange graces lurk.
Such be I think the sumptuous towers
Which skill does make in Princes bowers.
So good a say inuites the eye,
A little downward to epsy,
The lively clusters of her breasts,
Of Venus babe the wanton nests:
Like pomels round of Marble clear:
Where azurde veins well mixed appear.
With dearest tops of porphyrie.
Betwixt these two a way does lie,
A way more worthy beauties fame,
Then that which bears the Milkie name.
This leads into the joyous field,
Which only still does Lillies yield:
But Lillies such whose native smell
The Indian odours does excel.
Waste it is calde, for it does waste
Men's lives, until it be imbraste.
There may one see, and yet not see
Her ribs in white all armed be.
More white then Neptunes fomie face,
When struggling rocks he would embrace.
In those delights the wandering thought
Might of each side astray be brought,
But that her nauel does unite,
In curious circle, busy sight:
A dainty seal of virgin-waxe,
Where nothing but impression lackes.
Her belly then glad sight does fill,
Justly entitled Cupids hill.
A hill most fit for such a master,
A spotless mine of Alablaster.
Like Alablaster fair and sleeke,
But soft and supple fatten like.
In that sweet feate the Boy does sport:
Loath, I must leave his chief resort.
For such a use the world has gotten,
The best things still must be forgotten.
Yet never shall my song omit
Thighs, for Ouids song more fit;
Which stanked with two sugared flanks,
Lift up their stately swelling banks;
That Albion cliues in whitenes pass:
With hanches smooth as looking glass.
But how all knees, now of her knees
My tongue does tell what fancy fees.
The knottes of joy, the gemmes of love,
Whose motion makes all graces move.
Whose bought incau'd does yield such sight,
Like cunning Painter shadowing white.
The gartring place with child-like sign,
Shows easy print in metal fine.
But then again the flesh does rise
In her brave calves, like crystal skies.
Whose Atlas is a smallest small,
More white then whitest bone of all.
Thereout steals out that round clean foot
This noble Cedars precious root:
In show and sent pale violets,
Whose step on earth all beauty sets.
But back unto her back, my Muse,
Where Ledas swanne his feathers mewes,
Along whose ridge such bones are met,
Like comfits round in marchpane set.
Her shoulders be like two white Doves,
Pearching within square royal rooues,
Which leaded are with silver skin,
Passing the hate-sport Ermelin.
And thence those arms derived are;
The Phoenix wings are not so rare
For faultlesse length, and stainelesse hew,
Ah woe is me, my woes renew;
Now course does lead me to her hand,
Of my first love the fatal band.
Where whitenes does for ever sit:
Nature her self enameld it.
For there with strange compact does lie
Warm snow, moist pearl, soft iuorie.
There fall those Saphir-coloured brooks,
Which conduit-like with curious crookes,
Sweet Islands make in that sweet land.
As for the singers of the hand,
The bloody shaftes of Cupids war,
With amatists they headed are.
Thus has each part his beauties part,
But how the Graces do impart
To all her limbs a spctiall grace,
Becoming every time and place.
Which does even beauty beautify,
And most bewitch the wretched eye.
How all this is but a fair Inn
Of fairer guestes, which dwell within.
Of whose high praise, and praisefull bliss,
Goodness the pen, heaven paper is.
The ink immortal same does lend:
As I began, so must I end.
No tongue can her perfections tell,
In whose each part all tongues may dwell
But as Zelmane was coming to the latter end of her song, she might see the
same water-spaniell which before had hu^ted, come and fetch away one of
Philocleas gloves; whose fine proportion, showed well what a dainty guest was
wont there to be lodged. It was a delight to Zelmane, to see that the dog was
therewith delighted, and so let him go a little way withal, who quickly
carried it out of sight among certain trees and bushes, which were very close
together. But by and by he came again, and amongst the raiments ( Miso and
Mopsa being preparing sheets against their coming out) the dog lighted upon a
little book of four or five leaves of paper, and was bearing that away to.
But then Zelmane (not knowing what importance it might be of) ran after the
dog, who going straight to those bushes, she might see the dog deliver it to a
Gentleman who secretly lay there. But she hastily coming in, the Ge^tleman
rose up, and with a courteous (though sad) countenance presented himself unto
her. Zelmanes eyes straight willed her mind to mark him: for she thought, in
her life she had never seen a man of a more goodly presence, in whom strong
making took not away delicacie, nor beauty fierceness: being indeed such a
right man like man, as Nature often erring, yet shows she would feign make.
But when she had a while (not without admiration) vewed him, she desired him to
deliver back the glove and paper, because they were the Lady Philocleas;
telling him withal, that she would not willingly let the^ know of his close
lying in that prohibited place, while they were bathing themselves; because she
knew they would be mortally offended withal. Fair Lady (answered he) the
worst of the complaint is already passed, since I feel of my fault in my self
the punishment. But for these things I assure you, it was my dogs wanton
boldness, not my presumption. With that he gave her back the paper: But for
the glove (said he) since it is my Lady Philocleas, give me leave to keep it,
since my heart cannot persuade it self to part from it. And I pray you tell the
Lady (Lady indeed of all my desires) that owes it, that I will direct my life
to honor this glove with serving her. O villain (cried out Zelmane, madded
with finding an unlooked for Rival, and that he would make her a messenger)
dispatch (said she) and deliver it, or by the life of her that owes it, I will
make thy soul (though too base a price) pay for it. And with that drew out her
sword, which ( Amazon-like) she ever ware about her. The Gentleman retired
himself into an open place from among the bushes; and the^ drawing out his too,
he offered to deliver it unto her, saying withal, God forbid I should use my
sword against you, since (if I be not deceived) you are the same famous
Amazon, that both defended my Ladies just title of beauty against the valiant
Phalantus, and saved her life in killing the Lion; therefore I am rather to
kiss your hands, with acknowledging my self bound to obey you. But this
courtesy was worse then a bastonado to Zelmane: so that again with ragefull
eyes she bad him defend himself, for no less then his life should answer it.
A hard case (said he) to teach my sword that lesson, which has ever used to
turn it self to a shield in a Ladies presence. But Zelmane harkening to no
more words, began with such witty fury to pursue him with blows and
thrusts, that Nature and Virtue commanded the Gentleman to look to his
safety. Yet still courtesy, that seemed incorporate in his heart, would not be
persuaded by danger to offer any offense, but only to stand upon the best
defensive guard he could; sometimes going back, being content in that respect to
take on the figure of cowardice; sometime with strong and well-met wards;
sometime cunning auoidings of his body; and sometimes faining some blows,
which himself pulled back before they needed to be with stood. And so with play
did he a good while fight against the fight of Zelmane, who (more spited with
that courtesy, that one that did nothing should be able to resist her) burned
away with choler any motions, which might grow out of her own sweet
disposition, determining to kill him if he fought no better; and so redoubling
her blows, drove the stranger to no other shift, then to ward, and go back;
at that time seeming the image of innocence against violence. But at length he
found, that both in public and private respects, who stands only upon
defense, stands upon no defense: For Zelmane seeming to strike at his head, and
he going to ward it, withal stepped back as he was accustomed, she stopped her
blow in the air, and suddenly turning the point, ran full at his breast; so
as he was driven with the pommell of his sword (having no other weapon of
defense) to beat it down: but the thrust was so strong, that he could not so
wholly beat it away, but that it met with his thigh, through which it ran.
But Zelmane retiring her sword, and seeing his blood, victorious anger was
conquered by the before-conquered pity; and heartily sorry, and even ashamed
with her self she was, considering how little he had done, who well she found
could have done more. In so much that she said, truly I am forie for your hurt,
but your self gave the cause, both in refusing to deliver the glove, and yet
not fighting as I know you could have done. But (said she) because I perceive
you disdain to fight with a woman, it may be before a year come about, you
shall meet with a near kinsman of mine, Pyrocles Prince of Macedon, and I
give you my word, he for me shall maintain this quarrel against you. I would
(answered Amphialus) I had many more such hurtes to meet and know that worthy
Prince, whose virtue I love and admire, though my good destiny has not been to
see his person.

Mopsa (curious in any thing, but her own good behavior) having followed and
seen Zelmane fighting, had cried, what she had seen, while they were drying
themselves, and the water (with some drops) seemed to weep, that it should
part from such bodies. But they careful of Zelmane (assuring themselves that
any Arcadian would bear reverence to them) Pamela with a noble mind, and
Philoclea with a loving (hastily hiding the beauties, where of Nature was
proud, and they ashamed) they made quick work to come to save Zelmane. But
already they found them in talk, and Zelmane careful of his wound. But when
they saw him they knew it was their cousin germain, the famous Amphialus; whom
yet with a sweete-graced bitterness they blamed for breaking their fathers
commandment, especially while themselves were in such sort retired. But he
craved pardon, protesting unto them that he had only been to seek solitary
places, by an extreme melancholy that had a good while possessed him, and guided
to that place by his spaniell, where while the dog hunted in the river, he had
with drawn himself to pacify with sleep his ouer-watched eyes: till a
dream waked him, and made him see that where of he had dreamed, and withal
not obscurely signified that he felt the smart of his own doings. But
Philoclea (that was even jealous of her self for Zelmane) would needs have her
glove, and not without so mighty a loure as that face could yield. As for
Zelmane when she knew, it was Amphialus, Lord Amphialus (said she) I have long
desired to know you, heretofore I must confess with more good will, but still
with honoring your virtue, though I love not your person: and at this time I
pray you let us take care of your wound, upon condition you shall hereafter
promise, that a more knightly combat shall be performed betweenevs. Amphialus
answered in honorable, sort, but with such excusing himself, that more and
more accused his love to Philoclea, and provoked more hate in Zelmane. But
Mopsa had already called certain shepherds not far of (who knew and well
observed their limits) to come and help to carry away Amphialus, whose wound
suffered him not without danger to strain it: and so he leaving himself with
them, departed from them, faster bleeding in his heart, then at his wound: which
bound up by the sheets, wherewith Philoclea had been wrapped, made him thank
the wound, and bless the sword for that favor.

CHAP. 12.
1 How Basilius found Plangus: 2 his lame^tation. 3 Philoclea entreated by
Zelmane to relate the story of Erona.

He being gone, the Ladies (with merry anger Zelmane invited them to the little
arbor, only reserved for her, which they willingly did: and there sitting,
Pamela having a while made the lute in his language, show how glad it was to be
touched by her fingers, Zelmane delivered up the paper, which Amphialus had at
first yielded unto her: and seeing written upon the backside of it, the
complaint of Plangus, remembering what Dorus had told her, and desiring to know
how much Philoclea knew of her estate, she took occasion in the presenting of
it, to ask whether it were any secret, or no. No truly (answered Philoclea)
it is but even an exercise of my fathers writing, upon this occasion: He was
one day (somwhile before your coming hither) walking abroad, having us two
with him, almost a mile hence; and crossing a hie way, which comes from the
city of Megalopolis, he saw this Gentleman, whose name is there written, one
of the proprest and best-graced men that ever I saw, being of middle age, and
of a mean stature. He lay as then under a tree, while his servant were
getting fresh posthorses for him. It might seem he was tired with the extreme
travail he had taken, and yet not so tired, that he forced to take any rest;
so hasty he was upon his journey: and withal so sorrowful, that the very face
thereof was painted in his face; which with pitiful motions, even groans,
tears, and passionate talking to him self, moved my Father to fall in talk
with him: who at first not knowing him, answered him in such a desperate phrase
of grief, that my Father afterward took a delight to set it down in such
form as you see: which if you read, what you doubt of, my sister and I are
hable to declare unto you. Zelmane willingly opened the leaves, and read it,
being written Dialogue-wise in this manner.

Plangus. Basilius. Plangus. ALas how long this pilgrimage does last?
What greater ills have now the heavens in store,
To couple coming harms with sorrows past?
Long since my voice is hoarce, and throat is sore,
With cries to skies, and curses to the ground,
But more I plain, I feel my woes the more.
Ah where was first that cruel cunning found,
To frame of Earth a vessel of the mind,
Where it should be to selfe-destruction bound?
What needed so high sprites such mansions blind?
Or wrapped in flesh what do they here obtain,
But glorious name of wretched humaine-kind?
Balls to the stars, and thralles to Fortunes reign;
Turned from themselves, infected with their cage,
Where death is feared, and life is held with pain.
Like players pla'st to fill a filthy stage,
Where change of thoughts one fool to other shows,
And all but jests, save only sorrows rage.
The child feels that; the man that feeling knows,
With cries first borne, the presage of his life,
Where wit but serves, to have true taste of woes.
A Shop of shame, a Book where blots be rise
This body is: this body so composed,
As in it self to nourish mortal strife.
So diverse be the Elements disposed
In this weak work, that it can never be
Made uniform to any state reposed.
Grief only makes his wretched state to see
(Even like a top which naught but whipping moves)
This man, this talking beast, this walking tree.
Grief is the stone which finest judgment proves:
For who grieves not has but a blockish brain,
Since cause of grief no cause from life remoues.

Basilius. How long will thou with monefull music stain
The cheerful notes these pleasant places yield,
Where all good haps a perfect state maintain?

Plangus. Cursed be good haps, and cursed be they that build
Their hopes on haps, and do not make despair
For all these certain blows the surest shield.
Shall I that saw Eronaes shining hair
Torn with her hands, and those same hands of snow
With loss of purest blood themselves to tear?
Shall I that saw those breasts, where beauties flow,
Swelling with sighs, made pale with minds disease,
And saw those eyes (those Sons) such shoures to show,
Shall I, whose ears her mournful words did seize,
Her words in syrup laid of sweetest breath,
Relent those thoughts, which then did so displease?
No, no: Despair my daily lesson says,
And says, although I seek my life to fly,
Plangus must live to see Eronaes death.
Plangus must live some help for her to try
Though in despair, so Love enforces me;
Plangus does live, and must Erona dye?
Erona dye? O heaven (if heaven there be)
Has all thy whirling course so small effect?
Serve all thy starrie eyes this shame to see?
Let doltes in haste some altars fair erect
To those high powers, which idly sit above,
And virtue do in greatest need neglect.

Basilius. O man, take heed, how thou the Gods do move
To irefull wrath, which thou can not resist.
Blasphemous words the speaker vain do prove.
Alas while we are wrapped in foggie mist
Of our self-love (so passions do deceive)
We think they hurt, when most they do assist.
To harm us worms should that high Justice leave
His nature? nay, himself? for so it is.
What glory from our loss can he receive?
But still our dazeled eyes their way do miss,
While that we do at his sweet scourge repine,
The kindly way to beat us to our bliss.
If she must dye, then has she past the line
Of loath some days, whose loss how can thou moan,
That do so well their miseries define?
But such we are with inward tempest blown
Of minds quite contrary in waves of will:
We moan that lost, which had we did bemone.

Plangus. And shall she dye? shall cruel fire spill
Those beams that set so many hearts on fire?
Has she not force even death with love to kill?
Nay even cold Death enflamde with hot desire
Her to enjoy, where joy it self is thrall,
Will spoil the earth of his most rich attire.
Thus Death becomes a rival to us all,
And hopes with foul embracements her to get,
In whose decay Virtues fair shrine must fall.
O virtue weak, shall death his triumph set
Upon thy spoils, which never should lie waste?
Let Death first dye; be thou his worthy let.
By what eclipse shall that Son be defaste?
What mine has erst thrown down so fair a tower?
What sacrilege has such a saint disgra'st?
The world the garden is, she is the flower
That sweetens all the place; she is the guest
Of rarest price, both heaven and earth her bower.
And shall (O me) all this in ashes rest?
Alas, if you a Phoenix new will have
Burnt by the Sun, she first must build her nest.
But well you know, the gentle Sun would save
Such beams so like his own, which might have might
In him, the thoughts of Phaetons damme to grave.
Therefore, alas, you use vile Vulcans spite,
Which nothing spares, to melt that Virgin-waxe
Which while it is, it is all Asias light.
O Mars, for what does serve thy armed axe?
To let that wit-old beast consume in flames
Thy Venus child, whose beauty Venus lackes?
O Venus (if her praise no envy frames,
In thy high mind) get her thy husbands grace.
Sweet speaking often a currish heart reclaimes.
O eyes of mine, where once she saw her face,
Her face which was more lively in my heart;
O brain, where thought of her has only place;
O hand, which touched her hand when she did part;
O lips, that kissed her hand with my tears sprent;
O toonge, then dumb, not daring tell my smart;
O soul, whose love in her is only spent,
What ere you see, think, touch, kiss, speak, or love,
Let all for her, and unto her be bent.

Basilius. Thy wailing words do much my spirits move,
They vttred are in such a feeling fashion,
That sorrows work against my will I prove.
Me-thinkes I am partaker of thy passion,
And in thy case do glass mine own debilitie:
Selfe-guiltie folk most prone to feel compassion.
Yet Reason says, Reason should have ability,
To hold these worldly things in such proportion,
As let them come or go with even facility.
But our Desires tyrannical extortion
Does force us there to set our chief delightfulnes.
Where but a baiting place is all our portion.
But still, although we fail of perfect rightfulnes,
Seek we to tame the childish superfluities:
Let us not wink though void of purest sightfulnes.
For what can breed more peevish incongruities,
Then man to yield to female lamentations?
Let us some grammar learn of more congruities.

Plangus. If through mine ears pearce any consolation
By wise discourse, sweet tunes, or Poets fiction;
If ought I cease these hideous exclamations,
While that my soul, she, she lives in affliction;
Then let my life long time on earth maintained be,
To wretched me, the last worst malediction.
Can I, that know her sacred parts restrained be,
For any joy, know fortunes vile displacing her,
In mor all rules let raging woes contained be?
Can I forget, when they in prison placing her,
With swelling heart in spite and due disdainfulnes
She lay for dead, till I helped with vnlasing her?
Can I forget, from how much mourning plainfulnes
With Diamond in window-glasse she graued,
Erona dye, and end thy ougly painefulnes?
Can I forget in how strange phrase she craved
That quickly they would her burn, drown, or smother,
As if by death she only might be saved?
Then let me eke forget one hand from other:
Let me forget that Plangus I am called:
Let me forget I am son to my mother,
But if my memory must thus be thralled
To that strange stroke which conquered all my senses,
Can thoughts still thinking so rest unappalled?

Basilius. Who still does seek against himself offenses,
What pardon can avail? or who employes him
To hurt himself, what shields can be defenses?
Woe to poor man: each outward thing annoyes him
In diverse kinds; yet as he were not filled,
He heaps in inward grief, which most destroys him.
Thus is our thought with pain for thistles tilled:
Thus be our noblest parts dried up with sorrow:
Thus is our mind with too much minding spilled.
One day lays up stuff of grief for the morrow:
And whose good haps do leave him unprovided,
Condoling cause of friendship he will borrow.
Betwixt the good and shade of good divided,
We pity deem that which but weakness is:
So are we from our high creation slided.
But Plangus lest I may your sickness miss
Or rubbing hurt the sore, I here do end.
The ass did hurt when he did think to kiss.

When Zelmane had read it over, marueyling very Eronas death, and therefore
desirous to know further of it, but more desirous to hear Philoclea speak,
Most excellent Lady (said she) one may be little the wiser for reading the
Dialogue, since it nether sets forth what this Plangus is, nor what Erona is,
nor what the cause should be which threatens her with death, and him with
sorrow: therefore I would humbly crave to understand the particular discourse
thereof: because (I must confess) some thing in my travail I have heard of
this strange matter, which I would be glad to find by so sweet an authority
confirmed. The truth is (answered Philoclea) that after he knew my father to
be Prince of this country; while he hoped to prevail something with him in a
great request he made unto him, he was content to open fully unto him the
estate both of himself, and of that Lady; which with my sisters help (said
she) who remembers it better then I, I will declare unto you: and first of
Erona, (being the chief Subject of this discourse) this story (with more
tears and exclamations then I list to spend about it) he recounted.

CHAP. 13.
Erona 1 irreligious against Love, 2 must love the base Antiphilus, 3 is loved,
pursued, and beleaguered by the great Tiridates. 4 The two Greek Princes aid
her. 5 They combatte with two kings; Antiphilus with Plangus; they conquerors,
he prisoner. 6 Eronas hard-choice to redeem him. 7 Tiridates slain,
Antiphilus delivered, Artaxia chased by the two Princes, 8 and her hate to them.

Lycia, who had for the blessing of his marriage, this only daughter of his,
Erona; a Princess worthy for her beauty, as much praise, as beauty may be
praiseworthy. This Princess Erona, being 19. years of age, seeing the
country of Lycia so much devoted to Cupid, as that in every place his naked
pictures and images were superstitiously adored (either moved theru^to, by the
esteeming that could be no Godhead, which could breed wickedness, or the
shamefast consideration of such nakedness) procured so much of her father, as
utterly to pull down, and deface all those statues and pictures. Which how
terriblie he punished (for to that the Lycians impute it) quickly after
appeared.

Antiphilus: so mean, as that he was but the son of her Nurse, and by that
means (without other desert) became known of her. Now so evil could she
conceal her fire, and so wilfully perseuered she in it, that her father
offering her the marriage of the great Tiridates, king of Armenia (who desired
her more then the joys of heaven) she for Antiphilus-sake refused it. Many
ways her father sought to withdraw her from it; sometimes persuasions,
sometimes threatenings; once hiding Antiphilus, and giving her to understand
that he was fled the country: Lastly, making a solemn execution to be done of
another, under the name of Antiphilus, whom he kept in prison. But nether she
liked persuasions, nor feared threateninges, nor changed for absence: and when
she thought him dead, she sought all means (as well by poison as by knife) to
send her soul, at least, to be married in the eternal church with him. This so
brake the tender fathers heart, that (leaving things as he found them) he
shortly after died. Then forth with Erona (being seized of the crown, and
arming her will with authority) sought to advance her affection to the holy
title of matrimony.

But before she could accomplish all the sole^nities, she Tiridates made upon
her, only for her person; toward whom (for her ruin) Love had kindled his
cruel heart; indeed cruel and tyrannous: for (being far too strong in the
field) he spared not man, woman, and child, but (as though there could be found
no foil to set forth the extremity of his love, but extremity of hatred)
wrote (as it were) the sonets of his Love, in the blood, and tuned the^ in the^
cries of her subjects; although his fair sister Artaxia (who would accompany
him in the army) sought all means to appease his fury: till lastly, he
besieged Erona in her best city, vowing to win her, or lose his life. And
now had he brought her to the point either of a woeful consent, or a ruinous
denial; when there came thither (following the course which Virtue and Fortune
led the^) two excellent young Princes, Pyrocles and Musidorus, the one Prince
of Macedo^, the other of Thessalia: two princes, as Pla^gu^s said, (and he
witnessed his saying with sighs and tears) the most accnoplished both in body
and mind, that the Sun ever looked upon. While Philoclea spoke those words, O
sweet words (thought Zelmane to her self) which are not only a praise to me,
but a praise to praise it self, which out of that mouth issues.

These 2. princes (said Philoclea) as well to help the weaker (especially being a
Lady) as to save a Greek people from being ruined by such, whom we call and
count Barbarous, gathering together such of the honestest Lycians, as would
venture their lives to succor their Princess: giving order by a secreat
message they sent into the City, that they should issue with all force at an
appointed time; they set upon Tiridates camp, with so well-guided a fiercenes,
that being of both sides assaulted, he was like to be overthrown: but that
this Plangus (being General of Tiridates hors-men) especially aided by the two
mighty men, Euardes and Barzanes, rescued the footmen, even almost defeated:
but yet could not bar the Princes (with their succoures both of men and
victual) to enter the City.

Tiridates found would make the war long, (which length seemed to him worse
then a languishing consumption) he made a challenge of three Princes in his
retinue, against those two Princes and Antiphilus: and that thereupon the
quarrel should be decided; with compact, that neither side should help his
fellow: but of whose side the more overcame, with him the victory should
remain. Antiphilus (though Erona chose rather to bide the brunt of war, then
venture him, yet) could not for shame refuse the offer, especially since the
two strangers that had no interest in it, did willingly accept it: besides
that, he saw it like enough, that the people (werie of the miseries of war)
would rather give him up, if they saw him shrink, then for his sake venture
their ruin: considering that the challengers were far of greater worthiness
then him self. So it was agreed upon; and against Pyrocles was Euardes, King
of Bithinia; Barzanes of Hircania, against Musidorus, two men, that thought the
world scarce able to resist them: and against Antiphilus he placed this same
Plangus, being his own cousin germain, and son to the King of Iberia. Now so
it fell out that Musidorus slew Barzanes, and Pyrocles Euardes; which victory
those Princes esteemed above all that ever they had: but of the other side
Pla^gus took Antiphilus prisoner: under which color (as if the matter had
been equal, though indeed it was not, the greater part being overcome of his
side) Tiridates continued his war: and to bring Erona to a compelled yielding,
sent her word, that he would the third morrow after, before the walls of the
town strike of Antiphilus head; without his suite in that space were granted:
adding withal (because he had heard of her desperate affection) that if in the
mean time she did her self any hurt, what tortures could be devised should
belayed upon Antiphilus.

Then lo if Cupid be a God, or that the tyranny of our Antiphilus, O Erona? and
shall Tiridates enjoy thy body; with what eyes will thou look upon Antiphilus,
when he shall know that another possesses thee? But if thou will do it, can
thou do it? can thou force thy heart? Think with thy self, if this man have
thee, thou shall neu^er have more part of Antiphilus the^ if he were dead. But
thus much more, that the affection shall be gnawing, and the remorse still
present. Death perhaps will cool the rage of thy affection: where thus, thou
shall ever love, and ever lack. Think this beside, if thou marry Tiridates,
Antiphilus is so excellent a man, that long he cannot be from being in some
high place married:can thou suffer that too? If an other kill him, he does him
the wrong: if thou abuse thy body, thou do him the wrong. His death is a
work of nature, and either now, or at another time he shall die. But it shall be
thy work, thy shameful work, which is in thy power to shun, to make him live
to see thy faith falsified, and his bed defiled. But when Love had well kindled
that part of her thoughts, then went he to the other side. What (said he) O
Erona, and is thy Love of Antiphilus come to that point, as thou do now make
it a question, whether he shall die, or no? O excellent affection, which for
too much love, will see his head of. Mark well the reasons of the other side,
and thou shall see, it is but love of thy self which so disputes. Thou can
not abide Tiridates: this is but love of thy self: thou shall be ashamed to
look upon him afterward; this is but fear of shame, and love of thy self:
thou shall want him as much then; this is but love of thy self: he shall be
married; if he be well, why should that grieve thee, but for love of thy self?
No, no, pronounce these words if thou can, let Antiphilus die. Then the
images of each side stood before her understanding; one time she thought she
saw Antiphilus dying: an other time she thought Antiphilus faw her by Tiridates
enjoyed: twenty times calling for a servant to carry message of yielding, but
before he came the mind was altered. She blushed when she considered the effect
of granting; she was pale, when she remembered the fruits of denial. As for
weeping, sighing, wringing her hands, and tearing her hair, were indifferent
of both sides. Easily she would have agreed to have broken al disputatio^s with
her own death, but that the fear of Antiphilus further torments stayed her. At
length, eue^ the evening before the day appointed of his death, the
determination of yielding prevailed, especially, growing upon a message of
Antiphilus; who with all the coniuring terms he could devise, besought her to
save his life, upon any condition. But she had no sooner sent her messenger to
Tiridates, but her mind changed, and she went to the two young Princes, Pyrocles
and Musidorus, and falling down at their feet, desired the^ to trie^ some way
for her deliverance; showing her self resolved, not to ouer-liue Antiphilus,
nor yet to yield to Tiridates.

They that knew not what she had done in private, Antiphilus, having no armor,
nor weapon, but affection. And I cannot tell you how, by what devise (though
Plangus at large described it) the conclusion was, the wonderful valor of the
two Princes so prevailed, that Antiphilus was succored, and the King slain.
Plangus was then the chief man left in the camp; and therefore seeing no
other remedy, co^ueied in safety into her country Artaxia, now Queen of
Armenia; who with truelame^tations, made, comfort her in respect of her
brothers loss, who^ she studied all means possible to revenge upon every one
of the occasioners, having (as she thought) overthrown her brother by a most
abominable treason. In so much, that being at home, she proclaimed great rewards
to any private man, and her self in marriage to any Prince, that would destroy
Pyrocles and Musidorus. But thus was Antiphilus redeemed, and (though against
the consent of all her nobility) married to Erona; in which case the two Greek
Princes (being called away by an other adventure) left them.

CHAP. 14.
1 Philocleas narration broken of by Miso. 2 Her old-wiues tale, 3 and ballad
against Cupid. 4 Their drawing cuts for tales. 5 Mopsas tale of the old cut: 6
cut of by the Ladies to return to their stories.

Antiphilus, that brought her to this misery; and withal wish you al, that
from al mankind indeed you stop your ears. O most happy were we, if we did set
our loves one upon another. (And as she spoke that word, her cheeks in red
letters writ more, then her tongue did speak.) And therefore since I have
named Plangus, I pray you sister (said she) help me with the rest, for I have
held the stage long enough; and if it please you to make his fortune known,
as I have done Eronas, I will after take heart again to go on with his
falsehood; and so between us both, my Lady Zelmane shall understand both the
cause and parties of this Lamentation. Nay I beshrow me then (said Miso) I will
none of that, I promise you, as long as I have the government, I will first
have my tale, and the^ my Lady Pamela, my Lady Zelmane, and my daughter Mopsa
(for Mopsa was then returned from Amphialus) may draw cuts, and the shortest
cut speak first. For I tell you, and this may be suffered, when you are married
you will have first, and last word of your husbands. The Ladies laughed to see
with what an eger earnestness she looked, having threatening not only in her
Ferret eyes, but while she spoke, her nose seeming to threaten her chin, and
her shaking lims one to threaten another. But there was no remedy, they must
obey: and Miso (sitting on the ground with her knees up, and her hands upon her
knees) tuning her voice with many a quauering cough, thus discoursed unto the^.
I tell you true (said she) whatsoever Dametas. But let that pass, God amend
him: and yet I speak it not without good cause. You are full of your tittle
tattling of Cupid: here is Cupid, and there is Cupid. I will tell you now, what
a good old woman told me, what an old wise man told her, what a great learned
clerk told him, and gave it him in writing; and here I have it in my prayer
book. I pray you (said Philoclea) let us see it, and read it. No have but good
(said Miso) you shall first know how I came by it. I was a young girl of a
seven and twenty year old, and I could not go through the streate of our
village, but I might hear the young me^ talk; O the pretty little eyes of
Miso; O the fine thin lips of Miso; O the goodly fat hands of Miso: besides,
how well a certain wrying I had of my neck, became me. Then the one would
wincke with one eye, and the other cast daiseys at me: I must confess, seeing
so many amorous, it made me set up my peacocks tail with the hiest. Which when
this good old woman perceived (O the good would woman, well may the bones rest
of the good would woman) she called me to her into her house. I remember full well
it stood in the lane as you go to the Barbers shop, all the town knew her,
there was a great loss of her: she called me to her, and taking first a soppe
of wine to comfort her heart (it was of the same wine that comes out of Candia,
which we pay so dear for now a days, and in that good world was very good
cheap) she called me to her; Minion said she, (indeed I was a pretty one in
those days thongh I say it) I see a number of lads that love you; Well (said
she) I say no more: do you know what Love is? With that she brought me into a
corner, where there was painted a foul fie^d I trow: for he had a pair of
horns like a Bull, his feet cloven, as many eyes upon his body, as my
gray-mare has dappels, and for all the world so placed. This mo^ster fat like
a ha^gman upon a pair of gallows, in his right hand he was painted holding a
crown of Laurel, in his left hand a purse of money, and out of his mouth honge
a lace of two fair pictures, of a man and a woman, and such a countenance he
showed, as if he would persuade folks by those alureme^ts to come thither and
be hanged. I, like a tender hearted wench, skriked out for fear of the devil.
Well (said she) this fame is even Love: therefore do what thou list with all
those fellows, one after another; and it recks not much what they do to thee,
so it be in secreat; but upon my charge, never love none of them. Why mother
(said I) could such a thing come from the belly of the fair Fenus? for a few
days before, our (priest between him and me) had told me the whole story of
Venus. Tush (said she) they are all deceived: and therewith gave me this Book,
which she said a great maker of bailets had given to an old painter, who for a
little pleasure, had bestowed both book and picture of her. Read there (said
she) and thou shall see that his mother was a cow, and the false Argus his
father. And so she gave me this Book, and there now you may read it. With
that the remembrance of the good old woman, made her make such a face to weep,
as if it were not sorrow, it was the carcass of sorrow that appeared there.
But while her tears came out, like rain falling upon durtie furrows, the
latter end of her prayer book was read among these Ladies, which contained
this.

Poor Painters often with silly Poets join,
To fill the world with strange but vain conceits:
One brings the stuff, the other stamps the coin,
Which breeds naught else but gloses of deceits.
Thus Painters Cupid paint, thus Poets do
A naked god, young blind, with arrows two.
Is he a God, that ever flies the light?
Or naked he, disguised in all untruth?
If he be blind, how hitteth he so right?
How is he young, that tam'de old Phoebus youth?
But arrows two, and tipped with gold or lead:
Some hurt accuse a third with horny head.
No, nothing so; an old false knave he is
By Argus got on Io, then a cow:
What time for her Juno her Jove did miss,
And charge of her to Argus did allow.
Mercury killed his false fire for this act,
His damme a beast was pardoned beastly fact.
With fathers death, and mothers guilty shame,
With Jove's disdain at such a riuals seed,
The wretch compelled a runnagate became,
And learned what ill a miser state does breed,
To lie, feign, gloze, to steal, pry, and accuse,
Naught in himself each other to abuse.
Yet bears he still his parents stately gifts,
A horned head, cloven foot, and thousand eyes,
Some gazing still, some winking wilye shifts,
With long large ears where never rumor dies.
His horned head does seem the heaven to spite:
His cloven foot does never tread aright.
Thus half a man, with man he daily haunts,
Clothed in the shape which soonest may deceive:
Thus half a beast, each beastly vice he plants,
In those weak hearts that his advice receive.
He proules each place still in new colors decked,
Sucking ones ill, another to infect.
To narrow breasts he comes all wrape in gain:
To swelling hearts he shines in honors fire:
To open eyes all beauties he does rain;
Creeping to each with flattering of desire.
But for that Loves desire most rules the eyes,
Therein his name, there his chief triumph lies.
Millions of years this old driuell Cupid lives;
While still more wretch, more wicked he does prove:
Till now at length that Jove him office gives,
(At Iunos suite who much did Argus love)
In this our world a hangman for to be,
Of all those fools that will have all they see.
These Ladies made sport at the description and story Cupid. But Zelmane could
scarce suffer those blasphemies (as she took them) to be read, but humbly
besought Pamela she would perform her sisters request of the other part of
the story. Noble Lady (answered she, beautifying her face with a sweet
smiling, and the sweetness of her smiling with the beauty of her face) since I
am borne a Princes daughter, let me not give example of disobedience. My
gouernesse will have us draw cuts, and therefore I pray you let us do so: and
so perhaps it will light upon you to entertain this company with some story
of your own; and it is reason our ears should be willinger to hear, as your
tongue is abler to deliver. I will think (answered Zelmane) excellent
Princess my tongue of some value, if it can procure your tongue thus much to
favor me. But Pamela pleasantly persisting to have fortune their judge, they
set hands, and Mopsa (though at the first for squeamishnes going up and down,
with her head like a boat in a storm) put to her golden gols among them, and
blind Fortune (that saw not the coulor of them) gave her the pre-eminence: and
so being her time to speak (wiping her mouth, as there was good cause) she
thus tumbled into her matter. In time past (said she) there and so Knight
casting up his eyes to the window, did fall into such love with her, that he
grew not worth the bread he eat; till many a sorry day going over his head,
with Daily Diligence and Grisly Groans, he wan her affection, so that they
agreed to run away together. And so in May, when all true hearts rejoice, they
stale out of the Castle, without staying so much as for their breakfast. Now
forsooth, as they went together, often all to kissing one another, the Knight
told her, he was brought up among the water Nymphs, who had so bewitched him,
that if he were ever asked his name, he must presently vanish away: and
therefore charged her upon his blessing, that she never ask him what he was,
nor whether he would. And so a great while she kept his commandment; til once,
passing through a cruel wilderness, as dark as pitch; her mouth so watered,
that she could not choose but ask him the question. And then, he making the
greeuousest complaints that would have melted a tree to have heard them,
vanished quite away: and she lay down, casting forth as pitiful cries as any
shrich-owle. But having laien so, (wet by the rain, and burnt by the Sun) five
days, and five nights, she gat up and went over many a high hill, and many a
deep river; till she came to an Aunts house of hers; and came, and cried to
her for help: and she for pity gave her a Nut, and bad her never open her
Nut, til she was come to the extremest misery that ever tongue could speak of.
And so she went, and she went, and never rested the evening, where she went in
the morning; til she came to a second Aunt; and she gave her another Nut.

Now good Mopsa (said the sweet Philoclea) I pray Mopsa was very glad of the
bargain, especially that it should grow a festiual Tale: so that Zelmane, who
desired to find the uttermost what these Ladies understood touching her self,
and having understood the danger of Erona (of which before she had never heard)
purposing with her self (as soon as this pursuit she now was in, was brought
to any effect) to succor her, entreated again, that she might know as well
the story of Plangus, as of Erona. Philoclea referred it to her sisters
perfecter remembrance, who with so sweet a voice, and so winning a grace, as in
themselves were of most forcible eloquence to procure attention, in this manner
to their earnest request soon condiscended.

CHAP. 15.
1 Plangus-his parcntage. 2 His trick of youth, 3 espied, 4 and turned over by,
and to his old father. 5 An inueagling-womans arts. 6 A guilty stepmothers
devilish practices against Plangus. 7 Her ministers false informations. 8
Plangus perplexities. 9 His fathers ielousies. The Queens complots 10 to feed
the ones suspicion, 11 and work the others overthrow. 12 Plangus taken; 13
delivered flietch: 14 is pursued with old hate, and new treason 15 Yet must he
serve abroad, while a new heir is made at home. 16 This story broken off by
Basilius.

Plangus as yet lives, and is King of Iberia: a man (if the judgment of
Plangus may be accepted) of no wicked nature, nor willingly doing evil,
without himself mistake the evil, seeing it disguised under some form of
goodness. This Prince, being married at the first to a Princess (who both
from her auncesters, and in her self was worthy of him) by her had this son,
Plangus. Not long after whose birth, the Queen (as though she had performed
the message for which she was sent into the world) returned again unto her
maker. The King (sealing up al thoughts of love under the image of her memory)
remained a widdower many years after; recompencing the grief of that
disioyning from her, in conioyning in himself both a fatherly and a motherly
care toward her only child, Plangus. Who being grown to man's age, as our own
eyes may judge, could not but fertilly requite his fathers fatherly education.

her face. And so possessed he his desire without any interruption; he constantly
favoring her, and she thinking, that the enameling of a Princes name, might
hide the spots of a broken wedlock. But as I have seen one that was sick of a
sleeping disease, could not be made wake, but with pinching of him: so out of
his sinful sleep his mind (unworthy so to be lost) was not to be called to
it self, but by a sharp accident.

It fell out, that his many-times leaving of the court

Whereupon, the King (to give his fault the greater) employed all his wit to
bring his father to a better opinion. And because he might bend him from that
(as he counted it) crooked conceit of her, he wrested him, as much as he could
possibly, to the other side: not sticking with prodigal protestations to set
forth her chastity; not denying his own attempts, but thereby the more
extolling her virtue. His Sophistry prevailed, his father believed; and so
believed, that ere long (though he were already stepped into the winter of his
age) he found himself warm in those desires, which were in his son far
more excusable. To be short, he gave himself over unto it; and (because he
would avoid the odious comparison of a young rival) sent away his son with
an army, to the subduing of a Province lately rebelled against him, which he
knew could not be a less work, the^ of three or four years. Wherein he
behaved him so worthily, as even to this country the fame thereof came, long
before his own coming: while yet his father had a speedier succes, but in a
far vnnobler conquest. For while Plangus was away, the old man (growing only
in age and affection) followed his suite with all means of dishonest servants,
large promises, and each thing else that might help to counteruaile his own
vnlouelines.

Plangus, or at lest not hoping of him to obtain so aspiring a purpose, left
no art unused, which might keep the line from breaking, whereat the fish was
already taken; not drawing him violently, but letting him play himself upon the
hook, which he had greedely swalowed. For, accompanying her mourning with a
doleful countenance, yet neither forgetting hansomnes in her mourning
garments, nor sweetenes in her doleful countenance; her words were ever
seasoned with sighs; and any favor she showed, bathed in tears, that
affection might see cause of pity; and pity might persuade cause of affection.
And being grown skillful in his humors, she was no less skillful in applying
his humors: never suffering his fear to fall to a despair, nor his hope to
hasten to an assurance: she was content he should think that she loved him;
and a certain stolen look should sometimes (as though it were against her
will) bewray it: But if thereupon he grew bold, he straight was encountered
with a mask of virtue. And that which seems most impossible unto me, (for as
near as I can I repeat it as Plangus told it) she could not only sigh when
she would, as all can do; and weep when she would, as (they say) some can do;
but (being most impudent in her heart) she could, when she would, teach her
chekes blushing, and make shame fastnes the cloak of shamelesnes. In sum, to
leave out many particularities which he recited, she did not only use so the
spur, that his Desire ran on, but so the bit, that it ran on, eue^ in such a
careere as she would have it; that within a while, the king, seeing with no
other eyes but such as she gave him, and thinking no other thoghts but such as
she taught him; having at the first liberal measure of favors, then shortened
of the^, when most his Desire was inflamed; he saw no other way but marriage to
satisfy his longing, and her mind (as he thought) loving, but chastely loving.
So that by the time Plangus returned from being notably victorious of the
Rebels, he found his father, not only married, but already a father of a son
and a daughter by this woman. Which though Pla^gus (as he had every way just
cause) was grieved at; yet did his grief never bring forth either co^temning of
her, or repining at his father. But she (who besides she was in her, or if it
were a shame, a shame not of the fault, but of the repulse, she did not only
(as hating him) thirst for a revenge, but (as fearing harm from him) endeavored
to do harm unto him. Therefore did she try the uttermost of her wicked wit,
how to overthrow him in the foundation of his strength, which was, in the
favor of his father: which because she saw strong both in nature and desert,
it required the more cunning how to undermine it. And therefore (shunning the
ordinary trade of hireling sycophants) she made her praises of him, to be
accusations; and her aduauncing him, to be his ruin. For first with words
(nearer admiration then liking) she would extol his excelle^cies, the
goodlines of his shape, the power of his wit, the valiantnes of his courage,
the fortunatenes of his successes: so as the father might find in her a
singular love toward him: nay, she shunned not to kindle some few sparks of
jealousy in him. Thus having gotten an opinion in his father, that she was
far from meaning mischief to the son, then fell she to praise him with no
less vehemency of affection, but with much more cunning of malice. For then
she sets forth the liberty of his mind, the high flying of his thoughts, the
fitness in him to bear rule, the singular love the Subjects bare him; that it
was doubtful, whether his wit were greater in winning their favors, or his
courage in employing their favors: that he was not borne to live a
subiect-life, each action of his bearing in it Majesty, such a Kingly
entertainment, such a Kingly magnificence, such a Kingly heart for
enterprises: especially remembering those virtues, which in a successor are no
more honored by the subjects, then suspected of the Princes. Then would she by
putting-of obiectio^s, bring in obiectio^s to her husbands head, already
infected with suspision. Nay (would she say) I dare take it upon my death, that
he is no such son, as many of like might have been, who loved greatness so
well, as to build their greatness upon their fathers ruin. Indeed Ambition,
like Love, can abide no lingering, and ever urges on his own successes; hating
nothing, but what may stop the^. But the Gods forbid, we should ever once
dream of any such thing in him, who perhaps might be content, that you and the
world should know, what he can do: but the more power he has to hurt, the
more admirable is his praise, that he will not hurt. Then ever remembering to
strengthen the suspicion of his estate with private jealousy of her love, doing
him excessive honor when he was in presence, and repeating his pretty speeches
and graces in his absence; besides, causing him to be employed in all such
dangerous matters, as either he should perish in them, or if he prevailed, they
should increase his glory: which she made a weapon to wou^d him, until she
found that suspicion began already to speak for it self, and that her
husbands ears were grown hungry of rumors, and his eyes prying into every
accident.

Then took she help to her of a servant near about the King to look to
himself; for that all the court and City were full of whisperings, and
expectation of some sudden change, upon what ground himself knew not.
Another time he would counsel the King to make much of his son, and hold
his favor, for that it was too late now to keep him under. Now seeming to
fear himself, because (he said) Plangus loved none of them that were great
about his father. Lastly, breaking with him directly (making a sorrowful
countenance, and an humble gesture bear false witness for his true meaning)
that he found, not only soldiery, but people weary of his government, and al
their affections bent upon Plangus. Both he and the Queen concurring in
strange dreams, and each thing else, that in a mind (already perplexed) might
breed astonishment: so that within a while, all Plangus actions began to be
translated into the language of suspicion.

Plangus found, yet could he not avoid, even co^traries being driven to draw
one yoke of argument: if he were magnifice^t, he spent much with an aspiring
intent: if he spared, he heaped much with an aspiring intent: if he spoke
courteously, he angled the peoples hearts: if he were silent, he mused upon some
dangerous plot. In sum, if he could have turned himself to as many forms as
Proteus, every form should have been made tedious.

make the son bind the father. This word (finding the King already
supersticious through suspision) amazed him straight, as a presage of his own
fortune: so that, returning, and breaking with his wife how much he misdoubted
his estate, she made such gaine-saying answers, as while they straue, straue
to be overcome. But even while the doubts most boiled, she thus nourished them.

She underhand dealt with the principal me^ of that Plangus, his associate in
government with him: assuring the^, that not only she would join with them,
but that the father himself would take it kindly; chargeing the^ not to
acquaint Plangus withal; for that perhaps it might be harmeful unto him, if the
King should find, that he were a party. They (who thought they might do it, not
only willingly, because they loved him, and truly, because such indeed was the
mind of the people, but safely, because she who ruled the King was agreed
thereto) accomplished her counsel: she indeed keeping promise of vehement
persuading the same: which the more she and they did, the more she knew her
husband would fear, and hate the cause of his fear. Plangus found this, and
humbly protested against such desire, or will to accept. But the more he
protested, the more his father thought he disse^bled, accou^ting his integrity
to be but a cunning face of falsehood: and therefore delaying the desire of his
subjects, attended some fit occasion to lay hands upon his son: which his
wife thus brought to pass.

She caused that same minister of hers to go unto Pla^gus, and (enabling his
words with great show of faith, and endearing them with desire of secrecy) to
tell him, that he found his ruin conspired by his stepmother, with certain of
the noble men of that country, the King himself giving his consent, and that
few days should pass, before the putting it in practice: with all discovering
the very truth indeed, with what cunning his stepmother had proceeded. This
agreing with Plangus his own opinion, made him give him the better credit: yet
not so far, as to fly out of his country (according to the naughty fellows
persuasion) but to attend, and to see further. Whereupon the fellow (by the
direction of his mistress) told him one day, that the same night, about one of
the clock, the King had appointed to have his wife, and those noble me^
together, to deliberate of their manner of proceeding against Plangus: and
therefore offered him, that if himself would agree, he would bring him into a
place where he should hear all that passed; and so have the more reason both
to himself, and to the world, to seek his safety. The poor Pla^gus (being
subject to that only disadvantage of honest hearts, credulity) was persuaded by
him: and arming himself (because of his late going) was closely conveyed into
the place appointed. In the mean time his stepmother, making all her gestures
cunningly counterfeit a miserable affliction, she lay almost groueling on the
flower of her chamber, not suffering any body to comfort her; until they
calling for her husband, and he held of with long enquiry, at length, she told
him (even almost crying out every word) that she was weary of her life, since
she was brought to that plunge, either to conceal her husbands murder, or
accuse her son, who had ever been more dear, then a son unto her. Then
with many interruptions and exclamations she told him, that her son Plangus
(sollicting her in the old affection between them) had besought her to put her
helping hand to the death of the King; assuring her, that though all the laws
in the world were against it, he would marry her when he were King.

She had not fully said thus much, with many pitiful Pla^gus: andru^ning
himself out of breath, fell at the Kings feet, beseeching him to save himself,
for that there was a man with sword drawn in the next room. The King
affrighted, went out, and called his guard, who entering the place, found indeed
Plangus with his sword in his hand, but not naked, but standing suspiciously in
ough, to one already suspicious. The King (thinking he had put up his sword
because of the noise) never took leisure to hear his answer, but made him
prisoner, meaning the next morning to put him to death in the market place.

But the day had no sooner opened the eyes and ears Plangus, though he might
have used the force of his friends to revenge his wrong, and get the crown;
yet the natural love of his father, and hate to make their suspicion seem
just, caused him rather to choose a volu^tarie exile, the^ to make his fathers
death the purchase of his life: and therefore went he to Tiridates, whose
mother was his fathers sister, living in his Court eleven or Twelve years,
ever hoping by his intercession, and his own desert, to recover his fathers
grace. At the end of which time, the war of Erona happened, which my sister
with the cause thereof discoursed unto you.

Tiridates, and afterward his niece Artaxia, because in their Court he
received countenance, leaving no means vnatte^pted of destroying his son;
among other, employing that wicked servant of his, who undertook to empoyson
him. But his cunning disguised him not so well, but that the watchful servants
of Pla^gus did discover him. Whereupon the wretch was taken, and (before his
wel-deserued execution) by torture forced to confess the particularities of
this, which in general I have told you.

Tiridates with solemn Embassage sent it to the King) wrought no effect. For
the King having put the reins of the government into his wives hand, never
did so much as read it; but sent it straight by her to be considered. So as
they rather heaped more hatred upon Plangus, for the death of their servant.
And now finding, that his absence, and their reports had much diminished the
wavering peoples affection toward Plangus, with aduauncing fit persons for
faction, and granting great immunities to the commons, they prevailed so
far, as to cause the son of the second wife, called Palladius, to be
proclaimed successor, and Plangus quite excluded: so that Plangus was driven
to continue his serving Tiridates, as he did in the war against Erona, and
brought home Artaxia, as my sister told you; when Erona by the treason of
Amiphilus, But at that word she stopped. For Basilius Zelmane he was afraid
she had stolen away his daughters) invited them to follow the Suns counsel
in going then to their lodging; for indeed the Sun was ready to set. They
yielded, Zelmane meaning some other time to understand the story of Amiphilus
treason, and Erona danger, whose case she greatly tendered. But Miso had no
sooner espied Basilius, but that as spitefully, as her rotten voice could utter
it, she set forth the sauciness of Amphialus. But Basilius only attended what
Zelmanes opinion was, who though she hated Amphialus, yet the nobility of her
courage prevailed over it, and she desired he might be pardoned that youthful
error; considering the reputation he had, to be one of the best knights in the
world; so as hereafter he governed himself, as one remembering his fault.
Basilius giving the infinite terms of praises to Zelmanes both valor in
conquering, and pittifulnesse in pardoning, commanded no more words to be made
of it, since such he thought was her pleasure.

CHAP. 16.
1 The cumber of Zelmanes love and lovers. 2 Gynecias loue-lamentations. 3
Zelmanes passions 4 and sonet. 5 Basilius-his wooing, and Zelmanes answers. 6
Philoclea feed attorney to plead her fathers cause.

Zelmane received a tedious entertaineme^t; oppressed with being loved, almost
as much, as with loving. Basilius not so wife in covering his passion, could
make his tongue go almost no other pace, but to run into those immoderate
praises, which the foolish Lover thinks short of his Mistres, though they
reach far beyond the heavens. But Gynecia (whom womanly modesty did more
outwardly bridle) yet did oftentimes use the advantage of her sex in kissing
Zelmane, as she sat upon her bedde-side by her; which was but still more and
more sweet incense, to cast upon the fire wherein her heart was sacrificed:
Once Zelmane could not stir, but that, (as if they had been poppets, whose
motion stood only upon her pleasure) Basilius with serviceable steps,
Gynecia with greedy eyes would follow her. Basilius mind Gynccia well knew,
and could have found in her heart to laugh at, if mirth could have borne any
proportion with her fortune. But all Gynecias actions were interpreted by
Basilius, as proceeding from jealousy of his amorousnesse. Zelmane betwixt
both (like the poor child, whose father while he beats him, will make him
believe it is for love; or like the sick man, to whom the Physician swears,
the ill-tasting wallowish medicine he profers, is of a good taste) their love
was hateful, their courtesy troublesome, their presence cause of her absence
thence, where not only her light, but her life consisted. Alas (thought she to
her self) dear Dorus, what ods is there between thy destiny and mine. For
thou have to do in thy pursuit but with shepherdish folks, who trouble thee
with a little envious care, and affected diligence. But I (besides that I have
now Miso, the worst of thy devils, let loose upon me) am waited on by Princes,
and watched by the two wakefull eyes of Love and Jealousy. Alas, incomparable
Philoclea, thou ever see me, but do never see me as I am: thou hear
willingly all that I dare say, and I dare not say that which were most fit for
thee to hear. Alas who ever but I was imprisoned in liberty, and banished
being still present? To whom but me have lovers been iailours, and honor a
captivity?

But the night coming on with her silent steps upon Gynecia, who (when
Basilius after long tossing was gotten a sleep, and the cheereful comfort of
the lights removed from her) kneeling up in her bed, began with a soft voice,
and swollen heart, to renew the curses of her birth; and the^ in a manner
embracing her bed; Ah chastest bed of mine (said she) which never heretofore
could accuse me of one defiled thought, how can thou now receive this
desastred changeling? Happy, happy be they only which be not: and thy
blessedness only in this respect thou may feel, that thou have no feeling.
With that the furiously tare off great part of her fair hair: Take here
forgotten virtue (said she) this miserable sacrifice; while my soul was
clothed with modesty, that was a comely ornament: now why should nature crown
that head, which is so wicked, as her only despair is, she cannot be enough
wicked? More she would have said, but that Basilius (awaked with the noise)
took her in his arms, and began to comfort her; the good man thinking, it was
all for a jealous love of him: which humor if she would a little have
maintained, perchance it might have weakened his new conceived fancies. But he
finding her answers wandering from the purpose, left her to her self (glad the
next morning to take the advantage of a sleep, which a little before day,
ouerwatched with sorrow, her tears had as it were sealed up in her eyes) to
have the more conference with Zelmane, who baited on this fashion by these two
lovers, and ever kept from any mean to declare herself, found in her self a
daily increase of her violent desires; like a river the more swelling, the more
his current is stopped.

Basilius himself gave her good occasion to go beyond them. For having combd
and trickt himself more curiously, then any time forty winters before, coming
where Zelmane was, he found her given over to her musical muses, to the great
pleasure of the good old Basilius, who retired himself behind a tree, while
she with a most sweet voice did utter these passionate verses.

Loved I am, and yet complain of Love:
As loving not, accused, in Love I die.
When pity most I crave, I cruel prove:
Still seeking Love, love found as much I fly.
Burnt in my self, I muse at others fire:
What I call wrong, I do the same, and more:
Bard of my will, I have beyond desire:
I wail for want, and yet am chokte with store.
This is thy work, thou God for ever blind:
Though thousands old, a Boy entit'led still.
Thus children do the silly birds they find,
With stroking hurt, and too much cramming kill.
Yet thus much Love, O Love, I crave of thee:
Let me be loved, or else not loved be.
Basilius made no great haste from behind the tree, till Danae is painted, when
she so dainly saw the golden shoure, O heavenly woman, or earthly Goddess
(said he) let not my presence be odious unto you, nor my humble suit seem of
small weight in your ears. Vouchsafe your eyes to descend upon this miserable
old-ma^, whose life has hitherto been maintained but to serve as an increase
of your beautiful triumphs. You only have over thrown me, and in my bondage
co^sists my glory. Suffer not your own work to be despised of you: but look
upon him with pity, whose life serves for your praise. Zelmane (keeping a
cou^tena^ce ascanses she understood him not) told him, It became her evil to
suffer such excessive reverence of him, but that it worse became her to correct
him, to whom she owed duty: that the opinion she had of his wisdom was
such, as made her esteem greatly of his words; but that the words themselves
founded so, as she could not imagine what they might intend. Intend? (said
Basilius, proud that that was brought in question) what may they intend, but a
refreshing of my soul, and a swaging of my heat, and enjoying those your
excellencies, wherein my life is vpheld, and my death threatened? Zelmane
lifting up her face as if she had received a mortal injury of him, And is
this the devotion your ceremonies have been bent unto? said she: Is it the
disdain of my estate, or the opinion of my lightness, that have emboldned
such base fancies toward me? enjoying quoth you? now little joy come to them
that yield to such enjoying. Poor Basilius was so appalled, that his legs
bowed under him; his eyes looked as though he would gladly hide himself; and his
old blood going to his heart, a general shaking all over his body possessed
him. At length with a wanne mouth; he was about to give a stammering answer,
when it came into Zelmanes head by this devise to make her profit of his
folly; and therefore with a relented countenance, thus said unto him. Your
words (mighty Prince) were unfit either for me to hear, or you to speak: but
yet the large testimony I see of your affection makes me willing to suppress
a great number of errors. Only thus much I think good to say, that the same
words in my Lady Philocleas mouth, as from one woman to another (so as there
were no other body by) might have had a better grace; and perchance have found
a gentler receipt.

Basilius (whose senses by Desire were held open, and Philoclea: whom he found
at that time duetifully watching by her mother, and Miso curiously watching
her; having left Mopsa to do the like service to Pamela. Basilius forthwith
calling Philoclea aside, (with all the coniuing words which Desire could
endite, and authority utter) besought her she would preserve his life, in who^
her life was begone; she would save his graye hairs from rebuke, and his aged
mind from despair; that if she were not cloyed with his company, and that she
thought not the earth ouer-burdened with him, she would cool his fiery
grief, which was to be done but by her breath. That in fine, whatsoever he
was, he was nothing but what it pleased Zelmane; all the powers of his spirit
depending of her: that if she continued cruel, he could no more sustain his
life, then the earth remain fruitful in the Suns continual absence. He
concluded, she should in one payment requite all his deserts: and that she
needed not disdain any service (though never so mean) which was warranted by
the sacred name of a father. Philoclea more glad then ever she had known her
self, that she might by this occasion, enjoy the private conference of
Zelmane, yet had so sweet a feeling of virtue in her mind, that she would not
suffer a vile color to be cast over her fair thoughts; but with humble grace
answered her father: That there needed nether promise nor persuasion to her, to
make her do her uttermost for her fathers service. That for Zelmanes favor,
she would in all virtuous sort seek it toward him: and that as she would not
pearce further into his meaning, then himself should declare, so would she
interpret all his doings to be accomplished in goodness: and therefore
desired, (if otherwise it were) that he would not imparte it to her, who then
should be forced to begin (by true obedience) a show of disobedience: rather
perfourming his general commandment, which had ever been, to embrace virtue,
then any new particular, sprung out of passion, and contrary to the former.
Basilius content to take that, since he could have no more (thinking it a great
point, if by her means, he could get but a more free access unto Zelmane)
allowed her reasons, and took her prosser tha^kfully, desiring only a speedy
return of comfort. Philoclea was parting, and Miso straight behind her, like
Alecto following Proserpina. But Basilius forced her to stay, though with much
a do, she being sharp-set upon the fulfilling of a shrewde office, in
ouer-looking Philoclea: and so said to Basilius, that she did as she was
commanded, and could not answer it to Gynecia, if she were any whitte from
Philoclea: telling him true, that he did evil to take her charge from her. But
Basilius, (swearing he would put out her eyes, if she stird a foot to trouble
his daughter) gave her a stop for that while.

CHAP. 17.
1 Zelmanes tears, 2 and tearefull dittie. 3 Philoclea enters conference with
her. 4 She shues, and shows her self Prince Pyrocles. 5 Philoclea fears
much, but loves more. 6 Their conclusion, 7 with reentrie to their intermitted
historiologie.

SO away departed Philoclea, with a new field of fancies for her trauayling
mind. For well she saw, her father was grown her adverse party, and yet her
fortune such, as she must favor her Rival; and the fortune of that fortune
such, as neither that did hurt her, nor any contrary mean help her.

But she walked but a little on, before she saw Zelmane Ladon, that (her tears
falling into the water) one might have thought, that she began meltingly to be
metamorphosed to the vnder-running river. But by and by, with speech she made
known, as well that she lived, as that she sorrowed. Fair streams (said she)
that do vouchsafe in your cleerenes to represent unto me my blubbered face, let
the tribute-offer of my tears unto you, procure your stay a while with me,
that I may begin yet at last, to find some thing that pities me: and that
all things of comfort and pleasure do not fly away from me. But if the
violence of your spring command you to haste away, to pay your duties to your
great prince, the Sea, yet carry with you these few words, and let the
uttermost ends of the world know them. A Love more clear then your selves,
dedicated to a Love (I fear) more cold then your selves, with the cleerenes
lays a night of sorrow upon me; and with the coldenes enflames a world of fire
within me. With that she took a willowe stick, and wrote in a sandy bank
these

Over these brooks trusting to ease mine eyes,
(Mine eyes even great in labor with their tears)
I laid my face; my face wherein there lies
Clusters of clouds, which no Sun ever cleares.
In watery glass my watric eyes I see:
Sorrows ill easde, where sorrows painted be.
My thoughts imprisonde in my secreat woes,
With flamie breathes do issue often in sound:
The sound to this strange aier no sooner goes,
But that it does with Echoes force rebound.
And make me hear the plaints I would refrain:
Thus outward helps my inward griefs maintain.
Now in this sand I would discharge my mind,
And cast from me part of my burdnous cares:
But in the sand my tales forctolde I find,
And see therein how well the writer fares.
Since stream, aier, sand, mine eyes and ears conspire:

And as soon as she had written them (a new swarm of thoughts stinging her
mind) she was ready with her foot to give the newborn letters both death and
burial. But Philoclea (to whom delight of hearing and seeing was before a stay
from interrupting her) gave her self to be seen unto her, with such a lightning
of Beauty upon Zelmane, that nether she could look on, nor would look of. At
last Philoclea (having a little mused how to cut the threede even, between her
own hopeless affection, and her fathers unbridled hope) with eyes, cheeks,
and lips, (where of each sange their part, to make up the harmony of
bashfulnesse) began to say, My Father to whom I owe my self, and therefore,
When Zelmane (making a womanish habit to be the Armor of her boldness,
giving up her life to the lips of Philoclea, and taking it again by the
sweetness of those kisses) humbly besought her to keep her speech for a
while within the Paradise of her mind. For well she knew her fathers erra^d,
who should soon receive a sufficient answer. But now she demanded leave not
to loose this long sought-for commodity of time, to case her heart thus far,
that if in her agonies her destiny was to be condemned by Philocleas mouth, at
left Philoclea might know, whom she had condemned. Philoclea easily yielded to
grant her own desire: and so making the green bank the situation, and the
river the prospect of the most beautiful buildings of Nature, Zelmane doubting
how to begin, though her thoughts already had run to the end, with a mind
fearing the unworthiness of every word that should be presented to her ears,
at length brought it forth in this manner.

Most beloved Lady, the incomparable excellencies before the beginning, and
many circumstaunces in the uttering my speech, both bold, and fearful. But
the small opportunity of envious occasion (by the malicious eye hateful Love
does cast upon me) and the extreme bent of my affection (which will either
break out in words, or break my heart) compel me, not only to embrace the
smallest time, but to pass by respects due unto you, in respect of your poor
caitifes life, who is now, or never to be preserved. I do therefore vow unto
you, hereafter never more to omit all dutiful form: do you only now
vouchsafe to hear the matter of a mind most perplexed. If ever the found of
Love have come to your ears, or if ever you have understood, what force it
has had to conquer the strongest hearts, and change the most settled estates:
receive here an example of those strange Tragedies; one, that in him self
contains the particularities of all those misfortunes: and from henceforth
believe that such a thing may be, since you shall see it is. You shall see (I
say) a living image, and a present story of what Love can do, when he is bent
to ruin.

But alas, whether go thou my tongue? or how does my heart consent to
adventure the revealing his nearest touching secret? But peace Fear, thou
come too late, when already the harm is taken. Therefore I say again, O
only Princess, attend here a miserable miracle of affection. Behold here
before your eyes Pyrocles, Prince of Macedon, whom you only have brought to
this game of Fortune, and unused Metamorphosis: whom you only have made
neglect his country, forget his Father, and lastly, forsake to be Pyrocles:
the same Pyrocles, who (you heard) was betrayed by being put in a ship, which
being burned, Pyrocles was drowned. O most true presage: for these traitors, my
eyes, putting me in a ship of Desire, which daily burns, those eyes (I say)
which betrayed me, will never leave till they have drowned me. But be not, be
not, (most excellent Lady) you that Nature has made to be the Load-starre of
comfort, be not the Rock of shipwreck: you whom virtue has made the
Princess of felicity, be not the minister of ruin: you, whom my choice has
made the Goddess of my safety, O let not, let not, from you be powered upon me
destruction. Your fair face has many tokens in it of amazement at my words:
think then what his amazement is, from whence they come: since no words can
carry with them the life of the inward feeling. I desire, that my desire may be
waied in the balances of Honor, and let Virtue hold them. For if the highest
Love in no base person may aspire to grace, then may I hope your beauty will
not be without pity. If otherwise you be (alas but let it never be so)
resolved, yet shall not my death be comfortles, receiving it by your sentence.

The joy which wrought into Pygmalions mind, while Zelmanes words creepingly
entered into Philoclea: till her pleasure was fully made up with the manifesting
of his being; which was such as in hope did overcome Hope. Yet Doubt would
feign have played his part in her mind, and called in question, how she should
be assured that Zelmane was Pyrocles. But Love straight stood up and deposed,
that a lie could not come from the mouth of Zelmane. Besides, a certain spark
of honor, which rose in her well-disposed mind, made her fear to be alone
with him, with whom alone she desired to be (with all the other co^tradictions
growing in those minds, which nether absolutely clime the rock of Virtue, nor
freely sink into the sea of Vanity) but that spark soon gave place, or at
lest gave no more light in her mind, then a ca^dle does in the Suns presence.
But even sick with a surfeit of joy, and fearful of she knew not what (as he
that newly finds huge treasures, doubts whether he sleep or no; or like a
fearful Dear, which then looks most about, when he comes to the best feed)
with a shrugging kind of tremor through all her principal parts, she gave
these affectionate words for answer. Alas, how painful a thing it is to a
divided mind to make a wel-ioyned answer? how hard it is to bring inward
shame to outward confession? and what handsomnes trow you can be observed in
that speech, which is made one knows not to whom? Shall I say o Zelmane? Alas
your words be against it. Shall I say Prince Pyrocles? wretch that I am, your
show is manifest against it. But this, this I may well say; If I had continued
as I ought, Philoclea, you had either never been, or ever been Zelmane: you had
either never attempted this change, set on with hope, or never discovered it,
stopped with despair. But I fear me, my behavior ill governed, gave you the
first comfort: I fear me, my affection ill hid, has given you this last
assurance: I fear indeed, the weakness of my government before, made you
think such a mask would be grateful unto me: and my weaker government since,
makes you to pull of the visar. What shall I do then? shall I seek far-fetched
inventions? shall I labor to lay marble colors over my ruinous thoughts? or
rather, though the pureness of my virgin-minde be stained, let me keep the true
simplicity of my word. True it is, alas, too true it is, o Zelmane (for so I
love to call thee, since in that name my love first began, and in the shade of
that name my love shall best lie hidden,) that even while so thou were, (what
eye bewitched me I know not) my passions were fitter to desire, then to be
desired. Shall I say then, I am sorry, or that my love must be turned to hate,
since thou art turned to Pyrocles? how may that well be, since when thou were
Zelmane, the despair thou might not be thus, did most torment me. Thou have
then the victory: use it with virtue. Thy virtue wan me; with virtue preserve
me. Do thou love me? keep me then still worthy to be beloved.

Then held she her tongue, and cast down a self-accusing Pyrocles so carried up
with joy, that he did not envy the Gods felicity, presented her with some
jewels of right princely value, as some little tokens of his love, and quality:
and withal showed her letters from his father King Euarchus, unto him, which
even in the Sea had amongst his jewels been preserved. But little needed those
prooses to one, who would have fallen out with her self, rather then make any
contrary conjectures to Zelmanes speeches; so that with such imbracements, as
it seemed their souls desired to meet, and their hearts to kiss, as their
mouths did: which feign Pyrocles would have sealed with the chief arms of
his desire, but Philoclea commanded the contrary; and yet they passed the
promise of marriage.

Philocleas entreaty, who was willing to purloine all occasions of remaining
with Zelmane, she told her the story of her life, from the time of their
departing from Erona, for the rest she had already understood of her sister.
For (said she) I have understood, how you first in the company of your Noble
cousin Musidorus parted from Thessalia, and of diverse adventures, which with no
more danger then glory you passed through, till your coming to the succor of
the Queen Erona; and the end of that war (you might perceive by my self) I
had understood of the Prince Plangus. But what since was the course of your
doings, until you came, after so many victories, to make a conquest of poor
me, that I know not, the fame thereof having rather showed it by pieces; then
delivered any full form of it. Therefore, dear Pyrocles (for what can mine
ears be so sweetly fed with as to hear you of you) be liberal unto me of
those things which have made you indeed precious to the world, and now doubt
not to tell of your perils; for since I have you here out of them, even the
remembrance of them is pleasant. Pyrocles easily perceived she was content
with kindness, to put of occasion of further kindness; wherein Love showed
himself a cowardly boy, that durst not attempt for fear of offending. But
rather Love proved him self valiant, that durst with the sword of reverent
duty gaine-stand the force of so many enraged desires. But so it was, that
though he knew this discourse was to entertain him from a more straight
parley, yet he duist not but kiss his rod, and gladly make much of the
entertainment which she allotted unto him: and therefore with a desirous sigh
chastning his breast for too much desiring, Sweet Princess of my life (said
he) what Trophies, what Triumph, what Monuments, what Histories may ever make
my fame yield so sweet a Music to my ears, as that it pleases you to lend
your mind to the knowledge of any thing touching Pyrocles, only therefore of
value, because he is your Pyrocles? And therefore grow I now so proud, as to
think it worth the hearing, since you vouchsafe to give it hearing. Therefore
(only height of my hope) vouchsafe to know, that after the death of Tiridates,
and settling Erona in her government; for settled we left her, howsoever since
(as I perceived by your speech the last day) the ungrateful treason of her
ill-chosen husband overthrew her (a thing in truth never till this time by me
either heard, or suspected) for who could think without having such a mind as
Antiphilus, that so great a beauty as Eronas (indeed excellent) could not have
held his affection? so great goodness could not have bound gratefulness? and so
high advancement could not have satisfied his ambition? But therefore true it
is, that wickedness may well be compared to a bottomless pit, into which it
is far easier to keep ones self from falling, then being fallen, to give
ones self any stay from falling infinitely. But for my Cosen, and me, upon
this cause we parted from Erona.

CHAP. 18.
1 Anaxius-his surcuidrie; 2 and challenge to Pyrocles, accepted. 3 The
execution of Ladies done on a Light-of-loue. 4 Pyrocles-his intercession in the
cause. 5 The lewd parts of that light lecher. 6 His scoffing excuses. 7 Didos
revenge on him stopped, 8 and his revenge on her stayed by Pyrocles.

EVardes (the brave and mighty Prince, whom it was my fortune to kill in the
co^bat for Erona) had three Nephews, sons to a sister of his; all three set
among the foremost ra^cks of Fame for great minds to attempt, and great force
to perform what they did attempt; especially the eldest, by name Anaxius; to
whom al men would willingly have yielded the height of praise, but that his
nature was such, as to bestow it upon himself, before any could give it. For
of so unsupportable a pride he was, that where his deed might well stir
envy, his demeanor did rather breed disdain. And if it be true that the Giants
ever made war against heaven, he had been a fit ensigne-bearer for that
company. For nothing seemed hard to him, though impossible; and nothing unjust,
while his liking was his justice. Now he in these wars had flatly refused his
aid; because he could not brook, that the worthy Prince Plagus was by his
cosen Tiridates preferred before him. For allowing no other weights, but the
sword and spear in judging of desert, how-much he esteemed himself before
Plangus in that, so much would he have had his allowance in his service.

But now that he understood that his uncle was slain Lycia; where he would
prove upon me, that I had by some treachery overcome his uncle, whom else many
hundreds such as I, could not have withstood. Youth and success made me
willing enough to accept any such bargain; especially, because I had heard
that your cosen Amphialus (who for some years has universally borne the name
of the best Knight in the world) had diverse times fought with him, and never
been able to master him; but so had left him, that every man thought Anaxius in
that one virtue of courtesy far short of him, in all other his match; Anaxius
still deeming himself for his superior. Therefore to him I would go, and I
would needs go alone, because so I understood for certain, he was; and (I
must confess) desirous to do something without the company of the incomparable
Prince Musidorus, because in my heart I acknowledge that I owed more to his
presence, then to any thing in my self, whatsoever before I had done. For of
him indeed (as of any worldly cause) I must grant, as received, what ever there
is, or may be good in me. He taught me by word, and best by example, giving me
in him so lively an Image of virtue, as ignorance could not cast such mist over
mine eyes, as not to see, and to love it, and all with such dear friendship
and care, as (o heavens) how ca^ my life ever requite unto him? which made me
indeed find in my self such a kind of depending upon him, as without him I
found a weakness, and a mistrustfulnes of my self, as one strayed from his
best strength, when at any time I mist him. Which humor perceiving to
overrule me, I straue against it; not that I was unwilling to depend upon him
in judgment, but by weakness I would not; which though it held me to him,
made me unworthy of him. Therefore I desired his leave, and obtained it: such
confidence he had in me, preferring my reputation before his own tenderness;
and so privately went from him, he determining (as after I knew) in secreat
manner, not to be far from the place, where we appointed to meet, to prevent
any foul play that might be offered unto me. Full loath was Erona to let us
depart from her, (as it were) foreseeling the harms which after fell to her.
But I, (rid fully from those combers of kindness, and half a days journey
in my way toward Anaxius) met an adventure, (though in it self of small
importance) I will tell you at large, because by the occasion thereof I was
brought to as great comber and danger, as lightly any might escape.

making mine ear my guide, I left not many trees behind me, before I saw at
the bottom of one of them a gentleman bound (with many garters) hand and
foot, so as well he might tomble and toss, but neither run nor resist he
could. Upon him (like so many Eagles upon an Ox) were nine Gentle-women;
truly such, as one might well enough say, they were hansome. Each of them
held bodkins in their hands, wherewith they continually pricked him, having
been beforehand unarmed of any defense from the wast upward, but only of his
shirte: so as the poor man wept and bled, cried and prayed, while they sported
themselves in his pain, and delighted in his prayers, as the arguments of
their victory.

I was moved to compassion, and so much the more that neither during, nor after
the fight, she gave any truce to her cruelty, but still used the little
instrument of her great spite, to the well-witnest pain of the impatient
patient: and was now about to put out his eyes, which all this while were
spared, because they should do him the discomfort of seeing who prevailed over
him. When I came in, and after much ado, brought her to some conference, (for
some time it was before she would harken, more before she would speak; and
most, before she would in her speech leave off that remembrance of her bodkin)
but at length when I pulled off my head-peece, and humbly entreated her pardon,
or knowledge why she was cruel; out of breath more with choler (which
increased in his own exercise) the^ with the pain she took, much to this
purpose she gave her grief unto my knowledge. Gentleman (said she) much it is
against my will to forbear any time the executing of my just revenge upon this
naughty creature, a man in nothing, but in deceauing women; But because I see
you are young, and like enough to have the power (if you would have the mind)
to do much more mischief, then he, I am content upon this bad subject to read
a lecture to your virtue.

Pamphilus, in birth I must confess is noble (but what is that to him, if it
shall be a stain to his dead ancestors to have left such an offspring?) in
shape as you see not uncomely (indeed the fit mask of his disguised falsehood)
in conversation wittily pleasant, and pleasantly gamesome; his eyes full of
merry simplicity, his words of hearty companablenesse; and such a one, whose
head one would not think so stayed, as to think mischieuously: delighted in all
such things, which by imparting their delight to others, makes the vser thereof
welcome; as, Music, Daunsing, Hunting, Feasting, Riding, and such like. And
to conclude, such a one, as who can keep him at arms end, need never wish a
better co^panio^. But under these qualities lies such a poisonous addar as I
will tell you. For by those gifts of Nature and Fortune (being in all places
acceptable) he creepes, nay (to say truly) he flies so into the favor of
poor fillie women, that I would be too much ashamed to confess, if I had not
revenge in my hand, as well as shame in my cheeks. For his heart being wholly
delighted in deceiving us, we could never be warned, but rather, one bird
caught, served for a stale to bring in more. For the more he gat, the more
still he showed, that he (as it were) gave away to his new mistress, when he
betrayed his promises to the former. The cunning of his flattery, the readiness
of his tears, the infinitenes of his vows, were but among the weakest
threedes of his net. But the stirring our own passions, and by the entrance
of them, to make himself Lord of our forces; there lay his Masters part of
cunning, making us now jealous, now envious, now proud of what we had, desirous
of more; now giving one the triumph, to see him that was Prince of many,
Subject to her; now with an estranged look, making her fear the loss of that
mind, which indeed could never be had: never ceasing humblenes and diligence,
till he had embarked us in some such disadvantage, as we could not return
dryshod; and then suddenly a tyrant, but a crastie tyrant. For so would he use
his imperiousnes, that we had a delightful fear, and an awe which made us
loath to lose our hope. And, which is strangest (when sometimes with late
repentance I think of it) I must confess, even in the greatest tempest of my
judgment was I never driven to think him excellent, and yet so could set my
mind, both to get and keep him, as though therein had laien my felicity:
like them I have seen play at the ball, grow extremely earnest, who should
have the ball, and yet every one knew it was but a ball. But in the end, the
bitter sauce of the sport was, that we had either our hearts broken with sorrow,
or our estates spoiled with being at his direction, or our honors for ever
lost, partly by our own faults, but principally by his faulty using of our
faults. For never was there man that could with more scornful eyes behold
her, at whose feet he had lately lain, nor with a more vnmanlike bravery use
his tongue to her disgrace, which lately had song Sonets of her praises: being
so naturally inconstant, as I marvel his soul finds not some way to kill his
body, whereto it had been so long united. For so has he dealt with us
(unhappy fools,) as we could never tell, whether he made greater haste after
he once liked, to enjoy, or after he once enjoyed, to forsake. But making a
glory of his own shame, it delighted him to be challenged of unkindness: it
was a triumph unto him to have his mercy called for: and he thought the fresh
colors of his beauty were painted in nothing so well, as in the ruins of his
Lovers: yet so far had we engaged our selves, (unfortunate souls) that we
listed not complain, since our complaints could not but carry the greatest
accusation to our selves. But every of us (each for her self,) labored all
means how to recover him, while he rather daily sent us companions of our
deceit, then ever returned in any sound and faithful manner. Till at length
he concluded all his wrongs with betrothing himself to one (I must confess)
worthy to be liked, if any worthiness might excuse so unworthy a
changeableness; leaving us nothing but remorse for what was past, and despair
of what might follow. Then indeed, the common injury made us all join in
friendship, who till that time, had employed our endeavors one against the
other. For, we thought nothing was a more condemning of us, then the justifying
of his love to her by marriage: then Despair made Fear valiant, and Revenge
gave Shame countenance: whereupon, we (that you saw here) devised how to get
him among us alone: which he (suspecting no such matter of them, whom he had by
often abuses he thought made tame to be still abused) easily gave us
opportunity to do.

And a man may see, even in this, how soon Rulers

Among other of his answers (forsooth) I shall never forgette, how he would
prove it was no inconstancy to change from one Love to an other, but a great
constancy; and contrary, that which we call constancy, to be most
changeable. For (said he) I ever loved my Delight, and delighted always in
what was Lovely: and where-soeuer I found occasion to obtain that, I
constantly followed it. But these constant fools you speak of, though their
Mistres grow by sickness foul, or by fortune miserable, yet still will love her,
and so commit the absurdest inconstancy that may be, in changing their love
from fairenes to foulness, and from louelines to his contrary; like one not
content to leave a friend, but will straight give over himself to his mortal
enemy: where I (whom you call inconstant) am ever constant; to Beauty, in
others; and Delight in my self. And so in this iollie scoffing bravery he went
over us all, saying, He left one, because she was ouer-waiwarde; another,
because she was too soon won; a third, because she was not merry enough; a
fourth, because she was ouer-gamesome; the fifth, because she was grown with
grief subject to sickness; the sixth, because she was so foolish, as to be
ielous of him; the seventh, because she had refused to carry a letter for him,
to another that he loved; the eight, because she was not secret; the ninth,
because she was not liberal: but to me, who am named Dido, (and indeed have
met with a false AEnoeas) to me, I say, (o the ungrateful villain) he could
find no other fault to object, but that (perdie) he met with many fayrer.

have mangled him so, as should have lost his credit for ever abusing more. But
as you have made my fellows fly away, so for my part the greatness of his
wrong ouershadowes in my judgment the greatness of any danger. For was it
not in ough for him, to have deceived me, and through the deceit abused me,
and after the abuse forsaken me, but that he must now, of all the company, and
before all the company lay want of beauty to my charge? Many fairer? I trow
eue^ in your judgment, Sir, (if your eyes do not beguile me) not many fairer;
and I know (whosoever says the contrary) there are not many fairer. And of
whom should I receive this reproach, but of him, who has best cause to know
there are not many fairer? And therefore how-soeuer my fellows pardon his
injuries, for my part I will ever remember, and remember to revenge this
scorn of al scorns. With that she to him afresh; and surely would have put
out his cies (who lay muet for shame, if he did not sometimes cry for fear)
if I had not lept from my horse, and mingling force with in treaty, stayed her
fury.

But, while I was persuading her to meekenes, comes Anaxius, for whom I was
feign to stay two days in the appointed place, he disdaining to wait for me,
till he was sure I were there.

CHAP. 19.
1 The monomachie between Anaxius and Pyrocles; 2 adiourned by Pyrocles to
resuccour Dido. 3 The course of Didos danger. 4 The miserableness of her
father. 5 His carlish entertainment to Pyrocles; 6 and his treason against
him. 7 Pyrocles hard bestead. 8 Succored by Musidorus: 9 both saved by the
King of Iberia. 10 The execution of the traitors, and death of Dido.

And indeed he was turned, and coming upon me with his sword drawn, both
our staves having been broken at that encounter. But I was so ready to answer
him, that truly I know not who gave the first blow. But whosoever gave the
first, it was quickly seconded by the second. And indeed (excellentest Lady) I
must say truly, for a time it was well fought between us; he undoubtedly
being of singular valor, (I would to God, it were not abased by his too much
loftiness) but as by the occasion of the combat, winning and loosing ground,
we changed places, his horse happened to come upon the point of the broken
spear, which fallen to the ground chanced to stand upward; so as it lighting
upon his heart, the horse died. He driven to dismount, threatened, if I did not
the like, to do as much for my horse, as Fortune had done for his. But whether
for that, or because I would not be beholding to Fortune for any part of the
victory, I descended.

So began our foote-fight in such sort, that we were Pamphilus, whom I had
delivered (easy to be known, for he was bare faced) with a dosen armed men
after him; but before him he had Dido (that Lady, who had most sharply
punished him) riding upon a palfrey, he following her with most vnmanlike
cruelty; beating her with wandes he had in his hand, she crying for sense of
pain, or hope of succor: which was so pitiful a sight unto me, that it
moved me to require Anaxius to defer our combat, till an other day, and now
to perform the duties of Knighthood in helping this distressed Lady. But he
that disdaines to obey any thing but his passion (which he calls his mind) bad
me leave of that thought; but when he had killed me, he would then (perhaps) go
to her succor. But I well finding the fight would be long between us (longing
in my heart to deliver the Poor Dido) giving him so great a blow, as somewhat
stayed him, (to term it a right) I flatly ran away from him toward my horse,
who trotting after the company, in mine armor I was put to some pain, but
that use made me nimble unto it. But as I followed my horse, Anaxius followed
me: but his proud heart did so disdain that exercise, that I had quickly
ouer-run him, and ouer-taken my horse; being (I must confess) ashamed to see a
number of country folks, who happened to pass thereby, who hallowed and howted
after me as at the arrantest coward, that ever showed his shoulders to his
enemy. But when I had leapt on my horse (with such speedy agility, that they
all cried, O see how fear gives him wings) I turned to Anaxius, and aloud
promised him to return thither again, as soon as I had relieved the iniuried
Lady. But he railing at me, with all the base words angry contempt could
endite; I said no more, but, Anaxius, assure thy self, I nether fear thy
force, nor thy opinion. And so using no weapon of a Knight as at that time, but
my spurs, I ran in my knowledge after Pamphilus, but in all their conceits
from Anaxius, which as far as I could hear, I might well hear testified with
such laughters and games, that I was some few times moved to turn back again.

my horse sometimes, then of my self, so rightly to hit the way) I ouergat
the^ a little before night, near to an old il-fauoured castle, the place where
I perceived they meant to perform their vnknightly errand. For there they
began to strip her of her clothes, when I came in among them, and running
through the first with a lau^ce, the justness of the cause so enhabled me
against the rest (falsharted in their own wrong doing) that I had, in as short
time almost as I had been fighting with only Anaxius, delivered her from those
injurious wretches: most of whom carried news to the other world, that amongst
men secret wrongs are not always left unpunished. As for Pamphilus, he having
once seen, and (as it should seem) remembered me, even from the beginning
began to be in the rereward, and before they had left fighting, he was too far
of to give them thanks for their pains. But when I had delivered to the Lady
a full liberty, both in effect, and in opinion, (for some time it was before
she could assure her self she was out of their hands, who had laid so
vehement apprehension of death upon her) she then told me, how as she was
returning toward her fathers, weakly accompanied (as too soon trusting to the
falsehood of reconcilement) Pamphilus had set upon her, and killing those that
were with her, carried her self by such force, and with such manner as I had
seen, to this place, where he meant in cruel and shameful manner to kill
her, in the sight of her own Father; to whom he had already sent word of it,
that out of his castle window (for this castle, she said, was his) he might
have the prospect of his only childs destruction, if my coming, whom (she
said) he feared (as soon as he knew me by the armor) had not warraunted her
from that near approaching cruelty. I was glad I had done so good a deed for
a Gentlewoman not unhandsome, whom before I had in like sort helped. But the
night beginning to persuade some retiring place, the Gentlewoman, even out of
countenance before she began her speech, much after this manner invited me to
lodge that night with her father.

Chremes) she would hide no truth from me, which was in sum, that as he was
of all that region the man of greatest possessions, and riches, so was he
either by nature, or an evil received opinion, given to sparing, in so
unmeasurable a sort, that he did not only bar him self from the
delightful, but almost from the necessary use thereof; scarsely allowing him
self fit sustenaunce of life, rather then he would spend of those goods,
for whose sake only he seemed to joy in life. Which extreme dealing
(descending from himself upon her) had driven her to put her self with a
great Lady of that country, by which occasion she had stumbled upon such
mischance, as were little for the honor either of her, or her family. But so
wise had he showed himself therein, as while he found his daughter maintained
without his cost, he was content to be deaf to any noise of infamy: which
though it had wronged her much more then she deserved, yet she could not deny,
but she was driven thereby to receive more then decent favors. She concluded,
that there at left I should be free from injuries, and should be assured to
her-wards to abound as much in the true causes of welcomes, as I should want of
the effects thereof.

I, who had acquainted my self to measure the delicacie regard of my self,
but only the importunity of his daughter made me enter. Where I was met with
this Chremes, a driueling old fellow, lean, shaking both of head and hands,
alredie half earth, and yet then most greedy of Earth: who scarcely would
give me thanks for that I had done, for fear I suppose, that thankfulness
might have an introduction of reward. But with a hollow voice, giving me a
false welcome, I might perceive in his eye to his daughter, that it was hard to
say, whether the displeasure of her company did not ouer-way the pleasure of
her own coming. But on he brought me, into so bare a house, that it was the
picture of miserable happiness, and rich beggerie (served only by a company
of rusticall villains, full of sweat and dust, not one of them other, then a
labourer) in sum (as he counted it) profitable drudgerie: and all
preparations both for food and lodging such, as would make one detest
nigardnesse, it is so sluttish a vice. His talk nothing but of his poverty,
for fear belike lest I should have proved a young borrower. In sum, such a
man, as any enemy could not wish him worse, then to be himself. But there that
night bid I the burden of being a tedious guest to a loathsome host;
ouer-hearing him sometimes bitterly warn his daughter of bringing such costly
mates under his roof: which she grieuing at, desired much to know my name, I
think partly of kindness to remember who had done something for her, and
partly because she assured her self I was such a one as would make even his
miser-minde contented, with what he had done. And accordingly she demanded my
name, and estate, with such earnestness, that I whom Love had not as then so
robbed me of my self, as to be another then I am, told her directly my name
and condition: whereof she was no more glad then her father, as I might well
perceive by some ill-fauoured cheerfulness, which then first began to
wrinckle it self in his face.

But the causes of their joys were far different; for Artaxias setting my
head to sale, for having slain her brother Tiridates; which being the sum of
an hundredth thousand crowns (to whosoever brought me alive into her hands)
that old wretch, (who had ouer-liued all good nature) though he had lying idly
by him much more then that, yet above all things loving money, for moneys own
sake determined to betray me, so well deserving of him, for to have that which
he was determined never to use. And so knowing that the next morning I was
resolved to go to the place where I had left Anaxius, he sent in all speed to a
Captain of a Garrison hard by; which though it belonged to the King of Iberia,
(yet knowing the Captains humor to delight so in riotous spending; as he cared
not how he came by the means to maintain it) doubted not, that to be half
with him in the gain, he would play his quarters part in the treason. And
therefore that night agreeing of the fittest places where they might surprise
me in the morning, the old caitiffe was grown so ceremonious, as he would
needs accompany me some miles in my way; a sufficient token to me, if Nature
had made me apt to suspect; since a churles courtesy rathely comes but either
for gain, or falsehood. But I suffered him to stumble into that point of good
manner: to which purpose he came out with all his clownes, horst upon such
cart-iades, and so furnished, as in good faith I thought with my self, if that
were thrist, I wished none of my friends or subjects ever to thrive. As for his
daughter (the gentle Dido) she would also (but in my conscience with a far
better mind) prolong the time of farewell, as long as he.

Artaxia. But they could not have used worse eloquence to have persuaded my
yielding, then that; I knowing the little good will Artaxia bare me. And
therefore making necessity and justice my bestsword and shield, I used the
other weapons I had as well as I could; I am sure to the little case of a good
number, who trusting to their number more then to their valor, and valewing
money higher then equity, felt, that guiltlesnesse is not always with ease
oppressed. As for Chremes, he withdrew himself, yet so guilding his wicked
conceits with his hope of gain, that he was content to be a beholder, how I
should be taken to make his pray.

But I was grown so weary, that I supported my Musidorus came to my succor;
who having followed my trace as well as he could, after he had found I had left
the fight with Anaxius, came to the niggards Castle, where he found all burnd
and spoiled by the country people, who bare mortal hatred to that covetous
man, and now took the time, when the castle was left almost without guard, to
come in, and leave monuments of their malice therein: which Mustdorus not
staying either to further, or impeach, came upon the spur after me (because
with one voice many told him, that if I were in his company, it was for no good
meant unto me) and in this extremity found me. But when I saw that Cosen of
mine, me thought my life was doubled, and where before I thought of a noble
death, I now thought of a noble victory. For who can fear that has Musidorus
by him? who, what he did there for me, how many he killed, not stranger for
the number, then for the strange blows wherewith he sent them to a
wel-deserued death, might well delight me to speak off, but I should so hold
you too long in every particular. But in truth, there if ever, and ever, if
ever any man, did Musidorus show himself second to none in able valor.

Yet what the unmeasurable excess of their number coming thither of the King
of Iberia, that same father of that worthy Plangus, whom it has pleased you
sometimes to mention: who, (not yielding over to old age his country delights,
especially of hauking) was at that time (following a Merline) brought to see
this injury offered unto us: and having great numbers of Courtiers waiting upon
him, was straight known by the soldiers that assaulted us, to be their King,
and so most of them withdrew themselves.

Plangus against him, caused the Captains head presently to be stricken off,
and the old bad Chremes to be hanged: though truly for my part, I earnestly
labored for his life, because I had eaten of his bread. But one thing was
notable for a conclusion of his miserable life, that neither the death of his
daughter, who (alas the poor Gentlewoman) was by chance slain among his
clownes, while she ouerboldly for her weak sex sought to hold the^ from me,
nor yet his own shameful end was so much in his mouth as he was led to
execution, as the loss of his goods, and burning of his house: which often,
with more laughter then tears of the hearers, he made pitiful exclamations
upon.

CHAP. 20.
1 The two Princes passage to the Iberian Court. 2 Andromanas omniregencie. 3
Her parti-loue to them both. 4 Her fair and foul means to inueigle them. 5
Palladius love to Zelmane. 6 Zelmanes love to Pyrocles, and practice with her
Lover to release her beloved.

THis justice thus done, and we delivered, Anaxius, could learn nothing, but
that he was gone out of the country, boasting in every place, how he had made
me run away) we were brought to receive the favor of acquaintance with this
Queen Andromana, whom the Princess Pamela did in so lively colors describe
the last day, as still me thinks the figure thereof possesses mine eyes,
confirmed by the knowledge my self had.

And therefore I shall need the less to make you would not, and after, he
could not tell how to gouem, without being governed by her: but finding an ease
in not understanding, let loose his thoughts wholly to pleasure, entrusting to
her the entire conduct of all his royal affairs. A thing that may luckely
fall out to him that has the blessing, to match with some Heroical minded
Lady. But in him it was nether guided by wisdom, nor followed by Fortune, but
thereby was slipte insensibly into such an estate, that he lived at her
indiscreet discretion: all his subjects having by some years learned, so to
hope for good, and fear of harm, only from her, that it should have neded a
stronger virtue the^ his, to have vnwound so deeply an entered vice. So that
either not striving (because he was contented) or contented (because he would
not strive) he scarcely knew what was done in his own chamber, but as it
pleased her Instruments to frame the relation.

an evil mind in authority, does not only follow the sway of the desires
already within it, but frames to it self new desires, not before thought of.
For, with equal ardour she affected us both: and so did her greatness disdain
shamefastnes, that she was content to acknowledge it to both. For, (having many
times torn the veil of modesty) it seemed, for a last delight, that she
delighted in infamy: which often she had used to her husbands shame, filling
all men's ears (but his) with reproach; while he (hoodwinkt with kindness) lest
of al me^ knew who struck him. But her first degree was, by setting forth her
beauties, (truly in nature not to be misliked, but as much adua^ced to the
eye, as abased to the judgment by art) thereby to bring us (as
willingly-caught fishes) to bite at her bait. And there to had she that
scutchion of her desires supported by certain badly-dilige^t ministers, who
often cloyed our ears with her praises, and would needs teach us a way of
felicity by seeking her favor. But when she found, that we were as deaf to
the^, as dumb to her; then she lifted no longer stay in the suburbs of her
foolish desires, but directly entered upon the^; making herslef an impudent
suter, authorizing her self very much with making us see that all favor and
power in that realm, so depe^ded upon her, that now (being in her hands) we
were either to keep, or lose our liberty, at her discretion; which yet she so
te^pred, as that we might rather suspect, the^ she threate^. But when our
wounds grew so, as that they gave us leave to travel, and that she found we
were purposed to use all means we could to depart thence, she (with more and
more importunatnes) craved that, which in all good manners was either of us to be
desired, or not granted. Truly (most fair and every way excellent Lady) you
would have wondered to have seen, how before us she would confess the contention
in her own mind, between that lovely (indeed most lovely) brou^nes of Musidorus
his face, and this color of mine, which she (in the deceiuable style of
affection) would entitle beautiful: how her eyes wandered (like a glutton at a
feast) from the one to the other; and how her words would begin half of the
sentence to Musidorus, and end the other half to Pyrocles: not ashamed (seeing
the friendship between us) to desire either of us to be a mediator to the
other; as if we should have played a request at Tennis between us: and often
wishing, that she might be the angle, where the lines of our friendship might
meet; and be the knotte which might tie our hearts together. Which proceeding
of hers I do the more largely set before you (most dear Lady) that by the
foil thereof, you may see the noblenes of my desire to you, and the
warrantablenes of your favor to me.

Philoclea smiled, with a little nod. But (said Pyrocles) when she perceived
no hope by suite to prevail, then (persuaded by the rage of affection, and
encouraged by daring to do any thing) she found means to have us accused to
the King, as though we went about some practice to overthrow him in his own
estate. Which, because of the strange successes we had in the kingdoms of
Phrigia, Pontus and Galatia) seemed not unlikely to him, who (but skimming any
thing that came before him) was disciplined to leave the through-handling of
all, to his gentle wife: who forth with caused us to be put in prison, having
(while we slept) deprived us of our armor: a prison, indeed injurious,
because a prison, but else well testifying affection, because in all respects
as commodious, as a prison might be: and indeed so placed, as she might at all
hours, (not seen by many, though she cared not much how many had seen her)
come unto us. Then fell she to sause her desires with threatenings, so that we
were in a great perplexity, restrained to so unworthy a bondage, and yet
restrained by Love, which (I cannot tell how) in noble minds, by a certain
duty, claims an answering. And how much that love might move us, so much,
and more that faultines of her mind removed us; her beauty being balanced by
her shamelesnes. But that which did (as it were) tie us in captivity, was,
that to grant, had been wickedly injurious to him, that saved our lives: and to
accuse a Lady that loved us, of her love unto us, we esteemed almost as
dishonorable: and but by one of those ways we saw no likelihood of going out
of that place, where the words would be injurious to your ears, which should
express the manner of her suite: while yet many times earnestnes died her
cheeks with the color of shamefastnes; and wanton languishing borrowed of her
eyes the downe-cast look of modesty. But we in the mean time far from loving
her, and often assuring her, that we would not so recompense her husbands
saving of our lives; to such a ridiculous degree of trusting her, she had
brought him, that she caused him send us word, that upon our lives, we should
do whatsoever she commanded us: good man, not knowing any other, but that all
her pleasures bent to the preservation of his estate. But when that made us
rather pity, then obey his folly, then fell she to servile entreating us, as
though force could have been the school of Love, or that an honest courage
would not rather strive against, then yield to injury. All which yet could
not make us accuse her, though it made us almost pine away for spite, to
loose any of our time in so troublesome an idleness.

But while we were thus full of weariness of what to poison me with roses,
sometimes to heal me with wormwood) brought forth a remedy unto us: which
though it helped me out of that distres, alas the conclusion was such, as I
must ever while I live, think it worse then a wrack, so to have been
preserved. This King by this Queen had a son of tender age, but of great
expectation, brought up in the hope of themselves, and already acceptance of
the inconstant people, as successor of his fathers crown: whereof he was as
worthy, considering his parts, as unworthy, in respect of the wrong was
thereby done against the most worthy Plangus: whose great deserts now either
forgotten, or ungratefully remembered, all men set their sails with the
favorable wind, which blewe on the fortune of this young Prince, perchance
not in their hearts, but surely not in their mouths, now giving Plangus (who
some years before was their only cha^pion) the poor comfort of calamity,
pity. This youth therefore accounted Prince of that regio^, by name
Palladius, did with vehement affection love a young Lady, brought up in his
fathers court, called Zelmane, daughter to that mischieuously unhappy Prince
Plexirtus (of whom already I have, and sometimes must make, but never honorable
mention) left there by her father, because of the intricate changeablenes of
his estate; he by the motherside being half brother to this Queen Andromana,
and therefore the willinger committing her to her care. But as Love (alas) does
not always reflect it self, so fell it out that this Zelmane, (though truly
reason there was enough to love Palladius) yet could not ever persuade her
heart to yield thereunto: with that pain to Palladius, as they feel, that
feel an vnloued love. Yet loving indeed, and therefore constant, he used
still the intercession of diligence and faith, ever hoping, because he would
not put him self into that hell, to be hopeless: until the time of our being
come, and captiued there, brought forth this end, which truly deserves of
me a further degree of sorrow then tears.

Such was therein my ill destiny, that this young Zelmane (like some unwisely
liberal, that more delight to give presents, then pay debtes) she chose (alas
for the pity) rather to bestow her love (so much undeserved, as not desired)
upon me, then to recompense him, whose love (besides many other things) might
seem (even in the court of Honor) justly to claim it of her. But so it was
(alas that so it was) whereby it came to pass, that (as nothing does more
naturally follow his cause, then care to preserve, and benefit does follow
unfeigned affection) she felt with me, what I felt of my captivity, and
straight labored to redress my pain, which was her pain: which she could do
by no better means, then by using the help therein of Palladius: who (true
Lover) considering what, and not why, in all her commandments; and indeed she
concealing from him her affection (which she entitled compassion,) immediately
obeyed to employ his uttermost credit to relieve us: which though as great, as
a beloved son with a mother, faulty otherwise, but not hard-harted toward him,
yet it could not prevail to procure us liberty. Wherefore he sought to have
that by practice, which he could not by prayer. And so being allowed often to
visit us (for indeed our restraints were more, or less, according as the ague
of her passion was either in the fit, or intermission) he used the opportunity
of a fit time thus to deliver us.

CHAP. 21.
1 The cause of the Iberian yearly iustes. 2 Queen Helens praises. 3 The
prize borne by her Knights, which Palladius and the Princes set them to
reuerse. 4 The inventions and actions of seven tilters. 5 Palladius and the
Princes entry into the field, honor in it, and flight from it. 6 Andromanas
pursuit of them 7 to the death of her son 8 and her self.



Helen, Queen of Corinth; a Lady, whom Fame at that time was so desirous to
honor, that she borrowed all men's mouths to join with the sound of her
Trumpet. For as her beauty has won the prize from all women, that stand in
degree of comparison (for as for the two sisters of Arcadia, they are far
beyond all conceit of comparison) so has her government been such, as has
been no less beautiful to men's judgments, then her beauty to the eiesight.
For being brought by right of birth, a woman, a young woman, a fair woman, to
govern a people, in nature mutinously proud, and always before so used to
hard governors, as they knew not how to obey without the sword were drawn.
Yet could she for some years, so carry her self among them, that they found
cause in the delicacie of her sex, of admiration, not of contempt: and which
was notable, even in the time that many countries were full of wars (which for
old grudges to Corinth were thought still would conclude there) yet so handled
she the matter, that the threatens ever smarted in the threatners; she using so
strange, and yet so well-succeeding a temper, that she made her people by
peace, warlike; her courtiers by sports, learned; her Ladies by Love, chaste.
For by continual martial exercises without blood, she made them perfect in
that bloody art. Her sportes were such as carried riches of Knowledge upon the
stream of Delight: and such the behavior both of her self, and her Ladies,
as builded their chastity, not upon waywardnes, but by choice of worthiness: So
as it seemed, that court to have been the marriage place of Love and Virtue, and
that her self was a Diana apparelled in the garments of Venus. And this which
Fame only delivered unto me, (for yet I have never seen her) I am the
willinger to speak of to you, who (I know) know her better, being your near
neighbor, because you may see by her example (in her self wise, and of others
beloved) that neither folly is the cause of vehement Love, nor reproach the
effect, For never (I think) was there any woman, that with more unremovable
determination gave her self to the counsel of Love, after she had once set
before her mind the worthiness of your cousin Amphialus; and yet is nether her
wisdom doubted of, nor honor blemished. For (O God) what does better become
wisdom, then to discern, what is worthy the loving? what more agreeable to
goodness, then to love it so discerned? and what to greatness of heart, then to
be constant in it once loved? But at that time, that Love of hers was not so
publicly known, as the death of Philoxenus, and her search of Amphialus has
made it: but then seemed to have such leisure to send thither diverse choice
Knights of her court, because they might bring her, at lest the knowledge,
perchance the honor, of that Triumph.

Palladius (who himself had never used arms) persuaded the Queen Andromana
to be content (for the honor sake of her court) to suffer us two to have our
horse and armor, that he with us might undertake the recovery of their lost
honor: which she granted; taking our oath to go no further then her son, and
never to abandon him. Which she did not more for saving him, then keeping us:
and yet not satisfied with our oath, appointed a band of horsemen to have eye,
that we should not go beyond appointed limits. We were willing to gratify the
young Prince, who (we saw) loved us. And so the fourth day of that exercise, we
came into the field: where (I remember) the manner was, that the forenoone
they should run at tilt, one after the other: the afternoon in a broad field,
in manner of a battle, till either the strangers, or that country Knights wan
the field.

The first that ran was a brave Knight, whose devise Impresa was (...)

Against him came forth an Iberian whose manner of entering was, with bagpipes
in steed of trumpets; a shepherds boy before him for a Page, and by him a
dosen apparelled like shepherds for the fashion, though rich in stuff, who
carried his lances, which though strong to give a launcely blow indeed, yet so
were they colored with hooks near the mourn, that they pretily represe^ted
shephooks. His own furniture was dressed over with wool, so enriched with Jewels
artificially placed, that one would have thought it a marriage between the
lowest and the highest. His Impresa was a sheep marked with pitch, with this
word Spotted to be known. And because I may tell you out his conceit (though
that were not done, till the running for that time was ended) before the Ladies
departed from the windows, among them there was one (they say) that was the
Star, whereby his course was only directed. The shepherds attending upon
PHILISIDES went among the^, and fa^g an eclogue; one of the^ answering another,
while the other shepherds pulling out recorders (which possessed the place of
pipes) accorded their music to the others voice. The Eclogue had great praise:
I only remember six verses, while having questioned one with the other, of
their fellow-shepheards so daine growing a man of arms, and the cause of his
so doing, they thus said.

ME thought some staves he mist: if so, not much amiss:
For where he most would hit, he ever yet did miss.
One said he brake acrosse; full well it so might be:
For never was there man more crossely crossed then he.
But most cried, O well broke: O fool full gaily blessed:
Where failing is a shame, and breaking is his best.
Thus I have digrest, because his manner liked me well: But when he began to run
against LElius, it had near grown (though great love had ever been betwixt
them) to a quarrel. For Philisides breaking his staves with great
commendation, Lelius (who was known to be second to none in the perfection of
that Art) ran ever over his head, but so finely to the skillful eyes, that
one might well see, he showed more knowledge in missing, then others did in
hitting. For with so gallanta grace his staff came swimming close over the
crest of the Helmet, as if he would represent the kiss, and not the stroke of
Mars. But Philisides was much moved with it, while he thought Lelius would show
a contempt of his youth: till Lelius (who therefore would satisfy him, because
he was his friend) made him know, that to such bondage he was for so many
courses tied by her, whose disgraces to him were graced by her excellency, and
whose injuries he could never otherwise return, then honors.

But so by Lelius willing-missing was the odds of the Iberian side, and
continued so in the next by the excellent running of a Knight, though fostred
so by the Muses, as many times the very rustic people left both their
delights and profits to harken to his songs, yet could he so well perform
all armed sports, as if he had never had any other pen, then a Lance in his
hand. He came in like a wild man; but such a wildnes, as showed his eyesight
had tamed him, full of withered leaves, which though they fell not, still
threatened falling. His Impresa was, a mill-horse still bound to go in one
circle; with this word, Data fata sequutus. But after him the Corinthian
Knights absolutely prevailed, especially a great noble man of Corinth; whose
deuife was to come without any devise, all in white like a new knight, as
indeed he was; but so new, as his newnes shamed most of the others long
exercise. Then another from whose tent I remember a bird was made fly, with
such art to carry a written embassage among the Ladies, that one might say, If
a live bird, how so taught? if a dead bird, how so made? Then he, who hidden,
man and horse in a great figure lively representing the Phoenix: the fire took
so artificially, as it consumed the bird, and left him to rise as it were, out
of the ashes thereof. Against whom was the fine frosen Knight, frosen in
despair; but his armor so naturally representing Ice, and all his furniture so
lively answering thereto, as yet did I never see any thing that pleased me
better.

But the delight of those pleasing sights have carried Corinthians that morning
in the exercise (as they had done the days before) had the better; Palladius
neither suffering us, nor himself to take in hand that party till the
afternoon; when we were to fight in troops, not differing otherwise from
earnest, but that the sharpness of the weapons was taken away. But in the
trial Palladius (especially led by Musidorus, and somewhat aided by me)
himself truly behauing himself nothing like a beginner, brought the honor to
rest it self that night of the Iberian side: And the next day, both morning,
and afternoon being kept by our party, He (that saw the time fit for that
delivery he intended) called unto us to follow him; which we both bound by
oath, and willing by good-wil, obeyed: and so the guard not daring to interrupt
us (he commanding passage) we went after him upon the spur to a little house in
a forest near by: which he thought would be the fittest resting place, till
we might go further from his mothers fury, whereat he was no less angry, and
ashamed, then desirous to obey Zelmane.

Bythinia, not regarding shame, or danger of having entered into another
dominions: but (having with her about a three score hors-men) straight
commanded to take us alive, and not to regard her sons threatening therein:
which they attempted to do, first by speech, and then by force. But neither
liking their eloquence, nor fearing their might, we esteemed few swords in a
just defense, able to resist any unjust affaulters. And so Musidorus incredible
valor (beating down all lets) made both me, and Palladius, so good way, that
we had little to do to overcome weak wrong.

And now had the victory in effect without blood, Palladius (heated with the
fight, and angry with his mothers fault) so pursued our assaylers, that one of
them (who as I heard since had before our coming been a special minion of
Andromanas, and hated us for having dispossessed him of her heart) taking him to
be one of us, with a traitorous blow slew his young Prince: who falling down
before our eyes, whom he specially had delivered, judge (sweetest Lady) whether
anger might not be called justice in such a case: once, so it wroght in us,
that many of his subjects bodies we left there dead, to wait on him more
faithfully to the other world.

All this while disdain, strengthened by the fury of Andromana stay to the
last of the combat: and when she saw us light down, to see what help we might
do to the helpless Palladius, she came running madly unto us, then no less
threatening, when she had no more power to hurt. But when she perceived it was
her only son that lay hurt, and that his hurt was so deadly, as that already
his life had lost the use of the reasonable, and almost sensible part; then
only did misfortune lay his own ouglinesse upon his fault, and make her see
what she had done, and to what she was come: especially, finding in us rather
detestation then pity (considering the loss of that young Prince) and
resolution presently to depart, which still she labored to stay. But deprived
of all comfort, with eyes full of death, she ran to her sons dagger, and
before we were aware of it (who else could have stayed it) struck her self a
mortal wound. But then her love, though not her person, awaked pity in us,
and I went to her, while Musidorus labored about Palladius. But the wound was
past the cure of a better surge on then my self, so as I could but receive
some few of her dying words; which were cursings of her ill set affection, and
wishing unto me many crosses and mischances in my love, whensoever I should
love, wherein I fear, and only fear that her prayer is from above granted. But
the noise of this fight, and issue thereof being blazed by the country people
to some noble-me^ there-abouts, they came thither, and finding the wrong
offered us, let us go on our journey, we having recommended those royal bodies
unto the^ to be conveyed to the King of Iberia. With that Philoclea, seeing the
tears stand in his eyes with remembrance of Palladius, but much more of that
which thereupon grew, she would needs drink a kiss from those eyes, and he
suck another from her lips; whereat she blushed, and yet kissed him again
to hide her blushing. Which had almost brought Pyrocles into another discourse,
but that she with so sweet a rigor forbad him, that he durst not rebel,
though he found it a great war to keep that peace, but was feign to go on his
story: for so she absolutely badde him, and he durst not know how to disobey.

CHAP. 22.
1 A new complaint of Pamphilus new change, 2 to a graceless curtisan. 3
Zelmane loves, and as a Page serves Pyrocles. 4 The two Princes policy to
reconcile two warring brothers. 5 The unbrotherly brave combat of Tydeus and
Telenor. 6 Plexirtus his viperine unkindness to the kindest Leonatus. 7 His
conquest by the two brothers, 8 and his dogtrick to destroy them by themselves.
9 The regreete of the dying brothers.

SO (said he) parting from that place Pamphilus, thou art untrue, and woe is me
therefore. How often did thou swear unto me, that the Sun should loose his
light, and the rocks run up and down like little kiddes, before thou would
falsify thy faith to me? Sun therefore put out thy shining, and rocks run
mad for sorrow, for Pamphilus is false. But alas, the Sun keeps his light,
though thy faith be darckned; the rocks stand still, though thou change like
the wethercocke. O fool that I am, that thought I could graspe water, and
bind the wind. I might well have known thee by others, but I would not; and
rather wished to learn poison by drinking it my self, while my love helped
thy words to deceive me. Well, yet I would thou had made a better choice,
when thou did forsake thy unfortunate Leucippe. But it is no matter, Baccha
(thy new mistres) will revenge my wrongs. But do not Baccha, let Pamphilus live
happy, though I die.

Pamphilus) stepped to comfort her: and though I could not do that, yet I got
thus much knowledge of her, that this being the same Leucippe, to whom the
inconstant Pa^philus had betrothed himself, which had moved the other Ladies
to such indignation as I told you: nether her worthiness (which in truth
was great) nor his own suffering for her (which is wont to endeare affection)
could fetter his ficklenes, but that before his mariage-day appointed, he had
taken to wife that Baccha, of whom she complained; one, that in diverse places I
had heard before blazed, as the most impudentlie unchaste woman of all Asia;
and withal, of such an imperiousnes therein, that she would not stick to
employ them (whom she made unhappy with her favor) to draw more companions of
their folly: in the multitude of whom she did no less glory, then a Captain
would do, of being followed by brave soldiers: waiwardly proud; and therefore
bold, because extremely faulty: and yet having no good thing to redeem both
these, and other unlovely parts, but a little beauty, disgraced with wandering
eyes, and vnwaied speeches; yet had Pamphilus (for her) left Leucippe, and
withal, left his faith: Leucippe, of whom one look (in a clear judgment)
would have been more acceptable, then all her kindenesses so prodigally
bestowed. For my self, the remembrance of his cruelty to Dido, joined to
this, stirred me to seek foam revenge upon him, but that I thought, it should
be a gain to him to lose his life, being so matched: and therefore (leaving
him to be punished by his own election) we conveyed Leucippe to a house
thereby, dedicated to Vestall Nuns, where she resolved to spend all her
years (which her youth promised should be many) in bewayling the wrong, and
yet praying for the wrong-dooer.

But the next morning, we (having striuen with the Zelmane, Plexirtus daughter;
whom vnconsulting affection (unfortunately borne to me-wards) had made borrowe
so much of her natural modesty, as to leave her more-decent rayments, and
taking occasion of Andromanas tumultuous pursuing us, had apparrelled her self
like a Page, with a pitiful cruelty cutting of her golden hair, leaving
nothing, but the short curles, to cover that noble head, but that she ware upon
it a fair head-peece, a shield at her back, and a lance in her hand, else
disarmed. Her apparel of white, wrought upon with broken knots, her horse,
fair and lusty, which she rid so, as might show a fearful boldness, daring
to do that, which she knew that she knew not how to do: and the sweetness of
her countenance did give such a grace to what she did, that it did make hansome
the vnhansomnes, and make the eye force the mind to believe, that there was a
praise in that unskillfulness. But she straight approached me, and with few
words (which borrowed the help of her countenance to make themselves understood)
she desired me to accept her in my service; telling me, she was a noble-mans
son of Iberia, her name Daiphantus, who having seen what I had done in that
court, had stolen from her father, to follow me. I enquired the particularities
of the manner of Andromanas following me, which by her I understood, she hiding
nothing (but her sex) from me. And still me thought I had seen that face, but
the great alteration of her fortune, made her far distant from my memory: but
liking very well the young Gentleman, (such I took her to be) admitted this
Daiphantus about me: who well showed, there is no service like his, that serves
because he loves. For, though borne of Princes blood, brought up with tenderest
education, unapt to service (because a woman) and full of thoughts (because in
a strange estate;) yet Love enjoined such diligence, that no apprentise, no, no
bondslaue could ever be by fear more ready at all commandments, then that
young Princess was. How often (alas) did her eyes say unto me, that they loved?
and yet, I (not looking for such a matter) had not my conceit open, to
understand them. How often would she come creeping to me, between gladness to
be near me, and fear to offend me? Truly I remember, that then I maruailing,
to see her receive my commandments with sighs, and yet do them with
cheerefulnes: sometimes answering me in such riddles, as I then thought
childish in experience: but since returning to my remembrance, they have come
more near unto my knowledge: and pardon me (only dear Lady) that I use many
words: for her affection to me deserves of me an affectionate speech.

In such sort did she serve me in that kingdom of Bythinia, Bythinia and his
brother. For my excellent cousin, and I (dividing our selves to either side)
found means (after some trial we had made of our selves) to get such credit
with them, as we brought them to as great peace between themselves, as love
toward us, for having made the peace. Which done, we intended to return
through the Kingdom of Galatia, toward Thrace, to ease the care of our father
and mother, who (we were sure) first with the shipwreck; and then with the
other dangers we daily past, should have little rest in their thoughts, till
they saw us.

But we were not entered into that Kingdom, when by fights between two
Knights, that ever has adorned the martial story. So as I must confess, a
while we stood wondering, another while delighted with the rare bravery thereof;
till seeing such streams of blood, as threatened a drowning of life, we galloped
toward them to part them. But we were prevented by a dosen armed Knights, or
rather villains, who using this time of their extreme feebleness, all
together set upon them. But common danger brake of particular discord, so
that (though with a dying weakness) with a lively courage they resisted, and by
our help drove away, or slew those murdering attempters: among whom we hapt to
take alive the principal. But going to disarme those two excellent Knights, we
found with no less wonder to us, then astonishment to themselves, that they
were the two valiant, and indeed famous Brothers, Tydeus and Telenor; whose
adventure (as afterward we made that ungracious wretch confess) had thus
fallen out.

Leonatus had by his fathers death succeeded in the kingdom of Galatia, he
(forgetting all former injuries) had received that naughty Plexirtus into a
straight degree of favor, his goodness being as apt to be deceived, as the
others craft was to deceive. Till by plain proof finding, that the
ungrateful man went about to poison him, yet would not suffer his kindness to
be overcome, not by justice it self: but calling him to him, used words to
this purpose. Plexirtus (said he) this wickedness is found by thee. No good
deeds of mine have been able to keep it down in thee. All men counsel me to
take away thy life, likely to bring forth nothing, but as dangerous, as
wicked effects. But I cannot find it in my heart, remembering what fathers
son thou art. But since it is the violence of ambition, which perchance
pulls thee from thine own judgment, I will see, whether the satisfying that,
may quiet the ill working of thy spirits. Not far hence is the great city
of Trebisonde; which, with the territory about it, aunciently pertained unto
this crown, now unjustly possessed, and as unjustly abused by those, who have
neither title to hold it, nor virtue to use it. To the conquest of that for
thy self I will lend thee force, and give thee my right. Go therefore, and
with less unnaturalness glut thy ambition there; and that done, if it be
possible, learn virtue.

Plexirtus, mingling forsworn excuses with falsemeant Erona) by their virtue
chiefly (if not only) obtained the conquest of that goodly dominion. Which
indeed done by them, gave them such an authority, that though he reigned,
they in effect ruled, most men honoring them, because they only deserved
honor; and many, thinking therein to please Plexirtus, considering how much he
was bound unto them: while they likewise (with a certain sincere boldness of
selfe-warranting friendship) accepted all openly and plainly, thinking nothing
should ever by Plexirtus be thought too much in them, since all they were, was
his.

But he (who by the rules of his own mind, could construe feared what they
could do; and as suddenly suspected, what they would do, and as suddenly
hated them, as having both might, and mind to do. But dreading their power,
standing so strongly in their own valor, and others affection, he durst not
take open way against them: and as hard it was to take a secret, they being
so continually followed by the best, and every way hablest of that region: and
therefore used this devilish slight (which I will tell you) not doubting (most
wicked man) to turn their own frie^dship toward him to their own
destruction. He, (knowing that they well knew, there was no friendship between
him and the new King of Pontus, never since he succored Leonatus and us, to
his overthrow) gave them to understand that of late there had passed secret
defiance between them, to meet privately at a place appointed. Which though
not so fit a thing for men of their greatness, yet was his honor so engaged, as
he could not go back. Yet faining to find himself weak by some counterfeit
infirmity, the day drawing near, he requested each of them to go in his
stead; making either of the^ swear, to keep the matter secret, ever each from
other, delivering the self same particularities to both, but that he told
Tydeus, the King would meet him in a blew armor; and Telcnor, that it was a
black armor: and with wicked subtlety (as if it had been so appointed) caused
Tydeus to take a black armor, and Telenor a blew; appointing them ways how to
go, so as he knew they should not meet, til they came to the place appointed,
where each had promised to keep silence, lest the King should discover it was
not Plexirtus: and there in await had he laid these murderers, that who
ouerliued the other, should by them be dispatched: he not daring trust more
then those, with that enterprise, and yet thinking them too few, till
themselves by themselves were weakened.

This we learned chiefly, by the chief of those waybeaters, Bythinia, where we
learning thus much (as I have told you) caused the wicked Historian to
conclude his history, with his own well-deserued death.

CHAP. 23.
1 Zelmanes grief for Plexirtus fault. 2 Otaues, and his Giants war on
Pontus. 3 Plexirtus endaungered, needs help of the dead brothers. 4 Zelmane
thought-sicke, vnmaskes her self. 5 Her dying tears 6 and last requests. 7
Musidorus to Pontus, Pyrocles hardly parts to save Plexirtus. 8 The sourse and
course of his deaths-doome, 9 stayed by Pyrocles. 10 The combat of Pontus well
ended. 11 The Asian Princes meeting, to honor the two Greeks.

Daiphantus, that I could not but much marvel (finding them continue beyond
the first assault of pity) how the cause of strangers (for further I did not
conceive) could so deeply pearce. But the truth indeed is, that partly with
the shame and sorrow she took of her fathers faultiness, partly with the
fear, that the hate I conceived against him, would utterly disgrace her in my
opinion, whenever I should know her, so vehemently perplexed her, that her
fair color decayed; and daily, and hastily grew into the very extreme working
of sorowfulnesse: which often I sought to learn, and help. But she, as
fearful as loving, still concealed it; and so decaying still more and more,
in the excellency of her fairness, but that whatsoever weakness took away,
pity seemed to add: yet still she forced her self to wait on me, with such
care and diligence, as might well show had been taught in no other school, but
Love.

While we returning again to embarke our selves for Greece, understood that
the mighty Otaues (brother to Barzanes slain by Musidorus, in the battle of
the six Princes) had entered upon the kingdom of Pontus, partly upon the
pretenses he had to the crown, but principally, because he would revenge upon
him (whom he knew we loved) the loss of his brother: thincking (as indeed he
had cause) that wheresoever we were, hearing of his extremity, we would come
to relieve him; in spite where of he doubted not to prevail, not only upon
the confidence of his own virtue and power, but especially because he had in
his company two mighty Giants, sons to a couple whom we flue in the same
realm: they having been absent at their fathers death, and now returned,
willingly entered into his service, hating (more then he) both us, and that
King of Pontus. We therefore withal speed went thetherwarde, but by the way
this fell out, which whenever I remember without sorrow, I must forget
withal, all humanity.

Poor Daiphantus fell extreme sick, yet would needs Pontus, we met one, who in
great have went seeking for Tydeus and Telenor, whose death as yet was not
known unto the messenger; who (being their servant and knowing how dearly
they loved Plexirtus) brought them word, how since their departing, Plexirtus
was in prent danger of a cruel death, if by the valiantness of one of the
best Knights of the world, he were not reskewed: we enquired no further of the
matter (being glad he should now to his loss find what an unprofitable
treason it had been unto him, to dismember himself of two such friends) and
so let the messenger part, not sticking to make him know his masters
destruction, by the falsehood of Plexirtus.

Daiphantus, that she fell suddenly into deadly soundings; never coming to
herself, but that withal she returned to make most pitiful lamentations;
most strange unto us, because we were far from ghessing the ground thereof.
But finding her sickness such, as began to print death in her eyes, we made
al have possible to convey her to the next town: but before we could lay her
on a bed, both we, and she might find in herself, that the harbinger of
ouer-hastie death, had prepared his lodging in that dainty body, which she
undoubtedly feeling, with a weak chearefulnes, showed comfort therein; and then
desiring us both to come near her, and that no body else might be present;
with pale, and yet (even in palenes) lovely lips, Now or never, and never
indeed, but now it is time for me (said she) to speak: and I thank death
which gave me leave to discover that, the suppressing whereof perchance has
been the sharpest spur, that has hasted my race to this end. Know then my
Lords, and especially you my Lord and master, Pyrocles, that your page
Daiphantus is the unfortunate Zelmane, who for your sake caused my (as
unfortunate) lover, and cosen, Palladius, to leave his fathers court, and
consequently, both him and my Aunt his mother, to loose their lives. For your
sake my self have become, of a Princess a Page: and for your sake have put
off the apparel of a woman, and (if you judge not more mercifully) modesty.
We were amazed at her speech, and the^ had (as it were) new eyes given us to
perceue that which before had been a present stranger to our minds. For indeed,
we forthwith knew it to be the face of Zelmane, who^ before we had known in
the court of Iberia. And sorrow and pity laying her pain upon me, I
comforted her the best I could by the tenderness of good will, pretending indeed
better hope then I had of her recovery.

But she that had inward ambassadors from the tyra^t curles, the testimony of
my servitude) and by the service I have done you (which God knows has been
full of love) think of me after my death with kindness, though ye cannot with
love. And whenever ye shall make any other Lady happy with your placed
affection, if you tell her my folly, I pray you speak of it, not with scorn,
but with pity. I assure you (dear Princess of my life, for how could it be
otherwise?) her words and her manners, with the lively consideration of her
love, so pierced me, that I, though I had diverse griefs before, yet me
thought I never felt till then, how much sorrow enfeebleth all resolution. For I
could not choose, but yield to the weakness of abundant weeping; in truth with
such grief, that I could willingly at that time have changed lives with her.

Plexirtus, remember withal that he is Zelmanes father. The second is, that
when you come into Greece, you will take unto your self this name (though
unlucky) of Daiphantus, and vouchsafe to be called by it: for so shall I be
sure, you shall have cause to remember me: and let it please your noble cousin
to be called Falladius, that I do that right to that poor Prince, that his
name may yet live upon the earth in so excellent a person: and so between you,
I trust sometimes your unlucky page shall be (perhaps with a sigh) mentioned.
Lastly, let me be buried here obscurely, not suffering my friends to know my
fortune, till (when you are safely returned to your own country) you cause my
bones to be conveyed thither, and laid (I beseech you) in some place, where
yourselfe vouchsafe sometimes to resort. Alas, small petitions for such a
suter; which yet she so earnestly craved, that I was feign to swear the
accomplishment. And then kissing me, and often desiring me not to condemn her
of lightness, in mine arms she delivered her pure soul to the purest place:
leaving me as full of agony, as kindness, pity, and sorrow could make an honest
heart. For I must confess for true, that if my stars had not wholly reserved
me for you, there else perhaps I might have loved, and (which had been most
strange) begun my love after death: whereof let it be the less marvel,
because somewhat she did resemble you: though as far short of your
perfection, as her self dying, was of her flourishing: yet something there was,
which (when I saw a picture of yours) brought again her figure into my
remembrance, and made my heart as apt to receive the wound, as the power of
your beauty with irresistable force to pearce.

But we in woeful (and yet private) manner burying her, Musidorus toward the
King of Pontus, who stood in no less need then immediate succor, and even
ready to depart one from the other, there came a messenger from him, who after
some inquiry found us, giving us to understand, that he trusting upon us two,
had appointed the combat between him and us, against Otaues, and the two
Giants. Now the day was so accorded, as it was impossible for me both to
succor Plexirtus, and be there, where my honor was not only gaged so far,
but (by the strange working of unjust fortune) I was to leave the standing by
Musidorus, whom better then my self I loved, to go save him whom for just
causes I hated. But my promise given, and given to Zelmane, and to Zelmane
dying, prevailed more with me, then my friendship to Musidorus: though
certainly I may affirm, nothing had so great rule in my thoughts, as that.
But my promise carried me the easier, because Musidorus himself would not
suffer me to break it. And so with heavy minds (more careful each of others
success, the^ of our own) we parted; I toward the place, where I understood
Plexirtus was prisoner to an ancient Knight, absolutely governing a goodly
Castle, with a large territory about it, whereof he acknowledged no other
sovereign, but himself: whose hate to Plexirtus, grew for a kinsman of his,
who^ he maliciously had murdered, because in the time that he reigned in
Galatia, he found him apt to practice for the restoring of his virtuous brother
Leonatus. This old Knight, still thirsting for revenge, used (as the way to it)
a policy, which this occasion I will tell you, prepared for him. Plexirtus in
his youth had married Zelmanes mother, who dying of that only childbirth, he a
widdower, and not yet a King, haunted the Court of Armenia; where (as he was
coming to win favor) he obtained great good liking of Artaxia, which he
pursued, till (being called home by his father) he falsely got his fathers
kingdom; and then neglected his former love: till thrown out of that (by our
means) before he was deeply rooted in it, and by and by again placed in
Trebisonde, understanding that Artaxia by her brothers death was become Queen
of Armenia, he was hotter then ever, in that pursuit, which being understood by
this old Knight, he forged such a letter, as might be written from Artaxia,
entreating his present (but very privy) repair thither, giving him faithful
promise of present marriage: a thing far from her thought, having faithfully,
and publicly protested, that she would never marry any, but some such Prince
who would give sure proof, that by his means we were destroyed. But he (no
more witty to frame, then blind to judge hopes) bitte hastily at the bait,
and in private manner poasted toward her, but by the way he was met by this
Knight, far better accompanied, who quickly laid hold of him, and condemned
him to death, cruel enough, if any thing may be both cruel and just. For he
caused him to be kept in a miserable prison, till a day appointed, at which
time he would deliver him to be devoured by a monstrous beast, of most ugly
shape, armed like a Rhinoceros, as strong as an Elephant, as fierce as a Lion,
as nimble as a Leopard, and as cruel as a Tigre: whom he having kept in a
strong place, from the first youth of it, now thought no fitter match, then
such a beastly monster with a monstrous Tyrant: proclaiming yet withal, that
if any so well loved him, as to venture their lives against this beast, for
him, if they overcame, he should be saved: not caring how many they were (such
confidence he had in the monsters strength) but especially hoping to entrappe
thereby the great courages of Tydeus and Telenor, whom he no less hated,
because they had been principal instruments of the others power.

Zelmane had known what danger I should have passed, she would rather have
let her father perish, then me to have bidden that adventure. But my word was
past, and truly, the hardness of the enterprise, was not so much a bitte, as a
spur unto me; knowing well, that the journey of high honor lies not in plain
ways. Therefore, going thither, and taking sufficient security, that
Plexirtus should be delivered if I were victorious, I undertook the combatte:
and (to make short, excellent Lady, and not trouble your ears with
recounting a terrible matter) so was my weakness blessed from above, that
without dangerous wounds I flewe that monster, which hundreds durst not
attempt: to so great admiration of many (who from a safe place might look on)
that there was order given, to have the fight, both by sculpture and picture,
celebrated in most parts of Asia. And the old nobleman so well liked me, that
he loved me; only bewayling, my virtue had been employed to save a worse
monster then I killed: whom yet (according to faith given) he delivered, and
accompanied me to the kingdom of Pontus, whether I would needs in all speed
go, to see whether it were possible for me (if perchance the day had been
delaied) to come to the combat. But that (before I came) had been thus finished.

Leonatus understanding two so good friends of his were to be in that danger,
would perforce be one him self: where he did valiantly, and so did the King of
Pontus. But the truth is, that both they being sore hurt, the incomparable
Musidorus finished the combat by the death of both the Giants, and the taking
of Otaues prisoner. To whom as he gave his life, so he got a noble friend:
for so he gave his word to be, and he is well known to think him self
greater in being subject to that, then in the greatness of his principality.

But thither (understanding of our being there) Phrygia, Bythinia, with those
two hurt, of Pontus and Galatia, and Otaues the prisoner, by Musidorus set
free; and thither came Plexirtus of Trebisonde, and Antiphilus, then King of
Lycia; with as many mo great Princes, drawn either by our reputation, or by
willingness to acknowledge them selves obliged unto us, for what we had done for
the others. So as in those parts of the world, I think, in many hundreds of
years, there was not seen so royal an assembly: where nothing was let pass
to do us the highest honors, which such persons (who might command both
purses and inventions) could perform. All from all sides bringing unto us
right royal presents (which we to avoid both unkindness, and importunity,
liberally received,) and not content therewith, would needs accept, as from
us, their crowns, and acknowledge to hold them of us: with many other
excessive honors, which would not suffer the measure of this short leisure to
describe unto you.

CHAP. 24.
1 The causes and provisions of the Princes embarking for Arcadia. 2 Plexirtus
his treason against them disclosed by one, 3 attempted by another of his
ministers. 4 Sedition and slaughter in the ship about it. 5 Their shipwreck
by fire. 6 Pyrocles fight with the Captain, and escape from sea. 7 The amarous
concluding the old, and beginning a new story, both broken of by Miso.

But we quickly aweary thereof, hasted to Greece-ward, led thither partly with
the desire of our parents, but hastened principally, because I understood that
Anaxius with open mouth of defamation had gone thither to seek me, and was
now come to Peloponnesus where from Court to Court he made enquyrie of me,
doing yet himself so noble deeds, as might hap to aucthorize an ill opinion
of me. Argalus and Amphialus (two knights of such rare prowes, as we desired
especially to know) and yet by far, not so much for that, as without
suffering of comparison for the beauty of you and your sister, which makes all
indifferent judges, that speak thereof, account this country as a temple of
deities. But these causes indeed moving us to come by this land, we embarked
our selves in the next port, whether all those Princes (saving Antiphilus, who
returned, as he pretended, not able to tarry long from Erona) conveyed us. And
there found we a ship most royally furnished by Plexirtus, who made all things
so proper (as well for our defense, as ease) that all the other Princes greatly
commended him for it: who (seeming a quite altered man) had nothing but
repentance in his eyes, friendship in his gesture, and virtue in his mouth: so
that we who had promised the sweet Zelmanc to pardon him, now not only
forgave, but began to favor; persuading our selves with a youthful
credulity, that perchance things were not so evil as we took them, and as it
were desiring our own memory, that it might be so. But so were we licensed
from those Princes, truly not without tears, especially of the virtuous
Leonatus, who with the king of Po^tus, would have come with us, but that we (in
respect of the ones young wife, and both their new settled kingdoms) would not
suffer it. Then would they have sent whole fleets to guard us: but we, that
desired to pass secretly into Greece, made them leave that motion, when they
found that more ships, then one, would be displeasing unto us. But so
committing our selves to the uncertain discretion of the wind, we (then
determining as soon as we came to Greece, to take the names of Daiphantus and
Palladius, as well for our own promise to Zelmane, as because we desired to
come unknown into Greece) left the Asian shore full of Princely persons, who
even upon their knees, recommended our safeties to the devotion of their chief
desires: among whom none had been so officious (though I dare affirm, all
quite contrary to his unfaithfulness) as Plexirtus.

Plexirtus, and was sent as our principal guide) came unto us, and with a
certain kind manner, mixed with shame, and repentance, began to tell us, that
he had taken such a love unto us (considering our youth and fame) that though
he were a servant, and a servant of such trust about Plexirtus, as that he
had committed unto him even those secrets of his heart, which abhorde all other
knowledge; yet he rather chose to reveal at this time a most pernicious
counsel, then by concealing it bring to ruin those, whom he could not choose
but honor. So went he on, and told us, that Plexirtus (in hope thereby to
have Artaxia, endewed with the great Kingdom of Armenia, to his wife) had
given him order, when we were near Greece, to find some opportunity to
murder us, bidding him to take us a sleep, because he had seen what we could
do waking. Now sirs (said he) I would rather a thousand times loose my life,
then have my remembrance (while I lived) poisoned with such a mischief: and
therefore if it were only I, that knew herein the Kings order, then should my
disobedience be a warrant of your safety. But to one more (said he) namely the
Captain of the ship, Plexirtus has opened so much touching the effect of
murdering you, though I think, laying the cause rather upon old grudge, then
his hope of Artaxia. And my self, (before the consideration of your
excellencies had drawn love and pity into mind) imparted it to such, as I
thought fittest for such a mischief. Therefore, I wish you to stand upon your
guard, assuring you, that what I can do for your safety, you shall see (if it
come to the pushe) by me performed. We thanked him, as the matter indeed
deserved, and from that time would no more disarme our selves, nor the one
sleep without his friends eyes waked for him: so that it delaied the going
forward of their bad enterprise, while they thought it rather chance, then
providence, which made us so behave our selves.

But when we came within half a days sailing of Plexirtus bad him, he would
not stick to kill God him self. And therewith called his mates, and in the
Kings name willed them to take us, alive or dead; encouraging the^ with the
spoil of us, which he said, (and indeed was true) would yield many exceeding
rich jewels. But the Counselor (according to his promise) commanded them they
should not commit such a villainy, protesting that he would stand between them
and the Kings anger therein. Wherewith the Captain enraged: Nay (said he) the^
we must begin with this traitor him self: and therewith gave him a sore blow
upon the head, who honestly did the best he could to revenge himself.

which was fast to the ship: but while they that were first, were cutting of
the rope that tied it, others came leaping in, so disorderly, that they drowned
both the boat, and themselves.

But while even in that little remnant (like the children Cadmus) we continued
still to slay one an other, a fire, which (whether by the desperate malice of
some, or intention of separate, or accidentally while all things were cast up
and down) it should seem had taken a good while before, but never heeded of
us, (who only thought to preserve, or revenge) now violently burst out in many
places, and began to master the principal parts of the ship. Then necessity
made us see, that, a common enemy sets at one a civil war: for that little
all we were (as if we had been waged by one man to quench a fire) straight went
to resist that furious enemy by all art and labor: but it was too late, for
already it did embrace and devour from the stern, to the wast of the ship: so
as laboring in vain, we were driven to get up to the prowe of the ship, by
the work of nature seeking to preserve life, as long as we could: while truly
it was a strange and ougly sight, to see so huge a fire, as it quickly grew to
be, in the Sea, and in the night, as if it had come to light us to death. And
by and by it had burned off the maste, which all this while had prowdly borne
the sail (the wind, as might seem, delighted to carry fire and blood in his
mouth) but now it fell over board, and the fire growing nearer us, it was not
only terrible in respect of what we were to attend, but insupportable through
the heat of it.

So that we were constrained to bide it no longer, but disarming and stripping
our selves, and laying our selves upon such things, as we thought might help
our swimming to the land (too far for our own strength to bear us) my cousin
and I threw our selves into the Sea. But I had swomme a very little way, when I
felt (by reason of a wound I had) that I should not be able to bide the
travail, and therefore seeing the maste (whose tackling had been burnt of)
flote clear from the ship, I swamme unto it, and getting on it, I found mine
own sword, which by chance, when I threw it away (caught by a piece of
canuas) had honge to the maste. I was glad, because I loved it well; but
gladder, when I saw at the other end, the Captain of the ship, and of all this
mischief; who having a long pike, belike had borne him self up with that,
till he had set him self upon the mast. But when I perceived him, Villain
(said I) do thou think to ouerliue so many honest men, whom thy falsehood
has brought to destruction? with that bestriding the mast, I gat by little and
little toward him, after such a manner as boys are wont (if ever you saw that
sport) when they ride the wild mare. And he perceiving my intention, like a
fellow that had much more courage then honesty, set him self to resist. But I
had in short space gotten within him, and (giving him a sound blow) sent him
to feed fishes. But there my self remainde, until by pirates I was taken up,
and among them again taken prisoner, and brought into Laconia.

Philoclea) became of your cousin Musidorus? Lost said Pyrocles. Ah my
Pyrocles, said Philoclea, I am glad I have taken you. I perceive you lovers do
not always say truly: as though I know not your cousin Dorus, the
sheepeheard? Life of my desires (said Pyrocles) what is mine, even to my soul
is yours: but the secret of my friend is not mine. But if you know so much,
then I may truly say, he is lost, since he is no more his own. But I
perceive, your noble sister and you are great friends, and well does it become
you so to be. But go forward dear Pyrocles, I long to hear out till your
meeting me: for there to me-warde is the best part of your story. Ah sweet
Philoclea (said Pyrocles) do you think I can think so precious leisure as
this well spent in talking. Are your eyes a fit book (think you) to read a
tale upon? Is my love quiet enough to be an historian? Dear Princess, be
gracious unto me. And then he feign would have remembered to have forgot
himself. But she, with a sweetly disobeying grace, desired that her desire
(once for ever) might serve, that no spotte might disgrace that love which
shortly she hoped should be to the world warrantable. Feign he would not have
heard, til she threatened anger. And then the poor lover durst not, because he
durst not. Nay I pray thee, dear Pyrocles (said she) let me have my story.
Sweet Princess (said he) give my thoughts a little respite: and if it please
you, since this time must so be spoiled, yet it shall suffer the less harm,
if you vouchsafe to bestow your voice, and let me know, how the good Queen
Erona was betrayed into such danger, and why Plangus sought me. For in dcede, I
should pity greatly any mischance fallen to that Princess. I will, said
Philoclea smiling, so you give me your word, your hands shall be quiet
auditors. They shall, said he, because subject. Then began she to speak, but
with so pretty and delightful a majesty, when she set her countenance to
tell the matter, that Pyrocles could not choose but rebel so far, as to kiss
her. She would have pulled her head away, and speak, but while she spoke he
kissed, and it seemed he fed upon her words: but she gate away. How will you
have your discourse (said she) without you let my lips alone? He yielded and
took her hand. On this (said he) will I revenge my wrong: and so began to make
much of that hand, when her tale, and his delight were interrupted by Miso: who
taking her time, while Basilius back was turned, came unto them: and told
Philoclea, she deserved she knew what, for leaving her mother, being evil at
case, to keep company with strangers. But Philoclea telling her, that she
was there by her fathers commandment, she went away muttering, that though her
back, and her shoulders, and her neck were broken, yet as long as her tongue
would wagge, it should do her errand to her mother.

CHAP. 25.
1 Gynecias divining dream. 2 For passionate jealousy in actions, 3 speech,
and 4 song described 5 Her troubling Philoclea and Zelmane, 6 The rebels
troubling her. 7 Rebels resisted by Zelmane. 8 Zelmane assisted by Dorus. 9
Dorus and Zelmanes five memorable strokes.

Miso to Gynecia, who was at that time miserably vexed with this manner of
dream. It seemed unto her to be in a place full of thorns, which so molested
her, as she could neither abide standing still, nor tread safely going
forward. In this case she thought Zelmane, being upon a fair hill, delightful
to the eye, and easy in appearance, called her thither: whither with much
anguish being come, Zelmane was vanished, and she found nothing but a dead
body like unto her husband, which seeming at the first with a strange smell to
infect her, as she was ready likewise within a while to die, the dead body,
she thought, took her in his arms, and said, Gynecia, leave all; for here is
thy only rest.

With that she awaked, crying very loud, Zelmane, Zelmane. Basilius by, (her
guilty conscience more suspecting, then being suspected) she turned her call,
and called for Philoclea, Miso forthwith like a valiant shrew, (looking at
Basilius, as though she would speak though she died for it) told Gynecia,
that her daughter had been a whole hour together in secret talk with
Zelmane: And (says she) for my part I could not be heard (your daughters are
brought up in such awe) though I told her of your pleasure sufficiently.
Gynecia, as if she had heard her last doom pronounced against her, with a
side-looke and changed countenance, O my Lord (said she) what mean you to
suffer these young folks together Basilius (that aimed nothing at the mark of
her suspicion) smilingly took her in his arms, sweet wife (said he) I thank
you for your care of your child: but they must be youths of other metal,
then Zelmane, that can endaunger her. O but; cried Gynecia, and therewith she
stayed: for then indeed she did suffer a right conflict, betwixt the force of
love, and rage of jealousy. Many times was she about to satisfy the spite of
her mind, and tell Basilius, how she knew Zelmane to be far otherwise then
the outward appearance. But those many times were all put back, by the
manifold objections of her vehement love. Feign she would have barde her
daughters hap, but loath she was to cut off her own hope. But now, as if her
life had been set upon a wager of quick rising, as weak as she was, she gat
up; though Basilius, (with a kindness flowing only from the fountain of
unkindness, being in deed desirous to win his daughter as much time as
might be) was loath to suffer it, swearing he saw sickness in her face, and
therefore was loath she should adventure the air.

Gynecia, possessed with those devils of Love and Jealousy, did rid herself
from her tedious husband: and taking no body with her, going toward the^; O
Jealousy (said she) the frenzy of wise folks, the well-wishing spite, and
unkind carfulness, the selfe-punishment for others faults, and selfe-miserie
in others happiness, the cousin of envy, daughter of love, and mother of
hate, how could thou so quietly get thee a seat in the unquiet heart of
Gynecia, Gynecia (said she sighing) thought wise, and once virtuous? Alas it is
thy breeders power which plants thee there: it is the flaming agony of
affection, that works the chilling access of thy fever, in such sort, that
nature gives place; the growing of my daughter seems the decay of my self;
the blessings of a mother turn to the curses of a co^petitor; and the fair
face of Philoclea, appears more horrible in my sight, then the image of death.
Then remembered she this song, which she thought took a right measure of her
present mind.

With two strange fires of equal heat possessed,
The one of Love, the other Jealousy,
Both still do work, in neither find I rest:
For both, alas, their strengthes together tie:
The one aloft does hold, the other hie.
Love wakes the jealous eye least thence it moves:
The jealous eye, the more it looks, it loves.
These fires increase: in these I daily burn:
They feed on me, and with my wings do fly:
My lovely joys to doleful ashes turn:
Their flames mount up, my powers prostrate lie:
They live in force, I quite consumed die.
One wonder yet far passes my conceate:
The fuel small: how be the fires so great?
But her vnleasured thoughts ran not over the ten Misos departure, had left
their tale, and determined what to say to Basilius. But full abashed was poor
Philoclea, (whose conscience now began to know cause of blushing) for first
salutation, receiving an eye from her mother, full of the same disdainefull
scorn, which Pallas showed to poor Arachne, that durst contend with her for
the prize of well weauing: yet did the force of love so much rule her, that
though for Zelmanes sake she did detest her, yet for Zelmanes sake she used no
harder words to her, then to bid her go home, and accompany her solitary
father.

Zelmane the storehouse of her deadly desires, when so dainly the confused
rumor of a mutinous multitude gave just occasion to Zelmane to break of any
such conference, (for well she found, they were not friendly voices they heard)
and to retire with as much diligence as conveniently they could, toward the
lodge. Yet before they could win the lodge by twenty paces, they were
overtaken by an unruly sort of clownes, and other rebels, which like a violent
flood, were carried, they themselves knew not whether. But as soon as they came
within perfect discerning these Ladies, like enraged beasts, without respect
of their estates, or pity of their sex, they began to run against them, as
right villains, thinking ability to do hurt, to be a great advancement: yet
so many as they were, so many almost were their minds, all knitte together
only in madness. Some cried, Take; some, Kill; some, Save: but even they that
cried save, ran for company with them that meant to kill. Every one
commanded, none obeyed, he only seemed chief Captain, that was most ragefull.

Zelmane(whose virtuous courage was ever awake) drew out her sword, which upon
those il-armed churls giving as many wounds as blows, and as many deaths
almost as wounds (lightning courage, and thundering smart upon them) kept them
at a bay, while the two Ladies got themselves into the lodge: out of the which,
Basilius (having put on an armor long untried) came to prove his authority
among his subjects, or at lest, to adventure his life with his dear mistress,
to who^ he brought a shield, while the Ladies tremblingly attended the issue of
this dangerous adventure. But Zelmane mane made them perceive the ods between
an Eagle and a Knight, with such a nimble stayednes, and such an assured
nimblenes, that while one was running back for fear, his fellow had her sword
in his guts.

And by and by was both her heart and help well Dorus, who having been making
of hurdles for his masters sheep, heard the horrible cries of this mad
multitude; and having straight represented before the eyes of his careful
love, the peril wherein the soul of his soul might be, he went to Pamelas
lodge, but found her in a cave hard by, with Mopsa and Dametas, who at that
time would not have opened the entry to his father. And therefore leaving them
there (as in a place safe, both for being strong, and unknown) he ran as the
noise guyded him. But when he saw his friend in such danger among them, anger
and contempt (asking no counsel but of courage) made him room among them,
with no other weapon but his sheephooke, and with that overthrowing one of the
villains, took away a two-hand sword from him, and withal, helped him from
ever being ashamed of losing it. Then lifting up his brave head, and flashing
terror into their faces, he made arms and legs go complain to the earth, how
evil their masters had kept them. Yet the multitude still growing, and the
very killing wearying them (fearing, left in long fight they should be
conquered with co^quering) they drew back toward the lodge; but drew back in
such sort, that still their terror went forward: like a valiant mastisse, whom
when his master pulles back by the tail from the bear (with whom he has
already interchanged a hateful imbracement) though his pace be backwarde, his
gesture is foreward, his teeth and eyes threatening more in the retiring, then
they did in the advancing: so guided they themselves homeward, never stepping
step backward, but that they proved themselves masters of the ground where
they stepped.

Zelmane. But as he came within her distance, turning his sword very nicely
about his crown, Basilius, with a side blow, struck of his nose. He (being a
suitor to a seimsters daughter, and therefore not a little grieved for such a
disgrace) stouped down, because he had hard, that if it were fresh put to, it
would cleave on again. But as his hand was on the ground to bring his nose to
his head, Zelmane with a blow, sent his head to his nose. That saw a butcher, a
butcherly chuffe indeed (who that day was sworn brother to him in a cup of
wine) and lifted up a great leauer, calling Zelmane all the vile names of a
butcherly eloquence. But she (letting slip the blow of the leauer) hitte him
so surely on the side of his face, that she left nothing but the nether iawe,
where the tongue still wagged, as willing to say more, if his masters
remembrance had served. O (said a miller that was half drunk) see the luck
of a good fellow, and with that word, ran with a pitchforke at Dorus: but the
nimblenes of the wine carried his head so fast, that it made it overrun his
feet, so that he fell withal, just between the legs of Dorus: who setting his
foot on his neck (though he offered two milche kine, and four fat hogs for
his life) thrust his sword quite through, from one ear to the other; which
took it very unkindly, to feel such news before they heard of them, in stead
of hearing, to be put to such feeling. But Dorus (leaving the miller to vomit
his soul out in wine and blood) with his two-hand sword struck of another quite
by the waste, who the night before had dreamed he was grown a couple, and
(interpreting it he should be married) had bragd of his dream that morning
among his neighbors. But that blow astonished quite a poor painter, who stood
by with a pike in his hands. This painter was to counterfette the skirmishing
between the Centaures and Lapithes, and had been very desirous to see some
notable wounds, to be able the more lively to express them; and this morning
(being carried by the stream of this company) the foolish fellow was even
delighted to see the effect of blows. But this last, (happening near him) so
amazed him, that he stood still, while Dorus (with a turn of his sword) struck
of both his hands. And so the painter returned, well skilled in wounds, but
with never a hand to perform his skill.

CHAP. 26.
1 Zelmanes confident attempt to appease the mutiny. 2 A bone of division cast
by her, 3 and caught by them. 4 Her pacificatorie oration. 5 The acceptance
and issue of it.

In this manner they recovered the lodge, Then did the two Ladies mix fear
with love, especially Philoclea, who ever caught hold of Zelmane, so (by the
folly of love) hindering the help which she desired. But Zelmane seeing no way
of defense, not time to deliberate (the number of those villains still
increasing, and their madness still increasing with their number) thought it
only the means to go beyond their expectation with an unused boldness, and
with danger to avoid danger: and therefore opened again the gate, and ( Dorus
and Basilius standing ready for her defense) she issued again among them. The
blows she had dealt before (though all in general were hasty) made each of
them in particular take breath, before they brought them suddenly ouer-neere
her, so that she had time to get up to the iudgementseate of the Prince,
which (according to the guise of that country) was before the gate. There she
paused a while, making sign with her hand unto them, and withal, speaking
aloud, that she had something to say unto them, that would please them. But she
was answered a while with nothing but shouts and cries; and some beginning to
throw stones at her, not daring to approach her. But at length, a young farmer
(who might do most among the country sort; and was caught in a little
affection toward Zelmane) hoping by this kindness to have some good of her,
desired them, if they were honest men, to hear the woman speak. Fie fellows,
fie, (said he) what will all the maids in our town say, if so many tall men
shall be afraid to hear a fair wench? I swear unto you by no little ones, I
had rather give my teeme of oxen, then we should show our selves so uncivil
wights. Besides, I tell you true, I have heard it of old men counted wisdom,
to hear much, and say little. His sententious speech so prevailed, that the
most part began to listen. Then she, with such efficacy of gracefulnes, and
such a quiet magnanimity represented in her face in this uttermost peril, as
the more the barbarous people looked, the more it fixed their looks upon her,
in this forte began unto them.

It is no small comfort unto me (said she) having to Basilius himself in
person is within this Lodge, and was one of the three, who^ a few of you went
about to fight withal: (and this she said, not doubting but they knew it well
enough; but because she would have them imagine, that the Prince might think
that they did not know it) by him am I sent unto you, as from a Prince to his
well approved subjects, nay as from a father to beloved children, to know what
it is that has bred just quarrel among you, or who they be that have any way
wro^ged you? what it is with which you are displeased, or of which you are
desirous? This he requires: and indeed (for he knows your faithfulness) he
commands you presently to set down, and to choose among your selves some one,
who may relate your griefs or demaundes unto him.

Zelmane for his wife) but when they began to talk of their grieves, never
Bees made such a co^fused hu^ming: the town dwellers demanding putting down
of imposts: the country fellows laying out of commons: some would have the
Prince keep his Court in one place, some in another. Al cried out to have new
cou^cellors: but when they should think of any new, they liked the^ as well as
any other, that they could remember, especially they would have the treasure so
looked unto, as that he should never need to take any more subsides. At length
they fell to direct contrarieties. For the Artisans, they would have corn and
wine set at a lower price, and bound to be kept so still: the plowmen,
vine-laborers, and farmers would none of that. The cou^trimen demanded that
every man might be free in the chief towns: that could not the Burgesses like
of. The peasa^ts would have the Gentlemen destroyed, the Citizens (especially
such as Cooks, Barbers, and those other that lived most on Gentlemen) would
but have them resourmed. And of each side were like divisions, one neighborhood
beginning to find fault with another. But no confusion was greater then of
particular men's likings and dislikings: one dispraising such a one, who^
another praised, and demanding such a one to be punished, whom the other would
have exalted. No less ado was there about choosing him, who should be their
spokes-man. The finer sort of Burgesses, as Merchants Prentises, and
Clothworkers, because of their riches, disdaining the baser occupations, and
they because of their number as much disdaining them: all they scorning the
countrimens ignorance, and the countrymen suspecting as much their cunning: So
that Zelmanc (finding that their united rage was now grown, not only to a
dividing, but to a crossing one of another, and that the mislike grown among
themselves did well allay the heat against her) made tokens again unto the^ (as
though she took great care of their well doing, and were afraid of their
falling out) that she would speak unto the^. They now grown jealous one of
another (the stay having inge^dred division, and division having manifested
their weakness) were willing enough to hear, the most part striving to show
themselves willinger then their fellows: which Zelmane (by the acquaintance
she had had with such kind of humors) soon perceiving, with an angerles
bravery, and an vnabashed mildnes, in this manner spoke unto them.

An unused thing it is, and I think not heretofore seen, Arcadians, that a
woman should give public counsel to men, a stranger to the country people, and
that lastly in such a presence by a private person, the regal throne should be
possessed. But the straungenes of your action makes that used for virtue, which
your violent necessity imposes. For certainly, a woman may well speak to
such men, who have forgotten al manlike government: a stranger may with reason
instruct such subjects, that neglect due points of subjection: and is it
marvel this place is entered into by another, since your own Prince (after
thirty years government) dare not show his face unto his faithful people?
Hear therefore o Arcadians, and be ashamed: against who^ has this rage been
stirred? whether have been bent these ma^full weapons of yours? In this quiet
harmles lodge are harbourd no Argians your ancient enemies, nor Laconians your
now feared neighbors. Here be nether hard landlords, nor biting usurers. Here
lodge none, but such, as either you have great cause to love, or no cause to
hate: here being none, besides your Prince, Princess, and their children, but
my self. Is it I then, o Arcadians, against whom your anger is armed? Am I the
mark of your vehement quarrel? if it be so, that innocence shall not be a
stop for fury; if it be so, that the law of hospitality (so long and holily
observed among you) may not defend a stranger fled to your arms for succor:
if in fine it be so, that so many valiant men's courages can be enflamed to the
mischief of one silly woman; I refuse not to make my life a sacrifice to your
wrath. Exercise in me your indignation, so it go no further, I am content to
pay the great favors I have received among you, with my life, not ill
deserving I present it here unto you, o Arcadians, if that may satisfy you;
rather the^ you (called over the world the wise and quiet Arcadians) should be
so vain, as to attempt that alone, which all the rest of your country will
abhor; the^ you should show your selves so ungrateful, as to forget the fruit
of so many years peaceable government; or so unnatural, as not to have with
the holy name of your natural Prince, any fury ouer-maistred. For such a
hellish madness (I know) did never enter into your hearts, as to attempt any
thing against his person; which no successor, though never so hateful, will
ever leave (for his own sake) unrevenged. Neither can your wonted valor be
turned to such a baseness, as in stead of a Prince, delivered unto you by so
many royal ancestors, to take the tyrannous yoke of your fellow subject, in
whom the innate means will bring forth ravenous covetousness, and the newnes of
his estate, suspectfull cruelty. Imagine, what could your enemies more wish
unto you, then to see your own estate with your own hands undermined? O what
would your forefathers say, if they lived at this time, and saw their offspring
defacing such an excellent principality, which they with so much labor and
blood so wisely have established? Do you think them fools, that saw your
should not enjoy your vines, your cattle, no not your wives and children,
without government; and that there could be no government without a Magistrate,
and no Magistrate without obedience, and no obedience where every one upon his
own private passion, may interpret the doings of the rulers? Let your wits
make your present example to you. What sweetness (in good faith) find you in
your present condition? what choice of choice find you, if you had lost
Basilius? under whose ensign would you go, if your enemies should invade you?
If you cannot agree upon one to speak for you, how will you agree upon one to
fight for you? But with this fear of I cannot tell what, one is troubled, and
with that passed wrong another is grieved. And I pray you did the Sun ever
bring you a fruitful harvest, but that it was more hot then pleasant? Have
any of you children, that be not sometimes cumbersome? Have any of you fathers,
that be not sometime weerish? What, shall we curse the Son, hate our
children, or disobey our fathers? But what need I use these words, since I see
in your countenances (now virtuously settled) nothing else but love and duty to
him, by whom for your only sakes the government is embraced. For all what is
done, he does not only pardon you, but thank you; judging the action by the
minds, and not the minds by the actio^. Your grieves, and desires, whatsoever,
and whenever you list, he will consider of, and to his consideration it is
reason you should refer them. So then, to conclude; the uncertainty of his
estate made you take arms; now you see him well, with the same love lay them
down. If now you end (as I know you will) he will make no other account of
this matter, but as of a vehement, I must confess ouer-vehement affection: the
only continuance might prove a wickedness. But it is not so, I see very well,
you began with zeal, and will end with reverence.

Zelmane used, being beautified by nature and apparelled with skill, her
gestures being such, that as her words did paint out her mind, so they served
as a shadow, to make the picture more lively and sensible, with the sweet
cleernesse of her voice, rising and falling kindly as the nature of the word,
and efficacy of the matter required, altogether in such admirable person,
whose incomparable valor they had well felt, whose beauty did pearce through
the thick dulnes of their senses, gave such a way unto her speech through the
rugged wilderness of their imaginations, who (besides they were stricken in
admiration of her, as of more then a humane creature) were coold with taking
breath, and had learned doubts out of leisure, that in steed of roaring cries,
there was now heard nothing, but a co^fused muttring, whether her saying were
to be followed, betwixt fear to pursue, and lothnesse to leave: most of them
could have been content, it had never been begun, but how to end it (each
afraid of his companion,) they knew not, finding it far easier to tie then to
loose knots. But Zelmane thinking it no evil way in such mutinies, to give the
mutinous some occasion of such service, as they might think (in their own
judgment) would counteruaile their trespass, withal, to take the more assured
possession of their minds, which she feared might begin to waver, Loiall
Arcadians (said she) now do I offer unto you the manifesting of your duties:
all those that have taken arms for the Princes safety, let the^ turn their
backs to the gate, with their weapons bent against such as would hurt his
sacred person. O weak trust of the many-headed multitude, whom inconstancy
only does guide to well doing: who can set confidence there, where company
takes away shame, and each may lay the fault of his fellow? So said a crafty
fellow among them, named Clinias, to himself, when he saw the word no sooner
out of Zelmanes mouth, but that there were some shouts of joy, with, God save
Basilius, and diverse of them with much iollity grown to be his guard, that but
little before me^t to be his murderers.

CHAP. 27.
1 A verbal crafty coward purtrayed in Clinias. 2 His first raising, and with
the first, relenting in this mutiny, 3 punished by the farmer. 4 The uproar
reenforced, and weakened by themselves. 5 Clinias-his Sinon-like narration of
this dru^ken rebellions original. 6 The kings order in it.

THis Clinias in his youth had been a with many passions, and to frame his face
to bear the figure of them: long used to the eyes and ears of men, and to
reckon no fault, but shamefastness; in nature, a most notable Coward, and yet
more strangely then rarely venturous in privy practices.

Cecropia, Amphialus-his mother, so that he was privy to all the mischievous
devises, wherewith she went about to ruin Basilius, and his children, for the
aduauncing of her son: and though his education had made him full of tongue,
yet his love to be doing, taught him in any evil to be secret; and had by his
mistress been used (ever since the strange retiring of Basilius) to whisper
rumors into the peoples ears: and this time (finding great aptnes in the
multitude) was one of the chief that set them in the uproar (though quite
without the consent of Amphialus, who would not for all the Kingdoms of the
world so have adue^tured the life of Philoclea.) But now perceiving the flood
of their fury began to ebb, he thought it policy to take the first of the
tide, so that no man cried louder then he, upon Basilius. And some of the
lustiest rebels not yet agreeing to the rest, he caused two or three of his
mates that were at his commandment to lift him up, and then as if he had had a
prologue to utter, he began with a nice gravity to demand audience. But few
attending what he said, with vehement gesture, as if he would tear the stars
from the skies, he fell to crying out so loud, that not only Zelmane, but
Basilius might hear him. O unhappy men, more mad then the Giants that would
have plucked Jupiter out of heaven, how long shall this rage continue? why do
you not all throw down your weapons, and submit your selves to our good
Prince, our good Basilius, the Pelops of wisdom, and Minos of all good
government? when will you begin to believe me, and other honest and faithful
subjects, that have done all we could to stop your surie?

The farmer that loved Zelmane could abide him no Zelmane: so now perceiving,
that the people, once any thing down the hill from their fury, would never
stop till they came to the bottom of absolute yielding, and so that he should
be nearer fears of punishment, then hopes of such advancement, he was one of
them that stood most against the agreement: and to begin withal, disdaining
this fellow should play the preacher, who had bin one of the chiefest
make-bates, struck him a great wound upon the face with his sword. The cowardly
wretch fell down, crying for succor, and (scrambling through the legs of them
that were about him) gat to the throne, where Zelmane took him, and comforted
him, bleeding for that was past, and quaking for fear of more.

But as soon as that blow was given (as if AEolus had Basilius were
intermingled with the^ that would not yield. These men thinking their ruin
stood upon it; those men to get favor of their Prince, converted their
ungracious motion into their own bowels, and by a true judgment grew their
own punishers. None was sooner killed the^ those that had been leaders in the
disobedience: who by being so, had taught them, that they did lead
disobedience to the same leaders. And many times it fell out that they killed
them that were of their own faction, anger whetting, and doubt hastening their
fingers. But then came down Zelmane; and Basilius with Dorus issued, and
sometimes seeking to draw together those of their party, sometimes laying
indifferently among them, made such havoc (among the rest Zel-mane striking
the farmer to the heart with her sword, as before she had done with her eyes)
that in a while all they of the contrary side were put to flight, and fled to
certain woods upon the frontiers; where feeding coldly, and drinking only
water, they were disciplined for their dronken riots; many of them being slain
in that chase, about a score only escaping. But when these late rebels, now
soldiers, were returned from the chase, Basilius calling them together, partly
for policy sake, but principally because Zelmane before had spoken it (which
was to him more the^ a divine ordinance) he pronounced their general pardon,
willing them to return to their houses, and thereafter be more circu^spect in
their proceedings: which they did most of them with share-marks of their folly.
But imagining Clinias to be one of the chief that had bred this good
alteration, he gave him particular thanks, and withal willed him to make him
know, how this frenzy had entered into the people.

Clinias purposing indeed to tell him the truth of al, saving what did touch
himself, or Cecropia, first, dipping his hand in the blood of his wou^d, Now by
this blood (said he) which is more dear to me, then all the rest that is in my
body, since it is spent for your safety: this tongue (perchance unfortunate,
but never false) shall not now begin to lie unto my Prince, of me most beloved.
Then stretching out his hand, and making vehement countena^ces the vshers to
his speches, in such manner of terms recounted this accident. Yesterday (said
he) being your birthday, in the goodly green two mile hence before the city
of Enispus, to do honor to the day, were a four or five thousand people (of
all conditions, as I think) gathered together, spending all the day in dancings
and other exercises: and when night came, vndertents and bows making great
cheer, and meaning to observe a wassaling watch all that night for your sake.
Bacchus (the learned say) was begot with thunder: I think, that made him ever
since so full of stur and debate. Bacchus indeed it was which sou^ded the first
trumpet to this rude alaru^. For that barbarous opinion being generally
amongthem, to think with vice to do honor, and with actiuitie in beastlines to
show abunda^nce of love, made most of the^ seek to show the depth of their
affection in the depth of their draught. But being once well chased with wine
(having spent all the night, and some piece of the morning in such reuelling)
and imboldned by your absented manner of living, there was no matter their ears
had ever heard of that grew not to be a subject of their winie conference. I
speak it by proof: for I take witness of the gods (who never leave periuries
unpunished) that I often cried out against their impudency, and (when that
would not serve) stopped mine ears, because I would not be partaker of their
blasphemies, till with buffets they forced me to have mine ears and eyes
defiled. Public affairs were minlegd with private grudges, neither was any man
thoughts of wit, that did not pretend some cause of mislike. Railing was
counted the fruit of freedom, and saying nothing had his vttermoste praise in
ignorance. At the length, your sacred person (alas why did I live to hear it?
alas how do I breath to utter it? But your commandment does not only enioine
obedience, but give me force: your sacred person (I say) fell to be their
table-talke: a proud word swelling in their stomachs, and disdainful reproaches
against so great a greatness, having put on the show of greatness in their little
minds: till at length the very unbridled use of words having increased fire
in their minds (which God knows thought their knowledge notable, because they
had at all no knowledge to condemn their own want of knowledge) they descended
(O never to be forgotten presumption) to a direct mislike of your living from
among them. Whereupon it were tedious to remember their far-fetched
constructions. But the sum was, you disdained them: and what were the pompes
of your estate, if their arms mainteyned you not? Who would call you a
Prince, if you had not a people? When certain of them of wretched estates, and
worse minds (whose fortunes, change could not impair) began to say, that your
government was to be looked into; how the great treasures (you had levied among
the^) had been spent; why none but great men and gentlemen could be admitted
into counsel, that the commons (forsooth) were to plain headed to say their
opinions: but yet their blood and sweat must maintain all. Who could tell
whether you were not betrayed in this place, where you lived? nay whether you
did live or no? Therefore that it was time to come and see; and if you were
here, to know (if Arcadia were grown loathsome in your sight) why you did not
rid your self of the trouble? There would not want those that would take so
fair a cumber in good part. Since the Country was theirs, and the government
an adherent to the country, why should they not consider of the one, as well
as inhabit the other? Nay rather (said they) let us begin that, which all
Arcadia will follow. Let us deliver our Prince from danger of practices, and
our selves from want of a Prince. Let us do that, which all the rest think.
Let it be said, that we only are not astonished with vain titles, which have
their force but in our force. Lastly, to have said and heard so much, was as
dangerous, as to have attempted: and to attempt they had the name of glorious
liberty with them. These words being spoken (like a furious storm) presently
carried away their well inclined brains. What I, and some other of the honester
sort could do, was no more, then if with a puff of breath, one should go
about to make a sail go against a mighty wind: or, with one hand, stay the
ruin of a mighty wall. So general grew this madness among them, there needed
no drum, where each man cried, each spoke to other that spoke as fast to him,
and the disagreeing sound of so many voices, was the chief token of their
unmeet agreement. Thus was their banquette turned to a battle, their winie
mirthes to bloody rages, and the happy prayers for your life, to monstrous
threatening of your estate; the solemnizing your birthday, tended to have been
the cause of your funerals. But as a dronken rage has (besides his wickedness)
that folly, that the more it seeks to hurt, the less it considers how to be
able to hurt: they never weyed how to arm themselves, but took up every thing
for a weapon, that fury offered to their hands. Many swords, pikes, and
bills there were: others took pitchforkes and rakes, converting husbandry to
souldierie: some caught hold of spittes (things serviceable for life) to be
the instruments of death. And there was some such one, who held the same pot
wherein he drank to your health, to use it (as he could) to your mischief.
Thus armed, thus governed, forcing the unwilling, and hartening the willing,
adding fury to fury, and increasing rage with running, they came headlong
toward this lodge: no man (I dare say) resolved in his own heart, what was the
uttermost he would do when he came hither. But as mischief is of such nature,
that it cannot stand but with strengthening one evil by an other, and so
multiply in it self, till it come to the highest, and then fall with his own
weight: so to their minds (once passed the bounds of obedience) more and more
wickedness opened it self, so that they who first pretended to preserve you,
then to reform you, (I speak it in my conscience, and with a bleeding heart)
now thought no safety for them, without murdering you. So as if the Gods (who
preserve you for the preservation of Arcadia) had not showed their miraculous
power, and that they had not used for instruments, both your own valor (not
fit to be spoken of by so mean a mouth as mine) and some (I must confess)
honest minds, (who^ alas why should I mention, since what we did, reached not
the hundred part of our duty?) our hands (I tremble to think of it) had
destroyed all that, for which we have cause to rejoice that we are Arcadians.

Basilius, that was not the sharpest pearcer into masked minds, took a good
liking to him; and so much the more as he had tickled him with praise in the
hearing of his mistres. And therefore pitying his wou^d, willed him to get him
home, and look well unto it, and make the best search he could, to know if
there were any further depth in this matter, for which he should be well
rewarded. But before he went away, certain of the shepherds being come (for
that day was appointed for their pastorals) he sent one of them to Philanax,
and an other to other principal noblemen, and cities there abouts, to make
through-inquirie of this uproar, and withal, to place such garrisons in all
the towns and villages near unto him, that he might thereafter keep his
solitary lodge in more security, upon the making of a fire, or ringing of a
bell, having them in a redines for him.

CHAP. 28.
1 The praises of Zelmanes act. 2 Dametas his caroll for saving himself, and
his charge. 3 Basilius his conference with Philanax of the Oracle (the ground
of all this story.) 4 His wrong-construction of it. 5 His hymn to Apollo. 6
His courting turnde over to tale-telling.

THis, Clinias (having his care one way Cecropia that she was to take some
speedy resolution, or else it were danger those examinations would both
discover, and ruin her: and so went his way, leaving that little company with
embracements, and praising of Zelmanes excellent proceeding, to show, that no
decking sets forth any thing so much, as affection. For as, while she stood
at the discretion of those indiscreete rebels, every angry countenance any
of them made, seemed a knife laid upon their own throats; so unspeakable was
now their joy, that they saw (besides her safety and their own) the same
wrought, and safely wrought by her means, in whom they had placed all their
delights. What examples Greece could ever allege of wit and fortitude, were
set in the rank of trifles, being compared to this action.

) made them look the way of the ill-noysed song. The song was this.

A Hateful cure with hate to heal:
A blooddy help with blood to save:
A foolish thing with fools to deal:
Let him be bold that bobs will have.
But who by means of wisdom hie
Has saved his charge? it is even I.
Let other deck their pride with skarres,
And of their wounds make brave lame shows:
First let them die, then pass the stars,
When rotten Fame will tell their blows.
But eye from blade, and ear from cry:
Who has saved all? it is even I.
They had so one found it was Dametas, who came with no less lifted up
countenance, then if he had passed over the bellies of all his enemies: so wise
a point he thought he had performed, in using the natural strength of a cave.
But never was it his doing to come so soon thence, till the coast were more
assuredly clear: for it was a rule with him, that after a great storm there
ever fell a few drops before it be fully finished. But Pamela (who had now
experienced how much care does solicit a Lovers heart) used this occasion of
going to her parents and sister, indeed as well for that cause, as being unquiet,
till her eye might be assured, how her shepherd had gone through the danger.
But Basilius with the sight of Pamela (of whom almost his head otherwise
occupied, had left the wonted remembrance) was suddenly stricken into a devout
kind of admiration, remembering the oracle, which (according to the fauning
humor of salfe hope) he interpreted now his own to his own best, and with
the willing blindness of affection (because his mind ran wholly upon Zelmane)
he thought the Gods in their oracles did principally mind her.

But as he was deeply thinking of the matter, one of Philanax was already come
with a hundred horse in his company. For having by chance rid not far of the
little desert, he had heard of this uproar, and so was come upon the spur
(gathering a company of Gentlemen as fast as he could) to the succor of his
Master. Basilius was glad of it; but (not willing to have him, nor any other of
the Noble men, see his Mistress) he himself went out of the Lodge, and so
giving order unto him of placing garrisons, and examining these matters; and
Philanax with humble earnestness beginning to entreat him to leave of his
solitary course (which already had been so dangerous unto him) Well (said
Basilius) it may be ere long I will co^discend unto your desire. In the mean
time, take you the best order you can to keep me safe in my solitariness.
But, (said he) do you remember, how earnestly you wrote unto me, that I should
not be moved by that Oracles authority, which brought me to this resolution?
Full well Sir (answered Philanax) for though it pleased you not as then to let
me know, what the Oracles words were, yet all Oracles holding (in my conceit)
one degree of reputation, it suffised me to know, it was but an Oracle, which
led you from your own course. Well (said Basilius) I will now tell you the
words; which before I thought not good to do; because when all the events fall
out (as some already have done) I may charge you with your incredulity. So he
repeated them in this sort.

THy elder care shall from thy careful face
By princely mean be stolen, and yet not lost.
Thy younger shall with Natures bliss embrace
An uncouth love, which Nature hates most.
Both they them selves unto such two shall wed,
Who at thy beer, as at a bar, shall plead;
Why thee (a living man) they had made dead.
In thy own seat a foreign state shall sit.
And ere that all these blows thy head do hit,
Thou, with thy wife, adultry shall commit.
For you forsooth (said he) when I told you, that some supernatural cause sent
me strange visio^s, which being confirmed with presagious chances, I had gone
to Delphos, and there received this answer: you replied to me, that the only
supernatural causes were the humors of my body, which bred such melancholy
dreams; and that both they framed a mind full of conceits, apt to make
presages of things, which in themselves were merely chaungeable: and with all
as I say, you remember what you wrote unto me, touching authority of the
Oracle: but now I have some notable trial of the truth thereof, which herafter
I will more largly communicate unto you. Only now, know that the thing I most
feared is already performed; I mean that a sorraine state should possess my
throne. For that has been done by Zelmane, but not as I feared, to my ruin,
but to my preservation. But when he had once named Zelmane, that name was as
good as a pully, to make the clock of his praises run on in such sort, that (
Philanax found) was more exquisite then the only admiration of virtue breeds:
which his faithful heart inwardly repining at, made him shrink away as soon as
he could, to go about the other matters of importance, which Basilius had
enjoined unto him.

Basilius returned into the Lodge, thus by him self Zelmane had as it were
robbed from him the care of his first begotten child, yet was it not lost, since
in his heart the ground of it remained. That his younger should with Natures
bliss embrace the love of Zelmane, because he had so commanded her for his
sake to do; yet should it be with as much hate of Nature, for being so
hateful an opposite to the jealousy he thought her mother had of him. The
sitting in his seat he deemed by her already performed: but that which most
comforted him, was his interpretation of the adultery, which he thought he
should commit with Zelmane, whom afterward he should have to his wife. The
point of his daughters marriage, because it threatened his death withal, he
determined to prevent, with keeping them unmarried while he lived. But having as
he thought, gotten thus much understanding of the Oracle, he determined for
three days after to perform certain rites to Apollo: and even then began
with his wife and daughters to singe this Hymn, by them yearly used.

APollo great, whose beams the greater world do light,
And in our little world do clear our inward sight,
Which ever shine, though hid from earth by earthly shade,
Whose lights do ever live, but in our darkness sade;
Thou God, whose youth was decked with spoils of Pytho^s skin:
( So humble knowledge can throw down the snakish kin)
Latonas son, whose birth in pain and travail long
Does teach, to learn the good what travails do belong:
In travail of our life (a short but tedious space)
While brickle houreglas runs, guide thou our panting pace:
Give us foresightfull minds: give us minds to obaye
What foresight tells; our thoughts upon thy knowledge stay.
Let so our fruits grow up, that nature be maintainde:
But so our hearts keep down, with vice they be not stainde.
Let this assured hold our judgments overtake,
That nothing winnes the heaven, but what does earth forsake.
enough he might lay all his care upon Philanax, he was willing to sweeten the
taste of this passed tumult, with some rural pastimes. For which while the
shepherds prepared themselves in their best manner, Basilius took his
daughter Philoclea aside, and with such have, as if his ears hunted for
words, desired to know how she had found Zelmane. She humbly answered him,
according to the agreement betwixt them, that thus much for her sake Zelmane
was content to descend from her former resolution, as to hear him, whensoever
he would speak; and further then that (she said) as Zelmane had not granted,
so she nether did, nor ever would desire. Basilius kissed her with more then
fatherly thanks, and straight (like a hard-kept ward new come to his lands)
would feign have used the benefit of that grant, in laying his sickness before
his only physician. But Zelmane (that had not yet fully determined with her
self, how to bear her self toward him) made him in a few words understand,
that the time in respect of the company was unfit for such a parley, and
therefore to keep his brains the busier, letting him understand what she had
learned of his daughters, touching Eronas distress (whom in her travail she
had known, and been greatly beholding to) she desired him to finish the rest,
for so far as Pla^gus had told him; Because she said (and she said truly) she
was full of care for that Lady, whose desert (only except an ouer-base
choice) was nothing agreeable to misfortune. Basilius glad that she would
command him any thing, but more glad, that in excusing the vnsitnesse of that
time, she argued an intention to grant a fitter, obeyed her in this manner.

CHAP. 29.
1 Antiphilus his base-borne pride borne high by flattery. 2 His unkind
hating the loving Erona, and fond loving of hating Artaxia. 3 Artaxias trap to
take them both. 4 The man's weakness, and the woman's strength in bearing
captivity. 5 Plangus love to her, employed by her to save Antiphilus, 6 who
again betraies himself and them. 7 His execution by women. 8 Plangus hardy
attempts to save Erona. 9 The conditions of her death. 10 Her sorrow for
Antiphilus, 11 and Plangus travail for her: with his crosses, and course
therein.

Madame (said he) it is very true, that since years enhabled me to judge what
is, or is not to be pitied, I never saw anything that more moved me to justify
a vehement compassion in my self, then the estare of that Prince, whom strong
against al his own afflictions (which yet were great, as I perceive you have
heard) yet true and noble love had so pulled down, as to lie under sorrow for
another. Antiphilus being crowned, and so left by the famous Princes Musidorus
and Pyrocles (led thence by the challenge of Anaxius, who is now in these
provinces of Greece, making a dishonorable inquiry after that excellent prince
Pyrocles already perished) Antiphilus (I say) being crowned, and delivered
from the presence of those two, whose virtues (while they were present, good
schoolmasters) suppressed his vanities, he had not strength of mind enough in
him to make long delay, of discovering what manner of man he was. But straight
like one carried up to so hie a place, that he loses the discerning of the
ground over which he is; so was his mind lifted so far beyond the level of his
own discourse, that remembering only that himself was in the high seat of a
King, he could not perceive that he was a king of reasonable creatures, who
would quickly scorn follies, and repine at injuries. But imagining no so true
property of souereigntie, as to do what he listed, and to list whatsoever
pleased his fancy, he quickly made his kingdom a Teniscourt, where his
subjects should be the balls; not in truth cruelly, but licenciously abusing
them, presuming so far upon himself, that what he did was liked of every
body: nay, that his disgraces were favors, and all because he was a King. For
in Nature not able to conceive the bonds of great matters (suddenly borne into
an unknown Ocean of absolute power) he was swayed withal (he knew not how)
as every wind of passions puffed him. Whereto nothing helped him better, then
that poisonous sugar of flattery: which some used, out of the innate baseness
of their heart, straight like dogs sawning upon the greatest; others
secretly hating him, and disdayning his great rising so suddenly, so
undeservedly (finding his humor) bent their exalting him only to his
overthrow; like the bird that caries the shellfish high, to break him the
easier with his fall. But his mind (being an apt matter to receive what form
their amplifying speeches would lay upon it) daunced so pretty a music to
their false measure, that he thought himself the wysest, the woorthyest, and
best beloved, that ever gave honor to a royal title. And being but obscurely
borne, he had found out vnblushing pedegrees, that made him not only of the
blood royal, but true heir, unjustly dispossessed by Eronas ancestors. And
like the foolish bird, that when it so hides the head that it sees not it
self, thinks no body else sees it: so did he imagine, that no body knew his
baseness, while he himself turned his eyes from it.

Erona, as of whom he had received no benefit, that within half a years
marriage he began to pretend barrenness: and making first an unlawful law of
having mo wives then one, he still keeping Erona, vnder-ha^d, by message sought
Artaxia, who no less hating him, then loving (as unlucky a choice) the
naughty King Plexirtus, yet to bring to pass what he purposed, was content to
train him into false hopes, till already his imagination had crowned him King
of Armenia, and had made that, but the foundation of more, and more monarchies;
as if fortune had only gotten eyes to cherish him. In which time a great
assembly of most part of all the Princes of Asia being to do honor to the never
sufficiently praised Pyrocles and Musidorus, he would be one not to acknowledge
his obligation (which was as great as any of the others,) but looking to have
been young master among those great estates, as he was among his abusing
underlings. But so many valorous Princes, in-deed far nearer to disdain him
then otherwise, he was quickly (as standing upon no true ground, inwardly) out
of countenance with himself, till his seldom-co^fortlesse flatterers
(persuading him, it was envy and fear of his expected greatness) made him have
away from that company, and without further delay appointed the meeting with
Artaxia; so incredibly blinded with the ouerbright shining of his roialty, that
he could think such a Queen could be content to be ioined-patent with an
other to have such an husband. Poor Erona to all this obeyed, either veheme^cy
of affection making her stoop to so ouerbase a servitude, or astonished with an
unlooked for fortune, dull to any behoofeful resolution, or (as many times it
falls out even in great hearts when they can accuse none but themselves)
desperately bent to maintain it. For so went she on in that way of her love,
that (poor Lady) to be beyond all other examples of ill-set affection, she was
brought to write to Artaxia, that she was content, for the public good, to be
a second wife, and yield the first place to her: nay to extol him, and even
woo Artaxia for him.

But Artaxia (mortally hating them both for her brothers Musidorus and
Pyrocles, even met them half way in excusing her brothers murder, as not being
principal actors; and of the other-side, driven to what they did by the
euer-pardonable necessity: and so well handled the matter, as, though she
promised nothing, yet Antiphilus promised himself all that she would have him
think. And so a solemn enteruiew was appointed. But (as the Poets say) Hymen
had not there his saffron-coloured cote. For Artaxia laying men secretly (and
easily they might be secret, since Antiphilus thought she ouerran him in love)
when he came even ready to embrace her, showing rather a countenance of
accepting then offering, they came forth, and (having much advantage both in
number, valor, and fore-preparation) put all his company to the sword; but
such as could fly away. As for Antiphilus she caused him and Erona both to be
put in irons, hasting back toward her brothers tomb, upon which she meant to
sacrifice them; making the love of her brother stand between her and all other
motions of grace, from which by nature she was alienated.

Antiphilus that had no greatness but outward, that taken away, was ready to
fall faster then calamity could thrust him; with fruitless begging (where
reason might well assure him his death was resolved) and weak bemoning his
fortune, to give his enemies a most pleasing music, with many promises, and
protestations, to as little purpose, as from a little mind. But Erona sad
in-deede, yet like one rather used, then new fallen to sadness (as who had the
joys of her heart already broken) seemed rather to welcome then to shun that
end of misery, speaking little, but what she spoke was for Antiphilus,
remembering his guiltlesnesse, being at that time prisoner to Tiridates, when
the valiant princes slew him: to the disgrace of men, showing that there are
women more wise to judge what is to be expected, and more constant to bear it
when it is happened.

by her birth, and her sadness by her beauty, made this noble prince Plangus,
who (never almost from his cousin Artaxia) was now present at Eronaes taking,
to perceive the shape of loveliness more perfectly in woe, then in ioyfulnesse
(as in a picture which receives greater life by the darkness of shadows,
then by more glittering colors) and seeing to like; and liking to love; and
loving straight to feel the most incident effects of love, to serve and
preserve. So borne by the hasty tide of short leisure, he did hastily deliver
together his affection, and affectionate care. But she (as if he had spoken of
a small matter, when he mentioned her life, to which she had not leisure to
attend) desired him if he loved her, to show it, in finding some way to save
Antiphilus. For her, she found the world but a wearisom stage unto her, where
she played a part against her will: and therefore besought him, not to cast his
love in so unfruitful a place, as could not love it self: but for a
testimony of constancy, and a sutablenes to his word, to do so much comfort
to her mind, as that for her sake Antiphilus were saved. He told me how much
he argued against her tendering him, who had so ungratefully betrayed her, and
foolishly cast away himself. But perceiving she did not only bend her very
good wits to speak for him against her-selfe, but when such a cause could be
allied to no reason, yet love would needs make itself a cause, and bar her
rather from hearing, then yield that she should yield to such arguments: he
likewise in who^ the power of Love (as they say of spirits) was subject to the
love in her, with grief consented, and (though backwardly) was dilligent to
labor the help of Antiphilus: a man whom he not only hated, as a trair our to
Erona, but envied as a possessor of Erona. Yet Love swear, his heart, in spite
of his heart, should make him become a servant to his rival. And so did he,
seeking all the means of persuading Artaxia, which the authority of so near,
and so virtuous a kinsma^ would give unto him. But she to whom the eloquence of
hatred had given revenge the face of delight, rejected all such motions; but
rather the more closely imprisoning them in her chief city, where she kept
them with intention at the birthday of Tiridates (which was very nere) to
execute Antiphilus, and at the day of his death (which was about half a year
after) to use the same rigor towars Erona. Plangus much grieved (because much
loving) attempted the humors of the Lycians, to see, whether they would come in
with forces to succor their Princess. But there the next inheritor to the
crown (with the true play that is used in the game of kingdo^s) had no sooner
his mistres in captivity, but he had usurped her place, and making her odious
to her people, because of the unfit election she had made, had so left no hope
there: but which is worse, had sent to Artaxia, persuading the iusticing her,
because that injustice might give his title the name of justice. Wanting that
way, Plangus practiced with some dear friends of his, to save Antiphilus out
of prison, whose day because it was much nearer then Eronaes, and that he well
found, she had twisted her life upon the same thread with his, he determined
first to get him out of prison: and to that end having prepared al matters as
well as in such case he could, where Artaxia had set many of Tiridates old
servants to have well-marking eyes, he co^ferred with Antiphilus, as (by the
auothoritie he had) he found means to do; and agreed with him of the time and
manner, how he should by the death of some of his iaylors escape.

But all being well ordered, and Plangus willingly Antiphilus (who, like a
bladder, sweld ready to break, while it was full of the wind of prosperity,
that being out, was so abiected, as apt to be trod on by every body) when it
came to the point, that with some hazard, he might be in apparent likelihoode
to avoid the uttermost harm, his heart fainted, and (weak fool, neither
hoping, nor fearing as he should) gat a conceit, that with bewraying his
practice, he might obtain pardon: and therefore, even a little before Plangus
should have come unto him, opened the whole practice to him that had the
charge, with vnpittyed tears idly protesting, he had rather die by Artaxias
commandment, then against her will escape: yet begging life upon any the
hardest, and wretchedest conditions that she would lay upon him. His keeper
provided accordingly, so that when Plangus came, he was like, himself to have
been entrappud: but that finding (with a luckie in-sight) that it was
discovered, he retired; and (calling his friends about him) stood upon his
guard, as he had good cause. For, Artaxia (accounting him most ungrateful,
considering that her brother and she, had not only preserved him against the
malice of his father, but ever used him much liker his birth, then his fortune)
sent forces to apprehend him. But he among the martial men had gotten so great
love, that he could not only keep himself from the malice, but work in their
minds a compassion of Eronas adversity.

But for the succor of Antiphilus he could get no not been able to qualify
the hatred; so that Artaxia might easily upon him perform her will; which
was (at humble suite of all the women of that city) to deliver him to their
censure, who mortally hating him for having made a law of Polygamie, after
many tortures, forste him to throw himself from a high Pyramid, which was
built over Tiridates tomb, and so to end his fallse-harted life, which had
planted no strong thought in him, but that he could be unkind.

Plangus well perceiving that Artaxia stayed only for the appointed day, that
the fair Eronas body, (consumed to ashes) should make a notorious testimony,
how deeply her brothers death was engraven in her breast, he assembled good
numbers of friends, who^ his virtue (though a stranger) had tied unto him, by
force to give her liberty. Contrariwise, Artaxia, to whom Anger gave more
courage then her sex did fear, used her regal authority (the most she
could) to suppress that sedition, and have her will: which (she thought) is
the most princely thing that may be. But Plangus, who indeed (as all men
witness) is one of the best captains (both for policy and valor) that are
trained in the school of Mars, in a conflict overthrew Artaxias power, though
of far greater number: and there took prisoner a base son of her brothers,
whom she deerly affected, and then sent her word that he should run the same
race of fortune (whatsoever it was) that Erona did: and happy was that
threatening for her; for else Artaxia had hastened the day of her death, in
respect of those tumults.

fully pardoned, and all prisoners (except Erona) delivered, she should be put
into the hands of a principal nobleman, who had a castle of great strength,
upon oath, that if by the day two year from Tiridates death, Pyrocles and
Musidorus did not in person combat, and overcome two knights, who^ she
appointed to maintain her quarrel against Erona and them, of having by treason
destroyed her brother, that the^ Erona should be that same day burned to ashes:
but if they came, and had the victory, she should be delivered; but upon no
occasion, neither freed, nor executed, till that day. And hereto of both sides,
all took solemn oath, and so the peace was concluded; they of Plangus party
forcing him to agree, though he himself the sooner condiscended, knowing the
courtesy of those two excellent Princes, not to refuse so noble a quarrel,
and their power such, as two more (like the other two) were not able to resist.
But Artaxia was more, and upon better ground, pleased with this action; for she
had even newly received news from Plexirtus, that upon the sea he had caused
them both to perish, and therefore she held herself sure of the match.

Plangus knew not so much, and therefore seeing his party (as most times it
falls out in like case) hungry of conditions of peace, accepted them; and then
obtained leave of the Lord, that indifferently kept her, to visit Erona, whom
he found full of desperate sorrow, not suffering, neither his unworthiness,
nor his wrongs, nor his death (which is the natural conclusion of all worldly
acts) either to cover with forgetfulness, or diminish with consideration, the
affection she had borne him: but even glorying in affliction, and shunning all
comfort, she seemed to have no delight, but in making her self the picture of
misery. So that when Plangus came to her, she fell in deadly traunces, as if
in him she had seen the death of Antiphilus, because he had not succored him:
and yet (her virtue striving) she did at one time acknowledge her self bound,
and profess her self injured; in steed of allowing the conclusion they had
made, or writing to the Princes (as he wished her to do) craving nothing but
some speedy death to follow, her (in spite of just hate) beloved Antiphilus.

Plangus having nothing but a ravished kiss from her hand at their parting',
went away toward Greece, whetherward he understood the Princes were embarked.
But by the way it was his fortune to intercept letters, written by Artaxia to
Plexirtus: wherein she signified her accepting him to her husband, whom she had
ever favored, so much the rather, as he had performed the conditions of her
marriage, in bringing to their deserved end, her greatest enemies: withal,
thanking the sea, in such terms, as he might well perceive, it was by some
treason wrought in Plexirtus ship. Whereupon (to make more diligent search)
he took ship himself, and came into Laconia, enquiring, and by his inquiry
finding, that such a ship was indeed with fight, and fire, perished, none
(almost) escaping. But for Pyrocles and Musidorus, it was assuredly determined
that they were cast away: for the name of such Princes (especially in Greece)
would quickly else have been a large witness to the contrary. Full of grief
with that, for the loss of such, who left the world poor of perfection: but
more sorry for Eronas sake, who now by them could not be relieved. A new
advertisement from Armenia ouertooke him, which multiplied the force of his
anguish. It was a message from the Nobleman who had Erona in ward, giving him
to understand, that since his departure, Artaxia (using the benefit of time)
had besieged him in his castle, demanding present delivery of her, whom yet
for his faith given, he would not, before the day appointed, if possibly he
could resist, which he foresaw, long he should not do for want of victual,
which he had not so wisely provided, because he trusted upon the general oath
taken for two years space: and therefore willed him to make have to his
succor, and come with no small forces; for all they that were of his side in
Armenia, were consumed, and Artaxia had increased her might by marriage of
Plexirtus, who now crowned King there, stickt not to glory in the murder of
Pyrocles and Musidorus, as having just cause thereto, in respect of the deaths
of his sister Andromana, her son his nephew, and his own daughter Zelmane,
all whose loss he unjustly charged them withal, and now openly stickt not to
confess, what a revenge his wit had brought forth. Plangus much astonished
herewith, bethought himself what to do. For to return to Armenia was vain,
since his friends there were utterly overthrown. The^ thought he of going to
his father; but he had already (even since the death of his stepmother, and
brother) attempted the recovering his favor, and all in vain. For they, that
had before joined with Andromana to do him the wrong, thought now no life for
the^ if he returned, and therefore kept him still (with new forged suspicions)
odious to his father. So that Plangus reserving that for a work of longer
time, then the saving of Erona could bear, determined to go to the mighty and
good King Euarchus: who lately having (to his eternal fame) fully, not only
conquered his enemies, but established good government in their countries, he
hoped he might have present succor of him, both for the iustnes of the cause,
and revenge of his childrens death, by so heinous a treason murdered.
Therefore with diligence he went to him; and by the way (passing through my
country) it was my hap to find him, the most overthrown man with grief, that
ever I hope to see again. For still it seemed he had Erona at a stake before
his eyes; such an apprehension he had taken of her danger; which in despite of
all the comfort I could give him, he poured out in such lamentations, that I
was moved not to let him pass, till he had made full declaration, which by
pieces my daughters and I have delivered unto you. Feign he would have had
succor of my self, but the course of my life being otherwise bent, I only
accompanied him with some that might safely guide him to the great Euarchus:
for my part having had some of his speeches so feelingly in my memory, that at
an idle time (as I told you) I set them down Dialogue-wise, in such manner as
you have seen. And thus, excellent Lady, I have obeyed you in this story;
wherein if it well please you to consider, what is the strange power of Love,
and what is due to his authority, you shall exercise therein the true
nobleness of your judgment, and do the more right to the unfortunate
Historian. Zelmane (sighing for Eronaes sake, yet inwardly comforted in that
she assured her self, Euarchus would not spare to take in hand the just
delivering of her, joined with the just revenge of his childrens loss) having
now what she desired of Basilius, to avoid his further discourses of
affection, encouraged the shepherds to begin, whom she saw all ready for them.

The second Eclogues.
THe rude tumulte of the Enispians gave occasion to the honest shepherds to
begin their pastorals this day with a dau^ce, which they called the skirmish
betwixt Reason and Passion. For seven shepherds (which were named the
Reasonable shepherds) joined themselves; four of them making a square, and
the other two going a little wide of either side, like wings for the maine
battle; and the seventh man foremost, like the forlorn hope to begin the
skirmish. In like order came out the seven appassionated shepherds; all
keeping the pase of their foot by their voice, and sundry consorted
instruments they held in their arms. And first, the foremost of Reasonable side
began to sing.

R. Thou Rebel vile, come, to thy master yield.

And the other that met with him answered. P. No, Tyrant; no: mine, mine shall
be the field.

Reason. Can Reason then a Tyrant counted be?

Passion. If Reason will, that Passions be not free.

R. But Reason will, that Reason govern most.

P. And Passion will, that Passion rule the roast.

R. Your will is will; but Reason reason is.

P. Will has his will, when Reasons will does miss.

R. Whom Passion leads unto his death is bent.

P. And let him die, so that he die content.

R. By nature you to Reason faith have sworn.

P, Not so, but fellowlike together borne.

R. Who Passion does ensue, lives in annoy.

P. Who Passion does forsake, lives void of joy.

R. Passion is blind, and treades an unknown trace

P. Reason has eyes to see his own ill case.

Then as they approached nearer, the two of Reasons sides, as if they shot at
the other, thus sange.

R. Dare Passions then abide in Reasons light?

P. And is not Reason dimde with Passions might?

R. O foolish thing, which glory does destroy.

P. O glorious title of a foolish toye.

R. Weakness you are, dare you with our strength fight?

P. Because our weakness weakeneth all your might.

R. O sacred Reason, help our virtuous toiles.

P. O Passion, pass on feeble Reasons spoils.

R. We with ourselves abide a daily strife.

P. We gladly use the sweetness of our life.

R. But yet our strife sure peace in end does breed.

P. We now have peace, your peace we do not need.

Then did the two square battles meet, and in steed of fighting embrace one
another, singing thus.

R. We are too strong: but Reason seeks no blood.

P. Who be too weak, do feign they be too good.

R. Though we cannot overcome, our cause is just.

P. Let us overcome, and let us be unjust.

R. Yet Passion, yield at length to Reasons stroke.

P. What shall we win by taking Reasons yoke?

R. The joys you have shall be made permanent.

P. But so we shall with grief learn to repent.

R. Repent indeed, but that shall be your bliss.

P. How know we that, since present joys we miss?

R. You know it not: of Reason therefore know it.

P. No Reason yet had ever skill to show it.

R. P. Then let us both to heavenly rules give place,
Which Passions skill, and Reason do deface.

THen embraced they one another, and came to the King, who framed his praises
of the^ according to Zelmanes liking; whose unrestrained parts, the mind and
eye, had their free course to the delicate Philoclea, whose look was not short
in well requiting it, although she knew it was a hateful sight to her jealous
mother. But Dicus (that had in this time taken a great liking of Dorus for the
good parts he found above his age in him) had a delight to taste the fruits
of his wit, though in a subject which he him self most of all other despised:
and so entered to speech with him in the manner of this following Eclogue.

Dicus. Dorus. Dicus. DOrus, tell me, where is thy wonted motion
To make these woods resounde thy lamentation?
Thy saint is dead, or dead is thy devotion.
For who does hold his love in estimation,
To witness, that he thinks his thoughts delicious,
Thinks to make each thing badge of his sweet passion.

Dorus. But what does make thee Dicus so suspicious
Of my due faith, which needs must be immutable?
Who others virtue doubt, themselves are vicious.
Not so; although my metal were most mutable,
Her beams have wrought therein most fair impression:
To such a force some change were nothing suitable.

Dicus. The heart well set does never shun confession:
If noble be thy bands, make them notorious:
Silence does seem the mask of base oppression.
Who glories in his love, does make Love glorious:
But who does fear, or bideth muet wilfully,
Shows, guilty heart does deem his state opprobrious.
Thou then, that framste both words and voice most skilfully.
Yield to our ears a sweet and sound relation,
If Love took thee by force, or caught thee guilefully.

Dorus. If Sunnie beams shame heavenly habitation;
If three-leau'd grass seem to the sheep unsavory,
Then base and sower is Loves most high vocation.
Or if sheep cries can help the Suns own bravery,
Then may I hope, my pipe may have ability,
To help her praise, who decks me in her slavery.
No, no: no words ennoble selfe-nobilitic.
As for your doubts; her voice was it deceived me,
Her eye the force beyond all possibility.

Dicus. Thy words well voic'd, well gra'ste had almost heaued me
Quite from my self to love Loves contemplation;
Till of these thoughts thy sudden end bereaved me.
Go on therefore, and tell us, by what fashion
In thy own proof he gets so strange possession,
And how possessed he strengthens his invasion?

Dorus. Sight is his root, in thought is his progression,
His childhood wonder, prenticeship attention,
His youth delight, his age the souls oppression:
Doubt is his sleep, he waketh in invention;
Fancy his food, his clothing is of carefulnes;
Beauty his boot, his play lovers dissension:
His eyes are curious search, but vailde with warefulnesse:
His wings desire often clipped with desperation:
Largess his hands could never skill of sparefulnesse.
But how he does by might, or by persuasion
To conquer, and his conqnest how to ratify,
Experience doubts, and schools hold disputation,

Dicus. But so thy sheep may thy good wishes satisfy
With large increase, and wool of fine perfection,
So she thy love, her eyes thy eyes may gratify,
As thou will give our souls a dear refection,
By telling how she was, how now she framed is
To help, or hurt in thee her own infection.

Dorus. Blessed be the name, wherewith my mistres named is:
Whose wounds are salues, whose yokes please more then pleasure does:
Her stains are beams; virtue the fault she blamed is.
The heart, eye, ear here only find his treasure does:
All numbering arts her endless graces number not:
Time, place, life, wit scarcely her rare gifts measure does.
Is she in rage? so is the Sun in summer hot,
Yet harvest brings. Does she alas absent her self?
The Sun is hid; his kindly shadows cumber not.
But when to give some grace she does content herself,
O then it shines; then are the heavens distributed,
And Venus seems, to make up her, she spent herself.
Thus then (I say) my mischiefs have contributed
A greater good by her divine reflection;
My harms to me, my bliss to her attributed,
Thus she is framde: her eyes are my direction;
Her love my life; her anger my destruction.
Lastly what so she is, that is my protection.

Dicus. Thy safety sure is wrapped in destruction:
For that construction thine own words do bear.
A man to fear a woman's moodie eye,
Makes Reason lie a slave to servile Sense.
A weak defense where weakness is thy force:
So is remorse in folly dearly bought.

Dorus. If I had thought to hear blasphemous words,
My breast to swords, my soul to hell have sold
I rather would, then thus mine ears defile
With words so vile, which viler breath does breed.
O herds take heed; for I a woolfe have found;
Who hunting round the strongest for to kill,
His breast does fill with earth of others joys,
And laden so pulls down, pulled down destroys.
O sheepheards boys, eschew these tongues of venom,
Which do enuenome both the soul and senses.
Our best defenses are to fly these adders.
O tongues like ladders made to clime dishonor,
Who judge that honor, which has scope to slander.

Dicus. Dorus you wander far in great reproaches;
So love encroches on your charmed reason,
But it is season for to end our singing.
Such anger bringing: as for me, my fancy
In sicke-mans frenzy rather takes compassion,
Then rage for rage: rather my wish I send to thee,
Thou soon may have some help, or change of passion.
She often her looks, the stars her favor bend to thee:
Fortune store, Nature health, Love grant persuasion.
A quiet mind none but thy self can lend to thee,
Thus I commend to thee all our former love,

Dorus. Well do I prove, error lies often in zeal,
Yet it is seal, though error, of true heart.
Naught could impart such heates to friendly mind.
But for to find thy words did her disgrace,
Whose only face the little heaven is,
Which who does miss his eyes are but delusions,
Barred from their chiefest object of delightfulness,
Thrown on this earth the Chaos of confusions.
As for thy wish to my enraged spitefulness,
The lovely blown with rare reward, my prayer is
Thou may love her that I may see thy sightfulnesse.
The quiet mind (whereof my self empairer is,
As thou do think) should most of all disquiet me
Without her love, then any mind who fairer is.
Her only cure from surfet-woes can diet me:
She holds the balance of my contentation:
Her cleared eyes, naught else, in storms can quiet me.
Nay rather then my ease discontentation
Should breed to her, let me for aye dejected be
From any joy, which might her grief occasion.
With so sweet plagues my happy harms infected be:
Pain wills me die, yet will of death I mortify:
For though life irkes, in life my loves protected be.
Thus for each change my changelesse heart I fortify.

When they had ended to the good pleasing of the assistants, especially of
Zelmane, who never forgot to give due co^me^dations to her friend Dorus, the
more to advance him in his pursuit (although therein he had brought his matters
to a more wished conclusion then yet she knew of) out starte a jolly yonker,
his name was Nico, whose tongue had borne a very itching silence all this
while. And having spied one Pas, a mate of his, as mad as himself (both indeed
lads to clime any tree in the world) he bestowed this manner of salutation upon
him, and was with like reverence requited.

Nico. Dorus. Nico. ANd are you there old Pas? in troth I ever thought,
Among us all we should find out some thing of naught.

Pas. And I am here the same, so mote I thrive and thee,
Despairde in all this flock to find a knave, but thee.

Nico. Ah now I see, why thou art in thy self so blind:
Thy gray-hood hides the thing, that thou despairst to find.

Pas. My gray-hood is mine own, all be it be but gray,
Not like the scrippe thou stol'ste, while Dorcas sleeping lay.

Nico. Mine was the scrippe: but thou, that seeming raid with love,
Did snatch from Cosmas hand her greeny wroughte^ glove.

Pas. Ah fool; so Courtiers do. But who did lively skippe,
When for a treene-dish stolen, thy father did thee whippe?

Nico. In deed the witch thy dam her crouch from shoulder spread,
For pilfring Lalus lamb, with crouch to bless thy head.

Pas. My voice the lamb did win, Menalcas was our judge:
Of singing match was made, whence he with shame did trudge.

Nico. Could thou make Lalus fly? so nightingales avoid,
When with the kawing crows their music is annoide.

Pas. Nay like to nightingales the other birds give ear:
My pipe and song made him both pipe and song forswear.

Nico. I think it well: such voice would make one music hate:
But if I had been there, the adst met another mate.

Pas. Another sure as is a gander from a goose:
But still when thou do sing, me thinks a colt is loose.

Nico. Well aimed by my hat: for as thou sangst last day;
The neighbors all did cry, alas what ass does bray?

Pas. But here is Dicus old; let him then speak the word,
To whether with best cause the Nymphs fair flowers afford.

Nico. Content: but I will lay a wager hereunto,
That profit may ensue to him that best can do.
I have (and long shall have) a white great nimble cat,
A king upon a mouse, a strong foe to the rat,
Fine ears, long tail he has, with Lions curbed clawe,
Which often he lifts up, and stays his lifted pawe,
Deep musing to himself, which after-mewing shows,
Till with lickt beard, his eye of fire epsy his foes.
If thou (alas poor if) do win, then win thou this,
And if I better sing, let me thy Cosma kiss.

Pas. Kiss her? now may thou kiss. I have a better match;
A pretty curre it is; his name iwis is Catch,
No ear nor tail he has, least they should him disgrace,
A ruddie hair his cote, with fine long spectled face:
He never musing stands, but with himself will play
Leaping at every fly, and angry with a flea:
He eft would kill a mouse, but he disdaines to fight,
And makes our home good sport with dancing bolt upright.
This is my pawn; the price let Dicus judgment show;
Such odds I willing lay; for him and you I know.

Dicus. Sing then my lads, but sing with better vain then yet.
Or else who sings worst, my skill will hardly hit.

Nico. Who doubts but Pas fine pipe again will bring
The ancient praise to Arcad shepherds skill?
Pan is not dead, since Pas begins to sing.

Pas. Who evermore will love Apollos quill,
Since Nico does to sing so widely gape?
Nico his place far better furnish will.

Nico. Was not this he, who did for Syrinx escape
Raging in woes teach pastors first to plain?
Do you not hear his voice, and see his shape?

Pas. This is not he that failed her to gain,
Which made a Bay, made Bay a holy tree:
But this is one that does his music stain.

Nico. O Faunes, O Fairies all, and do you see,
And suffer such a wrong? a wrong I trow,
That Nico must with Pas compared be?

Pas. O Nymphs, I tell you news, for Pas you know:
While I was warbling out your woonted praise,
Nico would needs with Pas his bagpipe blow.

Nico. If never I did fail your holy days,
With daunces, carols, or with barlybreake:
Let Pas now know, how Nico makes the lays.

Pas. If each day has been holy for your sake,
Unto my pipe, O Nymphs, help now my pipe,
For Pas well knows what lays can Nico make.

Nico. Alas how often I look on cherries ripe,
Me thinks I see the lips my Leuca has,
And wanting her, my weeping eyes I wipe.

Pas. Alas, when I in spring meet roses rathe,
And think from Cosmas sweet red lips I live,
I leave mine eyes vnwipte my cheeks to bathe.

Nico. As I of late, near bushes used my sieve,
I spied a thrush where she did make her nest,
That will I take, and to my Leuca give.

Pas. But long have I a sparrow gaily dressed,
As white as milk, and coming to the call,
To put it with my hand in Cosmas breast.

Nico. I often do sue, and Leuca faith, I shall,
But when I did come near with heat and hope,
She ran away, and threw at me a ball.

Pas. Cosma once said, she left the wicket open,
For me to come, and so she did: I came,
But in the place found nothing but a rope.

Nico. When Leuca does appear, the Sun for shame
Does hide himself: for to himself he says,
If Leuca live, she darken will my fame.

Pas. When Cosma does come forth, the Sun displaies
His utmost light: for well his wit does know,
Cosmas fair bcames emblemish much his rays.

Nico. Leuca to me did yester-morning show
In perfect light, which could not me deceive,
Her naked leg, more white then whitest snow.

Pas. But yesternight by light I did receive
From Cosmas eyes, which full in darkness shine,
I saw her arm, where purest Lillies cleave.

Nico. She once stark naked did bathe a little tine;
But still (me thought) with beauties from her fell,
She did the waters wash, and make more fine.

Pas. She once, to cool her self, stood in a well,
But ever since that well is well besought,
And for Rose Water sold of rarest smell.

Nico. To rivers bank, being on walking brought,
She bad me spy her babie in the brook,
Alas (said I) this babe does nurce my thought.

Pas. As in a glass I held she once did look,
I said, my hands well paid her for mine eyes,
Since in my hands self goodly sight she took.

Nico. O if I had a ladder for the skies,
I would climb up, and bring a prettic star,
To wear upon her neck, that open lies.

Pas. O if I had Apollos golden carre,
I would come down, and yield to her my place,
That (shining now) she then might shine more far.

Nico. Nothing (O Leuca) shall thy fame deface,
While shepherds tunes be heard, or rimes be read,
Or while that shepherds love a lovely face.

Pas. Thy name (O Cosma) shall with praise be spread,
As far as any shepherds piping be:
As far as Love possesses any head.

Nico. Thy monument is laid in many a tree,
With name engrau'd: so though thy body die,
The after-folkes shall wonder still at thee.

Pas. So often these woods have heard me Cosma cry,
That after death, to heaven in woods resound,
With Echoes help, shall Cosma, Cosma fly.

Nico. Peace, peace good Pas, thou weeriest even the ground
With sluttish song: I pray thee learn to blea,
For good thou may yet prove in sheepish sound.

Pas. My father has at home a pretty Iay,
Go win of him (for chattering) praise or shame:
For so yet of a conquest speak thou may.

Nico. Tell me (and be my Pan) the monsters name,
That has four legs, and with two only goes,
That has four eyes, and only two can frame.

Pas. Tell me (and Phoebus be) what monster grows
With so strong lives, that body cannot rest
In ease, until that body life forgoes.

Dicus. Enough, enough: so ill has done the best,
That since the having them to neither's due,
Let cat and dog fight which shall have both you.

SOme speech there straight grew among the hearers, what they should mean by
the riddles of the two monsters. But Zelmane, whose heart better delighted in
wailefull ditties, as more according to her fortune, she desired Lamon, he
would again repeat some other lamentation of the still-absent Strephon and
Klaius. Basilius (as soon as he understood Zelmanes pleasure) commanded Lamon
upon pain of his life (as though every thing were a matter of life and death,
that pertained to his mistress service) immediately to sing it: who with great
cunning, varying his voice according to the diversity of the persons, began
this Dizaine, answered in that kind of verse, which is called the Crown.

Strephon. Klaius. Strephon. I Joy in grief, and do detest all joys:
Despise delight, and tyrde with thought of ease
I turn my mind to all forms of annoyes,
And with the change of them my fancy please.
I study that which may me most displease,
And in despite of that displeasures might,
Embrace that most, that most my soul destroys.
Blinded with beams, fell darkness is my sight:
Dole on my ruin feeds, with sucking smarte,
I think from me, not from my woes to part.

Klaius. I think from me, not from my woes to part,
And loath this time, called life, nay think, that life
Nature to me for torment did emparte;
Think, my hard haps have blunted deaths sharp knife,
Not sparing me, in whom his works be rise:
And thinking this, think Nature, Life, and Death
Place Sorrows triumph on my conquered breast:
Whereto I yield, and seek none other breath,
But from the sent of some infectious grave:
Nor of my fortune ought, but mischieue crave.

Strephon. Nor of my fortune ought but mischief crave,
And seek to nourish that, which now contaynes
All what I am: if I my self will save,
Then must I save, what in me chiefly reigns,
Which is the hateful web of Sorrows pains.
Sorrow then cherish me, for I am sorrow:
No being now, but sorrow I can have:
Then deck me as thine own; thy help I borowe,
Since thou my riches art, and that thou haste
Enough to make a fertile mind lie waste.

Klaius. Enough to make a fertile mind lie waste
Is that huge storm, which powers it self on me:
Hailestones of tears, of sighs a monstrous blast,
Thunders of cries; lightnings my wild looks be,
The darkened heaven my soul which naught can see;
The flying sprites which trees by roots up tear
Be those despaires, which have my hopes quite wast.
The difference is; all folks those storms forbear:
But I cannot; who then my self should fly
So close unto my self my wrackes do lie.

Strephon. So close unto my self my wrackes do lie;
Both cause, effect, beginning, and the end
Are all in me: what help then can I try?
My ship, my self; whose course to love does bend,
Sore beaten does her mast of Comfort spend:
Her cable, Reason, breaks from anchor, Hope:
Fancy, her tackling, torn away does fly:
Ruin, the wind, has blown her from her scope:
Bruised with waves of Cares, but broken is
On rock, Despair, the burial of my bliss.

Klaius. On rock, Despair, the burial of my bliss
I long do plowe with plough of deep Desire:
The seed Fast-meaning is, no truth to miss:
I harowe it with Thoughts, which all conspire
Favor to make my chief and only hire.
But, woe is me, the year is gone about,
And now I feign would reap, I reap but this,
Hate fully grown, Absence new sprongen out.
So that I see, although my sight empaire,
Vain is their pain, who labor in Despair.

Strephon. Vain is their pain, who labor in Despair.
For so did I, when with my angle, Will,
I sought to catch the fish Torpedo fair.
Even then Despair did Hope already kill:
Yet Fancy would perforce employ his skill,
And this has got; the catcher now is caught,
Lamde with the angle, which it self did bear,
And unto death, quite drownde in Dolours, brought
To death, as then disguisde in her fair face.
Thus, thus I had, alas, my loss in chase.

Klaius. Thus, thus I had, alas, my loss in chase,
When first that crowned Basiliske I knew,
Whose footesteps I with kisses often did trace,
Till by such hap, as ^ must ever rewe,
Mine eyes did light upon her shining hew,
And hers on me, astonished with that sight.
Since then my heart did loose his wonted place,
Infected so with her sweet poisons might,
That, leaving me for dead, to her it went:
But ah her flight has my dead relics spent.

Strephon. But ah her flight has my dead relics spent,
Her flight from me, from me, though dead to me,
Yet living still in her, while her beams lent
Such vital spark, that her mine eyes might see.
But now those living lights absented be,
Full dead before, I now to dust should fall,
But that eternal pains my soul should bent,
And keep it still within this body thrall:
That thus I must, while in this death I dwell,
In earthly fetters feel a lasting hell.

Klaius. In earthly fetters feel a lasting hell
Alas I do; from which to find release,
I would the earth, I would the heavens fell.
But vain it is to think these pains should cease,
Where life is death, and death cannot breed peace.
O fair, o only fair, from thee, alas,
These foul, most foul, distresses to me fell;
Since thou from me (o me) o Sun did pass.
Therefore esteeming all good blessings toys
I joy in grief, and do detest all joys.

Strephon. I joy in grief, and do detest all joys.
And now an end, (o Claius) now an end
For even the herbs our mournful music stroyes,
And from our burning breath the trees do bend.

So well did Lamons voice express the passions of those shepherds, that all
the Princely beholders were stricken in a silent consideration of them; indeed
every one making, that he heard of another the bala^ce of his own troubles. And
Basilius perceiving such melancholique music best consorted to the humor of
his mistress, entreated again the young melancholy shepherd, that he would
emparte some part of the sorrow his countenance so well witnessed unto them.
Which he in part to satisfy, began an Eclogue betwixt himself and the Echo:
framing his voice in those deserte places, as what words he would have the Echo
reply unto, those he would singe higher then the rest, and so kindly framed a
disputation betwixt himself and it. Which with these Hexameters in the
following order he uttered.

[Strephon and] Echo Fair rocks, goodly rivers, sweet woods, when shall I see
peace? [Echo:] Peace.
Peace? who debars me my tongue? who is it that comes me so nie? [Echo:] I.
O I do know what guest I do meet: it is Echo. [Echo:] It Is Echo
Wellmett Echo; aproch, and tell me thy will too. [Echo:] I will too.
Echo, what do I get yielding my sprite to my grieves? [Echo:] Grieves.
What medicine may I find for a pain that draws me to death? [Echo:] Death.
O poisonous medicine: what worse to me can be then it? [Echo:] It.
In what state was I then, when I took this deadly disease? [Echo:] Ease.
And what manner a mind, which had to that humor a vain? [Echo:] Vain.
Has not reason enough vehemence the desire to reprove? [Echo:] Prove.
Ost prove I: but what salve, when Reason seeks to be gone? [Echo:] One.
O what is it? what is it, that may be a salve to my love? [Echo:] Love.
What do lovers seek for, long sceking for to enjoy? [Echo:] Joy.
What be the joys, for which to enjoy they went to the pains? [Echo:] Pains.
Then to an earnest love what does best victory lend? [Echo:] End.
End? but I can never end: Love will not give me the leave. [Echo:] Leave.
How be the minds disposde, that cannot taste the Physic? [Echo:] Sick.
Tet say again the advice for th'ils that I told thee. [Echo:] I told thee.
Does the infected wretch of his ill the extremity know? [Echo:] No.
But if he know not his harms, what guids has he whilst he be blind? [Echo:]
Blind.
What blind guides can he have that leads to a fancy? [Echo:] A fancy.
Can fancies want eyes? or he fall that steppeth alost? [Echo:] Often.
What causes first made these torments on me to light? [Echo:] Light.
Can then a cause be so light, that forces a man to go die? [Echo:] I.
Tet tell, what light thing I had in me to draw me to die? [Echo:] Eye.
Eie-sight made me to yield: but what first pearst to my eyes? [Echo:] Eyes.
Eyes hurters? eyes hurt? but what from them to me falls? [Echo:] Falls.
But when I first did fall, what brought most fall to my heart? [Echo:] Art.
Art? what can be that art, which thou do mean by thy speech? [Echo:]
Speech.
What be the fruits of speaking art, what grows by the words? [Echo:]
Words.
O much more then words: those words served more me to bless. [Echo:] Less.
O when shall I be known, where most to be known I do long? [Echo:] Long.
Long by thy woes for such bad news: how recks she my thoughts? [Echo:] Oughts.
Then, then what do I gain, since vnt' her will I do wind? [Echo:] Wind.
Wind, tempests, and scorns: yet in end what gives she desire? [Echo:] Ire.
Silly reward: yet above women has she a title. [Echo:] A tittle.
What great name may I give to so heavenly a woman? [Echo:] A wo-man.
Woc, but seems to me joy, that agrees to my thought so. [Echo:] I thought so.
Think so: for of my desired bliss it is only the course. [Echo:] Course.
Cursed be thy self for cursing that, which leads me to joys. [Echo:] T'oyes.
What be the sweet creatures where lowly demaundes be not hard? [Echo:] Hard.
Hard to be got, but got constant, to be held very steeles. [Echo:] Eeles.
How be they held unkind? Speak, for thou have narrowly pry'de. [Echo:] Pride.
How can pride come there since springs of beauty be thence? [Echo:] Thence.
Horrible is this blasphemy unto the most holy. [Echo:] O lie.
Thou list, false Echo, their minds, as virtue, be just. [Echo:] Just.
Mockst thou those Diamonds, which only bematcht by the Godds? [Echo:] Odds.
Odds? what an odds is there, since them to the heavens I prefer? [Echo:]
Err.
Tell yet again, how name ye the goodly made evil? [Echo:] A devil.
Devil? where hell if such Devil is, to that hell I do go. [Echo:] Go.
After this well placed Echo, the other shepherds were offering themselves to
have continued the sports: But the night had so quietly spent most part of her
self, that the King for that time licensed them: and so bringing Zelmane to
her lodging, who would much rather have done the same for Philoclea, of all
sides they went to counterfeit a sleep in their beds, for a true one their
agonies could not afoord them. Yet there lay they (for so might they be most
solitary) for the food of their thoughts, till it was near noone the next
day. After which Basilius was to continue his Apollo devotions, and the other
to meditate upon their private desires.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE COUNTESS OF PEMBROKES ARCADIA.
CHAP. 1.
Dorus-his 1 fair and 2 foul weather in his love. 3 His forlorn agonies. 4
His doubts to write, 5 and Pamelaes to read, 6 his elegy.

THis last days danger, Pamelaes love discern, what a loss it should have
suffered, if Dorus had been destroyed, bredde such tenderness of kindness in
her toward him: that she could no longer keep Love from looking through her
eyes, and going forth in her words; whom before as a close prisoner she had to
her heart only committed; so as sinding not only by his speeches and letters,
but by the pitiful oration of a languishing behauior, and the easily
discyphered character of a sorrowful face, that Despair began now to threaten
him destruction, she grew content both to pity him, and let him see she
pityed him: as well by making her own beautiful beams thawe away the former
icinesse of her behavior, as by entertaining his discourses (whenever he did
use them) in the third person of Musidorus; to so far a degree, that in the
end she said, that if she had been the Princess, whom that disguised Prince
had virtuously loved, she would have requited his faith with faithful
affection: finding in her heart, that nothing could so heartily love as virtue:
with many mo words to the same sense of noble favor, and chaste plainness.
Which when at the first it made that expected bliss shine upon Dorus; he was
like one frozen with extremity of cold, over hastily brought to agreat fire,
rather oppressed, then relieved with such a lightning of felicity. But after
the strength of nature had made him able to feel the sweetness of ioyfulnes,
that again being a child of Passion, and never acquainted with mediocrity,
could not set bounds upon his happiness, nor be content to give Desire a
kingdom, but that it must be an unlimited Monarchy. So that the ground he
stood upon being ouer-high in happiness, and slipperie through affection, he
could not hold himself from falling into such an error, which with sighs blew
all comfort out of his breast, and washed away all cheerfulnes of his cheer,
with tears. For this favor filling him with hope, Hope encouraging his
desire, and Desire considering nothing, but opportunity: one time ( Mopsa being
called away by her mother, and he left alone with Pamelia) the sudden occasion
called Love, and that never staid to ask Reasons leave; but made the too-much
loving Dorus take her in his arms, offering to kiss her, and, as it were, to
establish a trophee of his victory.

unto heaven, as amazed to find herself so beguiled in him; then laying the
cruel punishment upon him of angry Love, and lowering beauty, showing disdain,
and a despising disdain, Away (said she) unworthy man to love, or to be loved.
Assure thy self, I hate my self for being so deceived; judge then what I do
thee, for deceiving me. Let me see thee no more, the only fall of my judgment,
and stain of my conscience. With that she called Mopsa, not staying for any
answer (which was no other, but a flood of tears, which she seemed not to mark
much less to pity) and chid her for having so left her alone.

It was not an amazement, it was not a sorrow, but it Dorus: which certainly at
that instant would have killed him, but that the fear to tarry longer in her
presence (contrary to her commandment) gave him life to carry himself away
from her sight, and to run into the woods, where, throwing himself down at
the foot of a tree, he did not fall to lamentation, for that proceeded of
pitying) or grieuing for himself (which he did no way) but to curses of his
life, as one that detested himself. For finding himself not only unhappy,
but unhappy after being salne from all happiness: and to be fallen from all
happiness, not by any misconceiuing, but by his own fault, and his fault to be
done to no other but to Pamela: he did not tender his own estate, but despised
it; greedily drawing into his mind, all conceits which might more and more
torment him. And so remained he two days in the woods, disdaining to give his
body food, or his mind comfort, loving in himself nothing, but the love of
her. And indeed that love only straue with the fury of his anguish, telling
it, that if it destroyed Dorus, it should also destroy the image of her that
lived in Dorus: and when the thought of that was crept in unto him, it began to
win of him some compassion to the shrine of the image, and to bewail not for
himself (who^ he hated) but that so notable a love should perish. The^ began
he only so far to wish his own good, as that Pamels might pardon him the
fault, though not the punishment: and the uttermost height he aspired unto,
was, that after his death, she might yet pity his error, and know that it
proceeded of love, and not of boldness.

Elegiac as fittest for mourning. But pen did never more quakingly perform his
office; never was paper more double moistened with ink and tears; never words
more slowly married together, and never the Muses more tired, then now with
changes and rechanges of his devises: fearing how to end, before he had
resolved how to begin, mistrusting each word, condemning each sentence. This
word was not significant, that word was too plain: this would not be conceived;
the other would be il conceived. Here Sorrow was not enough expressed; there he
seemed too much for his own sake to be sorry. This sentence rather showed art,
then passion; that sentence rather foolishly passionate, then forcibly moving.
At last, marring with mending, and putting out better, then he left, he made an
end of it; and being ended, and diverse times ready to tear it: till his
reason assuring him, the more he studied, the worse it grew, he folded it up,
devoutly inuoking good acceptance unto it; and watching his time, when they
were all gone one day to dinner (saving Mopsa) to the other lodge, stale up
into Pamelaes chamber, and in her sta^dish (which first he kissed; and craved
of it a safe and friendly keeping) left it there, to be seen at her next using
her ink (himself returning again to be true prisoner to desperate sorrow)
leaving her standish upon her beds head, to give her the more occasion to mark
it: which also fell out.

For she finding it at her after noone-returne, in another) was not guilty. At
last, she concluded, it were not much amiss to look it over, that she might
out of his words pick some further quarrel against him. Then she opened it,
and threw it away, and took it up again, till (ere she were aware) her eyes
would needs read it, containing this matter.


and now fully believes help to be quite perished;
Grant yet, grant yet a look, to the last monument of his anguish,
O you (alas so I find) cause of his only ruin.
Dread not a whit (O goodly cruel) that pity may enter
into thy heart by the sight of this Epistle I send:
And so refuse to behold of these strange wounds the recital,
least it might the allure home to thy self to return,
(Unto thy self I do mean those graces dwell so within thee,
gratefulnes, sweetness, holy love, hearty regard)
Such thing cannot I seek (Despair has given me my answer
despair most tragical clause to a deadly request)
Such thing cannot he hope, that knows thy determinat hardness;
hard like a rich marbell: hard, but a fair Diamond.
Can those eyes that of eyes drowned in most hearty flowing tears,
(tears and tears of a man) had no return to remorse;
Can those eyes now yield to the kind conceit of a sorrow,
which ink only relates, but ne laments, ne replies?
Ah, that, that I do I not conceive (though that to my bliss were)
more then Nestors years, more then a Kings diadem.
Ah, that, that I do not conceive; to the heaven when a mouse climes
then may I hope to atchieue grace of a heavenly tiger.
But, but alas, like a man co^demn'd does crave to be heard speak
not that he hopes for amends of the desaster he feels,
But finding the approach of death with an ougly relenting,
gives an adieu to the world, as to his only delight:
Right so my boiling heart, enflam'de with fire of a fair eye,
bubling out does breath signs of his hugie dolours:
Now that he finds to what end his life and love be reserved,
and that he hence must part where to live only he loved.
O fair, O fairest, are such the triumphs to thy fairness?
can death beauty become? must be such a monument?
Must I be only the mark, shall prove that Virtue is angry?
Shall prove that fiercenes can with a white dove abide?
Shall to the world appear that faith and love be rewarded
with mortal disdain, bent to vnendly revenge?
Unto revenge? O sweet, on a wretch will thou be revenged?
shall such high Plannets end to the loss of a worm?
And to revenge who do bend, would in that kind be revenged,
as the offense was done, and go beyond if he can.
All my' offense was Love: with Love then must I be chastned,
and with more, by the laws that to Revenge do belong.
If that love be a fault, more fault in you to be lovely:
Love never had me oppressed, but that I saw to be loved.
You be the cause that I loved: what Reason blames a shadow,
that with a body't goes? since by a body it is.
If that Love you did hate, you should your beauty have hidden:
you should those fair eyes have with a veil covered.
But fool, fool that I am, those eyes would shine from a dark cave.
what veiles then do prevail, but to a more miracle?
Or those golden locks, those locks which lock me to bondage,
torn you should disperse unto the blasts of a wind.
But fool, fool that I am, tho I had but a hair of her head found,
even as I am, so I should unto that hair be a thrall.
Or with fair ha^ds-nailes (o hand which nails me to this death)
you should have your face (since Love is ill) blemished.
O wretch, what do I say? should that fair face be defaced?
should my too-much sight cause so true a Sun to be lost?
First let Cimmerian darkness be my onel habitaco'n:
first be mine eyes pulde out, first be my brain perished;
Ere that I should consent to do such excessive a damage
unto the earth, by the hurt of this her heavenly jewel.
O no: but such love you say you could have afoorded,
as might learn Temperance void of a rages events.
O sweet simplicity: from whence should Love so be learned?
unto Cupid that boy shall a Pedante be found?
Well: but faulty I was: Reason to my Passion yielded,
Passion unto my rage, Rage to a hasty revenge.
But what is this for a fault, for which such fault is abolisht,
Such faith, so staineles, inuiolate, violent?
Shall I not? o may I not thus yet refresh the remembrance,
what sweet joys I had once, and what a place I did hold?
Shall I not once object, that you, you granted a favor
unto the man, whom now such miseries you awarde?
Be^d your thoghts to the dear sweet words which the^ to me given were:
think what a world is now, think who has altered her heart.
What? was I then worthy such good, now worthy such evil?
now fled, then cherished? then so nie, now so remote?
Did not a rosed breath, from lips more rosy proceeding,
say, that I should well find in what a care I was had?
With much more: now what do I find, but Care to abhor me,
Care that I sink in grief, Care that I live banished?
And banished do I live, nor now will seek a recourie,
since so she will, whose will is to me more then a law.
If then a man in most ill case may give you a farewell;
farewell, long farewell, all my woe, all my delight.
CHAP. 2.
1 The young Ladies met: 2 invited to the countrie-wenches sports, 3 go
thither, 4 there are taken, and thence carried to Amphialus castle. 5 Their
entertainment there. 6 Cecropias auricular confession of her proud carriage in
prosperity, 7 and ambitious practices in adversity. 8 Amphialus his affection
in these actions.

WHat this would have wrought in her, she her self could not tell: for, Miso,
called her down to entertain Zelmane, who was come to visit the two sisters;
about whom, as about two Poles, the Sky of Beauty was turned: while Gynecia
wearied her bed with her melancholy sickness, and made Misos shrewdness (who
like a sprite, set to keep a treasure, barde Zelmane from any further
conference) to be the Lieutenant of her jealousy: Both she and her husband,
driving Zelmane to such a streit of resolution, either of impossible granting,
or dangerous refusing, as the best escape she had, was (as much as she could)
to avoid their company. So as, this day, being the fourth day after the
uproar, ( Basilius being with his sick wife, conferring upon such
examinations, as Philanax, and other of his noblemen had made of this late
sedition, all touching Cecropia with vehement suspicion of giving either flame
or fuel unto it) Zelmane came with her body, to find her mind, which was gone
long before her, and had gotten his seat in Philoclea: who now with a bashful
cheerfulness (as though she were ashamed, that she could not choose but be
glad) joined with her sister, in making much of Zelmane.

And so as they sat devising how to give more feathers garnished with leaves,
their legs naked, saving that above the anckles they had little black silk
laces, upon which did hang a few silver belles: like which they had a little
above their elbowes, upon their bare arms. Upon their hair they ware garlands
of roses and gilliflowers; and the hair was so dressed, as that came again
above the garlandes; enterchaunging a mutual covering: so as it was doubtful,
whether the hair dressed the garlandes, or the garlandes dressed the hair. Their
breasts liberal to the eye: the face of the formoste of of them, in
excellency fair; and of the rest lovely, if not beautiful: and beautiful
would have been, if they had not suffered greedy Phoebus, ouer-often, and
hard, to kiss them. Their countenaunces full of a graceful gravity; so as
the gesture matched with the apparel, it might seem a wanton modesty, and an
entising sobernes. Each of them had an instrument of music in their hands,
which consorting their wel-pleasing tunes, did charge each ear with
vnsensiblenes, that did not lend it self unto them. The Music entering alone
into the lodge, the Ladies were all desirous to see from whence so pleasant a
guest was come: and therefore went out together; where, before they could take
the pains to doubt, much less to ask the question of their quality, the
fairest of them (with a gay, but yet discreet demeanor) in this sort spoke
unto them. Most excellent Ladies, (whose excellencies have power to make cities
envy these woods, and solitarines to be accounted the sweetest company)
vouchsafe our message your gracious hearing, which as it comes from Love, so
comes it from lovely persons. The maids of all this coast of Arcadia,
understanding the often access that certain shepherds of these quarters, are
allowed to have in this forbidden place; and that their rural sports are not
disdained of you, have been stird with emulation to them, and affection to you,
to bring forth some thing, which might as well breed your contentment: and
therefore hoping that the goodness of their intention, and the hurtlesnes of
their sex shall excuse the breach of the commandment in coming to this place
unsent for, they chose out us, to inuit both your princely parents, and your
selves, to a place in the woods about half a mile hence: where they have
provided some such sports, as they trust your gracious acceptatio^s will
interpret to be deliteful. We have been at the other lodge, but finding them
there, busied in weightier affairs, our trust is, that you yet will not deny
the shining of your eyes upon us.

The Ladies stood in some doubt, whether they Basilius might be angry withal.
But Miso (that had been at none of the pastorals, and had a great desire to
lead her old senses abroad to some pleasure) told them plainly, they should
nor will nor choose, but go thither, and make the honest country people know,
that they were not so squeamish as folks thought of them. The Ladies glad to
be warranted by her authority; with a smiling humbleness obeyed her: Pamela
only casting a seeking look, whether she could see Dorus (who poor wretch
wandered half mad for sorrow in the woods, crying for pardon of her, who could
not hear him) but indeed was grieved for his absence, having given the wound
to him through her own heart. But so the three Ladies and Miso went with those
six Nymphs, conquering the length of the way with the force of music,
leaving only Mopsa behind, who disgraced weeping with her countenance, because
her mother would not suffer her to show her newskoured face among them. But
the place appointed (as they thought) met them half in their way, so well were
they pleased with the sweet tunes and pretty conversation of their inuiters.
There found they in the midst of the thickest part of the wood, a little square
place, not burdened with trees, but with a board covered, and beautified with
the pleasantest fruits, that Sunburnd Autumn could deliver unto the^. The
maids besought the Ladies to sit down, and taste of the swelling grapes, which
seemed great with child of Bacchus: and of the diverse colored plums, which
gave the eye a pleasant taste before they came to the mouth. The Ladies would
not show to scorn their provision, but eat, and drank a little of their cool
wine, which seemed to laugh for joy to come to such lips.

Zelmane before she could draw her sword, and taking it from her, put hoods
over the heads of all four, and so muffled, by force set them on horseback
and carried them away; the sisters in vain crying for succor, while Zelmanes
heart was rent in pieces with rage of the injury, and disdain of her fortune.
But when they had carried them a four or five mile further, they left Miso
with a gagge in her mouth, and bound hand and foot, so to take her fortune:
and brought the three Ladies (by that time that the Night seemed with her
silence to conspire to their treason) to a castle about ten mile of from the
Lodges: where they were feign to take a boat which waited for them. For the
castle stood in the midst of a great lake, upon a high rock, where partly by
Art, but principally by Nature, it was by all men esteemed impregnable.

But at the Castle gate their faces were discovered, Cecropia. But that sight
increased the deadly terror of the Princess, looking for nothing but death,
since they were in the power of the wicked Cecropia: who yet came unto them,
making courtesy the outside of mischief, and desiring them not to be
discomforted: for they were in a place dedicated to their service. Philoclea
(with a look where Love shined through the miste of Fear) besought her to be
good unto them, having never deserved evil of her. But Pamelas high heart
disdayning humbleness to injury, Aunt, (said she) what you have determined of
us I pray you do it speedily: for my part I look for no service, where I
find violence.

But Cecropia (using no more words with them) conveyed them all three to
several lodgings ( Zelmanes heart so swelling with spite, that she could not
bring forth a word) and so left them: first taking from them their knives,
because they should do themselves no hurt, before she had determined of them:
and then giving such order that they wanted nothing but liberty, and comfort,
she went to her son, who yet kept his bed, because of his wound he had
received of Zelmane, and told him, whom now he had in his power. Amphialus was
but even then returned from far countries, where he had won immortal fame,
both of courage and courtesy, when he met with the Princesses, and was hurt by
Zelmane, so as he was utterly ignorant of all his mothers wicked devises; to
which he would never have consented, being (like a rose out of a brier) an
excellent son of an evil mother: and now when he heard of this, was as much
amazed, as if he had seen the Sun fall to the earth. And therefore desired
his mother that she would tell him the whole discourse, how all these matters
had happened.

Basilius that now reigns, having lived unmarried till he was nigh threescore
years old (and in all his speeches affirming, and in all his doings assuring,
that he never would marry) made all the eyes of the country to be bent upon
your father, his only brother (but then younger by thirty years) as upon the
undoubted successor: being indeed a man worthy to reign, thinking nothing
enough for himself: where this goose (you see) puts down his head, before
there be any thing near to touch him. So that he holding place and estimation
as heir of Arcadia, obtained me of my father the King of Argos, his brother
helping to the conclusion, with protesting his bachelerly intention: for else
you may be sure the King of Argos, nor his daughter would have suffered their
Royal blood to be stained with the base name of subjection. So that I came
into this country as apparent Princess thereof, and accordingly was courted,
and followed of all the Ladies of this country. My port and pomp did well
become a King of Argos daughter: in my presence their tongues were turned into
ears, and their cares were captives unto my tongue. Their eyes admired my
Majesty, and happy was he or she, on whom I would suffer the beams thereof to
fall. Did I go to church? it seemed the very Gods waited for me, their
devotions not being solemnized till I was ready. Did I walk abroad to see any
delight? Nay, my walking was the delight it self: for to it was the concourse;
one thrusting upon another, who might show him self most diligent and
serviceable toward me: my sleeps were inquired after, and my wakings never
unsaluted: the very gate of my house full of principal persons, who were glad,
if their presents had received a grateful acceptance. And in this felicity
were thou borne, the very earth submitting it self unto thee to be trodden on
as by his Prince; and to that pass had my husbands virtue (by my good help)
within short time brought it, with a plot we laid, as we should not have
needed to have waited the tedious work of a natural end of Basilius; when the
heavens (I think envying my great felicity) the^ stopped thy fathers breath,
when he breathed nothing but power and sovereignty. Yet did not thy orphancie,
or my widdowhood, deprive us of the delightful prospect, which the hill of
honor does yield, while expectation of thy succession did bind dependencies
unto us.

But before, (my son) thou were come to the age to feel the sweetness of
authority, this beast (whom I can never name with patience) falsely and
foolishly married this Gynecia, then a young girl, and brought her to sit
above me in all feasts, to turn her shoulder to me-ward in all our solemnities.
It is certain, it is not so great a spite to be surmounted by strangers, as
by ones own allies. Think then what my mind was, since withal there is no
question: The fall is greater from the first to the second, then from the
second to the undermost. The rage did swell in my heart, so much the more as it
was feign to be suppressed in silence, and disguised with humblenes. But above
all the rest, the griese of grieves was, when with these daughters (now thy
prisoners) she cut of al hope of thy succession. It was a tedious thing to me;
that my eyes should look lower then any bodies, that (my self being by)
another voice then mine, should be more respected. But it was insupportable
unto me, to think that not only I, but thou should spend al thy time in such
misery, and that the Sun should see my eldest son less then a Prince. And
though I had been a saint I could not choose, finding the change this change
of fortune bred unto me, for now from the multitude of followers, silence grew
to be at my gate, and abse^ce in my presence. The guess of my mind could
prevail more before, then now many of my earnest requests. And thou (my dear
son) by the fickle multitude no more then any ordinary person (borne of the
mud of the people) regarded. But I (remembering that in all miseries weeping
becomes fools, and practice wise folks) have tried diverse means to pull us
out of the mire of subjection. And though many times Fortune failed me, yet did
I never fail my self. Wild beasts I kept in a cave hard by the lodges, which I
caused by night to be fed in the place of their pastorals, I as then living in
my house hard by the place, and against the hour they were to meet (having
kept the beasts without meat) then let them loose, knowing that they would
seek their food there, and devour what they found. But blind Fortune hating
sharpe-sighted inventions, made them unluckily to be killed. After, I used my
servant Clinias to stir a notable tumult of country people: but those louts
were too gross instruments for delicate conceits. Now lastly, finding
Philanax-his examinations grow dangerous, I thought to play double or quit;
and with a slight I used of my fine-witted we^ch Artesia, with other maids of
mine, would have sent these good inheritrixes of Arcadia, to have pleaded their
cause before Pluto, but that ouer-fortunatly for the^, you made me know the
last day how vehemently this childish passion of love does torment you.
Therefore I have brought them unto you, yet wishing rather hate the^ love in
you. For Hate often begets victory; Love commonly is the instrument of''
subjection. It is true, that I would also by the same practice have entrapped
the parents, but my maids failed of it, not daring to tarry long about it. But
this suffices, since (these being taken away) you are the undoubted inheritor,
and Basilius will not long ouer-liue this loss.

O mother (said Amphialus) speak not of doing them Philoclea accepted for a
servant. Well (said Cecropia) I would I had borne you of my mind, as well as
of my body: then should you not have suncke under base weaknesses. But since
you have tied your thoughts in so wilful a knot, it is happy I have brought
matters to such a pass, as you may both enjoy affection, and upon that build
your sovereignty. Alas (said Amphialus) my heart would feign yield you thanks
for setting me in the way of felicity, but that fear killes them in me,
before they are fully borne. For if Philoclea be displeased, how can I be
pleased? if she count it unkindness, shall I give tokens of kindness? perchance
she co^demnes me of this action, and shall I triumph? perchance she drownes
now the beauties I love with sorrowful tears, and where is then my reioicing?
You have reason (said Cecropia with a feined gravity) I will therefore send
her away presently, that her contentment may be recovered. No good mother (said
Amphialus) since she is here, I would not for my life constrain presence, but
rather would I die then consent to absence. Pretty intricat follies (said
Cecropia) but get you up, and see how you can prevail with her, while I go to
the other sister. For after we shall have our hands full to defend our selves,
if Basilius hap to besiege us. But remembering herself, she turned back, and
asked him what he would have done with Zelmane, since now he might be
revenged of his hurt. Nothing but honorably, answered Amphialus, having
deserved no other of me, especially being (as I hear) greatly cherished of
Philoclea. And therefore I could wish they were lodged together. O no (said
Cecropia) company confirms resolutio^s, and lonelines breeds a werines of ones
thoughts, and so a sooner consenting to reasonable profers.

CHAP. 3.
1 Amphialus addressing him to Philoclea. 2 Her melancholy habit. 3 His humble
suit. 4 Her pitiful answer: 5 and his compassionate reply. 6 Their parting
with cold comfort.

But Amphialus (taking of his mother Philocleas knives, which he kept as a
relic, since she had worn them) gat up, and calling for his richest
apparel, nothing seemed sumptuous enough for his mistresses eyes: and that
which was costly, he feared were not dainty: and though the invention were
delicat, he misdoubted the making. As careful he was too of the color; lest
if gay, he might seem to glory in his injury, and her wrong; if mourning, it
might strike some evil presage unto her of her fortune. At length he took a
garment more rich then glaring, the ground being black velvet, richly
embrodered with great pearl, and precious stones, but they set so among
certain tuffes of cypres, that the cypres was like black clouds, through
which the stars might yield a dark luster. About his neck he ware a broad
and gorgeous collar; whereof the pieces enterchangeably answering; the one was
of Diamonds and pearl, set with a white enamell, so as by the cunning of the
workman it seemed like a shining ice, and the other piece being of Rubies, and
Opalles, had a fiery glistring, which he thought pictured the two passions of
Fear and Desire, wherein he was enchayned. His hurt (not yet fully well) made
him a little halt, but he straue to give the best grace he could unto his
halting.

Philocleas chamber: whom he found (because her chamber was ouerlightsome)
sitting of that side of her bed which was from the window; which did cast
such a shadow upon her, as a good Painter would bestow upon Venus, when
under the trees she bewailed the murder of Adonis: her hands and fingers (as
it were) indented one within the other: her shoulder leaning to her beds head,
and over her head a scarf, which did eclipse almost half her eyes, which
under it fixed their beams upon the wall by, with so steddie a manner, as if in
that place they might well change, but not mende their object: and so remained
they a good while after his coming in, he not daring to trouble her, nor she
perceiving him, till that (a little varying her thoughts something quickening
her senses) she heard him as he happed to stir his upper garment: and
perceiving him, rose up, with a demeanure, where in the book of Beauty there
was nothing to be read but Sorrow: for Kindness was blotted out, and Anger was
never there.

Amphialus that had entrusted his memory with long and forcible speeches,
found it so locked up in amazement, that he could pike nothing out of it, but
the beseeching her to take what was don in good part, and to assure herself
there was nothing but honor meant unto her person. But she making no other
answer, but letting her hands fall one from the other, which before were
joined (with eyes something cast aside, and a silent sigh) gave him to
understand, that considering his doings, she thought his speech as full of
incongruitie, as her answer would be void of purpose: whereupon he kneeling
down, and kissing her hand, (which she suffered with a countenance
witnessing captivity, but not kindness) he besought her to have pity of him,
whose love went beyond the bounds of conceit, much more of uttering: that in
her hands the balance of his life or death did stand; whereto the least
motion of hers would serve to determine, she being indeed the mistress of
his life, and he her eternal slave; and with true vehemency besought her that
he might hear her speak, whereupon she suffered her sweet breath to turn it
self into these kind of words.

Alas cousin, (said she) what shall my tongue be toward me, then let not my
fortune be disgraced with the name of imprisonment: let not my heart waste it
self by being vexed with feeling cuill, and fearing worse. Let not me be a
cause of my parents woeful destruction; but restore me to my self; and so
doing I shall account I have received my self of you. And what I say for my
self, I say for my dear sister, and my friend Zelmane: for I desire no well
being, without they may be partakers. With that her tears rained down from
her heavenly eyes, and seemed to water the sweet and beautiful flowers of her
face.

Amphialus was like the poor woman, who loving a tame Do she had, above all
earthly things, having long played withal, and made it feed at her hand and
lap, is constrained at length by famine (all her flock being spent, and she
failen into extreme poverty) to kill the Dear, to sustain her life. Many a
pitiful look does she cast upon it, and many a time does she draw back her
hand before she can give the stroke. For even so Amphialus by a hunger-sterued
affection, was compelled to offer this injury, and yet the same affection made
him with a tormenting grief, think unkindness in himself, that he could
find in his heart any way to restrain her freedom. But at length, neither
able to grant, nor deny, he thus answered her. Dear lady (said he) I will
not say unto you (how justly soever I may do it) that I am neither author, nor
accessarie unto this your withholding. For since I do not redres it, I am as
faultry as if I had begun it. But this I protest unto you (and this
protestation of mine, let the heavens hear, and if I lie, let them answer me
with a deadly thunderbolt) that in my soul I wish I had never seen the light,
or rather, that I had never had a father to beget such a child, the^ that by my
means those eyes should ouerflow their own beauties, then by my means the
sky of your virtue should be ouerclowded with sorrow. But woe is me, most
excellent Lady, I find my self most willing to obey you: neither truly do
mine ears receive the least word you speak, with any less reverence, then as
absolute, and irresistable commandments. But alas, that Tyrant Love, (which
now possesses the hold of all my life and reason) will no way suffer it. It
is Love, it is Love, not I, which disobey you. What then shall I say? but that
I, who am ready to lie under your feet, to venture, nay to loose my life at
your least commandment: I am not the stay of your freedom, but Love, Love,
which ties you in your own knots. It is you your self, that imprison your
self: it is your beauty which makes these castlewalles embrace you: it is
your own eyes, which reflect upon themselves this injury. Then is there no
other remedy, but that you some way vouchsafe to satisfy this Loves
vehemency; which (since it grew in your self) without question you shall
find it (far more then I) tractable.

But with these words Philoclea fell to so extreme a quaking, and her lively
whiteness did degenerate to so dead a palenesse, that Amphialus feared some
dangerous trance: so that taking her hand, and feelinge that it (which was
woonte to be one of the chief firebrands of Cupid) had all the sense of it
wrapped up in coldness, he began humbly to beseech her to put away all fear, and
to assure herself upon the vow he made thereof unto God, and her self, that
the uttermost forces he would ever employ to conquer her affection, should be
Desire, and Desert. That promise brought Philoclea again to her self, so that
slowly lifting up her eyes upon him, with a countenance ever courteous, but
then languishing, she told him, that he should do well to do so, if indeed
he had ever tasted what true love was: for that where now she did bear him
good will, she should (if he took any other way) hate, and abhor the very
thought of him: offering him withal, that though his mother had taken away her
knives, yet the house of Death had so many doors, as she would easily fly
into it, if ever she found her honor endaungered.

Amphialus having the cold ashes of Care cast upon the coals of Desire,
leaving some of his mothers Gentlewomen to wait upon Philoclea, himself
indeed a prisoner to his prisoner, and making all his authority to be but a
footestoole to Humblenes, went from her to his mother. To whom with words which
Affection endited, but Amazement uttered, he delivered what had passed between
him and Philoclea: beseeching her to try what her persuasions could do with
her, while he gave order for all such things as were necessary against such
forces, as he looked daily Basilius would bring before his castle. His mother
bade him quiette him self, for she doubted not to take fit times. But that
the best way was, first to let her own Passion a little tire it self.

CHAP. 4.
1 Amphialus warlike preparations. 2 His justification. 3 His fortifications. 4
His Art of men. 5 His Loue-passions, and passionate complaints.

SO they calling Clinias, and some other Argos: but he was as then so
ouer-laide with war himself, as from thence he could attend small succor.

But because he knew, how violently rumors do be, that can discern between
truth and truthlikenes, between shows and substance; he caused a
justification of this his action to be written, whereof were sowed abroad many
copies, which with some glosses of probability, might hide indeed the
foulenes of his treason; and from true common-places, fetch down most false
applications. For, beginning how much the duty which is owed to the country,
goes beyond all other duties, since in it self it conteines them all, and
that for the respect thereof, not only all tender respects of kindred, or
whatsoever other friendshippes, are to be laid aside, but that even long-helde
opinions (rather builded upon a secreate of government, then any ground of
truth) are to be forsaken. He fell by degrees to show, that since the end
whereto any thing is directed, is ever to be of more noble reckning, then the
thing thereto directed: that therefore, the weale-publicke was more to be
regarded, then any person or magistrate that thereunto was ordained. The
feeling consideration whereof, had moved him (though as nere of kin to
Basilius as could be, yet) to set principally before his eyes, the good estate
of so many thousands, over whom Basilius reigned: rather then so to hoodwinke
himself with affection, as to suffer the realm to run to manifest ruin.
The care whereof, did kindly appertain to those, who being subalterne
magistrates and officers of the crown, were to be employed as from the Prince,
so for the people; and of all other, especially himself, who being descended
of the Royal race, and next heir male, Nature had no sorrer opened his eyes,
but that the soil where-upon they did look, was to look for at his hands a
continual carefulnes: which as from his childhood he had ever carried; so now
finding that his uncle had not only given over al care of government, but had
put it into the hands of Philanax, (a man neither in birth comparable to many,
nor for his corrupt, proud, and partial dealing, liked of any) but beside,
had set his daughters (in whom the whole estate, as next heirs thereunto, had
no less interest the^ himself) in so unfit and il-guarded a place, as it was
not only dangerous for their persons, but (if they should be conveyed to any
foreign country) to the whole commonwealth pernicious: that therefore he had
brought them into this strong castle of his, which way, if it might seem
strange, they were to consider; that new necessities require new remedies: but
there they should be served and honored as belonged to their greatness, until by
the general assembly of the estates, it should be determined how they should
to their best (both private, and public) advantage be matched; vowing all
faith and duty both to the father and children, never by him to be violated.
But if in the mean time, before the estates could beasse^bled, he were
assailed, he would the^ for his own defense take arms: desiring all, that
either tendered the dangerous case of their country, or in their hearts loved
justice, to defend him in this just actio^. And if the Prince should command
them otherwise, yet to know, that therein he was no more to be obeyed, then if
he should call for poison to hurt himself withal: since all that was done, was
done for his service, howsoever he might (seduced by Philanax) interpret of
it: he protesting, that what soever he should do for his own defense, should
be against Philanax, and no way against Basilius.

To this effect, amplified with arguments and examples, and painted with
rhetorical colors, did he sow abroad many discourses: which as they prevailed
with some of more quick then sound conceipte, to run his fortune with him;
so in many did it breeda coolness, to deal violently against him, and a
falseminded neutralitie to expect the issue. But besides the ways he used to
weaken the adverse party, he omitted nothing for the strengthening of his own.
The chief trust whereof (because he wanted men to keep the field) he reposed
in the surety of his castle; which at lest would win him much time, the
mother of many mutations. To that therefore he bent his outward and inward
eyes, striving to make Art strive with Nature, to whether of them two that
fortification should be most beholding. The seat Nature bestowed, but Art gave
the building: which as his rocky hardness would not yield to undermining
force, so to open affaults he took counsel of skill, how to make all
approches, if not impossible, yet difficult; as well at the foot of the castle,
as round about the lake, to give unquiet lodgings to the^, whom only enmity
would make neighbors. Then omitted he nothing of defense, as well simple
defense, as that which did defend by offending, fitting instruments of
mischief to places, whence the mischief might be most liberally bestowed.
Nether was his smallest care for victuals, as well for the providing that which
should suffice both in store and goodness, as in well preserving it, and wary
distributing it, both in quantity, and quality; spending that first which
would keep lest.

makes all the rest to stir; and that therefore in the Art of man stood the
quintessence, and ruling skill of all prosperous government, either peaceable,
or military) he chose in number as many as without pestring (and so danger of
infection) his victual would seem for two year to maintain; all of hable
bodies, and some few of able minds to direct, not seeking many commanders,
but contenting him self, that the multitude should have obeying wills, every
one knowing whom he should command, and whom he should obey, the place where,
and the matter wherein; distributing each office as near as he could, to the
disposition of the person that should exercise it: knowing no love, danger,
nor discipline can suddenly alter an habit in nature. Therefore would he not
employ the still man to a shifting practice, nor the liberal man to be a
dispenser of his victuals, nor the kind-harted man to be a punisher: but would
exercise their virtues in sorts, where they might be profitable, employing his
chief care to know the^ all particularly, and thoroughly, regarding also the
co^stitutio^ of their bodies; some being able better to abide watching, some
hunger, some labor, making his benefit of each hability, and not forcing beyond
power. Time to every thing by just proportion he allotted, and as well in that,
as in every thing else, no small error winckt at, lest greater should be
animated. Even of vices he made his profit, making the cowardly Clinias to
have care of the watch, which he knew his own fear would make him very
wakefully perform. And before the siege began, he himself caused rumors to be
sowed, and libels to be spread against himself, fuller of malice, then witty
persuasion: partly, to know those that would be apt to stumble at such
motions, that he might cull them from the faithfuller band; but principally,
because in necessity they should not know when any such thing were in earnest
attempted, whether it were, or not, of his own invention. But even then
(before the enemies face came near to breed any terror) did he exercise his
men daily in all their charges, as if Danger had presently presented his most
hideous presence: him self rather instructing by example, then precept; being
neither more sparing in trauile, nor spe^ding in diet, then the meanest
soldier: his hand and body disdaining no base matters, nor shrinking from the
heavy.

Gorgons head he had been suddenly turned into a stone, so would he there
abide with his eyes planted, and hands lifted, till at length, coming to the
use of himself, he would look about whether any had perceived him; then would
he accuse, and in himself condemn all those wits, that durst affirm
Idleness to be the wellspring of Love. O, would he say, al you that affect
the title of wisdom, by ungrateful scorning the ornaments of Nature, am I now
piping in a shadow? or do slothful feathers now enwrap me? Is not hate
before me, and doubt behind me? is not danger of the one side, and shame of
the other? And do I not stand upon pain, and travail, and yet over all, my
affection triumphs? The more I stir about urgent affairs, the more me
thinks the very stirring breeds a breath to blow the coals of my love: the
more I exercise my thoughts, the more they increase the appetite of my desires.
O sweet Philoclea (with that he would cast up his eyes wherein some water did
appear, as if they would wash themselucs against they should see her) thy
heavenly face is my Astronomy; thy sweet virtue, my swect Philosophy: let me
profit therein, and farewell all other cogitations. But alas, my mind misgiues
me, for your planets bear a contrary aspect unto me. Woe, woe is me, they
threaten my destruction: and whom do they threaten this destruction? even him
that loves them; and by what means will they destroy, but by loving them? O
dear (though killing) eyes, shall death head his darte with the gold of
Cupids arrowe? Shall death take his aim from the rest of Beauty? O beloved
(though hating) Philoclea, how if thou be merciful, has cruelty stolen
into thee? Or how if thou be cruel, does cruelty look more merciful then
eucr Mercy did? Or alas, is it my destiny that makes Mercy cruel? Like an
evil vessel which turns sweet licour to sowernes; so when thy grace falls
upon me, my wretched constitution makes it become fierceness. Thus would he
exercise his eloquence, when she could not hear him, and be dumbe-striken,
when her presence gave him fit occasion of speaking: so that his wit could
find out no other refuge, but the comfort and counsel of his mother, desiring
her (whose thoughts were vnperplexed) to use for his sake the most prevailing
manners of intercession.

CHAP. 5.
1 Subtle Cecropia visites sad Philoclea. 2 The shameless Aunts shrewd
temptations to love and marriage. The modest neeces maidenly resistance.

CEcropia seeing her sons safety depend thereon, (though her pride much
disdained the name of a desire) took the charge upon her, not doubting the
easy conquest of an inexpert virgin, who had already with subtlety and
impudency begun to undermine a monarchy. Therefore, waighing Philocleas
resolutions by the counterpease of her own youthful thoughts, which she then
called to mind, she doubted not at least to make Philoclea receive the poison
distilled in sweet liquour, which she with little disguising had drunk up
thirsuly. Therefore she went softly to Philocleas chamber, and peeping through
the side of the door, then being a little open, she saw Philoclea sitting
low upon a cushion, in such a giuen-ouer manner, that one would have thought,
silence, solitariness, and melancholy were come there, under the ensign of
mishap, to conquer delight, and drive him from his natural feate of bcautie:
her tears came dropping downc like rain in Sunshine, and she not taking heed
to wipe the tears, they ran down upon her cheeks, and lips, as upon
cherries which the dropping tree bedeweth. In the dressing of her hair and
apparel, she might see neither a careful art, nor an art of carelessness,
but even left to a neglected chance, which yet could no more imperfect her
perfections, then a Dieanie way cast, could loose his squarenesse.

Cecropia (stirred with no other pity, but for her son) Arcadia wish for, and
the men long after? Fie of this peevish sadness; in sooth it is untimely for
your age. Look upon your own body, and see whether it deserve to pine away
with sorrow: see whether you will have these hands (with that she took one of
her hands and kissing it, looked upon it as if she were enamoured with it)
fade from their whiteness, which makes one desire to touch them; and their
softness, which rebounds again a desire to look on them, and become dry,
lean and yellowe, and make every body wonder at the change, and say, that
sure you had used some art before, which now you had left? for if the
beauties had been natural, they would never so soon have been blemished.
Take a glass, and see whether these tears become your eyes: although, I must
confess, those eyes are able to make tears comely. Alas Madame (answered
Philoclea), I know not whether my tears become mine eyes, but I am sure mine
eyes thus beteared, become my fortune. Your fortune (said Cecropia) if she
could see to attire herself, would put on herbest raiments. For I see, and I
see it with grief, and (to tell you true) unkindness: you misconster every
thing, that only for your sake is attempted. You think you are offended, and
are indeed defended: you esteem your self a prisoner, and are in truth a
mistres: you fear hate, and shall find love. And truly, I had a thing to say
to you, but it is no matter, since I find you are so obstinatly melancholy, as
that you woo his fellowship: I will spare my pains, and hold my peace: And so
stayed indeed, thinking Philoclea would have had a female inquisitiveness of
the matter. But she, who rather wished to unknow what she knew, then to
burden her heart with more hopeles knowledge, only desired her to have pity of
her, and if indeed she did mean her no hurt, then to grant her liberty: for
else the very grief and fear, would prove her vnappointed executioners. For
that (said Cecropia) believe me upon the faith of a kings daughter, you shall be
free, so soon as your freedom may be free of mortal danger, being brought
hither for no other cause, but to prevent such mischiefs as you know not of.
But if you think indeed to win me to have care of you, even as of mine own
daughter, then lend your ears unto me, and let not your mind arm it self with
a wilfulness to be flexible to nothing. But if I speak reason, let Reason
have his due reward, persuasion. Then sweet niece (said she) I pray you
presuppose, that now, eue^in the midst of your agonies, which you paint unto
your self most horrible, wishing with sighs, and praying with vows, for a
soon and safe delivery. Imagine niece (I say) that some heavenly spirit should
appear unto you, and bid you follow him through the door, that goes into the
garden, assuring you, that you should thereby return to your dear mother, and
what other delights soever your mind esteems delights: would you (sweet niece)
would you refuse to follow him, and say, that if he led you not through the
chief gate, you would not enjoy your ouer-desired liberty? Would you not
drink the wine you thirst for, without it were in such a glass, as you
especially fancied? tell me (dear neecc:) but I will answer for you, because I
know your reason and will is such, as must needs conclude, that such niceness
can no more be in you, to disgrace such a mind, then disgracefulnesse can have
any place in so faultles a beauty. Your wisdom would assuredly determine, how
the mark were hit, not whether the bow were of Ewe or no, wherein you shot. If
this be so, and thus sure (my dear niece) it is, then (I pray you) imagine,
that I am that same good Angel, who grieuing in your grief, and in truth not
able to suffer, that bitter sighs should be sent forth with so sweetc a
breath, am come to lead you, not only to your desired, and imagined happiness,
but to a true and essential happiness; not only to liberty, but to liberty
with commandment. The way I will show you (which if it be not the gate builded
hitherto in your private choice, yet shall it be a door to bring you through a
garden of pleasures, as sweet as this life can bring forth; nay rather, which
makes this life to be a life: My son, (let it be no blemish to him that I name
him my son, who was your fathers own nephew: for you know I am no small kings
daughter,) my son (I say) far passing the neernesse of his kindred, with the
neernesse of good will, and striving to match your matchless beauty with a
matchless affection, does by me present unto you the full enjoying of your
liberty, so as with this gift you will accept a greater, which is, this castle,
with all the rest which you know he has, in honorable quantity; and will
confirm his gift, and your receipt of both, with accepting him to be yours. I
might say much both for the person and the matter; but who will cry out the
Sun shines? It is so manifest a profit unto you, as the meanest judgment must
straight apprehend it: so far is it from the sharpness of yours, thereof to
be ignorant. Therefore (sweet niece) let your gratefulnes be my intercession,
and your gentleness my eloquence, and let me carry comfort to a heart which
greatly needs it. Philoclea looked upon her, and cast down her eye again. Aunt
(said she) I would I could be so much a mistres of my own mind, as to yield
to my cousins virtuous request: for so I construe of it. But my heart is already
set (and staying a while on that word, she brought forth afterward) to lead a
virgins life to my death: for such a vow I have in my self devoutly made. The
heavens prevent such a mischief (said Cecropia.) A vow, quoth you? no, no, my
dear niece, Nature, when you were first borne, vowed you awoma^, and as she
made you child of a mother, so to do your best to be mother of a child: she
gave you beauty to move love; she gave you wit to know love; she gave you an
excellent body to reward love: which kind of liberal rewarding is crowned with
unspeakable felicity. For this, as it binds the receiver, so it makes happy
the bestower: this does not impouerish, but enrich the giver. O the sweet name
of a mother: O the comfort of co^forts, to see your children grow up, in who^
you are (as it were) eternized: if you could conceive what a hart-tickling joy
it is to see your own little ones, with awful love come running to your lap,
and like little models of your self, still carry you about them, you would
think unkindness in your own thoughts, that ever they did rebel against the
mean unto it. But percha^ce I set this blessedness before your eyes, as Captains
do victory before their soldiers, to which they might come through many
pains, grieves and dangers. No, I am content you shrink from this my counsel,
if the way to come unto it, be not most of all pleasant. I know not (answered
the sweet Philoclea, fearing least silence would offend her sullennes) what
contentment you speak of: but I am sure the best you can make of it, (which is
marriage) is a burdenous yoke. Ah, deer niece (said Cecropia) how much you are
deceived? A yoke indeed we all bear, laid upon us in our creation, which by
marriage is not increased, but thus far eased, that you have a yoke fellow to
help to draw through the cloddy cumbers of this world. O widow-nights, bear
witness with me of the difference. How often alas do I embrace the orfan-side of
my bed, which was wo^t to be imprinted by the body of my dear husband, and
with tears acknowledge, that I now enjoy such a liberty as the banished man
has; who may, if he list, wa^der over the world, but is ever restrained from
his most delightful home? that I have now such a liberty as the seeled dou
has, which being first deprived of eyes, is then by the falconer cast off? For
believe me, niece, believe me, man's experience is womans best eie-sight. Have you
ever seen a pure Rosewater kept in a crystal glass; how fine it lokes, how
sweet it smells, while that beautiful glass imprisons it? Break the prison,
and let the water take his own course, does it not embrace dust, and loose all
his former sweetness, and fairness? Truly so are we, if we have not the
stay, rather then the restraint of Cristailine marriage. My heart meltes to
think of the sweet comfortes, I in that happy time received, when I had
never cause to care, but the care was doubled: when I never reioiced, but that
I saw my joy shine in another eyes. What shall I say of the free delight,
which the heart might embrace, without the accusing of the inward conscience, or
fear of outward shame? and is a solitary life as good as this? then can one
string make as good music as a consort: the^ can one color set forth a
beauty. But it may be, the general consideration of marriage does not so much
mislike you, as the applying of it to him. He is my son, I must confess, I
see him with a mothers eyes, which if they do not much deceive me, he is no
such one, over whom Contempt may make any just challenge. He is comely, he is
noble, he is rich; but that which in it self should carry all comeliness,
nobility, and riches, he loves you; and he loves you, who is beloved of
others. Drive not away his affection (sweet Lady) and make no other Lady
hereafter proudly brag, that she has robbed you of so faithful and notable
a servant. Philoclea heard some pieces of her speches, no otherwise then one
does when a tedious pratler co^bers the hearing of a delightful music. For
her thoughts had left her ears in that captivity, and conveyed themselves to
behold (with such eyes as imagination could lend the^) the estate of her
Zelmane: for who^ how well she thought many of those sayings might have been used
with a far more grateful acceptance. Therefore listing not to dispute in a
matter whereof her self was resolute, and desired not to inform the other,
she only told her, that whilst she was so captiued, she could not conceive of
any such persuasions (though never so reasonable) any otherwise, then as
constraints: and as constraints must needs eue^ in nature abhor the^, which at
her liberty, in their own force of reason, might more prevail with her: and
so feign would have returned the strength of Cecropias persuasions, to have
procured freedom.

CHAP. 6.
1 Fresh motives to Philoclea. 2 Cecropias new fetch to attempt Pamela. 3
Pamelas prayer, 4 and Sainct-like graces in it. 5 Her Auntes fruiteles
arguments.

But neither her witty words in an Cecropia, no more then her persuasions
could win Philoclea to disauowe her former vow, or to leave the prisoner
Zelmane, for the commanding Amphialus. So that both sides being desirous, and
neither graunters, they brake of conference. Cecropia sucking up more and more
spite out of her denial, which yet for her sons sake, she disguised with a
visarde of kindness, leaving no office unperformed, which might either witness,
or endeare her sons affection. Whatsoever could be imagined likely to please
her, was with liberal diligence performed: Musickes at her window, and
especially such Musickes, as might (with doleful embassage) call the mind to
think of sorrow, and think of it with sweetness; with ditties so sensibly
expressing Amphialus case, that every word seemed to be but a diuersifying of
the name of Amphialus. Daily presents, as it were oblations, to pacify an
angry Deity, sent unto her: wherein, if the workmanship of the form, had
striuen with the sumptuousnes of the matter, as much did the invention in the
application, contend to have the chief excellency: for they were as so many
stories of his disgraces, and her perfections; where the richnes did inuit the
eyes, the fashion did entertain the eyes, and the device did teach the eyes
the present misery of the presenter himself, awefully serviceable: which was
the more notable, as his authority was manifest. And for the bondage wherein
she lived, all means vied to make known, that if it were a bondage, it was a
bondage only knitte in loue-knots. But in heart already understanding no
language but one, the Music wrought indeed a dolefulnes, but it was a
dolefulnes to be in his power: the dittie intended for Amphialus, she
translated to Zelmane: the presents seemed so many tedious clogs of a thralled
obligation: and his service, the more diligent it was, the more it did
exprobrate (as she thought) unto her, her unworthy estate: that even he that
did her service, had authority of commanding her, only construing her
servitude in his own nature, esteeming it a right, and a right bitter
servitude: so that all their shots (how well soever leuelled) being carried
awrie from the mark, by the storm of her mislike, the Prince Amphialus
affectionately languished, and Cecropia spitefully cunning, disdained at the
barrennes of their success.

Cecropia would have revenged, but that she saw, her hurt could not be
divided from her sons mischief: wherefore, she bethought her self to attempt
Pamela, whose beauty being equal, she hoped, if she might be won, that her
sons thoughts would rather rest on a beautiful gratefulnes, then still be
tormented with a disdaining beauty. Wherefore, giving new courage to her wicked
inventions, and using the more industry, because she had mist in this, and
taking even precepts of prevailing in Pamela, by her failing in Philoclea, she
went to her chamber, and (according to her own ungracious method of a subtle
proceeding) stood listening at the door, because that out of the circumstance of
her present behavior, there might kindly arise a fit beginning of her
intended discourse.

And so she might perceive that Pamela did walk up But yet, my God, if in thy
wisdom, this be the aptest chastizement for my inexcusable folly; if this low
bondage be fittest for my ouer-hie desires; if the pride of my not-inough
humble heart, be thus to be broken, O Lord, I yield unto thy will, and joyfully
embrace what sorrow thou will have me suffer. Only thus much let me crave of
thee, (let my craving, o Lord, be accepted of thee, since even that proceeds
from thee) let me crave, even by the noblest title, which in my greatest
affliction I may give my self, that I am thy creature, and by thy goodness
(which is thy self) that thou will suffer some beam of thy Majesty so to
shine into my mind, that it may still depend confidently upon thee. Let
calamity be the exercise, but not the overthrow of my virtue: let their power
prevail, but prevail not to destruction: let my greatness be their pray: let
my pain be the sweetness of their revenge: let them (if so it seem good unto
thee) vex me with more and more punishment. But, o Lord, let never their
wickedness have such a hand, but that I may carry a pure mind in a pure body.
(And pausing a while) And o most gracious Lord (said she) what ever become of
me, preserve the virtuous Musidorus.

Cecropia might well hear, but this latter prayer for Musidorus, her heart
held it, as so iewellike a treasure, that it would scarce trust her own
lips withal. But this prayer, sent to heaven, from so heavenly a creature,
with such a fervent grace, as if Devotion had borrowed her body, to make of it
self a most beautiful representation; with her eyes so lifted to the skieward,
that one would have thought they had begun to fly thetherward, to take their
place among their fellow stars; her naked hands raising up their whole length,
and as it were kissing one another, as if the right had been the picture of
Zeal, and the left, of Humbleness, which both united themselves to make their
suites more acceptable. Lastly, all her senses being rather tokens then
instruments of her inward motions, altogether had so strange a working power,
that even the harde-harted wickedness of Cecropia, if it found not a love of
that goodness, yet it felt an abashment at that goodness; and if she had not a
kindly remorse, yet had she an yrksome accusation of her own naughtines, so
that she was put from the biasse of her fore-intended lesson. For well she
found there was no way at that time to take that mind, but with some, at lest,
image of Virtue, and what the figure thereof was her heart knew not.

Yet did she prodigally spend her uttermost eloquence, Philoclea in marriage,
and so match the next heir apparent, she being in his power: yet plentifully
periuring, how extremely her son loved her, and excusing the little shows
he made of it, with the dutiful respect he bare unto her, and taking upon her
self that she restrained him, since she found she could set no limits to his
passions. And as she did to Philoclea, so did she to her, with the tribute of
gifts, seek to bring her mind into servitude: and all other means, that
might either establish a beholdingness, or at the left awake a kindness; doing
it so, as by reason of their imprisonment, one sister knew not how the other
was wooed; but each might think, that only she was sought. But if Philoclea
with sweet and humble dealing did avoid their assaults, she with the Majesty
of Virtue did beat them of.

CHAP. 7.
1 An Alarm to the Amphialians. 2 Base cowardice in Clinias; 3 brave courage
imaged in Amphialus. 4 His onset with the death of two friends his foes. 5 The
horror of Mars-his game. 6 Two deaths taken where they were not looked for, the
third delayed where it was expected.

to them that were to abide the terror. But the watch gave a quick Alarm to
the soldiers within, whom practice already having prepared, began each, with
vnabashed hearts, or at lest countenaunces, to look to their charge, or
obedience, which was allotted unto them.

Only Clinias and Amphialus did exceed the bounds Clinias (who was bold only
in busy whisperings, and even in that whisperingnes rather indeed consident in
his cunning, that it should not be bewraied, then any way bold, if ever it
should be bewrayed) now that the enemy gave a dreadful aspect unto the castle,
his eyes saw no terror, nor ear heard any martial sound, but that they
multiplied the hideousness of it to his mated mind. Before their coming he
had many times felt a dreadful expectation, but yet his mind (that was
willing to ease it self of the burden of fear) did sometimes feine unto it
self possibility of let; as the death of Basilius, the discord of the
nobility, and (when other cause failed him) the nature of chance served as a
cause unto him: and sometimes the hearing other men speak valiantly, and the
quietness of his vnassailed senses, would make himself believe, that he durst
do something. But now, that present danger did display it self unto his eye,
and that a dangerous doing must be the only mean to prevent the danger of
suffering, one that had marked him would have judged, that his eyes would have
run into him, and his soul out of him; so unkindly did either take asent of
danger. He thought the lake was too shallow, and the walls too thin: he
misdouted each man's treason, and coniectured every possibility of misfortune,
not only fore-casting likely perils, but such as all the planets together
could scarce have conspired: and already began to arm him self, though it was
determined he should tarry within doors; and while he armed himself,
imagined in what part of the vault he might hide himself, if the enemies won
the castle. Desirous he was that every body should do valiantly, but himself;
and therefore was afraid to show his fear, but for very fear would have hid
his fear; lest it should disco^fort others: but the more he sought to disguize
it, the more the vnsutablenes of a weak broken voice to high brave words, and
of a pale shaking countenance to a gesture of animating, did discover him.

Amphialus, who before the enemies came was careful, prouidently diligent, and
not sometimes without doubting of the issue; now the nearer danger approached
(like the light of a glow-worme) the less still it seemed: and now his courage
began to boil in choler, and with such impatience to desire to power out both
upon the enemy, that he issued presently into certain boats he had of
purpose, and carrying with him some choice men, went to the fortress he had
upon the edge of the lake, which he thought would be the first thing, that the
enemy would attempt; because it was a passage, which commanding all that side
of of that country, and being lost would stop victual, or other supply, that
might be brought into the castle: and in that fortress having some force of
horsemen, he issued out with two hundred horse, and five hundred footmen,
embushed his footme^ in the falling of a hill, which was over shadowed with a
wood, he with his horsemen went a quarter of a mile further; aside hand of which
he might perceive the many troops of the enemy, who came but to take view
where best to encampe themselves.

But as if the sight of the enemy had been a Magnes Philanax, whose face as
yet did not bewray his sex, with so much as show of hair; of a mind having no
limits of hope, nor knowing why to fear; full of iollitie in conversation, and
lately grown a Lover. His name was Agenor, of all that army the most
beautiful: who having ridden in sportfull conversation among the foremost, all
armed saving that his beauer was up, to have his breath in more freedom, seeing
Amphialus come a pretty way before his company, neither staying the
commandment of the captain, nor recking whether his face were armed, or no,
set spurs to his horse, and with youthful bravery casting his staff about his
head, put it then in his rest, as careful of comely carrying it, as if the
mark had been but a ring, and the lookers on Ladies. But Amphialus lance was
already come to the last of his descending line, and began to make the full
point of death against the head of this young Gentleman, when Amphialus
perceiving his youth and beauty, Compassion so rebated the edge of Choler,
that he spared that fair nakedness, and let his staste fall to Agenors
vamplat: so as both with brave breaking should hurtleslie have performed that
match, but that the pitiless lance of Amphialus (angry with being broken)
with an unlucky counterbuffe full of vnsparing splinters, lighted upon that
face far fitter for the combats of Venus; giving not only a sudden, but a
foul death, leaving scarsely any tokens of his former beauty: but his hands
abandoning the reins, and his thighs the saddle, he fellsidewarde from the
horse. Which sight coming to Leontius, a dear friend of his, who in vain
had lamentably cried unto him to stay, when he saw him begin his careere, it
was hard to say, whether pity of the one, or revenge of the other, held as
then the sovereignty in his passions. But while he directed his eye to his
friend, and his hand to his enemy, so wrongly-consorted a power could not
resist the ready minded force of Amphialus: who perceiving his il-directed
direction against him, so paid him his debt before it was lent, that he also
fell to the earth, only happy that one place, and one time, did finish both
their loves and lives together.

ever to light there, where smallest resista^ce might worse prevent mischief.
The clashing of armor, and crushing of staves; the iustling of bodies, the
resounding of blows, was the first part of that ill-agreeing music, which
was beautified with the griseliness of wounds, the rising of dust, the hideous
falls, and groans of the dying. The very horses angry in their masters
anger, with love and obedience brought forth the effects of hate and
resistance, and with minds of servitude, did as if they affected glory. Some
lay dead under their dead masters, who me vnknightly wounds had unjustly
punished for a faithful duty. Some lay upon their Lords by like accidents,
and in death had the honor to be borne by them, who^ in life they had borne.
Some having lost their commanding burdens, ran scattered about the field,
abashed with the madness of mankind. The earth itself (wont to be a burial
of men) was now (as it were) buried with men: so was the face thereof hidden
with dead bodies, to whom Death had come masked in diverse manners. In one
place lay disinherited heads, dispossessed of their natural seignories: in an
other, whole bodies to see to, but that their hearts wont to be bound all over
so close, were now with deadly violence opened: in others, fowler deaths had
ouglily displayed their trayling guts. There lay arms, whose fingers yet
moved, as if they would feel for him that made them feel: and legs, which
contrary to common nature, by being discharged of their burden, were grown
heavier. But no sword paid so large a tribute of souls to the eternal
Kingdom, as that of Amphialus, who like a Tigre, from who me a company of
Woolues did seek to ravish a new gotten pray; so he (remembering they came to
take away Philoclea) did labor to make valor, strength, hatred, and choler
to answer the proportion of his love, which was infinite.

AEschylus, who though by years might well have been allowed to use rather
the exercise of wisdom, then of courage; yet having a lusty body and a
merry heart, he ever took the summons of Time in jest, or else it had so
creepingly stolen upon him, that he had heard scarcely the noise of his feet,
and therefore was as fresh in apparel, and as forward in enterprises, as a
far younger man: but nothing made him bolder, then a certain prop hecie had
been told him, that he should die in the arms of his son, and therefore
feared the less the arm of an enemy. But now, when Amphialus sword was
passed through his throat, he thought himself abused; but that before he
died, his son, indeed, seeing his father begin to fall, held him up in
his arms, till a pitilesse soldier of the other side, with a mace brained
him, making father and son become twins in their never again dying birth.
As for Drialus, Memnon, Nisus and Policrates; the first had his eyes cut out
so, as he could not see to bid the near following death welcome: the second
had met with the same Prophet that old AEschylus had, and having found many
of his speeches true, believed this to, that he should never be killed, but by
his own companions: and therefore no man was more valiant then he against an
enemy, no man more suspicious of his friends: so as he seemed to sleep in
security, when he went to a battle, and to enter into a battle, when he
began to sleep, such guards he would set about his person; yet mistrusting the
very guardes, that they would murder him. But now Amphialus helped to
vnriddle his doubts; for he overthrowing him from his horse, his own
companions coming with a fresh supply, pressed him to death. Nisus grasping
with Amphialus, was with a short dagger slain. And for Policrates, while he
shunned as much as he could, keeping only his place for fear of punishment,
Amphialus with a memorable blow struck his head, where, with the conuulsions
of death setting his spurs to his horse, he gave so brave a charge upon the
enemy, as it grew a proverb, that Policrates was only valiant, after his
head was off. But no man escaped so well his hands as Phebilus did: for he
having long loved Philoclea, though for the meannesse of his estate he never
durst reveal it, now knowing Amphialus, setting the edge of a rival upon the
sword of an enemy, he held strong fight with him. But Amphialus had already
in the daungerousest places disarmed him, and was lifting up his sword to
send him away from him, when he thinking indeed to die, O Philoclea (said he)
yet this joys me, that I die for thy sake. The name of Philoclea first stayed
his sword, and when he heard him out, though he abhorde him much worse then
before, yet could he not vouchsafe him the honor of dying for Philoclea, but
turned his sword another way, doing him no hurt for overmuch hatred. But what
good did that to poor Phebilus, if escaping a valiant hand, he was slain by a
base soldier, who seeing him so disarmed, thrust him through?

CHAP. 8.
The Basilians reembattelled 1 first by Philanax, 4 then by the black Knight.
2 Ismenus slain by Philanax. 3 Philanax captiued by Amphialus. 4 The black
Knights exploits. 5 His encounter with Amphialus, parted by a by-blow. 6 The
Amphialians retrait, and departure of the black Knight.

Amphialus were the other almost overthrown, when Philanax (who was the
marshal of the army) came in, with new force renewing the almost decayed
courage of his soldiers. For, crying to them (and asking them whether their
backs or their arms were better fighters) he himself thrust into the press,
and making force and fury wait upon discretion and government, he might
seem a brave Lion, who taught his young Lionets, how in taking of a pray, to
join courage with cunning. The^ Fortune (as if she had made chases inow of the
one side of that blooddy Teniscourt) went of the other side the line, making as
many fall down of Amphialus followers, as before had done of Philanaxis; they
loosing the ground, as fast as before they had won it, only leaving them to
keep it, who had lost themselves in keeping it. Then those that had killed,
inherited the lot of those that had been killed; and cruel Death made the^ lie
quietly together, who most in their lives had sought to disquiet each other; and
many of those first overthrown, had the comfort to see the murderers ouerrun
them to Charons ferrie.

Codrus, Ctesiphon, and Milo, lost their lives upon Philanax Amphialus, called
Ismenus, who never abandoning his master, and making his tender age aspire to
acts of the strongest manhood, in this time that his side was put to the
worst, and that Amphialushis valor was the only stay of them from delivering
themselves over to a shameful flight, he saw his masters horse killed under
him. Whereupon, asking no advise of no thought, but of faithfulness and courage,
he presently lighted from his own horse, and with the help of some choice and
faithful servants, gat his master up. But in the multitude that came of either
side, some to succor, some to save Amphialus, he came under the hand of
Philanax: and the youth perceiving he was the man that did most hurt to his
party, (desirous eue^ to change his life for glory) struck at him, as he rode
by him, and gave him a hurt upon the leg, that made Philanax turn toward him;
but seeing him so yo^g, and of a most lovely presence, he rather took pity of
him; meaning to make him prisoner, and the^ to give him to his brother Agenor
to be his companion, because they were not much unlike, neither in years, nor
countenance. But as he looked down upon him with that thought, he spied where his
brother lay dead, and his friend Leontius by him, eue^ almost under the squiers
feet. The^ soroing not only his own sorrow, but the past-co^fort sorrow, which
he fore-knew his mother would take, (who with many tears, and misgiuing sighs
had suffered him to go with his elder brother Philanax) blotted out all figures
of pity out of his mind, and putting forth his horse (while Ismenus doubled
two or three more valiant, then well set blows) saying to himself, Let other
mothers bewail an untimely death as well as mine; he thrust him through. And
the boy fearce though beautiful; and beautiful, though dying, not able to
keep his failing feet, fell down to the earth, which he bit for anger,
repining at his Fortune, and as long as he could resisting Death, which might
seem unwilling to; so long he was in taking away his young struggling soul.

Philanax himself could have wished the blow vngiuen, when he saw him fall
like a fair apple, which some discourteous body (breaking his bow) should
throw down before it were ripe. But the case of his brother made him forget
both that, and himself: so as ouerhastily pressing upon the retiring enemies,
he was (ere he was aware) further engaged then his own soldiers could relieve
him; were being overthrown by Amphialus, Amphialus glad of him, kept head
aginst his enemies while some of his men carried away Philanax.

Philanax-his men as if with the loss of Philanax they had lost the fountain
of their valor, had their courages so dried up in fear; that they began to
set honor at their backs, and to use the virtue of patience in an untimely
time: when into the press comes (as hard as his horse, more afraied of the
spur, then the sword could carry him) a Knight in armor as dark as blacknes
could make it, followed by none, and adorned by nothing; so far without
authority that he was without knowledge. But virtue quickly made him known,
and admiration bred him such authority, that though they of whose side he came
knew him not, yet they all knew it was fit to obey him: and while he was
followed by the valiantest, he made way for the vilest. For, taking part with
the besiegers, he made the Amphialians blood serve for a caparison to his
horse, and a decking to his armor. His arm no oftener gave blows, then the
blows gave wounds, then the wounds gave deaths: so terrible was his force,
and yet was his quicknes more forcible then his force, and his judgment more
quick then his quicknes. For though the sword went faster then eyesight could
follow it, yet his own judgment went still before it. There died of his hand,
Sarpedon, Plistonax, Strophilus, and Hippolitus, men of great proof in wars,
and who had that day undertaken the guard of Amphialus. But while they sought
to save him, they lost the fortresses that Nature had placed them in. The^ slew
he Megalus, who was a little before proud, to see himself stained in the
blood of his enemies: but when his own blood came to be married to theirs, he
then felt, that Cruelty does never enjoy a good cheap glory. After him sent
he Palemon, who had that day vowed (with foolish bravery) to be the death of
ten: and nine already he had killed, and was careful to perform his (almost
performed) vow, when the Black Knight helped him to make up the tenth himself.

And now the often-changing Fortune began also own horrible manner. But
neither could danger be dreadful to Amphialus his vndismayable courage, nor
yet seem ougly to him, whose truely-affected mind, did still paint it over
with the beauty of Philoclea. And therefore he, rather enflamed then troubled
with the increase of dangers, and glad to find a worthy subject to exercise
his courage, sought out this new Knight, whom he might easily find: for he,
like a wanton rich man, that throws down his neighbors houses, to make
himself the better prospecte, so had his sword made him so spacious a room,
that Amphialus had more cause to wonder at the finding, then labor for the
seeking: which, if it stirred hate in him, to see how much harm he did to the
one side, it provoked as much aemulation in him, to perceive how much good he
did to the other side. Therefore, they approaching one to the other, as in two
beautiful folks, Love naturally stirs a desire of joining, so in their two
courages Hate stirred a desire of trial. Then began there a combatte between
them, worthy to have had more large listes, and more quiet beholders: for with
the spur of Courage, and the bitte of Respect, each so guided himself, that
one might well see, the desire to overcome, made them not forget how to
overcome: in such time and proportion they did employ their blows, that none
of Ceres servant could more cunningly place his flaile: while the left
foot spur set forward his own horse, the right set backward the
contrary horse, even sometimes by the advantage of the enemies leg, while
the left hand (like him that held the stern) guy ded the horses obedient
courage: All done in such order, that it might seem, the mind was a right
Prince indeed, who sent wise and diligent Lieutenants into each of those well
governed parts. But the more they fought, the more they desired to fight; and
the more they smarted, the less they felt the smarte: and now were like to
make a quick proof, to whom Fortune or Valor would seem most friendly,
when in comes an old Governor of Amphialus, always a good Knight, and
careful of his charge; who giving a sore wound to the black Knights thigh,
while he thought not of him, with an other blow slew his horse under him.
Amphialus cried to him, that he dishonored him: You say well (answered the
old Knight) to stand now like a private soldier, setting your credit upon
particular fighting, while you may see Basilius with all his host, is getting
between you and your town.

He looked that way, and found that true indeed, Philocleas Lover. The other
party being sorry for the loss of Philanax, was yet sorrier when the black
Knight could not be found. For he having gotten on a horse, whom his dying
master had bequeathed to the world, finding himself sore hurt, and not
desirous to be known, had in the time of the enemies retiring, retired away
also: his thigh not bleeding blood so fast, as his heart bledde revenge. But
Basilius having attempted in vain to bar the safe return of Amphialus,
encamped himself as strongly as he could, while he (to his grief) might hear
the joy was made in the town by his own subjects, that he had that day sped
no better. For Amphialus (being well beloved of that people) when they saw him
not vanquished, they esteemed him as victorious, his youth setting a
flourishing show upon his worthiness, and his great nobility ennobling his
dangers.

CHAP. 9.
1 The Loue-diuining dream of Amphialus song to Philoclea. 2 Philanax his
captivity, and deaths-doome, 3 for Philocleas sake turnde to life and
liberty. 4 His loyal answer of his Lords intents. 5 Cecropias arts to
persuade the sisters.

But the first thing Amphialus did, being returned, was to visit Philoclea,
and first presuming to cause his dream to be song unto her (which he had seen
the night before he fell in love with her) making a fine boy he had, accord a
pretty dolefulnes unto it. The song was this.


With Suns depart: and now the darkness of the night
Didlight those beamye stars which greater light did dark:
Now each thing that enjoyed that fiery quickening spark
(Which life is called) were mon'd their spirits to repose,
And warning use of eyes their eyes began to close:
A silence sweet each where with one consent embraste
(Amusique sweet to one in careful musing plaste)
And mother Earth, now clad in mourning weeds, did breath
A dull desire to kiss the image of our death:
When I, disgraced wretch, not wretched then, did give
My senses such relief, as they which quiet live,
Whose brains broile not in woes, nor breasts with beatings ache,
With natures praise are wont in safest home to take.
Far from my thoughts was ought, whereto their minds aspire,
Who under courtly pompes do hatch a base desire.
Free all my powers were frem those captining snares,
Which heavenly purest gifts defile in muddy cares.
Ne could my soul it self accuse of such a saulte,
As tender conscience might with furious panges assault.
But like the feeble flower (whose stalk cannot sustain
His weighty top) his top downward drooping lean:
Or as the silly bird in well acquainted nes^t
Does hide his head with cares but only how to rest:
So I in simple course, and vnentangled mind
Did suffer drousie lids mine eyes then clear to blind;
And laying down my head, did natures rule obserne,
Which senses up does shut the senses to preserve.
They first their use forgot, then fancies lost their force;
Till deadly sleep at length possessed my living coarse.
A living coarse I lay: but ah, my wakefull mind
(Which made of heavenly stusfe no mortal chan^ge does blind)
Flow up with clear wings of fleshly bondage free;
And having plaste my thoughts, my thoughts thus placed me.
Me thought, nay sure I was, I was in fairest wood
Of Samothea land; a land, which whilom stood
An honor to the world, while Honor was their end,
And while their lime of years they did in virtue spend.
But there I was, and there my calmie thoughts I fedd
On Natures sweet repast, as healthful senses ledd.
Her gifts my study was, her beauties were my sport:
My work her works to know, her dwelling my resort.
Those lamps of heavenly fire to fixed motion bound,
The euer-turning spheres, the neuer-mouing ground;
What essence dest'nie has; if fortune be or no;
Whence our immortal souls to mortal earth do flow:
What life it is, and how that all these lives do gather,
With outward makers force, or like an inward father.
Such thoughts, me thought, I thought, and straind my single mind
Then void of nearer cares, the depth of things to find.
When lo with hugest noise (such noise a tower makes
When it blown down with wind a fall of ruin takes)
(Or such a noise it was, as highest thunders send,
Or canons thunder-like, all shot together, lend)
The Moon a sunder rent; whereout with sudden fall
(More swift then falcons stoop to feeding Falconers call)
There came a chariot fair by doves and sparrowes guided:
Whose stormelike course staid not till hard by me it bided.
I wretch astonished was, and thought the deathfull doom
Of heaven, of earth, of bell, of time and place was come.
But straight there issued forth two Ladies (Ladies sure
They seemd to me) on whom did wait a Virgin pure:
Strange were the Ladies weeds; yet more unfit then strange.
The first with clothes tuckt up as Nymphs in woods do range;
Tuckt up even with the knees, with bow and arrows pressed:
Her right arm naked was, discovered was her breast.
But heavy was her pace, and such a meagre cheer,
As little hunting mind (God knows) did there appear.
The other had with art (more then our women know,
As stuff meant for the sale set out to glaring show)
A wanton woman's face, and with curld knots had twinde
Her hair, which by the help of painters cunning, shinde.
When I such guests did see come out of such a house,
The mountains great with child I thought brought forth a mouse.
But walking forth, the first thus to the second said,
Venus come on: said she, Diane you are obaide.
Those names abasht me much, when those great names I hard:
Although their fame (me seemd) from truth had greatly iard.
As I thus musing stood, Diana called to her
The waiting Nymphe, a Nymphe that did excel as far
All things that erst I saw, as orient pearls exceed,
That which their mother hight, or else their silly seed.
Indeed a perfect hawe, indeed a sweet consent
Of all those Graces gifts the heavens have ever lent.
And so she was attirde, as one that did not prize
Too much her peerles parts, nor yet could them despise.
But called, she came apace; a pace wherein did move
The band of beauties all, the little world of Love.
And bending humbled eyes (o eyes the Sun of sight)
She waited mistress will: who thus disclosd her spright.
Sweet Mira mine (quoth she) the pleasure of my mind,
In whom of all my rules the perfect proof I find,
To only thee thou see we grant this special grace
Us to attend, in this most private time and place.
Be silent therefore now, and so be silent still
Of that thou see: close up in secret knot thy will.
She answered was with look, and well performed behest:
And Mira I admirde: her shape sonke in my breast.
But thus with iresull eyes, and face that shook with site
Diana did begin. What moude me to inuit
Your presence (sister dear) first to my Moony sphere,
And hither now, vouchsafe to take with willing ear.
I know full well you know, what discord long bath reigned
Betwixt us two; how much that discord foul has stained
Both our estates, while each the other did deprave,
Proof speaks too much to us that feeling trial have.
Our names are quite forgot, our temples are defaced:
Our offerings spoiled, our priest from priesthood are displaced
Is this the fruit of strife? those thousand churches hie,
Those thousand altars fair now in the dust to lie?
In mortal minds our minds but planets names preserve:
No knees once bowed, for sooth, for them they say we serve.
Are we their servants grown? no doubt a noble stay:
Celestial powers to worms, Jove's children serve to claye.
But such they say we be: this praise our discord bred,
While we for mutual spite a striving passion fed.
But let us wiser be; and what foul discord brake,
So much more strong again let fas^test concord make.
Our years do it require: you see we both do feel
The weakening work of Times for euer-whirling wheel.
Although we be divine, our grandsire Saturn is
With ages force decayed, yet once the heaven was his.
And now before we seek by wise Apollos skill
Our young years to renew (for so he says he will)
Let us a perfect peace between us two resolve:
Which lest the ruinous want of government dissolve;
Let one the Princess be, to her the other yield:
For vain equality is but contentious field.
And let her have the gifts that should in both remain:
In her let beauty both, and chastnesse fully reign.
So as if I prevail, you give your gifts to me:
If you, on you I lay what in my office be.
Now rests only this, which of us two is she,
To whom precedence shall of both accorded be.
For that (so that you like) hereby does lie a youth
(She beckned unto me) as yet of spotless truth,
Who may this doubt discern: for better, wit, then lot
Becomes us: in us fortune determines not.
This crown of amber fair (an amber crown she held)
To worthiest let him give, when both he bath beheld:
And be it as he says. Venus was glad to hear
Such proffer made, which she well showd with smiling cheer.
As though she were the same, as when by Paris doom
She had chief Goddesses in beauty overcome.
And smirkly thus began say. I never sought debate
Diana dear; my mind to love and not to hate
Was cuer apt: but you my pastimes did despise.
I never spited you, but thought you ouerwise.
Now kindness profred is, none kinder is then I:
And so most ready am this mean of peace to try.
And let him be our judge: the lad does please me well.
Thus both did come to me, and both began to tell
(For both together spoke, each loath to be behind)
That they by solemn oath their Deities would bind
To stand unto my will: their will they made me know.
I that was first aghast, when first I saw their show:
Now bolder waxt, waxt proud, that I such sway must bear:
For near acquaintance does diminish reverent fear.
And having bound them fast by Styx, they should obaye
To all what I decreed, did thus my verdict say.
How ill both you can rule, well has your discord taught:
Ne yet for ought I see, your beauties merit ought.
To yonder Nymphe therefore (to Mira I did point)
The crown above you both for ever I appoint.
I would have spoken out: but out they both did cry;
Fie, fie, what have we done? ungodly rebel fie.
But now we needs must yield, to that our oaths require.
Yet thou shall not go free (quoth Venus) such a fire
Her beauty kindle shall within thy foolish mind,
That thou full often shall wish thy judging eyes were blind.
Nay then ( Diana said) the chastnesse I will give
In ashes of despair (though burnt) shall make thee live.
Nay thou (said both) shall see such beams shine in her face
That thou shall never dare seek help of wretched case.
And with that cursed curse away to heaven they fled,
First having all their gifts upon fair Mira spread.
The rest I cannot tell, for therewithal I waked
And found with deadly fear that all my sinews shak'd.
Was it a dream? O dream, how have thou wrought in me,
That I things erst unseen should first in dreaming see?
And thou o traitor Slcepe, made for to be our rest,
How have thou sramde the pain wherewith I am oppressed?
O cowarde Cupid thus do thou thy honor keep,
Vnarmde (alas) unawares to take a man asleep?
Laying not only the conquests, but the heart of the co^querour at her feet.
*** But she receiving him after her woonted sorrowful (but otherwise unmoved)
manner, it made him think, his good success was but a pleasant monument of a
doleful burial: Joy it self seeming bitter unto him, since it agreed not to
her taste.

Philanax unto him, whom he had not only long hated, but now had his hate
greatly increased by the death of his Squire Ismenus. Besides he had made him
as one of the chief causes that moved him to this rebellion, and therefore
was inclined (to color the better his action, and the more to embrewe the
hands of his accomplices by making them guilty of such a trespass) in some
formal sort to cause him to be executed: being also greatly egged thereunto by
his mother, and some other, who long had hated Philanax, only because he was
more worthy to be loved then they.

But while that deliberation was handeled, according Philoclea coming to
knowledge of the hard plight wherein Philanax stood, she desired one of the
gentlewomen appointed to wait upon her, to go in her name, and beseech
Amphialus, that if the love of her had any power of persuasion in his mind, he
would lay no further punishment, then imprisonment, upon Philanax. This
message was delivered even as Philanax was entering to the presence of
Amphialus, coming (according to the warning was given him) to receive a
judgment of death. But when he with manfull resolution attended the fruit of
such a tyrannical sentence, thinking it wrong, but no harm to him that
should die in so good a cause; Amphialus turned quite the form of his
pretended speech, and yielded him humble thanks, that by his means he had
come to that happiness, as to receive a commandment of his Lady:and
therefore he willingly gave him liberty to return in safetye whither he
would; quitting him, not only of all former grudge, but assuring him that he
would be willing to do him any friendship, and service: only desiring thus
much of him, that he would let him know the discourse and intent of
Basilius-his proceeding.

Philanax) if there were any such known to me secret in my masters
counsel, as that the revealing thereof might hinder his good success, I
should loath the keeping of my blood, with the loss of my faith; and would
think the just name of a traitor a hard purchase of a few years living.
But since it is so, that my master has indeed no way of privy practice, but
means openly and forcibly to deal against you, I will not stick in few
words to make your required declaration. Then told he him in what amaze of a
mazement, both Basilius and Gynecia were, when they mist their children and
Zelmane. Sometimes apt to suspect some practice of Zelmane, because she was a
stranger; sometimes doubting some relics of the late mutiny, which doubt
was rather increased, then any way satisfied, by Miso: who (being found,
almost dead for hunger, by certain Countrey-people) brought home word, with
what cunning they were trained out, and with what violence they were carried
away. But that within a few days they came to knowledge where they were, with
Amphialus-his own letters sent abroad to procure confederates in his
attemptes. That Basiliushis purpose was never to leave the siege of this town,
till he had taken it, and revenged the injury done unto him. That he meant
rather to win it by time, and famine, then by force of assault: knowing how
valiant men he had to deal withal in the town: that he had sent order, that
supplies of soldiers, pioners, and all things else necessary, should daily
be brought unto him: so as, my Lord (said Philanax) let me now (having
received my life by your grace) let me give you your life and honor by my
counfaile; protesting unto you, that I cannot choose but love you, being my
maister-his nephewe; and that I wish you well in all causes: but this, you
know his nature is as apt to forgive, as his power is able to conquer. Your
fault passed is excusable, in that Love persuaded, and youth was persuaded. Do
not urge the effects of angry victory, but rather seek to obtain that
constantly by courtesy, which you can never assuredly enjoy by violence. One
might easily have seen in the cheer of Amphialus, that disdainful choler
would feign have made the answer for him, but the remembrance of Philoclea
served for forcibie barriers between Anger, and angry effects: so as he said
no more, but that he would not put him to the trouble to give him any further
counsel: But that he might return, if he lifted, presently. Philanax glad to
receive an uncorrupted liberty, humbly accepted his favorable conuoy out of
the town; and so departed, not having visited the Princesses, thinking it
might be offensive to Amphialus, and no way fruitful to them, who were no way
but by force to be relieved.

The poor Ladies indeed, not suffered either to Cecropia had already framed to
sing all their songs to her tune, she herself omitting no day, and catching
hold of every occasion to move forward her sons desire, and remove their
known resolutions: using the same arguments to the one sister, as to the
other; determining that whom she could win first, the other should
(without her sons knowledge) by poison be made away. But though the reasons
were the same to both, yet the handeling was diverse, according as she saw
their humors to prefer a more or less aptness of apprehension: this day
having used long speech to Philoclea, amplifying not a little the great
duetifulnesse her son had showed in delivering Philanax: of whom she could
get no answer, but a silence sealed up in virtue, and so sweetly graced, as
that in one instant it carried with it both resistance, and humbleness.

CHAP. 10.
1 Pamelas exercise. Cecropias talk with her 2 of Beauty 3 and the use
thereof. 4 The Auntes Atheism 5 resuted by the Neeces Divinity

CEcropia threatening in her self to run a more ragged race with her, went to
her sister Pamela: who that day having wearied her self with reading, and with
the height of her heart disdaining to keep company with any of the Gentlewomen
appointed to attend her, whom she accounted her iaylours, was woorking upon
a purse certain Roses and Lillies, as by the finenesse of the work, one might
see she had borrowed her wits of the sorrow that owed them, and lent them wholly
to that exercise. For the flowers she had wrought, carried such life in them,
that the cu^ningest painter might have learned of her needle: which with so
pretty a manner made his careers to and fro through the cloth, as if the needle
it self would have been loath to have gone fro^ward such a mistres, but that it
hoped to return the^ceward very quickly again: the cloth loking with many eyes
upon her, and lovingly embracing the wounds she gave it: the sheares also were
at hand to behead the silk, that was grown to short. And if at any time she
put her mouth to bite it off, it seemed, that where she had been long in
making of a Rose with her hand, she would in an instant make Roses with her
lips; as the Lillies seemed to have their whiteness, rather of the hand that
made them, then of the matter whereof they were made; and that they grew there
by the Su^nes of her eyes, and were refreshed by the most in discomfort
comfortable air, which an unawares sigh might bestow upon them. But the colors
for the ground were so well chosen, neither sullenly dark, nor glaringly
lightsome, and so well proportioned, as that, though much cunning were in it,
yet it was but to serve for an ornament of the principal work; that it was
not without marvel to see, how a mind which could cast a careless semblant
upon the greatest conflictes of Fortune, could command it self to take
care for so small matters. Neither had she neglected the dainty dressing of
her self: but as it had been her marriage time to Affliction, she rather seemed
to remember her own worthiness, then the unworthiness of her husband. For
well one might perceive she had not rejected the counsel of a glass, and
that her hands had pleased themselves, in paying the tribute of vndeccyuing
skill, to so high perfections of Nature.

Cecropia take a sudden assuredness of hope, that she should obtain
somewhat of Pamela: thinking (according to the squaring out of her own good
nature) that beauty, carefully set forth, would soon prove a sign of an
vnrefusing harborough. Animated wherewith, she fate down by Pamela: and taking
the purse, and with affected curiosity looking upon the work, Full happy is
he (said she) at least if he knew his own happiness, to whom a purse in this
manner, and by this hand wrought, is dedicated. In faith he shall have cause to
account it, not as a purse for treasure, but as a treasure it self, worthy to
be pursed up in the purse of his own heart. And think you so indeed (said
Pamela half smiling) I promise you I wrought it, but to make some tedious
hours believe, that I thought not of them: for else I valued it, but even as a
very purse. It is the right nature (said Cecropia) of Beauty, to work
unwitting effects of wonder. Truly (said Pamela) I never thought till now,
that this outward glass, entitled Beauty, which it pleases you to lay to my
(as I think) vnguiltie charge, was but a pleasant mixture of natural
colors, delightful to the eye, as music is to the ear, without any further
consequence: since it is a thing, which not only beasts have; but even stones
and trees many of them do greatly excel in it. That other things (answered
Cecropia) have some portion of it, takes not away the excellency of it, where
indeed it does excel: since we see, that even those beasts, trees, and
stones, are in the name of Beauty only highly praised. But that the beauty of
human persons be beyond all other changs there is great likelihood of reason,
since to them only is given the judgment to discern Beauty; and among
reasonable wights, as it seems, that our fex has the pre-eminence, so that in
that pre-eminence, Nature counteruailes all other liberalities, wherein she may
be thought to have dealte more favorably toward mankind. How do men crown
(think you) themselves with glory, for having either by force brought others
to yield to their mind, or with long study, and premeditated orations,
persuaded what they would have persuaded? and see, a fair woman shall not
only command without authority, but persuade without speaking. She shall not
need to procure attention, for their own eyes will chain their ears unto
it. Men venture lives to conquer; she conqueres lives without venturing. She
is served, and obeyed, which is the most notable, not because the laws so
command it, but because they become laws to themselves to obey her; not for
her parents sake, but for her own sake. She need not dispute, whether to
govern by Fear, or by Love, since without her thinking thereof, their love
will bring forth fear, and their fear will fortify their love: and she
need not seek offensive, or defensive force, since her lips may stand for
ten thousand shieldes, and ten thousand inevitable shot go from her eyes.
Beauty, Beauty (dear Niece) is the crown of the feminine greatness; which
gift, on whom soever the heavens (therein most nigardly) do bestow, without
question, she is bound to use it to the noble purpose, for which it is created:
not only winning, but preserving; since that indeed is the right happiness,
which is not only in it self happy, but can also derive the happiness to
another. Certainly Aunt (said Pamela) I fear me you will make me not only
think my self fairer then ever I did, but think my fairnes a matter of
greater value then heretofore I could imagine it. For I ever (till now)
conceived these conquests you spoke of, rather to proceed from the weakness of
the conquered, then from the strength of the co^quering power: as they say, the
Cranes overthrow whole battles of Pygmees, not so much of their Cranish
courage, as because the other are Pygmees: and that we see, young babes think
babies of woonderful excellency, and yet the babies are but babies. But since
your elder years, and abler judgment, find Beauty to be worthy of so
incomparable estimation, certainly me thinks, it ought to be held in dearnes,
according to the excellency, and (no more then we would do of things which we
account precious) ever to suffer it to be defiled.

Cecropia) Mary God forbid that my speech should tend to any such purpose, as
should deserve so foula title. My meaning is to ioyn your beauty to love; your
youth to delight. For truly, as colors should be as good as nothing, if there
were no eyes to behold them: so is Beauty nothing, without the eye of Love
behold it: and therefore, so far is itfrom defiling it, that it is the only
honoring of it, the only preferuing of it: for Beauty goes away, devoured by
Time, but where remains it ever flourishing, but in the heart of a true loer?
And such a one (if ever there were any) is my son: whose love is so subjected
unto you, that rather then breed any offense unto you, it will not delight it
self in beholding you. There is no effect of his love (answered Pamela) better
pleases me then that: but as I have often answered you, so, resolutely I say
unto you, that he must get my parents consent, and then he shall know further
of my mind; for, without that, I know I should offend God. O sweet youth (said
Cecropia) how untimely subject it is to devotion? No, no sweet niece, let us
old folks think of such precise consideratio^s, do you enjoy the heaven of your
age, where of you are sure: and like good householders, which spend those
things that will not be kept, so do you pleasantly enjoy that, which else will
bring an ouer-late repentance, when your glass shall accuse you to your face,
what a change there is in you. Do you see how the springtime is full of
flowers, decking it self with them, and not aspiring to the fruits of Autumn?
what lesson is that unto you, but that in the april of your age, you should be
like April? Let not some of the^, for whom already the grave gapeth, and perhaps
envy the felicity in you, which themselves cannot enjoy, persuade you to lose
the hold of occasion, while it may not only be taken, but offers, nay sues to
be taken: which if it be not now taken, will never hereafter be overtaken. Your
self know, how your father has refused all offers made by the greatest Princes
about you, and will you suffer your beauty to be hid in the wrinckles of his
peuish thoughts? If he be peuish (said Pamela) yet is he my father, and how
beautiful soever I be, I am his daughter: so as God claims at my hands
obedience, and makes me no judge of his imperfections.

Pamela, made Cecropia think, that there was no righter way for her, then as
she had (in her opinion) set her in liking of Beauty, with persuasion not to
suffer it to be void of purpose, so if she could make her less feeling of
those heavenly conceits, that then she might easily wind her to her crooked
bias. Therefore, employing the uttermost of her mischievous wit, and speaking
the more earnestly, because she spoke as she thought, she thus dealt with her.
Dear niece, or rather, dear daughter, if my affection and wish might
prevail therein, how much does it increase (trow you) the earnest desire I
have of this blessed match, to see these virtues of yours knit fast with such
zeal of Devotion (indeed the best bond) which the most politic wits have
found, to hold man's wit in well doing? For, as children must first by fear
be induced to know that, which after (when they do know) they are most glad
of: So are these bugbeares of opinions brought by great Clearkes into the
world, to serve as shewelles to keep them from those faults, whereto else the
vanity of the world, and weakness of senses might pull them. But in you
(Niece) whose excellency is such, as it need not to be held up by the staff
of vulgar opinions, I would not you should love Virtue seruillie, for fear of
I know not what, which you see not: but even for the good effects of virtue
which you see. Fear, and indeed, foolish fear, and fearful ignorance, was
the first inuenter of those conceates. For, when they heard it thunder, not
knowing the natural cause, they thought there was some angry body above, that
spoke so loud: and ever the less they did perceive, the more they did
conceive. Whereof they knew no cause that grew straight a miracle: foolish
folks, not marking that the alterations be but upon particular accidents, the
universality being always one. Yesterday was but as to day, and to morrow
will tread the same footsteps of his foregoers: so as it is manifest enough,
that all things follow but the course of their own nature, saving only Man, who
while by the pregnancie of his imagination he strives to things supernatural,
meane-while he loses his own natural felicity. Be wise, and that wisdom
shall be a God unto thee; be contented, and that is thy heaven: for else to think
that those powers (if there be any such) above, are moved either by the
eloquence of our prayers, or in a chafe by the folly of our actions; caries
as much reason as if flies should think, that men take great care which of them
hums sweetest, and which of them flies nimblest.

She would have spoken further to have enlarged and Pamela (whose cheeks were
died in the beautifullest grain of virtuous anger, with eyes which glistered
forth beams of disdain) thus interrupted her. Peace (wicked woman) peace,
unworthy to breathe, that do not acknowledge the breathgiuer; most unworthy
to have a tongue, which speak against him, through whom thou speak: keep
your affection to your self, which like a bemired dog, would defile with
fauning. You say yesterday was as to day. O foolish woman, and most miserably
foolish, since wit makes you foolish. What does that argue, but that there is
a constancy in the everlasting governor? Would you have an inconstant God,
since we count a man foolish that is inconstant? He is not seen you say, and
would you think him a God, who might be seen by so wicked eyes, as yours?
which yet might see enough if they were not like such, who for sport-sake
willingly hood-wincke themselves to receive blows the easier. But though I
speak to you without any hope of fruit in so rotten a heart, and there be no
body else here to judge of my speeches, yet be thou my witness, O captivity,
that my ears shall not be willingly guilty of my Creators blasphemy. You
say, because we know not the causes of things, therefore fear was the mother
of superstition: nay, because we know that each effect has a cause, that has
engendered a true and lively devotion. For this goodly work of which we are,
and in which we live, has not his being by Chance; on which opinion it is
beyond marvel by what chance any brain could stumble. For if it be eternal
(as you would seem to conceive of it) Eternity, and Chance are things
insufferable together. For that is chaunceable which happens; and if it
happen, there was a time before it happened, when it might not have happened; or
else it did not happen; and so of chaunceable, not eternal, as now being, the^
not being. And as absurd it is to think that if it had a beginning, his
beginning was derived from Chance: for Chance could never make all things of
nothing: and if there were substaunces before, which by chance should meet
to make up this work, thereon follows another bottomless pit of
absurdities. For then those substaunces must needs have been from ever, and so
eternal: and that eternal causes should bring forth chaunceable effects, is
as sensible, as that the Sun should be the author of darkness. Again, if
it were chaunceable, then was it not necessary; whereby you take away all
consequents. But we see in all things, in some respect or other, necessity of
consequence: therefore in reason we must needs know that the causes were
necessary.

Lastly, Chance is variable, or else it is not to be called Chance: but we see
this work is steady and permanent. If nothing but Chance had glewed those
pieces of this All, the heavy parts would have gone infinitely downewarde,
the light infinitely upward, and so never have met to have made up this
goodly body. For before there was a heaven, or a earth, there was neither a
heaven to stay the height of the rising, nor an earth, which (in respect of the
round walls of heaven) should become a center. Lastly, perfect order, perfect
beauty, perfect constancy, if these be the children of Chance, or Fortune
the efficient of these, let Wisdom be counted the root of wickedness, and
eternity the fruit of her inconstancy. But you will say it is so by nature,
as much as if you said it is so, because it is so: if you mean of many natures
conspiring together, as in a popular government to establish this fair
estate; as if the Elementishe and ethereall parts should in their towne-house
set down the bounds of each ones office; then consider what follows: that
there must needs have been a wisdom which made them concur: for their
natures being absolute contrary, in nature rather would have sought each
others ruin, then have served as well consorted parts to such an
inexpressible harmony. For that contrary things should meet to make up a
perfection without a force and Wisdom above their powers, is absolutely
impossible; unless you will fly to that hissed-out opinion of Chance again.
But you may perhaps affirm, that one universal Nature (which has been for
ever) is the knitting together of these many parts to such an excellent
unity. If you mean a Nature of wisdom, goodness, and providence, which knows
what it does, then say you that, which I seek of you, and cannot conclude
those blasphemies, with which you defiled your mouth, and mine ears. But if
you mean a Nature, as we speak of the fire, which goes upward, it knows not
why: and of the nature of the Sea which in ebbing and flowing seems to observe
so just a dance, and yet understands no music, it is but still the same
absurdity subscribed with another title. For this word, one, being attributed
to that which is All, is but one mingling of many, and many ones; as in a less
matter, when we say one kingdom which conteines many cities; or one city
which conteines many persons, wherein the under ones (if there be not a
superior power and wisdom) cannot by nature regard to any preservation but
of themselves: no more we see they do, since the water willingly quenches the
fire, and drownes the earth; so far are they from a conspired unity: but
that a right heavenly Nature indeed, as it were vnnaturing them, does so bridle
them.

Again, it is as absurd in nature that from an unity many contraries should
proceed still kept in an unity: as that from the number of contrarieties an
unity should arise. I say still, if you banish both a singularity, and
plurality of judgment from among them, then (if so earthly a mind can lift
it self up so hie) do but conceive, how a thing whereto you give the highest,
and most excellent kind of being (which is eternity) can be of the base and
vilest degree of being, and next to a not-being; which is so to be, as not to
enjoy his own being? I will not here call all your senses to witness, which can
hear, nor see nothing, which yeeldes not most evident evidence of the
vnspeakeablenesse of that Wisdom: each thing being directed to an end, and
an end of preservation: so proper effects of judgment, as speaking, and
laughing are of mankind.

But what madd fury can ever so enueagle any conceipte, as to see our mortal
and corruptible selves to have a reason, and that this universality (whereof
we are but the lest pieces) should be utterly deuoide thereof? as if one should
say, that ones foot might be wise, and him self foolish. This heard I once
alleged against such a godless mind as yours, who being driven to
acknowledge these beastly absurdities, that our bodies should be better then
the whole world, if it had the knowledge, where of the other were void; he
sought (not able to answer directly) to shifte it of in this sort: that if
that reason were true, then must it follow also, that the world must have in
it a spirit, that could write and read to, and be learned; since that was in
us so commendable: wretched fool, not considering that Books be but supplies
of defects; and so are praised, because they help our want, and therefore
cannot be incident to the eternal intelligence, which needs no recording of
opinions to confirm his knowledge, no more then the Sun wants wax to be the
fuel of his glorious lightfulnesse. This world therefore cannot otherwise
consist but by a mind of Wisdom, which gouernes it, which whether you will
allow to be the Creator thereof, as undoubtedly he is, or the soul and
governor thereof, most certain it is that whether he govern all, or make
all, his power is above either his creatures, or his government. And if his
power be above all things, then consequently it must needs be infinite, since
there is nothing above it to limit it. For beyond which there is nothing, must
needs be boundless, and infinite: if his power be infinite, then likewise
must his knowledge be infinite: for else there should be an infinite proportion
of power which he should not know how to use; the insensibleness whereof I
think even you can conceive: and if infinite, then must nothing, no not the
estate of flies (which you with so unsavory skorne did jest at) be unknown
unto him. For if it were, then there were his knowledge bounded, and so not
infinite: if knowledge and power be infinite, then must needs his goodness and
justice march in the same rank: for infinitenes of power, and knowledge,
without like measure of goodness, must necessarily bring forth destruction
and ruin, and not ornament and preservation. Since then there is a God, and an
all-knowing God, so as he sees into the darkest of all natural secrets, which
is the heart of Man; and sees therein the deepest dissembled thoughts, nay sees
the thoughts before they be thought: since he is just to exercise his might,
and mighty to perform his justice, assure thy self, most wicked woman (that
have so plaguily a corrupted mind, as thou can not keep thy sickness to
thy self, but must most wickedly infect others) assure thy self, I say, (for
what I say dependes of everlasting and vnremooueable causes) that the time will
come, when thou shall know that power by feeling it, when thou shall see his
wisdom in the manifesting thy ougly shamelessness, and shall only perceive
him to have been a Creator in thy destruction.

CHAP. 11.
1 Cecropia malcontent, still practices. 2 The besiegers discipline, and
attempts of the besieged. 3 Phalantus chalengeth 4 by Letter Amphialus: 5 who
by Letter accepts it. 6 Amphialus 7 and Phalantus militar accoustrements. 8
Their fo-like combat, 9 but friendly conclusion.

THus she said, thus she ended, with Cecropia saw indeed, or else the guilty
amazement of her selfe-accusing conscience, made her eyes untrue judges of
their natural object, that there was a light more then human, which gave a
luster to her perfections. But Cecropia, like a Batte (which though it have
eyes to discern that there is a Sun, yet has so evil eyes, that it cannot
delight in the Sun) found a truth, but could not love it. But as great
persons are wont to make the wrong they have done, to be a cause to do the
more wrong, her knowledge rose to no higher point, but to envy a worthier, and
her will was no otherwise bent, but the more to hate, the more she found her
enemy provided against her. Yet all the while she spoke (though with eyes cast
like a horse that would strike at the stirrup, and with color which blushed
through yellowness) she sat rather stillthen quiet, and after her speech
rather muttered, then replied: for the war of wickedness in her self,
brought forth disdainefull pride to resist cunning dissunulation; so as, saying
little more unto her, but that she should have leisure enough better to
bethink her self; she went away repining, but not repenting: condemning
greatly (as she thought) her sons ouer-feeble humbleness, and purposing to
egg him forward to a course of violence. For her self, determining to deal
with neither of them both any more in manner of a suter: for what majesty of
virtue did in the one, that did silent humbleness in the other. But finding
her son ouer-apt to lay both condemnation, and execution of sorrow upon
himself, she sought to mitigate his mind with feigned delays of comfort,
who (having this inward overthrow in himself) was the more vexed, that he
could not utter the rage thereofvpon his outward enemies.

Basilius taught by the last days trial, what dangerous effects chosen
courages can bring forth, rather used the spade, then the sword; or the
sword, but to defend the spade; girding about the whole town with trenches;
which beginning a good way of from the town, with a number of well directed
Pioners, he still carried before him till they came to a near distance, where
he builded Fortes, one answering the other, in such sort, as it was a pretty
consideration in the discipline of war, to see building used for the
instrument of ruin, and the assayler entrenched as if he were besieged. But
many sallies did Amphialus make to hinder their woorking. But they (exercising
more melancholy, then choler in their resolution) made him find, that if by
the advantage of place, few are able to defend themselves from many, that
many must needs have power, (making themselves strong in seat) to repel
few; referring the revenge rather to the end, then a present requital. Yet
oftentimes they dealt some blows in light skirmishes, each side having a
strong retyring place, and rather fighting with many alarums, to vex the
enemy, then for any hope of great success.

Which every way was a tedious comber to the impacient Amphialus: till the
fame of this war, bringing thither diverse, both strangers, and subjects, as
well of princely, as noble houses, the gallant Phalantus, who restrained his
sportfull delights as then, to serve Basilius, (whom he honored for received
honors) when he had spent some time in considering the Arcadian manner in
marching, encamping, and fighting, and had learned in what points of
government, and obedience their discipline differed from others, and had
satisfied his mind in the knowledge, both for the cutting off the enemies
helps, and furnishing ones self, which Basilius orders could deliver unto
him, his young spirits (weary of wanting cause to be weary) desired to keep
his valor in knowledge, by some private act, since the public policy
restrained him; the rather, because his old mistress Artesia might see, whom
she had so lightly forsaken: and therefore demanding and obteyning leave of
Basilius; he caused a Heraulde to be furnished with apparel of his office, and
tokens of a peaceable message, and so sent him to the gate of the town to
demand audience of Amphialus: who understanding thereof, caused him both
safely, and courteously to be brought into his presence: who making lowly
reverence unto him, presented his Letters, desiring Amphialus that whatsoever
they contained, he would consider that he was only the bearer, but not the
inditer. Amphialus with noble gentleness assured him both, by honorable
speeches, and a demeanure which answered for him, that his revenge,
whenever, should sort unto it self a higher subject. But opening the
Letters, he found them to speak in this manner.

PHalantus of Corinthe, to Amphialus of Arcadia, sends the greeting of a
hatelesse enemy. The liking of martial matters without any mislike of your
person, has brought me rather to the company, then to the mind of your
besiegers: where languishing in idleness, I desire to refresh my mind with
some exercise of arms, which might make known the dooers, with delight of the
beholders. Therefore, if there be any Gentleman in your Town, that either for
the love of Honor, or honor of his Love, well armed, on horseback, with
lance, and sword, will win another, or loose himself, to be a prisoner at
discretion of the conqueror, I will to morrow morning by Sun rising, with a
trumpet and a Squire only, attend him in like order furnished. The place I
think fittest, the Island within the Lake, because it stands so well in the
view of your Castle, as that the Ladies may have the pleasure of seeing the
combat: which though it be within the commandment of your Castle, I desire
no better security, then the promise I make to my self of your virtue. I
attend your answer, and wish you such success as may be to your honor,
rather in yielding to that which is just, then in mainteyning wrong by much
violence.

AMphialus read it with cheerful countenance, and

AMphialus of Arcadia, to Phalantus of Corinthe, wishes all his own wishes,
saving those which may be hurtful to another. The matter of your letters so fit
for a worthy mind, and the manner so suitable to the nobleness of the matter,
give me cause to think how happy I might accounte my self, if I could get
such a friend, who esteem it no small happiness to have met with so noble
an enemy. Your challenge shall be answered, and both time, place, and weapon
accepted. For your security for any treachery (having no hostage worthy to
counteruaile you) take my word, which I esteem above all respects. Prepare
therefore your arms to fight, but not your heart to malice; since true valor
needs no other whetstone, then desire of honor.

Amphialus showed unto his mother, and some other of his chief Counsailours,
what he had received, and how he had answered: telling them withal, that he
was determined to answer the challenge in his own person. His mother with
prayers authorized by motherly commandment; his old governor with
persuasions mingled with reprehensions, (that he would rather affect the glory
of a private fighter, then of a wise General) Clinias with falling down at
his feet, and beseeching him to remember, that all their lives depended upon
his safety, sought all to dissuade him. But Amphialus (whose heart was enflamed
with courage, and courage enflamed with affection) made an imperious resolution
cut off the tediousness of replies, giving them in charge, what they should
do upon all occasions, and particularly to deliver the Ladies, if otherwise
then well happened unto him: only desiring his mother, that she would bring
Philoclea to a window where she might with ease perfectly discern the combar.
And so, as soon as the morning began to draw dew from the fairest greenes,
to wash her face withal, against the approach of the burning Sun, he went to
his stable, where himself chose out a horse, whom (though he was near twenty
year old) he preferred for a piece of sure service, before a great number of
younger. His color was of a brown bay, dapled thick with black spots; his
forhead marked with a white star; to which, in all his body there was no
part suitable, but the left foot before; his mane and tail black, and thick,
of goodly, and well proportioned greatness. He caused him to be trimmed with a
sumptuous saddle of tawnie, and gold ennamell, enriched with precious stones:
his furniture was made into the fashion of the branches of a tree, from which
the leaves were falling: and so artificially were the leaves made, that as the
horse moved, it seemed indeed that the leaves wagged, as when the wind plays
with them; and being made of a pale cloth of gold, they did bear the
strawcoloured liuerie of ruin. His armor was also of tawnie and gold, but
formed into the figure of flames darkened, as when they newly break the
prison of a smoakie furnace. In his shield he had painted the Torpedo fish.
And so appointed, he caused himself, with is trumpet and squire (whom he had
taken since the death of Ismenus) to be ferried over into the Island: a place
well chosen for such a purpose. For, it was so plain, as there was scarcely
any bush, or hillock, either to vnleuell, or shadow it: of length and breadth
enough, to try the uttermost both of lance and sword, and the one end of it
facing of the castle, the other extending it self toward the camp, and no
access to it, but by water: there could no secreate treachery be wrought, and
for manifest violence, either side might have time enough to succor their party.

Phalantus, already waiting for him upon a horse, milk white, but that upon his
shoulder and withers, he was fretned with red stains, as when a few
strawberies are scattered into a dish of cream. He had caused his mane and
tail to be died in carnation; his reins were vine branches, which ingendring
one with the other, at the end, when it came to the bitte, there, for the
bosse, brought forth a cluster of grapes, by the workman made so lively, that
it seemed, as the horse champed on his bitte, he chopped for them, and that it
did make his mouth water, to see the grapes so near him. His furniture behind
was of vines, so artificially made, as it seemed the horse stood in the shadow
of the vine, so pretily were clusters of rubie grapes dispersed among the
trappers which embraced his sides. His armor was blew, like the heaven, which
a Sun did with his rays (proportionately delivered) guilde in most places. His
shield was beautified with this device; A greyhound, which ouerrunning his
fellow, and taking the hare, yet hurts it not when it takes it. The word was,
The glory, not the pray.

Amphialus landed, he sent his squire to Phalantus, to tell him, that there was
the Knight, ready to know whether he had any thing to him. Phalantus answered,
that his answer now must be in the language of lances; and so each attended
the warning of the tru^pets, which were to sound at the appointment of four
judges, who with consideration of the same, had divided the ground.
Phalantus-his horse young, and feeling the youth of his master, stood
coruetting; which being well governed by Phala^tus; gave such a glittering
grace, as when the Sun shines upon a wauing water. Amphialus-horse stood
panting upon the ground, with his further foot before, as if he would for his
masters cause begin to make himself angry: till the trumper sounded together.
Together they set spurs to their horses, together took their lances from
their thighs, conveyed them up into their restes together, together let them
sink downward; so as it was a delectable sight, in a dangerous effect; and a
pleasant consideration, that there was so perfect agreement, in so mortal
disagreement; like a music, made of cunning discords. But their horses keeping
an even line their masters had skilfully allotted unto them, passed one by
another without encountering, although either might feel the angry breath of
other. But the staves being come to a just descent, but even when the mark was
ready to meet them, Amphialus was run through the vamplate, and under the
arm: so as the staff appearing behind him, it seemed to the beholders he had
been in danger. But he struck Phalantus just upon the gorget, so as he battred
the lamms thereof, and made his head almost touch the back of his horse. But
either side having stayed the spur, and used the bit to stop their horses fury,
casting away the tro^cheons of their staves, and drawing their swords, they
attended the second summons of the death-threatning trumpet, which quickly
followed; and they as soon making their horses answer their hands, with a gentle
galop, set the one toward the other; til being come in the neernes of little
more then a staves length. Amphialus trusting more to the strength, then to the
nimblenes of his horse, put him forth with speedy violence, and making his
head join to the others flank, guiding his blow with difcretion, and
strengthening it with the course of his horse, struck Phalantus upon the head,
in such sort, that his feeling sense did both dazell his sight, and astonish
his hearing. But Phalantus (not accustomed to be ungrateful to such benefits)
struck him upon the side of his face, with such a force, that he thought his
iawe had been cut asunder: though the faithfulness of his armor indeed guarded
him from further damage. And so remained they awhile, rather angry with
fighting, then fighting for anger, till Amphialus-his horse, leaning hard upon
the other, and winning ground, the other horse feeling himself pressed, began to
rise a little before, as he was wont to do in his coruette: which advantage
Amphialus taking, set forward his own horse with the further spur, so as
Phalantus-his horse came over with his master under him. Which Amphialus
seeing, lighted, with intention to help Phalantus. But his horse that had
faulted, rather with untimely art, then want of force, gatte up from burdning
his burden, so as Phalantus (in the fall having gotten his feet free of and
the stirrup) could (though something bruised) arise, seeing Amphialus near
him, he asked him, Whether he had given him any help in removing his horse.
Amphialus said No. Truly said Phalantus, I asked it, because I would not
willingly have fought with him, that had had my life in his mercy. But now
(said Phalantus) before we proceed further, let me know who you are, because
never yet did any man bring me to the like fortune. Amphialus listing to keep
him self unknown, told him he was a Gentleman, to whom Amphialus that day had
given armor and horse to try his valor, having never before been in any
combat worthy remembrance. Ah, (said Phalantus in a rage) And must I be the
exercise of your prentis-age? and with that, choler took away either the
bruise, or the feeling of the bruise, so as he entered a fresh into the co^bat,
and boiling in his arms the disdain of his heart, struck so thick upon
Amphialus, as if every blow would feign have been foremost. But Amphialus (that
many like trials had taught, great spending to leave small remnants) let pass
the storm with strong wards, and nimble auoidings: till seeing his time fit,
both for distaunce and nakedness, he struck him so cruel a blow on the knee,
that the poor Gentleman fell down withal in a sown.

But Amphialus, pitying approved valor, made precious Amphialus) if it be
not to my request, that you will account your self to have great interest in
me. Phalantus more overcome by his kindness, the^ by his fortune, desired yet
once again to know his name, who in his first beginning had showed such fury
in his force, and yet such stay in his fury. Amphialus, then named himself,
telling him withal, he would think his name much bettred, if it might be
honored by the title of his friend. But no Baulme could be more comfortable to
his wound, then the knowledge thereof was to his mind, when he knew his mishap
should be excused by the renowned valor of the other. And so promising each to
other assurednes of good will, Phalantus, (of whom Amphialus would have no
other ransom, but his word of frie^dship) was conveyed into the camp, where
he would but little remain among the enemies of Amphialus: but went to seek
his adventures other-where.

CHAP. 12.
1 Philocleas il-taking Amphialus wel-meaning. 2 His challenge and conquests
continued for Love, and his love. 3 Argalus sent for to this challenge. 4 The
conjugal happiness of him and his wife. 5 The passions stirred by this message.
6 Their sorrow-sounding farewell. 7 Argalusis defy. 8 Amphialusis answer. 9
Argalusis furniture. 10 Their combat, bloody to both, deadly to Argalus. 11
Parthenia comes to the end of it, and him. 12 Her 13 and his lamentations. 14
The funerals.

Amphialus he was received with triumph into the castle; although one might see
by his eyes (humbly lifted up to the window where Philoclea stood) that he was
rather suppliaunt, then victorious: which occasion Cecropia taking, (who as
then stood by Philoclea, and had lately left Pamela in another room, whence
also she might see the combat) Sweet Lady (said she) now you may see, whether
you have cause to love my son, who then lies under your feet, when he
stands upon the neck of his brauest enemies. Alas said Philoclea, a simple
service to me, me thinks it is, to have those, who come to succor me,
destroyed: If it be my duty to call it love, be it so: but the effects it
brings forth I confess I account hateful. Cecropia grew so angry with this
unkind answer, that she could not abstain from telling her, that she was like
them that could not sleep, when they were softly laid: but that if her son
would follow her counsel, he should take another course with her: and so
flange away from her.

Yet (knowing the desperate melancholy of Amphialus Amphialus, that he (though
against public respect, and importunity of dissuaders) presently caused it to
be made known to the camp, that whatsoever Knight would try the like fortune
as Phalantus did, he should in like sort be answered: so as diverse of the
valiantest, partly of themselves, partly at the instigation of Basilius,
attempted the combat with him: and according to every ones humor; so were the
causes of the challe^ge grounded: one laying treason to his charge; another
preferring himself in the worthiness to serve Philoclea; a third, exalting some
Ladies beauty beyond either of the sisters; a fourth, laying disgraces to Love
it self, naming it the bewitcher of the wit, the rebel to Reason, the
betrayer of resolution, the defiler of thoughts, the underminer of
magnanimity, the flatterer of vice, the slave to weakness, the infection of
youth, the madness of age; the curse of life, and reproach of death; a fifth,
disdayning to cast at less then at all, would make the cause of his quarrel
the causers of love, and proclayme his blasphemies against womankinde; that
namely that sex was the oversight of Nature, the disgrace of reasonablenes, the
obstinate cowards, the slaue-borne tyrants, the shops of vanities, the gilded
wethercocks; in who^ conscience is but peeuishnes, chastity way wardnes, and
gratefulnes a miracle. But all these challenges (how well so ever endited) were
so well answered, that some by death taught others, though past learning
themselves; and some by yielding gave themselves the lie for having blasphemed;
to the great grief of Basilius, so to see his Rebel prevail, and in his own
sight to crown himself with deserved honor.

Argalus, in whose approved courage and force, he had (and had cause) to have
great confidence, with a letter; requiring him, to take this quarrel in hand,
from which he had hitherto spared him in respect of his late marriage. But now
his honor, and (as he esteemed it) felicity standing upon it, he could no
longer forbear to challenge of him his faithful service.

Argalus at a castle of his own, sitting in a parler with the fair Parthenia,
he reading in a book the stories of Hercules, she by him, as to hear him
read; but while his eyes looked on the book, she looked on his eyes, and
sometimes staying him with some pretty question, not so much to be resolved of
the doubt; as to give him occasion to look upon her. A happy couple, he
ioying in her, she ioying in her self, but in her self, because she enjoyed
him: both increasing their riches by giving to each other; each making one life
double, because they made a double life; one, where desire never wanted
satisfaction, nor satisfaction never bred sacietie; he ruling, because she
would obey: or rather because she would obey, she therein ruling.

But when the messenger came in with letters in his Parthenia, and as forie as
might be for parting, and yet more sorry for her sorrow, he gave her the letter
to read. She with fearful slownes took it, and with fearful quickness read
it; and having read it, Ah my Argalus (said she) and have you made such have to
answer? and are you so soon resolved to leave me? But he discoursing unto
her, how much it imparted his honor (which since it was dear to him, he knew
it would be dear unto her) her reason ouerclowded with sorrow, suffered her not
presently to reply, but left the charge thereof to tears, and sighs; which
he not able to bear, left her alone, and went to give order for his present
departure.

By that time he was armde, and ready to go, she had recovered a little
strength of spirit again, and coming out, and seeing him armed, and wanting
northing for his departure but her farewell, she ran to him, took him by the
arm, and kneeling down with out regard, who either heard her speech, or saw
her demeanor, My Argalus, my Argalus (said she) do not thus forsake me.
Remember, alas, Remember that I have interset in you, which I will never yield
shall be thus adventured. Your valor is already sufficiently known:
sufficiently have you already done for your country: ennow, ennow there are
besides you to loose less worthy lives. Woe is me, what shall become of me,
if you thus abandon me? Then was it time for you to follow these adventures,
when you adventured no body but your self, and were no bodies but your own.
But now pardon me, that now, or never, I claim mine own; mine you are, and
without me you can undertake no danger; and will you enda^ger Parthenia?
Parthenia shall be in the battle of your fight: Parthenia shall smart in your
pain, and your blood must be bled by Parthenia. Dear Parthenia (said he) this
is the first time, that ever you resisted my will: I thank you for it; but
persevere not in it; and let not the tears of those most beloved eyes be a
presage unto me of that, which you would not should happen. I shall live, doubt
not: for so great a blessing, as you are, was not given unto me, so soon to be
deprived of it. Look for me therefore shortly, and victorious; and prepare a
joyful welcome, and I will with for no other triumph. She answered not, but
stood as it were thunder-striken with amazement: for true Love made obedience
stand up against all other passions. But when he took her in his arms, and
sought to printe his heart in her sweet lips, she fell in a sound, so as he
was feign to leave her to her Gentlewomen: and carried away by the tyranny of
Honor, though with many a backe-cast look, and hearty groan, went to the
camp. When understanding the notable victories of Amphialus, he thought to
give him some days respite of rest, because he would not have his victory
disgraced by the others weariness. In which days, he sought by all means
(having leave to parley with him) to dissuade him from his enterprise: and then
imparting his mind to Basilius, because he found Amphialus was inflexible,
wrote his defy unto him in this manner.

RIght famous Amphialus, if my persuasion in reason,

To this quickly he received this answer.

MVch more famous Argalus, I, whom never threatenings against all dangers,
since I come full of him by whom your self have been (if I be not deceived)
sometimes conquered. I will therefore attend your appearaunce in the I Will,
carrying this advantage with me, that as it shall be a singular honor if I get
the victory, so there can be no dishonor in being overcome by Argalus.

Argalus was armed in a white armor, which was gilded over with knots of
woman's hair, which came down from the crest of his head-pecce, and spread it
self in rich quantity over all his armor: his furniture was cut out into the
fashion of an Eagle, where of the beak (made into a rich jewel) was fastened
to the saddle, the tail covered the crooper of the horse, and the wings served
for trappers; which falling of each side, as the horse stirred, the bird seemed
to fly. His pettrell and reins, were embrodered with feathers suitable unto
it: upon his right arm he ware a sleeue, which his dear Parthenia had made
for him, to be worn in a iustes, in the time that success was ungrateful to
their well-deserued love: It was full of bleeding hearts, though never intended
to any blooddie enterprise. In this shield (as his own device) he had two
Palm trees, near one another, with a word signifying, In that sort
flourishing. His horse was of a fiery sorrel, with black feet, and black
list on his back, who with open nostrels breathed war, before he could see an
enemy: and now up with one leg, and then with another, seemed to complain of
Nature, that she had made him any whit earthie.

Amphialus, in all points provided to give a hard entertainme^t. And then
sending each to other their Squires in honorable manner, to know whether they
should attend any further ceremony; the trumpets sounding, the horses with
smooth running, their staves with vnshaked motion, obediently performed their
choleric commandments. But when they drew nere, Argalus-his horse being hot,
pressed in with his head: which Amphialus perceiving, knowing if he gave him his
side, it should be to his disaduauntage, pressed in also with him, so as both the
horses and men met shoulder to shoulder, so as the horses (hurt as much with
the striking, as being stricken) tumbled down to the earth, daungerously to
their master, but that they by strength nimble, and by use skillful, in the
falling shunned the harm of the fall, and without more respite, drew out
their swords with a gallant bravery, each striving to show himself the
less endamaged, and to make known that they were glad, they had now nothing
else to trust to, but their own virtue. True it is, that Amphialus was the
sooner up; but Argalus had his sword out the sooner: and then fell they to the
cruellest combat, that any present eye had seen. Their swords first, like
Canons, battering down the walls of their armor, making breaches almost in
every place for troops of wounds to enter. Among the rest, Argalus gave a
great wound to Amphialus-his disarmed face; though part of the force of it
Amphialus warded upon his shield, and with-all (first casting his eye up to
Philocleas Window, as if he had fetched his courage thence) fcyning to entend
the same sort of blows, turned his sword, and with a mighty reuerfe, gave a
cruel wound to the right arm of Argalus, the unfaithful armor yielding to
the swoordes strong-guided sharpness. But though the blood accused the hurt
of Argalus, yet would he in no action of his confess it: but keeping himself
in a lower ward, stood watching with timely thrustes to repair his loss;
which quickly he did. For Amphialus (following his fawning fortune) laid on so
thick upon Argalus, that his shield had almost fallen peece-meale to the
earth, when Argalus coming in with his right foot, and something stowping to
come under his armor, thrust him into the belly daungerously, and mortally it
would have been, but that with the blow before, Amphialus had overthrown
himself so, as he fell side-warde down, and with falling saved himself from
ruin. The sword by that means slipping aside, and not pearcing more deeply,
Argalus secing him fall, threatening with voice and sword, bad him yield. But
he striving without answer to rise, Argalus struck with all his might upon
his head. But his hurt arm not able to master so sound a force, let the
swoorde fall so, as Amphialus, though astonished with the blow, could arise:
which Argalus considering, ran in to graspe with him, and so closed together;
falling so to the ground, now one getting above, and then the other; at
length, both weary of so unlovely embracements, with a dissenting consent gate
up, and went to their swords: but happened each of his enemies: where Argalus
finding his focs sword garnished in his blood, his heart raze with the same
swoorde to revenge it, and on that blade to allie their bloods together. But
his mind was evil wayted-on by his lamed force, so as he received still more
and more wounds, which made all his armor seem to blush, that it had
defended his master no better. But Amphialus perceiving it, and waying the
small hatefulness of their quarrel, with the worthiness of the Knight,
desired him to take pity of himself. But Argalus, the more repining, the more
he found himself in disaduauntage, filling his veins with spite in stead of
blood, and making courage arise against faintness, (like a Candle, which a
little before it goes out, gives then the greatest blaze) so did he unite all
his force, that casting away the little remnaunt of his shield, and taking his
swoorde in both hands, he stroke such a notable blow, that he cleft his
shield, armor, and arm almost to the bone.

But then Amphialus forgot all ceremonies, and with Parthenia, (who had that
night dreamed she saw her husband in such estate, as she then found him,
which made her make such haste thither) they both maruailed. But Parthenia
ran between them (fear of love making her forget the fear of Nature) and
then fell down at their feet, determining so to part them, till she could
get breathe to sigh out her doolefull speeches: and when her breath (which
running had spent, and dismayednesse made slow to return) had by sobbes
gotten into her; sorow-closed breast, for a while she could say nothing, but,
O wretched eyes of mine, O wailefull sight, O day of darkness: at length
turning her eyes (wherein sorrow swamme) to Amphialus, My Lord (said she) it
is said you love; in the power of that love, I beseech you to leave of this
combat, as even your heart may find comfort in his affection, even for her
sake, I crave it: or if you be mortally determined, be so pitiful unto me, as
first to kill me, that I may not see the death of Argalus. Amphialus was about
to have answered, when Argalus, vexed with his Fortune, but most vexed that
she should see him in that fortune, Ah Parthenia (said he) never till now
unwelcome unto me, do you come to get my life by request? And can not Argalus
live but by request? Is it a life? With that he went aside, for fear of
hurting her, and would have begun the combat afresh. But Amphialus not
only coniured by that which held the Monarchy of his mind, but even in his
noble heart melting with compassion at so passionate a sight, desired him to
withholde his hands, for that he should strike one, who sought his favor,
and would not make resistaunce. A notable examble of the wonderful effects
of Virtue, where the conqueror, sought for friendship of the conquered, and
the conquered would not pardon the conqueror: both indeed being of that
mind to love each other for accepting, but not for giving mercy, and neither
affected to ouer-liue a dishonor: so that Argalus not so much striving with
Amphialus (for if he had had him in the like sort, in like sort he would have
dealt with him) as laboring against his own power (which he chiefly despised)
set himself forward, stretching his strength to the uttermost. But the fire of
that strife, blown with his inward rage, boiled out his blood in such
abundance, that he was driven to rest him upon the pommel of his sword: and
then each thing beginning to turn round in the dance of Death before his
eyes, his sight both dazzled, and dimmed, till (thinking to sit down) he fell
in a sown. Parthenia, and Amphialus both hastily went unto him: Amphialus
took of his helmet, and Parthenia laid his head in her lap, tearing of her
linen sleeves and partlet, to serve about his wounds; to bind which, she took
of her hair-lace, and would have cut of her fair hair her self, but that the
squires and judges came in with fitter things for the purpose: while she
bewailed her self with so lamentable sweetness, as was enough to have taught
sorrow to the gladdest thoughts, and have engraued it in the minds of hardest
metal.

O Parthenia, no more Parthenia (said she) What art Argalus, Argalus, I will
follow thee, I will follow thee.

But with that Argalus came out of his sown, and and iron sleep did seek to
lock up) seeing her, in who^ (even dying) he lived, and him self seated in so
beloved a place, it seemed a little cheerful blood came up to his cheeks,
like a burning cole, almost dead, if some breath a little revive it: and
forcing up (the best he could) his feeble voice, My dear, my dear, my better
half (said he) I find I must now leave thee: and by that sweet hand, and
fair eyes of thine I swear, that Death bringes nothing with it to grieve me,
but that I must leave thee, and cannot remain to answer part of thy infinite
deserts, with being some comfort unto thee. But since so it pleases him, whose
wisdom and goodness guides all, put thy confidence in him, and one day we
shall blessedly meet again, never to depart: mean while live happily, dear
Parthenia, and I persuade my self, it will increase the blessedness of my
soul, so to see thee. Love well the remembrance of thy loving, and truly
loving, Argalus: and let not (with that word he sighed) this disgrace of mine,
make thee one day think, thou had an unworthy husband. They could scarcely
understand the last words: for Death began to seize him self of his heart,
neither could Parthenia make answer, so full was her breast of anguish. But
while the other sought to stanch his remediles wounds, she with her kisses made
him happy: for his last breath was delivered into her mouth.

Argalus was gone; till Amphialus (so moved with pittic of that sight, as that
he honored his adversaries death with tears) caused her (with the help of
her women that came with her) partly by force, to be conveyed into boat,
with the dead body of Argalus, from which she could not depart. And being come
of the other side, there she was received by Basilius him self, with all the
funeral pomp of military discipline, trayling all their Ensigns upon the
ground, making his warlike instruments sound doleful notes, and Basilius (with
comfort in his mouth, and woe in his face) sought to persuade some ease into
Parthenias mind: but all was as easefull to her, as the handling of sore
wounds: all the honor done, being to her but the triumph of her ruin, she
finding no comfort, but in desperate yielding to Sorrow: and rather determined
to hate her self, if ever she should find ease thereof. And well might she
hear as she past through the Campc, the great praises spoken of her husband,
which all were records of her loss. But the more excellent he was (being
indeed accounted second to none in all Greece) the more did the breath of
those praises, bear up the wings of Amphialus-his fame: to whom yet (such was
his case) that Trophe upon Trophe, still did but build up the monument of his
thraldom; he ever finding himself in such favor of Philoclea, that she was
most absent, when he was present with her; and ever sorriest, when he had best
success: which would have made him renounce all comfort, but that his mother,
with diversity of devises, kept up his heart.

But while he allayed thus his outward glory, with inward discomfort, he was
like to have been overtaken with a notable treason, the beginning whereof
(though merely ridiculous) had like to have brought forth unto him a weeping
effect.

CHAP. 13.
1 Dametas put in heart 2 to defy Clinias. 3 Clinias out of heart to see the
vie. 4 Dametas bravery, adoubements, and imprese. 5 Clinias drawn 6 to
answer him. 7 Their passions in coming to the field. 8 Their actions in it,
not so doubty, as their fortune doubtful. 9 Clinias yielding to triumphant
Dametas.

Basilius in this expedition, Dametas was one; whether to be present with him,
or absent from Miso: once, certain it was without any mind to make his sword
cursed by any widow. Now, being in the camp, while each talk seemed
injurious, which did not acknowledge some duty to the fame of Amphialus, it
fell out sometimes in communication, that as the speech of heaven does often
beget the mention of hell, so the admirable prowes of Amphialus (by a
contrary) brought forth the remembrance of the cowardice of Clinias: in so
much, as it grew almost to a proverb, As very a cowarde, as Clinias. Describing
him in such sort, that in the end, Dametas began to think with himself, that
if he made a challenge unto him, he would never answer it; and that then he
should greatly increase the favorable conceit of Basilius. This fancy of his
he uttered to a young Gentleman, that waited upon Philanax, in whose friendship
he had especial confidence, because he haunted his company, laughing often
merely at his speeches, and not a little extolling the goodly dotes of Mopsa.
The young Gentleman as glad, as if he had found a Hare sitting, egd him on,
breaking the matter with Philanax, and then (for fear the humor should quayle
in him) wrote a challenge him self for Dameatas, and brought it to him. But
when Dameatas read it, putting his head on his shoulder, and somewhat smiling;
he said, it was pretty indeed; but that it had not a lofty style enough: and
so would needs indite it in this sort.

O Clinias, thou Clinias, the wickedest worm that ever Damaetas, chief
governor of all the royal cattle, and also of Pamela (whom thy Master most
perniciously has, suggested out of my dominion) do desie thee, in a mortal
affray from the bodkin to the pike upwarde. Which if thou do presume to take
in hand, I will out of that superfluous body of thine make thy soul to be
euacuated.


Basilius (every one helping on, to ease his mind ouercharged with melancholy)
he went into the town according to the manner before time used, and in the
presence of Amphialus delivered this letter to Clinias; desiring to have an
answer, which might be fit for his reputation. Clinias opened it, and read it;
and in the reading, his blood not daring to be in so dangerous a place, went
out of his face, and hid it self more inwardly: and his very words (as if
they were afraid of blows) came very slowly out of his mouth: but, as well as
his painting breath would utter it, he bad him tell the lowte that fent him,
that he difdained to have any thing to do with him. But Amphialus perceauing
the matter, took him aside, and very earnestly dealt with him not to shame
himself; Amphialus not only desirous to bring it to pass to make some sport
to Philoclea, but not being able to persuade with him, Amphialus licenced the
Gentleman, telling him, by the next morning he should have answer.

Damaetas, who had fetched many a sowerbreathed sigh, for fear Clinias would
accept the challenge. But when he perceived by his trusty messenger, that this
delay was in effect a denial, there being no difpofitio^ in him to accept it;
then lo, Damaetas began to speak his loud voice, to look big, to march up and
down, and in his march to lift his legs higher the^ he was wont, swearing by no
mean deuotio^s, that the walls should not keep the coward from him, but he
would fetch him out of his connie-berrie: and then was hotter then ever to
provide himself of horse and armor, saying, he would go to the Island bravely
addoubed, and show himself to his charge Pamela. To this purpose many willing
hands were about him, letting him have reins, pettrell, with the rest of the
furniture, and very brave bases; but all coming from diverse houses, nether in
color or fashion, showing any kindred one with another; but that liked
Damaetas the better: for that he thought would argue, that he was master of
many brave furnitures. Then gave he order to a painter for his device; which
was, a plowe with the oxen lewfed from it, a sword with a great many arms and
legs cut of; and lastly a great army of pen and inke-hornes, and books.
Nether did he stick to tell the secret of his intent, which was, that he had
left of the plowe, to do such bloody deeds with his swoorde, as many
inkehornes and books should be employed about the historifying of them: and
being asked, why he fet no word unto it, he faid, that was indeed like the
painter, that says in his picture, Here is the dog, and here is the Hare: and
with that he laughed so perfectly, as was great consolation to the beholders.
Yet remembering, that Miso would not take it well at his return, if he forgot
his duty to her, he caused about in a border to be written: Miso mine own
pigsnie, thou shall hear news of Damaetas.



Thus all things being condignely ordered, with an ill favored impatiencie he
waited, until the next morning, that he might make a muster of him self in the
Island; often asking them that very diligently waited upon him, whether it were
not pity, that such a coward, as Clinias, should fet his runaway feet upon
the face of the earth?

But as he was by diverse principal young Gentlemen, Amphialus, who with humble
smiling reverence delivered a letter unto him from Clinias: whom Amphialus had
brought to this, first with persuasions (that for certain, if he did accept
the combat, Damaetas would never dare to appear, and that then the honor
should be his) but principally threatening him, that if he refused it, he would
turn him out of the town to be put to death for a traitor by Basilius: so as
the present fear (ever to a coward most terrible) of being turned out of the
town, made him, though full unwillingly, undertake the other fear, wherein he
had some show of hope, that Damaetas might hap either to be sick, or not to
have the courage to perform the matter. But when Damaetas heard the name of
Clinias, very aptly suspecting what the matter might be, he bad the page carry
back his letter, like a naughty boy as he was: for he was in no humor, he
told him, of reading letters. But Damaetas-his friend, first persuading him,
that for certain it was some submission, took upon him so much boldness, as
to open his letter, and to read it alowd in this sort.

FIlthy driuell, unworthy to have thy name set in any letter by a soldiers
hand written: could thy wretched heart think it was timorousness, that made
Clinias suspende a while his answer? No caitiffe, no: it was but as a Ram,
which goes back to return with the greater force. Know therefore that thou
shall no sooner appear (appear now if thou dare) I say thou shall no sooner
appear in the Island (O happy thou, if thou do not appear) but that I will
come upon thee withal my force; and cut thee in pieces (mark, what I say)
ioynte after ioynte, to the eternal terror of all presumptuous villaynes.
Therefore look what thou do: for I tell thee, horrible smarte, and pain
shall be thy lot, if thou will needs be so soolish (I having given thee no such
cause) as to meet with me.


These terrible words Clinias used, hoping they Dametas-his courage: and so
indeed they did, that he did groan to hear the thundering of those
threatenings. And when the Gentleman had ended the reading of them, Damaetas
told them, that in his opinion he thought his answer came too late, and that
therefore he might very well go, and disarme him self: especially considering
the other had in courteous manner warned him not to come. But they (having him
now on horseback) led him unto the ferrie, and so into the Island; the clashing
of his own armor striking miserable sear into him, and in his mind thinking
great unkindness in his friend, that he had brought him to a matter so
contrary to his complexion. There stayed he but a little (the Gentlemen that
came with him teaching him how to vfe his sword and lance, while he cast his
eye about, to see which way he might run away, cursing all Islands in being
evil situated) when nias with a brave found of trumpets landed at the other
end: who came all the way debating with himself, what he had deserved of
Amphialus to drive him to those inconveniences. Sometimes his wit made him
bethink him self what was best to be done; but fear did so corrupt his
wit, that whatsoruer he thought was best, he still found danger therein;
fearfulness (contrary to all other vices) making him think the better of
another, the worse he found him self; rather imagining in him self, what
words would use (if he were overcome) to get his life of Damaetas, then how to
overcome, where of he could think with no patience. But oftentimes looking to
the Earth pitifully complaining, that a man of such sufficiency (as he
thought him self) should in his best years be swallowed up by so base an
element. Fame he would have prayed, but he had not heart enough to have
confidence in prayer; the glittering of the armor, and sounding of the
trumpets giving such an affault to the weake-breache of his false senses, that
he grew from the degree of fear to an amazement, not almost to know what he
did; till two judges (chosen for the purpose) making the trumpets cease, and
taking the oath of those champions, that they came without guile or witchcraft,
set them at wonted distaunce; one from the other.

Damaetas-his horse (used to such causes) when he thought lest of the matter,
started out so lustely, that Damaetas was iogde back with head, and body, and
pulling withal his bridle-hande, the horse (that was tender of mouth) made
half a stop, and fell to bounding, so that Damaetas threw away his lance, and
with both his hands held by the pummell: the horse, half running, half
leaping, till he met with Clinias: who fearing he should miss his rest, had
put his staff therein before he began his careere: neither would he then have
begun, but that at the trumpets warning, one (that stood behind) struck on his
horse, who running swiftly, the wind took such hold of his staff, that it
crossed quite over his breast, and in that sort gave a slat baston ado to
Damaetas: who, half out of his sadle, went near to his old occupation of
digging the earth, but with the creste of his helmet. Clinias when he was paste
him, not knowing what he had done, but fearing lest Damaetas were at his back,
turned with a wide turn; and seeing him on the ground, he thought then was his
time, or never, to tread him under his horses feet; and withal (if he could)
hurt him with his lance, which had not broken, the encounter was so easy. But
putting forth his horse, what with the falling of the staff to low before the
legs of the horse, and the coming upon Damaetas, who was then sera^bling up,
the horse fell over and over, and lay upon Clinias. Which Damaetas (who was
gotten up) perceiving, drew out his sword, prying which way he might best come
to kill Clinias behind. But the horse that lay upon him, kept such a pawing with
his feet, that Damaetas durft not approach, but very leysurely; so as the horse
(being lusty) gat up, and withal fell to strike, and leap, that Damaetas
sTarted up a good way, and gave Clinias time to rise, but so bruised in body,
and broken in heart, that he meant to yield himself to mercy: and with that
intent drew out his sword, entending when he came nearer, to present the
pommell of it to Damaetas. But Damaetas, when he fawe him come with his sword
drawn, nothing conceiving of any such intent, went back as fast as his back
and heels would lead him. But as Clinias found that, he began to think a
possibility in the victory, and therefore followed with the cruel haste of a
prevailing cowarde; laying upon Damaetas, who did nothing but cry out to him
to hold his hand: sometimes that he was dead, sometimes that he would
complain to Basilius: but still bare the blows ungratefully, going back,
till at length he came into the water with one of his feet.

But then a new fear of drowning took him, so that lighted on him) nor to
yield (because of the cruel threatenings of Clinias) fear being come to the
extremity, fell to a madness of despair: so that (winking as hard as ever he
could) he began to deal some blows, and his arm (being used to a flaile in
his youth) laid the^ on so thick, that Clinias now began with lamentable eyes
to see his own blood come out in many places, and before he had lost half an
ounce, finding in himself that he fainted, cried out aloud to Damaetas, that
he yielded. Throw away thy sword then (said Damaetas) and I will save thee; but
still laying on, as fast as he could. Clinias straight obeyed, and humbly
craved mercy, telling him, his sword was gone. Then Damaetas first opened his
eyes, and seeing him indeed unweaponed, made him stand a good way of from it;
and then willed him to lie down upon the earth as flat as he could. Clinias
obeyed; and Damaetas (who never could think himself safe, till Clinias were
dead) began to think with himself, that if he struck at him with his sword,
if he did not kill him at the first blow, that then Clinias might hap to
arise, and revenge himself. Therefore he thought best to kneel down upon
him, and with a great whittle he had (having difarmed his head) to cut his
throat, which he had used so with Calves, as he had no small dexterity in it.
But while he sought for his Knife, which under his armor he could not well
find out, and that Clinias lay with so sheepish a countenance, as if he would
have been glad to have his throat cut for fear of more pain, the Judges
came in, and took Damaetas from off him, telling him he did against the law
of Arms, having promised life, if he threw away his sword. Damaetas was
loath to consent, till they swear, they would not uffer him to fight any more,
when he was up: and then more forced, then persuaded, he let him rise, crowing
over him, and warning him to take heed how he dealt any more with any that
came of his fathers kindred. But hus this combat of cowardes being finished,
Damaetas was with much mirth and melody received into the camp as victorious,
never a Page there failing to wait upon this Triumph.

CHAP. 14.
1 Clinias a sly traitor. 2 Artesia his malcontent accomplice. 3 Zelmanes
passions. 4 Her practice with Artesia. 5 The complot revealed to the disliking
sisters, 6 bewrayed by

BUT Clinias, though he wanted Clinias (finding himself the scorning-stocke of
every company) fell with repining to hate the cause thereof; and hate in a
cowards heart, could set it self no other limits, but death. Which purpose was
well egged on by representing unto himself, what danger he lately was in;
which still kept no less ougly figure in his mind, then when it was present:
and quickly (even in his dissembling countenance) might be discerned a
concealed grudge. For though he forced in himself a far more diligent
officiousness toward Amphialus, then ever before, yet a leering eye upon the
one side at him, a countenance still framed to smiling before him (how little
cause soever there was of smiling) and grombling behind him, at any of his
commandments, with an uncertain manner of behavior: his words coming out,
though full of flattery, yet slowly, and hoarcely pronounced, might well have
blazed, what arms his salfe heart bare. But despised, because of his
cowardlinesse, and not marked, because despised, he had the freer scope of
practice. Which he did the more desperately enter into, because the daily
dangers Amphialus did submit himself into, made Clinias assuredly look for
his overthrow, and for his own consequently, if he did not redeem his former
treason to Basilius, with a more treasonable falsehood toward Amphialus.

Amphialus, whom either like fear, tediousnes of the siege, or disco^tentment
of some unsatisfied ambition would make apt to dig in the fame mine that he
did: and some already of welthy weary folks, and unconstant youths (who had not
found such sudden success as they had promised themselves) he had made stoop
to the lure. But of none he made so good account as of Artesia, sister to the
late slain Ismenus, and the chief of six maids, who had trained out the
Princesses to their banquet of misery: so much did the sharpnes of her wit
counteruaile (as he thought) any other defects of her sex: for she had
undertaken that dangerous practice by the persuasion of Cecropia; who assured
her that the two princesses should be made away; and the^ Amphialus would marry
her: which he was the apter to believe, by some false persuasio^ her glass had
given her of her own incomparable excellencies, and by the great favor she knew
he bare to her brother Ismenus, which (like a self-flattering woman) she
conceived was done for her sake. But when she had achieved her attempt, and
that she found the Princesses were so far from their intended death, as that
the one of them was like to be her fouereigne, and that neither her service had
won of Amphialus much more the^ ordinary favor, nor her ouer-large offering
herself to a mind otherwise owed, had bteined a loked-for acceptatio^; disdain
to be disdained spite of a frustrate hope, and perchauce unquenched lustgrowne
rage, made her unquiet thoughts find no othor rest, but malice: which was
increased by the death of her brother, who^ she judged neither succored
against philanax, nor reue^ged upon Philanax. But all these coals were well
blowneby the company she especially kept with Zelmane, all this time of her
imprisonment. For finding her presence vncheerfull to the mourning Philoclea,
and contemned of the hie-harted Pamela, she spent her time most with Zelmane.
Who though at the first hardly broking the instrument of their milerie,
learning cunning the school of adversity, in time framed her self to yield
her acceptable intertainment.

For Zelmane, when she had by that unexpected mischief Philocleas misfortune,
and not able to succor her, she was a great while, before the greatness of her
heart could descend to sorrow, but rather rose boiling up in spite and disdain;
Reason hardly making Courage believe, that it was distressed: but as if the
walls would be afraid of her, so would her looks shoot out threatening upon
them. But the fetters of servitude (growing heavier with wearing) made her
feel her case, and the little prevailing of repining: and then griese gat
seat in her softened mind, making sweetness of passed comfortes by due title
claim tears of present discomfort: and since her fortune made her able to
help as little as any body, yet to be able to wail as much as any body;
solitary Sorrow, with a continual circle in her self, going out at her own
mouth, to come in again at her own ears. Then was the name of Philoclea
graued in the glass windows, and by the foolish idolatry of affection, no
sooner written, the^adored; and no sooner adored, the^ pitied: all the wo^ted
praises (she was wont to give unto her) being now but figures of rethorick to
amplify the injuries of misfortune; against which being alone, she would
often make inuectiue declamations, methodized only by raging sorrow.

Artesia did insinuat herself into her acquaintance, she gave the government of
her courage to wit, and was content to familiarize herself with her: so much
the rather, as that she perceived in her certain flawes of il-co^cealed
discontentme^t. Insomuch that when Zelmane would sweete^ her mouth with the
praises of the sisters, especially setting forth their noble gratefulnes, in
never forgetting wel-intended services, and inuoking the justice of the gods,
not to suffer such treasures to be wrongfully hidden, and sometimes with a kind
unkindness, charging Artesia that she had been abused to abuse so worthy persons:
Artesia (though falsely) would protest, that she had bin beguiled in it, never
meaning other matter the^ recreatio^: and yet withal (by alleging how
ungratefully she was dealt with) it was easy to be seen, it was the
vnrewarding, and not the evil employing her service, which grieved her. But
Zelmane (using her own bias to bowl near the mistress of her own thoughts)
was content to lend her belief, and withal, to magnify her desert, if
willingly she would deliver, whom unwillingly she had imprisoned; leaving no
argument which might tickle ambition, or flatter revenge. So that Artesia,
(pusht forward by Clinias, and drawn onward by Zelmane) bound her self to
that practice; wherein Zelmane for her part) desired no more, but to have armor
and weapons brought into her chamber, not doubting, therewith to perfourm any
thing, how impossible soever, which longing Love can persuade, and invincible
valor dare promise.

But Clinias (whose faith could never comprehend Artesia, while he by
corruption had drawn the guard of one gate, to open it (when he would appoint
the time) to the enemy: that she should impoyson Amphialus, which she might
the easier do, because she her self had used to make the broaths, when
Amphialus (either wearied or wounded) did use such diet. And al things already
were ready to be put in execution, when they thought best to break the matter
with the two excellent sisters, not doubting of their consent in a thing so
behoofefull to themselves: their reasons being, that the Princesses knowing
their service, might be sure to preserve them from the fury of the entering
soldiers: whereof Clinias (even so) could scarcely be sufficiently certain:
and withal, making them privy to their action, to bind them afterward to
acknowledge gratefulnes toward them. They went therefore at one time, when they
knew them to be alone, Clinias to Philoclea, and Artesia to Pamela: and
Clinias, with no few words, did set forth what an exploite was intended for
her service. But Philoclea (in whose clear mind treason could find no hiding
place) told him, that she would be glad, if he could persuade her cousin to
deliver her, and that she would never forgett his service therein: but that she
desired him to lay down any such way of mischief, for that (for her part) she
would rather yield to perpetual imprisonment, then consent to the destroying
her cousin, who (she knew) loved her, though wronged her. This unlooked for
answer amazed Clinias, so that he had no other remedy in his mind, but to
kneel down to Philoclea, and beseech her to keep it secret, considering that
the intention was for her service: and vowing (since she misliked it) to
proceed no further therein. She comforted him with promise of silence, which she
performed.

Artesia having in like fort opened this device to Pamela, she (in whose mind
Virtue governed with the scepter of Knowledge) hating so horrible a wickedness,
and straight judging what was sit to do, Wicked woman (said she) whose
vnrepenting heart can find no way to amend treason, but by treason: now the
time is come, that thy wicked wiles have caught thy self in thine own net:
as for me, let the Gods dispose of me as shall please them; but sure it shall
be no such way, nor way-leader, by which I will come to liberty. This she
spoke something with a louder voice then she was wont to use, so as Cecropia
heard the noise; who was (sooner then Artesia imagined she would) come up, to
bring Pamela to a window, where she might see a notable skirmish happened in
the Camp, as she thought, among themselves: and being a cunning fisher in
troubled waters, straight found by their voices and gestures, there was some
matter of consequence, which she desired Pamela to tell her. Ask of her (said
Pamela) and learn to know, that who do falshoode to their superiors, teach
falshoode to their inferiors. More she would not say. But Cecropia taking away
the each-way guilty Artesia, with fear of torture, gat of her the whole
practice: so as Zelmane was the more closely imprisoned, and Clinias (with the
rest of his corrupted mates, according to their merits) executed: For, as for
Artesia, she was but locked up in her chamber, Amphialus not consenting (for the
love he bare Ismenus) that further punishment should be laid upon her.

CHAP. 15.
1 Proud Anaxius breaks through the besiegers. 2 His welcome by Amphialus. 3
The Music, 5 The sallie of Anaxius and his on the Basilians, 6 backed by
Amphialus, 7 beaten back by three unknowen Knights. 8 The Retraite of both
sides.

Anaxius, nephewe to the Giant Euardes whom Pyrocles slew: A Prince, of body
excedingly strong; in arms so skillful and fortunate, as no man was thought to
excel him; of courage that knew not how to fear: parts worthy praise, if
they had not been guyded by pride, and followed by injustice. For, by a strange
composition of mind, there was no man more tenderly sensible in any thing
offered to himself, which in the farthest-fette construction, might be wrefted
to the name of wrong; no man, that in his own actions could worse distinguish
between Valor and Violence: So proud, as he could not abstain from a
Thraso-like boasting, and yet (so unlucky a lodging his virtues had gotten) he
would never boast more then he would accomplish: falsely accounting an
unflexible anger, a courageous constancy: esteeming fear, and astonishment,
righter causes of admiration, then Love and Honor. This man had four sundry
times fought with Amphialus, but Mars had been so impartial an arbiter, that
neither side gate advantage of the other. But in the end it happened, that
Anaxius found Amphialus (unknown) in a great danger, and saved his life:
whereupon (loving his own benefit) began to favor him, so much the more, as,
thinking so well of himself, he could not choose but like him, whom he found
a match for himself: which at last grew to as much friendship toward him,
as could by a proud heart be conceived. So as in this travail (seeking
Pyrocles to be revenged of his uncles death) hearing of this siege, never
taking pains to examine the quarrel (like a man whose will was his God, and
his hand his law) taking with him his two brothers (men accounted little
inferior to him self in martial matters) and two hundred chosen horsemen
(with whom he thought him self able to conquer the world) yet commanding
the rest of his forces to follow, he him self upon such an unexpected
suddainenesse entered in upon the back of Basilius, that many with great
unkindness took their death, not knowing why, nor how they were so murdered.
There, if ever, did he make known the wonderfulnes of his force. But the
valiant, and faithful Philanax, with well governed speed made such head against
him, as would have showed, how soon Courage falls in the ditch which has not
the eye of wisdom. But that Amphialus at the same time issued out, and winning
with an abondaunce of courage one of the sconses, which Basilius had builded,
made way for his friend Anaxius with great loss of both sides, but especially
of the Basilians; such notable monuments had those two swords especially left
of their Masters redoubted worthynesse.

There with the respect fit to his estate, the honor Amphialus enforce him
self) as much as in a besieged town he could) to make Anaxius know, that his
succor was not so needful, as his presence grateful. For causing the
streates and houses of the town to witness his welcome (making both soldiers
and Magistrates in their countenaunces to show their gladness of him) he led
him to his mother, whom he besought to entertain him with no less love and
kindness, then as one, who once had saved her sons life, and now came to
save both life and honor. Tush (said Anaxius, speaking alowde, looking upon
his brothers) I am only sorry there are not half a dozen Kings more about
you: that what Anaxius can do, might be the better manifested. His brothers
smiled, as though he had ouer-modestly spoken far underneath the pitch of his
power. Then was he disarmed at the earnest request of Amphialus: for Anaxius
boiled with desire to issue out upon the enemies, persuading himself, that
the Sun should not be set, before he had overthrown them. And having
reposed himself, Amphialus asked him, whether he would visit the young
Princesses. But Anaxius whispered him in the care: In truth (said he) dear
friend Amphialus, though I am none of those, that love to speak of
themselves, I never came yet in companic of Ladies, but that they fell in love
with me. And I that in my heart scorn them as a peevish paltrie sex, not
worthy to communicate with my virtues, would not do you the wrong: since (as
I hear) you do debase your self so much as to affect them. The courteous
Amphialus could have been angry with him for those words; but knowing his
humor, suffered him to dance to his own music: and gave himself to
entertain both him and his brothers, with as cheerful a manner, as could
issue from a mind whom unlucky love had filled with melancholy. For to
Anaxius he yielded the direction of all. He gave the watchwoorde, and if any
grace were granted, the means were to be made to Anaxius. And that night when
supper was ended, wherein Amphialus would needs himself wait upon him, he
caused in Boats upon the Lake an excellent music to be ordered: which,
though Anaxius might conceive was for his honor, yet indeed he was but the
Bricke-wall to convey it to the ears of the beloved philoclea.

The music was of Cornets, whereof one aunswering

The Fire to sce my woes for anger burns:
The Air in rain for my affliction weepeth:
The Sea to ebb for grief his flowing turns:
The Earth with pity dull his center turns.
Fame is with wonder blazed:
Time runs away for sorrow:
Place stands still amazed,
To see my night of ils, which has no morrow.
Alas all only she no pity takes
To know my miseries, but chaste and cruel
My fall her glory makes;
Yet still her eyes give to my flames their fuel.
Fire, burn me quite till sense of burning leave me:
Air, let me draw thy breath no more in anguish:
Sea, drowned in thee of tedious life bereave me:
Earth, take this earth wherein my spirits languish.
Fame, say I was not borne:
Time,have my dying hour:
Place, see my grave vptorne:
Fire, air, sea, earth, same, time, place show your power.
Alas from all their help I am exiled:
For hers am I, and Death fears her displeasure.
Fie Death thou art beguiled:
Though I be hers, she sets by me no treasure.
Anaxius (seeming a weary before it was ended) told Amphialus, that for his
part he liked no music, but the neighing of horses, the sound of trumpets, and
the cries of yielding persons: and therefore desired, that the next morning
they should issue upon the same place, where they had entered that day, not
doubting to make them quickly a weary of being the besiegers of Anaxius.
Amphialus, who had no whitlesse courage, though nothing blown up with pride,
willingly condiscended: and so the next morning (giving false alarm to the
other side of the camp) Amphialus at Anaxius earnest request, staying within
the town to see it guarded, Anaxius and his brethern, Lycurgus, and Zoilus,
sallied out with the best chosen men.But Basilius (having been the last day
somewhat unprovided) now had better fortified the overthrown sconse; and so
well had prepared every thing for defense, that it was impossible for any
valor from within, to prevail. Yet things were performed by Anaxius beyond
the credit of the credulous. For thrice (valiantly followed by his brothers)
did he set up his banner upon the rampire of the enemy: though thrice again
by the multitude, and advantage of the place, but especially by the coming of
three valiant Knights, he were driven down again. Numbers there were that
day, whose deaths and overthrows were executed by the well known sword of
Anaxius: but the rest, by the length of time and injury of Historians, have
been wrapped up in dark forgetfulness: only Tressennius is spoken of,
because when all abandoned the place, he only made head to Anaxius; till
having lost one of his legs, yet not lost the heart of fighting, Lycurgus
(second brother to Anaxius); cruelly murdered him; Anaxius him self
disdayning any further to deal with him.

But so far had Anaxius at the third time prevailed, Basilians began to let
their courage descend to their feet, Basilius, and philanax in vain
striving, with reverence of authority to bridle the flight of astonishment,
and to teach Fear discretion: so that Amphialus, seeing Victory show such a
flattering countenance to him, came out with all his force; hoping that day to
end the siege.

But that fancy altered quickly by the sudden coming to the other side of
three Knights, whereof the one was in white armor, the other in green, and
the third by his black armor, and device straight known to be the notable
Knight, who the first day had given Fortune so short a stop with his notable
deeds, and fighting hand to hand with the deemed invincible Amphialus. For the
very cowardes no sooner saw him, but as borrowing some of his spirit, they went
like young Eagles to the pray, under the wing of their damme. For the three
adventurers, not content to keep them from their rampire, leapt down among
them, and entered into a brave combat with the three valiant brothers. But to
whether side Fortune would have been partial, could not be determined. For
the Basilians, lightened with the beams of these strangers valor; followed
so thick, that the Amphialians were glad with some haste to retire to the
walls ward: though Anaxius neither reason, fear, nor example, could make
him assuage the fury of his fight: until one of the Basilians (unworthy to
have his name registered, since he did it cowardly, sidewarde, when he least
looked that way) almost cut off one of his legs: so as he fell down,
blaspheming heaven, that all the influences thereof had power to overthrow him;
and there death would have seized of his proud heart, but that Amphialus took
in hand the black knight, while some of his soldiers conveyed away Anaxius,
so requiting life for life unto him.

Amphialus, the fight began to enter into a new fit of heat: when Basilius
(that thought enough to be done for that day) caused retraite to be founded;
fearing least his men following ouer-hastily, might be the loss of those
excellent Knights whom he desired to know. The Knights as soon as they heard
the retraite (though they were eagerly set, knowing that courage without
discipline is nearer beastliness then manhood) drew back their swords, though
hungry of more blood: especially the black Knight, who, knowing Amphialus,
could not refrain to tell him, that this was the second time he escaped out of
his hands, but that he would shortly bring him a bill of all the former
accounts. Amphialus seeing it fit to retire also (most of his people being hurt,
both in bodies and hearts) withdrew himself, with so well seated a resolution,
that it was as far from anger, as from dismayednesse; answering no other to
the black Knights threats, but that when he brought him his account, he should
find a good play master.

CHAP. 16.
1 The unknown Knights will not be known. 2 The Knight of the Tombs show, 3
and challenge accepted by Amphialus. 4 Their fight, with the death of the
Tombe-knight. 5 Who that Knight was. 6 The dying speeches, and 7 the lamentable
funerals.

THe fight being ceased, and each side withdrawn within their strengthes,
Basilius sent Philanax to entertain the strange Knights, and to bring them
unto him, that he might acknowledge what honor was due to their virtue.
unwelcome courtesy is a degree of injury) he suffered them to retire themselves
to a tent of their own without the camp, where they kept themselves secret:
Philanax himself being called away to another strange Knight; strange not
only by the vnlookedfornesse of his coming, but by the strange manner of his
coming.

Impresa, he had a beautiful child, but having two heads; whereon the one
showed, that it was already dead: the other alive, but in that case,
necessarily looking for death. The word was, No way to be rid from death, but
by death.

Basilius, to demand leave to send in a damosel into the town, to call out
Amphialus, according as before time some others had done. no body else in that
camp was known willing to do) the damsel went in, and having with tears
sobbed out a brave challenge to Amphialus, from the Knight of the Tomb,
Amphialus, honorably enterteining the gentlewoman, and desiring to know the
Knights name (which the doolefull Gentlewoman would not discover) accepted the
challenge, only desiring the Gentlewoman to say thus much to the strange
Knight, from him; that if his mind were like to his title, there were more
cause of affinity, then enmity between them. And therefore presently
(according as he was wont) as soon as he perceived the Knight of the Tomb,
with his Damsels and Judge, was come into the Island, he also went over in
accustomed manner: and yet for the courtesy of his nature, desired to speak
with him.

But the Knight of the Tomb, with silence and drawing his horse back, showed
no will to hear, nor speak: but with Lance on thigh, made him know, it was
fit for him to go to the other code of the Career, whence waiting the starte
of the unknown Knight, he likewife made his sources claim haste of his horse.
But when his stasse was in his rest, coming down to meet with the Knight,
now very near him, he perceived the Knight had mist his rest: wherefore the
courteous Amphialus would not let his Lance descend, but with a gallant
grace, ran over the head of his there-in friended enemic: and having stopped
his horse, and with the turning of him, blessed his sight with the Window
where he thought Philoclea might stand, he perceived the Knight had lighted
from his horse, and thrown away his staff, angry with his misfortune, as
having mist his rest, and drawn his sword to make that supply his fellows
fault. He also lighted, and drew his sword, esteeming victory by advantage,
rather robbed then purchased: and so the other coming eagerly toward him, he
with his shield out, and sword aloft, with more bravery then anger, drew unto
him; and straight made their swords speak for them a pretie-while with equal
fearcenes. But Amphialus (to whom the carth brought forth few matches) having
both much more skill to choose the places, and more force to work upon the
chosen, had already made many windows in his armor for death to come in at;
when (the noblenes of his nature abhorring to make the punishment ouergoe the
offense) he stepped a little back, and withal, Sir Knight (said he) you may
easily see, that it pleases God to favor my cause; employ your valor against
them that wish you hurt: for my part, I have not deserved hate of you. Thou
lie false traitor, said the other, with an angry, but weak voice. But
Amphialus, in whom abused kindness became spiteful rage, Ah barbarous wretch
(said he) only courageous in discourtesie; thou shall soon see whether thy
toonge has betrayed thy heart, or no: and with that, redoubling his blows,
gave him, a great wound upon his neck, and closing with him overthrew him,
and with the fall thrust him mortally into the body: and with that went to
pull off his helmet, with intention to make him give himself the lie, for
having so said, or to cut off his head.

face (soon known by the badge of excellency) witnessed that it was
Parthenia, the unfortunately virtuous wife of Argalus: her beauty then even
in despite of the passed sorrow, or coming death, assuring all beholders,
that it was nothing short of perfection. For her exceeding fair eyes, having
with continual weeping gotten a little redness about them; her roundy sweetly
swelling lips a little trembling, as though they kissed their neighbor
death; in her cheeks the whiteness striving by little and little to get upon
the rosinesse of them; her neck, a neck indeed of Alablaster, displaying the
wound, which with most dainty blood labored to drown his own beauties; so
as here was a river of purest read, there an Island of perfittest white, each
giving luster to the other; with the sweet countenance (God-knowes) full of an
unaffected languishing: though these things to a grossly conceauing sense might
seem disgraces; yet indeed were they but apparailing beauty in a new fashion,
which all looked-vpon thorough the spectacles of pity, did eue^ increase the
lines of her natural fairenes, so as Amphialus was astonished with grief,
compassion, and shame, detesting his fortune, that made him unfortunate in
victory.

Therefore, putting off his headpeece and gauntlet; kneeling Parthenia (who had
inward messingers of the desired deaths approach) looking upon him, and
straight turning away her feeble sight, as from a delightlesse object, drawing
out her words, which her breath (loath to part from so sweet a body) did
faintly deliver, Sir (said she) I pray you (if prayers have place in enemies)
to let my maids take my body untouched by you: the only honor I now desire
by your means, is, that I have no honor of you. Argalus made no such bargain
with you, that the hands which killed him, should help me. I have of them
(and I do not only pardon you, but thank you for it) the service which I
desired. There rests nothing now, but that I go live with him, since whose
death I have done nothing but die. Then pawsing, and a little fainting, and
again coming to herself, O sweet life, welcome (said she) now feel I the
bands untied of the cruel death, which so long has held me. And O life, O
death, answer for me, that my thoughts have not so much as in a dream tasted
any comfort; since they were deprived of Argalus. I come, my Argalus, I come:
And, O God hide my faults in thy mercies, and grant (as I feel thou do
grant) that in thy eternal love, we may love each other eternally. And this O
Lord: But there Atropos cut off her sentence: for with that, casting up both
eyes and hands to the skies, the noble soul departed (one might well assure
himself) to heaven, which left the body in so heavenly a demeanure.

Amphialus (with a heart oppressed with grief, because of her request)
withdrewe himself, but the Judges, as full of pity, had been all this while
disarming her, and her gentlewomen with lamentable cries, laboring to stanch
the remediles wounds: and a while she was dead before they perceived it; death
being able to divide the soul, but not the beauty from that body. But when the
infallible tokens of death assured the^ of their loss, of the women would have
killed her self, but that the squire of Amphialus perceauing it, by force held
her. Others that had as strong passions, though weaker resolution, fell to cast
dust upon their heads, to tear their garments: all falling upon, and crying
upon their sweet mistres; as if their cries could persuade the soul to leave
the celestial happiness, to come again into the elements of sorrow: one time
calling to remembrance her virtue, chastnes, sweetness, goodness to them: another
time accursing themselucs, that they had obeyed her, they having been deceived
by her words, who assured the^, that it was revealed unto her, that she should
have her hearts desire in the battle against Amphialus, which they wrongly
understood. Then kissing her cold hands and feet, weary of the world, since
she was gone, who was their world. The very heavens seemed, with a cloudie
countenance, to loure at the loss, and Fame it self (though by nature glad to
tell rare accidents, yet) could not choose but deliver it in lamentable
accents, and in such sort went it quickly all over the Camp: and, as if the
air had been infected with sorrow, no heart was so hard, but was subject to that
contagion; the rarenes of theaccident, matching together (the rarely matched
together) pity with admiration. Basilius himself came forth, and brought
forth the fair Gynecia with him, who was gone into the camp under color of
vifiting her husband, and hearing of her daughters: but indeed Zelmane was the
Saint, to which her pilgrimage was intended: cursing, envying, blessing, and
in her heart kissing the walls which imprisoned her. But both they with
Philanax, and the rest of the principal Nobility, went out, to make Honor
triumph over Death, conueying that excellent body (whereto Basilius himself
would needs bend his shoulder) to a church a mile from the camp, where the
valiant Argalus lay intombed; recommending to that sepulcher, the blessed
relics of faithful and virtuous Love: giving order for the making of marble
images, to represent them, and each way enriching the tomb. Upon which,
Basilius himself caused this Epitaphe to be written.

(...) CHAP. 17.
1 The remorse of Amphialus for his last deed, and lasting destiny. 2 His
reverent respect in love. 3 His mothers ghosty Counsel to a rape.

THen with cyes full of tears, and Amphialus: Who (poor Gentleman) had
therefore greater portion of woe, then any of them. For that courteous heart,
which would have grieved but to have heard the like adventure, was rent with
remembering himself to be the author: so that his wisdom could not so far
temper his passion, but that he tookehis sword, counted the best in the world
(which with much blood he had once conquered of a mighty Giant) and brake it
into many pieces (which afterward he had good cause to repent) saying, that
neither it was worthy to serve the nobleexercise of chivalry, nor any other
worthy to feel that sword, which had stricken so excellent a Lady: and
withal, banishing all cheerfulnes of his countenance, he returned home. Where
he gate him to his bed, notso much to rest his restles mind, as to avoid all
company, the sight whereof was tedious unto him. And then melancholy(only
rich in unfortunate remembrances) brought before him all the mishappes, with
which his life had wrestled: taking this, not only as a confirming of the
former, but a presage of following misery; and to his heart (alredie overcome
by sorrowfulnes) even trifling misfortunes came, to fill up the roll of a
grieved memory, laboring only his wits to pearce farther and farther into
his own wretchedness. So all that night (in despite of darkness) he held his
eyes open; and the morning when the light began to restore to each body his
color, then with curtains barde he himself from the enjoying of it: neither
willing to feel the comfort of the day, nor the ease of the night: until his
mother (who never knew what love meant, but only to himward) came to his bed
side, and beginning with loving earnestnes to lay a kind chiding upon him,
because he would suffer the weakness of sorrow, to conquer the strength of
his virtues; he did with a broaken peecemeale speech (as if the tempest of
passion unorderly blewe out his words) remember the mishappes of his youth, the
evils he had been cause of, his rebelling with Shame, and that shame increased
with shameful accidents, the deaths of Philoxenus and Parthenia, wherein he
found himself hated of the euer-ruling powers, but especially (and so
espeically, as the rest seemed nothing when he came to that) his fatal love to
Philoclea: to whom he had so governed himself, as one that could neither
conquer, nor yield; being of the one side a slave, and of the other a iaylor:
and with all, almost vpbrayding unto his mother the little success of her
large hoping promises, he in effect finding Philoclea nothing mollified, and
now himself so cast down, as he thought him unworthy of better.

fault in him self, and therefore there ought to be little or no grief in
him; when she came to the head of the fore, indeed seeing that she could not
patch up her former promises (he taking a desperate deafness to all delaying
hopes) she confessed plainly, that she could prevail nothing: but the fault was
his own, who had marred the young Girl by seeking to have that by prayer,
which he should have taken by authority. That as it were an absurd cunning to
make hie ladders to go in a plain way; so was it an untimely and foolish
flattery, there to beseech, where one might command, puffing the^ up by being
besought, with such a selfe-pride of superiority, that it was not (forsooth)
to be held out, but by a denial. O God (said Amphialus) how well I thought my
fortune would bring forth this end of your labors? assure your self, mother, I
will sooner pull out these eyes then they shall look upon the heavenly
Philoclea, but as upon a heaven, whence they have their light, and to which
they are subject, if they will power down any influe^ces of comfort, O happy I:
but if by the sacrifice of a faithful heart, they will not be called unto me,
let me languish, and wither with languishing, and grieve with withering, but
never so much as repine with never so much grieuing. Mother, o Mother, lust may
well be a tyrant, but trueloue where it is indeed, it is a servant. Accursed
more" then I am, may I be, if ever I did approach her, but that I friezed as
much in a fearful reverence, as I burned in a vehement desire. Did ever man's
eye look thorough love upon the majesty of virtue, shining through beauty, but
that he became (as it well became him) a captive? and is it the style of a
captive, to write, Our will and pleasure?

Tush, tush son (said Cecropia) if you say you love, but withal you fear;
you fear lest you should offend; offend? and how know you, that you should
offend? because she does deny: deny? Now by my truth; if your sadness would
let me laugh, I could laugh heartily, to see that yet you are ignorant, that No,
is no negative in a woman's mouth. My son, beleaue me, a woman, speaking of
women: a lovers modesty among us is much more praised, then liked: or if we
like it, so well we like it, that for marring of his modesty, he shall never
proceed further. Each virtue has his time: if you command your soldier to
march foremost, and he for courtesy put others before him, would you praise his
modesty? love is your General: he bids you dare: and will Amphialus be a
dastard? Let examples serve: do you think Theseus should ever have gotten
Antiope with sighing, and crossing his arms? he ravished her, and ravished her
that was an Amazon, and therefore had gotten a habit of stournes above the
nature of a woman; but having ravished her, he got a child of her. And I say no
more, but that (they say) is not gotten without consent of both sides. Iole had
her own father killed by Hercules, and her self ravished, by force ravished,
and yet ere long this ravished, and vnfathered Lady could sportfully put on the
Lions skin upon her own fair shoulders, and play with the clubbe with her
own delicate hands: so easily had she pardoned the rauisher, that she could
not but delight in those weapons of rauishing. But above all, mark Helen
daughter to Jupiter, who could never brook her manerly-wooing Menelaus, but
disdained his humblenes, and lothed his softnes. But so well she could like the
force of enforcing Paris, that for him she could abide what might be abidden.
But what? Menelaus takes heart; he recouers her by force; by force carries her
home; by force inioies her; and she, who could never like him for
feruiceablenesse, ever after loved him for violence. For what can be more
agreeable, then upon force to lay the fault of desire, and in one instant to
join a dear delight with a just excuse or rather the true cause is (pardon me
o woman-kinde for revealing to mine own son the truth of this mystery) we
think there wants fire, where we find no sparkles at lest of fury. Truly I
hue known a great Lady, long sought by most great, most wise, most beautiful,
most valiant persons; never won; because they did ouer-suspiciously solicit
her: the same Lady brought under by an other, inferior to all them in all
those qualities, only because he could use that imperious maisterfulnesse,
which nature gives to men above women. For indeed (son, I confess unto you)
in our very creation we are servants: and who prayseth his servant shall
never be well obeyed: but as a ready horse straight yeeldes, when he finds one
that will have him yield; the same falls to bounds when he feels a fearful
horseman. Awake thy spirits (good Amphialus) and assure thy self, that though
she refuses, she refuses but to endeere the obtaining. If she weep, and
chide, and protest, before it be gotten, she can but weep, and chide, and
protest, when it is gotten. Think, she would not strive, but that she means
to try thy force: and my Amphialus, know thy self a man, and show thy self a
man: and (believe me upon my word) a woman is a woman.

CHAP. 18.
1 The forsaken Knights defy. 2 Amphialus answer. 4 The one 3 and others
armor and imprese. 5 The issue of their quarrel. 6 Their heroical monomachy
on horse, 7 and foot. 8 Their breathings, 9 and reencounters. 10 Amphialus
rescued by Anaxius brethren, the Black Knight by the green and white. 11 The
supply of both sides to carry away the breathles Knights. 12 The Blackknights
grieves.

AMphialus was about to answer her, when a Gentleman of his made him
understand, that there was a messengercome, who had brought a letter unto him
from out of the camp: whom he presently calling for, took, opened, and read
the letter, importing this.

Amphialus of Arcadia, the forsaken Knight wishes health, and courage, that by
my hand thou may receive punishment for thy treason, according to thine own
offer, which wickedly occasioned, thou haste proudly begun, and accursedly
mainteyned. I will presently (if thy mind faint thee not for his own
guiltiness) meet thee in thy Island, in such order, as has by the former
been used: or if thou likest not the time, place, or weapon, I am ready to
take thine own reasonable choice in any of them; so as thou do perform the
substance. Make me such answer as may show that thou have some taste of
honor: and so I leave thee, to live till I meetc thee.


Amphialus read it, and with a deep sigh (according to the humor of inward
affection) seemed even to condemn him self, as though indeed his reproaches
were true. But howsoever the dulnes of Melancholy would have languishingly
yielded thereunto, his Courage (unused to such injuries) desired help of Anger
to make him this answer.

FOrsaken Knight, though your namelesse challenge might


This being written, and delivered, the messenger Patrons. Which Amphialus
accepted, and withal shaking of (with resolution) his mothers importunate
disswasions, he furnished him self for the fight: but not in his wonted
furniture. For now (as if he would turn his inside outward) he would needs
appear all in black; his decking both for him self, and horse, being cut out
into the fashion of very rags: yet all so dainty, joined together with
precious stones, as it was a brave raggedness, and a rich poverty: and so
cunningly had a workman followed his humor in his armor, that he had given
it a rustie show, and yet so, as any man might perceive was by art, and not
negligence; carrying at one instant a disgraced handsomnesse, and a new oldnes.
In his shield he bare for his devise, a Night, by an excellently painter, with
a Sun with a shadow, and upon the shadow with a speech signifying, that it
only was barrd from inioying that, whereof it had his life: or, From whose I
am bannished. In his creste he carried Philocleas knives, the only token of her
forward favor.

Anaxius; where he found the forsaken Knight, attired in his own liuerie, as
black, as forrowe it self could see it self in the blackest glass: his
ornaments of the same hew, but formed in the figure of Ravens, which seemed to
gape for carrion: only his raynes were snakes, which finely wrapping
themselves one within the other, their heads came together to the cheeks and
bosses of the bit, where they might seem to bite at the horse, and the horse
(as he champte the bit) to bite at them; and that the white foame was engendered
by the poisonous fury of the combatt. His Impresa was a Catoblepta which so
long lies dead, as the Moon (whereto it has so natural a sympathy) wants
her light. The word signified that The Moon wanted not the light, but the
poor beast wanted the Moons light. He had in his headpiece, a whippe, to
witness a selfe-punishing repentance. Their very horses were cole-blacke too,
not having so much as one star to give light to their night of blackenesse:
so as one would have thought they had been the two sons of Sorrow, and were
come thither to fight for their birthright in that sorry inheritance.

Which aliance of passions so moved Amphialus (already Amphialus) upon that
quarrel: for I confess the same too: but it proceeds from their own beauty,
to enforce Love to offer this force. I maintain then (said the forsaken
Knight) that thou art not worthy so to love. And that confess I too (said
Amphialus) since the world is not so richly blessed, as to bring forth any
thing worthy thereof. But no more unworthy then any other, since in none can be
a more worthy love. Yes, more unworthy then my self (said the forsaken Knight)
for though I deserve contempt, thou deseruest both contempt, and hatred.

But Amphialus by that thinking (though wrongly, seed: for it yielded him his
own with such increase, that though Reason and Amazement go rarely together,
yet the most reasonable eyes that saw it, found reason to be amazed at the
fury of their combat. Never game of death better played; never fury set it self
forth in greater bravery. The courteous Vulcan, when he wrought at his now
more courteous wives request, AEnaes an armor, made not his hammer beget a
greater sound; then the swords of those noble Knights did; they needed no
fire to their forge; for they made the fire to shine at the meeting of their
swords, and armours; each side fetching new spirit from the castle window, and
careful of keeping their sight, it was a matter of greater consideration in
their combat, then either the advantage of Sun or wind: which Sun and wind
(if the astonished eyes of the beholders were not by the astonishment deceived)
did both stand still to be beholders of this rare match. For neither could
their amazed eyes discern motion in the Sun, and no breath of wind stirred,
as if either for fear it would not come among such blows, or with delight had
his eyes so busy, as it had forgot to open his mouth. This fight being the
more cruel, since both Love and Hatred conspired to sharpen their humors,
that hard it was to say, whether Love with one trumpet, or Hatred with another,
gave the louder alarm to their courages. Spite, rage, disdain, shame,
revenge, came waighting upon Hatred: of the other side came with loue-longing
Desire, both invincible Hope, and fearelesse Despair, with riuallike
Jealousy, which (although brought up within doors in the school of Cupid)
would show themselves no less forward, then the other dustie band of Mars,
to make themselves notable in the notablenes of this combat. Of either side
Confidence, unacquainted with Loss, but assured trust to overcome, and good
experience how to overcome: now seconding their terrible blows with cunning
laboring the horses, to win ground of the enemy; now unlooked for parting
one from the other, to win advantage by an aduantageous return. But force
against force, skill against skill, so enterchangeably encountered, that it was
not easy to determine, whether enterprising, or preventing came former: both,
sometimes at one instant, doing and suffering wrong, and choler no less rising
of the doing, then of the suffering. But as the fire, the more fuel is put to
it, the more hungry still it is to devour more: so the more they struck, the
more vnsatissied they were with striking. Their very armor by piecemeale fell
away from them: and yet their flesh abode the wounds constantly, as though it
were less sensible of smarte, then the senseless armor: their blood in most
places stayning the black, as if it would give a more lively color of
mourning, then black can do. And so a long space they fought, while neither
virtue, nor fortune seemed partial of either side: which so tormented the
unquiet heart of Amphialus, that he resolved to see a quick end: and therefore
with the violence of courage, adding strength to his blow, he struck in such
wise upon the side of the others head, that his remembrance left that battered
lodging: so as he was quite from himself, casting his arms abroad, and ready
to fall down; his sword likewise went out of his hand; but that being fast by
a chain to his arm, he could not loose. And Amphialus used the favor of
occasion, redoubling his blows: but the horse (weary to be beaten, as well as
the master) carried his master away, till he came unto himself: But then who
could have seen him, might well have diserned shame in his cheeks, and revenge
in his eyes: so as setting his teeth together with rage, he came running upon
Amphialus, reaching out his arm, which had gathered up the sword, meaning with
that blow to have cleaued Amphialus in two. But Amphialus seeing the blow
coming, shunned it with nimble turning his horse aside; wherewith the forsaken
Knight ouer-strake himself so, as almost he came down with his own strength.
But the more hungry he was of his purpose, the more he was bard the food of
it: disdaining the resistance, both of force, and fortune, he returned upon the
spur again, and ran with such violence upon Amphialus, that his horse with
the force of the shocke rose up before, almost ouerturned: which Amphialus
perceauing, with rain and spur put forth his horse; and withal gave a
mighty blow in the descent of his horse, upon the shoulder of the forsaken
Knight; from whence sliding, it fell upon the neck of his horse, so as horse
and man fell to the ground: but he was scarce down before he was up on his
feet again, with brave gesture showing rising of courage, in the falling of
fortune.

Amphialus excused himself, for having (against his will) killed his horse.
Excuse thy self for viler faults (answered the forsaken Knight) and use this
poor advantage the best thou can; for thou shall quickly find thou have
need of more. Thy folly (said Amphialus) shall not make me forget my self:
and therewith (trotting a little aside) alighted from his horse, because he
would not have fortune come to claim any part of the victory. Which courteous
act would have mollified the noble heart of the forsaken Knight, if any other
had done it, besides the Iaylor of his mistres: but that was a sufficient
deseazaunce for the firmest bond of good nature; and therefore he was no sooner
alighted, but that he ran unto him, re-entring into as cruel a fight, as eye
did ever see, or thought could reasonably imagine; far beyond the reach of
weak words to be able to express it. For what they had done on horseback, was
but as a morsel to keep their stomakes in appetite, in comparison of that,
which now (being themselves) they did. Nor ever glutton by the change of
dainty diet could be brought to fetch feeding (when he might have been
satisfied before) with more earnestnes, then those (by the change of their
manner of fight) fell clean to a new fight, though any elfe would have thought
they had had their fill already. Amphialus being the taller man, for the most
part stood with his right leg before; his shield at the uttermost length of
his arm; his sword hie, but with the point toward his enemy. But when he
struck, which came so thick, as if every blow would strive to be foremost, his
arm seemed still a postillion of death. The forsaken Knight showed with like
skill, unlike gesture, keeping himself in continual motion, proportioning the
distance between the^ to any thing that Amphialus attempted his eye guided his
foot, and his foot conueighed his hand; and since nature had made him
something the lower of the two, he made art follow, and not strive with nature:
Shunning rather the^ warding his blows; like a cunning mastiffe, who knows
the sharpnes of the horn, and strength of the Bull; fights low to get his
proper advantage; answering mightines with nimblencs, and yet at times
employing his wonderful force, wherein he was second to none. In sum, the
blows were strong, the thrusts thick, and the auoydings cunning. But the
forsaken Knight (that thought it a degree of being conquered to belong in
conquering) struck so mighty a blow, that he made Amphialus put knee to the
ground, without any humblenes. But when he felt himself stricken down, and saw
himself stricken down by his rival, then shame seemed one arm, and disdain
another; fury in his eyes, and revenge in his heart; skill and force gave place,
and they took the place of skill and force: with so unweariable a manner, that
the forsaken Knight was also driven to leave the stream of cunning, and give
himself wholly to be guided by the storm of fury: there being in both
(because hate would not suffer admiration) extreme disdain to find
themselves so matched.

Amphialus to himself) am I Amphialus, before whom so many monsters and Giants
have fallen dead, when I only sought causeless adventures? and can one Knight
now withstand me in the presence of Philoclea, and fighting for Philoclea? or
since I lost my liberty, have I lost my courage? have I gotten the heart of a
slave, as well as the fortune? If an army were against me in the fight of
Philoclea, could it resist me? O beast, one man resistes thee; thy ryuall
resists thee: or am I indeed Amphialus? have not passions killed him, and
wretched I (I know not how) succeeded into his place? Of the other side the
forsaken Knight with no less spite, fell out with himself; Have thou broken
(said he to himself) the co^ma^deme^t of thy only Princess to come now into
her presence, and in her presence to prove thy self a coward? Does Asta and
Egypt set up Trophes unto thee, to be matched here by a traitor? O noble
Barsanes, how shamed will thy soul be, that he that slew thee, should be
resisted by this one man? O incomparable Pyrocles, more grieved will thou be
with thy friends shame, the^ with thine own imprisonment, when thou shall know
how little I have been able to do for the delivery of thee, and those
heavenly Princesses. Am I worthy to be friend to the most valourous Prince
that ever was entitled valourous, and show my self so weak a wretch? No,
shamed Musidorus, worthy for nothing, but to keep sheep, get thee a
sheephooke again, since thou can use a sword no better.

Thus at times did they, now with one thought, then own nature he would go
downward. The forsaken Knight had the more wounds, but Amphialus had the
soarer; which the other (watchinge time and place) had co^ningly given unto
him. Who ever saw a well-mand Galley fight with a tall ship, might make unto
himself some kind of comparison of the difference of these two Knights; a
better couple then which, the world could not brag of. Amphials seemed to
excel in strength, the forsaken Knight in nimblenes; and yet did the ones
strength excel in nimblenes, and the others nimblenes excel in strength: but
now, strength and nimblenes were both gone, and excess of courage only
maintained the fight. Three times had Amphialus with his mighty blows driven
the forsaken Knight to go staggering backwarde, but every one of those times he
requited pain with smarte, and shame with repulse. And now, whether he had
cause, or that overmuch confidence (an ouer-forward scholar of unconquered
Courage) made him think he had cause, he began to persuade himself he had the
advantage of the combat, though the advantage he took himself to have, was
only that he should be the later to die: which hopes, Hate (as vnsecrete as
Love) could not conceal, but drawing himself a little back from him, brake out
in these manner of words.

Amphialus (said the forsaken knight) this third time thou shall not escape me,
but thy death shall satisfy thy ininry, and my malice; and pay for the cruelty
thou shewedst in killing the noble Argalus, and the fair Parthenia. In troth
(said Amphialus) thou art the best knight that ever I fought withal, which
would make me willing to grant thee thy life, if thy wit were as good as thy
courage; that (besides other follies) layest that to my charge, which most
against my will was committed. But whether my death be in thy power, or no, let
this tell thee; And upon the word waited a blow, which parted his shield into
two pieces; and despising the weak resistance of his alredie broken armor, made
a great breach into his heart side, as if he would make a passage for his love
to get out at.

But pain rather seemed to increase life, then to weaken Amphialus upon the
belly, so horrible a wou^d, that his guts came out withal. Which Amphialus
perceauing (fearing death, only because it should come with overthrow) he
seemed to conjure all his strength for one moments service; and so, lifting up
his sword with both hands, hit the forsaken knight upon the head, a blow,
wherewith his sword brake. But (as if it would do a notable service before it
died) it prevailed so, even in the instant of breaking, that the forsaken
Knight fell to the ground, quite for that instant forgetting both love and
hatred: and Amphialus (finding him self also in such weakness, as he looked for
speedy death) glad of the victory, though little hoping to enjoy it, pulled up
his visar, meaning with his dagger to give him death; but in stead of death, he
gave him life: for, the air so revived his spirits, that coming to himself,
and seeing his present danger, with a life conquering death, he took Amphialus
by the thigh, and together rose himself, and ouerturned him. But Amphialus
scrambled up again, both now so weak indeed, as their motions rather seemed
the afterdrops to a storm, then any matter of great fury.

But Amphialus might repent himself of his wilful breaking his good sword:
for, the forsaken Knight (having with the extremity of iustly-conceiued hate,
and the vnpitifulnes of his own neere-threatning death, blotted out all
complements of courtesy) set fly at him so cruelly, that though the blows
were weak, yet weakness upon a weakened subject, proved such strength, that
Amphialus having attempted in vain, once or twice to close with him, receiving
wound upon wound, sent his whole burden to strike the earth with falling, since
he could strike his foe no better in standing: giving no other tokens of
himself, then as of a man even ready to take his oath to be Deaths true
servant.

Anaxius perceived, not recking law of arms, nor use of chiualric, they flew
in to defend their friend, or revenge their loss of him. But they were
forthwith encountered with the two brave companions of the forsaken Knight;
whereof the one being all in green, both armor and furniture, it seemed a
pleasant garden, wherein grew orange trees, which with their golden fruits,
cunningly beaten in, and embrodered, greatly enriched the eyepleasing color of
green. In his shield was a sheep, feeding in a pleasant field, with this word,
Without fear, or cnuie. And therefore was called the Knight of the sheep. The
other Knight was all in milk white, his attiring else, all cut in stars,
which made of cloth of silver, and silver spangles, each way seemed to cast
many aspects. His device was the very Pole it self, about which many stars
stirring, but the place it self left void. The word was, The best place yet
reserved. But these four Knights, inheriting the hate of their friends, began
a fierce combat: the forsaken Knight himself not able to help his side, but
was driven to sit him down, with the extreme faintness of his more and more
fainting body. But those valiant couples seeking honor by dishonouring, and to
build safety upon ruin, gave new appetites, to the almost glutted eyes of the
beholders: and now blood began to put sweat from the full possession of their
outsides, no advantage being yet to be seen; only the Knight of the sheep
seeming most deliver, and affecting most all that viewed him, when a company of
soldiers sent by Cecropia, came out in boats to the Island: and all came
running to the destruction of the three Knights, where of the one was utterly
unable to defend himself.

But then did the other two Knights show their Philanax (who watchfully
attended such traitorous practices) sent likewise over, both by boat and
swimming, so choice a number as did put most of the other to the sword. Only
the two Brothers, with some of the brauest of them, carrying away the body of
Amphialus, which they would rather have died, then hauc left behind them.

So was the forsaken Knight (laid upon clokes) Basilius himself conquering
his earnest desire to see him, with fear to displease him, who had fought so
notably in his quarrel. But Fame set the honor upon his back, which he would
not suffer to shine in his face: no man's mouth being barrein of praises to the
noble Knight, that had bettered the most esteemed Knight in the world: every
body praying for his life, and thinking that therein they prayed for
themselves. But he him self, when by the diligent care of friends, and well
applied cunning of furgeons, he came to renew again the league between his
mind and body, then felt he to a fresh war with his own thoughts,
wrongfully condemning his manhood, laying cowardice to him self, whom the
impudentest backbiter would not so have wro^ged. For his courage (used to use
victory as an inheritance) could brook no resistance at any time: but now
that he had promised him self, not only the conquest of him, but the scaling
of the walls, and delivery of Pamela, though he had done beyond at others
expectation, yet so short was he of his own; that he hated to look upon the
Sun, that had seen him do so weakly: and so much abhorred all visitation or
honor, whereof he thought him self unworthy, that he besought his two noble
friends to carry him away to a castle not far of, where he might cure his
wounds, and never be known till he made success excuse this (as he thought)
want in him. They lovingly obeyed him, leaving Basilius and all the camp very
sorry for the parting of these three unknown Knights, in whose prowess they
had reposed greatest trust of victory.

CHAP. 19.
1 The state of the leaguer, and beleaguered. 2 The agonies of Amphialus. 3 The
wit-craft of Cecropia, to threaten Basilius with the three Ladies death. 4
Kalanders compassion. 5 Philanax-his counter-counsell. 6 The breaking up the
siege.

But they being gone, Basilius and Philanax gave good order to the strengthening
of the siege, fortifying themselves, so as they feared no more any such
sudden onset, as that of Anaxius. Anaxius hurt, but especially of Amphialus-
his) gave themselves only to diligent watch and ward, making no sallies out,
but committing the principal trust to Zoilus and Lycurgus. For Anaxius was yet
forced to keep his chamber. And as for Amphialus, his body had such wounds,
and gave such wounds to his mind, as easily it could not be determined,
whether death or he made the greater have one to the other: for when the
diligent care of cunning surgeons, had brought life to the possession of his
own right, Sorrow and Shame (like two corrupted servant) came waiting of
it, persuading nothing but the giving over of it self to destruction. They
laid before his eyes his present case, painting every piece of it in most
ougly colors: they showed him his love wrapped in despair, his fame blotted
by overthrow; so that if before he languished, because he could not obtain his
desiring, he now lamented because he durst not desire the obtaining. Recreant
Amphialus, (would he say to him self) how dare thou entitle thy self the
lover of Philoclea, that have neither showed thy self a faithful coward, nor a
valiant rebel, but both rebellious and cowardly, which no law ca^ quite, nor
grace have pity of? Alas Life, what little pleasure thou do me, to give me
nothing but sense of reproach, and exercise of ruin? I would sweet Philoclea,
I had died, before thy eyes had seen my weakness: and then perchance with some
sigh thou would have confessed, thou had lost a worthy servant. But now,
caitife that I am, what ever I have done, serves but to build up my riuals
glory. To these speeches he would couple such gestures of vexation, and would
fortify the gestures with such effects of fury, as sometimes ofiring to tear
up his wounds, sometimes to refuse the sustenance of meat, and counsel of
physicians, that his perplexed mother was driven to make him by force to be
tended, with extreme corsey to her self, and annoiance to him: till in the
end he was contented to promise her, he would attempt no violence upon himself,
upon condition he might be troubled by no body, but only his Physicians: his
melancholy detesting all company, so as not the very surgeons nor servants
durst speak unto him in doing him service: only he had prayed his mother, as
she tendered his life, she would procure him grace; and that without that, she
would never come at him more.

but as she from time to time should instruct them: she (for her self) being
resolved, now she had the government of al things in her own hands, to
satisfy her sons love, by their yielding, or satisfy her own revenge in
their punishment. Yet first, because he should be the freer from outward force,
she sent a messenger to the camp, to denounce unto Basilius, that if he did
not presently raise his siege, she would cause the heads of the three Ladies,
prisoners, to be cut of before his eyes. And to make him the more fear a
present performance, she caused his two daughters and Zelmane to be led unto
the walls, where she had made a scaffold, easy to be seen by Basilius: and
there caused the^ to be kept, as ready for the slaghter, til answer came from
Basilius. A sight full of pity it was, to see those three (all excelling in
all those excellencies, wherewith Nature can beautify any body: Pamela giving
sweetness to majesty, Philoclea enriching noblenes with humblenes, Zelmane
setting in womanly beauty manlike valor) to be thus subjected to the basest
injury of unjust Fortune. One might see in Pamela a willingness to die, rather
then to have life at others discretion, though sometimes a princely disdain
would sparkle out of her Princely eyes, that it should be in others power to
force her to die. In Philoclea a pretty fear came up, to endamaske her rosy
cheeks: but it was such a fear, as rather seemed a kindly child to her
innate humblenes, then any other dismaiednes: or if she were dismayed, it was
more for Zelmane, then for her self; or if more for her self, it was because
Zelmane should loose her. As for Zelmane, as she went with her hands bound (for
they durst not adventure on her well known valor, especially among people
which percha^ce might be moved by such a spectacle to some reuolte) she was the
true image of ouermaistred courage, and of spite, that sees no remedy. For her
breast swelled withll, the blood burst out at her nose, and she looked paler
then accustomed, with her eyes cast on the ground, with such a grace, as if she
were fallen out with the heavens, for suffering such an injury. The lookers on
were so moved withal, as they misliked what themselves did, and yet still did
what themselves misliked. For some, glad to rid themselves of the dangerous
annoyaunce of this siege, some willing to shorten the way to Amphialus-his
succession (whereon they were dependents) some, and the greatest some, doing
because others did, and suffering because none durst begin to hinder, did in
this sort set their hands to this (in their own conscience) wicked enterprise.

Basilius, and that this pitiful preparation was a sufficient letter of
credit for him to believe it, he called unto him his chief cou^celors: among
which, those he chiefly trusted were Philanax and Kalander (lately come to the
camp at Basilius commandment, and in him self weary of his solitary life,
wanting his sons presence, and never having heard him his beloved guestes since
they parted from him). Now in this doubt what he should do, he willed Kalander
to give him his advise: who spoke much to this purpose. You command me Sir
(said he) to speak, rather because you will keep your wonted grave, and noble
manner, to do nothing of importance without counsel, then that in this cause
(which indeed has but one way) your mind needs to have any counsel: so as my
speech shall rather be to confirm what you have already determined, the^ to
argue against any possibility of other determination. For what sophistical
scholar can find any question in this, whether you will have your
incomparable daughters live, or dye? whether since you be here to cause their
deliverance, you will make your being here the cause of their destruction? for
nothing can be more insensible, then to think what one does, and to forget the
end why it is done. Do therefore as I am sure you mean to do, remove the
siege, and after seek by practice, or other gentle means, to recover that
which by force you cannot: and thereof is indeed (when it please you) more
counsel to be taken. Once, in extremities the winning of time is the purchase
of life, and worse by no means then their deaths ca^ befall unto you. A man
might use more words, if it were to any purpose to guild gold, or that I had
any cause to doubt of your mind: But you are wise, and are a father. He said no
more, for he durst not attempt to persuade the marrying of his daughter to
Amphialus, but left that to bring in at another consultation. But Basilius made
sign to Philanax, who standing a while in a maze as inwardly perplexed, at
last thus delivered his opinion.

If ever I could wish my faith untried, and my counsel Kalander had come in
good time when you first took arms, before al your subjects gate notice of
your intention, before so much blood was spent, and before they were driven to
seek this shift for their last remedy. But if now, this force you away, why did
you take arms? since you might be sure when ever they were in extremity they
would have recourse to this threatening? and for a wise man to take in hand that
which his enemy may with a word overthrow, has in my conceit great
incongruity, and as great not to forethink what his enemy in reason will do.
But they threaten they will kill your daughters. What if they promised you if you
removed your siege, they would honorably send home your daughters? would you be
angled by their promises? truly no more ought you be terrified by their
threatenings. For yet of the two, promise binds faith more then threatening. But
indeed a Prince of judgment ought not to consider what his enemies promise,
or threaten, but what the promisers and threatners in reason will do: and the
nearest conjecture thereunto, is what is best for their own behoof to do. They
threate^ if you remove not, they will kill your daughters, and if you do remove,
what surety have you, but that they will kill the^, since if the purpose be to
cut off al impediments of Amphialus-his ambition, the same cause will continue
when you are away; and so much the more encoraged, as the revenging power is
absent, and they have the more opportunity to draw their factious friends about
them: but if it be for their security only, the same cause will bring forth the
same effect: and for their security they will preserve the^. But it may be said,
no man knows what desperate folks will do: it is true, and as true that no
reason nor policy can prevent what desperate folks will do: and therefore they
are among those dangers, which wisdom is not to recke^. Only let it suffice to
take away their despair, which may be by granting pardon for what is past; so
as the Ladies may be freely delivered. And let them that are your subjects,
trust you that are their Prince: do not you subject your self to trust them,
who are so untrusty as to be manifest traitors. For if they find you so
base-minded, as by their theatning to remove your force, what indignity is it,
that they would not bring you unto, still by the same threatening since then if
Love stir them, love will keep them from murdering what they love; and if
Ambition provoke them, ambitious they will be, when you are away, as well as
while you are here: take not away your force, which bars not the one, and
bridels the other. For as for their shows and words they are but to fear
babes, not worthy once to move a worthy man's conceit; which must still consider
what in reason they are like to do. Their despair I grant you shall do well to
prevent, which as it is the last of all resolutions, so no man falls into it,
while so good a way as you may offer, is open unto the^. In su^, you are a
Prince, and a father of people, who ought with the eye of wisdom, the hand of
fortitude, and the heart of justice to set down all private conceits, in
comparison of what for the public is profitable.

He would have proceeded on, when Gynecia came running Pamela, but mad for
Zelmane; and falling at Basilius feet, besought him to make no delay: using
such gestures of co^passio^ instead of stopped words, that Basilius, otherwise
enough tender minded, easily granted to raise the siege, which he saw dangerous
to his daughters: but indeed more careful for Zelmane, by whose besieged
person, the poor old man was straightly besieged: so as to rid him of the
famine of his mind, he went in speed away; discharging his soldiers: only
leaving the authority, as before, in Philanax his hands, he himself went with
Gynecia to a strong Castle of his, where he took counsel how first to deliver
Zelmane, whom he called the poor stranger, as though only Law of hospitality
moved him; and for that purpose sent diverse messengers to traffic with
Cecropia.

CHAP. 20.
2 The sweet resistance of the true sisters 1 to the sower assaults of their
false Aunt. The whipping of 3 Philoclea 5 and Pamela 4 The patience of both 6
and passions for their lovers.

CEcropia by this means rid of the present danger of the siege (desiring
Zoilus and Lycurgus to take the care, till their brother recovered, of
reuictualling, and furnishing the City, both with men and what else wanted,
against any new occasion should urge them, she her self disdaining to harken
to Basilius, without he would grant his daughter in marriage to her son, which
by no means he would be brought unto) bent all the sharpness of her malicious
wit, how to bring a comfortable grant to her son; whereupon she well found
no less then his life depended. Therefore for a while she attempted all means
of eloquent praying, and flattering persuasion, mingling sometimes gifts,
sometimes threatenings, as she had cause to hope, that either open force, or
undermining, would best winn the castle of their Resolution. And ever as much
as she did to Philoclea, so much did she to Pamela, though in manner sometimes
differing, as she found sit to level at the ones noble height, and the others
sweet lowliness. For though she knew her sons harre had wholly given it
self to Philoclea, yet seeing the equal gifts in Pamela, she hoped, a fair
grant would recover the sorrow of a fair refusal: cruelly ente^ding the
present impoysoning the one, as soon as the others affection were purchased.

Pamelaes determination was built upon so brae a Rock, that no shot of hers
could reach unto it: and Philoclea (though humbly seated) was so environed with
sweet rivers of clear virtue, as could neither be battred, nor undermined:
her witty persuasions had wife answers; her eloquence recompensed with
sweetness; her threatenings repelled with disdain in the one, and patience in
the other; her gifts either not accepted, or accepted to obey, but not to bind.
So as Cecropia in nature violent; cruel, because ambitious; hateful, for old
rooted grudge to their mother, and now spiteful because she could not prevail
with girls, as she counted them; lastly, drawn on by her love to her son, and
held up by a tyrannical authority, forthwith followed the byas of her own
crooked disposition, and doubling and redoubling her threatenings, fell to
confirm some of her threatened effects: first withdrawing al comfort, both of
servants, and service from the^. But that those excellent Ladies had been used
unto, cue^ at home, and the^ found in the^ selves how much good the hardness of
educatio^ does to the resistra^ce of misery. Then dishonorably using them both
in diet, and lodging, by a contempt to pull down their thoughts to yielding.
But as before, the consideration of a prison had disgraced ornaments, so now
the same consideration made the^ attend al diseasefulnes. Then still, as she
found those not prevail, would she go forward with giving them terrors,
sometimes with noices of horror, sometimes with sudden frightings in the
night, when the solitary darkness thereof might easier astonish the disarmed
senses. But to all Virtue, and Love resisted, strengthened one by the other,
when each found it self ouer-vehemently assaulted. Cecropia still sweetning
her fiercenesses with fair promises, if they would promise fair; that feeling
evil, and seeing a way far better, their minds might the sooner be mollified.
But they that could not taste her behavior, when it was pleasing, indeed could
worse now, when they had lost al taste by her injuries.

Philoclea, as if so many Kites should come about a white Dove, and matching
violent gestures with mischievous threatenings, she having a rod in her hand
(like a fury that should carry wood to the burning of Dienas temple) fell to
scourge that most beautiful body: Love in vain holding the shield of Beauty
against her blind cruelty. The Son drew clouds up to hide his face from so
pitiful a sight; and the very stone walls did yield drops of sweat for agony
of such a mischief: each senseless thing had sense of pity; only they that
had sense, were senseles. Virtue rarely found her worldly weakness more, then
by the oppression of that day: and weeping Cupid told his weeping mother, that
he was sorry he was not deaf, as well as blind, that he might never know so
lamentable a work. Phloclea, with tearefull eyes, and sobbing breast (as soon
as her wearines rather then compassion, gave her respite) kneeled dowe to
Cercropia, and making pity in her face honorable, and torment delightful,
besought her, since she hated her (for what cause she took God to witness she
knew not) that she would at once take away her life, and not please her self
with the tormenting of a poor Gentlewoman. If (said she) the common course of
Humanity cannot move you, nor the having me in your own walls, cannot claim
pity: nor womanly mercy, nor near alliance, nor remembrance (how miserable
so ever now) that I am a Princes daughter; yet let the love (you have often
told me) your son bears me, so much procure, that for his sake, one death
may be thought enough for me; I have not lived so many years, but that one
death may be able to conclude them: neither have my faults, I hope, been so
many, but that one death may satisfy them. It is no great suite to an enemy,
when but death is desired. I crave but that, and as for the granting your
request, know for certain you lose your labors, being every day further
of-minded from beco^ming his wife, who uses me like a slave. But that in stead
of getting grace renewed again Cecropias fury: so that (excellent creature) she
was newly again tormented by those hellish monsters: Cecropia using no other
words, but that she was a proud and ungrateful wench: and that she would teach
her to know her own good, since of her self she would not conceive it.

Zelmane was a prisoner: who therein only was short of the bottom of misery,
that she knew not how unworthily her Angel, by these devils was abused: but
wanted (God wot) no stings of grief, when those words did but strike upon her
heart, that Philoclea was a captive, and she not able to succor her. For well
she knew the confidence Philoclea had in her, and well she knew, Philoclea had
cause to have confidence: and all trodden under foot by the wheel of Philoclea
rested her mind, that she knew she should die beloved of Zelmane, and should
die, rather then be false to Zelmane. And so this most dainty Nimphe, easing
the pain of her mind with thinking of another pain; and almost forgetting
the pain of her body, through the pain of her mind, she wasted, even
longing for the conclusion of her tedious tragedy.

But for a while she was unvisited, Cecropia employing Pamela, her heart
growing not only to desire the fruit of punishing them, but even to delight
in the punishing them. But if ever the beams of perfection shined through the
clouds of affliction, if ever Virtue took a body to show his (else
vnconceaueable) beauty, it was in Pamela. For when Reason taught her there was
no resistance, (for to just resistance first her heart was inclined) then with
so heavenly a quietness, and so graceful a calmenes, did she suffer the diverse
kinds of torments they used to her, that while they vexed her fair body, it
seemed, that she rather directed, then obeyed the vexation. And when Cecropia
ended, and asked whether her heart would yield: she a little smiled, but such
a smiling as showed no love, and yet could not but be lovely. And then,
Beastly woman (said she) follow on, do what thou will, and can upon me:
for I know thy power is not unlimited. Thou may well wrack this sillic
body, but me thou can never overthrow. For my part, I will not do thee the
pleasure to desire death of thee: but assure thy self, both my life and death,
shall triumph with honor, laying shame upon thy derestable tyranny.

And so, in effect, conquering their doing with her Cecropia tried as many
sorts of pains, as might rather vex them, then spoil them (for that she
would not do while she were in any hope to win either of them for her son)
Pamela remained almost as much content with trial in her self, what virtue
could do, as grieved with the misery wherein she found her self plunged:
only sometimes her thoughts softened in her, when with open wings they flew to
Musidorus. Musidorus would take this her misery; and she, that wept not for
her self, wept yet Musidorus-his tears, which he would weep for her. For
gentle Love did easlier yield to lamentation, then the constancy of virtue
would else admit. Then would she remember the case wherein she had left her
poor shepherd, and she that wished death for her self, feared death for him;
and she that condemned in her self the feeblenes of sorrow, yet thought it
great reason to be sorry for his sorrow: and she that long had prayed for the
virtuous joining themselves together, now thinking to die herself, heartily
prayed, that long time their fortunes might be separated. Live long my
Musidorus (would she say) and let my name live in thy mouth; in thy heart my
memory. Live long, that thou may love long the chaste love of thy dead
Pamela. Then would she wish to her self, that no other woman might ever
possess his heart: and yet scarcely the wish was made a wish, when her self
would find fault with it, as being too unjust, that so excellent a man should
be banished from the comfort of life. Then would she fortify her resolution,
with bethinking the worste, taking the counsel of virtue, and comfort of love.

CHAP. 21.
1 Cecropias indurate tyrannies. 2 Her devise with the death of one to threaten
another. 3 Philoclea threatened, persisteth. 4 The execution done in sight of
Philoclea and Zelmane. 5 Philocleas sorrow for her sister.

SO these diamonds of the world Cecropia daily in one or other sort punishing
the^, still with her evil torments giving them fear of worse, making the
fear it self the sorriest torment of all; that in the end weary of their
bodies they should be content to bestow them at her appointment. But as in
labor, the more one does exercise it, the more by the doing one is enhabled to
do; strength growing upon the work, so as what at first would have seemed
impossible, after grows easy: so these Princesses second to none, and far
from any second, only to be matched by themselves, with the use of suffering
their minds gat the habit of suffering so, as all fears and terrors were to
them but summons to a battle, whereof they knew before hand they would be
victorious, and which in the suffering was painful, being suffered, was a
trophe to it self: whereby Cecropia found her self still farther of: for where
at first she might perchance have persuaded them to have visited her son, and
have given him some comfort in his sickness, drawing near to the co^fines of
Deaths kingdom, now they protested, that they would never otherwise speak to
him, then as to the enemy, of most unjust cruelty toward them, that any time
or place could ever make them know.



Cecropia went to Philoclea, and told her, that now she was to come to the
last part of the play: for her part, though she found her hard hearted
obstinacy such, that neither the sweetness of loving means, nor the force of
hard means could prevail with her, yet before she would pass to a further
degree of extremity; she had sought to win her sister; in hope, that her son
might be with time satisfied with the love of so fair a Lady: but finding her
also rather more then less wilful, she was now minded that one of their
deaths should serve for an example to the other, that despising worthy folks
was more hurtful to the despiser; then the despised: that yet because her
son especially affected her, and that in her own self she was more
inclinable to pity her, the^ she had deserved, she would begin with her
sister; who that afternoon should have her head cut of before her face; if in
the mean time one of them, did not pull out their il-wrought stiches of
unkindness, she bad her look for no other, nor longer time the^ she told her.
There was no assault given to the sweet Philocleas mind, that entered so far,
as this: for where to all pains and dangers of her self, foresight with (his
Lieutenant Resolution) had made ready defense; now with the love she bare her
sister, she was driven to a stay, before she determined: but long she stayed
not, before this reason did shine unto her, that since in her self she
preferred death before such a base servitude, love did teach her to wish the
same to her sister. Therefore crossing her arms, and looking sideward upon the
ground, Do what you will (said she) with us: for my part, heaven shall melt
before I be removed. But if you will follow my counsel, for your own sake
(for as for prayers for my sake I have felt how little they prevail) let my
death first serve for example to win her, who perchance is not so resolved
against Amphialus, and so shall you not only justly punish me (who indeed do
hate both you and your son) but, if that may move you, you shall do more
virtuously in preserving one most worthy of life, and killing an other most
desirous of death: lastly in winning her, in steed of a peevish unhappy
creature, that I am, you shall bless your son with the most excellent woman
in all praise - worthy things, that the world holds. But Cecropia, (who had
already set down to her self what she would do) with bitter both terms, and
countenance, told her, that she should not need to woo death ouer-egerly: for
if her sister going before her did not teach her wit, herself should quickly
follow. For since they were not to be gotten, there was no way for her sons
quiet, but to know, that they were past getting. And so since no entreating,
nor threatening might prevail, she bad her prepare her eyes for a new play,
which she should see within few hours in the hall of that castle.

Philocleas abode, in the other of even height, Pamelas, and Zelmanes in a
chamber above her: but all so vaulted of strong, and thickly built stone, as
one could no way hear the other: each of these chambers had a little window to
look into the hall, but because the sisters should not have so much comfort,
as to look out to one another, there was (of the outsides) curtaynes drawn,
which they could not reach with their hands, so barring the reach of their
sight. But when the hour came that the Tragedy should begin, the curtaynes
were withdrawn from before the windows of Zelmane, and of Philoclea: a
sufficient challenge to call their eyes to defend themselves in such an
encounter. And by and by came in at one end of the hall, with about a dozen
armed soldiers a Lady, led by a couple, with her hands bound before her:
from above her eyes to her lips muffled with a fair kerchiefe, but from her
mouth to the shoulders all bare: and so was led on to a scaffold raised a good
deal from the floor, and all covered with crimsin velvet. But neither
Zelmane, nor Philoclea needed to be told, who she was: for the apparel she
ware made them too well assured, that it was the admirable Pamela. Whereunto
the rare whiteness of her naked neck gave sufficient testimony to their
astonnished senses. But the fair Lady being come to the scaffold, and then
made to kneel down, and so left by her unkind supporters, as it seemed that
she was about to speak somewhat (whereunto Philoclea, poor soul, earnestly
listened, according to her speech even minded to frame her mind, her heart
never till then almost wavering to save her sisters life) before the
unfortunate Lady could pronounce three words, the executioner cut of the
ones speech, and the others attention, with making his sword do his cruel
office upon that beautiful neck. Yet the pitiless sword had such pity of
so precious an object, that at first it did but hitte flat long. But little
auailed that, since the Lady falling down astonnished withal, the cruel
villayne forced the sword with another blow to divorce the fair marriage of
the head and body.

And this was done so in an instant, that the very act Philocleas sorrow
(sorrow not being able so quickly to thunderbolte her heart thorough her
senses, but first only oppressed her with a storm of amazement) but when her
eyes saw that they did see, as condemning themselves to have seen it, they
became weary of their own power of seeing: and her soul then drinking up woe
with great draughts, she fell down to deadly trau^ces: but her waiting iaylors
with cruel pity brought lothed life unto her; which yet many times took his
leave as though he would indeed depart: but when he was stayed by force, he
kept with him deadly Sorrow, which thus exercised her mourning speech. Pamela
my sister, my sister Pamela, woe is me for thee, I would I had died for thee.
Pamela never more shall I see thee: never more shall I enjoy thy sweet
company, and wise counsel. Alas, thou art gone to beautify heaven, and
haste thou left me here, who have nothing good in me, but that I did ever love
thee, and ever will lament thee Let this day be noted of all virtuous folks
for most unfortunate: let it never be mentioned, but among curses; and cursed
be they that did this mischief, and most accursed be mine eyes that beheld
it. Sweet Pamela; that head is stricken of, where only wisdom might be
spoken withal; that body is destroyed, which was the living book of virtue.
Dear Pamela, how haste thou left me to all wretchedness, and misery? Yet
while thou liuedst, in thee I breathed, of thee I hoped. O Pamela, how much did
I for thy excellency honor thee, more then my mother, and love thee more then
my self? Never more shall I lie with thee: never more shall we bathe in the
pleasant river together: never more shall I see thee in thy shephearde
apparel. But thou art gone, and where am I? Pamela is dead; and live I? My
God, And with that she fell again in a soune, so as it was a great while
before they could bring her to her self again; but being come to her-selfe,
Alas (said she) unkind women, since you have given me so many deaths, torment
me not now with life: for Gods sake let me go, and excuse your hands of more
blood. Let me follow my Pamela, whom ever I sought to follow. Alas Pamela, they
will not let me come to thee. But if they keep promise, I shall tread thine
own steps after thee. For to what am I borne (miserable soul) but to be
most unhappy in my self, and yet more unhappy in other? But o that a
thousand more miseries had happened unto me, so thou had not dyed: Pamela,
my sister Pamela. And so, like lamentable Philomela, complained she the
horrible wrong done to her sister, which if it stird not in the wickedly closed
minds of her tormentors, a pity of her sorrow, yet bredde it a weariness of
her sorrow: so as only leaving one to prevent any harm she should do her
self, the rest went away, consulting again with Cecropia, how to make profit
of this their late bloody act.

CHAP. 22.
1 Cecropias policy to use Zelmanes intercession. 2 Zelmanes selfe-conflict.
3 Her motion to Philoclea rather to dissemble then dye. 4 Philocleas resolution
rather to dye then dissemble. 5 At sight of Philocleas head Zelmanes ecstasies,
7 desperate deseignes, 8 and comfortless complaints.

Zelmane, told Cecropia, that she found by many most sensible proofs in
Zelmane, that there was never woman so loved another, as she loved Philoclea:
which was the cause that she (further then the commandment of Cecropia) had
caused Zelmanes curtains to be also drawn: because having the same spectacle
that Philoclea had, she might stand in the greater fear for her, whom she
loved so well: and that indeed she had hit the needle in that devise: for never
saw she creature so astonished as Zelmane, exceedingly sorry for Pamela, but
exceedingly exceeding that exceedingnes in fear for Philoclea. Therefore her
advice was, she should cause Zelmane to come and speak with Philoclea. For
there being such vehemency of friendship between them, it was both likely to
move Zelmane to persuade, and Philoclea to be persuaded. Cecropia liked well of
the counsel, and gave order to the same woman to go deal therein with
Zelmane, and to assure her with oath, that Cecropia was determined Philoclea
should pass the same way that Pamela had done, without she did yield to
satisfy the extremity of her sons affection: which the woman did, adding
thereunto many (as she thought) good reasons to make Zelmane think Amphialus a
fit match for Philoclea.

Zelmane (who had from time to time understood the cruel dealing they had used
to the sisters, and now had her own eyes wounded with the sight of ones death)
was so confused withal (her courage still rebelling against her wit, desiring
still with force to do impossible matters) that as her desire was stopped with
power, so her conceit was darkened with a mist of desire. For blind Love, and
invincible valor still would cry out, that it could not be, Philoclea should be
in so miserable estate, and she not relieve her: and so while she haled her wit
to her courage, she drew it from his own limits. But now Philocleas death (a
word able to marshall al his thoughts in order) being come to so short a point
either with small delay to be suffered, or by the giving her self to another to
be prevented, she was driven to think, and to desire some leisure of thinking:
which the woman granted for that night unto her. A night that was not half so
black, as her mind; not half so silent, as was fit for her musing thoughts.
At last, he that would feign have desperately lost a thousand lives for her
sake, could not find in his heart, that she should loose any life for her own
sake; and he that despised his own death in respect of honor, yet could well
nigh dispense with honor it self in respect of Philocleas death: for once the
thought could not enter into his heart, nor the breath issue out of his mouth,
which could consent to Philocleas death for any bargain. Then how to prevent
the next degree to death (which was her being possessed by another) was the point
of his minds labor: and in that he found no other way, but that Philoclea
should pretend a yielding unto Cecropias request; and so by speaking with
Amphialus, and making fair (but delaying) promises, procure liberty for
Zelmane; who only wished but to come by a sword, not doubting then to destroy
them all, and deliver Philoclea: so little did both the me^, and their forces
seem in her eyes, looking down upon them from the hye top of affections
tower.

Philoclea, having already plotted out in her co^ceite, how she would deal with
her: and so came she with heart and eyes, which did each sacrifice either to
Love upon the altar of Sorrow: and there had she the pleasing displeasing
sight of Philoclea: Philoclea, who^ alredie the extreme sense of sorrow had
brought to a dullness therein, her face not without tokens that beauty had been
by many miseries cruelly battered, and yet showed it most the perfection of the
beauty, which could remain vnouerthrowne by such enemies. But when Zelmane
was set down by her, and the women gone away (because she might be the better
persuaded when no body was by, that had heard her say she would not be
persuaded) then began first the eyes to speak, and the hearts to cry out:
Sorrow a while would needs speak his own language without using their
tongues to be his interpreters. At last Zelmane brake silence, but spoke with
the only eloquence of amazement: for all her long methodized oration was
inherited only by such kind of speeches. Dear Lady, in extreme necessities
we must not. But alas unfortunate wretch that I am, that I live to see this
day. And I take heaven and earth to witness, that nothing: and with that her
breast swelled so with spite and grief, that her breath had not leisure to
turn her self into words. But the sweet Philoclea that had alredie dyed in
Pamela, and of the other side had the heaviness of her heart something quickened in
the most beloved sight of Zelmane, ghessed somewhat at Zelmanes mind; and
therefore spoke unto her in this sort. My Pyrocles (said she) I know this
exceeding comfort of your presence, is not brought unto me for any good will
that is owed unto me: but (as I suppose) to make you persuade me to save my
life with the ransom of mine honor: although no body should be so unfit a
pleader in that cause, as your self, yet perchance you would have me live.
Your honor? God forbid (faid Zelmane) that ever, for any cause, I should yield
to any touch of it. But a while to pretend some affection, til time, or my
liberty might work something for your service: this, if my astonished senses
would give me leave, I would feign have persuaded you.

To what purpose my Pyrocles? (said Philoclea) of a Pamelaes example wrought no
more in me? is a captive life so much worth? ca^ ever it go out of these lips,
that I love any other but Pyrocles? shall my tongue be so false a traitor to my
heart, as to say I love any other but Pyrocles? And why should I do all this? to
live? O Pamela, sister Pamela, why should I live? only for thy sake Pyrocles I
would live: but to thee I know too well I shall not live; and if not to thee,
has thy love so base allay, my Pyrocles, as to wish me to live? for
dissimulation, my Pyrocles, my simplicity is such, that I have hardly been
able to keep a straight way; what shall I do in a croo^ked? But in this case
there is no mean of dissimulation, not for the cunningest: present answer is
required, and present performance upon the answer. Art thou so terrible, o
Death? No my Pyrocles; and for that I do thank thee, and in my soul thank
thee; for I confess the love of thee is herein my chiefest virtue. Trouble me
not therefore, dear Pyrocles, nor double not my death by tormenting my
resolution: since I cannot live with thee, I will dye for thee. Only remember
me dear Pyrocles; and love the remembrance of me: and if I may crave so much
of thee, let me be thy last love, for though I be not worthy of thee (who
indeed art the worthiest creature living) yet remember that my love was a
worthy love. But Pyrocles was so overcome with sorrow (which wisdom and virtue
made just in so excellent a Ladies case, full of so excelle^r kindness) that
words were ashamed to come forth knowing how weak they were to express his
mind, and her merit: and therefore so stayed in a deadly silence, forsaken of
hope, and forsaking comfort: till the appointed gardians came in, to see the
fruits of Zelmanes labor: and then Zelmane warned by their presence, selagaine
to persuade, though scarcely her self could tell what; but in sum, desirous of
delays. But Philoclea sweetly continuing constant, and in the end punishing
her importunity with silence, Zelmane was feign to end. Yet craving an other
times conference, she obtained it, and diverse others; till at the last Cecropia
found it was to no purpose, and therefore determined to follow her own way.
Zelmane yet still desirous to win (by any means) respit, even wasted with
sorrow, and uncertain, whether in worse case in her presence, or absence,
being able to do nothing for Philocleas succor, but by submitting the greatest
courage of the earth to fall at the feet of Cecropia, and crave stay of their
sentence till the uttermost was seen, what her persuasions might do.

Cecropia seemed much to be moved by her importunity, so as diverse days were
won of painful life to the excellent Philoclea: while Zelmane suffered some
hope to cherrish her mind, especially trusting upon the help of Musidorus, who
(she knew) would not be idle in this matter, till one morning a noise awaked
Zelmane, from whose ouer-watchfull mind, the tired body had stolen a little
sleep: and straight with the first opening of her eyes, Care taking the woonted
place, she ran to the window which looked into the hall (for that way the
noise guided her,) and there might she see (the curtain being left open ever
since the last execution) seven or eight persons in a cluster upon the
seaffold: who by and by retiring themselves, nothing was to be seen thereupon,
but a basin of gold, pitifully enameled with blood, and in the midst of it,
the head of the most beautiful Philoclea. The horriblenes of the mischief was
such, as Pyrocles could not at first believe his own senses, but bent his woeful
eyes to discern it better: where too well he might see it was Philocleas
self, having no veil, but beauty, over the face, which still appeared to be
alive: so did those eyes shine, even as they were wont, and they were wont
more then any other: and sometimes as they moved, it might well make the
beholder think, that death therein had borrowed their beutie, and not they any
way disgraced by death: so sweet and pearsing a grace they carried with them.

It was not a pity, it was not an amazement, it was Pyrocles, but a wild
fury of desperate agony, so that he cried out, O tyrant heaven, traitor
earth, blind providence; no justice, how is this done? how is this suffered?
has this world a government? If it have, let it pour out all his mischiefs
upon me, and see whether it have power to make me more wretched then I am. Did
she excel for this? have I prayed for this? abominable hand that did it;
detestable devil that commanded it; cursed light that beheld it: and if the
light be cursed, what are then mine eyes that have seen it? And have I seen
Philoclea dead, and do I live? and have I lived, nor to help her, but to talk
of her? and stand I still talking? And with that (carried with the madness of
anguish, not having a redier way to kill himself) he ran as hard as ever he
could, with his head against the wall, with intention to brain himself: but
the haste to do it, made the doing the flower. For, as he came to give the
blow, his foot tript, so as it came not with the full force: yet forcible
enough to strike him down, and withal, to deprive him of his sense, so that
he lay a while, comforted by the hurt, in that he felt not his discomfort.

with his eyes, but there saw he nothing but the seaffold, all covered over
with skarlet, and nothing but solitary silence, to mourn this mischief. But
then, Sorrow having disperste it self from his heart, in all his noble parts,
it proclaimed his authority, in cries, and tears, and with a more gentle
dolefulnes, could pour out his inward cuill.

Alas (said he) and is that head taken away too, so Philoclea, thou art gone,
and have carried with thee my love; and have thy love in me, and I wretched man
do live; I live, to die continually, till thy revenge do give me leave to die:
and then die I will, my Philoclea, my heart willingly makes this promise to it
self. Surely he did not look upon thee, that gave the cruel blow: for no eye
could have abidden to see such beauty overthrown by such mischief. Alas,
why should they divide such a head from such a body? no other body is worthy
of that head; no other head is worthy of that body: O yet, if I had taken my
last leave, if I might have taken a holy kiss from that dying mouth. Where
art thou Hope which promisest never to leave a man while he lives? Tell me,
what can thou hope for? nay tell me, what is there which I would willingly
hope after? Wishing power (which is accounted infinite) what now is lest to
wish for? She is gone, and gone with her all my hope; all my wishing. Love, be
ashamed to be called Love: cruel Hate, unspeakable Hate is victorious over
thee. Who is there now left, that can justify thy tyranny, and give reason to
thy passion? O cruel divorce of the sweetest marriage that ever was in Nature:
Philoclea is dead, and dead is with her all goodness, all sweetness, all
excellency. Philoclea is dead, and yet Life is not ashamed to continue upon
the earth. Philoclea is dead: O deadly word; which contains in it self the
uttermost of all misfortunes. But happy word when thou shall be said of me,
and long it shall not be, before it be said.

CHAP. 17.
1 A Ladies kind comforts to Pyrocles comfortless unkindness. 2 His hardly
knowing her. 3 Her unmasking of Cecropias fruitless sophistry. 4 Their medley
of solace and sorrow.

THen stopping his words with philoclea, sigh philoclea, and cry out
philoclea: till as it happened (at that time upon his bed) toward the dawning
of the day, he heard one stir in his chamber, by the motion of garments; and
he with an angry voice asked, Who was there? A poor Gentlewoman (answered the
party) that wish long life unto you. And I soon death to you (said he) for
the horrible curse you have given me. Certainly (said she) an unkind answer,
and far unworthy the excellency of your mind; but not unsuitable to the rest of
your behavior. For most part of this night I have heard you (being let into
your chamber, you never perceiving it, so was your mind estraunged from your
senses) and have heard nothing of Zelmane, in Zelmane, nothing but weak
waylings, fitter for some nurse of a village, then so famous a creature as you
are. O God (cried out Pyrocles) that thou were a man that use these words
unto me. I tell thee I am sorry: I tell thee I will be sorry in despite of thee,
and all them that would have me joyful. And yet (replied she) perchance
philoclea is not dead, whom you so much bemone. I would we were both dead of
that condition, said Pyrocles. See the folly of your passion (said she) as
though you should be nearer to her, you being dead, and she alive; then she
being dead, and you alive: and if she be dead, was she not borne to die? what
then do you cry out for? not for her, who must have died one time or other;
but for some few years: so as it is time, and this world that seem so lovely
things, and not philoclea unto you. O noble Sisters (cried Pyrocles) now you be
gone (who were the only exalters of all womankind) what is left in that sex,
but babbling, and business? And truly (said she) I will yet a little longer
trouble you. Nay, I pray you do (said Pyrocles) for I wish for nothing in my
short life, but mischiefs, and combers: and I am content you shall be one of
them. In truth (said she) you would think your self a greatly privileged
person, if since the strongest buildings, and lastingest monarchies are subject
to end, only your philoclea (because she is yours) should be exempted. But
indeed you bemone your self, who have lost a friend: you cannot her, who
has in one act both preserved her honor, and left the miseries of this
world. O woman's philosophy, childish folly (said Pyrocles) as though if I do
bemone my self, I have not reason to do so, having lost more then any
Monarchy, nay then my life can be worth unto me. Alas (said she) comfort
your self, Nature did not forget her skill, when she had made them: you shall
find many their superiors, and perchance such, as (when your eyes shall look
abroad) your self will like better.

of Pyrocles; in so much, that leaping out of his bed, he ran to have stricken
her: but coming near her (the morning then winning the field of darkness)
he saw, or he thought he saw, indeed, the very face of philoclea; the same
sweetness, the same grace, the same beauty: with which carried into a divine
astonishment, he fell down at her feet. Most blessed Angel (said he) well
haste thou done to take that shape, since thou would submit thy self to
mortal sense; for a a more Angelical form could not have been created for
thee. Alas, even by that excellent beauty, so beloved of me, let it be lawful
for me to ask of thee, what is the cause, that she, that heavenly creature,
whose form you have taken, should by the heavens be destined to so unripe an
end? Why should injustice so prevail? Why was she seen to the world, so
soon to be ravished from us? Why was she not suffered to live, to teach the
world perfection? Do not deceive thy self (answered she) I am no Angel; I am
philoclea, the same philoclea, so truly loving you, so truly beloved of you.
If it be so (said he) that you are indeed the soul of philoclea, you have
done well to keep your own figure: for no heaven could have given you a
better. Then alas, why have you taken the pains to leave your blisfull seat to
come to this place most wretched, to me, who am wretchedness it self, and not
rather obtain for me, that I might come where you are, there eternally to
behold, and eternally to love your beauties? you know (I know) that I desire
nothing but death, which I only stay, to be justly revenged of your unjust
murtheres. Dear Pyrocles (said she) I am thy philoclea, and as yet living: not
murdered, as you supposed, and therefore to be comforted. And with that gave him
her hand. But the sweet touch of that hand, seemed to his astraied powers so
heavenly a thing, that it rather for a while confirmed him in his former
belief: till she, with vehement protestations (and desire that it might be so,
helping to persuade that it was so) brought him to yield; yet doubtfully to
yield to this height of al comfort, that philoclea lived: which witnessing
with the tears of joy, Alas (said he) how shall I believe mine eyes any more?
or do you yet but appear thus unto me, to stay me from some desperate end?
For alas I saw the excellent Pamela beheaded: I saw your head (the head
indeed, and chief part of all natures works) standing in a dishe of gold,
too mean a shrine (God wot) for such a relike. How can this be, my only
dear, and you live? or if this be not so, how can I belceeue mine own senses?
and if I can not believe the^, why should I now believe these blessed tidings
they bring me?

Pyrocles, that nether I (as you find) nor yet my dear sister is dead:
although the mischieuously subtle Cecropia used slightes to make either of us
think so of other. For, having in vain attempted the fardest of her wicked
eloquence, to make either of us yield to her son, and seeing that neither it,
accompanied with great flatteries, and rich presents, could get any ground of
us, nor yet the violent way she fell into of cruelty, tormenting our bodies,
could prevail with us; at last, she made either of us think the other dead,
and so hoped to have wrested our minds to the forgetting of virtue: and first
she gave to mine eyes the miserable spectacle of my sisters (as I thought)
death: but indeed not my sister: it was only Artesia, she who so cunningly
brought us to this misery. Truly I am sorry for the poor Gentlewoman, though
justly she be punished for her double falsehood: but Artesia muffled so, as you
could not easily discern her; and in my sisters apparel (which they had taken
from her under color of giving her Other) did they execute: And when I (for
thy sake especially dear Pyrocles) could by no force, nor fear be won, they
assayed the like with my sister, by bringing me down under the scaffolde, and
(making me thrust my head up through a hole they had made therein) they did put
about my poor neck a dishe of gold, where out they had beaten the bottom, so
as having set blood in it, you saw how I played the part of death (God knows
even willing to have done it in earnest) and so had they set me, that I reached
but on tiptoes to the ground, so as scarcely I could breathe, much less
speak: And truly if they had kept me there any whitlonger, they had
strangled me, in steed of beheading me: but then they took me away, and
seeking to see their issue of this practice, they found my noble sister (for
the dear love she vouchsafes to bear me) so grieved withal, that she willed
them to do their uttermost cruelty unto her: for she vowed, never to receive
sustenaunce of them, that had been the causers of my murder: and finding both
of us, even given over, not like to live many hours longer, and my sister
Pamela, rather worse then my self, (the strength of her heart worse bearing
those indignities) the good woman Cecropia (with the same pity as folks
keep foul, when they are not fat enough for their eating) made us know her
deceit, and let us come one to another; with what joy you can well imagine,
who I know feel the like; saving that we only thought our selves reserved to
miseries, and therefore fitter for condoling, then congratulating. For my
part, I am fully persuaded, it is but with a little respite, to have a more
feeling sense of the torments she prepares for us. True it is, that one of my
guardians would have me to believe, that this proceeds of my gentle cousin
Amphialus: who having heard some inckling that we were evil entreated, had
called his mother to his bedside, from whence he never rose since his last
combat, and besought, and charged her upon all the love she bare him, to use us
with all kindness: vowing, with all the imprecations he could imagine, that if
ever he understood for his sake, that I received further hurt then the want of
my liberty, he would not live an hour longer. And the good woman swear to me
that he would kill his mother, if he knew how I had been dealte with; but that
Cecropia keeps him from understanding things how they pass, only having
heard a whispering, and my self named, he had (of abundance, forsooth, of
honorable love) given this charge for us. Whereupon this enlargement of mine
was grown: for my part I know too well their cunning (who leave no money
vnoffered that may buy mine honor) to believe any word they say, but (my
dear Pyrocles) even look for the worste, and prepare my self for the same.
Yet I must confess, I was content to rob from death, and borrowe of my
misery the sweet comfort of seeing my sweet sister, and most sweet comfort
of thee my Pyrocles. And so having leave, I came stealing into your chamber:
where (O Lord) what a joy it was unto me, to hear you solemnise the funerals
of the poor Philoclea? That I my self might live to hear my death bewailed?
and by whom? by my dear Pyrocles. That I saw death was not strong enough to
divide thy love from me? O my Pyrocles, I am too well paid for my pains I
have suffered: joyful is my woe for so noble a cause; and welcome be all
miseries, since to thee I am so welcome. Alas how I pitied to hear thy pity
of me; and yet a great while I could not find in my heart to interrupt thee,
but often had even pleasure to weep with thee: and so kindly came forth thy
lamentations, that they enforced me to lament to, as if indeed I had been a
looker on, to see poor philoclea dye. Til at last I spoke with you, to try
whether I could remove thee from sorrow, till I had almost procured my self a
beating.

And with that she pretily smiled, which, mingled Zephyrus among fine colored
flowers. But Pyrocles, who had felt (with so small distance of time) in himself
the overthrow both of hope and despair, knew not to what key he should tune
his mind, either of joy, or sorrow. But finding perfect reason in neither,
suffered himself to be carried by the tide of his imagination, and his
imaginations to be raised even by the sway, which hearing or seeing, might give
unto the^: he saw her alive, he was glad to see her alive: he saw her weep, he
was sorry to see her weep: he heard her comfortable speeches, nothing more
gladsome: he hard her prognosticating her own destruction, nothing more
doleful. But when he had a little taken breath from the panting motion of such
contrariety in passions, he fell to consider with her of her present estate,
both comforting her, that certainly the worst of this storm was past, since
already they had done the worst, which man's wit could imagine: and that if
they had determined to have killed her, they would have now done it: and also
earnestly counselling her, and inhabling his counsels with vehement prayers,
that she would so far second the hopes of Amphialus, as that she might but
procure him liberty; promising then as much to her, as the liberality of
loving courage durst promise to himself.

CHAP. 24.
1 Amphialus excuses. 2 The Princesses accuse. 3 Cecropia seeking their death
4 finds her own. 5 Amphialus-his death-panges and selfe-killing. 6 The
woeful knowledge of it.

Philoclea content to receive a kiss, and but a kiss of Pyrocles, sealed up
with moving lips, and closed them up in comfort: and her-selfe (for the
passage was left between them open) went to her sister: with whom she had
stayed but a while, fortifying one another (while philoclea tempered Pamelas
just disdain, and Pamela ennobled Philocleas sweet humbleness) when
Amphialus came unto them: who never since he had heard Philoclea named, could
be quiet in himself, although none of them about him (fearing more his
mothers violence the^ his power) would discover what had passed: and many
messages he sent to know her estate, which brought answer back, according as
it pleased Cecropia to indite them, till his heart full of unfortunate
affliction, more and more misgiuing him, having impatiently borne the delay of
the nights unfitness, this morning he gat up, and though full of wounds (which
not without danger could suffer such exercise) he apparelled himself, and
with a countenance, that showed strength in nothing but in grief, he came
where the sisters were; and weakly kneeling down, he besought them to pardon
him, if they had not been used in that castle according to their worthiness, and
his duty; beginning to excuse small matters, poor Gentleman, not knowing in
what sort they had been handled.

Pamelaes hye heart (having conceived mortal hate for the injury offered to her
and her sister) could scarcely abide his sight, much less hear out his
excuses; but interrupted him with these words. Traitor (said she) to thine own
blood, and false to the profession of so much love as thou have vowed, do not
defile our ears with thy excuses; but pursue on thy cruelty, that thou and
thy godly mother have used toward us: for my part, assure thy self, and so do
I answer for my sister (whose mind I know) I do not more desire mine own
safety then thy destruction. Amazed with this speech, he turned his eye, full
of humble sorrowfulness, to Philoclea. And is this (most excellent Lady) your
doom of me also? She, sweet Lady, sat weeping: for as her most noble
kinsman she had ever favored him, and loved his love, though she could not be
in love with his person; and now partly unkindness of his wrong, partly pity
of his case, made her sweet mind yield some tears, before she could
answer; and her answer was no other, but that she had the same cause as her
sister had. He replied no further, but delivering from his heart two or three
(untaught) sighs, rose, and with most low reverence went out of their chamber:
and straight by threatening torture, learned of one of the women, in what
terrible manner those Princesses had been used. But when he heard it, crying
out, O God; and then not able to say any more (for his speech went back to
rebounde woe upon his heart) he needed no judge to go upon him: for no man
could ever think any otherworthy of greater punishment, the^ he thought
himself.

mitigated.

But when she saw him come in with a sword

And (if it could be) her ruin increased woe in the Amphialus, who when he saw
her fall, had his own rage stayed a little with the soddennes of her
destruction. And was I not enough miserable before (said he) but that before my
end I must be the death of my mother? who how wicked so ever, yet I would she
had received her punishment by some other. O Amphialus, wretched Amphialus;
thou have lived to be the death of thy most dear companion and friend
Philoxenus, and of his father, thy most careful fosterfather. Thou have lived
to kill a Lady with thine own hands, and so excellent, and virtuous a Lady,
as the fair Parthenia was: thou have lived to see thy faithful Ismenus slain
in succouring thee, and thou not able to defend him: thou have lived to show
thy self such a coward, as that one unknown Knight could overcome thee in thy
Ladies presence: thou have lived to bear arms against thy rightful Prince,
thine own uncle: Thou have lived to be accounted, and justly accounted, a
traitor, by the most excellent persons, that this world holds: Thou have
lived to be the death of her, that gave thee life. But ah wretched Amphialus,
thou have lived for thy sake, and by thy authority, to have Philoclea
tormented: O heavens, in Amphialus castle, where Amphialus commanded;
tormented, tormented? torment of my soul, Philoclea tormented: and thou have
had such comfort in thy life, as to live all this while. Perchance this hand
(used only to mischievous acts) thinks it were too good a deed to kill me;
or else filthy hand, only worthy to kill women, thou art afraid to strike a
man. Fear not cowardly hand, for thou shall kill but a cowardly traitor: and
do it gladly; for thou shall kill him, whom Philoclea hates. With that,
furiously he tare open his doublet, and fetting the pommell of the sword to
the ground, and the point to his breast, he fell upon it. But the sword more
merciful then he to himself, with the slipping of the pommell, the point
swarued, and razed him but upon the side: yet with the fall, his other wounds
opened so, as he bledde in such extremity, that Charons boat might very
well be carried in that flood: which yet he sought to hasten by this means. As
he opened his dublet, and fell, there fell out Philocleas knives, which
Cecropia at the first had taken from her, and delivered to her son; and he
had ever worn them next his heart, as the only relic he had of his Saint: now
seeing them by him, (his sword being so, as weakness could not well draw it out
from his doublette) he took the knives, and pulling one of them out, and many
times kissing it, and then, first with the passions of kindness, and unkindness,
melting in tears, O dear knives, you are come in a good time, to revenge the
wrong I have done you all this while, in keeping you from her blessed side, and
wearing you without your mistress leave. Alas, be witness with me, yet before I
die, (and well you may, for you have layn next my heart) that by my consent,
your excellent mistress should have had as much honor, as this poor place
could have brought forth, for so high an excellency; and now I am condemned
to die by her mouth. Alas, other, far other hope would my desire often have
given me: but other event it has pleased her to lay upon me. Ah Philoclea
(with that his tears gushed out, as though they would strive to ouerflow his
blood) I would yet thou knew how I love thee. Unworthy I am, unhappy I am,
false I am; but to thee, alas, I am not false. But what a traitor am I, any way
to excuse him, whom she condemns? Since there is nothing left me, wherein I
may do her feruice, but in punishing him, who has so offended her. Dear
knife, then do your noble mistresses commandment. With that, he stabbed
himself into diverse places of his breast, and throat, until those wounds
(with the old, freshly bleeding) brought him to the senseless gate of Death.

By which time, his servants having (with fear of his fury) abstained a while
from coming unto him, one of them (preferring duetifull affection before
fearful duty) came in, and there found him swimming in his own blood, there
giving a pitiful spectacle, where the conquest was the conquerors overthrow,
and selfruine the only triumph of a battle, fought between him, and
himself. The time full of danger, the person full of worthiness, the manner full
of horror, did greatly astonish all the beholders; so as by and by, all the
town was full of it, and then of all ages came running up to see the beloved
body; every body thinking, their safety bledde in his wounds, and their honor
died in his destruction.

CHAP. 25.
1 Anaxius-his rages for the death, 2 Queen Helens coming for the cure of
Amphialus. 3 Her complaints over him. 4 Her pasport and safeconduct, to carry
him to her Surgeon. 5 The peoples sorrow, 6 Set down in a song.

Anaxius, (who by that time was growe^ well of his wou^d, but never had come
abroad, disdayning to abase himself to the company of any other but of
Amphialus) he was exceedingly vexed, either with kindness, or (if a proud heart
be not capable thereof) with disdain, that he, who had the honor to be called
the friend of Anaxius, should come to such an unexpected ruin. Therefore, then
coming abroad, with a face red in anger, and engrained in pride, with liddes
raised up, and eyes leuelling from top to the toe of them that met him,
treading, as though he thought to make the earth shake under him, with his
hand upon his sword; short speeches, and disdainful answers, giving straight
order to his two brothers, to go take the oath of obedience, in his name, of
all the soldiers, and Citizens in the town: and withal, to swear them to
revenge the death of Amphialus, upon Basilius. He himself went to see him,
calling for all the surgeons and physicions there; spending some time in vewing
the body, and threatening them all to be hanged, if they did not heal him. But
they (taking view of his wounds, and falling down at Anaxius feet) assured
him, that they were mortal, and no possible means to keep him above two days
alive: and he stood partly in doubt, to kill, or save them, between his own
fury, and their humblenes. But vowing, with his own hands to kill the two
sisters, as causers of his friends death: when his brothers came to him, and
told him they had done his commandment, in having received the oath of
allegiance, with no great difficulty: the most part terrified by their valor,
and force of their servants, and many that had been forward actors in the
rebellion, willing to do any thing, rather then come under the subjection of
Basilius again; and such few as durst gainesay, being cut of by present
slaughter.

Anaxius, that the fair Queen Helen was come, with an honorable retinue, to
the town: hu^blie desiring leave to see Amphialus, who^ she had sought in many
places of the world; and lastly, being returned into her own country, she
heard together of the late siege and of his combat with the strange Knight, who
had dangerously hurt him. Whereupon, full of loving care (which she was content
even to publish to the world, how ungratefully soever he dealt with her) she
had gotten leave of Basilius, to come by his frontiers, to carry away Amphialus
with her, to the excellentest surgeon then known, whom she had in her
Country, but so old, as not able to travail: but had given her sovereign
annointments, to preserve his body withal, till he might be brought unto him:
and that Basilius had granted leave: either natural kindness prevailing over
all the offenses done, or rather glad to make any passage, which might lead
him out of his country, and from his daughters. This discourse Lycurgus
understanding of Helene, delivered to his brother, with her vehement desire to
see the body, and take her last farewell of him. Anaxius, though he were fallen
out with all womankind (in respect of the hate he bare the sisters, whom he
accounted murderers of Amphialus) yet at his brothers request, granted her
leave. And she (poor Lady) with grievous expectation, and languishing desire,
carried her faint legs to the place where he lay, either not breathing, or in all
appearance breathing but death.

up in woe) broke the prison of her fair lips, and brought memory (with his
servant senses) to his natural office, she yet made the breath convey these
doleful words with it. Alas (said she) Amphialus, what strange diseases be
these, that having sought thee so long, I should be now sorry to find thee?
that these eyes should look upon Amphialus, and be grieved withal? that I
should have thee in my power without glory, and embrace thee without comfort?
How often have I blessed the means that might bring me near thee? Now, woe worth
the cause that brings me so near thee. Often, alas, often have thou disdained
my tears: but now, my dear Amphialus, receive them: these eics can serve for
nothing else, but weep for thee; since thou would never vouchsafe them thy
comfort, yet disdain not them thy sorrow. I would they had been more dear
unto thee; for then had thou lived. Woe is me that thy noble heart could love
who hated thee, and hate who loved thee. Alas, why should not my faith to thee
cover my other defects, who only sought to make my Crown thy foote-stoole, my
self thy feruaunt? that was all my ambition; and alas thou disdainedst it to
serve them, by whom thy incomparable self were disdained. Yet (O Philoclea)
wheresoever you are, pardon me, if I speak in the bitterness of my soul,
excellent may you be in all other things (and excellent sure you are since he
loved you) your want of pity, where the fault only was infiniteness of
desert, cannot be excused. I would, O God, I would that you had granted his
deserved suite of marrying you, and that I had been your seruing-maide, to have
made my estate the foil of your felicity, so he had lived. How many weary
steps have I trodden after thee, while my only complaint was, that thou werte
unkind? Alas I would now thou werte, to be unkind. Alas why would thou not
command my service, in persuading Philoclea to love thee? who could, or (if
every one could) who would have recounted thy perfections so well, as I? who
with such kindly passions could have stirred pity for thee as I? who should
have delivered not only the words but the tears I had of thee? and so
should thou have exercised thy disdain in me, and yet used my service for
thee.

Anaxius, and humbling her self to him, as low as his own pride could wish,
besought him, that since the surgeons there had utterly given him over, that he
would let her carry him away in her litter with her, since the worst he could
have should be to die, and to die in her arms that loved him above al things;
and where he should have such monuments erected over him, as were fit for her
love, and his worthiness: beseeching him withal, since she was in a country of
enemies (where she trusted more to Anaxius valor, then Basilius promise) that
he would convey them safely out of those territories. Her reasons something
moved him, but nothing thoroughly persuaded him, but the last request of his
help: which he straight promised, warra^ting all security, as long as that
sword had his master alive. She as happy therein as unhappiness could be (having
received as small comfort of her own surgeons as of the others) caused yet the
body to be easily conveyed into the litter: all the people then beginning to
roar and cric, as though neucr till then they had lost their Lord. And if the
terror of Anaxius had not kept them under, they would have mutinied, rather
then suffered his body to be carried away.

Anaxius him self riding before the litter, with the choice men of that place,
they were afraid even to cry, though they were ready to cry for fear: but
(because that they might do) every body forced (even with harming them
selves) to do honor to him: some throwing themselves upon the ground; some
tearing their clothes, and casting duste upon their heads, and some even
wounding themselves, and sprinkling their own blood in the air. Among the
rest, one accounted good in that kind, and made the better by the true feeling
of sorrow, roared out a song of Lamentation, which (as well as might be) was
gathered up in this form.


Whom most the silly shepherds pipe did pryse,
Your doleful tunes sweet Muses now apply.
And you o trees (if any life there lies
In trees) now through your porous barks receive
The strange resounde of these my causefull cries:
And let my breath upon your branches leave,
My breath distinguished into words of woe,
That so I may signs of my sorrow leave.
But if among yourselues some one tree grow,
That aptest is to figure misery,
Let it embassage bear your grieves to show.
The weeping Myrrh I think will not deny
Her help to this, this iustest cause of plaint.
Your doleful tunes sweet Muses now apply.
And thou poor Earth, whom fortune does attaint
In Natures name to suffer such a harm,
As for to loose thy gemme, and such a Saint,
Upon thy face let coaly Ravens swarm:
Let all the Sea thy tears accounted be:
Thy bowels with all killing metals arm.
Let gold now rust, let Diamonds waste in thee:
Let pearls be wan with woe their damme does bear:
Thy self henceforth the light do never see.
And you, o flowers, which sometimes Princes were,
Till these strange altrings you did hap to try,
Of Princes loss your selves for tokens rear.
Lilly in mourning black thy whitenes die:
O Hiacinthe let Ai be on thee still.
Your doleful tunes sweet Muses now apply.
O Echo, all these woods with roaring fill,
And do not only mark the accents last,
But all, for all reach out my wailefull will:
One Echo to another Echo cast
Sound of my griefs, and let it never end,
Till that it has all woods and waters past.
Nay to the heavens your just complaining send,
And stay the stars inconstant constant race,
Till that they do unto our dolours bend:
And ask the reason of that special grace,
That they, which have no lives, should live solong,
And virtuous souls so soon should loose their place?
Ask, if in great men good men do so thronge,
That he for want of elbowe room must die?
Or if that they be skante, if this be wrong?
Did Wisdom this our wretched time epsy
In one true chest to rob all Virtues ireasure?
Your doleful tunes sweet Muses now apply.
And if that any counsel you to measure
Your doleful tunes, to them still playning say,
To well felt grief, plainte is the only pleasure.
O light of Sun, which is entit'led day,
O well thou do that thou no longer bidcst;
For mourning light her black weeds may display.
O Phoebus with good cause thy face thou hidest,
Rather then have thy all-beholding eye
Fould with this sight, while thou thy chariot guidest.
And well (me thinks) becomes this vaultie sky
A stately tomb to cover him deceased.
Your doleful tunes sweet Muses now apply.
O Philomela with thy breast oppressed
By shame and grief, help, helpeme to lament
Such cursed harms as cannot be redressed.
Or if thy mourning notes be fully spent,
Then give a quiet ear unto my playning:
For I to teach the world complainte am bent.
You dimmy clouds, which well employ your stayning
This cheerful air? with your obscured cheer,
Witness your woeful tears with daily rayning.
And if, o Sun, thou ever did appear,
In shape, which by man's eye might be perceived;
Virtue is dead, now set thy triumph here.
Now set thy triumph in this world, bereaved
Of what was good, where now no good does lie;
And by thy pomp our loss will be conceived.
O notes of mine your selves together tie:
With too much grief me thinks you are dissolved.
Your doleful tunes sweet Muses now apply.
Time ever old, and young is still reuolued
Within it self, and never tastes end:
But mankind is for aye to naught resolved.
The silthy snake her aged coat can mende,
And getting youth again, in youth does flourish:
But unto Man, age ever death does Send.
The very trees with grafting we can cherish,
So that we can long time produce their time:
But Man which helps them, helpless must perish.
Thus, thus the minds, which over all do clime,
When they by years experience get best graces,
Must finish then by deaths detested crime.
We last short while, and build long lasting places:
Ah let us all against foul Nature cry:
We Natures works do help, she us defaces.
For how can Nature unto this reply?
That she her child, I say, her best child kills?
Your doleful tunes siveete Muses now apply.
Alas, me thinks, my weakened voice but spilleth,
The vehement course of this just lamentation:
Me thinks, my sound no place with sorrow fills.
I know not I, but once in detestation
I have my self, and all what life contains,
Since Death on Virtues fort has made invasion.
One word of woe another after traineth:
Ne do I care how rude be my invention,
So it be seen what sorrow in me reigns.
O Elements, by whose (men say) contention,
Our bodies be in living power maintained,
Was this man's death the fruit of your dissension?
O Phisickes power, which (some say) has restrained
Approach of death, alas thou helpest meagerly,
When once one is for Atropos distrained.
Great be Physicians brags, but aid is beggarly,
When rooted moisture fails, or grows dry,
They leave off al, and say, death comes too eagerly.
They are but words therefore that men do buy,
Of any since God AEsculapius ceased.
Your doleful tunes sweet Muses now apply.
Justice, justice is now (alas) oppressed:
Bountifulnes has made his last conclusion:
Goodness for best attire in dust is dressed.
Shepherds bewail your uttermost confusion;
And see by this picture to you presented,
Death is our home, life is but a delusion.
For see alas, who is from you absented?
Absented? may I say for ever banished
From such as were to dye for him contented?
Out of our sight in turn of hand is vanished
Shepherd of shepherds, whose well settled order
Private with wealth, public with quiet garnished.
While he did live, far, far was all disorder;
Example more prevailing then direc^tion,
Far was homestrife, and far was foe from border.
His life a law, his look a full correc^tion:
As in his health we healthful were preserved,
So in his sickness grew our sure infection.
His death our death. But ah; my Muse has swarued,
From such deep plaint as should such woes descrie,
Which he of us for ever has deserved.
The style of heavy heart can never fly
So high, as should make such a pain notorious:
Cease Muse therforce: thy dart o Death apply;
And farewell Prince, whom goodness has made glorious.
CHAP. 26.
1 The public grief amplified. 2 Anaxius death-threatning to the Princesses.
3 Their resolutenes in it. 4 His return, and stop. 5 Zelmanes brave challenge
unto him 6 scorned by him. 7 His love to Pamela scorned by her. 8 His brothers
brave loves have as mean success.

THe general consort of al such numbers

Which so moved Anaxius to consider the loss of Helen, he sent a messenger to
the sisters, to tell them this courteous message: that at his return, with his
own hands, he would cut off their heads, and send them for tokens to their
father.

Zelmane, conferring how to carry themselves, having heard of the death of
Amphialus. And as no expectation of death is so painful, as where the
resolution is hindered by the intermixing of hopes, so did this new alarm,
though not remove, yet move some what the co^stancy of their minds, which were
so inconstantly dealt with. But within a while, the excellent Pamela had
brought her mind again to his old acquaintance: and then, as careful for her
sister (whom most dearly she loved) Sister (said she) you see how many acts
our Tragedy has: Fortune is not, yet a weary of vexing us: but what? A ship
is not counted strong for byding one strome? It is but the same trumpet of
death, which now perhaps gives the last sound: and let us make that profit of
our former miseries, that in them we learned to dye willingly. Truly said
Philoclea, dear sister, I was so beaten with the evils of life, that though I
had not virtue enough to despise the sweetness of it, yet my weakness bredde
that strength, to be weary of the pains of it: only I must confess, that
little hope, which by these late accidents was awaked in me, was at the first
angry withal. But even in the darkness of that horror, I see a light of
comfort appear; and how can I tread amiss, that see Pamelas steps? I would
only (O that my wish might take place) that my schoole-Mistres might live, to
see me say my lesson truly. Were that a life, my Philoclea? said Pamela. No,
no, (said she) let it come, and put on his worst face: for at the worst it is
but a bug-beare. Joy is it to me to see you so well resolved; and since the
world will not have us, let it lose us. Only (with that she stayed a little,
and sight) only my Philoclea, (then she bowed down, and whispered in her
ear) only Musidorus, my shepherd, comes between me and death, and makes me
think I should not dye, because I know he would not I should dye. With that
Philoclea sighed also, saying no more, but looking upon Zelmane: who was
walking up and down the chamber, having heard this message from Anaxius, and
having in times past heard of his nature, thought him like enough to perform
it, which winded her again into the former maze of perplexity. Yet debating
with her self of the manner how to prevent it, she continued her musing
humor, little saying, or indeed, little finding in her heart to say, in a case
of such extremity, where peremptorily death was threatened: and so stayed they;
having yet that comfort, that they might tarry together. Pamela nobly,
Philoclea sweetly, and Zelmane sadly, and desperately none of them entertaining
sleep, which they thought should shortly begin, never to awake.

But Anaxius came home, having safely conducted Helen: and safely he might well
do it: For though many of Basilius Knights would have attempted something upon
Anaxius by that means to deliver the Ladies, yet Philanax, having received his
masters commandment, and knowing his word was given, would not consent unto
it. And the black-Knight (who by the^ was able to carry abroad his wounds) did
not know thereof; but was bringing forces, by force to deliver his Lady. So as
Anaxius, interpreting it rather fear, then faith, and making even chance an
argument of his virtue, returned: and as soon as he was returned, with a felon
heart calling his brothers up with him, he went into the chamber, where they
were all three together; with full intention to kill the sisters with his own
hands, and send their heads for tokens to their father: Though his brothers
(who were otherwise inclined) dissuaded him: but his reverence stayed their
persuasions. But when he was come into the chamber, with the very words of
cholerike threatening climing up his throat, his eyes first lighted upon
Pamela; who hearing he was coming, and looking for death, thought she would
keep her own majesty in welcomming it; but the beams there of so struck his
eyes, with such a counterbuffe unto his pride, that if his anger could not so
quickly love, nor his pride so easily honor, yet both were forced to find a
worthineffe.

Zelmane (who had ready in her mind both what and how to say) stepped out unto
him, and with a resolute stayendes (void either of anger, kindness, disdain, or
humbleness) spoke in this sort. Anaxius (said she) if Fame have not been
ouerpartiall to thee, thou art a man of exceeding valor. Therefore I do call
thee even before that virtue, and will make it the judge between us. And now I
do affirm, that to the eternal blot of all the fair acts that thou have
done, thou do weakly, in seeking without danger to revenge his death, whose
life wfth danger thou might perhaps have preferued: thou do cowardly, in
going about by the death of these excellent Ladies, to prevent the just
punishment, that hereafter they by the powers, which they better then their
father there, or any other could make, might lay upon thee; and do most
basely, in once presenting thy self as an executioner; a vile office upon men,
and in a just cause: beyond the degree of any vile word, in so unjust a cause,
and upon Ladies, and such Ladies. And therefore, as a hangman, I say, thou art
unworthy to be counted a Knight, or to be admitted into the company of
Knights. Neither for what, I say, will I all eadge other reasons, of wisdom,
or justice, to prove my speech, because I know thou do disdain to be tied
to their rules: but even in thine own virtue (whereof thou so much gloriest) I
will make my trial: and therefore defy thee, by the death of one of us two,
to prove, or disprove these reproaches. Choose thee what arms thou likest, I
only demand, that these Ladies (whom I defend) may in liberty see the combat.

When Zelmane began her speech, the excellency of Pamela, had already taught
him some regard. But when she entered into bravery of speech, he thought at
first, a mad, and railing humor or possessed her; till, finding the speeches hold
well together, and at length come to flat challenge of combat; he stood
leaning back with his body and head, sometimes with bent brows looking upon
the one side of her, sometimes of the other, beyond marvel maruailing, that
he, who had never heard such speeches from any Knight, should be thus rebuffed
by a woman; and that marvel made him hear out her speech: which ended, he
turned his head to his brother Zoilus, and said nothing, but only lifting up
his eyes, smiled. But Zelmane finding his mind, Anaxius (said she) perchance
thou disdaynest to answer me, because, as a woman, thou think me not fit
to be fought withal. But I tell thee, that I have been trained up in martial
matters, with so good success, that I have many times overcome better Knights
then thy self: and am well known to be equal in feats of arms, to the
famous Pyrocles, who slew thy valiant Uncle, the Giant Euardes. The
remembrance of his Uncles death something netled him, so as he answered thus.

Indeed (said he) any woman may be as valiant as that coward, and traytorly
boy, who slew my Uncle trayterouslie, and after ran from me in the plain
field. Five thousand such could not have overcome Euardes, but by falsehood. But
I sought him all over Asia, following him still from one of his cony-holes to
another: till, coming into this Country, I heard of my friends being
besieged, and so came to blow away the wretches that troubled him. But
wheresoever the miserable boy fly, heaven, nor hell, shall keep his heart from
being torn by these hands. Thou lie in thy throat (said Zelmane) that
boy, where ever he went, did so noble acts, as thy heart (as proud as it is)
dares not think of, much less perform. But to please thee the better with
my presence, I tell thee, no creature can be nearer of kin to him, then my
self: and so well we love, that he would not be sorrier for his own death,
then for mine: I being begotten by his father, of an Amazon Lady. And
therefore, thou can not devise to revenge thy self more upon him, then by
killing me: which, if thou dare do mansuilie, do it; otherwise, if thou
harm these incomparable Ladies, or my self, without daring to fight with me,
I protest before these Knights, and before heaven, and earth, (that will
reveal thy shame) that thou art the beggerliest dastardly villain, that
dishonors the earth with his steps: and if thou let me ouer-liue them,
so will I blaze thee. But all this could not move Anaxius, but that he only
said, Evil should it become the terror of the world, to fight, much less to
skolde with thee.

But (said he) for the death of these same (pointing Pamela, and offering to
take her by the chin, And as for you, Minion (said he) yield but gently to my
will, and you shall not only live, but live so happily, He would have said
further, when Pamela, displeased both with words,matter,and manner, putting him
away with her fair hand, Proud beast (said she) yet thou plaiest worse thy
Comedy, then thy Tragedy. For my part, assurethy self, since my destiny is
such, that at each moment my life and death stand in equal balance, I had
rather have thee, and think thee far sitter to be my hangman, then my husband.
Pride and anger, would feign Cupia had begun to make it his sport, to pull his
plumes: so that, unused to a way of courtesy, and put out of his byas of
pride, he hastily went away, grumbling to himself, between threatening and
wishing; leaving his brothers with the^: the elder of whom, Lyeurgus, liked
Philoclea, and Zoilus would needs love Zelmane; or at lest, entertain
themselves with making the^ believe so. Lyeurgus more braggard, and nere his
brothers humor, began, with setting forth their blood, their deeds, how many
they had despised, of most excellent women; how much they were bound to them,
that would seek that of them. In sum, in all his speeches, more like the
bestower, then the desirer of felicity. Whom it was an excellent pastime (to
those that would delight in the play of verrue) to see, with what a witty
ignorance she would not understand: and how, acknowledging his perfections, she
would make, that one of his perfections, not to be iniurions to Ladies. But
when he knew not how to reply, then would he fall to touching and toying,
still vewing his gracesin no glass but self-liking. To which, Philocleas
shamefastnes, and humblenes, were as strong resisters,as choler, and disdain.
For though she yielded not, he thought she was to be overcome: and that thought
a while stayed him from further violence. But Zelmane had eye to his behavior,
and set in her memory, upon the score of Revenge, while she her self was no
less attempted by Zoilus; who less full of bragges, was forwardest in
offering (indeed) dishonorable violence.

CHAP. 27.
1 Zelmanes persuasions to temporize, and refer them to Basilius. 2
Anaxius-his embassage to treat the marriage. 3 Basilius recourse to a new
Oracle, 4 and his negative thereon. 5 The flattering relation of his Mercury.
6 The brothers course to resist force without, and use force within.

But when after their fruitless labors Zelmane (who with most assured
quietness of judgment looked into their present estate) earnestly persuaded
the two sisters, that to avoid the mischiefs of proud outrage, they would
only so far suit their behavior to their estates, as they might win time;
which as it could not bring them to worse case then they were, so it might
bring forth inexpected relief. And why (said Pamela) shall we any longer flatter
adversity? Why should we delight to make our selves any longer balls to
injurious Fortune, since our own kin are content traitorously to abuse us?
Certainly, in mishap it may be some comfort to us, that we are lighted in
these fellows hands, who yet will keep us from having cause of being
miserable by our friends means. Nothing grieves me more, then that you, noble
Lady Zelmane (to whom the world might have made us able to do honor)
should receive only hurt by the contagion of our misery. As for me,and my
sister, undoubtedly it becomes our birth to think of dying nobly, while we
have done,or suffered nothing, which might make our soul ashamed at the
parture from these bodies. Hope is the fawning traitor of the mind, while
under color of friendship, it robbes it of his chief force of resolution.
Virtuous and fair Lady (said Zelmane) what you say is true; and that truth
may well make up a part in the harmony of your noble thoughts. But yet the
time (which ought always to be one) is not tuned for it; while that may bring
forth any good, do not bar your self thereof: for then would be the time
to die nobly, when you ca^ not live nobly. Then so earnestly she persuaded with
them both, to refer themselves to their fathers consent (in obtaining whereof
they knew some while would be spent) and by that means to temper the minds
of their proud woers; that in the end Pamela yielded to her, because she
spoke reason; and Philoclea yielded to her reason, because she spoke it.

Pamela forced her self to make answer to Anaxius, that if her father gave
his consent she would make her self believe, that such was the heavenly
determination, since she had no means to avoid it. Anaxius (who was the most
frank promiser to him self of success) nothing doubted of Basilius consent,
but rather assured him self, he would be his orator in that matter: And
therefore he chose out an officious servant (whom he esteemed very wise,
because he never found him but just of his opinion) and willed him to be his
ambassador to Basilius, and to make him know, that if he meant to have his
daughter both safe and happy, and desired him self to have such a son in
law, as would not only protect him in his quiet course, but (if he listed to
accept it) would give him the monarchy of the world, that then he should
receive Anaxius, who never before knew what it was to pray any thing. That if
he did not, he would make him know, that the power of Anaxius was in every
thing beyond his will, and yet his will not to be resisted by any other power.
His servant with smiling and caste-vp look, desired God to make his memory
able to contain the treasure of that wise speech: and therefore besought him
to repeat it again, that by the oftener hearing it, his mind might be the
better acquainted with the divineness thereof, and that being graciously
granted, he then doubted not by carrying with him in his conceit, the grace
wherewith Anaxius spoke it, to persuade rocky minds to their own harm: so
little doubted he to win Basilius to that, which he thought would make him
think the heavens opened, when he hard but the proffer thereof. Anaxius
gravely allowed, the probability of his conjecture, and therefore sent him
away, promising him he should have the bringing up of his second son by
Pamela.

The messenger with speed performed his Lords Basilius, who by nature quiet,
and by superstition made doubtful, was loathe to take any matter of arms in
hand, wherein already he had found so slow success; though Philanax vehemently
urged him thereunto, making him see that his retiring back did encourage
injuries. But Basilius betwixt the fear of Anaxius might, the passion of his
love, and jealousy of his estate, was so perplexed, that not able to
determine, he took the common course of me^, to fly only the^ to devotion,
when they want resolution: so detaining the messe^ger with delays, he deferred
the directing of his course to the counsel of Apollo, which because himself at
that time could not well go to require, he entrusted the matter to his best
trusted philanax: who (as one in whom obedience was a sufficient reason unto
him) went with diligence to Delphos, where being entered into the secret place
of the temple, and having performed the sacrifices usual, the spirit that
possessed the prohesying woman, with a sacred fury, attended not his demand, but
as if it would argue him of incredulity, told him, not in dark wonted
speeches, but plainly to be understood, what he came for, and that he should
return to Basilius, and will him to deny his daughter to Anaxius and his
brothers, for that they were resrued for such as were better beloved of the
gods. That he should not doubt, for they should return unto him safely and
speedily. And that he should keep on his solitary course, till both Philanax
and Basilius fully agreed in the understanding of the former prophecy:
withal, commanding philanax from thence forward to give tribute, but not
oblation, to humane wifedome.

Philanax then finding that reason cannot show it self more reasonable, then
to leave reasoning in things above reason, returns to his Lord, and like one
that preferred truth before the maintaining of an opinion, hid nothing from
him, nor from thence forth durst any more dissuade him, from that which he
found by the celestial providence directed; but he him self looking to
repair the government as much as in so broken an estate by civil dissension
he might, and fortifying with notable art, both the lodges, so as they were
almost made vnaprochable, he left Basilius to bemone the absence of his
daughters, and to bewail the imprisonment of Zelmane: yet wholly given holily
to obey the Oracle, he gave a resolute negative unto the messenger of Anaxius,
who all this while had waited for it, yet in good terms desiring him to show
him self, in respect of his birth and profession, so Princely a Knight, as
without forcing him to seek the way of force, to deliver in noble sort shose
Ladies unto him, and so should the injury have been in Amphialus, and the
benefit in him.

The messenger went back with this answer, yet Basilius first understood his
desires, he did ouerreach so far all his most hopeful expectations, that ho
thought it were too great a boldness to harken to such a man, in whom the
heavens had such interest, without asking the Gods counsel, and therefore had
sent his principal counsailour to Delphos, who although he kept the matter
never so secret, yet his diligence, inspired by Anaxius his privilege over
all worldly things, had found out the secret, which was, that he should not
presnme to marry his daughters, to one who already was enrolled among the
demie-Gods, and yet much less he should dare the attempting to take them out
of his hands.

Anaxius, who till then had made Fortune his creator, Basilius resolution, he
and his brothers had courted their Ladies, as whom they vouchsased to have for
their wives, he resolved now to dally no longer in delays, but to make
violence his Orator, since he had found persuasions had gotten nothing but
answers. Which intention he opened to his brothers, who having all this while
wanted nothing to take that way, but his authority, gave spurs to his
running, and, unworthy men, neither feeling virtue in themselves, nor tendering
it in others, they were headlong to make that evil consorte of love and force,
when Anaxius had word, that from the Tower there were descried some companies
of armed men, marching toward the town; wherefore he gave present order to
his servants, and soldiers, to go to the gates and walless, leaving trone
within but himself, and his brothers: his thoughts then so full of their
intended pray, that Mars-his lowdest trumpet could scarcely have awaked him.

CHAP. 28.
1 Zoilus the messenger 2 and first offerer of force 3 is forccd to fly, and
die. 4 Lycurgus pointed to kill 5 is fought withal, 6 foiled, 7 and killed. 8
Anaxius the Revenger with Pyrocles the Punisher brave, and bravely combatted.

Zoilus, glad that he had the commission, went in the name of Anaxius, to tell
the sisters, that since he had answer from their father, that he and his
brother Licurgus, should have them in what sort it pleased them, that they
would now grant them no longer time, but presently to determine, whether they
thought it more honorable comfort to be compelled, or persuaded. Pamela made
him answer, that in a matter whereon the whole state of her life depended,and
wherein she had ever answered, the would not lead, but follow her parents
pleasure; she thought it reason she should, either by letter, or particular
messe^ger understand something from themselves, and not have her be led bound
to the report of their partial servants, and therefore, as to their words, she
and her sister, had ever a simple and true resolution, so against their unjust
force, God, they hoped, would either arm their lives, or take away their lives.

Well Ladies (said he) I will leave my brothers, who by Zelmane. But Zelmane
(having heard, all this while of the messengers being with Basilius, much to do
to keep those excellent Ladies from seeking by the pasport of death, to escape
those base dangers whereunto they found themselves subject) still hoping that
Musidorus would find some means to deliver them; and therefore had often both
by her own example, and comfortable reasons, persuaded the^ to ouerpasse many
insolent indignities of their proud suitors, who thought it was a sufficient
favor not too do the uttermost injury, now come again to the straight she
most feared for them, either of death or dishonor, if heroical courage would
have let her, she had been beyond herself amazed, but that yet held up her
wit, to attend the uttermost occasion which cue^ then brought his hairie
forehead unto her: for Zoilus smacking his lips, as for the Prologue of a
kiss, and something advancing himself, Darling (said he) let thy heart be full
of joy, and let thy fair eyes be of counsel with it, for this day thou shall
have Zoilus, who^ many have lo^ged for; but none shall have him, but Zulmane.
And oh, how much glory I have to think what a race will be between us. The
world, by the heavens, the world will be too little for them: And with that, he
would have put his arm about her neck, but she withdrawing her self from
him, My Lord (said she) much good may your thoughts do you, but that I may not
dissemble with you, my nativity being cast by one that never failed in any of
his progonostications, I have been assured, that I should never be apt to bear
children But since you will honor me with so hie favor, I must only desire that
I may perform a vow which I made among my cou^triwomen, the famous Amazons,
that I would never marry none, but such one as was able to withstand me in
Arms: therefore, before I make mine own desire serviceable to yours, you must
vouchsafe to lend me armor and weapons, that at least, with a blow or two or
two of the sword, I may not find my self perjured to my self.But Zoilus (but
laughing with a hearty lowdnes) went by force to embrace her; making no other
answer, but since she had a mind to try his knighthood, she should quickly
know what a man of arms he was: and so, with out reverence to the Ladies,
began to struggle with her.

Zelmane then Disdain became wisdom, and Anger gave occasion. For abiding no
longer abode in the mattter, she that had not put off, though she had
disguised, Pyrocles, being far fuller of strong nimblenes, tript up his
feet, so that he fell down at hers. And withal (meaning to pursue what she had
begun) pulled out his sword, which he ware about him: but before she could strike
him withal, he gat up, and ran to a fair chamber, where he had left his two
brethren, preparing themselves to come down to their mistresses. But she
followed at his heels, and eue^ as he came to throw himself into their arms
for succor, she hit him with his own sword, such a blowvpo^ the wast, that she
almost cut him a su^der: once, she sundred his soul from his body, se^ding it
to Proserpina, an angry Goddess against rauishers.

But Anaxius,seeing before his eyes the miserable end Lycurgus, Brother, said
he, chastise this vile creature, while I go down, and take order left further
mischief arise: and so went down to the Ladies, whom he visited, doubting there
had been some further practice the^ yet he conceived. But finding the^ only
strong in patience, he went and locked a great Iron gate, by which only any
body might mount to that part of the Castle, rather to conceal the shame of
his brother, slain by a woman, then for doubt of any other anoyance, and the^
went up to receauesome comfort of the execution, he was sure his brother had
done of Zelmane.

But Zelmane no sooner saw those brothers, of whom the first mark of valor to
be defense. And the^ accepting the opportunity of Anaxius going away, she
waited not the pleasure of Lycurgus, but without any words (which she ever
thought vain, whe^resolutio^ took the place of persuasion) gave her own heart
the contentment to be the assailor. Lycurgus, who was in the disposition of his
nature hazardouse, and by the luckie passing through many dangers, grown
confident in himself, went toward her, rather as to spoil, then to fight, so
far from fear, that his assuredness disdained to hope. But when her sword
made demonstrations above al flattery of arguments, and that he found she pressed
so upon him, as showed that her courage sprang not from blind despair, but was
guarded both with cunning and strength: self-loue the^ first in him divided it
self from vainglory, and made him find that the world of worthiness had not
his whole globe comprised in his breast, but that it was necessary to have
strong resista^ce against so strong assailing. And so between the^, for a few
blows, Mars himself might have bin delighted to look on. But Zelmane, who
knew that in her case, slownesse of victory was little better the^ ruin, with
the bellows of hate, blew the fire of courage, and he striking a maine blow at
her head, she warded it with the shield, but so warded, that the shield was cut
in two pieces, while it protected her, and withal she ran in to him, and
thrusting at his breast, which he put by with his target, as he was lifting up
his sword to strike again, she let fall the piece of her shield, and with her
left hand catching his sword of the inside of the po^mel, with nimble and
strong slight, she had gotten his sword out of his hand before his sense could
co^uey to his imagination, what was to be him such a wou^d upon his head, in
despite of the shields ouer-weak resista^ce, that withal he fell to the ground,
astonished with the pain, and aghast with fear. But seeing Zelmane ready to
conclude her victory in his death, bowing up his head to her, with a
countenance that had forgotten al pride, Enough excellent Lady, said, the honor
is yours: Whereof you shall want the best witness, if you kill me. As you have
taken from men the glory of ma^hood, return so now again to your own sex,
for mercy. I will redeem my life of you with no small services, for I will
undertake to make my brother obey all your comma^dements. Grant life I beseech
you, for your own honor and for the persons sake that you love best.

Zelmane represt a while her great heart, either disdaining Pyrocles by his aunt
of Thessalia, and greatly esteemed by him) he had presented to Philoclea, and
with inward rage promising extreme hatred, had seen Lyourgus with a proud
force, and not with out some hurt unto her, pull away from Philoclea because at
entreatie she would not give it him. But the sight of that was like a cyphar,
signifying all the injuries which Philoclea had of him suffered, and that
remembrance feeding upon wrath, trod down al co^ceits of mercy. And therefore
saying no more, but, No villain, dye: It is Philoclca that se^ds thee this
toke^ for they love. With that she made her sword drink the blood of his heart,
though he wresting his body, and with a cou^tena^ce prepared to excuse, would
fain have delaied the receiving of deaths ambassadors.

But neither that stayed Zelmanes hand, nor yet Anaxius cry unto her, who
having made fast the Iron gate, even then came to the top of the stairs, when,
contratire to all his imaginations, he saw his brother lie at Zelmanes mercy.
Therefore crying, promising, and threatening to her to hold her hand: the last
groan of his brother was the only answer he could get to his vnerespected
eloquence. But then Pity would feign have drawn tears, which Fury in their
spring dried; and Anger would feign have spoken, but that Disdain sealed up
his lips; but in his heart he blasphemed heaven,that it could have such a
power over him; no less ashamed of the victory he should have of her, then of
his brothers overthrow: and no more spited, that it was yet unrevenged, then
that the revenge should be no greater, then a woman's destruction. Therefore
with no speech, but such a groaning cry, as often is the language of sorrowful
anger, he came running at Zelmane, use of fighting then serving in steed of
patient consideration what to do. Guided wherewith, though he did not with
knowledge, yet did he according to knowledge, pressing upon Zelmane in such a
well defended manner, that in all the combats that ever she had fought, she had
never more need of quick seneses, and ready virtue. For being one of the
greatest men of stature then living, as he did fully answer that stature in
greatness of might, so did he exceed both in greatness of courage,which with a
cou^tena^ce formed by the nature both of his mind and body, to an almost
horrible fiercenes, was able to have carried fear to any mind, that was not
privy to it self of a true and costant worthiness. But Pyrocles, whose soul
might well be separeted from his body, but never alienated from the remembering
what was comely, if at the first he did a little apprehend the dangerousnes of
his adversary, whom once before he had something tried, and now perfectly saw,
as the very picture of forcible fury: yet was that apprehension quickly stayed
in him, rather strengthening, then weakening his virtue by that wrestling; like
wine, growing the stronger by being moved. So that they both, prepared in
hearts, and able in hands, did honor solitarines there with such a combat, as
might have demanded, as a right of fortune, whole armies of beholders. But no
beholders needed there, where manhood blew the trumpet, and satisfaction did
whette, as much as glory. There was strength against nimblenes; rage, against
resolution; fury, against virtue; confidence, against courage; pride, against
nobleness: love, in both, breeding mutual hatred, and desire of reue^ging the
injury of his brothers slaughter, to Anaxius, being like Philocleas captituity
to Pyrocles. Who had seen the one, would have thought nothing could have
resisted; who had marked the other, would have marueiled that the other had so
long resisted. But like two contrary tides, either of which are able to carry
worlds of ships, and men upon them, with such swiftnes, as nothing seems
able to withstand them: Yet meeting one another, with mingling their watrie
forces, and struggling together, it is long to say whether stream gets the
victory: So between these, if Pallas had been there, she could scarcely have
told, whether she had nurced better in the feats of arms. The Irish
greyhound, against the English mastiffe; the sword-fish, against the whale; the
Rhinoceros, against the elepha^t, might be models, and but models of this
co^bat. Anaxius was better armed defensiuely: for (beside a strong caske
bravely covered, wherewith he couerd his head) he had a huge shield, such
perchance, as Achilles showed to the pale walls of Troy, where with all that
body was covered. But Pyrocles, utterly unarmed for defense, to offend had the
advantage: for, in either hand he had a sword, and with both hands nimbly
performed that office. And according as they were diversely furnished, so did
they differ in the manner of fighting. For Anaxius most by warding, and
Pyrocles oftnest by avoiding, resisted the aduerfaries assault. Both hasty to
end, yet both often staying for advantage. Time, distance, and motion custom
made them so perfect in, that as if they had been fellow Counselors, and not
enemies, each knew the others mind, and knew how to prevent it. So as their
strength failed them sooner then their skill, and yet their breath failed them
sooner then their strength. And breathles indeed they grew, before either could
complain of any loss of blood.

CHAP. 29.
1 The Combattants first breathing, 2 reencounter, and

Anaxius stood leaning upon his sword, with his grym eye, so settled upon
Zelmane, as is wont to be the look of an earnest thought. Which Zelmane
marking, and according to the Pyroclean, nature, fuller of gay bravery in the
midst, then in the beginning of danger; What is it (said she) Anaxius, that
thou so deeply musest on? Does thy brothers example make thee think of thy
fault past, or of thy coming punishme^nt? I think (said he) what spiteful God
it should be, who, envying my glory, has brought me to such a way ward case,
that neither thy death can be a revenge, nor thy overthrow a victory. Thou
do well indeed (said Zelmane) to impute thy case to the heavenly
providence, which will have thy pride find it self (even in that where of thou
art most proud) punished by the weak sex, which thou most contemnest.

But then, having sufficiently rested themselves, they Anaxius oftener used
blows, his huge force (as it were) more delighting therein, and the large
protection of his shield, animating him unto it. Pyrocles, of a more^ fine, and
deliver strength, watching his time when to give fit thrustes; as with the
quick obeying of his body, to his eyes quick commandment, he shunned any
harm Anaxius could do to him: so would he soon have made an end of Anaxius, if
he had not found him a man of wonderful, and almost matchless excellency in
matters of arms. Pyrocles used diverse saynings, to bring Anaxius on, into some
inconvenience. But Anaxius keeping a sound manner of fighting, never offered,
but seeing fair cause, and then followed it with wel-gouerned violence. Thus
spent they a great time, striving to do, and with striving to do, wearying
themselves, more then with the very doing. Anaxius finding Zelmane so near
unto him, that with little motion he might reach her knitting all his strength
together, at that time mainly foyned at her face. But Zelmane strongly putting
it by with her right hand sword, coming in with her left foot, and hand,
would have given him a sharp visitation to his right side, but that he was
feign to leap away. Whereat ashamed, (as having never done so much before in
his life)


