A Famous Victory, Atchiued in August last 1613. by the Christian Galleys of
Sicilia, against the Turks.

Wherein were redeemed above a thousand Christian Captives, as many Turks
slain, and above six hundred taken.



Printed for TH: THORP. 1613.

A Famous Victory, Atchiued in August last 1613. by the Christian Galleys of
Sicilia, against the Turks.
HOW the Turk at first aspired to his greatness, and fithence has amplified
and maintained it, chiefly by distension of Christian Princes; I hold it
needless for me to set forth in writing, because it is a truth commonly
known, and generally confessed by all Writers: a matter much to be lamented,
that those Weapons which ought to have been bent against the enemies of
Christians and their Religion, have been so unchristianly and unnaturally
employed in the effusion of Christian blood. Hereupon have been erected those
glorious Trophies of many Victories, Wherewith the Grand Siguior has adorned
his Diadem.

But I will not insist any longer upon this common place of our Calamities: Let
us see awhile, what fruits Concord has produced, and to what height of
Honor she has advanced her followers; that so by comparing the great loss
and ignominy arysing from the one, with the abundant profit and renown
issuing from the other, we may all join in one hearty prayer to God, That he
would at length be pleased, to co-vnite the hearts of Christian Princes in one
firm bond of Peace, to the replantation of his Gospel in those conquered
Countries, and the extirpation of all Turcisme and Idolatry.

This was it, which lost us those ample and goodly Provinces in the East,
wherein our Religion was at first propagated; and wherein so many Millions of
Christians since that time hitherto, have been, and are reduced to most
miserable and insupportable slavery.

But because I study brevity, as desirous to draw near the intended subject
of this Discourse; it shall be sufficient (among many others) to allege one
or two examples for confirmation of this Truth.

At such time as that warlike Saladine, had by force invested himself in the
Kingdom of Syria, and subjected to his dominion Jerusalem, and the Holy Land,
the Christian Princes of these Western parts, combined in a strong league,
and moved with an holy zeal of Gods glory, transported an Army, under the
conduct of Godfrey of Bulloine, for the recovery of that Country.

Against this force of the Christians, the Saladine apposed with all his power;
and in many Conflictes, with variable success, for a long time maintained his
party: Mean while he forgot not (like a subtle Fox) by all possible
means, to corrupt such of the special Commanders, as he thought most likely
to be won to his purpose; if so, by disseuering the Chief of their secret
Consultations, he might make frustrate all their attempts.

The sum is; his Plots failed, and nothing suiteth to his wished purpose. He
relies therefore on his own Strength; is fought withal, and defeated, and the
Victory so hotly pursued, that driven he is at length, to abandon the
Kingdom, and leave it to the discretion of the victorious Conqueror.

In his room was that religious Godfrey inthroned: atfter whom, diverse
Christian Princes, for many years together, held the Sovereignty thereof, to
the great advantage and honor of Christendom, and the confusion of their
Enemies.

Afterward, in the time of Richard the first, King of this Land, the French
King then reigning, (excited with the like zeal of propagating our Religion,
and freeing that distressed Country from their merciless Enemies) entered into
firm League with the said Richard for the same purpose: These Princes
therefore with their joint forces, invade the Turks and win many Victories,
recover most of their Towns from them, as Ioppe, Acon, and others; and in the
end, expelling them from those parts, restore a perfect Liberty to the
oppressed Inhabitants.

By these means, have diverse of our ancient Princes acquired true glory,
whilst our Kingdom (being at peace in it self) was able and willing to
employ her forces against those damned miscreantes. But of this enough.

It is now time that we come to the purpose: wherein (according to my poor
skill) I will limme out unto you in a small pourtrait, the true Pattern (some
correspondent circumstances considered) of that famous Battle of Lepanto;
wherein the Turks and Christians, with their greatest forces contended, who
should prove the better men at Sea, and ought to have the Command and
Lordship thereof.

In which fight, the most of the Turkish Fleet was either lost, or taken, and
their General, with many other great Men, made Prisoners; besides a world of
ordinary Soldiers slain, and captiuated, But to our purpose.

The Duke of Ossuna, Viceroy of Sicil, keeping good Watch upon the Turks
proceedings, and knowing how much it behooved to use all circumspection against
so vigilant an enemy, for prevention of danger, and his own better
information, about the beginning of August last, sent forth eight Galleys from
Palermo, well manned and provided under command of Don Octauio Taglia Via d'
Arr^gona, to discover or attempt somewhat in the Leu^^t. Having all things
therefore in a readiness, He happily set sail, and with a good gale came to
Carigo: where he soon understood that the Turkish Fleet some few days
before had put from Constantinople with thirty Galleys, and were bound for
Rhodes, where they were to meet with sixteen more, which as then lay waiting
for them in the Negrepont; and that upon the meeting of these Fleetes they
should make sail for Soria, there to be employed against certain Rebels of
that Country, that were lately revolted from the Turks obedience.

Upon this Advertisement he put to Sea again, and touched at some Islands of
the Archipelago, where the same news of the Turkish Fleet were again
confirmed. He made no long stay, but thrust out again, and some few hours
after descried a Sail Whereunto making with all speed possible, he found her
to be of the Isle Macaria, demanding if they knew any news of the Turks;
They answered, that the day before, (at Zant) two Turkish Gallish had taken
from them five Barrels of Pitch; and that they reported for a truth, that the
Governor of Rhodes, the day before that Pitch taken, had sent out twelve
Galleys to tow certain Caramusals, or great Vessels, over the Channel of
Samos, that they might be the sooner ready to take their Freight from the
Carauan of Alexandria, and that for a more likelihood that this was true, they
themselves (besides those two Galleys with whom they had Conference) had seen
eight other Galleys, towing the Caramusals aforesaid.

DON OCTAVIO having gotten this intelligence, presently made to Sea-wards, and
plying with strength of Oars, and furthered with a fair gale, held his course
that day, and the next night for the other side toward the firm Land of
Natolia. Thither he came about the dawning, and at the Cape of Coruo met with
all his Galleys, which were in safety.

At day-breake he set sail again, and had not long coasted, when he might
ken a far off, ten sail of Galleys, being part of those twelve that had
towed the Caramusals: the other two, as was afterward reported, being sent by
the Turkish General to Scio. He had no sooner got sight of them, then he
prepared for their welcome, having a firm resolution to overcome or be taken.
Distributing therefore in fit places, all weapons and munition necessary, he
encouraged his Soldiers, and furiously made forth against them.

At the first he had thought to have encompassed them: but three of their
Galleys keeping aloof to sea, made his purpose frustra^e.

When the Fleetes were now come within reach of each other, the Ordinance on
either side began to thunder, and the small shot (like hail) flew aboard the
Galleys.

The two General Galleys made a furious encounter, and for the space of half
an hour, and upwards, maintained a bloody fight: during which time, Sinan the
Beg of Cypras, General of the Turkish Fleet, stood advanced in the poope of
his Gally, to behold the manner thereof, and to give directions as necessity
required.

In the end, after a sharp and terrible conflict, Don Octauio boorded the
Turkish Admiral in the Prow, and afterward in the Poope, wherein the
Sicillians made a wonderful slaughter.

In the mean while the other Galleys were not Idle, but with like violence
assaulted each other.

The victory fell to the Sicillians, with great execution done upon the Turks,
and small loss of their own. Seven of the Turks Galleys were presently
taken; two of them ran a shore, and the Turks leaping forth, saved
themselves in the mountains: the other three fled to sea-wards, and escaped.

Don Octauio having assured the victory, gave thanks to God the Author
thereof; and then gave order to repair his Galleys, which were no sooner in a
readiness, but with his own Galleys, and those that were taken, he joyfully
set forth, and made for Sicill.

In this fight, (besides the seven great Admiral Galleys which were taken)
these men of quality were made prisoners; Sinan the General, a man of great
account with the Turk: and Piali Bassa the Beg of Alexandria, being son to
the same Haly Bassa that was General at Lepanto: in whom I observe, that his
Family and Name is (as it were) predestined to increase the honor of
Christians with their ruin and captivity.

Many other men of great note were likewise taken, who are not likely to be
redeemed for a little: six or seven hundred Turks slain, as many taken, and
above a thousand poor Christians freed from slavery.

Thus have I briefly related unto you the sum of the victory; wherein if the
phrase be distasteful, let the truth of the matter supply that defect; And let
the common joy which we ought all to receive at the ouer-throw of our common
enemy, make some excuse for my rudeness, not affected with curiosity.

FINIS.

