The Sinners supplication.
Confessing his sins, and humbly craving pardon of the Lord: he hates the
world, and desires to inhabit in the heavenly Jerusalem: and the description
thereof.

To the tune of, Troy Town.


O Gracious God and heavenly King,
That rules and governes every thing,
Whose power the heavens and earth do know,
Behold me wretch oppressed with woe:
Be thou my God in this distress,
And ease me of my wickedness.
O Lord, Lord for thy mercy now forgive
me, come and receive me home.
The terrors of this fe^^ full death,
Which makes so many lose their breath,
Do make me fear my part therein,
For recompense of my great sin
O Lord unto my voice give heed,
And rid my life and soul from dread.
O Lord; Lord for thy mercy, etc.
Most gracious God now lend thine ear,
Bow down thy self my cries to hear,
Let not my words be spent in vain,
But help me Lord now I complain.
Be thou my rock my strength and stay,
For thou have promised help always.
This grievous scourge which thou have sent,
Upon us for our chastisement:
We must confess we have deserved,
For from thy laws we all have swerved.
Our sins have fore provoked thee,
In wrath against us all to be. etc.
The sins of Sodom here do reign,
And in our City do remain,
Both old and young, both rich and poor,
Do daily sin and vex thee sore:
They swear and lie, they steal and kill,
no for old shoes the poor they sell*
False beams and weights are daily used,
Whereby full many are abused,
And covetous Usurers by excess,
Have brought a number to distress,
They purchase daily house and ground,
And racking rents the poor they wound.
And I O Lord amongst the rest,
Do yield that I have sore transgrest:
But yet O Lord I thee desire,
Not to rebuke me in thine ire.
Bear not in mind my former ill,
But frame me to thy holy will.
I was conceivd and borne in sin,
And since I have most wicked bin,
Offending thee my gracious God,
Whereby I have deserved thy rod.
But now O Lord I do repent.
Let me not feel thy punishment.
My sins are set before mine eyes,
My graceless oaths I do despise,
My want of grace I do lament,
And youthful time so vainly spent.
Forgive me Lord for Christ his sake,
And let thy wrath and anger slake.
Vain world adue, thou flatterest man,
I loath thee now, do what thou can:
I yield my self most willingly
Unto my God to live and dye.
For under his wings I plainly see,
There is most safety for to be.
The second part, To the same Tune.


Oh where said David shall I fly,
But God will there be presently?
There is no place to escape from God,
If thou deserve to feel his rod.
Thou man in thy vocation stay,
And God will thee defend always.
I with my self am now resolved,
And with S. Paul to be dissolved,
From this Body of sin and mire,
I do most earnestly desire,
And with my Savior Christ to be,
To live with him eternally.
My thirsty soul desires her draught,
My poisoned mind would feign be out,
From chains and fetters of the flesh,
To live with him in happiness:
She longs to come into the coast,
Which she by Satan's wiles has lost.
From Egypt now I will return,
Where cruel bondage makes me mourn,
And eke from Babylon I would be,
Released from captivity:
To be in new Jerusalem,
Amongst the Saints to sing with them.
This is the home which I do mean,
That City new Jerusalem:
Where many thousand Saints do sing
Praises unto their heavenly King.
Within that City there is peace,
Continue's still and never cease.
There is an everlasting spring,
There birds do ever chirp and sing,
There blustering winter never blows,
It never freezeth there nor snowes:
Nor Summers parching does no harm,
The weather there is temperate warm.
There pleasant Gardens ever keep,
All forts of Flowers ever sweet:
The trees do blossom bud and bear
The fruits are mellow all the year
All sorts of plants both fresh and green,
At all times there are to be seen.
The gates of equal distance be,
Most beautiful and fair to see:
Bedeckt with many precious stones,
And wrought with burnisht I vory bones,
The walls of Jasper richly built,
The streets and houses paved and guilt.
There pleasant Wine in rivers flows,
Upon the banks the Sugar grows,
Enclosed in Reeds of Cynamon,
More sweeter than the honey comb:
To see these sights and many more,
Who would not covet there to go?
There is no need of Moon nor Sun,
For there the day and night are one:
No heart can think nor tongue can tell,
The glorious sightes for to excel.
The dwellers there are crowned with gold.
Like Kings most glorious to behold.
Like loving friends they live in bliss,
Like spouses they the Bridegroom kiss.
Their loving Lord and master dear,
Who feasteth them with heavenly cheer,
O God of heaven of thy good grace,
Conduct us to that heavenly place.
O Lord, Lord for thy mercy, now forgive
me, come and receive me home,
Printed at London for Henry Gosson, dwelling on London Bridge.


