FRIEND TO NAVIGATION Plainly expressing to the capacity of the simpler so the
whole mystery or foundation of the same Art, for whose sake, the Author has
only penned this Treatise, being himself a faithful good willer thereto.

woodcut of ship

Printed at London, by T.C. 1628.

drawing of astrological map

TO ALL THE MOST NOBLE AND GENEROUS SEAMEN of England, happiness in this life,
and eternally in the Heavens.
Urania having brought me (Right Noble) to the sight of your most admirable
Art, I could not choose but say, none could do so great a work, but the maker
of all things. And seeing it framed of so many excellent pieces, to say; none
but the Divine providence can uphold it: Whereupon I endeavored to enable my
self in some knowledge thereof; and (though poor) I Purchased some books,
and in diverse years bestowed much money; employing my (...) hours that I could
spare in this study and practice. And in the mean time, much sickness, and
death of my friends, bringing me vnder^^^ intolerable bondage (...), made me
come nearer this Honorable City; but with the loss of almost my whole estate:
and in the way had both my Books and goods, all lost and spoiled in the Thames
water. Nevertheless (although almost utterly unabled and ^nlearned) I have not
ceased to do good if possible I might (knowing that no man is borne for
himself.) Therefore I set forth in a bill at my door, to Teach the Art of
Navigations, to the poorer sort gratis: And not so content I have here framed a
good order there of (as I think) to send abroad to those that cannot come to
me. May it please you therefore under your favorable (...) direction, to admit
it your presence once only: to ask you leave, and to give you account what I
do among your servants as is most meet. And for your favorable
entertainment of it, your (...) respect to me for my good will, and your kind
acceptance, I rest,

Your Honors servant to be commanded, John Skay.

To the Ignorant and Honest Reader.
HOnest Reader, this work intended for thy good, despise not, but rather
accept it thankefully, seeing if it were better I ^ould have given it unto
thee; and more, while J live I rest always ready to do thee what good J may.
Thou have here (...) Chapters: The first is of the Cosmographicall description
of the world: The second is of the meas^re of the heavens: The third of the
Elements: The fourth is of the ground of the Art, The Jnstrument, Astronomicall
propositions, with the Geographicall (...), and Hidrographicall description of
the Earth and S^a: The fifth Chapter is of certain considerations briefly set
do^ne: The sixth is of Shipping and going out of the Harbor: The seventh of the
iournall observation and proiection. The eight and ninth is of propositions of
Navigations Arithmetically, Geometrically, and Jnstrumentally showed: The tenth
is of the motion of the Moon, and of coming into the Harbor. Jf thou profit
by it, give God the glory, to whom be praise for ever, Amen.

Vale, From my house in Saint Thomas Spittle, May the first, 1628. John Skay.

drawing of geometric equation
A FRIEND OF NAVIGATJON.
CHAP. I. Of the Cosm^graphicall description of the World.
THat which the only wise God made f^^ man's behoof, even all the world of
nothing, Genesis the first, is said to be round by all modern Writers: it is
proved by reason, and the holy Scripture says it, Psalm. 98. It was divided in
two parts by the same God, the part seen, and the part unseen: But by faith
search the Scriptures, there is the part and use in this our Christian
Navigations discovered.

The part seen is well defined to be a Book, In which we may see and learns
to praise God in his works. And is said to be of two parts, Celestial, and
Elementall: In the Celestial part may be considered the Arts, as Music, the
harmony of the Spheres: of Soul and Body, for whose health Physic is next,
in which we consider that Miraculous Medicine of preserving life, be it
Philosopher stone, Salt, Virgin-earth, or other denomination, or Mathematical,
as the knowledge of Points, Lines, Circles, Signs, Constelations, Planets, and
their Influence and power over bodies Elementall.

It may be said and that by good reason, I should begin at the Centor of the
Earth, and so consider of the things contained therein, with the Sea, The face
of the Earth and Sea, and the things thereon; The Air covering the other two,
and the Fire enclosing them all, making one round body of these Elementall
parts, being as a Centor to the rest, and so p^^^e upwards unto the first
m^^^er, showing the relation and agreement they have together, I living now
nearer the Centor of the Earth (as it is observed) by many thousand miles. But
if I end my work so high may be proud (as some are) or dazelled in the
Celestial brightness, being mortal, be cast down with Pl^^^^.

In the name of God therefore, and in his fear, I will begin with the first
mouer, which going with great violence, turns the whole frame of the heaven
within it, round in 24. hours, from East to West: Which heaven is said to have
no impression in it, being almost invisible, yet carrying the light and
darkness, making differ^nce of time in days and nights, according to the
difference of Longitude and Latitude of places on Earth.

In it are all the circles and points in the whole fabric of the world said
to be described, their plains defending and meeting in the Centor of the
Earth, or on their other Centors.

The two principal points, are the two poles of the world, the North pole
eliuated with us here at London 51. degrees, 30. or there about; and the South
pole is right opposite to it. Therefore depressed just as much (under the
horizon of which I will speak anon.) These (...) points are fixed fast and
immovable, between which and through the Centor of the Earth, there passes*
right line, which is called the Axe-tree of the world on which it turns.

Now we must consider both this right line, and all other right lines, cords,
signs, great circles and paralels, to be divided into 360. degrees, each
degree subdivided into 60. minutes, each minute into 60. Seconds, each Second
in 60. thirds, etc. as the case may require.

The Herman is a great circle, whose Centor is in the midst of the Earth, and
his plain reaches not only to the face of the Earth, dividing the upper part
from the lower, the day from the nights ^ut through the Or^e^ of the planits
and fixed stars, even to the first mouer. This circle has two poles, one is
called Zon^th, and is right over our head, from the which if a right line pass
through the Center of the Earth, touching the concaue superficies of the first
Mouer, it points out the other Pole, called Mador. In this Circle we count
the Amplitude of the Sun or Stars; and the Point of the Compass or Wind.
All the Circles called Azimuthes, cross the Horizon at Rectangles and pass
through the Poles thereof: His Parallels are Circle^ of Altitude, in which are
observed the position of the Planets and fixed Stars above the Earth, at all
hours of the day or night: Or Circles of Depresion dividing the length of
twilight.

The Equator is a great Circle, dividing the World into two equal parts, the
North part and the South: His parallels sets out the Latitude of places on
Earth, and declination in the Heavens. All the Meridians do cross the Equator
at Rectangles and go through the Poles of the World. On this is counted the
Longitude of places on the Earth or Sea: For every 4 of equal time made by
the equal motion of the Equator does make 1 degree. And 7 degrees. 30 min. of
Longitude, either East or West, does cause ^ hour difference in time of day or
night, and they that dwell 15, or 30 degrees. East have it 12 or 11 a clock, when
we have it 10 or 11, and those that dwell so much West of us, have it 10 or 11
when it is midnight with us. These that dwell at the East part of our Horison
have it noone when it is but 6 in the morning with us, and when it is noone
with us, it is 6 at night with them, but with them in the West part of our
Horizon it is 6 in the morning. Our Antipodes have it ^oo^e when it is midnight
with us, and when it is Summer with us, it is Winter with them.

All other Circles not yet named are likewise supposed to be in the first
Heaven, as in the rest of the inferior Orbs of which we suppose 11 after
Maginus. And to good purpose: For the Lord of Heaven and Earth has so laid the
Foundations of the Earth that they cannot be moved, Ps. 14.2. Though Co^^^^^ to
bring some good purpose about has imagined so.

Let the tenth Heaven be (if you please) the Wa^ers above the Firmament, for
there are so, Genesis 1.6, 7.

CHAP. II. Of the measure of the heavens
THe Zodiaque is a great broad circle crosing the heavens, like a b^n^^^re or
girdle, of 12d. broad at the ^east; in the midest ^hereof is a little circle
called the ecliptique line, which crosses the Equator at two opposite points,
swar^eth from it 23d. 30. at the least, as I have ^ound by observation this
present year 1627. So the poles of the Ecliptique are distant from the poles
of the world 23d. 30. by reason of his obliquitie: Between which poles there
passes a right live or Axetree on which the second ^ouer or tenth heaven is
carried in his own motion (contrary to the first) from West to East, and is
most slow, making his revolution in 3434 years, and 10. days.

The third mouer or ninth heaven, has his two poles in the two po^^ts of the
equator and ecliptique, and his motion is from North to South: making his
revolution in 1717. years and 5 days. But it will be sufficient for our
necessary use here to observe the motion of the 8. Sphere, wherein are all the
Celestial bodies of the fixed Stars placed: whose motion is from West to
East, (some say but one degree in 100. year. But the Planets moan in their
Or^es (...), as (...) in 30. year, Jupiter in 12. years, Mars in 2. year, ^
Sol in one year, Venus and Mercury like, Luna in a month from West to East.

Diverse learned Mathematicions have set down the magnitude of the Stars to
be far bigger then the earth: making 6. differences in bigness be sides
du^ke and obscure. The Planets also are said to be of (...) bignesses and
distances. The Orb of is (...) miles, and his distance from 78721 (...) The
Orb of 189^^54^ m. His distance to 78721. m. That of ^ 2630^800. m. his
distance from 15725. m. 343996 4/^. m. His distance from 23437 m. The Orb of
3274494 6/12. Her distance from 12812. m. Orb 253372 ^/^. m. His difference
from 12812, The to be in bigness 105222 ^/11. her distance from the earth 15750.
m. his bigness compared to the Earth i^ as 95. to 1. and his distance to the
Firmament 2^0445. m. (...) his magnitude to the Earth is a^ (...) 91. to ^. And
as ^. to 1. And the distant from the Fir^^ment to the Earth 35 846 3. m.

It has appeared manifestly that both by Sea and Land, who so trauaileth 60.
miles on a great Circle, alters a degr^e in his Travail: which takes 360.
times tho number of the whole circle, makes 21600. miles the conpasse of the
whole Earthland Sea. The Diameter then will be 6872 ^/11. the semyd^amiter 3436
4/1^ m. which makes the firmament to be from the Center of the Earth 361899^
^/^. Therefore it seems there is something to work upon to measure these
things by.

Likewise I may say, considering that from the earth to the Moon is 15750.
miles, and the is the lowest Planet. Therefore the two uppermost elements of
Air and Fire are both together 15750 mi. in thickness: Again, because the
hill Atlas is said to reach to the middle region of the air, that hill (which I
take to be Teneriffe) may easily be measured, and so the measure of all the
rest is had.

The motion of the Eclipticke causes other four circles to be described, two
are described of the motion of the Poles thereof, being distant from the ^^^es
of the world 23. degrees 30. min. making two round circles about them: that
next the North pole is called the circle Articke, the other is called the
circle Antarticke. The other two are described by the motion of the tow.
Tropicall points of the eclipticke, that on the North side of the equanox is
called the tropicke of Cancer, the other is called the tropicke of Capricorn.
The Zodiac is divided in 12. equal parts, beginning at the one intersection
of the same with the equanoctiall circle, and so going round: And these are
called the 12. signs of the Zodiac, for as much as they extend them to the
full breadth of the Zodiac, and are the cause thereof.

There are two other circles also of special use in this Art, one is the
Equinoctial colure, the other is the Solititiall colure: These two are great
circles, the first parts the Equator and Zodiac even, so as the North
signs are from the South signs parted by the first point of the first sign,
and the first point of the sca^outh sign: and these signs are called Aries,
and Libra, beginning the Spring and Autumn, the other passes by the two
tropicall points of Cancer, and Capricorn, making the beginning of Summer and
winter; both passing through the poles of the world, parting the Zodiac in
four equal parts, and the equator also with all his paralels.

The first point of, begins the Spring: that is, when the Sun in his
motion comes first to that point, and going through three signs, Taurus,
Gemini: then coming to the first point of, begins the Summer: and passing
through other three signs Leo, Virgo, so comes to Libra, Scorpio,
Sagitarius, to the first point of: begins the winter, from thence through,
Aquarius, Pisses making the whole years revolution. And these 12. signs are
called Constellations, and there are other Constellations, some North, some
South, in which is had a number of Stars bearing names, according to their
nature: and these constellations bear rule over diverse Regions, Countries and
Cities.

Now we may pass the Orbs of the other superior Planets, and only note their
friendly aspect as we pass by them: And consider the motion with the for the
Eclipses of use, for finding of longitude on earth or Sea. Her monthly motion,
full change and quarters, for the ebbing and flowing of the waters, spring and
nepe tides: her aspect with the planets, good or evil, for Physic: Her place
in the Zodiac, for blood letting either for Man or Beast.

C^AP. III. Of the Elements.
FIre is the most noble and superior of all the Elements, pure, subtle, most
spiritual, putting heat into all substances, lightsome, having motion Lionous,
choloricke. Air is divided into three Regions, that next the Fire is most hot,
that in the middle most cold, unto the which some hill tops do clime, as has
been seen, the lowest is that in which we live, the Clouds and the Fowls do
fly, which God of his mercy make wholesome unto us. God said let the waters
under heaven be gathered into one place, and let the dry land appear, Genesis
1.9. And God called the dry land Earth, and the gathering together of the
waters, he (even God) called Sea, ver. 10. Sea, which together with the earth
make one huge massiue body, round, as may be proved by the artificall Globe,:
but most truly by a perfect Artsman, who using his skill in his Travel, both
by Sea and Land, is able to salve such small irrigularities, as high tides,
low ebbes, high Mountains low Valleys: For experience is the mother of Acts,
and th^^^ (...) partly conceive in this (I having a brother in Saint
Christophers Isle of the West Indies, who has sent me Letters from Meri^rs
Hope there) I went to Gresham College in London of purpose to look on the
biggest Terrestrial Globe they had, and found such an I Will to lie in some 16.
degrees. of North Latitude, and in 321 degrees. of longitude, or there about: But there
I could find neither Cape, nor Bay, Port nor Haven; therefore no universal
Map will serve that turn: And Master, being there with me at that time, made
a doubt, saying: How know I that Saint Christophers I Will lies there except I
had seen it, or know some body that had bin there? meaning no doubt some
Arts-man, who (I confess) may not only observe the longitude and latitude;
but may also set out the Capes and Bays, Ports, Bounds, Rivers, and give the
dimention of the superficis.

Of the innumerable multitude of creatures in the Sea, and of her riches, I
will not speak; but the artificial making and use of Shipping therein is
admirable, as may appear in the whole Art of Navigations: A wonderful secret
thereof is the variation of the compass; a cause thereof is imagined to be the
hollownesse of the Earth or depth of the Sea, and for that nature abhorring
emptiness, the excellent virtue of the Lodestone does always draw toward it
in all places, where the needle being touched therewith shall draw most near;
but I think it is a special gift of God, sent for man's use, but far above
his knowledge. Sea and earth are divided as the heavens: the beginning of the
Equator or first Meridian being with Saint Michael and Saint Mary's Isles, the
circle of the equator passing by Saint Thomas I Will, Abasa^^^, the famous I Will of
Sa^^^ta, B^rni^, Pap^os, New Guinny, G^na^^s, and fo round, from Meridian to
Meridian Eastward we count Longitude on any parallel: but Latitude is counted
from the Equator toward the Poles of the World on the Meridian or colure. The
Paralels sets out the Zones and Climates.

Of creatures without life, or such as are in the earth only, are Gold,
Silver, precious Stones, Minerals, Metals. But the Bodies which shall one day
rise again, are chiefly to be considered. Of Creatures with life, some are
fixed, as Plants, Herbs, Flowers, Spices, Trees, bearing fruit, without
fruit. Genesis 2.19. Out of the ground God formed beasts and fowls: and in
another place it is said All flesh is grass. Therefore of moving things some
are in the Earth, as Worms, Serpents, Moles, Co^^e^: some in the Air, as
Fowls: in the Water, as Fishes. Monsters on the face of the earth, as all
manner of Beasts and Cattle wild and tame. The most excellent thing made is
man (a shame for him to become so wicked) Being wonderfully made, Psalm. 139. an
epitomy of the whole World; to seek and set forth Gods glory: surely flesh and
blood cannot set forth his glory, whose works do amaze the senses of the most
learned. Therefore be not proud O ye learned, nor vaineglorious O ye wise; but
seek and set forth Gods glory, that the unwise and unlearned, may see, mark,
and learn: and be encouraged O thou that art ignorant (of which I am chief)
to see the works of the Lord in heaven and in earth, and his wonders in the
deep Sea, Ps. 107.

CAHP. IIII. The gound of the Art, the Instrument, Astronomycall propositions,
with the Geographicall and Hidrographicall description of the Earth and Sea.
REason does teach, and this 36. years experience I have had, that to the
gaining of these knowledges, quantity is to be considered, either
Geometrically or Arithmetically, or most usually of both together. Arithmeticke
is the Art of numbering, and every number is expressed by certain Characters,
figures, and Ciphers, as: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0. or: 2^. 3d. 30. 50.
20l: {powerof3}+ {powerof2}+ {powerof1}=to {powerof5}-n. But the figures and
Ciphers whether they be abstract or contract, have a double signification to
express them, which is called their numeration, Psalm. 90. ver. 12. O Lord,
teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.
Figures do either signify themselves only, as 1. is one, 2. is two, etc. or
are valued according to their place: Position of this kind is known as men
read the Hebrew tongue. This Art gives the numerall solution in all
dementions, and has these kinds: Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication,
Division; and these all have a diverse property in their use, either in working
proportion, or otherwise. Another Arithmatique there is (not of numbers) but of
parts of number, having like species, properties and passions, and fetch either
their beginning from unity, but with a difference, for as number increases in
multitude Infinitely: so do Fractions decreaseth infinitely but most commonly,
as in this work, they are compound: for if I take in account of Time, Motion,
Measure, Signs, Degrees, Minut^, Seconds, etc. As in reckoning of the place,
Thus: suppose the in the day of to be in the first degree of; and a^ 20. days
old, I would know her place; say if the go in one day 12. degrees from the, and
the go each day one degree, Therefore the goes in 20. days 260d. which
divided by 30d. gives 8^: 20d. where ^. is the number 20, the Fraction, and
his place the 20d. of Sagitarius: But where degrees. are taken for numbers, there
Minutes, Seconds, Thirds, are Fractions: as 15d. to an hour 4. to a degree, or
20d. is as much as one hour 20: or 20d. 50. 30. is as much as 1250 miles: and
generally all circles and paralels, are numbered with these kind of
Astronomicall Fractions or numbers.

Geometry gives a punctual termination to all dementions, either in length,
breadth, or thickness: which number many times cannot do; as in dividing a
line by extreme and mean proportion. But number and parts do help Geometry
to express the quantity, be it in length, breadth, or thickness.
Linne^^^mall as angles right lined, of Sphericall: and may serve to tell some
distance (...) Instruments necessary in any work, are of necessity, and to
this work which contains so many Arts, it may be objected that one poor
though of a good capassity shall be never able to attain. Say not so man, for
the best instrument in any work is a willing mind: Again, shall I be ashamed
to endeavor to do well, because some more learned then I, will despise my
simplicity and weakness in knowledge? No sure, the virtuous will commend it,
God be thanked there are as many good Instruments as Arts, let every man be
content with such as he has, and God no doubt will bless the good endeavors
of the godly honest. 2s. 6d. on a pair of Compasses, and two pence on a
straight ruler is not much: with these thou may begin in spending some
spare hours time to work thus: first make a circle, diuid it in 360. parts,
or into 90, and besides abundance of necessary conclusions, which the malicious
ignorant will not believe, these following are not the least, and are most meet
to be known: Radius or any sign, cord, arc, Tangent, Secant, great circle,
parralell: example: I did take the height, May the 26. 1627. and so found his
declination 22d. 30. North, his place being in 15d. right assention, 61d. 30.
difference assentionall 28d. 15. height of the North pole 51d. 30. Amplitude
37d. 30 North. oblique assention 33d. 15.: semydiurnall arc 118d. 15.
semynocturnall arc 61d. 45. his course from rising to his setting, 15 hours
40. length of twilight 8 hours 14. length of the night dark 0. hour.
Likewise about December the 12. 1627. place 0 merid height 15d. declination
23d. 30. South, amplitude 40d. 30. south, right assention 270d. oblique
assencion 298. degrees. 30, difference assencional 28. d. 30. Likewise may the
fourth 1629. suppose the sons place which is his longitude, found by the
rules before going to be 53. d. or the 23. of. in the latitude of 51. degrees. 30.
min. his merid. height is found by these rules to be 55. degrees. declination 18.
degrees. north, amplitude 28. north, right assention 50. degrees. oblique 27. degrees.
difference assentionall 23. degrees. semydiurnall arc 7. hou. 32. min.
semynocturnall arc 4. hou. 28. min. length of twilight 2. hou. 4. min. from
noone to evening shut in 9. hou. 33. min. length of the day 19. hou. 6. min.
night dark 4. hou. 54. min. Son rise at 4. hou. 28. m. sets at 7 hou. and
32. min. Sun above the Horizon 1^ hou. 4 min. under the Horizon 8 hou. 56 min.

And here remember, that, The works of the Lord ^p g^^^^ sought out of all
them that have pleasure therein. Ps. 111.2. The merciful and gracious Lord
has so done his maruilous works, that they ought to be had in remembrance, v.
4. The Lord is high above the Heavens, Ps. 113.4. Who is like the Lord our God,
that has his dwelling so high, and y^^ humbles himself to behold the things
that are in Heaven and in Earth, v. 5. He takes the simple out of the ^^st. v.
6. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Fir^^^^^^ shows his
handiworke, Ps. 19.1. As Arcturius Orio^ pleades the hiden Chambers of the
South, the great Lauiathan that mo^eth in the water, but beyond all our
Redemption in Christ, God commanded Noah to build an Arc, and to build Shiping
were but vain except God bless it and be the Sea-mans guide. Say then, is it
not a great blessing we receive from him in guiding our Ships and Selves both
by Sea and Land with such excellent Rules of Art: Surely the learned in the
Geographicall, Hidrographicall and Nauticall Sciences must needs confess it,
especially those that travel.

Neither need any be so sottish as to think it a shame to spend ten min. of
his idle time every day to some such good purpose, which may add him more
comfort perhaps in distress, then all the friends in the world besides. By the
Seal made on a straight Ruler and Compasses distance is had easily without
measuring to them, for make a Circle and divide it in four equal parts with
straight lines over the Centor, then divide in two equal parts, and each of
them in 3 then again these subdiuision^ in 3 and lastly those into 5, so is
one quarter of the Circle divided into 90 degrees. by the same reason you may
divide a right line as your Ruler into Foots, each Foot into Inches or Tenths,
each 10 into ^^ 3. 4. 5. 7. 11. 12. 16. 20 parts or what you please, and then
begin to work thus, Imagine to stand on some Hill as at High (...) from thence
to all the highest Hills round about you cast your eye, and by your Circle
divided you may take the quantity of the Angle from your eye to the two next
Hills from you and nearest one to another. Suppose that Shutors Hill and
^urfleet Hill do make an Angle of 1/^ of the quadrant or 30 degrees. Or Harrow
Hill and Saint Albones make an Angle of 40 degrees. and the distance between
High-gate and Shuters Hill to be 10 mil. more or less, and from High-gate to
Harrow 12 mil. you shall go to Shuters Hill and observe the Angle between
High-gate and Purfleet, be it right or oblique, acut or obtuse make 2 lines,
whereof one to be laid down by the Scale on your Ruler of the just distance
between your 2 first stations, at the one end make the first Angle, at the
other end make the other looking one toward the other, and the two lines
continued will point you our Purfleet, do so by the other and it will point
you out Saint Albones, then by your Scale you may know their distance, having
them distances you may easily find all the distances and angles of position or
situation of all the Hills, Towns, Rivers, Borders, in any one County, and
from thence ye may do the like by the rest, and so take a true su^^eigh of a
Kingdom, and of all the Isles, and Rocks in the Sea, and Kingdoms adjoining,
as Scotland with his Isles, and over the Sea, as Ireland with his Isles, likewise
from Dover to Callice, and so take the Country and Kingdom of France, with
his Rivers, Isles, Rocks, and every remarkable thing that comes in view of
your eye.

But note, that if you measure such great distances, you must have regard to
Longitude and Latitude, for if you shall measure from France to Spain,
Portugale, and so over the mouth of the St^i^^ of Guib^ater into Barbary,
Guiny, by the Coast of Saint Thomas I Will, Monomotapa, Cape Good-hope, the Coast
of Saint Latence, Mosamque, Prester John, the head of the ancient River Nilus,
the Arabian, Iudean, Notalia, Grecian, Italian Countries, so come to Germany,
Polonia, and all those North parts to the Pole if you can, or to Sweden,
Moscouia, and the North part of Tartaria, and th^^ way discou^r all the North
parts round about the Pole, and so if you can come into North America, if not,
then come over Land near the Caspian Sea, Parthia, Persia, Ormuse, Gus^^^ Goa,
Cochin, and all the Isles to the South thereof, the Gulf of Bengala, Malaca,
Sumatra, the Strait of Sunda, Iaua mayor, Iaua minor, new Ginny, Papoos,
Hiland, Timor, so to Beach, and to the discovery of the parts of Maletor
Kingdom to the South Pole if you can, or by the Moluce^e, Bernie, Ca^^bia,
Cochin China, Iapan China, to Cathay, from thence East a little North to the
Straits of Annian, and so into the most Westerly parts of North America,
Portray all that new world, to be short, come by the Gulf of Mexico down to
the Strait of Land called Noua Hispaniola to Peru, go over the ^trait of
Ma^^^nica and discover all the unknown Land round about the South Pole.

Which thing may be done by Gods permission no doubt, and when thou have done
this most truly, with all the Coasts of the Seas, thou will say the
circompherence of the Sea is also had^ True, yet nevertheless ye shall never
be able to lay the true semetry of both Earth and Sea on a plain superficies
by this way.

The like may you prove by the Hidrographicall description of the Sea, by the
common Sea Card. And here note, that this may serve likewise to prove that the
Earth and Sea make one round Body.

CHAP. V. Of certain considerations to be remembered, briefly set down.
AS I conceive, there are these three things to be considered, without which
failing cannot be performed. The first, is an exact observation of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars. The second, is the perfect finding out of the vari^tion of
the Compass. Lastly, a true reckoning of the Ships way. These all do helps
one another, and should be precisely had. Again, the Earth and Sea making one
round Body, we may consider that to sail between 2 places, may be either by a
Par^a^ll, a Rui^^, or a gr^^^ Circle, as ye may perceive by the artificial
Globe. Therefore if ye can draw some blanke Charts to carry with you in your
voyages, such whose Meridians and Parralels bear such proportion one to the
other in each Latitude, as those in the Globe, you shall do well.

In the Globe you may perceive the degrees in the Equator to agree and be
equal with the degrees in the Meridian. Now the degrees in the Meridians (...)
where equal, but the degrees in the Parralels to the Equator are less and
less, so that a degree of Longitude in the 60 degrees. of Latitude is but of that
degree of Longitude in the Equator, and as the whole sign is to the number of
parts in a degree of Longitude at the Equator, so is the fight of the
complement of any Latitude to a fourth number (by the rule of proportion of
geometrical demostration) which number tells you how many parts of a degree of
the Equator serves a degree of Longitude in that Latitude, but in a plain
Card where the Meridians are all Parralels, there because the degrees of
Longitude in each Latitude are equal, you must increase the degrees of the
Meridian in each Latitude in such proportion as is above said, which is easy to
be done with the Scale on your Ruler.

This to look on to the eye will be strange, and to such as love to st^oke to
their old errors, in the plain Card they will think it clean against reason,
but let such describe some portion of the world in it, they may compare it with
a Globe, and see it bear a true semetry, but in their plain Card it will
appear monstrous. Here is now a view of the world from Centor to
Circomference, Here is an entrance to the means of obtaining to some ability
in the use and practice thereof: But above all and in all things give unto the
Lord the glory due unto his name, Ps. 29.2. And this indeed is the very thing
wherein we ought to rejoice, and for which God made us, namely, to seek his
glory, which is wonderfully seen: and for forth in the frame of the World, but
most mightily in the part vns^^^ but by Faith, with which eye thou must look
into Heaven by viewing here on Earth Gods holy Word, and hearkening with the
ear of Faith, to the Ministers of his Word, who do break the Bread of Life
unto the faith (...) ^^reable virgins strong meat unto men, and (...) unto
babes, so shall thou be the better able to worship the Lord in the beauty of
his holiness, Ps. 19.2.

It appears, G^^. 1.14. that God made the Lights in the Firmament to divide
the day from the night, and to be for signs and seasons, days and years. And
v. 15. to give light upon the Earth, according to the roundnesse of the Earth,
and motion of the the light and darkness do differ, for the Suns body
being bigger then the body of the Earth, makes that the Sun being at the
Equator, although from Sun rising to Sun setting be just 12 hours, yet the
light will appear from break of day to evening shut in 14 h. 24 m. and the
darkness will continue 9 h. 36 m. Now if two men be one under the North Pole,
another under the South Pole, they shall both see the Sun in their Horizon,
if the decline toward the North, he will rise above the Horizon to him in the
North, but to him in the South the sets and when the is in the tropicke of
it is noone with him in the North, but with him in the South it is midnight
(and contra.) By this it appears the time between Sun rising and Sun set
to either of them is about 436. hours, on ^/^ year, saving that the Lords
loving kindness has been of old, Psa 5, 6 to this Christian part of the
world, in placing the Suns Apoge in this part, by which we receive a double
benefit, the one of light so much the longer by the Suns slow motion, the
other, that when the Sun is come so near our Zeneth, it has pleased God to
draw it up nearer Heaven and further from the Earth, that we be not burned with
his heat, as it is written, The Sun shall not burn thee by day, nor the
Moon by night, Ps. 121.6. Et (...) in the South part of the World among the
Heathen that know not God. But in the Poles the twilight lasts so long as the
Sun is within 18 degrees. of the Horizon, which is about the first of May, so the
dark night lasts 1968 h. and the twilight is about 1200 h. that is 50 days
with us. From these two differences in a right Sphere you may make to your
self a Theoricke of the oblique by considering the difference of light
between any number of degrees from the Equator to the Poles as you please, or
after this example: I did observe the height of the Sun this year 1627, and
found him to be more then 62 degrees. in Meridian height, proves that the Sun has
more then a ^ degrees. 30 min. declination, or else the Poles elevation to be less
then 51 d. 30 m. here at London, which the learned have likewise proved in
the^^ most exact observations, but for the less learned, and the honest
Sea-mans use, the declination of 23 d. 30 m. will make no (...). Now that in a
Country of known Latitude you may fin^lly the height of the Sun his Azimuth
and declination in any Longitude, by which you may find the variation of your
Compass at all hours of the day, or by the day of the month the Suns Meridian
height being given, is had the Latitude of the place, or height of the Pole,
then the amplitude or azimuth as before, and to speak truly, these
prepositions depend on one another, and what is said of the Sun, may likewise
be done by the Stars being known, their Longitude, Latitude, and Declination
being likewise had.

If any man shall say, I have discovered my wants herein, he says truly, if my
malice my good will, let him know I care not, if any man will further my
willing mind, to him I will send this Boaste for Patronage, and for ever pray
for him, if any fleare and scoff at me, it were much better for his Soul
that he were at prayers, and leave scoffing. Every good man may if please him,
amend this, and so further me. If no ignorant man will profit by it, yet let
such as are honestly minded, suffer this to live with me, because all that I
have, or can do, is but to employ my time in such mean knowledge as I have,
to Gods glory, and the benefit of my Country. Wherein if knowledge and a
purse did agree with heart and good will, I would strive with the best Subject.
In the mean time I will strive to do my best, as my duty does bind me.

CHAP. VI. Of Shipping and going out of the Harbor.
THese things before spoken of, are most useful, and now I hold it a good
method to examine your Ship whether she be for your turn or not, in all
things well appointed for the Sea, if new, how well built, and strong, and how
well fitted in her ge^re, if old, whether she be able to endure the surging
waves of the Sea, to go another voyage, and likewise for her burden,
proportioned according to the business ye use her for. But if ye wi^^ build a
new Ship in any proportion assigned, ye shall judge (...) better how to have it
done, by learning so much in Arithmeticke, as to be able to extract the Square
and Rube root, then may you do after this example next following, or otherwise
at your pleasure. Let the proportion be as two to one, and suppose you have a
Ship of 100 tun, in all things so well framed, that thou do desire to have
one of 200 tun, and like to the other to do this, first take the measures of
your first Ship, which suppose to be these, the Keele 44 foot, at the Beam 20
foot, in Houle 9, foot, her Rake before 13 foot, after 7 foot, here is given
six numbers, and the proportion assigned, and seeing the proportion is to be
doubled, therefore take each number and cube it, then double that cube number,
and extract the cube root of that number, and you shall find the second Ship
must have in Keele 55 foot near, and Beam 25 and about, in Houle 11, Rake
before 16^, after almost 9, and her burden will be 200 tun, or this may be
found by that excellent Instrument of the memorable Mast. Edmund Gu^^^r, lately
set forth by him in his lifetime, and is called a Sector, his proportional
Ruler and Crosse-staffe is well known to be an excellent Instrument for these
purposes following, and also for many other, Take in equal parts of the Sector
44, and fit it over in the Cubes at 44, the Sector so resting, take with your
Compasses the distance over in 88 of the Cubes, and apply it to the equal
parts, gives 55, as before, do so by the rest, and you shall find the like
numbers.

But say it be demanded to have her of any other proportion, namely, as 20 to
15, or 4 to 3, take the measures of the first, an before, and cube them, then
say, if 15 give such a Cube, what Cube shall 20 give, it will give a number,
whose Cube root in the number sought. But by the Sector take the numbers (...)
etc. in equal parts, and fit them over in 15 of the Cubes, then take the
distance over in 20 of the same lines, and that applied to the equal parts,
gives the number sought.

And now being fitted with a Ship for thy purpose and having launched, and
going down the River take heed to the set of (...) Tide, not only for running
foul of other craft, but least ye bring your self on ground on a Lee shore,
on a Shelfe, Sand, or Shole, as Barking shelfe, a Shole against Grayes, Black
shelfe, the Piles below Tilberie, Milton shore, or in a dark night gape for a
sho^e, and think to gain the point, but run your Ship clean out of the
Thames as I see one had done, the 18 December. 1627, and laid her on the March
below Greene-hiue in Kent. Going out or in any River whatsoever, note what
mark ye see with the opening of any Point, as Yoke on a Wall, Tree, House,
Hill, Wood, Windmill, Steeple, Castle, or Town, and learn to describe the
Semetry of it, and note it in a Book, remembering to sound the depth, and note
it likewise, and what grounds for ancoring good or bad, with the swiftness and
indraft or outlet of the waters, ye may also describe the windings thereof by
the Compass, with the lengths and breadths on a Paper, and be sure to note the
magniticall Azimuth, for your variations, be it of the Son or Stars, which
to be able to do, learn so much in Geometry, as to be able to describe the
Sphere in plain, and to know the use of the Globes, or at least to use your
plain Scale, and keep your trauice on your Card, and a Iournall or days Book,
and know both in River and at Sea, thou must make use of these two Globes,
namely, the Scriptures where the good shine like Stars, and Christ Jesus is
the true Lodestone.

CAHP. VII. Of the Iournall, observation, and proiection.
When you are come into the Sea, begin your Iournall on this wife: In the Name
of God, Amen. The days Book for the Voyage intended, for Saint Christophers,
and C^^^e de Mine. The 24 of May we came out of Portsmouth, and ^^cored in
Stokes Bay. The 25 we weighed, and with a g^^e Basterly. The 26 we put
thorough the Needles. The 27 we put in at Dartmo^th, the wind South South
West, very fo^^e. And you may make a ^alender after such like order a^ this.

hear though I have set but some days of the mouth: yet I mean you should
set down each day, and in the last space to note each days variation, and
which Pole is eliuated in the end, say: This 31. of July, saying on an east
wind by Gods protection, we had sight of Matalena, and at noone our latitude
found by the Sun pearing through the Vane of your Instrument 15. de. 3. mi.
and by the North Star the next morning the like: so at noone the South East
part of Matalena South, and the Meridian distance from the Lizard 1009 leagues,
and diference of longitude 57. de. and dominico South end 58. de. and in your
way note thus, for example in a book by it self: May the 24. from the 23. at
noone, from South to East 10. de. 17. mi. latitude 23. de. 18. mi.. magnitude,
Azimuth 130. de. 5. mi. True Azimuth 117. de. 12. mi. the variation 12. de. 53.
mi. as in chap. 4. and set down whatsoever is remarkable in your way, as well
in the Sea as else for example being in the Latitude of 46. S. the body of the
Isles of Babe North East, 7 leagues being to the North of the Maine shole that
lies in mid way between Mintain and Isles Babe the West Land of Babe Isles
North West. North 5. leagues from the South I Will of Babe toward the East by
North. 20. leagues in Latitude 20. is a dry shole that has to the W. N. W. of
it a shole or Ledge that is 3. leagues off. Also from the dry shole is on to
the N. E. and from the dry shole another to the E. S. E. from the dry shole the
pike of Pasamond Hill 31. de. Mag. E. to N. 42. miles, which I found by
observation: for being 6. miles from shole, my Angle of shole and Hill 85. de.
and the Angle from shole to hill and Ship 87 de. from Hill to Shole and Ship 8.
de. by which the distance was found, and the Hill appeared thus.

And for the soundings do thus, April 29. evening Bautum hill 17. de. 2. mi.
from S. to W. 14. fatham Poloubaus and near point 26. from S. to W. 14.
fatham, at the same time A. N.E. by ^. 3. leagues. 4. fatham.

And now left any should say I have prescribed many things to others, and can
do nothing my self; I will make an evident and plain demonstration of most
of these things, wherein I shall make more easy the book of M. Thom^s
Addison, sometime of Ratcliffe* in his life time a good Seaman, and Mr. of the
Ship called the Palsgraue, bound to the East Indies in the year 1624. where he
dyed before he had diuulged them: his widow not knowing what to do in the
matter, and I hearing of the same, did purchase the said books at my own
charge: Thinking it but my duty to quicken and raise unto life for the benifit
of my Countrymen, according to the mind and intent of the Author, that which
would have dyed, or at lest was like to have dyed in the shell.

First, therefore as I have spoken of the cirkles of the m^tteriall Sphere and
Globe, so I would have understand them, though they be described in plano after
this manner. This description is common: but I have described the parralell
lines with pricks, the horison and cirkle of depression with black, the
almacanter with the other parralells are red, the sigments within are to show
the hour lines as that which croseth the equator as it were at r^ct Angles:
that which croseth the horizon: likewise to show the Azimuth and that which
croseth the Ecliptike to show the Longitude and Latitude in the Heavens, and
though there 3. inscribed sigments be something hard to do by Geometrical
demonstration, and for so much as they are of singular use: Therefore when thou will find the true Azimuth, Longitude, or hour on a parralell; Take thy
Sector (see chap. 6.) and open it to the distance of the Semidiameter of that
parralell in the total Sine, then take the distance in the Sine given, and
apply it in the parallel from the centor it shows the true place.

Now I have given a rule before for finding the Suns place in the Zodiac,
see chap. 4. which we will for examples sake suppose to be the 30. day April
1629. which is by the Tables of Origanus 19 de. 21. m. 2. se. of. and by my
rule just 19. de. the point in this demonstration for that place is at B. and
this point is found by the cirkle divided as is before spoken of, chap. 4. by
taking fromward the poies of the Zodiac, the Suns Longitude in degrees,
which in this example is 49. de. having the day of the month, and the. place
found, the rest follows most easily: For a parralell drawn to the equator
through the point at B. shows the declination at C. from A. right Ascencion B.
C. Amplitude A. D. Meridian height F. H. the difference Ascencionall C. D. and
all the rest follows, and are measured by degrees on the limb. By the same I
may say if the declination be given, as from A. in the Centor, to C. the
parralell, which by Origanus for the 30. day of April 1629. ^^ 17. de. 46. m^.
and by this it is 17. de. 30. which is but little less; and that was by the
neglect of the minute in the Suns Longitude.

I will give one demonstration more, and that shall suffice for this paper, for
my purpose is to include all this work within these few sheets.

This proiection is of that chapter the 4. May the 4. 1629.. place the 23. d.
12. m. 41. se.. Origanus Tables, declination 18. d. 32. mi. N.. Longi. 53. de.
12. mi. 41. se. but by this proiection, Suns place 23. de. and A. C.
declination 18. de. 30. mi. Longitude 53. de. and at B. from A. A. D. the
Amplitude ^8. de. E. F. the Meridian height 55. de. B. C. right Ascencion 50.
de. C. D. difference Ascencionall 23. de. 0. mi. B. G. Obligue Ascencion 27 de.
o. mi. D. E. semydiurnall arc 7. ho 32. mi. D. E. semynocturnall arc 4. ho.
28. D. H. length of twilight 2. ho. 4. mi. H. E. time from noone to evening
shut is 9. ho. 33. mi. that double is the length of the day. 19. ho. 6. mi.
This last taken from 24. leaves the length of the night dark 4. ho. 54. mi.
Sun rises at D. 4. ho. 28. mi. seteth at 7. ho. 32. mi. Time from rising to
setting 15. ho. 4. from Sun setting, to his rising 8. ho. 56. mi. Height of the
Pole N. R. 51. de. 30. mi. Though many more propositions may be wrought by this
kind of proiection, yet to make some good use of this mark, the last which is
the height of the Pole found, so that if ye do but remember the day of the
month; which you must needs do by your Calendar in the beginning of this chap.
or his declination: take his amplitude Azimuth, or Meridionall height, having
with you your Compasses: Compass, crostafe, Sea-quadrant, Card, and some good
Tables of the fixed Stars, that ye may use them for observation in the
night: and by all means I would have you get the reconing of your Ships way by
that excellent way of Mr. Addisons of the (...) glass, the Log-line, and also
by what true way soever the experienced Seaman can bring to light; and then
may you cast up your Trauerse by that excellent way of the Arithmeticall
Navigations, by your Card and Trauerse board, and by this Calendar, whose use is
this; June the 23. being in Latitude 48. de. 14. found by observation, we
failed until the 24. noone that is 24. ^^. there is the month, day, hour, in
the 2 first columes upon a course of 33. de. from S. to W. 20. leagues, the
wind being N. N. E. all this is in the 3. next columes: the Latitude then
observed to be 47. de. 25. mi. Longitude in miles 88. from Lizard west and the
variation 12. de. 53. ^^. depth 90. fatham, (if it were sound so) and these in
the 2. last columes, and from July the 19 in Latitude 17. de. 40. mi. to July
the 21. noone, that is 48. ho. we sailed on a course of 18. de. from W. to S.
74. leagues. The wind being at E. N E. which brought us into the Latitude of
16. de. 35. mi. and into Longitude 1834. miles: or 611 1/^. leagues W. from
Lizard vad 10. de. 0. mi. Depths 60. fatham, S. W. 7. leagues a Rock, and S. by
W. land thus. Note that if you get your height and course exactly, it will
correct your way, height and way will correct your course: course and way will
correct your height: but strive to do all as exact as posible you can, to do
which, note what follows.

Propositions of Navigations, Arethmetically, Geometrically, and Instrumentally
showed. Chap. 8.
1. To find the leagues run on any course, the difference of Latitude and
course being given.










in difference of Latitude and set it over in the equal fine^ of the course
from the parralell, the Sector so opened, take the distance over in the total
sign and that distance applied to the equal parts gives the miles of way run.

2 The difference of Latitude and Longitude given to find the leagues run.
SQuare both sides, then ad the 2. squares together and extract

Look which is the greater side, either the Lat. or the Lo^, This also gives
the Rombe.
and

Open the Sector to a rectangle: then take the miles in Longitude

3 To find the difference of Longitude, the course and difference of Latitude
being given.
AS the sum of the course from the parralell is to the difference

As the total sine is to the difference in Latitude: so is the Tangent

As the Tangent of the course, from the parralell to the miles in

As the Secant of the course from the parralell is to the difference

Take the Logarithme difference of the Angle from the Meridian

Take the number of equal parts (in the Sector) which are the of course from
the patrid all, and the i^strument opened to that widnesse: the distance over
in the sine of the course from the Meridian: that distance applied to the
equal parts, shows the Longitude in miles.

4 To find how many miles off the equator or Meridian is a degree of Longitude
in any parralell of Latitude.












5 To find the Longitude answering to a Meridian distance in any parralell of
Latitude.






As the Tangent of the complement to the Meridian distance: so

Let the Logarithme of the complement be taken out of the Logarithme

Take from the scale of equal parts in the Sector the Meridian

6 To find the sign of any Arc in any parralell.
AS the total sine is to the complement: so is the sine given

As the Tangent of Latitude to the sine of Latitude: so is the sine of the Arc
in the great Diameter to the sine of the Arc in the lesser.

As the Secant of Latitude to the total sine: so is the sine in the

As the Secant of the complement is to the Tangent thereof: so is This reduces
Longitud miles into degr:


Ad to the Logarithme of the Arc given, the Logarithme of the complement of
Latitude, the total is the Logarithme of sine demanded.

By the Sector let the distance from the Centor to the Arc given be put over
in 90. and 90. then the distance between the sines of

7 By a sine given in a parralell, to find the Arc.
AS the sine of the complement of the Latitude is to the sine given* so is the
total sine to the sine of the Arc.

As the sine of the parralell is to the sine given: so is the Tangent of the
parralell to the sine of the Arc sought.

As the total sine is to the sine given; so is the Secant of parralell

As the Tangent of the complement is to the sine given: so is the



It reduces Meridian degrees in to Longitude.
then the distance between 90. and 90. being set from the Centor shows the
Arc.

8 To find how many miles on Earth or Sea serves to a minute of time in the
Heaven, in any parralell of Latitude.
AS the total sine is to 15. mile, which serves a minute of time













Chapter the 9.
9 To find the course the way and difference of Latitude given.


As the miles in difference of latit. to the total sine, so the

As the difference of latitude to the way, so the total sine to

Square both difference of latitude and way, then subtract This gives the
longitude.
extract the square root, then as that root to the total sine, so the
difference of latitude to tangent of course from parallel.

Let the logarithme of way be taken out of the logarithme

Take the equal parts in way, and fit over in the total sine,

10. To find the course, the way, and longitude given.
AS the way to the total sine, so the longitude to course

As the longitude to the total sine, so the way to the secant

As the longitude to the way, so the total sine to the secant

Square both longitude and way, then subtract the lesser out This gives the
latitude.
then as that root to the total sine, so the longitude to the tangent of
course from the meridian.

Let the logarithme of way be taken out of the logarithme

Let the equal parts in way be fitted over in the total sine,

11. To find the course, the longitude and latitude g^uen.
AS the of the 2 sides added, is to the difference of each

Take the logarithme of the greater side, out of the logarithme of the lesser,
the remainder is logarithme of the angle opposite to the lesser side.

Open the sector to a rectangle, and take the longitude and latitude, and fit
them on 2 sides from the center; and from those 2 extensions take the distance
with a pair of compasses, and fit it over in the total sine; Then take the
longitude, and fit over in equal sines, gives the course from the meridian,
but the latitude so fitted gives the course from parallel.

12. To find the latitude, the course and way given.












I have showed already, chap. 7. how the distance from Paramont hill was found;
And as I conceive, it is easy to find the distance of places, if you do but
know the use of my Table of sines, tangents and secants, proviso, note that the
3 angles of any right-lined triangle is equal to 2 rectangles or 180 degrees.

For commonly at sea, you must observe the land, shore, or whatsoever it is you
would know the distance from, what angle it makes with your course; as admit
40 degrees, then reckon your ships way, suppose 1000 fathom, and then observe
again, let your second angle be 100 degrees, then add 100 degrees: and 40 degr:
which subtract from 180 degr: remainder 40 degr: for the third angle; then have
you 3 angles and one side given, by which means the other 2 sides are easily
had, and consequently the distance.

Now if the young beginner be troubled to find the sine of an angle, so big as
100 degr: let him note what the Table says; subtract 90 degr: from 100 degr:
the remainder 10 degr: subtract from 90 degr: rests So degr: or subtract 100
degr: from 180 degr: rests 80 degr: whose sine in my table is 985; the other
two angles being 40 degr: and 40 degr: their sines are 643 and 643, and the
distance 1000 fathom: Now to fetch the distance from shore say, as 643 the
sine of 40 degr: at c, found as before, to 1000 fathom, the distance from a to
b, the a places of observation, so 984 the sine of 80 degr: in the lesser
quadrant, or 100 degr: in the great, (which is all one) to the distance from a
to c 1531 ^6^/61^ fathom. Another example. 996 sine of 84 degr: 50. 985 sine
of 80 de. 262 sine of 15 d: 10. Let your first observation be at b 80 degr: the
second at d 84 degr: 50, and by your reckoning the distance 254 fathom; now it
is easy by the former rule to find the angle at c 15 degr: 10: then say if 262
give 254, what gives 985, facit c d 954 110/^^^: And as 262 to 254, so 996 to
the distance b c. So that it is all one whether the angles be right, or obtuce,
or acute, if they be all acute, there is no more to do but take the sines out
of my table as in the figure K, and no more, if one be a rectangle, then the
other 2 are acute, but if an angle be obtuce, as in the figure L, the angle at
b 100 degr: do by that angle whatsoever it be, as in the first example; here
because the angles at a and c are equal, therefore the distance from b to c is
1000 fathom.

But by the second example, it is but 965 77/^^^, therefore the angle at d was
not truly taken; for what 965 77/^^^ is in proportion to 1000, so is the angle
at d to the true angle: which must needs be more then 84 degr: 50, and the
angle at c less then 15 degr: 10 and consequently the side c d is more then
954 120/^^^. And further you may note, if you have observed so well that the
angles be truly taken, then have you not reckoned your ships way truly; and so
you may see that one of these does correct the other, as in the end of the 7
chapter.

And you may fetch a distance by Geometrical protraction, as in chap. 4.
suppose you would know the distance from c and b to f, in the figure m, first
having drawn the angle b e f, then reckon your ships way from ^ to b ^00
fathom, and having laid down so much by your scale and compasses, (see page
12) you shall observe to lay the line ^ b right in the course your ship went,
with b next your eye, and e toward the place of your first observation; then
from b draw another line to f, and that line will intersect with the line a f
at f, and then you may measure the distance; as in this example b f is 100
fathom, and e f is 140 fathom.

The next thing that will trouble the young beginner, is the propositions in
these 8 and 9 chapters, which are most easily performed, because the
demonstration is so plain.

First therefore as in all plain triangles, the sides are in proportion one to
another, as the subtences of the angles opposite, or as the sines of the angles
opposite to those sides. Example in the inscribed triangle: A the angle at b is
in proportion to the side c d or arc c g d, as the angle c to the side b d, or
arc b d e, and so is the angle d to the side b c, or arc b f c.

So note that in all rectangled right-lined triangles, the two containing sides
of the rectangle stand perpendicular one upon the end of another: Therefore if
you put the least side for radius or total sine, as in the figure b, the other
side will be the tangent, and the subtending side of the rectangle will be the
secant; or if you put the greater side for radius, the least will be the
tangent, and the subtence the secant, or you may put the subtence for radius,
as in the figure c is done.

It is manifest then that any side may be put for the total sine: First, if
you put the subtending side for radius, as in the figure d, let a b be part of
a meridian, and a c part of a parallel; then is the angle at b the course from
the meridian, and the angle at c is the course from parallel.

Then if the difference of latitude a b, and course, that is the angle at b or
c be given, you may find the leagues run, or distance b c, as in the first
resolution Arithmeticall.

Or if you put the longer side a b for radius, then say as the total sine a b
to the difference of latitude a b, so the secant b c of course, b from the
meridian, to the distance b c; if you put the least side for radius, say as the
tangent a b of course c from parallel, to a b the difference of latitude, so b
c the secant of the same course, to b c the distance. Let this su^^ice for the
first proposition chap. 8.

But if you demand the difference of longitude, the latitude and course being
given, you may do it by the first or second example Arithmeticall in this
chapter. page 29; or if you put the longer side b c for radius, say, as the
course c to a b, so the course b to a c the longitude: but if you put the side
a b for radius, say, as the total sine to the difference of latitude, so the
tangent a c to the difference of longitude: if the least side be put for
radius, say, as the tangent a b to the difference of latitude, so the total
sine to the difference of longitude. And this suffices for the Geometrical
demonstrotion of the third proposition, chap. 8.

And now you see how the proportional numbers do arise, it is easy to take
them out of the Table, and work them Arithmetically; and what is said of these
propositions may be said of all the rest by the very same reason; except the
second proposition chap. 8, and the 11 proposition in this chapter page 27: the
first of these is done as in Earlid 1.47. or thus Arithmetically.

Let the line a be 3 leagues of longitude and the line b 4 leagues of latitude,
first multiply 3 (...) 3, it is 9, and 4 into 4 is 16, which added is 25, the
square root is 5, for 5 times 5 is 25, and this is equal to the line c, the
ships way.

The Geometrical demonstration is this, set the line a perpendicular upon the
line b, as in the figure f, then draw the line c, and it is 5 the ships way.

There is another way of demonstration, by adding the sides of the squares into
one; also if the way and longitude had been given, to subtract the one out of
the other Geometrically, the remainder is the difference of latitude: if the
way and latitude had been given, then the side of the remainder is the
difference of longitude, Euclid 1.47. theor. 33. 6.31. theor. 21.

The next should be of the 11 proposition, but I suppose he that understands
that is more than an ignorant man, therefore whosoever will learn that, with
the extraction of the square and cube root, or any thing else that is in my
book, or any of those things that I have set out in any of my bills; let them
come to my dwelling, and I will satisfy their demand so far forth as God
shall enable me: where youth may be taught, dieted and lodged for reasonable
consideration.

CHAP. X. Of the motion of the Moon, and coming into the Harbor.
I Might here have added many and manifold propositions, and chiefly those
which do concern the great circle distance between any two places howsoever
situate; but I will first see thy kind acceptance of this: which if you
receive thankfully, I shall be ready to show thee many more to thy great
satisfaction, with the Geometrical demonstration, which I have gathered into a
book in Folio.

And now I will finish this work with the Moons motion; supposing you are
come in sight of your wished port in safety: which I do heartily wish to all
honest Seamen of my Country, that travel the seas to good ends.

And admit you are in a strange coast, you may the better come to find the
time of a full sea, at a spring tide, to bring your good ship over a bar or
shole: so I shall end my work where Mr. Addison began his: then having read
this, you may read his which is hereto joined; giving you to understand, if
you learn well these propositions of mine, they will make even the hardest
things in his book easy for thy understanding.

Let the full sea at your place of being be at a S Moon on the day of
conjunction as at a, and the Sun going in 4 degrees, as from a to c, the
Moon removing in the mean time 48 degrees from the Sun, as to d, does make
3 hours 12 minutes after noone for the time of high water; and in 16 days
more the Sun going from c to e, that is ^0 degrees from a: in the mean time
the Moon going from d to f, that is 260 degrees from a, which makes 17 hours
20 minutes, then substract 12 hours 0 minutes from 17 hours 20 minutes, the
remainder 5 hours 20 minutes; out of which take 1 hour 20 minutes for the
time of the Suns motion in 20 days, remainder 4 a clock for the true time
of full sea the Moon being 20 days old; if you perceive not the reason
hereof inquire futher, and so you may examine the truth hereof.

Therefore to the ignorant and honest Seaman I say, join these things in
practice with those things thy Master does teach thee at sea: And to those
things you learn at sea by experience join the practice of the things taught
in this book, and you shall be able in short time, through Gods grace, no
doubt, to take charge thy self to thy great commendations.

To conclude, you may do most of the things taught in this book as before
spoken of chapter the 4, with rular and compasses; which if you practice and
make your self able to perform, (wishing to every good man that is willing to
follow these rules, that I were at his elbow to make him a more plain
demonstration) he shall be able in a short time, to do such service, which
without those will not be performed in ten times so much time.

And so I pray thee to accept of this my labor, for unto such as are ignorant
and honest, that would learn, only do I write this book: And be sure to
read it all before you judge, so shall you see that such a thing there is,
then read it over again, and you shall see what manne^ of thing it is, so you
may judge of the good will of the Author, and read it over the third time to
thy singular profit.

As in Ecclesiasticus chapter the 22. verse ^3, it i^ (...) neighbor, so I say
to thee of thy friend to Navigation; (...)

Be faithful to him in his poverty, that you may rejoice with him in his
prosperity, abide steadfast with him in the time of his trouble, that you may be
heir with him in (this his little book) his heritage: for a mean estate is
not always to be contemned, nor the rich that is foolish to be had in
admiration.

Now I beseech Almighty God of his mercy in Christ Jesus, that we may so profit
in Christ's school, that we may be able thereby to pass the waves of this
sea of glass, that we may all arrive at the haven of eternal happiness. Amen.

FINIS.

