THE SPIRITVALL-MANS AIM.

Guiding a Christian in his Affections and Actions, through the sundry passages
of this life. So that Gods glory, and his own Salvation may be the maine end
of all.

By the faithful and Reverend Divine, R. SIBBES. D. D. and sometime Preacher to
the Honorable Society of Graies Inn.

Published by T. G. and P. N.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN NORTON, for John Rothwell, and are to be sold at the
Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1637.

The Spirituall-mans aim.
1. Cor. Chap. 7. ver. 29, 30. 31. It remains brethren, the time is short,
let those that have wives, be as if they had none.

2. And they that weep, as though they wept not, and they that rejoice as
though they rejoiced not, and they that buy as though they possessed not.

3. And they that use this world as not abusing it, for the fashion of this
world passes away.


The blessed Apostle in the former part of the Chapter, had given direction in
Cases of conscience, being a man that had the Tongue of the Learned to speak a
word in season to the weary: whereupon (as having in his eye greater matters
than particularities) as his use is almost in every Epistle, he calls them from
particular Cases, that they should not overmuch trouble themselves about them,
but the maine, The time is short, Let those that are married, be as if they
were not, etc. But

First he gives satisfaction to the particular Cases, We must know particulars
in our journey to heaven.
for as it is in traveling, it is not enough to know that a man's way lies
East, or West, or North, or South, but he must know the turnings and windings,
the particularities of the way: So in Religion it is not enough to know that we
must serve God above all, and love our Neighbor as our self, etc. Those
generalities that Atheists pretend to shake-off all study of Religion by, if
they know a few generals. Our knowledge stands in clearing particular Cases,
which being cleared the way is smother to heavenward; yet notwithstanding we
must not dwell too much upon particulars, for here you see the Apostle calls
them off, Finally my Brethren, the time is short, it remains that we look to
the maine, etc. For the fashion of this World passes away; wherein we
considered two points in general, which I will name, and hasten to that:
enlarging of that that I think sitting for this time.

The first was this, that

A very good way to satisfy Cases of Conscience in particular, is to have in
our mind the maine* Doct 1. Looking to the maine helps particulars*


For there be many that puzzle themselves all their life, about this and that
particular, and forget the maine in the mean time, let a man look to the
maine, and he will soon resolve whether it be good to redeem time to hear a
Sermon now and then: he will do it, and not make a Case of it, for it helps
the maine, I came into the world to save my soul, etc.

And so for sanctifying the Lord's Day entirely, many have scruples and keep
ado, but if they had the love of God in their souls, and did look to the
maine, they would cut off that idle question: why do I trifle about this and
that idle question, how stands it with the maine?

And so for conversing with company, are they such as are comfortable and
cheerful? are they such as may help to the main? no: why do I entangle my
self in that which hinders the maine? So we see Paul when he had resolved the
particulars, he calls them to the maine, Brethren the time is short; and
therefore be in these things as if ye were not, (as we shall see anon in the
particulars) For the fashion of this World passes away. To add a little in
this point, This is the reason why none but a true Christian can carry himself
moderately in the things of this world, why? because none but a sound Christian
has a maine, and a chief end that swaies the stern of his whole life, he
looks to heaven and happiness, and how it shall be with him afterward, and he
considers particulars thereafter, when another man of necessity must err in
particulars, because he has not a gracious aim: you have no man but a
Christian, but he loses himself in the things of this world.

Well, the second thing is this, you see that

Religion meddles with all matters Doct. 2. Religion reaches to other callings.


With the World, with Marriage, with buying and possessing, as we shall see
afterward. Says an Athiest (that stomachs it, that his ways should be
hindered from that commanding skill of Religion which has to do in all things)
What has the Minister to do with our Callings, with Lawyers, with Tradesmen,
or Statesmen? What has the Minister to do with these things?

It is true not with the materials, with the particular matters of those, that
is left to those that are Artists, that have skill in the particulars; but a
minister and a Christian, and Religion in any man has to deal with these
things, as they help to further the maine; for Religion is a skill that fits a
man for a further end, for his last end, that fits him for heaven. Religion
guides all to the maine.


Now being such a skill it must direct every thing so far as it helps or
hinders that, The heathen Philosopher could say, State knowledge is a
commanding knowledge, why? because it meddles with all trades. How? has a
Statesman skill in this or that trade? No, not in the particular mystery, but
he has skill so far as he sees what may serve for the public good. Let the
safety of the Commonwealth be the law of all trades. The State knowledge is
the supreme knowledge which is for the good of the whole, therefore he cuts of
particulars if they be mischievous to the whole: so all trades we must tell
them of their faults, as they are blemishes to Religion, for we must not be
so in this or that trade, as that we forget we are Christians, and therefore we
must hear meekly the word of God, when it meets with our particular callings,
we see Paul medleth with buying and selling, with marriage, etc. How? As far
as they might hinder the main. Finally my brethren, the time is short, and the
fashion of this World passes away. Therefore be not overmuch in these things.

It is an ancient rule, (summa ratio, etc.) it is the maine reason that makes
for Religion, as I said before of State-knowledge: it is ( summa Lex) though
that be the Supreme in regard of inferiors, yet there is one above that, that
is the chief Law of all that makes for Religion: that is the chief reason of
all that makes for Religion, there be many particular reasons that make for
this and that, I, but Religion faith the contrary, and that must rule, that is
the ( summa ratio.) Now I come to unfold the particulars, but to hasten to the
maine. The Apostle here stands upon five directions and bounds; those five
directions with three reasons. The five particular directions


Let those that are married, be as if they were not.

Those that weep, as if they wept not.

Those that rejoice, as if they rejoiced not.

And they that buy, as though they possessed not.

And they that use this world, as not abusing it.

How are these five directions enforced?

They are enforced from three reasons.

The first is in the front of the Text. The time is short. Therefore be
moderate in all things here.

The second is in the shuttingup of the Text, For the fashion of this World
passes away.

The third reason is a maine reason too: that is from their state and condition
in Christ: why Brethren, faith he, Partakers of the heavenly Calling, as he
says in another place, Partakers of better things, and by being Brethren,
Brethren in Christ, members of Christ; he is the knot of the Brotherhood, being
Borne again Sons of God, Brethren of Christ, Brethren partakers of the
heavenly Calling, not Brethren only among your selves, but Brethren in Christ,
and so Sons of God and Heirs of heaven. What, for you to be immoderate in
the things of the World; Paul wraps up a moving reason, not only to insinuate
into them to gain their affection, Oh! my Brethren: but to add a force of
reason likewise. Brethren, The time is short. And Brethren, the fashion of this
world passes away. So add these three reasons to the five directions, and we
see how strougly Paul backs his directions. Indeed it was needful for Paul so
to do; we are so desperately set on the things of this world, we are so hardly
taken off, that there must be reason upon reason; for the Holy Ghost, the Holy
Spirit of God, loves not wast of reasons, to spend them where there is no use.
And therefore we must think it is a weighty point and of great equity, that
we give ear to these directions that have so strong reasons.

But to come to say somewhat of the particulars.

We must remember (to make way to what is to be spoken of these things) that
every one of these reasons have a force in every direction: you that have
Wives, be as if you had none, for the Time is short, and the fashion of the
world passes away. And so you that weep, as if you wept not, for the time is
short, and the fashion of the world passes away. And you are Brethren, you
that use the world as not abusing it, for The time is short, and the fashion of
the world passes away. So that all these reasons must be thought on in every
particular direction, that I speak of, only in general; J will speak a
little of the first reason, The time is short.

What time? The time is short.


The time of the world; 1. Of the World.
there is but a little time before the day of judgment; Christ is at hand to
judge the quick and the dead. The time between this and that is short, it was
short then, it is shorter now, The time is short, we are fallen into the
latter end of the world: but that is not all.

Our time is short of our little world, 2 Of our life
our particular judgment is near at hand: it shall be with us at the latter
day, as it is when we dye, our time is short, the time of our particular life
is short, and that is more forcible to persuade us, The time is short.

The season of the time, 2. Of opportunity
which is the prime time: The season and opportunity of time is shorter then
the time of life: for we have not opportunity of time all our life. The time is
short: 1. Time is short.
that is, the advantage of doing good, and of taking good is short. All the
year is not harvest or seed-time, it is not always Tide, it is not always
sunshine, and as it is in nature, so it is in the spiritual state of things:
we have not always advantages and opportunities, we have not always gales.
Opportunity therefore is shorter then time, as our time is shorter then the
time of the world. The time is short. The opportunity and season of time is
shorter: well I will not dwell upon this point, though it be a great
inforcement, It is short, 2 Time is uncertain.


I, and uncertain, we cannot tell how short. If it were told any of us here,
that within two days you shall dye, it would startle us, the best of us all;
it would make us look about us: but who of us all, knows certainly that we
shall live two hours. The time as it is short, so it is uncertain, and here
is the wondrous folly of our nature, that we will take so much time to come, in
trust, as though we should live so long and make a covenant with death, but one
party cannot make a covenant, God and the time to come make no covenant with
us. Therefore it is extremity of Folly to say, I shall live so long, and so
long. Thou fool, faith God, when he proiected for a long time, and had
treasure laid up for many years, Thou fool, this night they shall take thy
soul. A man is a fool when he makes account of continuing of that he has no
promise of. And therefore the time being short, and uncertain too, Take it
while we may catch hold of it, especially the opportunity of time.

And then in the third place it is irrecoverable, 3. It is irrecoverable.
when it is gone, there is no recalling back of time when it is past. In all
these respects we must be good husbands of time, we must be thrifty of our
time, and not take care how to drive away that, that flies away of it self to
fast: it is a precious thing, precious for great purpose.

What is this little time given us for? To provide for eternity world without
end: and we trifle it a way about this thing and that thing to no purpose, we
fill it up with vanity, and with sin, which is worse. In this little time we
do that, that in a long time after, we cannot undo again, that is our madness
and folly, therefore The time being short, let us take heed what we do in it,
we may do that in a little time, that we may rue for eternity, we may do that
good, and get that good in a little time, that may stand by us world without
end; those that have but a little plot of ground, oh! they will husband it so,
that they will not lose a handful of it, so those that have but a little time,
oh! let them husband it well, sow that little time well, sow that seed that may
breed a harvest, that may benefit us after that we may say, Oh! it was a great
blessing, that God gave me a little time to get into Christ, to repent of my
sins. etc. Beloved there are three maine parts of this little time.

Past, Present, To come. 1: Repent the time past in ill.

The Time that is gone, let us repent of it, if it have not bin spent well,
that is the best use we can make of the time past; for there is nothing to be
done in the time that is past. But if things have been done ill, repent 2. For
time present do good.


The Time present is to do good in, and for the Time to come, it is out of our
power; and therefore even for the present we must work. The Time past, the
best use we can make of it, is to comfort our selves, as Hezekias, in our
sincerity, or to repent if any thing have been done amiss; but look to the
present, put not off, do the work, for which we came into the World,
presently, The time is short, the business is great, the journey is long, it is
a great journey from earth to heaven, it is a great matter to get from earth to
heaven.

Now having such business to heaven, let us, I beseech you, consider the
weight of the business, and give our eyes no sleep, 3. For time to come get
into such a state as is not liable to time.
nor our eyelids slumber, till we are gotten into such a state and condition,
as is not liable to time, let us make this special use of precious time. Those
that are young let them be advised to take Time along with them, Advice to
youth
(which is to be esteemed far above Gold) and consecrate the prime and the
flower of their time to God, and to the best things, especially considering,
that we have no assurance of this Time. A memorandum to old age.
And those that are old, that through age are going into the grave, let them
not neglect their Time. A young man (as we say) may die soon, an old man
cannot live long. And therefore let those that are stricken in years be put in
mind to think that their time is shorter then others. All men's times are
short, old men's shortest. Let those therefore that are in years think of this,
The Time is short. Our folly is this, we make it shorter then it is, by our
Vanity Vanity. it were well if it were only vanity, by many sinful actions
many shorten their days by intemperate courses, and so are fellons upon
themselves, or by their wickedness, they give God occasion to shorten their
days. A bloodthirstie and crvell man shall not live out half his days. God
meets with him, so The time is short, and we make it shorter, we are guilty of
the shortness of our time our selves, let us take heed of that. But I have bin
over long in this point, only because it is the prime reason, set before all
the particulars, I beseech you consider. The time is short. If we do not make
use of it, we are worse then the Devil himself, Our neglect of time makes us
worse than the Devil
he makes use of the shortness of his time, what does he? Because the time is
short, he does all the mischief he can. He fills up his time to increase his
kingdom, he does all the mischief he can, for this reason; because his time
is short: let us learn some what of the worst of spirits, but that which it
serves for in particular here, let us think of it in that respect, having
many things to do, and the time being short; let us be sure we do the maine
thing that we come for, and other things as they help the maine, and not hinder
it. The time is short, and we have many businesses to do, let us be sure that
we do all our business, so as that we leave not the maine undone, that is the
maine he aims at here; The time is short.

It remains that those that have wives, be as if they had none.

That is the first particular; Marriage lawful.
for before they had asked him Cases of Conscience about marriage, and that
makes him speak of it. All the particulars have dependence one upon another.
Those that mary will have occasion to weep, that is next, for there will be
cause: There will be loss of Husband, or wife, or child, and there is
somewhat always family-crosses attend upon Marriage. And therefore he adds
weeping after Marriage.

And then joy, because there is joy. A woman brings forth in sorrow, but she
Joys when a man child is borne, as Christ speaks. There is joy in children,
and there is mutual joy in that sweet conjugal friendship, there is much joy:
and therefore as there is weeping, so there is joy in Marriage.

And those that buy, as if they possessed not. There must be buying where there
is wife and children there must be looking to posterity: and then all this
enforces, Using of the World. And men when they enter into to that estate,
they enter into the world, as we use to say, they begin the world anew, they
enter into the world: for there are many things necessary to maintain that
society. Therefore we see one thing depends upon another: he ioynes all
together, aiming especially at one thing, at that kind of life especially.

Now in every one of these particulars, he gives a liberty to do the thing,
you may Marry, you may Weep, you may joy, you may buy, you may use the World;
but as there is a liberty, so there is a danger, you may, but you may go too
far. And therefore with a liberty, he gives a restraint. There is a danger,
and a restraint upon the danger; do them, but take heed you overdoe them not.
And this restraint is backed with reason, he has reason for his restraint. The
time is short: and therefore there is danger, lest you shoot your selves too
far, lest you pass too deep into these things, And the fashion of this
world passes away, all things here pass away. Therefore it is in vain for
you to be overmuch in those things, that are passing things.

And then you are Brethren, called to greater matters, so there is a liberty,
a danger, and a restraint upon the danger, and likewise a reason to back it in
every particular.

The liberty. 1 A liberty to marry.
We may Marry. I will not stand upon that: I had occasion heretofore to speak
of it, it is not questioned this liberty. There is not only a liberty, but it
is an honorable estate, and necessary; honored in Paradise, honored by
Christ's presence. There is no question of the liberty of that by which the
Church is maintained, by which the Church is brought into the world, for
heaven. There is no question of that, and it was the Devil that brought in a
base esteem of that honorable Condition in Popery, wherein they would be
rather the members of an Harlot, then the head of a wife. It was the Devil
that brought in those abominable opinions and writings to disparage that
honorable Condition, and so it must be thought.

But there is a danger, and that is the maine thing. 2. Danger.
You that have wives be as if you had none. There is a great danger in adouble
respect. A danger in the things, and a peril if we go too far in them.
That is, there is a great hazard, that we shall go over-farre in that
condition, and a danger that it tends to.

For instance, Those that have wives, have they not been drawn away by their
wives, as Solomon was to Idolatry? Is there not a danger of being drawn away?
And is there not a danger in being drawn away to hazard our Souls? There is
a danger to be hurt, and a danger in being hurt, did not sin come in that
way? Was not Adam led away by his wife? and how many men perish by being too
Vxorious, by being too flexible in that kind? If they had remembered the
Apostles precept to marry, as if they had not, they would not have been so
drawn away. Therefore there is a danger, and a restraint upon that danger, Let
those that have wives, be as though they had none. What to use them as if they
had none? to care for them, as if they had none? No, Those that have wives to
be as if they had none how to be understood.
that is not the meaning; but to be as if they had none. That is, Let them be
as resolute for Gods Truth, as if they had no wives to hinder them; Let them
be as willing to suffer crosses, if God call them, as if they had none. Let
them be as ready to good Duties if it fall within their Calling, as if they
had none. Let them avoyde distracting Cares, and worldly Encumbrances; as if
they had none. Let them not pretend their Marriage to their baseness, and
worldliness, and for avoiding of Crosses and aflictions when God is pleased to
call them unto them. Let them not pretend Marriage for their doubling in
Religion and dissembling, I shall undo my wife and children, Let them be as
if they had none: for Christ has given us direction to hate all in respect of
Christ. A man is not worthy of Christ and of Religion, that undervalues not
wife and children, and all for the Gospel. If things stand in question:
whether he shall stick to them, or to Christ, his chief husband: then we must
stick to him. The reason is, the bond of Religion is above all bonds. Bonds in
Religion, above all other.
And the bond that binds us to Christ, it abides when all bonds cease; for all
bonds between husband and wife, between father and children, they end in
death: but the bond of Christ is eternal. And therefore every bond must serve
the maine bond: and therefore we must not pretend this and that to wrong Christ
and Religion, which is the maine bond: We must so labor to please others,
that we displease not our chief husband. For the time will be, when we shall
neither marry nor give in Marriage: but we shall be as the Angels: and that
time shall be without bounds and limits, for Eternity, and we must look to
that. And therefore those that marry, Let them be as if they were not married.
You know how it fared with him in the Gospel, that pretended this, for his not
coming to Christ: he that was married, says, I cannot come, he could not, his
excuse was more peremptory then the rest; he couldnot. Could this excuse him?
And will pretending this excuse men when they are called to duties? There is
that disproportion, so much between Christ our chief Husband and any other,
though it be the wife of our bosom, or the children of our loins (the one
having redeemed us, and is our best husband, a husband for Eternity in heaven)
that no excuse will serve the turn for a man to wrong the bond of Religion for
any bond whatsoever. And therefore you know the peremptory answer to him that
pretended that excuse, You shall never taste of my feast. But I have been too
long in this point, intending other matters.

And those that weep, as though they wept not.

It is lawful to weep, Weeping lawful
not only for sin (that should be the main) but likewise to weep for the
miseries of the time and state we live in. There is a liberty here, Oh! that
my head were a fountain of tears, says Jeremiah; he thought he could not
weep enough: and therefore he wishes that his head were a Fountain, he
thought his tears would soon be dry, Oh! that my head were a fountain, so
that there is a liberty to weep. Nay men are bound to weep. There are tears
of sympathy, for the misery of the State and time we live in. And so for
familie-losses and crosses, we are flesh, and not spirit, and God has made us
men, and has given us sensible apprehensions of grief; and it is a cursed
temper to be without Natural affection. We may weep, and we may grieve, nay,
we ought to grieve.

Now grief is as it were the cloud from whence the shower of tears comes, and
weeping is but a distillation of that vapor.

Now if we may grieve and ought to grieve for the times, and it is a stupid
temper, not to apprehend the miseries of the state, and times we live in, if we
may grieve, we may weep, that is put for the Spring whence weeping comes. For
grief it self, there is a liberty no question of that, we may weep, but we
must weep, as if we wept not. For there is a danger in weeping over much for
any crosses. Weeping excessive dangerous
Here is a danger for we may flatter our grief too much, for wives, or
children. God takes it ill, he takes it unkindely, that when Christ himself is
a perpetual husband, and God is an Everlasting Father, that we should weep
and grieve too much; for the loss of father, or of wife, or of child. For is
not God worth all? So there is a danger, that naturally we are prone to over
grieve, when we do grieve, as we are to over-joy when we do joy, for our
Nature can hardly keep bounds; and God takes it unkindely when we do so, when
we over-grieve, Excessive grief argues want of trust in God.
for it is a sign we fetch not that comfort from him that is the Spring and
Fountain, that we should do. And therefore let those that weep, be as if
they wept not. That is, not overmuch. For the time is short, do thou loose
any friend, or any thing, The time is short, we shall meet again. There is but
a little time between this and the latter Judgment, And the fashion of this
world passes away. There will be a new World, a new heaven, and a new earth.
And then we shall live for ever with the Lord.

And then my Brethren. Why? Brethren should not be without hope of the
Resurrection, as the Gentiles are. They may weep that never think to see one
another again. But a Christian, a brother, that has hope of meeting again,
let not him weep as without hope, so let us weep, as if we wept not: So he
lays a restraint upon that, nay though our weeping be for sin, there must
be a moderation in that, Moderation in grief for sin.
for we may overgrieve, for we are bound to Joy in the Lord, and always to
rejoice. And therefore we must weep for sin, so as we must remember to
Joy. We must with one eye look upon our sins to humble us, and to work
upon our hearts to grieve; but with the other Eye, we must look upon Gods
mercy in Christ to comfort us again. The best grief of all must be
moderate, much more grief for any earthly thing.

Now when we are tempted to over-grieve, for any earthly thing, the best way is
diversion. Do I grieve for these? I, but is my soul as it should be? Let me
weep over my dead soul, as Christ wept over Lazarus, when he was dead Let me
weep over my dull soul, let me weep over that.

As Physicians, when the blood runs too much one way, they give an issue
another way: so let us turn our grief the right way, if we weep for other
things, How is it with us, is the life of Grace there? Is reckonings eaven
between God and my soul? Am I fit to end my days? Am I in a state fit for
heaven? then we shall weep for something. It is pity such pearls as tears
should be lost; God has no bottles for tears that are shed overmuch for the
things of the world. But if they be for our sins, and the sins of the time
we live in, and for the ils and miseries of the State that are on us, and hang
over our heads, then let us weep to purpose, turn our grief the right way,
and then let us grieve amain, if we will, so our grief run in that channel.

Those that Joy as if they did not.

Joy we may, and we ought, for God envies not our Joy, Joy lawful.
he has given us wherewith in this life to Joy, abundance of comforts of all
sorts, for all our senses Flowers, and Colors, etc. We have nothing in soul
or body, but it has objects to delight in, God has made himself for the
soul to delight in, and there is somewhat to delight us in every Creature, so
sweet is God; we may, and ought to rejoice. God gives us wife and children to
rejoice in, Rejoice in the wife of thy youth. There is no question of a
liberty in these things.

But then there is a danger: Danger in Joy.
especially in the sweet affections. There is danger, because we are like to
over-ioy. And poison is the subtillest, conveyed in sweet things. We are
proane to over-Joy. There is a danger, therefore, there must be a restraint.
We must Joy as if we rejoiced not: that is, so joy, in any thing here, as
considering that the time is short, I cannot enjoy it long. Shall I joy in that
that I cannot enjoy? The time is short, I cannot enjoy them. If a man cannot
enjoy a thing long, he cannot joy. The time is short you must go. The things
must go, and both must go: And the fashion of this world passes away. All
the frame of things pass away; Marriage passes away; and Callings pass away*
and friends pass away, and all pass away. And therefore Joy, as if you ioyed
not. I beseech you let us leame to Joy, as if we rejoiced not. The Prophet
calls Nineveh a rejoicing City. And we live in a Ioviall age. Men eat and
drink as they did in the days of the Old World, In Noah's time, they marry,
and give in Marriage. We live in Joviall times; and therefore we had need to
lay some restraint upon our joy: especially when God calls us to mourning as
well as Joy, as he does if we look round about us* If we look upon the
time, we should see cause to Joy as if we did not. We must not always be on
the merry pin, as we say, but we must temper and qualify our Joy.

Now considering that the Apostle adds, weeping, grieving and Joy, you see that

Religion is especially in moderating the affections.

Religion is in purging the affections from the evil that is in them, Religion
in the affections chiefly
and moderating them, if they be lawful and good. And therefore think not
that you are Religious enough, if you know a great deal, as many Christians
are very greedy of knowing. And yet if you look to their lives, their
grief, and their Joy is intemperate, they have not learned to bridle and to
school their affections. You see that Religion is in moderating of grief and
Joy in earthly things: Let us see men show the power of Religionin bearing of
crosses, so that they weep as if they wept not: and in bearing prosperity so
as they can learn to abound, to Joy, as if not. That man has learned Religion
to purpose: for Religion is especially about the affections: for we are good
if we Joy well, and grieve well, but not, if we know much. The Devil does
that better than we: Therefore especially labor, that God would vouchsafe
Grace to govern the affections, that we may know how to Grieve and how to
Joy, as naturally indeed we do not.

And then we see here another point (which now I add) that

The Affections of Gods people are mixed.

They so weep as that it is mingled with Joy, Affections of Christians mixed.
and their Joy is mingled with Weeping. They weep as if they wept not, They
Joy as if they Ioyed not.

A carnal man is in simples altogether; If he Joy he thrusts the house out of
the window, (as we say) If he be merry he is mad, he has no bounds. If he
be sorrowful, if somewhat restrain him not, he sinkes like a beast under his
sorrow, as Nabal did, for he has no grace to temper his sorrow, and to temper
his Joy. And therefore he is over sorrowful, or over Iocund. Ah! but Grace
(considering that we have objects of both) does temper the affections. A
Christian when he Joys, he does not over-Ioy, for he has cause at that time
to mourn for somewhat: and when he grieves, he does not over-grieve: for he
has somewhat then to Joy in; for Christ is his, and heaven is his, and the
Providence of God to direct all for good, is his still, he has somewhat to
Joy in at the worst. And therefore all his affections are tempered and
qualified. So much for that point.

And they that buy, as if they possessed not.

It is lawful to buy, Buying lawful.
because it is lawful to make contracts; and propriety is lawful: every man
ought to have his own, or else there were no thest, if there were no
propriety; nor there could be no works of mercy. Now if propriety and
dominion of things be lawful, that we may possess things as our own, then
buying is lawful, that is one way of contract, of making things our own,
there is no danger in that. Danger in buying.
But there is a danger in the manner of buying. Men buy to perpetuat them
selves, They call their lands after their names, such a house of such a one,
Enoch of Enochs, and they think to continue for ever. God makes fools of
them, for how few have you that go beyond the third generation? how few houses
have you, that the child, or the Grandchild can say, this was my
Grandfathers, and my Great Grandfathers? How few houses have you, that are
now in them can say, My Ancestour dwelt here, and these were his Lands? Go
over a whole Country it is hardly so.

Men when they build together with building in the earth, they build Castles in
the air, they have conceits: Now I build for my child, and for my childs
child. God crosses them, either they have no posterity, or by a thousand
things that fall out in the world, that it falls out otherwise. The time is
short, And the fashion of this world passes away. That is, The buildings pass
away, the owning passes away, al things here pass away: and therefore buy as
if you possessed not, buy so as we neglect not the best possession in heaven,
and so pos. sesse these things, as being not possessed and commanded of them.

In Levit. 25. There you see the year of Iubile in the 50 year war, that all
possessions might return again, if men would. God trained them up by this, to
teach them that they should not think of inheriting things long, that they
bought; for it returned in the year of Iubile, in the fiftieth year: so we
must learn that we cannot possess things long. Though we possess them our
selves, we may be thrust out by fraud or tyranny. Therefore Let those that
buy, be as though they did not possess. Ier. 22. 23. he says, Thou make thy
nest in the Cedars, and think it shall be thus and thus with thee. Oh!
Beloved, let not us build and dwell in our hopes and assurance upon that which
will yield no certain hope and assurance in this world, For the fashion of
this world (as we shall see after) passes away.

And then for Brethren, that have an inheritance in heaven, for them to buy as
if they should live here for ever. Brethren, that is a reason to take them off,
Brethren buy as if you possessed not. Thus you see, I have gone over the four
Directions.

They that use the world, as not abusing it.

We may use the world, while we are here in it, for we cannot want the things
of this life. We are members of two worlds, while we are here. We are Members
of this world, and we are heirs of a better, we have relation to two worlds.

Now while we live in this world, Using the world lawful.
we must use the things of this world. How many things does this poor life
need while we are in this world? While we are passengers, we must have things
to help us in the way to heaven. Passengers must have recessaries, there is no
question of that. And therefore we must use the world many ways, it is a point
of Nature: and therefore I will not spend time in that. But then, Use the world,

As not abusing it.

There is danger in using the world, Danger in using the world.
there is a danger of cleaving in our affections to the things of this world,
so much as that we forget a better world: and therefore we should use it as
not abusing it.

How should we use it?

Why use this world as laying a foundation for a better World. While we live
here, use the world as we may further our reckonings for a better. Use the
things of the world as we may express some grace in the using of it. Use the
world as that the using of it may comfort us when the thing passes. The world
passes. But let us use the world, as that the grace that we express in the
use of it may continue. Use the world to the honor of God, to the good of
others, to the increase of our reckoning: abuse it not to the dishonor of God:
fight not against God with his own blessings, that is to abuse the world:
Forget not God the Giver. Were it not an unkind thing if a man should invite
strangers, if they should turn their kind friend that had invited them, out
of doors? And so it is to use the things of the world so, as to turn God out
of our hearts that gives all. Turn not the things of this world against God,
or against others, to make them weapons of injustice, to be great to ruin
others. Abuse them not to wrong, and to pierce our own souls (as the Apostle
says) with Cares and the like: This is to abuse the world when we dishonor
God and wrong others, or to pierce our own souls: God has not given us the
things of this world for this end, to hurt our selves with them. And therefore
together with the things let us desire a gracious use of all things; for a
gracious use of them, is better than the thing it self. Labor to use them as
not abusing them (as we shall) if we have not grace to use them well, (as one
says) Many men have the gifts of God without God; because they have not his
grace. When we have the gifts of God, desire Grace to manage them well. To his
children God gives this with the other: he never gives them any thing, but he
gives them Grace to make a sanctified use of it. They are sanctified to all
things, and all things are sanctified unto them, Use the world as not abusing
of it. The reason is strong, The time is short, why should we be overmuch in
using the things of this world (for that is one way of abusing of the things of
this world) The time is short, we must be pulled from them whether we will
or no. And therefore let us weane our selves, For the time is short. And then
The fashion of this world passes away. Why should we dote upon a perishing
fashion? All things here pass away, the things of the world pass away, and a
new fashion comes after And then you, Brethren, that are heirs of a better
world, use this World, as not abusing it; Brethren, he puts them in mind of a
higher calling. And so I come to the last.

For the fashion of this world passes away.

That is the second reason, The world a show.
The Schema, that is, the Apparition of this world, the outward fashion, the
outward view and hew of the things of this world pass away. It is a notable
diminishing word in the Original, as if the world were not a substance, but a
fashion, Schema. As we say in Philosophy, in the Air there are Apparitions
and substances, as there are flying-horses sometimes, and fightingmen in the
air: These are not substances, but Apparitions of things; it is but Phasis,
but an Apparition, or Shape. The substance and true Realtie of these things is
another matter: so whatsoever is in the world, it is but an apparition: When
the Devil showed Christ all the kingdoms of the world, he showed him but an
apparition, but a show of things.

There is a diminishing in the word, Show.

And then in the word, fades away.

The fashion of this world passes away; or as some translate it, Deceives, and
turns us aside: And so it does indeed from better things. The fashion of this
world passes away. That Translation is fit enough. It passes away. Now shall
we be immoderate in any thing that passes away? It is but an Apparition, but
a show, but a Pageant. The word is partly taken from a Pageant, or a show that
has a resemblance of this and that. But there is no realtie or substance in a
Pageant. From this, That the things of this world are but an Apparition or
Pageant,

Learn to conceive aright of the things of this life, Use Things of this life
shows.
that there is no realtie in them to speak of. They have a kind of realtie:
Riches are in some sort riches: and Beauty is in some sort Beauty: and
Nobility is in some sort Nobility and so Possessions are in some sort
Possessions. But all this is but a Pageant as it were, as a man that acts in a
Pageant, or in a Play, he is in some sort a King, or a Beggar for the time:
But we value him not as he is then, but as he is when he is off the Stage.
And while we live here, we act the part, some of a Rich-man, some of a
Nobleman, some of a Beggar or poor man, all is but an acting of a part. And
there is a less proportion between the acting of a part in this life, than
there is between our life and eternity. All is but the acting of a part. We
are not rich in the grave more than others. The King is as poor in the Grave,
as the base Peasant, his Riches follow him not. The worm and the grave know no
difference, when we go to that house there is no difference: all acting, and
all differences end in the Grave. And therefore considering, that this world is
but an Apparition, but the acting of a part, why should we think our selves
the better for any thing here? Does he that acts the part of a Nobleman upon
the Stage think himself better than another, that acts the part of a Poor
man? No. He knows he shall go off in short time, and then he shall be as
he was before: why are we not thus wise in better things: It is not he that
acts; the greatest part, but he that acts well, he that acts the part of a
poor man may be better than he that acts the part of a rich man: it is not
the greatness of the part, but the well acting of it: all is but an
Apparition. If a mean man honor God in his condition, and be faithful in a
mean estate, he is a thousand times better then a great man that makes his
greatness an instrument of injustice, as if all the world were to serve his
turn, and to make men Idolize him, such a man is a wretched man, and will be
when he is turned off, the Stage. It is no matter how long he has lived, or
how great a part he has Acted, but how well. We value not men as they are
when they are acting, but as they are after. If they were bad before, they are
bad after: and they are praised after, if they do it well. So it is no matter
what a man acts, if he do it well, he is for ever happy. If he do it ill,
he is forever miserable: all here is but a Pageant. If you talk of realtie,
Things in religion, real.
it is in the things of Religion. If you talk of true Nobility, it is to be
the Child of God. If you talk of true Riches, they are those that we carry
to our deathbed, those that we carry to Heaven; those that comfort the soul;
those that enrich the soul with Grace, and Comfort, and Peace, that is true
Riches. If you talk of true Beauty, it is to have the Image of God stamped
upon our souls, to be like Christ, to be new Creatures. If we talk of true
Strength, it is to stand against Temptations, to be able to serve God, and to
go through the world without polluting our souls, to bear Crosses as we
should, that is the true realtie. The things of this life are all but
Apparitions and Pageants. The greatest man in the world will say so when he
lies a dying, as that great Emperor said, I have run through all things, and
now nothing does me good. The realtie was gone that he thought of, and now
there was nothing but a show and Apparition; when the realtie was gone, nothing
does me good. Come to a man that is gasping out his life, and ask him, what
does honors do you good? What does riches do you good? what does possessions
do you good? Solomon a wise man, wise by the Spirit of God, wise by
experience, because he was a King: wise by a special gift of God, and the
spirit of God, and experience together with the spirit of God and a gift of
Wisdom, he had all to enable him to give a true sentence; he that had run
through the variety of all good things, what does he pronounce, but Vanity of
Vanities? he cannot express himself, Vanity of vanities says Wise, Holy,
experienced Solomon, he that had all abilities that no man was able to say it
so well as he, yet he says Vanity of Vanities, and that which is worse
Vexation of Spirit, if a man have not especial grace to manage them a right.
And therefore I beseech you Brethren, do but represent the things of this
life, even under the notion here, they are but Apparitions, they are but
Pageants. If we be to buy any thing in this world: we pull off the trappings,
we pull off the Masque, or else we may be couzened in the thing: So if we
would judge of the things of this world as they are; What is within Riches? is
there not a great deal of care? What is within government? What is within the
things of this life? There is a goodly show and Apparition: what is within?
Pull of the Masque, and then you shall see the things of this World: The more
you pierce into them, and the more you know them, the worse you will like them.
Like a picture that seems goodly stuff afaroff, but neere-hand it seems baser
so if you come near these things there is emptiness, and not only so, but
Vexation But in the things of heaven, the nearer you are, the more you will
love them, the more you will admire them: the more a man knows God, the more
he may know him: the more a man knows Christ and loves Christ, the more he
may: there is a height, and breadth, and depth, there all dimensions in the love
of God in Christ, and in the joys of heaven, they are beyond comprehension.
The things that we have in Christ, they are larger than the soul, we cannot
comprehend them. There is nothing here, but we may compass it, it is
inferior to our knowledge and affections; our affections and our knowledge are
larger than any thin here; the things of a better life are beyond all. Shall
we stand upon apparitions, that the more we know them, the more we shall
undervalew them?

And the fashion of this world passes away.

It is a fashion, It passes away.
it is but a fashion, and then it passes away. Indeed they do pass away,
experience shows that they pass even like a river. As we see the Thames, or
any river, the water passes away, it goes and goes along, but it never comes:
so the things of this world, they pass away, but they never come again, they
vanish away, and we pass away with them too. Even as men in a ship, whether
they eat or drink, or sleep, or walk, the ship goes, and they go in it. So
it is in this world, whether we eat or drink, or sleep, we pass away to
death. Every day takes a part of our life away: and every day we live, we
live a day less, it is gone and past, and never returns again, as water,
which it is gone: and whether we walk or do any thing, the time passes.
While you hear, and while I speak, the time passes, and never returns
again: so the fashion of this world passes away. All things are passing here.

What is the ground of this, that all things are thus passing? Goods that are
not stable, we say they are movables, and indeed those things that we call
immoveables are movables: All pass away, heaven and earth will pass away ere
long. And there will be a new heaven and a new earth. Kingdoms pass away,
and Kings pass away, and States pass away. What is become of Rome? What is
become of Jerusalem? What is become of Babylon, and all those goodly Cities?
All are passed away, they are all gone. This experience speaks as well as
Divinity.

Now the ground of all this is, 1 Reason, because they were made of nothing.
not only the Nature of things, taken from the Nature of all things that are
made of nothing; and therefore subject to fall to their first principles
again. That is the fundamental reason, why things may be moove-able and
pass away. But that they are so, it is not a sufficient reason, for GOD might
have suspended the mutabilitie of things, if he would, as the heavenly Angels
are mutable, because they are Created, but God has suspended there mutability
world without end; And therefore it is not sufficient that all things are of
nothing, it shows that of themselves, they may turn to nothing indeed.

But there is another reason behind, 2. They are accursed.
that now since the fall of man, there is a curse upon all things. There is a
sentence of mutability and change, and a sentence of passing is passed upon all
this, that all things that have a beginning, shall have an end, and that this
world shall be a Stage of changes and alteration: There is a sentence of Vanity
upon the Creature, (as Saint Paul says Divinely) The Creature is subject to
Vanity, Romans 8.
not of his own will, but because God has subdued it to Vanity. Romans 8. Man
committed Treason, and therefore the Creatures which are man's servants, all
mourn for their masters fall; they all mourn in black, as it were. All the
Creatures are subject to Vanity, all the Creatures under the Sun, are
subject to mutabilitie and change: but we may thank our selves, we are the
grand-traitors that brought this misery upon the Creature; that is the true
reason why all things pass away, and so why our selves have the sentence of
death upon us, we pass away, and the things pass away, and we in the use of
them. Thus you see the ground of this, why things pass away in the sentence of
mutabilitie and vanity that God has passed upon them.

If this be so, Use. Not to grieve for the loss of them.
beloved, let us learn not to pass much for things that will pass away, not
to pass for them: learn all the former directions. The fashion of this world
passes away. Shall we grieve much for the loss of that that we cannot hold?
We say if a glass be broke, is a man much angry? a frail thing is broken.
If a friend be dead, shall a man be therefore angry? The fashion of this
world passes away. A sentence is passed upon them. Shall I be moved at that
that God has set down a Law for, that one generation shall go, and another
shall follow after: and there is a succession as in the streams of water?
Shall I oppose Cods sentence? God has made all things frail, and it is but
the common condition of all since the fall.

So it should be a use of comfort and contentment with any thing in this world,
2. Use. To be content with little.
place, or Riches, or honor, I must leave them, I know not how soon: and this
will breed a disposition of contentment. It is enough for him that must leave
all, I know not how soon, have I little or much, I must leave all: here is
enough for him that must leave all: and therefore leave worldly things to
worldly men: leave all these vain things to vain men: shall I build a fixed
hope on vain things? Oh! no, that should not be so.

As we must learn contentment, 3. To be moderate in desires.
so it should take us off from the hopes of this world, and from promising our
selves that which we have no promise in the world for, nor experience. Who
promised thee thou should enjoy thy wise long, that thou should enjoy thy
children long, thy place long: haste thou a promise for this? The nature of
things fight against thee. The things of the world are variable. Have we not
experience of former times? And have we not Scriptures to show that all is
Vanity? Why should we promise our selves that which the Word does not promise
us, or that we cannot see experience of in the world? Why would we have a
condition severed from all men? The seeing of things in a condition of fading,
as it should teach us contentment in the use of all things, so it should teach
us moderation and wisdom, that We should not promise our selves any thing in
this world.

And it should teach us to provide for stable, 4. To provide for better things
for certain things in changes and alterations: Look to somewhat that may
stand by us, when all these things are gone: will all these things leave me,
and must I leave them? How is it with me for world without end? Shall I not
therefore look for those comforts and those graces, and for that condition,
that will abide when I am gone hence? what desperate folly were it? Let us
labor for a sanctified use of the passing away of these things, that we may
provide for that which is not subject to alteration and change. The favor of
God. in Christ is for everlasting. The Graces of Gods Spirit are for
Everlasting. The condition of Gods Children is for everlasting. And therefore
why should we look after perishing things, and neglect better? For a Christian
has the realtie of things, he has a Husband for ever. He has matter of joy
for ever, he has a possession for ever* and then there will be a new world.
All these things are but Shows: the Christian has the realty of al, that never
passes away: and therefore considering that all things else pass away, but the
things that belong to a Christian as a Christian; let Christians learn to make
most of their best calling, and value themselves as they are Christians, and
value others as they are Christians, not as they are rich, or as they are poor
as they are noble, or as they are great. The fashion of this world passes
away; value them by that they have of eternity, what of the Spirit is in them?
what of the Image of God is in them? What Grace is in them? are they newborn?
are they truly noble? are they new Creatures? value them by that, and labor
to get that stamped upon our children, and upon our friends. Labor to have
Communion so with those that we love, that we may have eternal Communion in
heaven with them. Labor so to enjoy our friends, that our friendship may
continue in heaven, considering, that The fashion of this world passes away.
All friendship, all Bonds, all Possessions and all that we dote of, and are
desperately mad on, all passes away. The fashion of this world passes away.

It is a strange thing (Beloved) That a man capeable of high thoughts, The
world too low for a Christians thought.
of excellent thoughts, should spend the marrow of his soul, and the strength
of his spirits, about these things, that he should tire his spirits, that he
should crack his Conscience, that he should wear out his Life about things
which he cannot tell how long he shall enjoy them, and neglect these things
that abide for ever: for a man this is ill, but for Brethren, as he says, for
Brethren to do so, that have an inheritance immortal, for them to be cast
off the hooks for every Cross, for every loss, Why Christians are
excessive in outward things.
that are the children of God, and heirs of heaven. What a shame is this, that
Christians are so much in joy, and so much in sorrow for these things. It comes
from 2 or 3 grounds.

First, 1. They look not upon them as past.
they do not consider and look upon things as past: they look not with the
eye of Faith upon things, these things will pass: but they look upon things
in passing, and they see no alteration for the present: they should consider,
I, but what sentence is upon them? These are as good as past, they will be
gone ere long, look upon things in the world, see all things are passed. We
are dead, our friends are dead, and the world is gone. Faith says this, we
consider not this Eye, and so we are carried away with them: we look upon
things passing, and there we see little alteration. A man that looks upon the
shadow passing, he cannot see it: but if he come two or three hours after,
he shall see it past. Let us look upon things as gone, though they be not
for the present gone, see them in the Eye of Faith, and that will make us
consider them as passing away.

Again, 2. We compare not with eternity.
we are deceived hence in the passing of the things of this life, that we
compare them not with Eternity. We think it a great matter to enjoy things
twenty or forty years. What is this point of time to eternity? Compare this
short time here, of health and strength, of honor and place, and friends, what
is this to Eternity? what desperate folly is it to venture the loss of
Eternity, for the enjoying of these things? Compare these things with world
without end, and that will keep us from being deceived, with these passing
things: we are deceived, because we lay them not in the balance with things
that are for ever.

And then the third ground is we are forgetful, 3. We forget our better
condition.
we are not mindful of our best condition, we make not that use of our
knowledge that we might.

When a Christian is all in passion, all in Joy, all in fears, or in grief:
why, what is the matter at that time? What thoughts has he of his Eternal
estate, of the fading condition of these things? he is forgetful and
mindelesse. And therefore let us labor often to keep our souls in a heavenly
frame. And to draw to a conclusion, let us leame to value our selves above all
things below: if we be Christians, as we al pro felse our selves to be, value
our selves above all things below. It is a poorness of spirit for a
Christian, for to over-ioy or to over-grieve for any thing that is worse than
himself. Are not all things so that are here, if we be Christians indeed? if
were not Christians the very toads and serpents are better then blaspheming and
filthy Creatures, that are opposers of Gods Ordinances, they are better than
such wretches, as many among us, the Devil is almost as good as they such are
next the Devil. The earth they tread on is better than they: but if a man
have grace in him, all the world is inferior to him. What weakness of spirit
is it therefore, and emptiness to be put off with overmuch cause of grief
and forrow for any thing below, that is meaner than our selves, for any thing
that is fading, when we have a condition that is not subject to fade? And
therefore often think of our dignity in Christ; think of this motive here (
Brethren) think of that as well as of the fading condition here. If we would
weane our selves from these things, often think of the eternal estate of a
Christian, that our thoughts may run upon that much: and then upon the frail
condition of all things below, that we may be taken off from them; for two
things mortify a man.

The taking off of his affections from that they are set on,

And to set them upon that that will fill them, and satisfy them to the full.
If a man do that, he does that that a mortified man should do, that is in
this world, passing to a better.

To conclude all with this.

All things here in this world are subordinate to a further end. And let us
consider therefore that we use them, as that we loose not the maine,

All the contentments of a Traveller, Simile.
are subordinate to help him to his iourneyes end. If things come amiss in
his Inn, will he quarrel with Host, that he has not a soft bed? He will
think, I am going, I shall have better at home; and these lead me homeward, so
all things below are subordinate helps to better: Shall we make them the
maine? Shall we make all things subordinate to them, as worldlings do,
subordinate Religion to worldly things, and make all things contrary? They do
not grieve as though they grieved not; but they hear, as if they heard not.
They receive the Sacrament, as if they received it not. They pray, as if they
prayed not. They speak of Holy things, and do them, as if they did them not.
All things in Religion, as if not, but for other things, they are drowned in
them: This is the policy of Satan, that labors to bring Religion to be
subordinate. So that if men can be religious, and have the favor of such a
one: If he can be Religious and be great in the world, he will: but if
Religion it self, and the standing for it hinder their aims away with it,
they will rather be hollow, then stand for a good cause, because they have not
learned to subordinate things to the maine end; and the reason is, The reason
why men aim not at the maine.
because they have not Grace and heavenly Wisdom to teach them in what place
things should be valued; what is the maine, and what attends upon the maine,
and therefore they take by-things for the maine, and the maine for the by.
Indeed no man is wise, but a sound Christian, and he is wise for his soul,
and he is wise for Eternity. Application to the Sacrament
But what is this for the Sacrament? To cut off other things, it is this.

Are all things perishing food, such as we must leave, vain and empty things?
Will not this therefore make us seek the maine, the food that indures to
everlasting life, and labor to be in Christ more and more, labor to cherish
Communion with Christ, that Everlasting Bond? What is the Sacrament, but the
Food of our Souls, our Everlasting Manna, that will continue for ever, and
make us continue for ever? Christ, if we have him he continues for ever, and
he makes us continue for ever too. And therefore considering that all things
else are vain. I beseech you let the consideration of that that has been
spoken, be as sour herbs to make the Passover, to make Christ relish the
better. Oh! Are all things vain, and shall I not labor to have my part in
that that shall never die in him that is my Husband for ever, and my Lord for
ever? Shall I not labor to strengthen mine Interest in him that has all good
things in him? What if all the earth should fail? If I have Communion with
Christ I have all. If I marry Christ, I have all with him. All is my Ioynture,
if I have Christ once, All things are yours, if you are Christ's. If I have
Christ what can I want, when I receive the Sacrament, having Communion with
Christ? Let this strengthen my desire to come to the Sacrament, in this that I
have spoken: that all other things fail, our communion with Christ is
Everlasting. Therefore look to that. Christ is the food of the soul: all
other food the sweetness of it is gone within a quarter of an hour: The
sweetness is gone presently, and the strength within a day or two, of all
other food that we take: but this food Christ, the food of the Soul. Christ
offering himself unto death, and shedding out his blood, and giving his body
to be crucified for us: This food feeds our souls to everlasting life. We
cherish our Faith in the assurance of the favor of God to everlasting: the
sweetness, the strength, and the comfort of this food indures for ever. And
therefore considering that all other things are food that perishes; labor for
that that will feed us to everlasting life. And then we shall make a right use
of the alteration and change of all things.

A heathen man can say this Text, all* that I have, set ( Brethren) aside: a
heathen man could tell you, The time is short, And the fashion of things pass
away. He sees them, and thereupon could infer the Negative part: therefore
we should not be worldly for the Negative part: by the light of Nature, a man
that has no Religion may be sound in that, and therefore not to care much for
earthly things, considering that we must be gone.

A Heathen man could speak very sweetly this way, as Plutarch, and Seneca, and
the rest: what fine speeches had they this way. Oh! but the Positive part, that
is, when we see all things here are vain and fading, to know what we must
cleave too, that is proper to religion to know Christ, and the good we have by
Christ, when we have him* we have al, he is the of our souls: these things are
proper to Religion: and therefore let us arise from the consideration of the
Vanity of all things to the positive part, to interest our selves in that that
is better then all things. Which if we have, we have all; and then we shall
make a right use of this.

FINIS.
A Table of the several Heads contained in this Book.
WE must know Particulars in our journey to Heaven. page 2
1. Doctrine.
A very good way to satisfy cases of Conscience in particular, is to have in
our mind the maine. p. 3. Reason, why none but a sound Christian can carry
himself moderatly in the things of this world p. 5.
2. Doctrine.
Religion meddles with all matters. p. 6 Religion is a skill that fits a man
for a further end. p. 7. Religion guides all to the maine. p. 7. Time is short.
13. The world is short. Our life is short. Opportunity is short. Time
uncertain 14 Time irrecoverable p. 15. Time has three maine parts. p. 17.
Time past in ill, repent. ibid. Time present do good. ibid, Time to come get
into such an estate, as is not liable to time. p. 18. Advice to youth, to age.
p. 19. Neglect of time makes us worse than the Devil. p. 20. Marriage lawful.
p. 21. A liberty to marry p. 24. Who brought in a base esteem of Marriage. p.
25. A danger in Marriage. p. 25. Those that have Wives to be as if they had
none, how understood. p. 27. Bonds in Religion, above all bonds. p. 28. Weeping
lawful. p 30 For what we are bound to weep. p. 31. We ought to grieve. p.
31. Danger in weeping overmuch for crosses. p. 32. God takes it unkindly, when
we over-grieve for the loss of worldly comforts. ibid. Though our weeping be
for sin there must be a moderation. p. 34 What to do when we are tempted to
overgrieve for any earthly thing. p. 35. Joy lawful. p. 36 Danger in
over-joying. p. 37. Religion is seen, especially, in moderating the
affections. p. 39. Many Christians intemperate in their grief and joy, not
having learned to school their affections. ib. Affections of Christians mixed.
p. 41 A carnal man is in simples if merry, he is mad. ibid. Grace tempers the
Affections in a godly man. ibid. Buying is lawful, and why. 42. Danger in
buying. 43. Buy so as not to neglect the best possession. p. 44. Using the
world lawful. p. 46. Danger in using the word. p. 47, What it is to abuse the
world. p. 49 Labor to use it, as not abusing it. ibid. The world is a fashion
or a show. p. 51. Things of this life are a show. p. 53 Things in Religion
real. p. 56 The world passes away. 61 Reasons why it passes away. 1. Because
they were made of nothing. p. 63. 2. Because there is a sentence of mutabilitie
passed on it. p. 64 Not to grieve for the loss of things below. p. 65 Learn
to be content with little. p. 66. Be moderate in desires. p. 67. Provide for
better things after all these things are gone. p. 68. The world to low for a
Christians thoughts. p. 71. Why Christians are excessive in outward things, the
grounds. p. 72.
1.
They look not on them as past. ibid.
2
They compare them not with Eternity. p. 74.
3
They forget their better condition p. 74. Reason why men aim not at the
maine. p. 79. Application to the Sacrament. p. 80. How we ought to labor for
things certain, and not fading. p. 82.
Perlegi hanc Concionem, dignamque iudico quae Typis mandetur.

THO. WEEKS. R. P. Ep. Land. Cap. Domest.


