A CENSVRE UPON A DIALOGVE OF THE Anabaptists; Entitled, (...) what God has
Predestined concerning man, etc. By HENRY AINSVVORTH.

ROMANS 9.11.15.16. 11 (For the children being not yet borne, neither having done
any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand,
not of works, but of him that calls.)

15 For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I
will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.

16 So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God
that shows mercy.

Printed in the year of our Lord, 1623.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, howbeit the continued infirmity of this authors body,
wherewith it pleased God to exercise him, might justly have excused him from
taking pen in hand to write, especially in businesses of this nature, his
desire being as himself testified in his life time, to finish this last period
of his life with more comfortable meditations then to follow controversies: yet
did he labor to his power, yea and (as I may say) beyond his power, to enforce
himself even in his decayed health, together with his other necessary
labors, to discover the fraud and falsehood of the adversaries: amongst others
he judged these Anabaptists not the least, which occasioned this ensuing
Censure; Another nearer inhabitant then the former author, was one Mr. Paget
that lived in the same city by him* being a chief leader to another
congregation there, who being of a quarrelsome disposition, and envious hearted
toward Mr. Ainsworth, and the truth professed by him, having uniustly picked
quarrels against him: afterward without his privitie while matters were in
debating (not imitating D. Reynolds to Heart although he highly commends him
page 367.) published a book against him, laying to his charge things which he
knew not, even gross untruths, and palpable reproaches, making diverse false
charges upon him, as if he neither shamed nor feared to be Satan's instrument
to blow abroad whatsoever envy and malice had scraped together, in likelihood
expecting no other reward then gratifying the world, by the Gospells disgrace
in our subversion; yea laboring through his sides to smite the text it self,
which I trust M. Ainsworth has well cleared in that little advertisement
published in his life time with those books of Moses, besides a particular
answer to his book he had well begun, and had finished long before his death
had not his infirmity of body hindered. But now time permits not to instance
particulars, but leaving so unneighbourly, yea so unchristian an opposite to
the Lord for judgment, I will add a word or two touching the occasion of this
treatise ensuing, which was at the request of some, (whose minds the
Anabaptists would cumber with their errors) to show his judgment on the
foresaid book. Now as some were assaulted that yet would give no way or
entertainment to those errors, yet othersome that had stood in the truth a long
time, were perverted. The knowledge of these things coming to this reverend
and judicious man, Mr. Henry Ainsworth, he soon drew out this answer, and
sent it by a friend into England, to reclaim (if God saw it good) such as had
erred herein, and gone astrray by rash and inconsiderate zeal beyond
knowledge, and through the grace of God to preserve such from falling as yet
stood: this he sent for the present, purposing if the Lord continued some
competent health and strength, to revise and so to make more perfect this which
then shortness of time in respect of the Messengers great haste, could not be
affoorded, and so to make it public in this spring; but the Lord having
prevented this his purpose, by taking him to himself, he now rests from his
labors. Yet finding the matter may, through the blessing of God, be profitable
to his people, it is thought fit not to keep these his last labors in matters
of this nature in silence, but that it come to the public view for the good of
them that are ordained to life. And so I wish thee to farewell in the Lord.

A CENSVRE UPON A DIALOGVE of the Anabaptists, entitled, A Description of what
God has Predestined concerning MAN, etc.
BEING requested by some, whose minds the Anabaptists would cumber with their
errors, to show my judgment on their foresaid Book; I have set down these few
observations.

In the first part which they entitle of Predestination, they commit a double
fault, 1 They confirm not by holy Writ their own doctrine: for in the third
page of their Dialogue, they describe Gods Predestination out of their own
head; not one Scripture brought to prove that they say: neither can they
justify by Gods word that their description, wherein some things are
erroneous, some ambiguous and sophistical till they be cleared. 2 They abuse
and calumniate the doctrine of those whom they call Calvinists, and would
father upon them absurdities, errors, blasphemies: taking advantage upon some
harsh phrases, concluding against them worse things then either they spoke or
meant; passing over the explanations to be seen in sundry of their works,
which will clear them of the errors that these men would enforce upon them.

The differences which they make (in page 4) between the Calvinists doctrine
and theirs, are fraudulent and injurious. As between All things, and all good
things: where first these Anabaptists do differ from the plain Scriptures,
which testify that All things were created by Christ, Col. 1 16, and without
him was not any thing made that was made, 1 Ioh. 1 2. Secondly, they cannot be
ignorant but that we hold all things that were made to be very good, Genesis 1
31, so this difference they forged out of their idle heads.

The 2 and 3 differences, as that the Calvinists should say, whatsoever is done
(murder or the like) comes from God; and that God is the principal cause
and author of all things, appointing all things to the one part and to the
other, damnation as salvation, vice as virtue. But the Anabaptists say,
whatsoever good is done comes from God, but no evil things that are done;
and that God is the principal cause and author of all good, and of salvation
to all men; but the devil is the author of all evil. In these differences
they set down some error, with calumny and sophistry.

Error it is to say, God appoi^ted not Damnation as Salvation: wherein again
they proclaim themselves diff^rent from holy Scripture. For damnation being a
work of Gods justice upon the reprobates, (as salvation is a work of his grace
toward his elect,) comm^th from God, and is by him appointed; as those
Scriptures plai^ly testify, Mat. 25 41, Jude v. 4, 2 Pet. 2 3 ^ 9, Romans 9 22.

That any of us should say, murder and other l^ke vices come from God, and are
appointed by him, is injurious sophistication. We hold not God to be the
principal cause or author of any evil as it is sin; but only of evil as it
is condign punishment for sin, according to Esa. 45 7, Amos 3 6. Concerning
murder, and other like actions, we distinguish between the action as it is
natural, and as it is moral. All actions as they are merely natural, are of
God: for in him we live, and move, and have our being, Act 17 28, without him
no man can move his hand to smite h^s neghbour. As they are moral, Gods
providence concerning them is twofold: for as they are vicious and sinfully
done, God does them not, but suffers them so to be done: as they have in them
respect of justice and punishment, so God does, appoints, commands them to
be done: As, the defiling of David's Concubines, being considered in the
sinfulness of it, proceeded from Absaloms wicked lust, and A^hitophels wicked
counsel, 2 Samuel 16 21 22. thus God did it not, but suffered it to be done. But
considering it as a punishment or chastisement for David's sin, the Scripture
tells us, that God took David's wives and gave them to Absalom, and God did
this thing, 2 Samuel 12 11 12. The murdering of the Israelites by the Assy^^ans,
of the I^wes by the Babylonians, was a very si^full action done by these
Heathens; and thus God suffered them to do it: But as it was a just punishment
for his peoples iniquity, God sent those heathens against the hypocritical
nation, Esa 10*5 6. God caused the Jews to fall by the sword, he made
Jerusalem desolate, he himself fought against them with an outstretched hand,
he deliver^d them into the hands of Nebuchadrezar; he prepared destroy^rs
against them, he gave them into the hand of those that sought their lif^: the
Babylonians were his servants, whom he sent and took, and brought against the
land; though those H^ath^ns for their iniquity in doing this, were afterward
punished, Ier. 19*7 8, and 21 5 7, and 22 7 25, and 25 9 12. Other examples
ma^y are in the Scriptures, how these actions which men did most sinfully, G^d
did the same actions by those evil men; most justly: either for judgment upon
reprobats, or for chastisement and mercy unto his ch^sen.

They inveigh against us, Page 5.
as teaching that God decreed that Adam could not but sin; that God commanded
him not to sin, and yet decreed that he should not sin. Answ. They proceed in
wronging us. We teach not that God decreed sin should be done, otherwise then
by suffering it to be done. He never decreed either to do sin, or to command
it to be done, or to approve it being done. Neither did any decree of God force
Adam to sin; he might have have avoided sinning if he had would: but he would
not continue in obedience, he sinned willingly.

Further, they feign us to say, Page ^.
that though God by his reveiled will commanded Adam not to sin, yet in his
secret will he decreed he should sin. Answ. God neither openly nor secretly
decrees or wills sin as sin: for he is not a God that has pleasure in
wickedness, Psalm. 5 4. They keep their wont therefore in calumniating us. Also
they err, in refusing the distinction between Gods revealed and his secret
will, whereby we understand not two wills in God, but one and the same will,
partly revealed, partly concealed from us and secret, according to Deuteronomy. 29 29.
By his reveiled will or commandment, God would have Abraham to kill his son,
Genesis 22, by his secret will (not th^n reveiled to Abraham but afterward) he
would not have him killed. Page 7.


They go on and would prove, that God did neither decree, nor lay any
ne^essity on Adam to transgress. But they labor in the wind, and would prove
that which we confess, yet in their proof lurketh error; for they affirm,
that God left not Adam unfurnished with any thing that ^ight support him in
that estate in which he created him. For th^s they bring no word of God, but
broach their own fansi^s. A^am was unfurnished of Gods gracious help to support
him when h^ was tempted: for want of it, he willingly yielded unto Sa^an: by
it, he might and would have resisted all tentations; even as the elect Angels
having this grace, are supported so as they shall never fall. Adam in deed was
so furnished of God, that no power or frawd of Satan could have vanquished him,
unl^sse he himself would voluntary yield: which he did, and therefore had no
excuse for his sin. But God (if he had pleased) could so have confirmed his
will in good, could so have supported him with grace in tentation, that his
will should not at all have declined to evil. This God did not, because so it
pleased him; and he was not bound to give Adam more grace, then that which he
had bestowed on him: which was so great, that no power of devils could have
prevailed, if the man had not willingly fallen.

They proceed to manifest two things: first, Of Adams state, Page 10 1^.
viz. that God could not make him otherwise then be made him, that is mutable,
able to obey his precepts: but not unchangeably good. Ans. Not to reason of
things too high for us, how God could have made man: I grant that men and
Angels, and all cr^atures are changeable: and that Adam was able to obey all
Gods commandments, if he had would: but this proves not that he was furnished
with all things that might support him in that good estate: for he had not
special grace from God to stablish his will in good; which the Lord could have
done, and then Adam had not sinned. Whereas they add, God did not decree and
force him to sin; we say the same, and they sinfully wrong us to impute such
blasphemy unto us. 2 The second thing they would manifest is; That many things
be done against the will of God. Answ. This as it is set down is false: For it
was the will of God to suffer Adam to fall, else he had not fallen: and God
willingly suff^reth all the sins done under the Sun; for if he would not
suffer them, the creatures could not do them. But understanding by Gods will
his commandment, or his approbation: so it is true, that too many things are
done against Gods will: and this they need not go about to prove, for none (I
think) denies it.

Page 13.
But they scoff at the distinction between the action, and the sin of the
action, and call it merely a fabulous riddle: and say, the subtilty of the
Riddle is this, that sin is nothing: whereupon they pleasantly infer, that
malefactors are punished for nothing. Answ. Had they not a better faculty in
deriding then in disputing, they would not have called it a fabulous riddle. I
have before proved that all actions of men as they are natural, all motions
inward or outward, are of God, Act. 17 28. Again, I have proved that the
actions of Assyria and Babylon, were just and holy actions as God did them; but
wicked and sinful as men performed them Therefore the action and the sin of the
action are rightly and needfully distinguished, seeing Gods hand is in the one,
but not in the other. That sin is no substantial thing is plain, seeing all
things were made by God, Ioh. 1 2, but sin he never made: it is a vicious
quality infecting the good things which God made, and corrupting their actions.
And thus though sin be not simply nothing, yet it is no substantial thing.
Their definition of sin, that it is a thought, word, or deed, contrary to the
will of God* is no perfect definition: for there is an hereditary sin from
Adam, which all have, before they can either do, or speak, or think: of which
point we are to treat anon. Their inference that they which hold God to be the
author of the deed which is sin, hold him to be the author of sin, is
denied and before disproved. We know God was author of the deed of sending
Joseph into Egypt: for he sent him ^hither, partly to try and humble Joseph,
partly to provide for Iakobs family, Psalm. 10^ 17 19, Genesis 45 7 8, yet was ^e
not author of the sin committed in sending him, that was of the Patriarchs,
moved with envy, Act. 7 9.

They charge M. Knox with wide wandering, and large bl^sphemy, Page 15 16.
for ascribing to the providence of God, wh^tsoever the Ethnickes attributed to
fortune: Their reason is this, who knows not that unto fortune, the Ethnicks
ascribe all perverse and pestilent wickedness. Answ. Herein they wander from
the truth, and blaspheme it. Gods providence extends further then to such
things as he himself is author and doer of: it extends to all the most
horrible sins in the world, which he willingly suffers to be done, and
provideth in what manner and measure he will suffer them to be done, and by
his wisdom knows to bring good out of the vvorst and most sinful deed.
Could Adam have been tempted to sin, if God had not given Satan leave to tempt?
Could he have fallen, if God had not left him to himself? Was not Gods
providence in Absaloms horrible sin when he defiled his fathers vviues;
seeing God foretold it, and the manner of it, before all Israel, and before the
Sun? 2 Samuel 12 11 12. Gods providence suff^red Shimeis sin when he cursed
David: his providence kept Abimilech from sinning in defiling Sarah, Genesis 20 3
6. To conclude, it is near unto Atheism and Epicurisme to deny Gods
providence in any the least thing or action be it good or evil.

But these men infer worse matter; Page 16.
asking whether any thing may be spoken more repugnant to the nature of God, or
contrary to his word etc. then to say that God punishes man with hell
torments, for doing those things which he himself has predestined,
ordained, decreed, determined, appointed, willed and compelled him to do, and
that which a man cannot choose, but must needs do by the force and compulsion
of his predestination. Ans Bold calumniators, which vvoul make the vvorl^
believe we say such things as we abhor to think. In how many books might
they have seen these things denied, and refuted. We teach that sin is
suffered of God, not done by him, nor decreed, willed, commanded, much less
compelled. All that sin (whether men or divils) sin voluntarily, of their
own will, for which they might all in justice be damned. God tempts no man
to evil, much less forces or compels any to evil, Iam. 1 13. So they
answer unto, and vvoul^ refute their own fictions.

They affirm that we say, whatsoever God foreseeth be wills, Page 17 1^*
and it cannot but come to pass: vvhereto they answer, that God foreseeth all
things, good and evil, but he wills only good. And though he fore knows
^ll things, yet all things come not to passes before of necessity. Answ. They
still dally and deceive by general and ambiguous terms. If they understand by
Gods will, his p^rmissiue will, or vvilling sufferance: so we say all things
good or evil co^^ to pass by his will. But if they mean Gods effectiue or
approving will, so we hold that he wills nothing but good. The second we
teach not, that all things therefore come to pass because God foreknovveth
them: his foreknovvledge imposes no necessity on things. But vvithall we
teach, that whatsoever God foreknovveth shall be, that must needs be, else his
knowledge should not be certain and infallible: but they come to pass by
other causes then his bare for^knovvledge. These distinctions observed, their
reasons deduced from Scripture are soon taken away.

They plead, Page 18.
that God foreseeth the death of ^ sinner, and the cause thereof, viz. his
wickedness; but wills it not, as Ezech. 18 32 and 33 11. I will not the
death of a sinner, but that he return and live. Christ foresaw the destruction
of Jerusalem, yet he willed it not for he wept etc. Mat. 23 37. Answ. They do
not well to shuffle togeth^r, Death, and wickedness the cause of it.
Wickedness God wills permissiuely, suffering it to be done: Death he
wills ^ff^ctiuely, infl^cti^g it on obstinate sinners. Secondly, they err
in d^nying absolutely that God wills the death of a sinner, else how should
God judge the world? To kill for sin is a work of justice, as to pardon sin
is a work of mercy. God wills his own justice and work thereof. Who but
he creates the evil of punishment? Esaias 45 7, Amos 3 6. Who but he prepares
death and hell for sinners? Math. 25 41. And ^id he do this against his vvil?
The Scripture in plain words says of Eli^s wicked sons. They hearkened not
etc. because the Lord would sl^y them, 1 Samuel 2 25. Whereas therefore Ezekiel
says, God w^^ld not sinners death, it cannot be meant absolutely or in all
resp^ct^ (for then it should contradict the other Scripture,) but conditionally
or comparatively: So it is explained in Ezekiel. 18.21
if sinners repent he wills not their death; or he wills not their death
so much as their repentance. But if the vvick^d turn not, then the (Prophet
says) God whetteth his sword, bends his bow, and prepares for him the
instruments of death, Psalm. 7.12 13. So Christ would not Ierusalems
destruction, if they would have come to him: but because they would not, he
would make it desolate, as was foretold, Dan. 9.26 27.

They would prove, Page* 18.
that all things come not pass of necessity therefore; to wit, because of
Gods foreknovvledge. Answ. They labor in vain to prove that they need not.
Gods foreknowledge l^yeth no necessity that the thing must be done by force or
compulsion. Yea Gods will alvvayes lays no such necessity: seeing he
wills some things conditionally, which are not eff^cted unless the
condition be observed: as he would a sinners life, not death, conditionally if
he return to God. He would the destruction of Niniveh; but conditionally,
except they repented. Other things God wills absolutely; and those must needs
come to pass: for none can resist or hinder his absolute will. Esa. 46 10.11.
Job. 23*13 Psalm. 33.10.11. But forasmuch as God certainly foreknow^th all
things that shall be, whether good or evil, in this resp^ct all things come to
pass of necessity, otherwise God in his forek^owledge might be deceived. But
as necessity means viol^nce, force, compulsion: so all things are not of
necessity, but many are of the voluntary will of the creature. Therefore these
adve^saries deceive their rea^ers in answering texts of scripture alleged: for
sometime they fa^h^r untruths on us, Page ^^.
and with ^ll s^metime spread their errors As when they say, In these actions
(namely Shimeis cursing of David, and the like) there were evils, namely
cur^ing* ^n^y* pride* decei^: now the controversy is (say they) who was the
first cause ^f this cursing, ^nvy pride, deceit. Answ. They would make
controversy where none is. Page 2^*
We believe that all sin is originally from ^he creature, and none from the
creator. So when they would conclu^e from our doctrine, that God should be most
to be blamed for forcing of necessity by his decree, Satan to tempt, and man
to cons^nt and act it: they show themselves to be calumniators: we do not hol^
that ever any creature was, is, or shall be forced of necessity by Gods
decree, to consent unto, or to act any sin.

And here let the prudent reader observe, how these men themselves can
distinguish when they are driven to it: for (in page 24, 25.) they confess G^d
made them that are now Devils, and continues the life and being of men and
Divils: also (in page 26.) that these Divils and men (the instruments that act
wickedness) are good, as they are from God, yet the actions (they say) of
those instruments, the sins, cannot be good from God.

The first is true, that divils and men were Gods good creatures: the second,
(that God continues their life and being) is also true, but imperf^ct: they
should have added their moving also: for so we are taught, that in him we live,
and move, and have our being, Act. 17 28. Why said they not that God continues
their moving also* Was it because they saw all our actions are motions, and
th^r^fore in some respect a^^ also of God? But this they baulk for advantage to
their errors. Their third assertion is partly false, and partly fraudulent.
Fraud it is to confound actions and sins, as if they were all one, and
admitted no distinction (v^hich the A^aba^tists call a turning device.) False
it is that the actions of th^se instrum^nts cannot be good from God: for
vvhatso^ver is from G^d, is good; and all actions as they are merely natura^l,
are from G^d, in whom w^ live and move* Again, all acti^ns wh^^h God (eith^r
f^r ^^yall, chastisement or punishment) does by ev^l^ ^^struments, they are
morally good in respect of God: though as they are misdone, or sinfully done by
divils and men, they are morally evil; and thus God does them not, but only
suffers them to be done amiss.

Now for Gods sending the Assyrians against Israel, Page 26 27.
Esa. 10 5 6, his sending delusions upon reprobates, 2 Thessalonians. 2 11, and the
like: they say it was not otherwise then by suffering: and they would prove it
by the divils words to Christ, Send us into the swine, Mar. 5 12, which
another Evangelist sets down thus, Suffer us to go etc. Mat. 8 31. Hereupon
they infer, that Gods sending is nothing but suffering in this case.

Answ. They conclude more then the Scripture teaches: for though such sending
be suffering, yet it follows not that such sending is nothing but suffering:
there is more in it then so* For the punishing of Israel by Ashshur, Esai. 10.
was an act of Justice for their sins: and so is the sending of delusion in 2 Thessalonians. 2. a work of justice: therefore a good work. And if God did not do
these things, but only suffered them: then the good works of justice are done
by wicked men and divils; and the Divils shall be good doers; and God a
sufferer only of good to be done. The proof they make show of from comparing
the Evangelists, shows what strangers they are in the book of God. When
sundry Prophets or Apostles repeat the same things, it is usually with some
change and difference of words: not that the different words are equivalent,
one meaning neither more nor l^sse then another, but of different meaning, and
larger extent oftentimes, to teach further matter. That which one Evangelist
calls fasting, Mark 2.19. another calls mourning, Math. 9.15. yet are not
these two one, though often joined together. To drink with the drunken, Math.
24.49. is explained, To drink and to be drunken, Luke 12.45. which two speeches
are not always the same; for a man may drink with the drunken, and yet not be
drunken himself. In 2. Chron. 5.4. the Levites took up the Ark: in 1. King.
8.3. it is said, the Priests took up the Ark: this expounds the former; for
though all Priests were Levites, yet all Levites were not Priests. In 1. Chron.
19.19. the Syrians would not help the Ammonites: in 2. Sam. 10.19. it is said,
they feared to help them. Yet are not these words of equal force and extent:
for some may be unwilling to help though they be not afraid. The Prophet
says, Rejoice greatly O daughter of Sion, Zach. 9.9. the Apostle alleges it,
Fear not O daughter of Sion, Ioh. 12.15. The Prophet says, the Gentiles shall
seek, Esa. 11.10. the Apostle expounds it, the Gentiles shall trust. Romans
15.12. And many the like; where to make one of the words no more in force then
the other, were to do open violence to the scripture. And that all may see that
sending is more then suffering, the very same history which they allege does
convince them, for the same Divils at the same time desired Christ that he
would not send them away out of the country, Mark. 5 10. but in Luke 8.31. it
is said, they desired that he would not comm^nd them to go out into the deep.
If these men's reason be of weight, sending is no more then suffering: this
reason has as much weight, that sending is no less th^n commanding. Now
betwixt commanding and suffering themselves (I suppose) will confess there is
sometime a great difference. But why does the one Evangelist say send us, and
an other, suffer us? Not to confound these two as one, but to teach us two
things; 1. that as it was the divils sinful and malicious desire to hurt the
creatures, and to procure envy against Christ in this respect he suffered them:
2. but as it was Christ's just punishment on the covetous Gadarens, and trial of
them whether they loved their swine more then him and his gospel; in these
respects Christ not only suffered, but sent the divils into the swine; and the
divils were his servants to do what he would have done. The like is to be
minded for Gods sending the Assyrians, and Babylonians, with sword to kill; and
the divils with delusions to deceive the reprobates; and other the like, 1
King. 22, 19, 20 -- 22.23.

This is further manifested by the example of Christ's death: touching which
(whatsoever the Scripture says) these men do deny that God determined,
appointed or decreed, Page 28.
that the wicked should betray or murder him, otherwise then by suffering
them. Which if they spoke in respect of the sin only, we would grant: but
being meant of the actions done, it is against the express Scriptures, which
say the Jews took and crucified him, being delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God, Act. 2 23, and that both Gentiles and
Israelites were gathered together for to do whatsoever Gods hand and his
counsel, predestined (or fore-determined) to be done: Act. 4 27.28. Now Gods
Counsel and Predestination that a thing should be done, is more then bare
permission; and his hand being in it, shows him to be an agent in this work.
God out of his love, sent and gave his Son for us, Ioh. 3.16.17, it pleased
the Lord to bruise him, and put him to grief, Esaias 53.10, and Christ laid down
his life of himself, no man took it from him, Ioh. 10.18, he powered out his
soul unto death, Esa. 53.12, he offered up himself a sacrifice for our
sins, through the external Spirit, Heb. 7.27, and 9 14. These and the like
sayings in Scripture, teach us more of God in Christ's death, then a bare
suffering. Gods good hand was in it for our redemption, and not only the
wicked hands of them that sinfully crucified him.

Page 29.
Whereas they tell us, Christ might have been slain without sin, for God might
have appointed some to sacrifice Christ, as he did Abraham to sacrifice Isaak
etc. They speak too presumptuously in Gods matters. Will they teach him an
other or a better way to effect his own purposes, then himself has chosen?
But what would they infer upon it? If God had decreed that Christ should have
been slain by holy Angels; they would not then deny (I suppose) but God
should be an agent in his Sons death. Now that God decreed he should be slain
by evil Angels, and hands of wicked men; and his Decrees and Counsels must
stand, Psalm. 33.11, his predictions must needs be fulfilled, Act. 1.16, is he
not therefore an agent in Christ's death? Shall he be restrained from using any
of his creatures to do his good work, because they through their own
corruption and malice do it (and cannot but do it) amiss? Or shall their mis
doing which is in them voluntary, and not caused of God, be imputed to him?
Let men speak and think of God with more sobriety: and though our dullness
cannot comprehend how Gods good hand can be in the evil actions of wicked men,
and he not partaker of their sin: yet let us not deny that which God plainly
teaches, but rather lay our hand on our mouth, and confess we have uttered
that we understood not, things too wonderful for us which we knew not, Job.
40.4, and 42, 3.

The last reason which they pretend to answer, is such as dazelleth the
adversaries eyes. The Scripture says, the Jews could not believe, because
(the Lord) he blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, that they should not
see, nor understand, and be converted and healed, Ioh. 12.39.40. Also the Lord
says, I will harden Pharoahs heart: and be shall not bearken unto you, that I
may lay my hand upon Egypt, etc. Exodus 7.3.4. Page 32.
They answer, to the first, that by comparing Esa. 6.9. Mat. 13.14, etc. Act.
28.26, etc. it is manifest, that they winked with their eyes, lest they should
see: for which cause God gave them up to that reprobate sense. Page ^^.
To the latter they answer, that Pharaoh hardened his (own) heart, Exodus 9.34,
and God hardened his heart (and so the hearts of the wicked) by giving them up
to Satan (who works hardness of heart against God) and to their own hearts
hardness, and lusts, to vile affections, and to reprobate minds, Psalm.
81.11.12. Romans 1.24.26.28.

A^sw. That the Jews winked and would not see, that Pharaoh hardened his own
heart and would not let Israel go, is true. That for these causes God gave
them up to their own lusts, etc. and to Satan is also true. Thus far we
agree; but to the force of our reason they answer nothing at all. For in these
works of blinding and hardening, there is more then Gods bare permission: they
did it, and God it; they sinfully, but God righteously, justly rewarding their
sin. And thus the enemy condemns himself. For he that for sin, inflicteth
punishment, does a good work of justice, and suffers it not only to be done:
but God for sin blinded the eyes, and hardened the hearts of the Jews and
Egyptians; therefore in blindning and hardening, God was a doer (as a just
Judge) and not a sufferer only, as while ere they pleaded. Between these two
there is great difference. The Greeks took Softh^nes and beat him before
Gallioes judgment seat; here Gallio suffered them only, caring for none of
those things, Act. 18.15.16.17. Paul and Silas were beaten and imprisoned by
the Magistrates commandment, Act. 16.22.23, here the Magistrates not only
suffered, but were agents also in their beating and imprisoning, though they
did it by other wicked m^ns hands. So God when he commands Satan to go and
deceive, or harden wicked sinners, 1. King. 22.22, when he gives sinners up to
a reprobat mind, Romans 1.24.26, 28, then God deceives, God hardneth in just
judgment, and does not only suffer these things. When the Judge delivers an
evil doer to the Officer, and the Offi^er cast him into prison, Luke 12.58,
the Judge does this by the Offi^er. So God is the Judge, he delivers evil
doers to Satan to be their deluder, their tormentor, their jailer, he gives
them up to blindness, hardness, reprobate minds; and these are works of his
justice, which Satan and evil men execute most sinfully. Christ says, he came
into this world for judgment, that they which see not might see, and that they
which see might be made blind, Job. 9.39. Now in what manner God blinds and
hardneth sinners it is not in man to declare: for his judgments are
unsearchable, and his ways past finding out, Romans 11.33, But they that for his
judgments would make God the author of sin, err on the one hand: and they
that ascribe unto him herein but a bare permission, err on the other hand.
Godliness will teach us to believe and rest in that which the Scriptures
teach: though it pass our reach and capacity how God in his wisdom does
these things. Hitherto of Predestination.

Of Election.
THEY proceed to speak of election; where after they have set down (as they
think good themselves) what our opinion is, they propound their own doctrine,
viz. That Christ came to cure all men of their sins, Page 34 36.
but with a bitter medicine, which is, that we must deny our selves, take up
his cross, and follow him. So many as refuse to take this medicine, cannot be
cured, but such as receive it are cured. Again, that they are elected who do
put on Christ, and that our election depends upon this condition, Page 39.
according to the Scriptures, Romans 9.25.26.
the Lord chooses to himself a righteous man, and they that were not Gods
people, shall be his people, etc. if they seek righteousness by faith, Romans
11.5.7
and these are the elect, according to the election of grace. Election (they
say) is not of particular person, but of quality: all persons are Gods
generation; and those persons in whom he finds faith and obedience, Act.
17.28, 29.
of his mere mercy those persons he electeth to salvation, for the quality he
finds in them; which he himself has wrought by his word and Spirit, which
they might have resisted, but did not, but submitted to the righteousness of
God; and this is Gods purpose of election before the world was; Romans 8.29.
and these are they whom God knew, or acknowledged before. And for Gods decree
they feign it to be thus, Page 41.
I will cause all Nations to be taught (by Christ) and so many of them, (being
all called) as do not behave themselves as they ought, I will cause to be
punished, and the rest I will bless and make happy. This is the doctrine of
blind Odegos, the Guide; and ignorant Ereunetes the Searcher answers, I do
think it so to have been.

Answ. Very ignorantly and erroneously have they propounded their opinion, with
some truth mixing much error, that the blind may lead the blind into the
ditch. It is true, that such men as they describe are Gods elect: it is also
true that God has wrought these good things in them by his Word and Spirit.
But false it is, that our election depends upon this condition; False, that
election is not of particular persons, but of quality. False it is (and
thwarting their former speech) that God electeth those persons in whom he
finds faith and obedience: For before election no such persons are to be
found among all the sons of Adam. False it is, and an abusing of the
Scripture, to say, that God chooses to himself a righteous man. False it is
to say (in this matter of Election) that all persons are Gods generation.
Briefly, the whole tenor of their description of Gods election, is perverse
and erroneous. For,

1 No scripture tells them that our election to life, depends on this
condition, of our faith and obedience. Faith and obedience are the effects (not
the cause) of our election, and are conditions following election, not going
before it; as it is written, As many as were ordained to eternal life
believed, Act. 13.48, teaching that Gods ordaining to life (that is his
election) went before their believing, but these men invert the order of God,
and would teach, that so many as believed (beforehand) were ordained to life.

2 The Apostle teaches us, that whom God foreknew, he also did predestinate to
be conformed to the image of his Son, Romans 8.29, so that our conformity to
the image of Christ, our faith, obedience, bearing of his cross etc. is that
whereunto (not that wherefore) God predestined or chose us. This is most
apparent by the words following: Whom he did predestinate, them he also called,
and whom he called them he also justified, and whom he justified them he also
glorified, Romans 8.30, So then glorifying comes after justifying; justifying
after calling; calling, after predestinating or choosing unto life: and these
graces are not before predestination or causes of it, as these adversaries
would persuade.

3 It is written, that God has chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of
the world* that we should be holy; and he predestined us unto the adoption
of children by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.4.5, so that our holiness, and our
adoption, are things that we are chosen unto, and do follow election; but are
not the things going before, and which we are chosen for, because God finds
them in us.

4 Paul teaches us that God justifyeth the ungodly that believe in him, Romans 4
5, now those whom he justifies, he did choose and predestinate before, Romans
8.30, therefore he chose the ungodly, the unrighteous, that they may be made
godly, righteous, and holy, through his grace. But these men say, God chooses
a righteous man, whereas the Scripture says, There is none righteous, no not
one, there is none that understands, none that seeks after God, Romans
3.10.11, so that if God should choose the righteous only, none at all should be
chosen. They say, it is according to the Scripture, but they show no Scripture
that accords to their saying. If they intend Psalm 4.3, the Lord has set
apart (or separated) him that is godly for himself; (for I know not else what
Scripture they should mean,) they are deceived and would deceive; for David
speaks not there of his election to life, but of his being set apart to the
glory of the kingdom of Israel, which his enemies would have turned to
ignominy: neither uses he the word of election, but of setting-apart (or
separating after a mavelous sort) which word is used for Gods
administration toward his people after they are elected and called, as
appears in Ex. 33.16, and 11.7, yea and it is applied to bruit beasts, which
are not partakers of the Election that we treat of, Ex. 9.4.

5 Moses teaches Israel, that God gave them not inheritance in the earthly
Canaan (much less in the Kingdom of Christ) for their righteousness or
uprightness of their hearts, Deuteronomy. 9 4.5.6, he tells them, Because God loved
their fathers, therefore he choose their seed after them, Deuteronomy. 4.37. But
these men would persuade, that because men deny themselves, take up the
cross and follovv Christ, (that is, because they are righteous and holy)
therefore God chooses them to inherit heaven.

6 Because all men are by nature, or creation, the offspring, or generation of
God. Act. 17.28, these men would conclude that election to eternal life, is
not of particular persons, but of quality: as if our first natural birth, and
our second supernatural birth were all one: or, because all persons are of
God by creation, therefore no persons (or all persons) are of God by
regeneration, and by election. But it is palpable error to confound things so
different.

They proceed in their error, and say, All men to whom the Gospel is preached,
Page 4^.
were elected to salvation in Christ; not actually, for they could not be
actually chosen, before they had actually any being, but in the eternal
purpose of God upon the condition before spoken.

Answ. Their first assertion is against truth, against reason. It is not true
that all to whom the Gospel is preached, were elected to salvation in Christ:
no scripture says so. We are taught the contrary by Act. 13.46.48. where the
Gospel was preached to many, but all that heard it were not elected to
salvation: for as many as were ordained (that is elected) to eternal life,
believed. But all believed not: therefore all were not ordained (or elected) to
life. Against reason it is to say, All are elected: for election implies a
leaving or refusing of some. Where all ar taken, no choice is made. Their
second saying is, all were elected, not actually, because they had no being;
but in Gods eternal purpose. The action is in God, not in man: and his
purposes or decrees are his actions: and if before the foundation of the world,
God elected us in Christ, as the Apostle teaches, Ephesians. 1.4. then were we
actually chosen before we had natural being: though Gods choice had not effect
in us till we had being: But whereas they add, upon the condition before spoken;
it is an error before refuted.

Object. But of the elect Paul says, Ye were without Christ, without God in
the world, Ephesians. 2.12. so they were not then really and particularly elected.

Answ. Howsoever they change their terms, their reason is not good. They were
not without God or Christ in respect of Gods election, which he did before the
world was made, Ephesians. 1.4. but in respect of their sinful estate and unbeleefe,
before they were called, they were without God.

2 Obj. But the Apostle says, After ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy
spirit of promise, etc. Ephesians. 1.13.14.

Answ. What of this? Could they not be elected of the father, before they were
sealed by the holy Ghost? Gods election was before all time, Ephesians. 1.4. their
calling and sealing by the Spirit, was in time. But they would confound
election and sealing ignorantly.

3 Object. Romans 9.25, 1 Pet. 2.10. I will call them my people which were not my
people, etc. If we were actually and particularly chosen before the creation,
then were we also really Gods people, and could not at any time be said, not to
be his people.

Answ. Here again they confound Gods election, with his cal^^ng* which is the
manifestation of his election by the effect. Gods predestination is before his
calling, Romans 8.30. So though they were not his people by calling, they were
his by election. It is evident by Act. 18.10. that many in Corinth were Gods
people, before they were called or converted. Jeremy was known, sanctified and
ordained to be a Prophet, before he was formed or born, Ier. 1.5. and can we
think he was not then also chosen to life?

They say, The Apostles meaning is, Page ^^
that we are first particularly chosen, when we receive or put on Christ. For
God only chooses where be finds faith and obedience to the Gospel; and
rejects where these are wanting. Herein they wrong the Apostles, who neither
spoke nor meant as these men speak. It is showed before from Act. 13.48. that
election goes before faith: so these men err, that put it after. They pervert
the order set down in Romans 8.30. whiles they make men to be first called,
justified, glorified; and then predestined unto life. They neglect Paul's
doctrine, that God chose us before the world was, that we should be holy: and
teach new doctrine of Antichrists devising, that God chose us because we were
holy. But to follow them in their doctrine: God chooses none (they say) but
where he finds faith. Where does God find this, seeing he has shut up all in
unbelief? Romans 11.32. Faith is not of our selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians.
2.8. so then he finds not faith in his elect, but gives them faith. And if
they say some will not believe, and them God rejects: some will believe, and
them God electeth: I demand, whence have any this will to believe? If they
answer, of themselves and their own power; the Apostle tells us the
contrary, It is God that works in us both to will and to do of his good
pleasure, Phil. 2.13. Now God gives not all men this will to believe and obey:
for some cannot believe, 1. Ioh. 12.39. some are reprobate concerning faith and
every good work. 2. Tim. 3.8. Tit. 1 16. If God would give all men alike grace,
he could make all men willing to believe and obey: but this he does not: for
in some he gives a new heart and a new spirit, and takes away the stony heart
out of their flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. in other some he hardens their heart, that
they cannot believe, nor turn unto him, Ioh. 1^.39 40. The mystery of his
Gospel, God bideth from some, and reveals to oth^rsome: even so, for so it
seemed good in his sight, Math. 11.25.26. He has mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he hardens, Romans 9.18.

By this which has been said, all that love the truth may see, that all men to
whom the Gospel is preached, are not elected to salvation in Christ, as these
corrupters of the Gospel teach: neither can all men believe, or obey; because
God gives them not such grace. Some refuse indeed willingly, and they perish
justly: some (who naturally are as bad as other, and have hearts of stone not of
flesh) are changed, new hearts are given them, faith and holiness are wrought in
them, and so they are brought unto salvation whereunto they were elected. Why
God changes the heart of some and not of other some, when he could if he
pleased, change all is not a question to be disputed of, Romans 9.19.20. Let it
suffice us, that God owes us nothing, except death for our sins. His grace
is his own, he may give it where he will, and none have cause to complain: If
God have given grace to any of us, let us praise him for his mercy: when we
see others left without grace, let us reverence him for his unsearchable
judgments.

The rest of their discourse about election, though there be many abuses they
offer to the scriptures, which might justly be taxed, yet because they none of
them do prove these men's universal Election, nor disprove our faith, I think
needless to reply unto.

Of Reprobation.
TOgether with Election, they treat of Reprobation, badly as before, Our
doctrine they pretend to be thus, They say, Pag^ ^^.
God has reprobated some, and the greatest number, and that before they were
borne, and had done evil; for whom there was never means of salvation,
because God would have them perish, for that was his good pleasure.

Answ. We hold not (as they would bear the world in hand) that God would have
men to perish, because it is his good pleasure: but because of their sins he
destroys them, his justice so requiring. Neither do we hold that God ever
decreed to punish his reasonable creature, without respect of the sin thereof
deserving punishment. Yet was their punishment decreed before they were borne,
or had done evil. For God foreseeing their wickedness, appointed them to
wrath before they acted it, though he inflicteth not punishment till they be
sinners. And this the scripture teaches, as in Jude verse. 4. there are
certain men crept in, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation.
If they were ordained to it before of old, then was it before they were
borne. The same is confirmed by Romans 9.11.12.13. which scripture they seek to
pervert by a longsome and erroneous exposition. Our doctrine being thus by them
mis-reported; they labor to refute their own forgeries, not our assertions.
So that they are unworthy of any reply.

Of falling away.
THE next error which they would maintain, is, Page 78.
that a man may fall from his election: or, that godly men, which are in the
true and saving grace of God, may fall away: Page ^9.
and may loose their heavenly inheritance which they have right unto. This
Popish heresy they have not confirmed by any one Scripture, though they
pervert many Scriptures for a show to delude the simple.

The faith which we profess is this: that the elect, however through Satan's
tentations, and their own infirmities, they are subject to fall from God and
perish; yet they are kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation, 1
Pet. 1.5, though they through their weakness sin and fall, yet the Lord
puts under his hand, Psalm. 37.24, and the seed of God remains in them, and
they cannot sin (unto death) because they are borne of God, 1 Job. 3.9. Though
of themselves they are too ready to depart from God, yet he will not turn away
from them to do them good, but puts his fear in their hearts, that they
shall not depart from him, Ier. 32.40, so Christ's sheep shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of his hand, but he gives unto them eternal
life, Ioh. 10 28, and the elect cannot possibly be seduced from Christ, Mat.
24.24.

They plead for their error by 7 reasons.

The 1 is certain Scriptures; as Heb. 12.15. Look least any man fail of (or
fall from) the grace of God. Answ. This proves not that God will suffer his
elect to fall utterly from saving grace: but warns them to take heed to
themselves in respect of their own frailty, and Satan's subtilty. Though Gods
election and foundation stands sure, 2 Timothy 2*19, yet we must make an end of
our salvation with fear and trembling; and must add virtue unto faith, and
give diligence to make our calling and election sure; which if we do we shall
never fall, 2 Pet. 1.5. * 10.

Salt may loose his savor, Mat. 5. Answ. It may, if men be seasoned but with
common grace, such as God gives to many reprobates Heb. 6.4.5.6, but saving
grace bestowed on the elect, is a gift and calling without repentance, Romans
11.29.

Some that have escaped the pollutions of the world, etc. may return with the
Sow to wallow in the mire, 2 Pet. 2.20.22. Answ. Too many in deed do so, but
they are swine, not sheep of Christ: they seemed to be washed, by the knowledge
of the Lord which they had, but their swinish nature was never changed. The
Apostle in that chapter speaks of hypocrites and reprobates, which walk after
the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, v. 10, which are as natural bruit
beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, v. 12. which are wells without water,
v. 17, so they never had saving grace.

Those that Christ has bought may be damned, 2 Pet. 2.1. Answ. Those are such
as before I spoke of, which were bought of Christ by his offer of grace, and
their feyned acceptance of it: but had they been in deed bought from the earth,
they would have followed the Lamb, and should have been without fault before
the throne of God, Rev. 14.3.4 5. Had they been justified by his blood, and
reconciled to God by his death; much more should they be saved by his life;
Rom 5.9.10. Had they been of Christ's sheep, for whom he laid down his life, he
would have given them eternal life, Ioh. 10.27*28. And here note how these men
would make Christ's sufferings vain: for many whom (as they think) Christ died
for, shall die themselves for ever. Where is now the justice of God, that
punishes the wicked thems^lues, and yet punished Christ for them, without
cause without fruit? Such doctrine the Apostle does abhor, Gal. 2.21.

Some may tread under foot the blood of Christ, wherewith they were sanctified,
etc. Heb. 10.29. Answ. Such were never sanctified otherwise then Swine that
were washed, whose filthy nature was never indeed changed, otherwise then by
counterfeisance and hypocrisy.

They that have faith and good conscience, may put it away, and make shipwreck
of it: and some may leave their first faith, and be damned, 1 Timothy 1.19, and
5.12. Ans. Faith is not always in deed, that which it seems to be: There is
a temporary faith, which falls away in time of tentation, Luke 8.13* a vain
dead faith, Iam. 2, and there is a living faith, the ^aith of Gods elect, Tit.
1, 1, this faith never fails utterly, for it is the seed of God, by which we
are regenerate, and it remains in us, keeping us from sin, 1. Joh. 3.9.

Some written in the book of life, may be put out, Exodus 32.32.33. Psalm.
69.25.28, Rev. 3.5. Answ. Many things are spoken of God, not properly but
figuratively, and after the manner of men. So God is no way changeable, Mal.
3.6, Iam. 1.17, neither does he repent, 1. Sam. 15.29, yet is it said, It
repented him that he had made man etc. Genesis 6.6, because in destroying the
world, he did as men when they repent. So God is said to blot out of his book,
those wicked which for a time seemed to themselves, and to others to be written
in his book, but after by Gods rooting them out, are manifested never to have
been written there; for then they should have continued there* because the
gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11.^9, his foundation
stands sure, having this seal. The Lord knows them that are his, 2 Timothy
2.19. But to the wicked he will profess, I never knew you, Mat. 7, 23. The
talent may be taken from him that uses it not well, Mat. 25. Answ. All that
have talents, that is gracious gifts, have not true saving grace to sanctify
those gifts, neither are they all Gods elect. This therefore is no proof of the
question in hand.

The Saints at Rome that were justified by faith, and had access unto grace,
Romans 5.1.2, yet if they continued not in the bounty of God, they should be cut
off, etc. Romans 11.22. Answ. This and the examples following are like to the
former, and teach Gods elect to have care to continue in grace, without which
there is no salvation. They teach also that hypocrites falling from God, shall
perish. But none truly justified, and partakers of saving grace, shall perish,
for God gloryfieth them, Romans 5.9, and 8.30, and he puts his fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from him, Ier. 32 40, and if they depart
not, they perish not, but are kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.

2 Their second reason is, Page 80.
If the elect cannot fall out of Gods favor, then did not all fall in Adam,
and then some were never dead in sins, and so need not Christ's redemption,
etc. Answ. An ignorant cavil: for the Apostle teaches that God has chosen us
in Christ before the foundation of the world. Ephesians. 1 4. These men speak of our
state before Christ. Again Adam and all in him fell from grace, such as they
had of God in creation; but not from Christian grace, from grace of election
and redemption, whereof they had no need before ^h^ir fall, neither had they
any promise of it till they were dead in si^, Genesis 3 It is this saving grace in
Christ, from which the elect can never utterly fall, and not any other grace by
creation, from which all men and some Angels have fallen.

3 If the elect cannot fall from their election, then have not all sinned and
been deprived of the glory of God, and shut up in unbeleefe, etc. Answ. The
same sophistry is in this reason, that was in the former, changing the state
of the question, which is only of them that in Christ were chosen before the
world was, and are by him redeemed, justified, sanctified, and shall have
eternal life, Ioh. 10.28, whereas these deceivers speak of men without Christ,
and before they are by him redeemed.

4 The Ephesians were elect before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. yet
having forsaken their first love, if they repented not, God would remove the
candlestick etc. Rev. 2. Answ. This is answered in the answers to the
Scriptures which they brought in their first reason. It is true, the elect
without repentance, faith, and perseverance cannot be saved. But all Gods elect
have from him the grace to repent, believe, and continue in well-doing, as
before is proved: so they cannot perish. But hypocrites which were among the
Saints only, but never of them, they cannot continue with the Saints, and so
cannot be saved, 1 Ioh. 2.19.

5 If a man in Gods favor and chosen cannot fall out of it: then need he not,
though he commit incest, adultery, murder, etc. fear falling into damnation.
Answ. Herein they abuse Gods comfortable promises, as if men should continue in
sin that grace may abound. Far be it. All men ought to fear falling into any
sin, and the elect fear continually knowing their own frailty. Our
spiritual security is not carnal security: our faith is in God, not in our
selves; by his power we are kept, not by our own. He says to his people, The
mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed; Esai.
54.10. But if by fear, they mean fear without faith, that is despair: we
believe that the elect though they fall into such sins, ought not to despair
or distrust Gods mercy: as the examples of David, Peter etc: which they
allege, do evidently confirm. Psalm. 51. Luke 22.31.32.

6 If no man elect, can fall from his election by committing of any of these
sins, then to what end is repentance taught? It is in vain, if they neither
be, nor can be in condemnation, etc. Answ. They that teach such doctrine, their
religion is vain. We believe as the elect cannot perish, so neither can they
continue in sin: he that is borne of God (says the Apostle) commits not
sin, 1 Ioh. 3.9. All that truly believe that they are elect, do also
believe and know, that by repentance, faith, and abiding in Christ, they must
come to the end of their election, the salvation of their souls: this is the
way and means unto life, and without this they cannot see God.

7 To what end are men admonished or exhorted not to receive the grace of God
in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1, not to fall from their steadfastness, 2 Pet. 3.17 etc. If
they cannot fall into them, does the Lord use words in vain? Answ. No, but
these men's words are vain. For God as he has ordained men to life, has also
ordained his laws, exhortations, threatenings etc. as means to bring them into
life. He deals not with men as with stones, to carry them into heaven by
violence; but gives them repentance, faith, love, zeal, care and other
graces; he persuades, moves, draws them to come willingly, and to continue
carefully, and so at last saves them.

In the next place, these fallers from grace, seek to wrest the Scriptures
which refute their heresy. Page 84.
Unto Christ's words in Mat. 24.24, if it were possible they should deceive the
very elect: They answer, that the elect, (namely those that receive and obey
the truth Jesus Christ, and abide in him to the death,) cannot perish. Answ.
Great is the truth that forces the adversaries to yield; this is that which we
maintain; and Christ's words ( if it were possible) prove it undenyably; and
shows it to be unpossible that the elect should be deceived to loose Christ.

Obj. Our controversy is whether those that be elect, may fall out of it: and
not whether those that abide in it can perish. Answ. Here they would unsay that
which before they said well. And the controversy they make is mere cavilling.
For if it be unpossible that the elect should be seduced from Christ, then is
it unpossible they should perish; and consequently it is unpossible that they
should fall from their election. Again, if it be possible that they should fall
from their election, then is it possible they should perish, and possible that
they should be seduced from Christ: and so our Saviors words will not stand.
How greatly are these Deceivers fallen themselves, that seek so to pervert the
plain words of Christ.

Object. Many fall from their election, not by being deceived, but willingly
forsake the truth, against or after their inlightning, Heb. 6* 4, etc. and
10.26, etc. Answ. First, this is nothing to Christ's words in Mat. 24.24.
Secondly, the Scriptures which they cite, say not (nor does any Scripture say)
that the elect may fall from their election either by deceit or willingly.
Thirdly, as God keeps all his elect from being deceived from Christ: so he
keeps them from willing forsaking of Christ: for he puts his fear in
their hearts, that they shall not depart from him, Ier. 32.40, he stablisheth
them in Christ, and annointeth them, and seals them, and gives the earnest
of the Spirit in their hearts, 2 Cor. 1.21*22. Page 1^.


An other sure proof of the salvation of all Gods elect is in Ioh.
10.3.4.5.8.14.15.27.28.29. This Scripture the adversaries would pervert with
this gloss: That so long as they continue Christ's sheep, hear his voice and
follow him, so long they are sure, and have safety in Gods acceptance, etc.
But if they do evil and will not hear his voice, then he will repent of the
good that he promised, Ier. 18.10, etc. Answ. First, that by sheep are meant
Gods elect whom he will save, is plain by the parable of the sheep and goats,
Math. 25.33, etc. Secondly, in John 10, Christ uses no such words, so long as
they continue, so long as they hear his voice, etc. but he plainly tells us,
that the sheep do hear voice, v. 3, that they follow him, v. 4, that they
will not follow a stranger, neither know they his voice, v. 5. that the sheep
did not hear strangers, v. 8, yea all Christ's sheep shall hear his voice, v.
16.27, and he gives them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of his hand, or his fathers, v. 28.29. How
unsufferably now do these men wrest Christ's heavenly words! Thirdly, the
exception which they put, If they do evil in his sight, and will not hear
his voice, then he will repent of the good, etc. This exception is unpossible
to b^e found in Christ's sheep: for though through infirmity they fall, yet he
casts them not off, for the Lord upholdeth them with his hand, Psalm: 37, 24,
though they stray he seeks them up, Psalm: 119, 176, he brings again that
which was driven away, binds up that which was broken, strenthens that which
was sick, etc. Ezekiel: 34, 16, he circumciseth their heart to love the Lord, with
all their heart and withal their soul, that they may live, Deuteronomy: 30, 6, Such
as believe not, and hear not his voice, are not sheep, but goats or swine; as
Christ said to the Jews, ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, Ioh:
10, 26. And how is it possible that the sheep should perish, seeing God is
greater then all, in whose hand they are, Ioh: 10, 28, 29. If Satan assail
them, the God of peace will tread him under their feet, Rom: 16, 20, if the
world, they overcome it by their faith, for greater is he that is in them, then
he that is in the world, 1 John 4, 4, and 5, 4, if their own corruptions
rebel in them; God not only pardons, but also subdueth their iniquities,
Mic: 7, 18, 19: as he carried them from the womb, so he has promised to carry
them even unto old age, and hoarie hairs, Esa: 46, 3, 4. he sanctifies them
wholly, and preserves their whole spirit, and soul and body blameless unto
the coming of Christ, 1 Thessalonians: 5.23. If neither Satan, nor the world, nor the
flesh can draw them from Christ: nothing can draw them away; but they are kept
by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.

Unto Ioh. 13 1. where it is said, Christ loved his own unto the end; they
first say, Page ^7.
that the meaning is, unto the end of his life. Ans. This is a frivolous
limitation: did Christ love his own no longer then vvhiles he lived with them
in this world? Who taught these miserable men thus to limit and lessen the
love of Christ? He himself testifies otherwise to his people; I have loved
thee with an everlasting love, therefore with loving kindness have I drawn,
Ier. 31.3.

But it seems their conscience checked them when they wrote such doctrine:
therefore after they say, that he loves his for ever; but the question is not
of Christ's love unto his, but of their love unto him. A. This is no answer to
Joh. 13.1. which speaks of Christ's love, not of theirs. Secondly, it is
unpossible that Christ should love any for ever, if they also love not him. For
such as hate and forsake him, ^ Tim. 2.12.
them also he will hate and forsake: and so cannot love them for ever.
Thirdly, it is before proved from Jer. 31.3. that those whom he embraces with
everlasting love, he also draws with loving kindness: and being drawn,
they run after him, Song. 1.4. those whom he loves first, they love him 1.
Ioh. 4.19. he circumciseth their heart to love him, Deuteronomy. 30.6. he puts his
fear unto their heart, not to depart from him, Ier. 32.40. and nothing can
separate them from the love of Christ, Rom, 8.35.

Unto Romans 11.29. where the Apostle says, The gifts and calling of God are
without repentance: they answer with their common exception, that if the Jews
abide not still in unbelief, Page 89.
they shall be grafted in again: of this the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance.

Answ. They still labor to overthrow one part of the truth by alleging
another. The Apostle as he says, that if the Jews abide not in unbelief,
they shall be grafted in, for God is able, Romans 11.23* so he further says,
that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written. There
shall come out of Syon the deliverer, and shall turn away ungodlines from
Iakob, etc. v. 25 26. and further tells us, that as touching the election,
they are beloved for the fathers: whereof the reason is this: for the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance, v. 28.29 Therefore as the first is true,
that God is able to graffe them in, so the second is also true, that he is
willing, and they shall be graffed in: as there is a condition on their parts,
if they abide not in unbelief, so there is an absolute promise on Gods part,
that they shall not abide in it; because Christ the Deliverer will turn away
ungodlines from them, that is, he will take away their unbelief and hardness,
he will take away their sins, v. 26 27. which is a plain evidence that he
loves them, and repents not of his former love and promise. And as he
deals with the elect Jews, so does he with all the elect Gentiles:
therefore all Gods elect shall in time be converted, and have their sins
forgiven them, and so undoubtedly saved by him whose gifts and calling are
without repentance.

In 1. Ioh. 2.19. it is said, They went out from us, but they were not of us,
for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, etc.
This place shows, that hypocrites and reprobates which abide not; were
never of Christ's Church, though crept for a time amongst them. It teaches
also, that all who are of the Saints, of Christ's sheep and his elect, do
abide, and fall not away to perdition. Page ^0.


To this they make answer, first by an open slander; that we should affirm,
that God has predestined some to salvation; and some to damnation without
any condition. This we affirm not, but they falsely charge us, as I have
formerly manifested.

Again they say we affirm, that the elect making never so great show of
wickedness, and vvalking in the vvayes of B^^^all, are still elect, and can by
no means fall out of their election, etc. But herein they keep their wont.
Had they dealt honestly, they should have showed who and where we thus
affirm. We hold that the elect after their calling, are careful to avoid all
sin, as it is written, We know that whosoever is borne of God sins not;
but he that it begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked one touches
him not, 1 Ioh. 5, 18, And though the elect fall through infirmity into many
grievous sins, yet they abide not always in them, but are renewed by
repentance and faith in Christ: and whiles they are fallen, they are not cast
off, Psa. 37, neither does God repent of his electing of them, nor utterly
depriveth them of grace and his good spirit, Psalm. 51, Luk: 22, 31, 32, Ezekiel:
34, 16.

Thirdly, Page 91.
they tell us of difference between persons as they are Gods generation (or
creatures) and qualities good or evil. But this (howsoever they boast of the
excellency of it) is to no purpose: for all men being corrupted with evil
qualities, Romans 2. and 3^ how is it that any are changed into good; but by the
power and grace of God, which is effectual in all his elect: The residue
abide in their sins, because God changes not nor renews their hearts, and
such he never elected unto life, but ordained them of old unto condemnation,
Jude v ^4.

Lastly they answer with absurd Sophistry; Page 92.
saying, that these words, 1 Ioh: 2: 19: they went out from us, is meant of
lying spirits, the Antichrists, in those persons, who once had the spirit of
truth in them. And the Apostle says, they were never of us: for v: 21* no lie
is of the truth: For example (say they) the spirit of Hymeneus, together with
his person, was in spiritual fellowship with Paul, so long as he retained
faith and a good conscience, but having put away the spirit of truth, and
received a lying spirit, he went out from them in that his spirit, for or
because it was never of them, etc. Will any say that the Pope himself is
Antichrist in respect of his person? or rather in regard of his spirit or
spiritual power he has. Therefore all that this place proves, is, that lying
spirits or Antichrists in men's persons, went out from the truth, and were never
of the truth; and therefore serves nothing to prove that the elect can never
fall away.

Answ. Was ever plain scripture more violently wrested, by any heretic? The
Apostle says of the many Antichrists, they went out from us, but they were not
of us, 1 Ioh. 2, 18, 19. This these men will not have to be meant of their
persons, but of their spirits in their persons. And what understand they by
their spirits? their lies, their errors, their spiritual power, such as the
Pope has: that is (as before they distinguished) their wicked qualities; not
their persons: for God (they say) loves all persons, they being his
generation, Act. 17.27.

First it is an error to say God hates not the persons of wicked men, but the
evil qualities in them only: for though he hates no creature in respect of
their creation which was good; yet the creature being degenerate and fallen
from God, he hates their wickedness and them also for it, as the Scripture
plainly witnesses, Psalm. 5.4.5.6 and 11 5.

2 It is erroneous to say, that by Spirits, the Apostle means not persons,
but qualities, 1 Ioh. 4.1. for himself shows his meaning, when he says,
because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. So by Spirits to be
tried, he means Prophets, which came with spiritual gifts: and it is
frequent in Scripture to call subjects or persons, by the name of adjuncts or
qualities in them: as, I am against thee e pride, Ier. 50, 31, that is, o thou
most proud^: and, pride shall stumble and fall, v. 32, that is, the proud
person: the poverty of the land, 2 King. 24, 14, 15, the poorest people. Deceit
(or Sloth) rosteth not that which he took in hunting, Prove. 14, 27, that is,
the deceitful man; and many the like.

3 It is from the deepness^ of Familisme, to say, that Antichrists are not
persons, but evil qualities in men, so Christ may be holden no person, but a
godly quality in us. The Apostle speaks of the person, for he says not the
lie, but the liar, he that denies that Jesus is the Christ, he is Antichrist:
1 Ioh. 2.22.

4 It is an absurd exposition of 1 Ioh 2, 19, to put qualities for persons. He
there sp^aketh of Antichrists, They went out from us; these men will have it,
evil or Antichristian qualities went out from us. Bu^ what sense then will
they make of the last branch of the verse, That they might be made manifest,
that they were not all of us? Will they say, some Antichristian qualities were
of the Apostles; though not all? The meaning is evident, that in the Church are
persons some good, some bad, some elect, some reprobate^: but whiles they abide
and walk together in the Church, it is not manifest who are of the Church, who
are not; but when the wicked and reprobates depart from the truth and Church,
then it is manifest that such Apostates, though for a time in the Church, yet
were never of it. So it is a sure proof, that Gods elect are both in and of
the Church of Christ, and shall never fall away utterly from it.

Of Freewill.
THis point these adversaries hand^e confusedly, and maliciously. Confusedly,
because they show not what they mean by freewill, or freedom of will: whether
free from compulsion, or free from bondage of sin. M^liciously, for that they
feign the Calvinists to hold, Page 94.
that the wicked are not only lift by Gods suffering, but compelled to sin by
power, etc. compelled by the power, force and compulsion of Gods
predestination, to commit all those wicked crimes, for which they are punished
by the Magistrate, or tormented in hell, etc. and then much more does it in
goodness, as violent^y work all: so that the godly can neither choose nor
refuse goodness.

Answ. If these adversaries have common honesty, let them show out of the
writings of the Calvinists (as they call them) these assertions which they
impute unto them. Till they do this, let them have their name and fame among
liars and workers of iniquity. As for us, we abhor these doctrines of
compulsion to sin by force and power of Gods predestination etc. As for will in
man, we know it to be a natural faculty, still remaining* though corrupted by
sin, as all other like faculties in us. We acknowledge it still to be free from
compulsion or constreynt, for so will should be no will* But we confess with
grei^e that in respect of bondage to sin (under which all m^n were sold, Romans
7, 14.) it may rather be called Bond will, then Free will: for it is not free
to refuse sin, until it be renewed by Christ: and so far as it is regenerate by
him, Joh. 8.34*36
it is again (as other powers and faculties in the Saints) freed by grace, and
wills things that are good.

Again, Page 95.
they produce (to their own condemnation) out of Bastingius, and the Disput.
in Geneva these words; Man by evil was spoiled, not of his will, but of the
soundness of his will: therefore that which in nature was good, in quality
became evil: and Bernard teaches, there is in us all power to will, but to
will well we had need to profit better: to will evil, we are able already by
reason of our fall. The which if they would stand unto (says this adversary)
I would require no more.

Answ. This we will stand unto, and thereby do evince Odegos to be a blind
guide and vain disputer, that with lies and calumnies would disgrace his
opposites. We grant evil Free Will (or Free will to evil) is remaining in all
natural men: we believe that freewill to good, is from grace and regeneration;
and that all the Saints have it in part, as they have knowledge, faith, and
other virtues here in part: which shall be perfected in the life to come. And
if no more be required, his fruitless dispute is at an end: and it is
worthless labor to answer words of wind.

Of Original sin.
THe Anabaptists hold (more erroneously then the very papists, Confess* 18.
Council.
) that Original sin is an idle term, and that there is no such thing as men
intend by the word. In this their Dialogue they set the state of the Question
thus; Page 113.
Of the Original estate of mankind. Wherein they speak doubtfully and
deceitfully. For man's original estate is properly that described in Genesis 1*
which was by creation very good. But since the fall of Adam, our original
estate is through that fall become sinful and miserable: and is so
acknowledged by David, Psalm. 51.5, by Job, Job. 14.4. by Paul, Romans 5, 12 etc.
Eph^s. 2.3, and by Christ himself, Ioh. 3, 3, 5, 6.

Notwithstanding these adversaties affirm. Page 113.
That no infant whatsoever, is in the estate of condemnation of hell with the
wicked. Which they think to prove thus. Without sin there is no condemnation,
Romans 6, 23. Ez^k. 18, 4, 20; Without transgression of the Law there is no sin,
1 Ioh. 3, 4, Romans 5, 13. Therefore if infants have transgressed no law, there
is no condemnation them.

Answ. The conclusion (which implies that infants are not transgressers of
Gods law) is denied. The Apostle teaches us* That by one man sin entered into
the world, and death by sin: and so death passed upon all men, for that all
have sinned: and, by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners; Romans 5, 12,
19. Note also how th^se men thwart ^h^mselues: before, when they pleaded for
falling from grace, one of their reasons was, Page 80.
If the elect cannot fall out of Gods f^vour* then did not all fall in Adam,
and th^n some were never dead in sins and trespasses, and so need not Christ's
redemption, etc. Now they plead, that no infants are sinners: which if it be
so, then many (as all that die infants) never fell in Adam, nor needed Christ's
redemption. And so such shall either not come into heaven, or shall come
thither other ways then by Christ; contrary to Job. 14, 6, Act. 4, 12.

But these en^mies dispute (against the Apostles doctrine) thus. Page 11^.
Romans 7.1.
Infants had no l^fe nor being at that time (when the law was given to A^am:)
and the law is given to them that know it, and has dominion over a man as long
as he liv^th. Therefore infants having no being, and so no knowledge, nor being
then living, that Law had no dominion over them.

Answ. First, this is no more against infants then old men: for no man had life
or being at that time o^herwise then infants had So Adams fall was for himself
alone, and ^o man fell with him; for no man then had life (...) b^ing but he.
And thus th^se lying spirits fear not to resist the Apostle, who says,
Through the offense (or fall) of one, many are dead* Romans 5.15, by the offense
of one, (judgment come) upon all men to condemnation, v ^8, ^y one man's
disobed^^n^e, many were mad^ sinners, v. 1^, in Adam all dyed, 1 Cor. 15, 22.
This Apostolic doctrine is as contrary to the Anabaptists, as light is to
darkness.

2 They hereby weaken (if they could) the Apostles Argument in Heb. 7, 9, 10,
by Levies paying tithes to Melchisedek in Abraham: for a man might cavil, that
Levi had no life nor being at that time. But Paul says, he was in the loins
of his father Abraham, when Melchisedek met him. So say I, we all were in the
loins of our father Adam, when he transgressed. If then Levi paid tithes when
Abraham did, we all brake Gods law when Adam did.

3 They hereby weaken (as they can) the Apostles proof of our redemption by
Christ: for he says, that Adam is the figure of Christ that was to come: and
if through the offense of one many be dead, much more the gift ^y grace, by
one man Jesus Christ has abounded unto many: and, as by one man's disobedience
many be made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous,
Romans ^, 14.15, 19. Now take away the first, namely the transgression of all men
in Adam; and it overthrows the latter, to weet the righteousness and
salvation of the world by Christ.

4 They abuse the Apostles words, in Romans 7.1, whence they would prove, that
the Law (given to Adam) was given to them (only) that knew it; namely to Adam
and his wife, not to th^^r children which knew it not; wh^ras the Apostle
speaking to the Romans, spoke to them that knew the Law; the more to convince
them: he deneyeth not that God gave his Law to Adam and his posterity in his
loins. The Lord calls those things which be not, as though they were, Romans
4, 17, he spoke to Cyrus, and gave him promises, before Cyrus knew him, or was
borne into this world,, Esa. 45, 1, -- 5, he promised the land to Abraham and
to his seed after him, when as yet he had no child, Act. 7, 5, he made a
covenant with Israel, not with them only that stood there that day, but with
the^ also that were not there that day with them, Deuteronomy. 29, 14, 15. And if he
did thus imply the children with the parents in other covenants and promises:
how much more did he the like to Adams seed: seeing Adam is spoken of, not as a
particular man, but a general: so that his unrighteousness was not his own
only, but his childrens also; even as Christ's righteousness (whom Adam
figured) was not his own only, but is communicated with all his children, who
therefore is the second Adam causing life, as the first Adam caused death, Romans
5, 1 Cor. 15.

5 Like vanity is in their next words, Infants had then no being, no life,
therefore the Law had no dominion over them; For so they might elude Paul's
argument of Levies paying tithes, Heb. 7, 9, 10, saying, Levi had then no
being, no life, therefore he could pay no tithes in Abraham's days. But as the
Apostle says he was in the loins of Abraham, and so he paid tithes:
likewise we were in the loins of Adam, and so we sinned. Again in Romans 7, 1,
the Apostle speaks of a man during life, who when he is dead, his wife is
free from his law, v. 2. If they will apply this to all sin and sinners, then
they think when a wicked man dies, the law of God has no dominion over him
any more; and so there is no punishment by the law of God to be inflicted on
sinners after this life. But do these vain man think by such sophistry to
escape the damnation of hell? Do they not know that after death comes
judgment, and that by the law? Heb. 9.27. Romans 2.12.16.

Against the Apostles doctrine in Romans 5. they allege, Page 114.
That we were in Adam, not to bring any soul to hell for breach of that
command, Thou shall not eat: for the Lord says, All souls are mine, both the
soul of the father, and the soul of the son: that soul that sins it shall
dye. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, etc.

Ans. First the prophet speaks not in Ezekiel. 18.4. etc. of Adam, but of the
later fathers of the Jews, which sinned, v. 2. but Paul speaks of Adam, who
was not only a particular person (as all other fathers in this case are) but
an universal man, the root of all mankind, and a figure of Christ, Romans 5.14.
Again the Prophet speaks of such sonns as are just, and do not such like
sins as their fathers did, Ezekiel. 18.5.14. etc. but Paul speaks of us all as
we are in Adam, unjust and sinners, and guilty of our first fathers iniquity,
R^m. 5.12.19. So these two scriptures the one speaking of actual sins vvhi^h
are eschewed, the other speaking of original sin, which we now cannot avoid*
speak not of one and the same sin or estate, and therefore do not one
expound an other* Thirdly, the Prophet exempteth the good children, which
eschew their fathers si^nes, from death, Ezekiel. 18.9.17. The Apostle inwrappeth
us all the sons of Adam in his sin and in death; Romans 5.12*14 17. Fourthly,
the Prophet speaks generally of the many sins which the fathers did, and
the sons did not, Ezekiel. 18.6.7.8.18. the Apostle speaks of that one sin
or offense, by which we all (being in Adams loins) are guilty. Romans 5.16*
But to this they both agree, the Prophet says, The soul that sins, it
shall die, Ezekiel. 18 4 the Apostle says, that all have sinned (to wit, in
Adams loins) therefore death pa^seth upon all, Romans 5.^2, Hereby all wise men
may see, how impertinent a proof the Anabaptists bring from Ezekiel. 18. that
Adams sin brings not any soul to hell. For Adams sin bringing sin and
death upon all, and hell being the death which is eternal: it is brought by
his sin upon all his posterity: except through Jesus Christ our Lord, they
have eternal life, which is the gift of God, Romans 6.23.

Further, they answer, (and desire it may well be observed) that mankind was
only in Adam in their bodily substance: he is the father of our bodies in
respect of matter; but our form and souls came from God: he is the father of
our spirits, Heb. 12.9. Eccles. 12.7. and 8*8* that earthly matter was in Adam,
of which our bodies are made, etc. thus and no otherwise were we in Adam.

Answ. We observe it well, and observe their error also. It is untrue that thus
(to wit in respect of our bodies only) we were in Adam, and not in respect of
our souls: no scripture teaches them this, but their own fancy. For though
our souls were not in all respects in Adam, as our bodies were, to wit,
materially: yet in some resp^ct (to wit formally) we were in Adam both body and
soul; which I thus manifest. Adam begat Seth in his own image, Genesis 5 Abraham
begat Isaak, etc. Math. 1. so body begets not body; but man begets man:
and man consists of body and soul, which are the parts that constitute a
man. So man (that is the whole, not part of a man only) is said to be borne of
a woman, Job. 14.1. yea the 66 souls (whereby figuratively is meant persons,
consisting of bodies and souls) are said to come out of Iakobs thigh (or
loins) Genesis 46.26. and Levi in the l^ynes of Abraham is said to pay tithes,
Heb 7.9 10. Now the body without the spirit is dead, and therefore cannot pay
tithes, nor do any action. And in the place and case in hand, in Adam all
sinned, all died, judgment came on all men to condemnation, Romans 5.12.18. but
the body without the soul sins not, neither ^yeth, nor shall be condemned.
Therefore it is apparent that the scripture speaks of men in Adam otherwise
then in respect of their bodies only: so that th^se men's special observation
is nothing worth.

Again they plead, Page 115.
As God gave no law to Adam, before he gave him a soul of reason and
understanding: no m^re does he give to any of Adams posterity, a^y law, till
he give them souls of reason and understanding, as in Deuteronomy. 11.2. I speak not
to your children which have neither known nor seen, etc.

Answ. First the words of Moses to Israel to whom he propounded the law, are
not to be compared with Gods law given to Adam: for the Israelites were spoken
to personally: Adam generally as an universal man, the root of all mankine, as
before is proved. Secondly, the covenant of Moses law, did also after a sort
pertain to their children which then were not, Deuteronomy. 29.14.15. though it was
actually taught them only which were present, D^ut. 11. Thir^ly, the sin which
Paul treats of, and death for sin, was in the world before Moses law, which
these men speak of, Romans 5.12.13.14. Fourthly, let all they say be given them,
yet it helps them not: for I have before proved, that we were all in Adam as
living men, not as dead corpses* and so had souls of ^easo^ and understanding
in him originally; even as we had bodies, eyes, ears; etc. in him originally:
though after a different manner as before is noted.

Further they say, God never purposed to execute on Adam for that transgression
condemnation to hell; in that he purposed to send Christ betwixt, in whom Adam
believing should be saved. If Adam for his own sin was not condemned to hell
without remedy, shall any of his posterity be sent to hell without remedy, and
that for his sin? etc.

Answ. 1. The question in the first place is changed, which is, whether Adam
and all his posterity in him falling from God, deserved not hell for their
sin. This they deny not, neither can disprove. 2. As God purposed not to
damn Adam for his sin; so neither purposed he to damn Noah for his
drunkenness, Lot for his incest, David for his adultery and murder, etc. but
to give them remedy by faith in Christ. Will they hereupon plead that other
actual drunkards, murderers, whoremongers, deserve not damnation: or shall not
many such be damned for these sins? 3. Though all infants for their native
sin, and all men for their actual sins deserve damnat^on: yet never was it
Gods purpose to damn all without remedy. For Christ (the second Adam) gives
righteousness and life to all infants and old transgressors that are borne of
him; as the first Adam conveyed unrighteousness and death to all his ordinary
natural posterity. Yea grace here exceeds: for the judgment (or guilt) of
original sin was by one (offense) to condemnation; but the free gift (by
Christ) is of many offenses, unto justification, Romans 5.16.

They object, that condemnation is for not believing in Christ, Ioh* 3*19. and
16 9. Mar. 16.16. Romans 11.32.

Answ. First the Apostle says, the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. therefore
the wicked shall be condemned not only for their not believing in Christ, but
also for their unmercifulness, idolatries, adulteries and other crimes, Math.
25.41.42. Romans 2.5. -- 9. Secondly, the sin of unbelief cleaves unto all
Adams children as other sins: and shall be imputed as well as the sin of
lust, or any other iniquity. Thirdly, to believe is not in the will or power
of man, but is the gracious gift of God, to such as he has ordained unto life.
Ephesians. 2 8* Act, 13.48.

Again they allege, Page 116.
that Adam by that transgression deprived himself of Gods favor in that
estate wherein he was in paradise: and notwithstanding the promise of Christ,
has by his si^ procured this judgment, Cursed is the earth for thy sake etc
Genesis 3. Thus Adam brought himself and all his posterity, the earth and every
creature in it to vanity and bondage of corruption, Romans 8.20. etc. And in
this estate are all Adams sons begotten and borne: so that by Adams sin,
vanity, corruption and death went over all, etc. So infants have original
corruption, as other creatures have. Yet those that dye and have corruption by
Adams sin, shall not be cast into hell fire.

Answ. A felon, murderer, traitor, that is apprehended by the magistrate,
imprisoned, kept in fetters and affl^ction, his lands and goods confiscate,
etc. pleads he ought not to be put to death, because he has suffered for his
crimes, loss of liberty, goods, etc. But will this plea save him Even such is
the plea of th^se evil men. For all men being in Adam fall^n from God, and
traitors to his majesty, children of wrath, and servants of sin and Satan,
because God has cursed the earth for their sake, cast them out of earthly
paradise, made the creatures subi^ct to vanity, and themselves subject to
sorrows and miseries; therefore they d^serue not to die in hell, if these vain
men may be judges. But we know the judgment of God is according to truth
against all evil doers. He tells us, the wages of sin is death, but the
gift of God is eternal life through Christ, Romans 6.23. where eternal life
being opposed to death, shows that eternal death is the wages due for sin.
And what sin is is there that des^rveth not hell? 2. Whereas they say, Adam by
his sin deprived himself of paradise: it is true. But if they mean earthly
paradise only, they err from the truth: for by his sin he was depriv^d also
of the heavenly paradise, to which there is no restoring but by Christ, Luke
23.43. Reu. 2.7. and as himself, so all his posterity that sinned in him, Romans
5. Thirdly, so where they say, all his posterity were subjected to vanity and
corruption, it is true; but not all the truth, unless they understand such
corruption as Peter speaks, 2. Pet. 2.12. which is eternal destruction, and
then they yield the cause. But they mean not so, but corruption such as is in
beasts, birds, etc. wherein they go quite astray. For beasts and other brutish
and s^ncelesse creatures, are not sinners, as all Adams children are, Romans
5*12.19 sin is not but in reasonable creatures only, as Angels and men.
Neither is any creature subject to eternal torment, but sinners only. Other
creatures when they perish, there is an end of them, and of their misery with
them: but they that perish in their sins, have no end of their misery, but it
is eternal, Math. 25.46. Mark. 9.45.46. Wherefore they do not well to expound
Romans 5. by Romans 8 because the Apostle speaks not of the same, but of diverse
things and estates in those two chapters. Fourthly, take that which they say,
and it overthrows them. For how should Adams sin bring all his posterity
unto death, but by their guilt in Adams sin? If it made not them sinners, the
scripture which they formerly alleged, Ezekiel. 18. teaches that the children
should not dye for their fathers sins. Now seeing many infants dye daily, it
proves them all to be sinners, because death is the wages of sin, Romans 6 23.
Genesis 2.17. Page 117.


At length they come to answer Romans 5. with this perverse doctrine, This is the
meaning of the holy Ghost, that by Adams sin, all his posterity have weak
natures, Romans 8.3. by which, when the commandment comes (Romans 7.10.) they
cannot obey and live, but sin and so dye; till when they are alive without
the law, so says the Apostle verse. 9. and thus is verified, that all both
Jews and Gentiles are under sin, etc. Read on the scripture, and you may
evidently see, that neither this, nor any part of Gods word, is spoken to or of
infants.

Answ. This is not the Apostles meaning: for he says not they have weak
natures, but that all have sinned, and through the offense of one many are
dead, many were made sinners; Romans 5 12.15.19. which is more then weakness of
nature, and pronenesse to sin. Secondly, in Romans 8.3. it is said, that it (the
Law) is weak through the flesh, and so cannot save any man: which words
these men wrest, as if it meant Adams children vveak. Which thing though it be
true, yet is it not that which is spoken of in Romans 8.3. Thirdly, when the
Apostle says in Romans 7.9. that he was alive without the law: this
contradicts (according to their sense) the other scripture, in Romans 5 12.
that all have sinned, and are dead. The Apostle in Romans 5. speaks of things
as they are; in Romans 7.9, he speaks of things as they seemed to be, but were
not indeed. Paul was alive in his own conceit, thinking himself able to keep
the Law, as natural men do suppose they can. But when the commandment came
(to wit unto his knowledge and conscience,) then sin revived and he died. How
could this be: seeing the commandment is holy, just and good, v. 12 He tells
us in 13 v. that sin wrought death in him by that which was good. So then he
was sinful (though he knew it not) before the commandment came; sinful by
nature; but not discerning this his woeful state, the Law was given to show it
him; for by the law comes the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. Again, saying
in Romans 7, 11, that sin took occasion by the commandment, deceived him and
slew him: he plainly acknowledges sin to have been in him, before the
commandment came: this he confirms in v. 14. saying, the law is spiritual,
but I am carnal, sold under sin: Whereupon he applies the evils which he
did, to si^ne dwelling in him, v. 17.20. and this inhabiting or indwelling
sin, is that original sin whereof we treat; which Paul for a while
could not discern to be in him (as all natural men discern it not, but count
it an idle term, and think there is no such thing) till by the Law he came to
discern it and to lament it. Fourthly, it is here to be observed how the
Anabaptists ^grant, all men have weak natures, and cannot obey and live, but
sin and dye. How comes this to pass? By Adams sin, say they. Behold here
how they thwart their own grounds. They impose a necessity upon all men which
(they think) are born innocents, to sin. They cannot but sin, they must needs
dye: and this not through their own default at all, but by Adams. If we should
thus teach, what outcries would they make after us! How is it they here forget
the scriptures by themselves forealleaged, The son shall not bear the
iniquity of the father, Ezekiel. 18.20. Is not this a heavy burden which the
sonns bear, that their father sinning, and they being innocent, are so weakened
of God, that they cannot but sin, they cannot but dye? Does God create an
innocent man, and give him charge to do that which is unpossible for the man
to do, and threaten death unto him for not doing it? We abhor such doctrine
as quite overthrowing Gods justice. When he made Adam innocent, he gave him no
law, but that which was possible and easy for him to do, and to have
continued in doing it, if he had would. His justice requires him to do the
like to all his innocent creatures. Wherefore if these men come not to
acknowledge with the Apostle (and with us) original sin and death for sin to
be in Adams seed, that his fall and disobedience was the fall of us all, by
imputation and by infection, (as a serpent brings forth but a serpent) and that
so being sinners in him, we have lost our ability to do good, by Gods just
judgment, and are sold under sin: If they come not (I say) unto this, they
will be open enemies to the justice of God, and make the judge of all the
world not to do equity. 5. Finally, vvheras they say, that neither this nor
any part of Gods word is spoken to or of infants: they impudently avouch
untruth. The Apostle in Romans 5.14. speaks of them which sinned after the
similitude of Adams transgression, and yet death reigned over them also. What
sin can this be but original sin vvherin infants are born, and for which many
infants dye. For when they pass from infancy and come to understanstanding,
they sin actually as Adam did. To sin the same sin they cannot, for all being
shut out of paradise, they cannot eat of the forbidden tree, though they
would. Neither does the Apostle speak of that same sin, but of sinning after
the similitude of Adams transgression: so it means actual sin, like Adams.
Now all sin, is either original or actual. If then death reigns over them
which sin not actually, as Adam did, it must needs reign over them which sin
originally only in Adam: and these be infants. For the Anabaptists grant, that
when they come to discretion, they sin (and cannot but sin) actually. And
thus their next words also are refuted, Page 117.
when they say, Infants are under no law, therefore transgression cannot be
imputed unto them, Romans 4.15. The contrary is thus proved: Infants have
transgression imputed unto them, and death for transgression, as the Apostle
shows in Romans 5. Therefore they are under some law: though not under Moses law
which punishes actual transgressors, yet under Adams law (in whose loins
they were and sinned) for which they are punished even with death it self.

In their next words, Page 117.
they condemn themselves and all their vain reasoning, confessing, that Adam
fell from the estate wherein he was, and in him all mankind. This is very
true, and overthrows their heresy. For Adams fall, as the Apostle describes
it, was sin, offense, transgression, disobedience, judgment (or guiltiness)
to death, and condemnation: Romans 5.12. -- 19. Now all mankind fell in him, as
Paul teaches, and these enemies grant: therefore all mankind is in sin,
offense, transgression, etc. unto death and condemnation. Page 118.


Of the remedy for the sin of all (vvherof they next speak) we grant that is
both for infants and old sinners, by grace in Christ. But these are two
several questions: and here we treat of sin only and the merit of it. Of
Gods grace we have spoken otherwhere.

They proceed and say, that Infants whom Christ so often accounts innocents,
Mat. 18.3, 4, and 19.14. are freed from the law, and so sin is dead in them:
but when the commandment comes, then they die in sins and transgressions,
etc. Romans 7.8. Ephesians. 2.1.

Answ. Innocents may be so called in sundry respects: 1 when in them there is
no sin at all; thus Adam in his creation was innocent. 2. When though they be
sinners, yet they are not guilty of such sins as men lay to their charge,
Exodus 23.7. 2. Sam. 3.28. Ier. 2.34. 3. When they are clear of actual sins:
and thus infants may be called innocents, Psalm. 106 38 That Christ calls
infants innocents in the first sense, I deny: the scripture also denies them
so to be, I^b. 15.14, and 25.4, Ioh. 3.3.6. Ephesians. 2.3. I find not in the pla^es
which they quote, that Christ called infants innocents: how b^ it sometime he
calls his disciples innocents (or guiltless) Mat* 12.7. of whom yet these
men (I suppose) will not say, they were without all sin. That infants are
freed from the law given to Adam, is denied and disproved by Romans 5. for in
Adam they sinned and died. That sin is dead in them is also disproved: rather
they are dead in sin, till they be revived by Christ, Ephesians. 2.1.3. Page 119.


Infants (say they) have done neither good nor evil in the flesh therefore
Infants shall not appear before Christ, they shall receive no ju^gement, 2.
Cor. 5.10. R^v. 20, 12.13.

Answ. How boldly do these men abuse the s^riptures* In 2. Cor. 5.10. Paul
s^yth, We must all appear before the ju^gment seat of Christ. Rev. 20.12. it
is said, I saw the dead small and great stand before God. Nay, say these
adversaries, not infants. Their reason, because infants have done neither good
nor evil in the flesh, is an error before refuted: for though they have not
done good or evil actually, as older people; yet in the first Adam they have
done evil; and in the second Adam (Christ) they have done well. Page 119


Against David's confession of his birth sin in Psalm. 51. they thus dispute. If
David confess unto God his own sin, then he desires him in mercy to behold
whereof he was made, as Psalm. 103.14. of dust, weak flesh, unable to resist
the Tempter: through which weakness he was overcome in these sins: and thus
weak flesh is called sinful flesh, (in which Christ came) Romans 8.1. Christ is
said to be made sin, 2. Cor. 5.21. not that he was a sinner: no more David,
confessing he was conceived in sin, does prove that by conception and birth
he was a transgressor.

Answ. They pervert both David's words and meaning. He speaks of sin and
iniquity: they speak of weakness only, whereby he fell into sin. What
scripture can be so plain, that may not be wrested with such wicked glosses.
Against weakness we pray for aid and strength to resist evil: against sin
we pray for mercy and forgiveness: and for this David prays in Psalm. 51.

Secondly, it is another abuse of scripture that they say, weak flesh is
called sinful flesh, in which Christ came, Romans 8.1. where first they make
David no more a sinner at his birth, then Christ himself; contrary to the
whole tenor of this Psalm, and contrary to Romans 5. as is before showed. Then
they falsify the text in Romans 8.1.3. for the weakness there spoken of is in
the Law, it was weak through the flesh, and so not able to save sinners.

Thirdly, by Flesh there Paul means not the substance of flesh, for that
vveakneth not the Law, nor hinders man's salvation: it is the good creature of
God, as is the soul or spirit: but he means by flesh, our corrupt sinful
state in soul and body: for he says in verse 8. they that are in the flesh
cannot please God. If flesh mean our bodily substance, then no man living in
the body can please God: not the Prophets, not the Apostles, no nor Christ
himself, for he lived in our flesh, in our humame nature, and the Apostle
should speak untruly in the ninth verse, ye are not in the flesh. Wherefore
flesh in Romans 8. signifies our unregenerate state, as in Genes. 6.3. John 3.6.
Romans 7.18. and 8.5.9.

Fourthly, it is another falsification when they say, sinful flesh in which
Christ came: the scripture says not in sinful flesh, but in the likeness of
sinful flesh. Romans 8.3. Fifthly, weakness or infirmity, as it means not
sin, but affliction, such Christ had: such, the Apostle took pleasure, 2 Cor.
12, 10, but infirmity as it means sin, Christ had not: he is opposed herein
to the Priests of the Law, which had infirmity or weakness, Heb. 7, 27, 28,
and 4, 15, But David in Psalm. 51, confesses such infirmity (if they will have
it so called) as was sin and iniquity; which proves he was a transgressor
from the womb, and not without sin as was Christ. 6 Christ is said to be made
sin for us, 2 Cor. 5, 21, these words for us the adversaries baulk and omit.
David was not made sin for us, or for any: but was himself conceived in
sin. Christ being himself no sinner, yet was he made sin, that is a
sin^offering for us, to purge us, and make us the righteousness of God in him;
for the Sin-offering was usually called sin in the Law, Lev. 4, 3, 8, 14, 20,
24, etc. the Apostle expounds it For sin, meaning a sacrifice for sin, Heb.
10, 6, from Psalm. 40, thus Christ was a sin, that is a sacrifice for sin:
but David was not so. Therefore these places speak not of sin in one and
the same sense, but in the contrary. David complains of his own sin and
guiltiness: Paul speaks of Christ his purging David and us all from sin
and guiltiness, by being made a sin offering for us.

Their former answer being so apparently against the truth, that David
acknowledging sin, they will have it no sin, but weakness, they devise to
darken the light with an other cloud; as if David spoke not of his own estate,
but his mothers: and then (say they) it is the curse or punishment for sin
laid upon her, Genesis 3, 16, where the very words agree with these of David's etc.
and it is frequent in Scripture to call punishment for sin by the name of
sin, etc. and it is neither David's sin nor his mothers that he here
confesses, to speak properly, but his mothers punishment.

Answ. As a bird in the net, so the more they strive, the more they are
entangled. First, the whole scope of the Psalm is, that David might find
mercy with the Lord for his own sins, as any that reads it may see. And
that in supplicating to God for grace before and after, he should here insert a
complaint of his mothers punishment, is without any color of truth. But this
is the meaning, and suitable to his other words, that lamenting his actual
transgressions, he bewaileth the evil fountain whence they flowed, to weet,
his native corruption, which brought forth these ugly trespasses. Secondly, to
let pass how they call Gods fatherly chastisement, a curse or punishment; they
here again belie the Scripture, in saying, that the very words in Genesis 3.16,
agree with these of David's. For neither the word sin, nor iniquity, (both
which David uses in Psa. 51,) are to be found in Genesis 3 16, that Od^gos brow
may seem to be of brass, who sh^m^th not so often and openly to falsify the
text. Thirdly, it is true that sin and iniquity do often improperly mean
punishment: but the proper meaning for fault and guiltiness is most frequent:
and when it signifies punishment, the context manifests* which it does not
here at all: but David before and after bewayleth his sins properly. Neither
is here the phrase of bearing sin and iniquity, which is m^st usual when
pun^shment is meant: but of being brought forth in iniquity, and conceived in
sin; and they show not a^y o^e place of Scripture where such a phrase
signifies punishment. Fourthly, as neither sin nor iniquity are used in Genesis
3, 16, so the word conception there agrees not, but differs from the
conceiving that David speaks of in Psalm 51, and the difference of the words
plainly discovers these men's ignorance and error. For in Genesis 3, 16, Seron
is conception with sorrow, during the time that the mother goes with child:
but in Psalm. 51. jacham signifies conceiving with pleasure; for the word
properly signifies to be warm or inflamed with desire, as in the act of
generation, not of men only, but of cattle also, as in Genesis 30, 38, 39, 41.
Now nature both of man and beast teaches all, that such conceiving is with
delight, not with pain, and therefore David using such a word when he
tells how his mother conceived him, cannot (in any reasonable man's
understanding) mean his mothers corporal pains or punis^ment, as these
corrupters of the Scripture do feign.

They proceed and say, that David did not sin in being conceived and borne:
Page 120.
the soul is the subject of sin, for from the soul or heart comes
wickedness, Mat. 15, 19. The soul comes from God, the matter of the body from
the parents: the soul is very good coming from God, the body has not sinned
till it be infected with the soul by transgression of a law: and seeing they
^ffirme that the very matter or substance whereof David was made was sin, and
that this is it he confessoth in Psalm. 51, observe what will follow ^f this
their dream. The matter whereof all the sons of Adam are made is sin: but
Christ, one of the sons of Adam after the flesh was made of that matter;
therefore the matter or su^stance of Christ's body was sin. Page 121.
If it be wicked, to say Christ was a sinner because he was conceived of his
mothers su^stance, as it is: so it is no less wicked to say, David was a
sinner because he was conceived of his mothers substance: seeing the substance
of both the mothers was one and the same.

Answ. It is even a vvonder to b^hold how these men pervert, err and slander,
as if they had sold themselves to work iniquity. We teach not, (as the
perversely speak) that David sinned in being conceived and borne; for these
being the works of God and nature, are good. But David was a sinner, because
he was conceived and borne in sin, as himself confesses. 2 They err, in
saying, the soul is the subject of sin: for neither the soul alone, nor the
body alone, but the whole man (which differs from both, and consists of
both,) he is the subject of sin. Neither does the body without the soul,
nor the soul without the body commit sin: but the man vvhiles the soul is
in the body, sins, 2 Cor. 5, 10 and as the soul was not created but in the
body, Zach. 12, 1, so when it departs from the body, it sins no more, but
goes for judgment, Heb. 9, 27, Eccles. 9, 5, 6, 10. 3 Whereas they allege,
that wickedness^ is from the heart, Mat. 15, 19, it is spoken of living men
consisting of soul and body: Madness (as Solomon says) is in their heart
while they live, and after that (they go) to the dead; Eccles 9, 3. And where
they say, the soul comes from God, the matter of the body from the parents;
they lay not down the truth fully. For though the soul is created of God, and
is not materially from the parents as the body; yet the parents give occasion
to infuse the soul, (for without corporal generation no soul is created,)
and so the soul may in some sort be said to have the beginning from Adam,
though not of any matter from him. The essence of is of God; the subsistence of
it is from the parents, from whom it has the manner of subsisting in the
body. 4 Though the soul as it is created of God is very good, (as the body
also respected naturally is good) yet they err in saying, the body sins not
till it be infe^ted with the soul by transgression of a law; whereby they
mean actual transgression after it knows the law. For first, it is not the
body, but the man (of body and soul) that sins as before is showed.
Secondly, the body is not infected with the soul, but both body and soul are
infected with sin, to wit, that inbred and inhabiting sin which came from
Adam, as before is proved from Romans 5. And this sin man has, both by
imputation and inherence, before he actually transgresses the law, Romans 5.14,
Psalm. 51, for that which is borne of the flesh is flesh, Ioh. 3.6.5. They
notoriously sl^nder us, that we should affirm the very matter or substance
vvherof David was made, to be sin: We affirm no such thing. The matter or
substance we say is good, as every creature of God is. Sin is an evil
accident cleaving to the substance, to the body and soul of man. Of like
falsehood it is, that we should affirm David to confess in Psalm, 51. that the
substance whereof he was made was sin. Neither David nor we ever so spoke.
So the Argument which by consequence they frame touching the substance of
Christ's body, that it should be sin, is frivolous, collected from a fict^on of
their idle heads. For if no man's substance be sin (as we firmly hold) much
less Christ's.

After this, they cast a stumbling block in the way, and would have us show
how infants that have sinned, and are under condemnation of hell, can be
reconciled to God but only by faith in Christ Jesus: and if they cannot but by
repentance and faith, then are they all left under condemnation, not for any
law that they have broken, but for their father Adams sin.

Answ. Page 122.
That all have sinned, and are under condemnation, is proved by the Apostle,
Romans 5, 12, 18, how infants can be reconciled to God, he also teaches, namely
through the gift by grace, by one man Jesus Christ, Romans 5, 15, 18. The manner
if it be showed, I fear these men will not receive it: for they that have so
kicked against the pricks touching all men's fall and sin in Adam; how should
they receive the doctrine of restoration by Christ. Howbeit I will endeavor to
show it, if it do no good to them, it may to others. 1 The faith and
repentance which they require in infants, namely actual, is not to be found:
as such actual sins are not found in them, as are in older men. The one of
these exemplifieth the other, as the first Adam figured the second, Romans 5, 14.
By the first Adam we have sin, Romans 5, 12, offense, v. 15, disobedience, v.
19, judgment, v. 16, death, v. 14, condemnation, v. 16. By the second Adam
(Christ) we have grace, and the gift by grace, v. 15, the gift of
righteousness, v. 17, the free gift to justification, v. 16, even to
justification of life, v 18. By the first Adam we have three evils, 1
imputation of his sin: 2 corruption of our nature: 3 guiltiness of death
temporary and eternal. By the second Adam we have three opposite good things;
1 imputation of his righteousness, 2 regeneration (or renewing) of our nature,
3 and deliverance from death temporary and eternal. As the corruption or
viciousness that we have by Adam, is in the bud or spring, in the beginning
(not in the full growth,) and inclines us to all actual sins: so the
regeneration we have by Christ, is in the spring and beginnings thereof when
we ^re infants, and inclines us to actual faith and obedience. And thus
repentance and faith are in Christian infants in their bud or beginning,
inclinatiuely: even as impenitencie and unbelief are in Adams infants, in
their beginning, and by inclination. If any man ask with Nicodemus, how can
these things be? Let him consider, that as he knows not the way of the wind,
or of the spirit, or how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with
child, even so he knows not the works of God, who makes all; Job. 3,
Eccles. 11, 5.

Lastly, to the many examples of Gods judgments upon infants, as at Noes
flood, Page 122.
the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah, etc. they answer, though they had bodily
death for the sins of their parents; yet they perished not with the wicked in
hell. For of this (bodily death) other unreasonable creatures, as well as
infants, have always had their portions. All flesh must die, and death is
loss to none but to the wick^d: to the godly and innocent, death and all
afflictions of this life, are not worthy of the glory that shall be showed.

Answ. 1 In that they grant, Infants have bodily death for their parents
sins, they contradict their own plea before from Ezekiel. 18*20, the soul that
sins it shall die: the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father etc.
for there the Prophet speaks even of bodily death and miseries in this world,
whereof the Jews complained. And unless they confess^, that infants are
sinners in their parents, they cannot maintain the justice of God for killing
infants, and that oftentimes with strange and horrible deaths. And if they
grant that infants are sinners, they cannot with any truth deny but hell is
their due, unless they be redeemed by Christ. And by infants death, we
certainly conclude that they are sinners, from the Apostles ground in Romans 5,
12, 14, and 6, 23. and that for their sin they may and shall be cast into
hell (unless Christ save them) is evident by Christ's doctrine, in Ioh. 3, 3,
Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. And that
infants are there employed, is plain, because an infant is borne a man, as
Christ speaks Ioh 16, 21, and being borne a sinner, Psalm. 51, Romans 5, must be
borne again of the Spirit, or else shall not see the kingdom of God. If it
see not Gods kingdom, it shall see the devils prison; for a Limbus or third
place will no where be found. And how these men can exempt wicked infants from
hell, otherwise then by their own fancies I know not: ^he Apostles taught no
such doctrine, when without exception of infants, they call the old world
that perished, the world of the ungodly, 2 Pet. 2, 5, and reckon none saved but
Noe and his house, Heb. 11, 7, 1 Pet. 3* 20, 21, and tell us that Sodom,
Gomorrha, and the Cities about them, are set forth for an example, suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire, Jude v* 7. But these presumptuous men will
control the judgments of God, and tell us that which no Prophet or Apostle
ever taught, that all the infants in those cities suffer no such vengeance:
yea, though God himself promised that if but ten righteous had been found in
Sodom (wherein were many times ten infants) he would not have destroy^d the
city for tennes sake, Genesis 18, 32. 2 The reason which they would ground
upon, because other unreasonable creatures as well as infants have always had
their portions in bodily death; this reason is brutish, and beseems not men.
For no unreasonable creature is a sinner, as all men in Adam are sinners: no
unreasonable creature has a soul immortal infused of God, as all mankind
has: no bruit beast shall be raised from the dead, as all men shall, both old
and young, to life or death eternal. And when a beast dies it has an end
both of vvelfare and misery, so has none of Adams children. What comparison
then is there between men and beasts? Where they say, death is loss to none
but to the wicked; it is true. And hereupon it follows that seeing infants
are wicked, (as is formerly proved) until they be made righteous by Christ,
and borne again; death is a loss unto them; and a gain to those only
(whether old or young) which are made partakers of the grace and gift of
righteousness, by one Jesus Christ, Romans 5, 12, -- 17.

Of Baptizing Infants.
AGainst baptising of Infants the adversaries first lay this ground, Page 129.
Baptism perteyneth only to them that declare their repentance and faith to
those Disciples of Christ that baptize them. This appears by John Baptists
doctrine and practice, Mar. 1, 4, Mat. 3, 6, and Christ's disciples, Joh. 4, 1
and 3 22, by Christ's commission for all nations, Mat, 28, 19, Mar. 16.16, by
the Apostles practice, Act. 2, 38, 41 and 8, 12, 36 etc.

Answ. That baptism pertains to such as declare their repentance and faith,
is true; and the Scriptures alleged prove it. But that it pertains to such
only, is untrue: and none of the Scriptures which they bring, do so teach
The infants of the Church, which cannot declare repentance or faith, are also
to be baptized, as after shall be manifested.

That the practice taught by the foresaid Scriptures, is to be perpetual; we
grant: and they needed not have taken pains to prove it.

Page 131.
Infants (say they) may not be baptized, because there is neither commandment,
example, nor true consequence for it, in all Christ's perfect Testament, etc.

Answ, This we deny: commandment there is for it in Math. 28, and Mark 16, and
necessary consequences from many Scriptures confirm it; Page 132.
as shall be proved.

Baptism (they say) is in that a good conscience makes request unto God, 1
Pet. 3.21, it is of repentance for remission of sins, Mar. 1.^^ the washing
of the new birth, Tit. 3, 5 etc. If it cannot be proved by the Scriptures that
infants have their hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, have repentance,
faith etc. they ought not to be baptized.

Answ. Their argument has only a show, no substance of truth. For first a man
might frame as good a reason thus: Circumcision is not that which is outward in
the flesh, but that of the heart, in the spirit, Romans 2, 28, 29, it is the
putting off of the body of the sins of the flesh, Coloss. 2.11, it seals
the righteousnese of faith which they have, Romans 4.11, and the circumcising of
the fo^-skinne of the heart, Deuteronomy. 10 16, to love the Lord etc. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Now
if it cannot be proved by Scripture that infants have the l^ue of God in their
hearts, the righteousness of faith, the putting of of the body of sin etc. they
may not be circumcised, and the^r circumcision is nothing. If this be not a
good argument to keep children from circumcision, the other is no better to
keep them from Baptism. Secondly, Christian infants have the graces they speak
of, repentance, faith, regeneration etc, though not actually, or by way of
declaration to others; yet they have through the work of the Spirit, the seed
and beginning of faith, virtually and by way of inclination; so that they are
not wholly d^stitute of faith, regeneration etc. though it be a thing hid and
unknown unto us after what manner the Lord works these in them, Eccles. 11,
5. Which I further prove thus. If infants naturally are some vvayes capable of
Adams sin, and so of unbeleefe, disobedience, transgression etc. then
Christian infants supernaturally and by grace, are some ways capable of
Christ's righteousness, and so of faith, obedience, sanctification etc. But
infants are capable of the former evils by Adam: therefore they are capable of
the latter good things by Christ. That they are capable of the former, is
before proved (where we treated of original sin) by Rom 5, Psalm. 5 1, Ioh.
3, and many Scriptures. The consequence, that therefore they are capable of the
latter also, ^o wit of Christian graces, is thus manifested. 1 Because the
first Adam was a figure of the second Adam Christ, so that as the sin of the
first Adam, his fault, disobedience, and death for it came on all his children,
both by imputation and infection or corruption of nature: so the righteousness
and obedience of Christ comes on all his children, both by imputation and
renewing of nature, unto life and salvation, as the Apostle compares them,
Romans 5.12.15.16.17.18.19.21. 2 Because infants being by Adam sinners, children
of wrath etc. must be borne again of the spirits, or else they cannot see the
Kingdom of God, Ioh. 3, 3.5.6. But the Christian infants dying in infancy
shall see the Kingdom of God, and not be damned (as the adversaries grant)
therefore by Christ's doctrine they are borne again of the spirit: and so must
needs in some measure have repentance, faith, holiness, without which there is
no regeneration. Again, that infants have the faith and love of God in them,
and regeneration in their measure is thus proved. They to whom God gives the
sign and seal of righteousness by faith, and of regeneration, they have
faith and regeneration: for God gives no lying sign, he seals no vain or
false covenants. But God gave to infants circumcision, which was the sign
an^ ^ale of the righteousness of faith and regeneration, Gen* 17.12, Romans
4.11* and 2.28.29, Coloss. 2.11. Therefore infants had (and consequ^ntly now
have) faith and regeneration, though not in the crop or ha^vest by de^laration,
yet in the bud and beginnings of all Christian graces. They that deny this
reason, must either make God the author of a lying sign and seal of the
covenant to Abraham and ^is infants: or they must hold that infants had those
graces then, b^t not now: both which are wicked and absurd to affirm. Or they
must say, that circumcision was not the sign and seal of the righteousness of
faith, and then they openly contradict the Scripture, Romans 4.11.

Moreover, as the Apostle in Romans 5, compares our natural estate in Adam, and
our spiritual estate in Christ, so may we in this case. If we cannot justly
obj^ct against Gods work in nature, but do believe that our inf^nts are
reasonable creatures, and are borne not bruit beasts but men, though actually
they can manifest no reason or understanding more then beasts, (yea a young lamb
knows and discerns h^s damn sooner then an infant knows his mother:)
then neither can we justly object against Gods work in grace, but are to
believe that our infants are sanctified creatures, and are borne believers not
infidels, though outwardly they can manifest no faith or sanctification unto
us. And, why should it be thought incredible that God should work faith in
infants? If because we know not or perceive not how it can be: let us consider,
that we know not the way of our natural birth, and other earthly things
Eccles. 11 5. Ioh. 3, 8, how then can we know heavenly things? If we make
question of the power of God; nothing is unpossible with him. He made all
things of nothing; he can make the dumb beast speak with man's voice, Numb. 22,
he can make the babe in the moth^rs womb, to be aff^cted and leap for joy,
at the voice of words spoken to the mother, Luke 1.44, and can he not also
work grace, faith, holiness in infants? Has Satan power by sin to inf^ct and
corrupt infants (as is before proved,) and shall nor God have power to cleanse
from corruption, and make them holy? If we make doubt of the will of God
herein, behold we have his promises to restore our losses in Adam, by his
graces in Christ, as he sh^weth in Rom* 5, that he will circumcise our heart,
and the heart of our seed to love him, Deu. 30 6, we have the seal of his
promise, in giving circumcision to infants, to signify and seal the
righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11, Genesis 17. And we have assurance of all his
promises, and of that to Abraham and his seed in particular, to be confirmed
unto us (not abrogated or lessened) by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20, Luke 1.72.73 etc.
Gal. 3.14 etc. Wherefore they are but a faithless and crooked generation, that
notwithstanding all that God h^th spoken and done in this kind, do deny this
grace of Christ to the infants of his people, and the seal or confirmation of
this grace by baptism now, as it was by circumcision of old.

But they proceed to plead against the truth thus, Page 13^.
Regeneration is a turning from sin to God, Rev. 6.11. 1 These. 1.9. Tit* 4.5
Repentance is a sight and knowing of sin by the law a confessing and sorrow for
sin, etc. Faith is the ground of things hoped for, etc. Heb. 11.1. and is
accompa-with obedience, Iam. 2. Let them either now prove, that infants are
turned from sin, see, know, confess and sorrow for it, believe the promises of
God, etc. or they say nothing.

Answ. They reason ignorantly and perversely, not only against the light of
Gods word, but of nature. As if some brutish person should plead thus. A man is
a living creature that has a reasonable soul; and the proper affections of a
man as he is a man, are the faculty of understanding, of thinking,
capablenesse of learning, of remembering, faculty of reasoning, of judging and
discerning true and false, good and evil, of approving and improving, of
willing and nilling, of speaking, of numbering, etc. Now let them which affirm
that infants are borne men (as Christ does in Ioh. 16.21.) prove that infants
do understand, do think, remember, judge, discern good and evil, approve,
will, speak, etc. or else they say nothing. Were not such a disputer worthy to
be laughed and hissed at? who requires the actual use and manifestation of
humane affections and faculties in infants; which are in them but potentially
and in the seed and beginning: and because they cannot declare these things by
their works, therefore he denies them to be of the generation of mankind, or
borne men into the world: or that they have the faculties of men at all in
them any manner of way? Even such is the argumentation of these erroneous
spirits against the truth of religion. For as before they reasoned against the
sin, transgression, and condemnation of Infants, (contrary to Paul's doctrine in
Romans 5) because infants actually understand not the law, nor transgress
against it; and will not consider how they are sinners originally in Adam: so
now also they reason against the grace of Christ in infants, and his work of
regeneration in them; because they cannot outwardly manifest the effects of
regeneration or fruits of faith, (such as the scriptures that they allege do
require in older persons) and will not understand that these graces are in them
through Christ and his spirit, but in the beginnings only (as I have formerly
proved) and are not in them as in those of full age, who by reason of use have
their senses exercised to discern both good and evil. And here I desire to
know of the Anabaptists in their next vvritings about these matters; first when
they think that children (who in their opinion are borne without a^y sin)
begin to be sinners, whether at 2.3.5.7. or other years: and when they can
justly reprove a child for sin, if it show in word, deed, or gesture any thing
contrary to the law of God, as if it swear, curse, lie, disobey parents, take
another goods, be froward, angry, or the lik^. Yea let any of them tell me (if
he can) when he himself first fell from his innocence and became a sinner,
being none before; by what act or transgression of what commandment. It is
strange that an innocent man should fall from his innocence, and not know when
and how. Secondly let them say, whether every child so soon as it begins to
be a sinner, has not remedy for the sin by Christ; and so whether it it be
not capable of repentance, faith, regeneration, etc. and consequently of
baptism, so soon as it is a sinner. Thirdly, seeing they insist so much on
the perf^ction of the ordinances of the new Testament, as of the old, (which
thing I willingly grant) I desire to know whether (as God appointed the eight
day for the circumcising of a child after it was borne,) Christ has appointed
any day, month or year for a child to be baptized after it is borne. If they
say none, but when the child can manifest repentance and faith: then what
manifestation has Christ prescribed, whether if the child say it repents
him, and he believes, it is enough, or what rules and ordinances Christ has
given, by which we may certainly know that now (and not before or after) a
child is to receive baptism, as a repentant and believing sinner: and let them
tell us at what age of their children they or any of them has first baptized
his child unto remission of si^s. These things are needful to be known, that
we may walk by rule; and being not yet signified (to my knowledge) in any of
their writings, I desire for my information, and for the better clearing of
these controversies, that they would set down their doctrine touching these
points. For it is required of all parents to bring up their children in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. this they cannot do aright,
unless they know when first they begin to sin, and consequently when first
they begin to believe. If they blame a child for sin vvhiles it is an
innocent, they commit iniquity: if they keep a child from Christ and Christian
baptism when it is a repentant and believing sinner (which may be so soon as
it is a sinner) they vvrong their child most sinfully, to condemn that which
Christ justifies. These things are worthy of serious consideration both in
respect of our childrens estate, and of our own.

And now ere I proceed further to answer their cavils, I will show two
commandments for the baptising of infants: the one given of old to our
fathers, the other given by Christ.

1. That which was once commanded of God, and never by him called back, is
now still to be done; as it is written, What thing soever I command you,
observe to do it, Deuteronomy. 12.32. But God commanded the outward seal of his
covenant of grace to be given to the infants of his people, as in Genesis
17.12.13. He that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, etc. and
my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant. And this
commandment touching the substance of it, and outward sealing of the covenant,
has never by him been abrogated. Therefore it is still to be continued, and
our infants (by virtue of that commandment) are to have the seal of Gods
covenant.

The common objection that this proof is not from Christ's testament, but from
Moses writings, is of no weight. For Moses wrote of Christ, Ioh. 5.46. The
Apostles said none other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did s^y
should come, Act. 26.22. Christ came not to destroy the law or the Prophets,
but to fulfill. Math. 5.17. Paul proves our justification by faith in Christ
from Abraham's example written by Moses, as written not for his sake alone, but
for us, Romans 4.3 -- 24* Therefore the example of Abraham's infants circumcised,
is vvrit^en for us also. To manifest this reason more fully, I lay down these
particulars, 1. That the covenant then made with Abraham was the covenant of
the Gospel, which we now have. 2 That circumcision the seal of the covenant
then, and baptism the seal of the covenant now, are one and the same in
substance. The first is proved thus, Paul says, The Scripture foreseeing that
God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the Gospel unto
Abraham, In thee shall all nations be blessed, Gal. 3.8. Aga^ne, when
circumcision was instituted, the covenant was, Thou shall be a father of many
nations, etc. Genesis 17.4.5. this promise (as belonging to the faith of Christ)
is applied to our state under the Gospel, Romans 4.13.16.17. and is by Paul
there opposed to the Law. Moreover the covenant with Abraham was, that the
Lord would be a God to him and to his seed after him, Genesis 17*7. this promise
implies blessedness to him and them; for Blessed is the nation whose God is
the Lord, Psalm. 33.12. and this blessedness comes on none by the Law, Romans
4.15. Gal. 3.10.11.12. and that he should be a God unto us, and we his people,
is the sum of the Gospel, Heb. 8*10 2. Cor. 6.16. Reu. 21.3. The difference
between the fathers and us, is, that they had the Gospel in promise; we have
the same Gospel in performance, Luke 1.69.70, 72.73. etc. Act. 13.32.33. and
26 6. They believed in Christ that was to come; We believe in Christ who is
come: Their faith and ours is one in substance, Heb. 11. Gal. 3.9. That
circumcision and baptism are also one in substance (though differing in
outward sign) is thus manifested. Circumcision was the sign of faith and
holiness, Romans 4.11. and 2.29. Col. 2.11 Deuteronomy. 10*16. Baptism is the sign of
faith and holiness, Act. 8.37.38* Romans 6.3.4* etc. Circumcision was the first
sign and seal of entering into the covenant: Baptism is so now. We now being
buried with Christ in baptism, are said to be circumcised in him, Coloss.
2.11.12. which plainly manifests them to be one and the same: even as their
other sacramental signs, are said to be the same that we now have, in respect
of the things signified, 1. Cor. 10.1.2.3.4. 1 Cor. 5.7.8. Forasmuch then as
the covenant with Abraham and with us, and the seal of the covenant then and
now, are one in substance: it follows, that the commandment then to give
infants the seal of the covenant, being never repealed, binds us to give
them the seal of the covenant at this day. The exceptions which the
adversaries make of the difference between circumcision and baptism, shall be
answered after in their place.

2 The second commandment for baptising of infants, is in Mark. 16.15. Go
preach the Gospel to every creature; he that believes and is baptized, shall
be saved. Math. 28.19. Go teach all nations, baptising them, etc. In this
commission of Christ are two things, the preaching of the Gospel to every
creature, to all nations; and the sealing of the same by baptism. The Gospel
belonged to infants, and they are necessarily implied in the first: therefore
baptism belonged to infants, and they are as necessarily implied in the later.
Christ bids them proclaim or preach the Gospel: but what the Gospel is,
is not here declared, we must gather it from other scriptures. The Gospel (or
Evangelie) is the glad tidings or joyful declaration that the promise which
was made unto the Fathers, God has fulfillled the same unto us their
children: the promise, (I say) concerning Christ, and the redemption of the
world by him, as these scriptures teach, Act. 13.32.33. Luke
1.54.55.69.70.71.72.73. etc. Act. 2.38.39. and 26.22.23. Luke 4.18 -- 21. So
the Gospel (which is the good tidings of the fulfilling of the promise) is as
large as the promise was: vvhereupon, not in the forementioned scriptures
only, but in many other places, the Apostles refer the Gospel to the
promise (or promises) made of old, as, It is of faith, that it might be by
grace; to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed: Romans 4.16. and Now
we, brethren, as Isaak was, are the children of promise, Gal. 4.28. and, Christ
was a minister of the circumcision, for the truth of God, to confirm the
promises (made) unto the fathers: and that the Gentiles might glorify God for
mercy, Romans 15.8.9. and, That the promise by faith of Jesus Christ, might be
given to them that believe, Gal. 3.22. and, Paul an Apostle, etc. according to
the promise of life, which is in Christ Jesus, 2. Tim. 1.1. and many the like.
Not in general only, but the particular promises at several times, are
showed to be accomplished in the Gospel; as the promise to Adam, Romans 16 20.
from Genesis 3.15. to Abraham, Luke 1.55.73. Romans 4.16.17.18. to David, Luke
1.69.70. Act. 2*30 31. to Israel by Moses, Samuel, and other Prophets, Act.
3.22.24*25 Luke 1.70. so that all the promises of God are yea and Amen in
Christ, 2. Cor. 1.20. And for the point in controversy, the promise of grace
and salvation to Abraham and to his seed, Genesis 17.7. is by the Gpspell showed
to be confirmed, Luke 1.55. Act. 2.38*39. Gal. 3.14.16.29. But the promise to
Abraham's seed implied his infants, Genesis 17, 7, 10, 12, therefore the Gospel
(which is the complement of that promise) implies our infants: and so the
Apostle says, the promise is to you and to your children, Act. 2.39. And the
sign and seal of the promise was given to Abraham's children in infancy,
Genesis 17, 10, 12. therefore it belongs to our children in their infancy: and
we are said to be the children of promise as Isaak was* Gal. 4.28* But Isaak
was the child of promise in his infancy, and had then the seal of the promise
in his infancy, when he was but eight days old, Act, 7, 8, wherefore we also
in our infancy are children of the promise, and have right to the seal of the
covenant even then, or else we are not as Isaak was. And thus Christ
commanding the Gospel to be preached, commanded the fulfilling of the promises
to be preached, even all and every one of the promises, without excepting any:
and so commanded the promise of grace, and accomplishment of it to the seed of
the faithful even in their infancy to be preached. Likewise commanding the
seal of the covenant to be applied unto all within the promise, as freely and
generally now as ever it was of old, not excepting infants: he commanded
infants to be sealed by baptism, as they were sealed before by circumcision.
And seeing all believers are by his commission to be baptized: the infants of
the Church being believers (in respect of the beginning of faith, though not
actually) as I have formerly proved, they are also to be baptized by virtue of
Christ's commission, Mark. 16. Math. 28. that so the promises unto the fathers
may be confirmed, and the Gentiles (as well as the circumcision, that is, the
Jews) may glorify God for his mercy, Romans 15.8*9.

Now I will proceed to answer their exceptions; beginning first with this
about circumcision, and the covenant with Abraham.

1 There was a commandment for circumcision, Page 145.
Genesis 17. there is none for baptism of infants.

Answ. This is before disproved, and a commandment showed Mark. 16. For the
sealing of the seed of the faithful in infancy, was a part of the Gospel;
seeing the Gospel is the fulfilling of the covenant and promise made to the
fathers, and to Abraham in special, Act. 13 32, 33. Luke 1.55.73. If it be
objected, that baptising of infants is not there particularly expressed: I
answer, neither are other parts of the Gospel particularly expressed th^re:
but the G^spell in general being to be proclaimed, all parts of the Gosp^ll
(whereof sealing the infants is one) are necessarily implied. Note also that
things are taught and commanded sometime in scripture, though not in express
words: as the trinity of persons in the unity of the Go^head, the
resurrection of the dead (as Christ proves) was taught in Exodus 3. Eternal
life in heaven, and eternal death in hell are not expressed in Moses law: nor
that they should have Synagogues in every city for the people to meet on the
Sabbath. Neither in the new testament is it taught in express words, that
Christ is coessentiall, coequall, coeternall with the father: or, that his
death and obedience is the merit of our righteousness, or satisfaction for our
sins: nor ^xpr^sly commanded that women should receive the Lords supper, nor
example that any did: with sundry other things which though they be not
expressed in plain words, yet are they soundly to be proved by arguments from
the scripture.

2 That commandment included males only, children or servant though
unbeleevers, and excluded all females, though believers so does not baptism.

Answ. 1 It is untruly said that servants unbele^vers were to be circumcised:
they feign this, the s^ri^ture tea^heth them not so, but the contrary. For
circumcision was the seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4, 11, and
should it be set upon unbeleevers, which had no righteousness* no faith? So God
should be made the author of a false and lying seal: to signify and to assure
the things which were not. Again, every circumcised person was to eat the
Passover, and had all other privileges of Israells law, Exodus 12, 48, 49. the
Passover signified Christ, and the eating of it life by Christ, 1 Cor. 5.7.8.
Ioh. 6.57. But no unbeleever had these benefits. And if unbeleevers and
Israelites had communion together in circumcision, passover, and other holy
things, then was the Church of Israel no communion of Saints, but a mixture
with all sorts of infidels, whosoever would, contrary to Exodus 19, 5.6. Levit.
19, 2, and 20, 7. Deuteronomy. 14 ^, 2, and 26.18, 19, Levit. 20, 26, 1 King. 8.53.
Though females (vvanting that part of the body) were not outwardly circumcised,
for that foreskin which was not, could not be cut off: yet may we not say they
were excluded, for then they might not have eaten the passover, Exodus 12.48.
They were within the covenant (D^ut. 29, 10, 11, 12) and implied in the
males. As the men had that sign of purification (according to the nature of
the male) which women had not* so women had another kind of purification
(according to the nature of the female) which men had not, Levit. 12. Each ^^x
had their portion in the things that figured their redemption by Christ,
according to their several natures. Therefore when the outward sign was
changed from circumcising to baptising, whereof the female is as capable as the
male; both sexes are baptized, Act. 8.12. So infants now are as capable of
baptism, as they were of circumcision, there is nothing therefore to debar
them from it.

3 The law required circumcision to be performed on the eight d^y: so does not
the law of baptism.

Ans What of this? the law of baptism appoynteth no day at all for any: shall
none therefore be at all baptized? The law required the Passover to be kept on
the 14 day of the first month, Exodus 12 The law of Christ appoints no day
when to eat the Lords supper: yet it is the same in substance that the
Passover was, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8, so baptism is the same in substance that
circumcision was, Coloss. 2.11, 12. and as all may now eat the Lords supper,
which might then eat the Pascha: so all may now be baptized, which then were
circumcised.

4 But when faith is manifested, then is baptism to be performed.

Ans. They mean by manifestation, profession with mouth; and by then they mean
not before that time. This is denied, and formerly disproved, and they have no
one word of God to confirm their doctrine. 2 Though infants manifest no faith
by their own mouth, yet the mouth of God manifests them to have faith in the
beginning or feed thereof, because he testifies them to be holy, 1 Cor. 7, 14,
which is not without faith: and testifies them to have grace and righteousness
by Christ, answerable to the corruption and unrighteousness which they have by
Adam, Romans 5. as is before declared.

Again they say, Page 145.
Neither circumcision nor baptism are seals of the covenant of life and
salvation: that which is now the seal, was ever the same, which is the h^ly
spirit of promise, 2 Cor. 1, 22, Ephesians. 1, 13, and 4*30.

Ans. A bold untruth contradicting the Apostle, who calls the sign of
circumcision, the seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.1^. and
righteousness of faith is life and salvation, Gal. 3.11. Ephesians. 2*8. and the
covenant which circumcision sealed, was that the Lord would be their God, Genesis
17.7.10. and so he would give them life and salvation, Reu 21.3.4. Whereas they
except, The Spirit is the scale: it is true; but they should obs^rue that it is
an invisible seal in the heart; whereas Paul speaks of an outward visible
seal, which is also a sign, and on the body. Again, the covenant may have
more seals then one: so that if the Spirit were an outward seal, yet might
circumcision be a seal also of the same thing. Moses calls circumcision a
sign or token, Genesis 17.11, but he no where calls it a seal* yet Paul
calls it a seal, because in truth it was so, and more then a bare sign. For
a sign is to make some other thing known unto us, as the doole-stone or land
mark is for distinction of grounds: or it is further to put us in mind of
things formerly done, as the stones at Gilgall were for a memorial to Israel
how their Fathers passed through Jordan, Ioshu. 4.20.21.22. But a seal goes
yet further, and certifieth or assures of any promise or gift. Now because
circumcision was such a sign as assured unto Abraham his righteousness by
faith in Christ the promised seed: therefore the Apostle rightly calls it a
seal. Upon which ground we also rightly call the Passover, Baptism, and our
Lords Supper Seals, because they are such signs as certify and assure us of
forgiveness of sins, and of righteousness and salvation by Christ. And from
this we have a most certain ground for the baptism of infants: because
baptism is no more now, then circumcision was of old, namely a sign and
seal of righteousness by faith. And if infants had such a seal under the
promise of the Gospel: how should it with any color be denied now under the
performance of that promise? unless we will say, Christ has not confirmed the
promises made unto the fathers, contrary to Romans 15.8. 2 Cor. 1.20.

Further they say, page 146.
There is but two covenants, the Law and the Gospel, the Old and the New, Gal.
4. The old Covenant, the Law, was made with the children of Abraham after the
flesh, and had circumcision in their flesh for a sign thereof. The new
covenant the G^spell, is not made but with the one seed, Gal. 3.16. that are of
the faith of Abraham. The children of the flesh are not they to whom this
covenant is made, Romans 9.8 the children of the flesh must be but out, etc. Gal.
4 30. so that the covenant with Abraham and his children after the flesh, was
not the covenant of life and salvation; it was the covenant of work, of the
Law. etc.

Ans. In this their plea, there is a little truth, but much error and
delusion. It is true, there were but two Covenants, the Law and the Gospel.
There is sophistry and delusion in their saying the covenant of the law was
with the children of Abraham after the flesh: for as after the flesh means
natural generation, so Isaak, Iakob, and all the Israelites, even Christ
himself was Abraham's child after the flesh, Math. 1.1. Romans 1.3. and 9.3.4.5.
yet were not they aliens from the covenant of the Gospel. But as the flesh
means corruption of nature, Romans 8.1.8.9. and as men have no other generation
of the Spirit, but of the flesh, John* 3. verse. 5.6. in this sense it is true,
that the children of the flesh are not the children of God, Romans 9.8. and they
are under the Law, not under the Gospel. But this is nothing against the truth
we maintain. For Isaak who was Abraham's seed after the flesh in the first
sense, but after the Spirit, and by promise in the second sense, he was
circumcised in his infancy, Now all the Christian Church are as Isaak,
children of the promise, Gal. 4.28, and our infants though by nature (as it is
corrupted) they be children of wrath, Ephesians. 2, yet by promise and grace in
Christ, they are children of God, Romans 5, and therefore are to have the seal
of the covenant of grace in infancy, as Isaak had; even as by Abraham's
justification, the Apostle proves the justification of us all, Romans
4.3.22.23.24.

Error it is that they say, Abraham's children had circumcision in the flesh
for a sign of the old covenant or Law For first, the Law was given by Moses,
Job 1.7. many years after Abraham, and could not disanull the covenant with
Abraham, or make the promise of none effect, as the Apostle plainly teaches us
Gal. 3.17. Christ also says, Circumcision was not of Moses, but of the
fathers, Job. 7.22. Secondly, the covenant which circumcision sealed, was that
the Lord would be a God to Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17.7.10, this was the
covenant of the Gospel, Heb. 8.8 10, Rev. 2 1.3. Thirdly, Circumcision was the
seal of righteousness of faith, Romans 4 11, but the Law is not of faith, Gal.
3.11.12, therefore circumcision was a seal of the Gospel promised, a seal of
the covenant of grace.

Whereas they say, the new covenant is not made but with the one seed, Gal.
3.16, it is true, and makes against them: for that one seed, is there showed
to be Christ: not Christ in his own person only, but Christ with his Church,
which make one mystical body, 1 Cor. 12.12. Ephesians. 5.30.31.32. Now the infants of
the Church, are by the covenant of grace of the body of Christ, even as by
nature they are of the body and stock of Adam, as before (in the treaty of
Original sin,) we have proved by Romans 5, so that the new covenant is made with
them also, and therefore the seal of that covenant is due unto them now, as it
was in Abraham's days.

N^xt this, they go about to prove, Page 147.
That the covenant whereof circumcision was a sign, Genesis 17, was not the same
which we have now in the Gospel: because the Lord says, it is not the same,
Jer. 31.31, Heb. 8.6. it is a new covenant that we have under the Gospel.

Answ. It is no marvel though these men so often slander us, when they dare
belie the Lord himself. Neither does the Prophet, nor the Apostle (in the
places by them cited, or) any where say, that the covenant which Abraham had,
and which was sealed to him by circumcision, is not the same which we have. I
have before proved them to be one in substance by Gal. 3, and Romans 4.11. The
covenant spoken of by Jeremy, was made when God took them by the hand to bring
them out of Egypt, Ier. 31.32, Heb. 8, vvheras the covenant with Abraham was
many years before, Gal. 3.17. Therefore the covenant made with Abraham by
promise, is the same that we now have by performance and confirmation of that
prom^se, Luke 1.54 55, 72* 73 Romans 15.8.

Again they say, Page 148.
though Abraham himself had the covenant of grace promised him, by which
promise he had salvation in the M^ssiah to come; yet ha^ he not the ordin^^^^s
of the new covenant which we have: and therefore none of his seed in the flesh
could be partakers of that which he had not himself.

Answ. They grant enough to their own condemnation: for if Abraham's covenant
was of grace and salvation by Christ; then was it not of the Law (as before
they pleaded) for that causes wrath and damnation, Romans 4.15, Gal. 3.10.12.
We plead not for the same external Ordinances or manner of outward
^ispensation: but for the same substance of the covenant, which was of faith,
not of works; and so of the Gospel not of the Law, as Paul teaches us, Romans
4. Gal. 3. The Israelites Passover of the Lamb, and our Passover Christ:
their feast of unleavened cakes, and ours, (1 Cor. 5.7.8.) differ apparently in
the outward Ordinances. So their bread of Manna from heaven, ours of wheat from
the earth; their drink of water from the Rock, ours of wine from the Grape,
(in the supper of our Lord) how greatly do they differ in the outward things:
yet were they the same spiritual meat and drink both to them and us, even
Christ: as the Apostle teaches 1 Cor. 10.3.4. So Circumcision and Baptism,
differ much in the outward rite and sign; but not in the substance or thing
signified.

Yet cease they not their idle contention, but further say concerning us, Page
148.
They speak untruely [in saying that the covenant which this new is not like,
is that Law given upon mount Sina, Exodus 19. not that in Genesis 17.] Mark the
words (in Ier. 31, Heb. 8,) Not like the covenant that I made with their
fathers, when I took them by the hand to bring them out of Egypt, which is
mentioned in Exodus 3, not Exodus 19, then did God appear to Moses, and
commanded him to take them by the hand and lead them out of Egypt, where the
covenant is mentioned in ver. 6, I am the God of thy fathers, Abraham etc. I am
come to deliver them etc. to bring them into a good land etc. which promise was
made unto their father Abraham.

Answ. The untruth and ignorance is in themselves that so reason. For there was
no covenant made in Exodus 3. Let the place be veiwed. Though if there had then
a covenant been made, it were nothing to our purpose; because Abraham was dead
many years before, and we reason of the covenant made with him and his seed,
whiles he lived, Genesis 17. But in Exodus 19.5 etc. treaty is of a covenant to be
made: in Exodus, 20 etc. the Laws are promulgated. In Exodus 24, 7, 8, the
covenant is made up and dedicated. And that this was that first and old
covenant which should be abolished, as Jeremy foretold, the Apostle does
plainly manifest. For having showed the promise hereof in Heb. 8.8. -- 13, he
prosecuteth the same matter in Heb* 9, showing the differences between the
first covenant and the second, or the old and the new; and how a covenant (or
testament) must be confirmed by blood and death: which for the new was by the
death of Christ, Heb. 9.15.16, and for the first, it was with the death and
blood of bullocks and goats, wherewith Moses sprinkled the people, v. 18
19.20. And this was that action recorded in Exodus* 24, done at mount Sina.
Moreover observe here these men's fraud: Jeremy speaks of a covenant made;
they tell us of a covenant (or promise) mentioned in Exodus 3, as if to make a
covenant when they came out of Egypt, and to mention a covenant or promise
made many years before with Abraham in Canaan, were all one. That which is
alleged of the land of Canaan promised in Gen* 17, 8, is true, as a type or
figure, but not as the maine thing there intended. For Abraham himself had no
inheritance in the land of Canaan, no not so much as to set his foot on: Act.
7.5. how then did circumcision seal that to Abraham, which God never performed
to him? Is not this to make Gods promise to him, vain? The Apostl^ is a better
expositor, who says, that circumcision sealed to him righteousness of faith,
which he had before, Rom 4.11, and tells us, how by faith Abraham soiourned
in the land of promise, as in a strange Country, and looked for a heavenly
city and country, which he understood to be figured by that earthly land:
Heb. 11.9.10.16. And if ^h^ possession of Canaan was that which circumcision
sealed, then Abraham's servants; yea and all his sons by Keturah, and all
pros^lytes of other families, that were circumcised, were deluded with a vain
promise: seeing none of all these had ever inheritance in Canaan, but only the
Israelites the posterity of Isaak, which were numbered in Numb. 26*2. -- 53.

Again, they except thus. The covenant is made in Genesis 17, Page 150.
with Abraham and his seed, not with every faithful man and his seed. Is every
faithful man Abraham? What proof for that? It is well if we be Abraham's seed
etc.

Answ. The exception is frivolous: for by virtue of that covenant with Abraham
who circumcised his infants, Isaak his son, Iakob his son, all the Isra^lits
in their generations, and every faithful Proselyte of the heathens,
circumcis^d their infants. So the faithful now, who all are Abraham's seed,
and heirs by promise, G^l. 3.29, do seal their infants with Bap^ism^, as of
^ld ^h^y did with Circumcision, for the promise is to such and to their
children Act. 2.39. When Paul brings Abraham's example for justification by
faith, Romans 4. if any should trifle and say, What is that to us? We are not
Abraham: the Apostle tells, it was not written for his sake alone, but for
us also, Romans 4.23.24. So say we; that Abraham gave his infants the seal of
the covenant, it is not written for him alone, but also for us.

But they proceed and say; Page 151.
In Rom, 4, 21, Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, the seal of the
righteousness of faith which he ^ad, when he was uncircumcised, that he
should be the father of the faithful etc. This proves that Abraham received
Circumcision to seal up his fatherhood of the faithful; not that he received
it to seal up his faith in the Messiah, which he had 24 years before: but a
seal of his faith in believing God, that he should be the father of many
Nations, Genesis 17.4, Rom, 4.17, and this was imputed to him for righteousness,
Romans 4.22.

Answ. They are blind, and would make blind. 1 There is no faith that can be
imputed to any man for righteousness, but the faith that is in the Messiah; as
the Apostle proves at large, in Romans 3, 21.22.24.25. and Romans 4. Gal. 3.2 And
Abraham beleeeving the promise of a seed, which belief was counted to him for
righteousness, Genesis 15.5.6. believed Christ principally, as his seed after the
flesh: for otherwise how could all nations be blessed in him, that is in his
seed, as God promised, Genesis 12.3. Gal. 3.8.16. 3 The Apostle disproveth their
vain gloss, when having showed how Abraham's faith was counted to him for
righteousness, Romans 4.19. -- 22, he annexeth, that this was written for us
also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe in him that raised up Jesus,
v. 23 24. But if Abraham's faith had not been the faith in Christ, the Apostles
argument from his example had been impertinent.

Finally they say, Page 152.
Abraham received Circumcision as none received it: and faith was required of
none to Circumcision: but faith is required to Baptism: and therefore these be
but men's dreams, and chaff in sted of wheat.

Answ. In deed they would give us chafe for wheat. They would have us beleeu
that Abraham's circumcision sealed his fatherhood, not his faith in Christ:
which dream is before refuted. They would teach us two or more circumcisions,
one which Abraham had, another which other men had. But as there is one Lord,
one faith, one baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. so we find but one circumcision, which all
our fathers received. They would persuade us, that whatsoever Paul says, that
circumcision was the se^le of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. yet faith
was required of none to Circumcision. But who will believe this their dream?
Will God seal righteousness of faith to them that have no faith? This is to
make God the author of vain and worthless seals. If it sealed not to men
righteousness of faith, what sealed it? Not the land of Canaan, for (as is
foreshewed) no child of Abraham by Keturah, no Proselyte had inheritance in
Canaan: no nor Isaak, nor Iakob, who were but strangers in the land as Abraham
was, Heb. 11.9. Not the covenant of the Law, for that was not given till many
years after Abraham, neither could any man have righteousness by it, but
wrath and curse, Gal. 3.10. But had not error blinded their eyes, they might
see that the covenant sealed by circumcision was, that the Lord would be a
God to them and to their seed after them, Genesis 17.7. and this was the covenant
of grace in Christ, Heb. 8.8.10.

Against Peter's doctrine in Act. 2.38.39, where he says, the promise is made
to you and to your children; they cavil thus, Page 136*
Whereas many stumble at the word Children, conceiving that it is meant of
Infants, it is here and elsewhere used often in the Scriptures for men of
understanding: Act. 3.25, etc.

Answ* How struggle these men against the light! It is true, that the word
Children often means men of understanding: but means it not infants also?
The word seed, used in Genesis 17, often implies old persons also: will they
therefore infer, that the promise and seal thereof to Abraham's seed,
belonged not to his seed in their infancy? So nether is there any reason to
think that the promise to the Jews and their children mentioned in Act 2, is
meant only of men of understanding, and not also of their children in
infancy. For when the Apostle speaks of the promise to them and to their
children, concerning Christ and remission of sins by him, and sealing the
same by Baptism: he has evident reference to the promise made of old to
Abraham, which concerned the same things, and was sealed by circumcision: as
appears by comparing Luke 1.54.55.72.73 etc. Galath. 3.8.16.

Whereas the Apostle in 1 Cor. 7.14, calls a believers children holy; these
men expound him thus: Page 136*
If your children in your own judgment be holy, and you do not put them away
when you are converted to the faith, but use them still as your children, etc.
then may you keep your wives being holy, they being of a nearer natural bond
then your children, and use them still as your wives etc. Their reason of this
interpretation is; Because holiness sometime signifies when a person or thing
is set apart or sanctified to the believer, 1. Timothy 4.5, Titus 1.15. Thus is
the unbeleeving wife holy, and thus are the children h^ly, and not otherwise.

Answ. That children are thus sanctified to the believer is true: but in
saying, and not otherwise, they do violence to the Apostles doctrine, and the
truth is not in them. For first he means not the children to be holy in the
parents judgments; but tells them his own judgment, they are holy; and
uses it as a reason to confirm his former doctrine. Secondly, he means not
in respect of putting the children away from civil use as children; for so no
more should be said for the children of the faithful, then for their infidel
servants: for Philemon might and did retain Onesimus for civil use as a
servant, before he was converted to Christ, Phil v. 10.11, etc. and believing
servants might dwell and converse civilly with unbeleeving masters, 1 Timothy 6.1
2, Yea misbegotten children and bastards were not to be put away in respect of
civil use: for who should nourish or bring them up, rather then their own
parents? 2 Samuel 11 4.5, and 12.14.15 etc. Thirdly, they corrupt the Apostles
reason, which is not to this effect, If you may keep your children, then you
may keep your wives: But thus, your unbeleeving vviues you may keep, for they
are sanctified unto you, because the children which you beget of them are
holy: and so the holiness of the children is an argument and proof that they
might still reteyne their unb^leeving vviues. Fourthly, they change the
Apostles word am^ss^: he says not of unbeleeving vviues that they are holy,
but sanctified to the believing husbands; but the children were holy. Fif^ly,
the sanctification of meats, and purity of other things, mentioned in 1 Timothy
4.5 Tit. 1.15, is not meant of religious sanctification, but for civil uses:
whereas the children of believers are otherwise holy, namely, in respect of
the covenant of grace and Church of God, as is abundantly proved before, by
Romans 5, where, as they have naturally sin and unrighteousness by Adam, so
they have holiness and righteousness by the grace of God in Christ. Also by
Genesis 17, compared with Romans 4.11, where Abraham's (and all faithful men's)
children, are with their parents in the covenant of grace, and have the seal
of the righteousness of faith. And upon this ground does Paul strongly prove
the believers might keep their unbeleeving wives, because the children which
they had by such, were (by reason that one parent was a Christian) holy, to
wit, with holiness of the covenant made with the faithful and their seed. And in
this respect the children of those that are in the covenant, are said to be
borne unto the Lord, and to be his children, Ezekiel. 16.8.20, 21. vvheras in the
other respect, all children in the world are the Lords, Exodus 19, 5. And so the
children of the Church are called the holy seed, diff^ring herein from the
seed of other peoples, Ezra 9.1.2, which if th^se opposites had understood,
they could not thus have stumbled at the Apostles words, and wrested his
meaning.

But they plead further, that the Apostle says not, else were your Infants,
but else were your Children unclean, but now they are holy: so that all the
children of unbeleevers are as holy by this place as infants, etc. and so must
be baptized.

Answ. Herein they seek to pervert the straight ways of God. Page 138.
As if they should say: God (when he made with Abraham that everlasting
covenant which Circumcision was a seal of) said not that he would be a God
unto him and to his Infants after him, but unto his seed, Genesis 17 7, so that
all the seed of Abraham (Ismaelites, Edomites etc.) were as holy, and as well
within the covenant of grace and to be circumcised, as the Is^a^lites which
were the generation of Isaak. But they should observe that the covenant of
mercy passes from the fathers to the children from age to age, even to the
thousand generation, if they love God, and keep his commandments: whereas if
they ^ur^e away and hate him, he visi^^th their iniquity, Exodus 20.5.6, Ez^k.
18 9.10.13. Children of believers when they are borne of their parents, (and
all are borne infants) are all in the covenant with their parents; and were
of old to be circumcised, are now to be baptized. If the children be of years
when their parents enter into the covenant, either they assent and enter into
covenant with them, or they diss^nt and enter not. So Isma^l Abraham's child,
being taught of his father to keep the way of the Lord ( Genes* 18.19.) and
not disobeying, he was with his father circumcised at thirteen years of
age, Genes. 17.25. Likewise all children now assenting unto and vvalking in the
faith with their parents are to be baptized at what age soever. But when
Ismael fell from his obedince, then was he cast out of Abraham's house, and
was no longer counted for Abraham's seed, but in Isaak was his seed called,
Genes. 21.10.12. Ismael was still Abraham's seed and child in nature, according
to the flesh; but he continued not still the child of the covenant, Galath.
4.29.30, nor Abraham's seed according to the promise. Even so, if children of
believers now being of understanding, do refuse the faith of Christ, or fall
from it, they are to be kept out of the Church* or cast out from it: and so the
seal of grace and salvation belongs not unto them, ( Ezekiel. 18, 24, 2 Chro.
15.2, Matthew 3.7.9.10,) as it belongs to all the infants of the faithful, and
to all their children (of what age so ever) that receive the faith of Christ,
and abide in it with them. And these men greatly mistake if they think we hold
children are to be baptized, or are holy, because they are our children by
nature, (for so they are children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3,) but they are holy, and
to have the seal of salvation, because God has graciously accepted them into
his covenant with our selves: and keeps them in it, until they fall from
faith and obedience of Christ; even as we our selves continue in the covenant,
whiles we continue in the Christian faith, and no longer, 2 Timothy 2.12. As we
are the children of the first Adam, we are all sinners, disobedient,
unrighteous and under condemnation: but as we are the children of the second
Adam (Christ) we are all holy, made obedient, righteous; and heirs of
salvation, according to the Apostles doctrine in Romans 5*12 -- 21.

Against an other proof for baptism of Infants, gathered from Paul's words in
1 Cor. 10*1, 2 etc. where he speaks of all the Israelits Baptism in the
cloud and in the sea: they struggle with little reason or color of truth. For
(to omit their discourse of Paul's scope in bringing that in, which no way
clears the controverse) they tell us. Page 141.
1 That Moses did not at all wash them with water in the cloud and sea. Page
142.
2 That this of Moses is called baptism by comparison, as Noah's Arc is called
the figure of the Baptism that saves us: for as the Arc saved those in it
from drowning: so the Israelites were all under the cloud and in the sea, and
therein baptized or safeguarded from destruction of their enemies. 3 That it
pleased the Holy Ghost to say they were baptized in the sea and cloud, because
the cloud and sea was their safety, as Noah's Ark was: And as Christ says, they
are baptized that suffer for his sake. So there is as much warrant to enjoin
infants to suffer persecution, because it is called Baptism: as to baptize
them, because the clowd and sea is called Baptism.

Answ. How many vvrestings and vvindings are in these men's words? First, they
say, Moses did not at all baptize them with water. And why? Was there no water
(think they) in the clowd and in the sea? Let them consider Exodus 14.24.25.
compared with Psalm. 77.16.17, etc. and they may see there was water enough in
the clowd: and they will not say (I think) that there was no water in the
sea. All outward baptising or washing, must be with water or some other liquor.
If they were not baptized with water, what other liquour were they baptized
in? not with blood, as in the Baptism of suffering death for Christ's sake,
which they impertinently mention. Not with wine or strong drink: for they
found none such in the wilderness. If they can show nothing but water to
baptize them in, let them deny no more (for shame) that they were baptized with
water. God spoke to our fathers by the Prophets at sundry times (or in (...).
sundry parts, as it were by piece meal) as the Apostle teaches Hebrew. 1.1.
By Moses he showed how the clowd removed from before Israel, and stood behind
them, (as they passed through the sea) and gave them light, but was darkness
to the Egyptians: and from this fiery cloudie pillar the Lord looking,
troubled the Egyptians, and took off their charret wheels, that they drove
them heavily, Exodus 14.19.20 24.25. This being briefly and obscurely told by
Moses, God after inlargeth by Asaph another Prophet, who shows the manner of
it; how not only the waters of the sea saw the Lord, when they fled and
parted; but the clouds also (from above) poured out water when they rained;
the skies sent out a sound by thunder, etc. thus the ground being softened with
the rain, occasioned the charret wheels of the Egyptians (sticking in the
mire) to fall off, and hindered their pursuit: Romans 16.25.26.
Psa. 77.16.17, etc. After this the Apostle (taught by Gods spirit) manifests
the mystery which before was kept secret; namely how this passage under the
cloud (which rained) and through the sea was a baptism to the Israelits: 1.
Cor. 10.1.2. and* Mark. 1.5. Act. 16.33.
even as Christian men's washings in rivers or vessels, was a baptism to them.
And as the manna which Israel ate, and water from the rock which they drank,
was the same spiritual meat and drink which we have signified by bread and
wine in our Lords supper; so their washing in the cloud and sea, and our
washing in vessels or rivers, is spiritually the same baptism. From hence we
gather the baptising of our infants by two arguments: 1 All our fathers (says
Paul) were baptized in the cloud and sea: therefore (say we) infants: for seeing
there was no other baptism but that in the cloud and sea, such of our fathers
as then were infants were at that time baptized, or else many of our fathers
(even all the infants of many thousand families) were never baptized: which is
contrary to the Apostles doctrine. And if infants had baptism under Moses, it
cannot (with any color of reason) be denied them under Christ. 2. In that
the Apostle teaches us, that the extraordinary and temporary sacraments (or
seals of salvation) which Israel had, were the substance and truth which
we now have, though Moses does not so express: it follows upon like ground,
that their ordinary seals, namely Circumcision and the Passover, were the
same in truth and substance with baptism and the Lords Supper which we now
have. And being the same, as infants had circumcision then, so they are to have
baptism now.

Secondly, vvheras they say that of Moses was called baptism by comparison, as
if it were not properly baptism; they swerue from the right way: it was as
truly and properly baptism to them, as ours is to us, though the manner of
administration differ: even as their Manna and water were as truly and
properly the sacrament of Christ's body and blood to them, as bread and wine in
the Lords supper are to us. Otherwise the Apostle should not say truly, that
hey were the same. 1. Cor. 10.3.4.

Thirdly, Noes ark is not called the figure of baptism, as these corrupters of
scripture tell us: but baptism (says the Apostle) is a like-figure (or
antitype) 1 Pet. 3.21. So that the saving by water of eight men in the Ark, was
a type or figure: and the saving of a few now by water in baptism, is an
antitype, or like figure: both of them figuring salvation by the death of
Christ. Fourthly, neither do these men set down the reason fully and rightly,
why they are said to be baptized, namely, because the cloud and sea was their
safety as Noes ark was; for though it may in some sense be granted that these
were their safety, as baptism is our safety (for it is said to save us, 1
Pet. 3.21.) yet properly they were said to be baptized in the cloud and sea,
because they were in them sacramentally washed from their sins, and planted
together in the likeness of his death, burial, and resurrection, as we are
now by baptism, Romans 6.3.4*5. The cloud served them for three users, 1. to
protect and keep them safe, Esai. 4.5.6. 2 to guide them in the way that they
should go, Numb. 9.17. etc. Exodus 13.21. and these two were ordinary, 3. to
baptize them by pouring down water, and this was extraordinary, and but one
time in the red sea, for ought we find. And in this respect Paul says they
were baptized in it. Fifthly, their last speech of inioyning infants to suffer
persecution, as well as to baptize them, is spoken with a wry mouth: for as
we enjoyne not infants to be baptized, though we baptize them; so can we not
enjoin them to suffer persecution. But this we say and know, as infants are
baptitised into Christ, so oftentimes they suffer persecution for Christ: being
with their parents afflicted, imprisoned, banished, etc. yea and bereaved of
life it self, so that they have even the baptism of blood or martyrdom also.

Whereas we find mention of whole households to have been baptized by the
Apostles; from which example it is probably gathered that infants also were
baptized. Against this they dispute thus, Page 143.
1. There are many households in which there are no infants.

Ans. This is true: and it is also true that in many there are infants.
Therefore this argument is propounded but as probable, not as certain.

2 They say, It is most sure as the Apostles practiced in one household, so they
practiced in all. But in the Iaylors house they baptized such as they preached
the word unto, and such as believed, Act. 16.31.34. and this is most plain
that infants cannot hear nor believe, etc.

Ans. It is not most sure, but altogether unlikely, as themselves, I think,
Mat. 10.13 14.
will acknowledge. For there is no likelihood that all households to whom the
Apostles preached, did believe every one in them, 1 Cor. 7.13.16.
though some did. And they grant that none but believers were baptized. So then
if the goodman of the house, and the men only believed, there none but men
were baptized: if women only believed, they only were baptized. Therefore the
Apostles practice was not always alike in respect of the persons that they
baptized. So for infants, such houses as had none, we easily grant that no
infants were there baptized. But such as had infants, their parents believing,
we hold that their infants were baptized; for there is no exception of infants
at all in any place of the Apostles Acts. The bar which they put, that
infants cannot hear nor believe, is soon removed. We know infants can hear,
though not with understanding: we know also (and have proved before) that they
believe, though not actually or professantly. And this faith begun in them in
their regeneration, is a sufficient ground why infants should be baptized, as
I have formerly manifested.

Finally, Page 143.
unto Christ's words Mark. 1^.14. suffer ye little children to come unto me,
etc. for of such is the kingdom of God: they say, It is not s^yd, Infants are
of the kingdom of heaven, that is, obeyers of the Gospel, Luke 4 43* but that
they that enter into the kingdom of heaven, must become as little children, for
of such like is the kingdom of God. And, This is Christ's meaning, men must be
converted and receive the kingdom of God as a child. etc.

Ans They speak like children in understanding. 1. The people brought young
children properly unto Christ, not men converted and become like children:
Mark. 10.13. For the children the disciples rebuked the bringers: for their
rebuking Christ was much displeased, and said, Suffer the little children to
come unto me What reasonable creature will now deny that Christ speaks here
of children in years, not of old men like children. The children that were
brought, Christ took up in his arms, put his hands one them and blessed them:
may we think he took up aged persons. 2 The reason why he would have such
chil^ren suffered to come to him, is, for of such is the kingdom of God, Mark.
10.14 If he had not meant this of young children themselves, but of men like
children in some condition; there had been no weight in his words: but the
people might have brought unto him upon that ground, doves, and serpents for
Christ to lay hands upon and bless: for as godly men must in some things be
like children, 1. Cor. 14*20. so must they in some things also be like
serpents, and like doves, Math. 10.16*3* They wrest the t^xt, when they expound
f^^ of such is the kingdom of God, thus, for of such like: as if Christ meant
not the children properly, but ancienter men like such children. They might
even as well say, that when Paul writes, I beseech thee, being such a one as
Paul the aged, (Philem. v. 9 that he ^peaketh not this of himself, but of some
other man* like himself, that made request for Onesimus. But ignorant and
unstable men will pervert all scriptures to their own perdition. That infants
of the faithful are indeed of the kingdom of God, is before proved from Romans
5. and many other scriptures.

Now whereas Christ blessed the children; they tell us, he baptized them not,
which we grant: but if they which were by nature children of wrath and curse,
were now by grace made children of blessing in Christ; then were they in deed
of the kingdom of God, and such as might receive baptism the sign and seal
of blessedness.

Lastly they say, It is a blessing to infants to be created, to live, to grow
in stature, wisdom, etc. to have their sight, their limbs, etc. so that
Christ's blessings extend as well to this life as that which is to come.

Answ. All Gods benefits for this life and the next, are in deed blessings: But
Christ blessed not those children with any such worldly temporal blessings
particularly; but gave them the blessing of God in general: and men are too
presumptuous that will without due proof restreine that to some particulars
which the Lord has not restreyned. We know that our blessedness from God in
Christ, is our eternal salvation, Romans 4*6. etc. It was his l^st farewell to
his beloved disciples to lift up his hands and bless them, Luke 24.50. and it
is the sum of the Gospel, that in Abraham's seed (that is Christ) all nations
shall be blessed, Gal. 3.8. This grace Abraham's infants had, this grace Christ
gave to little children: and the same he vouchsafe to continue unto us and to
our children throughout their generations: preserving us and them from the
curse of Anabaptistrie, whereby so many errors are sparsed, scriptures
wrested, and souls perverted unto destruction.

FINIS.

