Pithy pleasant and profitable works of master Skeleton, Poet Laureate. Now
collected and newly published. ANNO 1568.

Imprinted at London in Fletestreate, near unto saint Dunstones church by
Thomas Marshe.

Salve plus decies quam sunt momenta dierum,
Quot generu^ species, quot res quot nomina reru^,
Quot prati flores, quot sunt in orb colores,
Quot Pisces, quot aues, quot sunt in equore naues,
Quot volucru^ pen, quot sunt tormenta gehe^ne,
Quot coeli stelle, quot sunt in orb puelle,
Quot sancti rome, quot sunt miracula thome,
Quot sunt virtutes, tot vobis mitto salutes.
IF sloth and tract of time, (that wears each thing away)
Should rust and canker worthy arts, Good works would soen decay.
If such as present are, For goes the people past:
Ourselus should soen in silence sleep, And loes renom at last.
No soyll nor land so rude, But some odd men can shoe:
Than should the learned pas unknown, whoes pen and skill did floe.
God sheeld our sloulth wear such, Or world so simple now:
That knowledge scaept without reward, Who sercheth virtue throw
And paints forth vice a right, And blames abues of men:
And shoes what lief desarues rebuke, And who the prays of pen.
You see how forrayn realms, Advance their Poets all:
And ours are drowned in the dust, Or flong against the wall.
In France did Marrot reign, and neighbor thear unto:
Was Petrark, marching full with dantte, Who erst did wonders do
Among the noble Greeks, Was Homere full of skill:
And where that Ovid norisht was, The soyll did flourish still.
With letters hie of style, But Uirgill wan the fraes,
And past them all for deep engyen, And made them all to gaes
Upon the books he made, Thus each of them you see
Wan praise and fame and honor had, Each one in their degree.
I pray you then my friends, Disdain not for to vewe:
The works and sugared verses fine, Of our raer poets new
Whoes barborus language rued, Perhaps ye may mislike,
But blame them not that ruedly plays If they the ball do strike.
Nor skorne not mother tunge, O babes of english breed,
I have of other language seen, And you at full may reed.
Fine verses trimly wrought, And coutcht in comely sort,
But never I nor you I troe, In sentence plain and short.
Did yet behold with eye, In any foreign tongue:
A higher verse a staetly style, That may be read or song.
Than is this day in deed, Our english verse and ryme:
The grace whereof does touch ye gods, And reatch the clouds sometime.
Through earth and waters deep, The pen by skill does pass:
And featly nyps the worlds abuse, And shoes us in a glass,
The virtue and the vice, Of eury wight a live:
The honey comb that be does make, Is not so sweet in hyue.
As are the golden leaves, That drops from poets head:
Which does surmou^t our common talk As far as dros does lead.
The flower is sifted clean, The bran is cast aside.
And so good corn is known from chafe, And each fine grain is spide.
Peers plowman was full plain, And Chausers spreet was great:
Earl Surry had a goodly vain, Lord Uaus the mark did beat.
And Phaer did hit the prick, In things he did translate:
And Edwards had a special gift, And diverse men of late.
Has helped our English tongue, That first was baes and brute
Ohe shall I leave out Skeltons name, The blossom of my fruit
The tree whereon in deed, My branchis all might groe,
Nay skeleton wore the Laurel wreath, And past in schoels ye knoe,
A poet for his art, Whoes judgment suer was hie,
And had great practies of the pen, His works they will not lie.
His terms to taunts did lean, His talk was as he wraet:
Full quick of wit, right sharp of words, And shilfull of the staet.
Of reason riep and good, And to the haetfull mind:
That did disdain his doings still, A skornar of his kind.
Most pleasant every way, As poets ought to be:
And seldom out of Princis grace, And great with each degree.
Thus have you heard at full, What Skeleton was in deed:
A further knowledge shall you have, If you his books do reed.
I have of mere good will, Theas verses written here:
To honor virtue as I ought, And make his fame apeer.
That when the Garland gay, Of laurel leaves but laet,
Small is my pain, great is his prays, That thus such honor gaet.
Finis
quod Churchyard.

Works of Skeleton newly collected by I. S. as follows.
1 The crown of laurel. 2 The bouge of court. 3 The duke of Albany 4 Speak
parrot. 5 Edward the fourth. 6 Against the Scotts 7 Ware the hawk. 8 How
every thing must have a time. 9 A prayer to the father of heaven. 10 To ye
second person. 11 To the holy ghost. 12 The tunning of Elinour Rumming. 13 The
reluce^t mirror 14 Why come ye not to court. 15 Colyn Clout. 16 Philip sparowe.
17 Of a comely Coystrowne. 18 Upon a deadma^s heed 19 To maistris Anne. 20 Of
three fools. 21 En parliament a Paris. 22 Epitaphes of two knaves of dise. 23
Lamentation for Nor wiche. 24 Against ye Scotts. 25 Praise of ye palmtre 26
Bedel quo^da^ Belial. 27 The dolorus death of the Lord Percie Earl of
Northumberlande. 28 Epitaphium Margarete countisse de Derbi. 29 Epita. Hen.
septi. 30 Eulogium pro suorum temporum. 31 A parable by William Cornishe in yt
Fleet. 32 Against venomous tongues. 33 Of Calliope.
The crown of Laurel
ARrectynge my sight toward the zodiake
The signs. xij. for to behold a far
When Mars retrograunt reuersed his back
Lord of the year in his orbicular
Put up his sword, for he could make no war
And when Lucina plenary did shine
Scorpion ascendynge degrees twyse nine
In place alone, than musing in my thought
How all thing passes, as does the somer flower
On every half my reasons forth I sought
How often fortune varyeth in an hour
Now clear wether, forth with a stormy shower
All thing compassed, no perpetuyte,
But now in welthe, now in aduersyte.
So depely drowned I was in this dumpe
Encraumpysshed so sore was my conceyte
That me to rest, I lent me to a stumpe
Of an oak, that sometime grew full streyghte
A mighty tree and of a noble heyght
whose beauty blasted was with the boysturs wind
His leaves lost, the sap was from the rynde.
Thus stood I in the frytthy forest of Galtres
Ensowked with sylt of the myry mose
Where hearts belluyng embosed with distres
Ra^on the raunge so long, that I suppose
Few men can tell where the hynde calfe gose.
F^re fall ye forster that so well can bate his hou^de
But of my purpose now turn we to the ground
Whylis I stood musing. in this meditacion
In slumbrynge I fell, and half in a sleep
And whether it were of ymaginacion
Or of humors superflue, that often will crepe
In to the brain by drynkyng over deep
Or it proceeded of fatal persuasion
I can not tell you what was the occasion
But suddenly at ones as I me aduysed
(As one in a trans or in an ecstasy)
I saw a pauylion wondersly disguised
Garnysshed fresshe after my fantasy
Enhachyde with perle and stones preciously
The ground engrosed and bet with bourne gold
That passing goodly it was to be hold
Within that a princes excellent of port
But to recounte her rich abilyment
And what estates to her did resort
Thereto am I full insuffycient
A goddess immortal she did represent
As I hard say Dame Pallas was her name
To whom supplied the royal queen of fame
The queen of Fame to dame Pallas.
PRinces most pusant of high preeminence
Renowned lady above the sterry heuyn
All other transcendynge of very congruence
Madame regent of the sciences seuyn
To whose astate all nobleness most lenen
My suppitcacion to you I arrecte
Whereof I beseech you to tender the effect.
Not unremembered it is unto your grace
How ye gave me a ryall commandment
That in my court Skeleton should have a place
Because that he his time studiously has spent
In your service: and to the accomplysshement
Of your request, regestred is his name
With laureate triumph in the court of Fame
But good madame the accustom and usage
Of ancient poets ye wot full well has been
Themself to embusy with all their hole courage
So that their works might famously be seen
In figure whereof they were the laurel grene
But how it is, Skeleton is wunder slack
And as we dare we find in him a lack
For ne were only he has your promocion
Out of my books full soon I should him raze
But sith he has tasted of the sugared pocion
Of Heliconis well: refresshed with your grace
And will not endeavor himself to purchase
The favor of ladys with words elect
It is sitting that ye must him correct.
Dame Pallas to the queen of Fame.
THe sum of your purpose, as we are aduysed
Is that our servant is some what to dull
Wherein this answer for him we have comprised
How ryuers ren not till the spring be full
Be^^er a du^me mouth than a brayneles scull
For if he gloriously publysshe his matter
Tha^ men will say how he does but flatter.
And if so him fortune to write true and plain
As sometime he must vices remorde
Than some will say he has but little brain
And how his words with reason will not accord
Beware, for writing remains of record
Displease not an hundred for one man's pleasure
Who writes wisely has a great treasure.
Also to furnysshe better his excuse
Ouide was banysshed for such a skyll,
And many mo, whom I could enduce.
Iuuenal was thret parde for to kill
For certain inuectiues: Yet wrote he none ill
Saving he rubbed some upon the gall,
It was not for him to abide the trial.
In general words I say not greatly nay
A poet sometime may for his pleasure taunt
Spekyng in parables, how the fox, the gray
The gander, the goose, and the huge oliphant
Went with the pecocke against the fesaunt
The lesarde came leaping and said that he must
With help of the ram lay all in the dust.
Yet druerse there be industriouse of reason
Some what would gadder in their coniceture
Of such an endarked chaptre some season
How be it, it were hard to construe this lecture
Soyhisticated craftily is many a confecture
An other man's mind diffuse is to expou^^e
Yet hard is to make but some fault be fou^^e.
The queen of Fame to dame Pallas
MAdame with favor of your benign suffrau^ce
Unto your grace tha^ make I this motive
Whereto made ye me him to auaunce
Unto the rowme of laureat promotyue?
Or whereto should he have the prerogative
But if he had made some memorial
Whereby he might have a name immortal?
To pass the time in sloughtfull ydelnesse
Of your royal palais it is not the gyse
But to do somewhat each man does him dress
For how should Cato else be called wise
But that his books, which he did deuyse
Record the same? Or why is had in mind
Plato, But for that he left writing behind
For men to look on? Aristotille also
Of philosophers called the principal.
Old Diogines, with other many mo
Demosthenes that orator royal
That gave Eschines such a cordial
That banisshed was he through his proposicion
Against whom he could make no contradiction.
Dame Pallas to the queen of Fame
SOft my good sister, and make there a pauses
And was Eschines rebuked as ye say?
Remember you well, point well that clause
Wherefore than rased ye not away
His name? Or why is it I you pray,
That he to your court is going and coming
Since he is sklaundred for defaute of counnynge?
The Queen of Fame to dame Pallas.
MAdame your apposelle is well inferred
And at your advantage quickly it is
Touched: and hard for to be barred
Yet shall I answer your grace as in this
With your reformacion if I say amiss
For but if your bounte did me assure
Mine argument else could not long endure
As touching that Eschines is remembered
That he so should be, me seems it sitting
All be it great part he has surrendered
Of his honor, whose dissuasyue in wryttynge
To courage Demosthenes was much excitynge
In setting out fresshely his crafty persuasion
From which Eschines had none evasion
The cause why Demosthenes so famously is bruted
Only proceeded, for that he did outray
Eschines: which was not shamefully confuted
But of that famous orator I say
Which passed all other: wherefore I may
Among my records suffer him named.
For though he were vanquished yet was he not shamed
As Hierome in his prea^ble frater Ambrosius
From that I have said in no point does vary
Wherein he reports of the coragious
Words, that were much consolatory
By Eschines rehearsed, to the great glory
Of Demosthenes, that was his utter fo
Few shall ye find or none that will do so.
Dame Pallas to the queen of Fame.
A Thank to have ye have well deserved,
your mind yt can maynteyne so appare^tly:
But a great part yet ye have reserved
Of that must follow than consequently
Or else ye demean you inordinatly
For if ye laud him, whom honor has oppressed
Than he that does worst is as good as the best.
But whom yt ye favor, I se well has a name
Be he never so little of substance
And whom ye love not, ye will put to shame
Ye counterwey not euynly your balaunce
As well folly as wisdom often ye do auaunce
For report ryseth many diverse ways
Some be much spoken of for making of frayes
Some have a name for theft and bribery
Some be called crafty, that can pyke a purse
Some men be made of for their mockery
Some careful cokolds, so^e have their wives curse
Some famous witwoldes, and they be much wurse
Some lidderons, some losels, some naughty packes
Some facers, some bracers, some make great cracks.
Some dronke^ dastards with their dry souls
Some sluggysshe slouens ye sleep day and night
Riot and Revel be in your court roules
Maintenau^ce and Mischefe these be men of might
Extorcion is counted with you for a knight
These people by me have none assignement
Yet they ride and run from Carlill to Rent.
But little or nothing ye shall here tell
Of them that have virtue by reason of counnyng
Which soueraynely in honor should excel
Men of such matters make but mummynge
For wisdom and sadness be set out a sunnyng
And such of my servants as I have promoted
One fault or other in them shall be noted
Either they will say he is to wise
Or else he can naught but when he is at scole
Prove his wit says he at cards or dyce
And ye shall well find he is a very fool
Twyshe, set him a chayer or reche him a stole
To sit him upon, and read Jack a thr u^mis bibil
For truly it were pite that he sat idyll.
The queen of Fame to dame Pallas.
TO make repugna^ce again that ye have said
Of very duty it may not well accord
but your benigu^ suffra^ce for my discharge I laid
For that I would not with you fall at discord
But yet I beseech your grace that good record
May be brought forth such as can be found
with laureat triu^phe why Skelto^ should be crou^de.
For else it were to great a derogacion
Unto your palais our noble court of Fame
That any man under supportacion
Without deserving should have the best game
If he to the ample encreace of his name
Can lay any warkes that he has compiled
I am content that he be not exiled
From the laureat senate: by force of proscripcion
Or else ye know well I can do no less
But I must bannysshe him from my jurisdiction
As he that aqueynteth him with Idelnesse
But if that he purpose to make a redress
What he has done let it be brought to sight
Grant my peticion, I ask you but right.
Dame Pallas to the queen of Fame
To your request we be well condiscended
Call forth, let se where is your clarionar
To blow a blaste with his long breath extended
Eolus your trumpet that known is so far
That bararag blows in every marciall war
Let him blow now, that we may take a vewe
What poets we have at our retynewe.
To se if Skeleton will put himself in prease
Among the thickest of all the hole route
Make noise enough, for claterars love no peace
Let se my sister, now speed you, go about
Anon I say this trumpet were found out
And for no man hardely let him spare
To blow bararag, till both his eien stare.
Skeleton poeta.
FOr the with there rose among the throng
A wonderful noise, and on every side
They presed i fast, some thought they were to long
Some were to hasty, and would no man side
Sue whispred, su^e rowned, su^e spoke, and some cride
with heuyng and shouyng, have in and have out
Some ran the next way, some ran about.
There was suynge to the queen of Fame
He plucked him back, and he went before.
Nay hold thy tu^ge quod an other let me have yt name
Make rowme said an other ye prese all to sore
Some said, hold thy peace you gettest here no more
A thousand thousand I saw on a plumpe
With that I hard the noise of a trumpe
That long time blew a full tymorous blaste
Like to the Boriall wyndes, when they blow
That towers, and towns, and trees down cast
Drove clouds to gether like dryftes of snow
The dredeful dinne drove all the route on a row
Some tre^bled, some girned, some gasped, some gased
As people half peuissh or men that were mased
Anon all was whyshte, as it were for ye nones
And each man stood gasyng and staryng upon other
With that there come in wonderly at ones
A murmur of minstrels, that such an other
Had I never seen, some softer some louder
Orpheus the Thracian harped melodiously
With Amphion, and other musis of Archady.
Whose heavenly armony was so passing sure
So truly proporcioned, and so well did gree
So duly entuned with every measure
That in the forest was none so great a tree
But that he daunced for joy of that gle
The huge mighty oaks themself did auaunce
And lepe from the hills to learn for to dance
In so much the stumpe, whereto I me lent
Sterte all at ones an hundred foot back
With that I sprange up toward the tent
Of noble dame Pallas, whereof I spoke
Where I saw came after I wot full litel lack
Of a thousand poets assembled to gether
But Phoebus was formest of all that came theder
Of laurel leaves a cronell on his heed
With hears encrisped yolowe as the gold
Lame^tynge Daphnes, whom with the darte of leed
Cupide has stryken so that she ne would
Concente to Phoebus to have his heart in hold
But for to preserve her maydenheed clean
Transformed was she into the laurel grene.
Meddled with murning yt most part of his muse
O thou gatfull heart, was ever more his song
Daphnes my derlynge why do you me refuse?
Yet look on me, that loved you have so long
Yet have compassion upon my pains strong
He sange also, how the tree as he did take
Between his arms he felt her body quake
Than he assurded into this exclamacion
Unto Diana the gods immortal
O merciles ma dame hard is your constellacion
So close to keep your cloister virginal
Enharded adyamant the sement of your wall
Alas what ayle you to be so ouerth wart
To banysshe pite out of a maidens heart?
why have the gods showed me this crueltte
Since I contryued first principles medycinable
I help all other of their infirmyte
But now to help myself I am not able
That profitteth all other is nothing profitable
Unto me, alas that herb nor gresse
The fervent axes of love can not repress.
O fatal fortune what have I offended?
Odious disdain why raist you me on this facyon?
But since I have lost now that I intended
And may not atteyne it by no mediacion
Yet in remembrance of Daphnes tra^sformation
All famous poets ensuynge after me
Shall we are a garlande of the laurel tree
This said, a great nombre followed by and by
Of poets laureat of many diverse nations
Part of their names I think to specify
First old Quintilian with his Declamations
Theocritus with his bucolicall relacions
Hesiodus the Icononucar,
And Homerus the fresshe historiar.
Prince of eloquence Tullius Cicero,
With Salust against Lutius Catiline
That wrote the history of Iugurtha also,
Ouide enshryned with the Musis nine,
But blessed Bacchus the pleasant god of wine
Of clusters engrosed with his ruddy flotes
These orators and poets refresshed their throtes.
Lucan with stacius in Achilliedos
Percius presed forth with problemes diffuse
Uirgill the mantuan with his enridos
Inuenall satirray that men makythe to muse
But blessed Bacchus the pleasant god of wine
Of clusters engrosed with his ruddy flotes
These oraters and Poets refreshed their throtes
There Titus Liuius himself did auaunce
With decadis historious which that he me^gleth
with matters yt amou^t the Romans in substance
Ennius that wrote of marciall war at length
But blessed Bacchus potenciall god of strength
Of clusters engrosed with his ruddy dropes
These orators and poets refresshed their throtes.
Aulus Gellius that noble historiar,
Orace also with his new poetry
Master Terence the famous comicar,
With Plautus that wrote many a comedy
But blessed Bacchus was in their company
Of clusters engrosed with his ruddy dropes
These orators and poets refresshed their throtes.
Senec full sobrely with his tragedies,
Boece recomforted with his philosophy,
And Marimiane with his mad dities,
How dotynge age would iape with young folly
But blessed Bacchus most reverent and holy
Of clusters engrossed with his ruddy dropes
These orators and poets refresshed their throtes.
There came John Boccas with his volu^es great
Quintus Cursius full craftily that wrate
Of Alexander: And Macrobius that did treat
Of Scipio^s dream what was the true probate
But blessed Bacchus that never man forgate
Of clusters engrosed with his ruddy dropes
These orators and poets refresshed their throtes.
Pogius also that famous florentie
Mustred there among the^ with many a mad tale
With a friar of France men call sir Gaguine
That frowned on me full angerly and pale
But blessed Bacchus, that bote is of all bale
Of clusters engrosed with his ruddy dropes
These orators and poets refresshed their throtes.
Plutarke and Patrarke two famous clerks
Lucilius and Ualerius Marimus by name
with Uince^tius in speculo yt wrote noble warkes
Propercius and Pisandros poets of noble fame
But blessed Bachus that mastrise often does frame
Of clusters engrosed with his ruddy dropes
These notable poets refresshed their throtes.
And as I thus sadly among them aduysed
I saw Gower, ye first garnished our e^glishe rude
And master Chaucer, that nobly entreprised
How ye our english might freshely be ennewed
The monk of Bury than after them ensued
Dane John^ Lydgate: these english poets three
As I ymagened repaired unto me.
To gether in arms as brethren enbrased
Their apparel far passing beyond yt I can tell
with diama^tes and rubies their taberdes were trased
None so rich stones in Turkey to sell
They wanted nothing but the Laurel.
And of their bounte they made me goodly chere
In manner and form as ye shall after here.
Master Gower to Skeleton.
BRother Skeleton your endeuorment
So have ye done, that meretoriously
Ye have deserved to have an enplement
In our collage above the sterry sky
Because that ye increase and amplify
The bruted Britons of Brutus Albion
That welnere was lost wha^ that we were gone
Poeta Skeleton to Master Gower.
Master Gower I have nothing deserved
To have So laudabyle A commendacion
To you three this honor shall be reserved
Arrectinge unto your wise examinacion
How all that I do is under Refformation
For only the Substance of that I entend
Is glad to please and loath to offend.
Master Chaucher Lawreat poet to Skeleton.
COunter waying your busy diligence
Of that we began in the supplement
Enforced are we you to recompense
Of all our holle collage by the agreement
That we shall bring you personally present
Of noble Fame before the queen's grace
In whose court poynted is your place.
Poeta Skeleton answers
O Noble Chaucer, whose pullisshed eloque^cs
Our englisshe rude so freshely has set out
That bound are we with all due reverence
with all our strength that we can bring about
To owe to you our service, and more if we mowte
But what should I say, ye wot what I entende
which glad am to please, and loath to offend.
Master Lydgate to Skeleton.
SO am I prevented of my brethren twain
In rendrynge to you thanks meretory
That welnere nothing there does remayns
wherewith to give you my regraciatory
But that I point you to be protonotory
Of Fames court, by all our holle assent
Auaunced by Pallas to laurel preferment.
Poeta Skeleton answers.
So have ye me far passing my merits extolled
Master Lydgate of your accustomable
Bounte, and so gloriously ye have enrolled
My name. I know well beyo^de that I am able
That but if my warkes thereto be agreeable
I am else rebuked of that I entend
which glad am to please and loath to offend
So Finally, wha^ they had showed their devise
Under the form as I said before
I made it strange, and drew back ones or twice
And ever they presed on me more and more
Till at the last they forced me so sore
That with them I went where they would me bri^ge
Unto the pauylion, where Pallas was syttyng.
Dame Pallas comanded ye they should me co^uay
In to the rich palace of the queen of Fame,
There shall he here what she to him will say
When he is called to answer to his name,
A cry anon forth with she made proclaim,
All orators and poets should thider go before
With all the prease that there was less and more.
Forthwith I say: thus wa^dring in my thought
How it was, or else within what hours
I can not tell you, but that I was brought
In to a palace, with turrettes and towers
Engalared goodly with halles and bowres
So curiosly, so craftly, so cou^nyngly wrought
That all the world I trow and it were sought
Such an other, there could no man find
Whereof partly I purpose to expound
Whiles it remains fresshe in my mind
with turks and grossolites enpaued was the ground
Of birral enbosed were the pyllers round
Of elephantes tethe, were the palace gates
Enlosenged with many goodly plates
Of gold entached with many a precious stone
An hundred steps mountynge to the halle
ONe of jasper, an other of whales bone,
Of diamantes poynted, was the Rokky wall.
The carpettes within and tappettes of pall
The chambres hanged with clothes of Arace
Enuauted with rubies yt v aute was of this
Thus passed we forth. walkyng unto ye pretory
Where ye postis were e^bulioned with saphirs i^dy blew
Englased glitteryng with many a clear story
Iacictes and smaragdes out of yt florth they grew.
Unto this place all poets there did sue
Wherein was set of Fame the noble queen
All other transcendyng most richely besene
Under a glorious clothe of estate
Fret all with orient perles of Garnate
Encrowned as empress of all this worldly fate
So ryally, so richely, so passyngly ornate
It was exceeding beyond the common rate
This house enuiron was a mile about
If. xii. were let in. xii. hundred stood without
Tha^ to this lady and sovereign of this palace
Of purseua^tes there presed i^ wc many diverse tale
Some were of Poyle, and some were of Thrace
Of Lymerik, of Lorei^, of Spain, of Portugale
From Napuls, from Nauern, and from Kou^ceuale
Some from Flaunders, some fro the sea cost
Some from the maine land, some fro the french host
with how does yt north, what tydi^ges i^ yt south
The west is wyndy, the Eest is metely well
It is hard to tell of every man's mouth
A slypper hold the tail is of an ele
And he halteth often that has a kyby hele
Su^e showed his safeco^duct, su^e showed his chart
Some looked full smothely, and had a falls quart.
With sir I pray you a litell tyne stand back
And let me come in to deliver my letter
An other told, how ships went to wrack
There were many words smaller and greatter
With I as good as thou, I faith and no better
Some came to tell treuthe, some came to lie.
Some came to flatter, some came to spy,
There were I say of all manner of sorts
Of dertmouth, of plymouth, of portesmouth also
The burgeis and the bayliues of the. v. ports
With now let me come, and now let me go
And all time wandered I thus. to and fro,
Till at the last these noble poets three
Anto me said lo sir now ye may se,
Of this hyghecourte the daily busynes
From you must we, but not long to tarry
Lo hither comes a goodly maistres
Occupacion, Fames regestary.
Which shall be to you a sovereign accessory
With singular pleasures to drive away y^ time
And we shall se you again or it be pryme.
Wha^ they were past, and went forth on their way
This gentilwoman, that called was by name
Occupacion, in right goodly array
Came toward me, and smyled half in game.
I saw her smyle, and than I did the same
With that on me she cast her goodly look
Under her arm me thought she had a book.
Occupation to Skeleton.
Like as the lark upon the summers day
Wha^ Tita^ radia^t burnisheth his bemes bright
Mounteth on hye, with her melodius lay
Of the son shine engladed with the light
So am I supprised with pleasure and delyght
To se this hour now, that I may say
How ye are welcome to this court of array
Of your aqueyntau^ce I was in times paste
Of studious doctrine when at the port salu
Ye first arrived, when broken was your maste
Of worldly trust, than did I you reskew
Your storm driven ship I repared new
So well entacled, what wind so ever blow
No stormy tempest your barge shall over throw
Welcome to me as hertly as heart can think,
Welcome to me with all my holle desire
And for mysake spare neither pen nor ynke
Be well assured I shall aquyte your hyre.
Your name recou^tyng beyond the land o Tire
From Sydony to the mount Olympian
From Babyll tower to the hills Caspian.
Skeleton Poeta answers.
I Thanked her much of her most noble offer
Affiaunsynge her mine hole assurance
For her pleasure to make a large profer
Empryntyng her words in my remembrance
To owe her my service with true perseueraunce
Come on with me she said, let us not stand
And with that word she took me by the hand
So passed we forth into the foresaid place.
With such co^municacion as came to our mind
And than she said, whiles we have time and space
To walk where we list, let us somewhat find
To pass the time with* but let us wast no wynd
For ydell Ianglers have but little brain
Words be swords and hard to call again
Into a field she brought me wide and large
Enwalled about with the stony flynt
Strongly enbateld much costious of charge
To walk on this wall, she bed I should not stint
Go softly she said, the stones be full glynt
She went before and bad me take good hold
I saw a thousand yates new and old
Than questioned I her what these yates meant,
Whereto she answered, and bryefly me told
How from the Est unto the Occident
And from the South unto the North so cold,
These yates she said, which that ye behold
Be issues and ports from all manner of nations
and seriously she showed me their denominacio^s
They had writing some greek, some ebrew,
Some Romayne letters as I understood
Some were old written, some were written new,
Su^e carectis of Caldy, some french was full good
But one gate specially, where as I stood
Had graven in it of Calcidony a capital. A.
What gate call ye this? and she said Anglia
The buyldyng thereof was passing commendable
Whero^ stood a lybbard crowned with gold and stones
Terrible of countinaunce, and passing formidable
As quickly touched as it were flesh and bones
As ghastly that glaris, as grimly that gronis
As fiersly frownyng as he had been fighting
And wc his form foot, he shoke forth this writi^g.
Cacosinthicon ex industria.
Formidanda nimis Iouis ultima fulmina tollis
Vnguibus ire parat loca singula liuida curuis
Quam modo per Phebes nummos raptura Celenoz
Arma, lues, luctus, fell, uis fraus barbara tellus
Mill modis erras odium tibi querere martis.
Spreto spineto cedat saliunca roseto.
Than I me lent and looked over the wall
Innumerable people presed to every gate
Shet were yt gates, they might well knock and call
And turn home again, for they came al to late
I her demanded of them and their astate
Forsothe quod she, these be haskardes and rybaudes
Dicers, carders, tumblars with gambaudes.
Fordrers of love, with baudrie a^neynted
Brayneles blynkardes that blow at the cole
False forgers of money for coynnage atteynted
Pope holy hypocrites as they were gold and hole,
Poule hatchettes yt prate well at every ale pole
Riot, reueler, rayler, brybery, theft,
With other conditions that well might be left.
Su^e feign the^self foles, and would be called wise
So^e meddling spies, by craft to grope thy mind
Some disdaynous daucockes that al men despise
False flatterers that faune the, and curres of kind
That speak fair before the, and shrewdly behind
Hither they come crowding to get them a name
But hayled they be homwarde with sorrow and shame
With that I herd gunnes rushe out at ones
Bowns, bowns, bowns, that all they out cryde
It made some limpe legged and broised their bones
Some were made pyuyshe porisshly pynke eyde
That evermore after by it they were aspyde
And one there was there, I wondered of his hap
For a gunstone I say had all to lagged his cap.
Ragged and dagged and cunnyngly cut
The blast of the brymston blew away his brain
Mased as a march hare, he ran like a scut
And sir among all me thought I saw twain
The one was a tumblar that afterward again
Of a dyssour a devil way grew a ientilman
Persprater the second that quarelles began
wc a pellet of peuishenes they had such a stroke
That al ye days of their life shall stick by their ribs
Foo, foisty baudias some smelled of ye smoke
I saw diverse yt were carried away thens i^ cribbes
Dasyng after dotrels like drunkardes yt dribbes
These titiuils wc tau^pins were touched and tapped
much mischef I hight you among the^ there happed
Sometime as it seems when the moon light
By means of a grosely endarked cloud,
Suddenly is eclipsed in the winter night
In like manner of wise, amyst did us shrowde
But well may ye think. I was nothing proud
Of that auentures, which made me sore agaste
In darkness thus dwelt we, till at the last
The clouds gone to clear, the mist was rarefied
In an herber I saw brought where I was
There birds on the brere sange on every side
With aleys ensanded about in compass
The banks enturfed with singular solas
Enrailed with rosers, and vines engraped
It was a new comfort of sorrows escaped
In the mids a cundite, yt curiously was cast
With pypes of gold, engusshyng out streams
Of cristall, the clerenes these waters far past
Enswimmyng with roches, barbils, and breames,
Whose skales ensilured again the son beams
Englisterd: that joyous it was to be hold
Than farthermore about me my sight I reuolde
Where I saw growyng a goodly laurel tree
Enuerdured with leave, continually grene,
Above in the top a bird of Araby
Men call a phoenix: her wings between
She bet up a fire with the sparks full kene
With branches and boughs of the sweet olyue
whose flagraunt flower was chief preservative. ^iua spe^osa in ^^pis.

A geynst al infections, with rancour enflamed
Against all baratous broisiours of old
It passed all bawmes that ever were named
Or gummes of Saby so derely that be sold Nota ex^elletiam ^irtutis ^^ oliua.

There blewe in that garden a soft piplyng cold
Enbrethyng of zephirus with his pleasant wind
Al fruits and flowers grew there in their kind.
Dryades there daunsed upon that goodly soil
With the nine muses Pierides by name
Phillis and Testalis there tresses with oil
Were newly enbybed: and round about the same
Grene tree of laurel, much solacious game
They made with chapplettes and garlandes grene
And formest of al Dame Flora the queen
Of somer so formally she foted the dance
There Citheus sat twinklyng upon his harpestriges
An^d Iopas his instrument did auaunce
The poemes and stories ancient in brynges
Of Athlas astrology, and many noble things
Of wandryng of the moon the course of the son
Of men and of bestes, and whereof they begone,
What thing occasioned the showers of rain
Of fire elementar in his supreme spear
And of that pole artike, which does remain
Behind the tail of vrsa so clear
Of Pliades he preched with their drowsy chere
Immoystred with mislyng and ay droppyng dry
And where the two trions a man should espy.
And of the winter days that hye them so fast
And of the winter nyghtes that fary so long
And of the somer days, so long that done lasts
And of their short nights: he brought i his so^ge
How wrong was no right, and right was no wrong.
There was cou^teryng of carols i meter and i verse
So many, that long in were to reherce.
Occupacion to Skeleton.
How say ye? is this after your appetite?
May this content you and your merry mind?
Here dwells pleasure, with lust and delight
Continual comfort here ye may find
Of welthe and solace nothing left behind
All thing couenably here is contryued
Wherewith your sprites may be reuyued.
Poeta Skeleton Answers.
QUestionles no doubt of that ye say
Jupiter himself this life might endure
This joy excedeth all worldly sport and play
Paradyse, this place is of syngular pleasure
O well were him that hereof might be sure
And here to inhabit, and aye for to dwell
But goodly maystres one thing ye me tell
Occupacion to Skeleton.
OF your demand show me the content
What it is, and where upon it stands
And if there be in it any thing meant,
Whereof the answer restyth in my hands
It shall be losed full sone out of the bands
of scrupulus doubt wherefore your mid discharge
And of your will the playnnes show at large
Poeta Skeleton answers.
I thank you goodly maistres to me most benign
That of your bounty so well have me assured
But my request is not so great a thing
That I ne force what though it be discured
I am not wounded but that I may be cured
I am not laden of lyddyrnes with lumpes
As dased doterdes that dream in their dumpes.
Occupacion to Skeleton.
Now what ye mean I trow I coniect
God give you good year ye make me to smyle
Now by your faith is not this theffect
Of your question ye make all this while
To understand who dwells in yone pile
And what blu^drer is po^der ye plays diddil diddil.
He fyndeth false mesures out of his fond fiddill
Interpolata (que industriosum postulat interpretem) satyra in uatis
aduersarium.
Tressis Agasonis species prior, altera Daui. Nota Al chimiam and septe^
metalla.

Aucupium culicis limis dum torquet ocellum.
Concipit. aligeras rapit, opetit, ^spice muscas,
Maia quoque fouet, fouet aut que Jupiter, aut que
Frigida Saturnus, Sol, Mars, Venus, Algida Luna,
Si tibi contingat uerbo aut committere scripto
Quam sibi mox tacita sudant precordia culpa?
Hinc ruit in flammas, stimulans huncurget and illum
Inuocat ad rixas, uanos tamen excitat ignes.
Labra mouens tacitus, rumpantur ut ilia Codro.
17. 4. 7. 2. 17. 5. 18.
18. 19. 1. 19. 8. 5. 12.
HIs name for to know if that ye list
Envious Rancour truly he hight
Beware of him I warn you: for if ye wist
How dangerous it were to stand in his light
ye would not deal with him thought yt ye might
For by his deuillisshe drift and graceles, provision
An holle realm he is able to set at dyuision.
For wha^ he speaks fairest tha^ thiketh he most il
Full gloriously can he gloss, thy mind for to feel
He will set men a feighting and sit himself still
And smerke like a smythy cur at sperkes of stele
He can never leave warke whiles it is well
To tell all his touches it were to great wonder
The devil of hell and he be seldom a sonder
Thus talki^g we went forth i^ at a postern gate,
Turning on the right hand, by a wynding stayre
She brought me to a goodly chamber of astate,
Where the noble countes of Surrey in a chair
Sat honorably, to whom did repair
Of ladies a Beuy. with all dew reverence
Sit down fair ladies and do your diligence
Come forth gentilwomen I pray you she said
I have contryued for you a goodly warke
And who can work best now shall be assayd
A cronell of laurel with verdures light and dark
I have devised for Skeleton my clerk
For to his service I have such regard
That of our bounty we will him reward.
For of all ladies he has the library
Their names recountyng in the court of Fame
Of all gentylwomen he has the scruteny
In F^mes court reportyng the same
For yet of women he never said shame
But if they were cou^trefettes yt women the^ call
That list of their lewdness with him for to bral.
With yt the tappettes and carpettes were laid
Whereon these ladies softely might rest
The saumpler to sow on, the laces to enbrayde
To weaue in the stole some were full pressed
with slaies, with tauels, with hedelles well dressed
The frame was brought forth wc his weaui^g pin
God give them good speed their warke to begin.
Some to enbrowder put them in prease
well gydi^g their glotto^ to keep straight their silk,
Some pyrlyng of gold their work to increase
With fingers small, and hands as white as mylk
With reche me that skayne of tewly sylke
And wind me that botoume of such an hew
Grene, red, tawney, white, purple, and blewe,
Of broken warkes wroght many a goodly thing
In castyng, in turnyng, in flourishing of flowers
With burres rowgh and buttons surffyllyng
In nedyll warke raysyng birds in bowres
With virtue enbesed all times and hours
And truly of their bounty thus were they bent
To work me this chaplet, by good aduisement.
Occupacion to Skeleton.
Behold and se in your advertisement,
How these ladies and gentylwomen all
For your pleasure do their edeuourment
And for your sake, how fast to warke they fall
To your remembrance wherefore ye must call
In goodly words pleasauntly comprised
That for them some goodly conceyte be devised.
Whith propre captacions of benevolence
Ornately pullyshed after your faculte
Since ye must needs afforce it by pretense
Of your profession unto humanite
Commensyng your process after their degree
To each of them re^dring thanks commendable
With sentence fructuous, and terms couenable
Poeta Skeleton answers.
AUansyng myself some thank to deserve
I me determined for to sharp my pen
Devoutly arrectyng my prayer to Minerue
She to vouche safe me to inform and ken
To Mercury also hertely prayed I then
Me to supporte, to help, and to assyst
To gyde and to govern my dredful trembling fist
As a mariner that amassed is in a stormy rage
Hardly be stad and driven is to hope
Of that the tempestous wind will a swage
In trust whereof comfort his heart does grope
From the anchor he cutteth the gabill rope
Commits al to god, and lets his ship ride
So I beseech Jesus now to be my gyde
To the right noble countes of Surrey.
AFter all duly ordered obeysaunce
In humble wise as lowely as I may
Unto you madame I make reconisaunce
My life enduryng I shall both write and say
Recounte, report, rehearse without delay
The passing bounty of your noble estate
Of honor and worship which has ye formar date.
Like to Argiua by just resemblaunce
The noble wife of Polimites king
Prudent Rebecca, of whom remembrance
The bible makes, with whose chaste living
Your noble demenour is counterwaynge
Whose passing bounte, and right noble estate
Of honor and worship it has the formar date.
The noble Pa^philia queen of the greeks land
Habilimentes royal found out industriously
Thamer also wrought with her goodly hand
Many diuises passing curiously
Whom ye represent and exemplify
Whose passing bounte and right noble estate,
Of honor and worship it has the formar date,
As dame Thamaris which took the king of Perse
Cyrus by name, as writes the story.
Dame Agrippina also I may rehearse
Of gentill courage the parfite memory
So shall your name endure perpetually
Whose passing bounte and right noble estate
Of honor and worship it has the formar date.
To my lady Eilabet h Howarip
To be your remembrance madame I am bound
Like to Aryna maydenly of port
Of virtue and connyng the well and perfect ground
Whom dame nature, as well I may report
Has freshely enbeautied wc many a goodly sort
Of woma^ly fetures, whose flourishing tender age
Is lusty to look on, plesaunt, demeure, and sage,
Goodly Creseid: fayrer than Polyxene
For to enuyne Pandarus appetite
Troilus I trow, if that he had you seen
In you he would have set his holle delight
Of all your beauty I suffice not to write
But as I said your florisshyng tender age
Is lusty to look on, pleasant, demure, and sage.
To my lady Myrriall hawarde.
MI little lady I may not leave behind
But to do you service needs now I must
Benign curteyse of gentill heart and mind
Whom fortune and fate plainly have discust
Long to enjoy pleasure, delight, and lust,
The enbudded blossoms of roses red of hew
With lilies white your beauty does renew.
Compare you I may to Cidippes the maid
That of Aconcius when she found the byll
In her bosom, lord how she was afraid
The ruddy shamefastnes in her vysage fill
Which manner of abassheme^t became her not ill
Right so madame the roses red of hew
With lillyes white your beuatie does renew
To my lady Anne Dakers of the sowth.
zeusis that enpictured fair Helene the queen
You to devise his craft were to seek
And if Apelles, your countenance had seen
Of porturature, which was the famous greek
He could not devise the lest point of your cheke
Princes of youth and flower of goodly port
Virtue, counnyng, solace, pleasure, comfort.
Paregall in honor unto Penolope
That for her troth is in remembrance had
Fair Dianira surmountynge in beauty
Demure Diana womanly and sad
Whose lusty lokes make heavy hearts glad
Princes of youth, and flower of goodly port
Virtue counnyng, solace, pleasure, comfort.
To maistres Margary wentworthe.
With Margerain gentill
The flower of goodly head
Enbrowdered the mantyll
Is of your maydenhede.
Plainly I can not gloss
Ye be as I deuyne
The praty primerose
The goodly columbyne.
With margerain gentill
The flower of goodly head
Enbrowdered the mantill
Is of your maiden head
Benygne, courteise, and meke,
With words well devised
In you who list to seek
Be virtues well comprysed.
With margerain gentill
The flower of goodly head
Enbrowdered the mantill
Is of your maiden head.
To maistres Margaret Tylney.
I you assure
Full well I know,
My busy cure
To you I owe
Humbly and low
Commendyng me
To your bounte.
As Machareus
Fair Canace
So I, I wys
Endeavor me
Your name to se
It be enrolde.
Written with gold
Phedra ye may
Well represent
Intentyue ay
And diligent
No time myspent
Wherefore delight
I have to write
Of Margarite
Perle orient
Lode sterre of light
Much relucent
Madame regent
I may you call
Of virtues all.
To masters Jane Blenner-Haiset.
What though my pen wax faint
And has small lust to paynt
Yet shall there no restraynt
Cause me to cease,
Among this prease,
For to increase
Your goodly name.
I will myself apply
Trust me ententyuely
You for to stellifye
And so observe
That ye ne swerve
For to deserve
Immortal fame.
Since maistres Jane Haiset
Small flowers helple to set
In my goodly chappelet
Therefore I render, of her the memory
Unto the legende of fair Leodomie.
To masters Isabell Pennell.
By saint Mary my lady
Your mammy and your dady
Brought forth a goodly baby
My maiden Isabell,
Reflarynge rosabell.
The flagraunt cammamell,
The ruddy rosary,
Tho sovereign rosemary
The praty strawbery,
The columbyne, the nepte,
The ieloffer well set,
The propre violet.
Ennewed your colowre
Is like the dasy flower,
After the Aprile shower.
Sterre of the morrow graye,
The blossom on the spraye,
The fressheste flower of May.
Maydenly demure,
Of woman head the lure,
Wherefore I make you sure,
It were an heavenly health,
It were an endelesse welthe,
A life for god himself,
To here this nyghtyngale
Among the birds small,
Warbelynge in the vale
Dug, dug, iug, iug,
Good year and good luck,
With chucke, chucke, chucke, chucke.
To maisties Margaret Hussy.
Mirry Margaret
As midsomer flower
Gentle as faucoun
Or hawk of the tower
With solace and gladness
Much mirth and no madness
All good and no badnes
So ioyously
So maydenly
So womanly
Her demenynge
In every thing
Far, far passing
That I can endite
Or suffice to write
Of mirry Margarete
As mydsomer flower
Gentill as faucoun
Or hawk of the tower
As pacient and as still
And as full of good will
As fair Isiphill
Coliander
Sweet pomaunder
Oood Cassander
Stefast of thought
well made, well wroght
Far may be sought
Erst that ye can find
So curteise so kind
As mirry Margare^te
this midsomer flower
Gentle as faucoun
Or hawk of ye tower.
To maistres Geretrude Statham.
Though ye were hard hearted
And I with you thwarted
With words that smarted,
Yet now doutles, ye give me cause
To write of you this goodly clause
Maistres Geretrude
With wowan head endude
With virtue well renude.
I will that ye shall be
In all benignite, Like to dame Pasiphe.
For now doutlesse, ye give me cause
To write of you this goodly clause
Maistres Geretrude
With woman head endude,
With virtue well renude.
Partly by your counsel.
Garnysshed with laurel.
Was my fresshe coronell.
Wherefore doutles
Ye give me cause
To write of you this goodly clause
Maistres Geretrude
With womanhede endude
With virtue well renude.
To maistres Isabe^ll Knight
BUt if I should aquite your kyndnes
Else say ye might
That in me were great blyndnes
I for to be so myndles
And could not write
Of Isabell knight
It is not my custom nor my gyse
To leave behind
Her, that is both womanly and wise
And specially which glad was to deuyse
The means to find
To please my mind.
In helping to warke my laurel grene,
With sylke and gold
Galathea the maid well besene.
Was never half so fair as I wene
Which was extolde, A thousand fold
By Maro the Mantuan prudent
Who list to read,
But and I had leyser competent
I could show you such a president
In very deed, How ye excede.
Occupacion to Skeleton.
Withdraw your hand, the time passes fast
Set on your heed this laurel which is wrought
Here you not Eolus. for you blows a blaste
I dare well say, that ye and I be sought.
Make no delay, for now ye must be brought
Before my ladys grace, the queen of Fame,
Where ye must brefely answer to your name.
Skeleton Poeta.
CAstyng my sight the chamber about
To se how duly, each thing in order was
Toward the door as we were coming out
I saw master Newton sit with his compass
His plummet, his pensell, his spectacles of glass
Deuysynge in picture by his industrious wit
Of my laurel the process every whitte.
Forth with upon this as it were in a thought
Gower, Chawcer, Lydgate these three
Before remembered, me courteisely brought
Into that place, where as they left me
Where all the said poets sat in their degree
But when they saw my laurel richely wrought
All other beside were countrefet they thought.
In comparison of that which I ware
Some preysed the perle, some the stones bright
Well was him that thereupon might stare
Of this warke they had so great delyght
The sylke, the gold, the flowers fresh to sight,
They said my laurel was the goodlyest
That ever they saw, and wrought it was the best,
In her estate there sat the noble queen
Of Fame, perceyuyng how that I was cum
She wondered me thought at my laurel grene
She looked hautely, and gave on me a glum
There was among them no word tha^ but mum
For each man herkened what she would to me say
Whereof in substance I brought this away.
The queen of Fame to Skeleton.
MY friend since ye are before us here present,
To answer unto this noble audience
Of that shall be reasoned ye must be content
And for as much as by the hye pretense
That ye have now by the preeminence
Of laureat triu^phe, your place is here reserved
We will understand how ye have it deserved.
Skeleton poeta to the queen of Fame.
Right high and mighty princes of astate
In famous glory all other transcendyng
Of your bounte the customable rate
Has been full often, and yet is attendyng
To all that to reason is condiscendyng
But if hasty crede^ce by maintenance of might
Fortune to stand between you and the light.
But such evidence I think for to enduce,
And so largely to lay for mine indempnyte
That I trust to make mine excuse
Of what charge so ever ye lay against me
For of my books, part ye shall se
Which in your records I know well be enrolde
And so occupacion your Regester me told.
Forth with she comanded I should take my place
Caliope pointed me where I should sit
With that. Occupacion preased in a pace
Be mirry she said, be not a ferde a whit
Your discharge here under mine arm is it
So than commanded she was upon this
To show her book: and she said here it is.
The queen of Fame to Occupacion.
Your book of remembrance we will now yt ye read
If any records in nombre can be found
What Skeleton has co^piled and written in deed
Rehersynge by order, and what is the ground
Let se now for him, how ye can expound
For i^ our court ye wot well his name ca^ not rise
But if he write oftenner than ones or twyse.
Skeleton Poeta.
With that of ye book losende were the claspes
The marge^t was illumined al with golden railes
And bice enpictured, with grassoppes and waspes.
With butterflies, and fresh pecocke tails.
Enflored with flowers and slymy snayles,
Enuiued pictures well touched and quickly
It would have made a man hole yt had be right sikly
To behold, how it was garnisshed and bound,
Encouerde over with gold of tissue fine
The clapses and bullio^s were worth a. M. pound
with balassis and carbu^cles ye borders did shine
With aurum musicum every other line
Was written: and so she did her speed
Occupacion immediately to read.
Occupacion reads and expounds some part of Skelto^s books and balades with
dities of pleasure: In asmoche as it were to long a process to reherce by name,
that he has compiled. etc.

OF your orator and poet laureate
Of England, his warkes here they begyne
In primis the book of Honorouse astate
Item the book how men should fle sin
Item royal demenaunce, worship to win
Item the book to speak well or be still.
Item to learn you, to dye when ye will.
Of virtue also, the sovereign interlude
The book of the rostar, prince Arthuris creacion
the false faith yt now goth which daily is renude
Item his dialogues of ymaginacion
Item Antomedon of loves meditacion
Item new grammar in english compilled
Ite^ Bouge of court, where dread was begylled
His comedy, Achademios called by name
Of Tullis familiars the translacion
Ite^ good aduisement that braineles does blame
The recule against Gaguine of the french nation
Item the Popingay, that has in commendacio^
Ladies and gentilwomen such as deserved
And such as be countrefettes they be reserved.
And of soueraintie a noble pamphelet.
And of magnificence a notable matter
How countrefet countenance of the new get
With crafty conueyaunce does smater and flater
And cloked collusion is brought in to clater
with courtly abusio^ who pri^teth it well in mind
Much doublenes of ye world therein he may find.
Of manerly maistres Margery milk and ale
To her he wrote many matters of mirth
Yet though I say it, thereby lies a tale
For Margery wynsed and brake her hinder gyrth
Lord how she made much of her gentill birth
wc gi^gerly go gingerly her tail was made of hay
Go she never so gingerly her honesty is gone away.
Hard to make ought of that is naked naught
This fustian maistres and this giggisshe gase
Wonder is to write what wre^ches she wrought
To face out her folly with a mydsomer mase
with pitche she patched her pitcher should not crase
It may well ryme but shrewdly it does accord
To pyke out honesty of such a potshorde.
Patet per uersus.
Hinc puer hinc natus? uir coniugis hinc spollatus
Iure thori? est? fetus deli, de sanguine cretus.
Hinc magis extollo, quod erit puer alter Apollo.
Si queris qualis? meretrix castissima talis.
Et relis and ralis, and reliqualis
A good herynge of these old talis
Find no mo such from wanflete to walis
Et reliqua. ome lia de diuersis tactatibus.
OF my ladis grace at the contemplacion
Out of french into englisshe prose
Of man's life the peregrinacion
He did translate: interpret, and disclose
The treatise of triumphs of the red rose
Wherein many stories are brefely contained
That unremembered long time remained.
The duke of Yorkes creau^cer wha^ Skelto^ was
Now Henry the. viij. king of England
A treatise he devised, and brought it to pas
Galled Speculum principis, to bear in his hand
Therein to read, and to understand
All the demenour of princely astate
To be our king of god preordinate.
Also the tunnyng of Eiinor Rummyng
With Colin clout, John yue, with Ioforth Jack
To make such trifels it asks some counnyng
In honest mirth parde requires no lack
The white appears the better for the black
And after conueyaunce as the world gose
It is no folly to use the walshemannes hose.
The vmbles of venison, the botels of wine
To fair maistres Anne, that should have be sent
He wrote thereof many a praty line
Where it became, and whither it went
And how that it was wantonly spent.
The balade also of the mustarde tarte
Such problemes to paint it longs to his art.
Of one Adam all a knave late dead and gone
Dormiat in pace like a dormous
He wrote an epitaph for his grave stone
With words devout and sentence Egerdous
For he was ever against gods house
All his delight was to braule and to bark
Again holy church, the pressed, and the clarke.
Of Philip sparowe the lamentable fate
The doleful desteny, and the careful chance
Devised by Skeleton after the funeral rate
Yet some there be there with that take greuau^ce
And grugge thereat with frowning cou^tenau^ce
But what of that? hard it is to please all men
Who list amend it, let him set to his pen.
For the gyse now adays,
Of some iangelynge da Iayes
Is to discommende
That they can not amend
Though they would spend
All the wits they have
What ayle them to deprave
Philippe sparowes grave
His dirige, her commendacion
Can be no derogacion
But myrthe and consolacion
Made by protestacion
No man to myscontent
With Philippis enterement
Alas that goodly maid
Why should she be afraid?
Why should she take shame,
That her goodly name
Honorably reported,
Should be set and sorted
To be matriculate, with ladies of astate?
I conjure the Philip sparowe
By Hercules that hell did harowe
And with a venomous arowe
Slew of the Epidaures
One of the Centaures
Or Onocentaurus,
Or Hippocentaurus
By whose might and main
An heart was slain with horns twain
Of glitteryng gold,
And the apples of gold
Of Hesperides with hold
And with a dragon kept
That never more slepte
By marciall strength,
He wan at length.
And slew Gerione,
With three bodies in one
With mighty courage,
Adaunted the rage
Of a lion savage.
Of Diomedis stabyll,
He brought out a rabill
Of coursers and rounses
With leapes and bounses
And with mighty luggynge
Wrastelynge and tuggynge,
He plucked the bull,
By the horned scul
And offered to Cornucopia,
And so forth per cetera
Also by Hecates bower
In Plutos ghastly tower.
By the ugly Eumenides,
That never have rest nor ease
By the venomous serpent,
That in hell is never brent.
In Lerua the greeks fen
That was engendered then
By Chemeras flames,
And all the deedly names,
Of infernal posty
Where souls frye and rosty.
By the stygial flode,
And the stremes wode
Of Cocytus botomlesse well.
By the feryman of hell
Caron with his berde hoar
That roweth with a rude ore,
And with his frounsed fore top
Gydeth his bote with a proppe.
I conjure Philippe and call
In the name of king Saul.
Primo regum expres,
He bad the Phitones
To wytche craft her to dres,
And by her abusions,
And damnable illusions,
Of merueylous conclusions,
And by her supersticions,
And wonderful conditions,
She raised up in that stead
Samuel, that was deed.
But wheder it were so,
He were idem innumero
The self same Samuel,
How be it to Saul he did tell
The Philistinis should him askrye
And the next day he should dye,
I will myself discharge
To lettred men at large.
But Philip I conjure the
Now by these names three
Diana in the woddes grene,
Luna that so bright does shene,
Proserpina in hell,
That thou shortly tell
And show now unto me,
What the cause may be,
Of this perplexite,
Inferias Philippe tuas Scroupe pulchra Ioanna
Instanter peciit, cur nostri carmints illam
Nunc pudet, est sero, minor est infamia Vero
Than such as have disdayned,
And of this work complained,
I pray god they by payned
No worse than is contained
In verses two or three,
That follow as ye may se*
Luride cur liuor Volucris pia funera damnas
Talia te rapiant, ^apiunt quae fata Volucrem,
Est tamen inuidia mors tibi continua.
The grou^ting and ye groining of ye groaning swyne
Also the Mournyng of the mapely rote
How the grene couerlet suffered great pyne.
When the fly net was set for to catch a cote
Struck one with a byrdbolt to the heart rote
Also a devout prayer to Moses horns
Metrified merrily, meddled with scorns.
Of paiantes that were played in joyous guard
He wrate of a mows through a mud wall
How a do came trippyng in at the rere ward
But lord how the parker was wroth with all
And of castle Angel the fenestrall
Glittryng and glistryng and gloriously glased
It made some men's eyes dasyld and dased.
The repete of the recule of Rosamu^des bower
Of his pleasant pain there and his glad destres
In plantyng and plucking a propre ieloffer flower
But how it was, some were to recheles
Not withstandyng it is remedeles
What might she say? what might he do thereto?
Though Jack said nay: yet mok there lost her sho.
How than like a man he wan the Barbican
With a saute of solace at the long last
The color deedly, swart, blo, and wan
Of Ereone her lamb is deed and past
The cheke and the neck but a short cast
In fortunes favor ever to endure
No man living he says can be sure.
How da^e Minerua first found you olive tree, she red
and planted yet where never before was no^e, vnshred
An hynde unhurt it by casuelte, not bled
Recouerd when the forster was gone, and sped
The hearts of the herd began for to groan, and fled
The houndis began to yerne and to quest: and dred
With little business stands much rest. in bed.
His epitomis of the myller and his ioly make
How herble was bright as blossom on the spray
A wanton wenche and well could bake a cake
The myllar was loath to be out of the way
But yet for all that be as be may
Whether he rode to Swassham^ or to Some
The myllar durst not leave his wife at home
With woefully arayd and shamefully betrayde
Of his making devout medytacions
Vexilla regis he devised to be desplayde,
With Sacris solempnus, and other contemplacious
That in them comprised consideracions
Thus passes he the time both night and day
Sometime with sadness, sometime with play
Though Galene and Dioscorides
With Hipocrates, and master Auicen
By their phisike done many a man ease
And though Albumasar can the inform and ken
What constellacions ar good or bad for men:
Yet when the rain raineth and ye gose winketh
Litell wotteth ye gosling what the gose thinks
He is not wise again the stream yt strives
Dun is in the mire, dame reche me my spur
Needs must he ren that the devil dryueth
When the stead is stolen sparre the stable dur
A gentle hounde should never play the kur
It is soon aspyed where the thorn pricketh
And well woteth the cat whose berde she licketh
With Marione clarione sol lucerne
Grande iuir, of this french proverb old
How men were wont for to discern
By candelmas day, what wether should hold
But Marione clario^e was caught wc a cold
And all ouercast with clouds unkind
This goodly flower with storms was vntwi^de
This ieloffer ge^till, this rose, this lylly flower,
This prime rose pereles, this propre violet,
This delicate dasy, this straubery prately set,
This columbyne clear and fresshest of color
With froward frostis alas was all to fret
But who may have more ungracious life
Than a childs bird and a knaves wife?
Think what ye will
Of this wanton byll.
By Mary Gipcie
Quod scripsi scripst
Vxor tua sicut Vitis
Habetis in custodiam
Custodite sicut scitis.
Secundum Lucam. etc.
Of ye bone homs of Asshrige beside Barca^stede
That goodly place to Skeleton most kind,
where the sange royal is, Christis blood so read
whereupon he metrified after his mind.
A plesa^ter place tha^ Ashrige is, hard were to fi^de
As Skelto^ reherseth with words few and plain
In his Distichon, made on verses twain.
Fraximus in cliuo frondetqne Viret sine riuo.
Non est fub diuo similis sieve flumini uiuo
The Nation of foles he left not behind,
Item Apollo that whirled up his chare,
That made some to snurre and snufe in ye wind
It made them to skip, to stamp, and to stare,
which (if they be happy) have cause to beware
In rymynge and raylynge with him for to mell
For dread yt he learn them their. A. B. C. to spell
Poeta Skeleton
with that I stood up, half suddenly afraid
Supplieng to Fame, I besought her grace
And that it would please her full te^derly I prayed
Out of her books Appollo to raze.
Nay sir she said, what so in this place
Of our noble court is ones spoken out
It must needs after ren all the world about.
God wot these words made me full sad
And when that I saw it would no better be
But that my peticion would not be had,
What should I do, but take it in gre?
For by Jupiter and his high majesty,
I did what I could to scarpe out the scrolles
Apollo to raze out of her ragman rolls.
Now here of it erketh me longer to write,
To Occupacion, I will again resort
which read on still, as it came to her sight
Rendrynge my devises I made in disporte
Of the maiden of Rent called comfort
Of lovers testamentes and of their wanton willis
And how Iollas loved goodly Phillis.
Diodorus Siculus of my translation
Out of fresshe latin into our english plain
Recou^tyng co^modites of many a strange nation
who redeth it ones would read it again
Six volumes engrosed together it does co^tayne.
But when of the laurel she made rehersall
Al orators and poets with other great and small
A thousand thousand I trow to my dome
Triumpha triumpha they cried all about
Of tru^pettes and clario^s the noise went to Rome
The sterry heaven me thought shoke with yt shout
The ground groned and tre^bled ye noise was so stout
The queen of Fame commanded, shet fast y^ book
And therewith sodaynely out of my sleep I woke
My mi^de of the great din was somdele amassed
I wyped mine eyes for to make them clear
Than to the heaven sphericall upward I gased
where I saw Ianus with his double chere
Making his almanak for the new year
He turned his tirickes his voluell ran fast
Good luck this new year the old year is past.
Men's tibi sit consulta petis? sic consule menti,
Emula sis Iani, retro speculetur et ante.
Skeltonis alloquitur librum suum.
Ite Britannorum lux o radiosa Britannum
Carmina nostra pium Vestrum celebrate Catullum
Dicite Skeltonis Vester Adonis erat.
Dicite Skeltonis Vester Homerus erat.
Barbara cum lacio pariter iam currite Versu.
Et licet est Verbo pars maxima texta Britanno,
Non magis incompta nostra Thalia patet:
Est magis inculta nec mea Caliope.
Nec uos poenite at liuoris tela subire.
Nec uos poeniteat rabiem tolerare caninam,
Nam Maro dissmiles non tulit ille minas,
Immunis necenim musa Nasonis erat.
Lenuoy.
Go litell quaire
Demean you fair
Take no despair
Though I you wrate
After this rate
In englisshe letter
So much the better
welcome shall ye
To some men be
For latin warkes
Be good for clerks
Yet now and then
Some latin men
May happily look
Upon your book
And so proceed
In you to read
That so in deed
your fame may sprede
In length and bread
But that I dread
you shall have need
you for to speed
To harnes bright
By force of might
Against envy
And obloquy
And wot ye why
Not for to fight
Against dispyght
Nor to derayne
Battle again
Scornful disdain
Nor for to chyde
Nor for to hyde
You cowardly
But courteisly
That I have pende
For to defend
Under the banner
Of all good manner
Under protection
Of sad correction
with toleration
And support acion
Of reformacion
If they can spy
Circumspectly
Any word defaced
That might be rased
Else ye shall pray
Them that ye may
Continue still
with their good will.
Adserenissimam maiestatem regiam, pariter cu^ du^o Cardinalilegato a latere
honorisicatissimo* etc.
Lautre enuoy.
Perge Uber, celebrem pronus regem Veneraro
Henricum octauum, resonans sua premia laudis.
Cardineum dominum pariter Venerando salutes,
Legatum a latere and fiat memor ipse precare,
Prebende, quam promiset mihi credere quondam.
Meque suum referas pignus sperare salutis
Inter spemque metum.
Twene hope and dread
My life I led
But of my speed
Small sekernes.
How be it I read
Both word and deed
Should be agrede
In noblenes.
Or else. etc.
The Prolgue to the Bouge Of Court.
IN Autumpne when the son in vyrgyne
By radyante hete enryped has our corn
When luna full of mutabylyte
As Emperes the dyademe has worn
Of our pole artyke, smiling half in scorn
At our folly, and our unsteadfastness
The time when Mars to war him did dres,
I calling to mind the great auctoryte
Of poets old, which full craftily
Under as couerte terms as could be
Can touch a troth, and cloak subtylly
With fresshe vtteraunce full sentencyously
Diverse in style some spared not vice to write
Some of mortality nobly did endyte
Whereby I read, their renome and their fame
May never dye, but evermore endure
I was sore moved to a forse the same
But Ignorance full soon did me dyscure
And showed that in this art I was not sure
For to Illumine she said I was to dulle
Aduysynge me my pen away to pulle
And not to write, for he so will atteyne
Excedyng ferther than his conning is
His heed may be hard, but feeble is brain
Yet have I known such er this
But of reproach surely he may not mys
That clymmeth hyer than he may fotinge have
What and he slide down, who shall him save?
Thus up and down my mind was drawn and cast
That I ne wyste what to do waa best
So sore enwered that I was at the last
Enforsed to sleep, and for to take some rest
And to lie down as soon as I my dreste
At har wyche port slumbrynge as I lay
In mine hosts house called powers keye
Me thought I saw, a ship goodly of sail
Come saylyng forth in to that haven brood
Her takelyng rich and of hye apparayle
She kast an anchor and there she lay at rode
Merchants her borded to se what she had
There in they found Royal marchaundyse
Fraghted with pleasure of what ye could devise
But than I thought I would not dwell behind
Amange all other I put myself in prece
Than there could I none aquentaunce find
There was much noise anon one cried cese
Sharply co^mau^dynge each man hold his piece
Masters he said, the ship that ye here se
The bowge of court it hyghte for certeynte.
The owner thereof is lady of estate
Whoos name to tell is dame saunce pere
Her marchaundyse is rich and fortunate
But who will have it must pay therefore dear
This royal chaffre that is shypped here
Is called favor to stand in her good grace
Than should ye se there pressynge in a pace.
Of one and other that would this lady se
Which sat behind a tranes of sylke fine
Of gold of tessew the fynest that might be
In a trone which far clear did shine
Than Phoebus in his spear celestyne
Whoos beauty bonoure goodly port
I have to little conning to report
But of each thing there as I took head
Among all other was written in her trone
In gold leters this word which I did read
Guard le fortune que est mauelz et bone
And as I stood redyng this verse myself alone
Her chyef gentylwoman danger by her name
Gave me ataunte and said I was to blame.
To be so perte to prese so proudely up
She said she trowed that I had eten sause
She asked if ever I drank of sauces cup
And I than softely answered to that clause
That so to say, I had given her no cause
Than asked she me Sir so god the speed
What is thy name? and I said it was dread
What moved the quod she hydder to come
Forsooth quod I to bye some of your ware
And with that word on me she gave a glome
With brows bente and began on me to stare
Full daynously and fro me she did fare
Leuynge me stondynge as a mased man
To whom there came an other gentilwoman.
Desire her name was and so she me fold
Saying to me brother be of good chere
Abasshe you not but hardely be bold
Auaunce yourselfe to aproche and come nere
What though our chaffer be never so dear
Yet I auyse you to speak for any dread
Who spares to speak, in faith he spares to sped
Maistres quod I, I have none aquentaunce
That will for me be medyatoure and mean
But this an other I have but small substance
Peace quod Desire ye speak not worth a been
If ye have not in faith I will you lene
A precious Jewel no rycher in this land
Bone adventure have here now in your hand.
Shyfte now therewith let se as ye can
In Bowge of court cheuysaunce to make
For I dare say that there nys erthly man
But and he can bone adventure take
There can no favor nor fre^dshyp him forsake
Bone adventure may bring you in such case
That ye shall stand in favor and in grace.
But of one thing I warn you er I goo
She that styreth the ship make her your friend
Maystres quod I, I pray you tell me why so
And how I may that way and means find
Forsooth quod she how ever blow the wind
Fortune gydeth and rules all our ship
Whom she hates shall over ye ship board skyp.
Whom she loves of all pleasure is rich
Whiles she laugheth and has lust for to play
Whom she hates she casts in the dyche
For wha^ she frou^eth she thinks to make a fray
She cherysshed him and him she chasseth away
Alas quod I how might I have her sure
In faith quod she by bone adventure.
Thus in a row of merchants a great route
Sued to fortune that she would be their frynde
They thronge in fast and flocked her about
And I with them prayed her to have in mind
She promised to us all she would be kind
of bowge of court she asks what we would have
And we asked favor, and favor she us gave
Thus ends the Prologue.
Dread.
THe sail is up fortune rules our helm
We want no wind to pass now over all
Favor we have tougher then any elm
That will abide and never from us fall
But under honey often time lies bitter gall
For as me thought in our ship I did se
Full subtell persons in nombre four and three
The first was fauell full of flaterie
With fables false that well could feign a tale
The second was Suspecte which that daily
Mysdempte each man with face deedly and pale
And Haruy haster that well could pick a male
With other four of their affynyte
Dysdayne. Ryotte. Dyssymuler, Subtylte.
Fortune their friend with whom often she did dau^ce
They could not fail they thought they were so sure
And oftentimes I would myself auaunce
With them to make solace and pleasure
But my dysporte they could not well endure
They said they hated for to dele with Dread
Than Fauell began with fair speech me to sede
Fauell,
Nothing erthly that I wonder so sore
As of your conninge that is so excellent
Deynte to have with us such one in store
So virtuously that has his days spente
Fortune to you gifts of grace has lent
Lo what it is a man to have conninge
All erthly tresoure it is surmountinge
Ye be an apt man as any can be found
To dwell with us and serve my ladies grace
Ye be to her yea worth a thousand pound
I herd her speak of you within short space
when there were diverse yt sore did you manace
And though I say it, I was myself your friend
For here be diverse to you that be unkind
But this one thing ye may be sure of me
For by that lord that bought dear all mankind
I cannot flatter I must be plain to the
And ye need ought man show to me your mind
For ye have me whom faithful ye shall find
Whiles I have ought by god you shalt not lack
And if need be, a bold word I dare crack
Nay nay be sure whiles I am on your side
Ye may not fall trust me ye may not fail
Ye stand in favor and fortune is your gyde
And as she will so shall our great ship sail
These lewd cok wits shall neuermore prevail
Against you hardely therefore be not afraid
Fare well till soon but no word that I said
Dread.
Than thanked I him for his great gentylnes
But as me thought he ware on him a cloak
That lyned was with doubtful doublenes
Me thought of words that he had full a poke
His stomach stuffed often times did reboke
Suspycyon me thought met him at a brayde
And I drew nere to herke what they two said
In faith quoth suspecte, spoke dread no word of me
Why what than will thou let men to speak
He says he can not well accord with the
Twysshe^ quoth suspecte go^ play him I ne reke
By christ quoth fauell dread is soleyne freke
What let us hold him up man for a while
Ye so quoth suspecte, he may us both begyle
And when he came walkinge soberly
With whom, and, ha, and with a crooked look
Me thought his heed was full of gelousy
His eyes rollynge his hondes fast they quoke
And to me ward the strayghte way he took
God sped brother to me quod he than
And thus to talk with me he began,
Suspicion
Ye remember the gentylman right now
That command with you me thought a party spoke
Beware of him for I make god auowe
He will begyle you and speak fair to your face
Ye never dwelte in such an other place
For here is none that dare well other trust
But I would tell you athinge and I durst
Speak he a faith no wordeto you of me
I wot and he did ye would me tell
I have a favor to you whereof it be
That I must show you much of my cou^selle
But I wonder what the devil of hell
He said of me when he with you did talk
By mine advise use not with him to walk
The soueraynst thing that any man may have
Is litill to say, and much to here and se
For but I trusted you so god me save
I would nothing so plain be
To you only me think I durst shryue me
For now am I plenarely dysposed
To show you things that may not be disclosed
Dread,
Than I assured him my fydelyte
His counseyle secret never to dyscure
If he could find in heart to trust me
Else I prayed him with all my besy cure
To keep it himself for than he might be sure
That no man erthly could him bewreye
Whiles of his mind it were lockte with yt keye
By god quod he this and thus it is
And of his mind he showed me al and some
Far well quod he we will talk more of this
So he departed there he would be come
I dare not speak I promised to be dome
But as I stood musinge in my mind
Haruy haster came lepinge light as linde,
Upon his breast he bare a versinge box
His throat was clear and lustely could feign
Me thought his gown was all furred with fox
And ever he sange, sith I am nothing plain
To keep him from pikinge it was a great pain
He gased on me with his gotishe berde
When I looked on him me purse was halfaferde
Heruy Haster
Sir god you save why look ye so sad
What thing is that I may do for you
A wonder thing that ye wax not mad
For and I study should, as ye do now
My wit would waste I make god auowe
Tell me your mind me think ye make a verse
I could it skan and ye would rehearse
But to the point shortelie to proceed
Where has your dwelling ben er ye came here
For as I trow I have seen you in deed
Er this when that ye made me royal chere
Hold up the helm look up and let god stere
I would be merry what wind that ever blow
Heue and how rombelow row yt bote norma^ row
Princes of youghtecan ye singe by rote
Or shall I sail with you a feloship assaie
For on the book I can not singe a note
Would to god it would please you some day
A ballade book before me for to lay
And learn me to singe (Re mi fa sol)
And when I fail bobbe me on the noll
Loo what is to you a pleasure great
To have that coninge and ways that ye have
By gods soul I wonder how ye get
So great pleasure or who to you it gave
Sir pardone me I am an homely knave
To be with you thus perte and thus bold
But ye be welcome to our houssholde
And I dare say there is no man here Inn
But would be glade of your company
I wiste never man that so soon could win
The favor that ye have with my lady
I pray to god that it may never die
It is your fortune for to have that grace
As I be saved it is a wonder case
For as for me I served here many a day
And yet uneath I can have my living
But I require you no word that I say
For and I know any erthly thing
That is again you ye shall have wetynge
And ye be welcome sir so god me save
I hope here after a friend of you to have
Dread.
With that as he departed so from
Anon there met with him as me thought
A man, but wonderly besene was he
He looked hawtie he set each man at nouhte
His gaudy garment with scorns was all wrought
With Indygnacion lyned was his hode
He frowned as he would swear by cocks blood.
He bote the lyppe he looked passing coye
His face was belymmed as byes had him stou^ge
It was no time with him to Iape nor toye
Envy has wasted his liver and his lounge
Hatred by the heart so had him wrounge
That he looked pale as ashes to my syghte
Dysdayne I wene his comerous crabes hyghte
To heruy haster than he spoke of me
And I drew nere to hark what they two said
Now quod Dysdayne as I shall saved be
I have great scorn and am right evil apayed
Than quod Heruy why art thou so dysmayde
By christ quod he for it is shame to say
To se Johan dawes that came but yester day
How he is now taken in conceyte
This doctor dawcocke Dread I wene he hight
By gods bones but if we have some sleyte
It is like he will stand in your light
By god quod heruy and it so happen might
Let us therefore shortly at a word
Find some mean to cast him over the board
By him yt me bought than quod Dysdayne
I wonder sore he is in such conceit
Turde quoth Haster I will the nothing said
There must for him be laid some pretty beyte
We tweyne I trow be not without dysceyte
First pycke a quarrel and fall out with him then
And so out face him with a card of ten,
Forth with he made on me a proud assawte
With scorfull look meuyd all in mood
He went about to take me in a fawte
He frou^de he stared he stampped where he stood
I looked on him I wend he had be wood
He set the arm proudly under the side
And in this wise he began with me to chyde
Dysdayne
Remembrest thou what thou said yester night
Will thou abide by the words again
By god I have of the now great dispite
I shall the anger ones in every vain
It is great scorn to se such an haine
As thou art one that came but yesterdaie
With us old servants such masters to play
I tell the I am of countenance
What wenest I were, I trow you know not me,
By gods wounds but for displesaunce
Of my querell soon would I venged be
But no force I shall ones mete with the
Come when it will oppose the I shall
What some ever adventure thereof fall
Trowest thou dreuill I say thou gawdie knave
That I have deinte to se the cherisshed thus
By goddis side my sword thy berde shall shave
well ones thou shalt be cherined I wus
Naie straw for tales thou shall not rule us
we be thy betters and so thou shalt us take
Or we shall the out of thy clothes shake
Dread,
With that came Ryotte rushing al at ones
A rustie galande to ragged and to rent
And on the board he whirled a pair of bones
Quarter treye dews he clattered as he went
Noue have at all by saint thomas of kente
And ever he threw and kyst I wot nere what
His here was grown through out his hat
Than I behylde how he dysgysed was
His heed was heavy for watchinge over night
His eyeu blered his face shone like a glass
His gown so short that it ne cover might
His rumpe he went so all for somer light
His hose was guarded with a list of grene
Yet at the knee they were broken I wene
His cote was checkerd with patches read and blewe
Of kyrkeby kendall was his short demye
And ay he sange in faith decon thou crewe
His elbowe bare he ware his gere so nigh
His nose droppinge, his lips were full dry
And by his side his whynarde and his pouche
The devil might dance therein for any crouche
Counter he could (O lux) upon a pot
And eestriche fedder of a capons tail
He set up frasshely upon his hat a lofte
What revel route quod he and began to rail
How often he hit Ienet on the tail
Of felyce fetewse and little pretty cate
How often he knocked at her klycket gate
What should I tell more of his rybaudrye
I was a shamed so to here him prate
He had no pleasure but in harlotrye
Ay quod he in the deuylles date
What art thou I saw the now but late
Forsooth quod I in this court I dwell now
Welcome quod Ryote I make god auowe
Ryoct
And sir in faith why comste not us among
To make the merry as other fellows done
Thou must swear and stare man aldaye long
And wake all night and sleep till it be none
Thou may not study or muse on the moon
This world is nothing but ete drink and sleep
And thus with us good company to keep
Pluck up thine heart upon a merry pin
And let us laugh a pluck or twain at nale
What the devil man mirth is here within
What lo man se here of dyce a bale
A brydelynge cast for that is in thy male
Now have at all that lies upon the burde
Fie on this dyce they be not worth a turde
Have at the hasarde or at the dosen brown
Or else I pas a penny to a pound.
Now would to god thou would leye money down
Lord how that I would cast it full round
Ay in mp pouche a buckell I have found
The arms of calyce I have no coin nor cross
I am not happy I run ay on the loss
Now run must I to the stews side
To wete if malkyn my le^man have get ought
I let her to hyre that men may on her ride
Her arms easy far and nere is sought
By goddis sides syns I her thither brought
She has got me more money with her tail
Than has some ship that into bordews sail
Had I as good an horse as she is a mare
I durst adventure to Journey through France
Who rydeth on her he needs not to care
For she is trussed for to break a lance
It is a curtel that well can wynche and praunce
To her will I now all my poverty lege
And till I come have here mine hat to plege
Dread
Gone is this knave this rybaude foul and leude
He ran as fast as ever that he might
Unthryftynes in him may well be showed
For whom tyborne groneth both day and night
And as I stood and cast a side my syghte
Dasdayue I saw with Dyssymulacyon
Standing in sad communicacyon
But there was poyntynge and noddyng with ye head
And many words said in secret wise
They wandered ay and stood still in no stead
Me thought always Dissymular did deuyse
Me passing sore mine heart than began arise
I dempte and dread their talking was not good
Anon dyssimular came where I stood
Than in his hode I saw there faces tweyne
That one was lene and like a pyned ghost
That other looked as he would me have slain
And to me ward as he began for to coost
When that he was even at me almoost
I saw a knyfe hyd in his one sleue
Whereon was written this word mysch efe
And in his other sleue me thought I saw
A spone of gold, full of honey sweet
To feed a fool, and for to preye a dawe
And on that sleue these words were wrete
A false abstracte comes from a falls concrete
His hode was side his cope was roset graye
These were the words yt he to me did say.
Dyssymulacyon.
How do ye master ye look so soberly
As I be saved at the dredefull day
It is a perilous vice this envy
Alas a conning man ne dwell may
In no place well but foles with fraye
But as for that conninge has no foo
Save him that naught can scripture says so.
I know your virtue and your lytterkture
By that little conninge that I have
Ye be maligned sore I you ensure
But ye have craft yourselfe alwaie to save
It is great skorne to se a misproude knave
With a clerk that conning is to prate
Let them go, lowse them in the deuilles date
For all be it that this long not to me
Yet on my back I bear such lewd delyng
Right now I spoke with one I trow I se
But what a straw I may not tell all thing
By god I say there is great heart brenning
Between the person ye wot of Iou
Alas I could not dele so with an yew
I would each man were as plain as I
It is a world I say to here of some
I hate this fayninge fie upon it fie
A man can not wot where to become
I wis I could tell but humlery home
I dare not speak we be so laid awaite
For all our court is full of desceite
Now by saint frau^cys that holy man and friar
I hate this ways again you that they take
Where I as you I would ride them full nere
And by my truth but if an end they make
Yet will I say some words for your sake
That shall them anger I hold thereon a grote
For some shall wene be hanged by the throat.
I have a stoppynge oyster in my poke
Trust me and if it come to a need
But I am loathe for to reyse a smoke
If ye could be otherwise agrede
And so I would it were so god me speed
For this may bread to a confusyon
Without god make a good conclusyon.
Nay se where yonder stondeth the feder man
A flaterynge knave and false he is god wot
The dreuill stondeth to harken and he can
It were more thryfte he bought him a new cote
It will not be, his purse is not on flote
All that he woreth it is borrowed ware
His wit is thynne his hode is threde bare.
More could I say but what this is ynowe
A dew till soon we shall speak more of this
Ye must be ruled as I shall tell you how
Amends may be of that is now a mys
And I am your sir so have I blys
In every point that I can do or say
Give me your hand farewell and have good day
Dread
Suddenly as he departed me fro
Came pressynge in one in a wonder array
Er I was ware behind me he said bo
Than I astonyed of that sodeyne fraye
Sterte all at ones I lyked nothing his play
For if I had not quyckely fled the touch
He had plucte out the nobles of my pouche.
He was trussed in a garmente strayte
I have not seen such an others page
For he could well upon a casket wait
His body all pounsed and guarded like a cage
Light lyme finger he took none other wage
Harken quod he lo here mine hand in thine
To us welcome thou art by saint Quyntyne.
Disceyte.
But by that lord that is one two and three
I have an errande to round in your ere
He told me so by god ye may trust me
Part remember when ye were there
There I wynked on you, wot ye not where
In (A) loco I mean iuxta (B)
Woo is him that is blind and may not se
But to here the subtylte and the craft
And the ragged ray
Of Galaway.
Dunbar, Dunde
Ye shall trow me
False scotts are ye
Your hearts sore faynted
And so attaynted
Like cowardes stark
At the castle of warke
By the water of Twede
Ye had evil speed.
Like cankerd curres
Ye lost your spurs
For in that fraye
ye ran away
With hey dog hay.
For sir William Lyle
Within short while
That valiant knight
Put you to flight
By his valyaunce
Two thausande of Fraunte
There he put back
To your great lack
And utter shame
Of your scottysshe name.
Your chief Cheftayne
Uoyde of all brain
Duke of all Albany
Than shamefuly
He reculed back
To his great lack
When he herd tell
That my Lord Amrell
Was coming down
To make him frown
And to make him lowre
With the noble power
Of my lord Cardynall
As an host royal
After the ancient manner
With saint Cutberdes banner
And saint Williams also
Your captain ran to go
To go to go to go
And brake up all his host
For all his crake and bost
Like a cowarde knight
He fled and durst not fight:
He ran away by night
But now must I
Your duke ascry, Of Albany
With a word or twain
In sentence plain:
Ye duke so doutty
So stern so stoutty
In short sentens
Of your pretens
What is the ground?
Breuely and round
To me expound
Or else will I
Euydently
Show as it is
For the cause is this
How ye pretend
For to defend
The young Scottyshe king
But ye mean a thing
And ye could bring
The matter about
To put his eyes out
And put him down
And set his crown
On your own heed
When he were deed
Such treachery: And traytory
Is all your cast.
Thus ye have compast
With the french king
A falls rekenyng
To enuade England
As I understand.
But our king royal
Whose name over all
Noble Henry the eight
Shall cast a beyght
And set such a snare
That shall cast you in care
Both king Fraunces and the
That known ye shall be
For the most recrayd
Cowardes afraid
And falsest forsworn
That ever were borne.
O ye wretched scotts
Ye puaunt pyspottes
It shall be your lottes
To be knytte up with knottes
Of halters and ropes
About your traitors throtes:
Oscottes pariured
Unhaply vred
Ye may be assured
Your falshod discured
It is, and shall be. From the scottish se
Unto Gabione
For ye be false echone
False and false again
Never true nor plain
But flery, flatter and feign
And ever to remain
In wretched beggary
And maungy misery
In lousy lothsumnesse
And scabbed scorffynesse
And in abhominacion
Of all manner of nation
Nation most in hate
Proud and poor of state:
Twyt scot go keep thy den
Mell not with English men
Thou did nothing but bark
At the castle of warke:
Twyt scot yet again ones
We shall break thy bones
And hang you upon polles
And byrne you all to colles
With twyt scot, twyt scot twyt
Walk scot go beg a byt
Of bread, at ylke man's hecke
The find scot break thy neck
Twyt scot again I say
Twyt scot of Galaway
Twyt scot, shake thy dog hay
Twyt scot thou ran away
We set not a fly
By your duke of Albany
We set not a prane
By such a dronken drane
We set not a might
By such a cowarde knight
Such a proud palyarde
Such a skyrgaliarde
Such a stark cowarde
Such a proud pultrowne
Such a foul Coystrowne
Such a doutty dagswayne
Send him to Faunce again
To bring with him more brain
From king Fraunces of Frauns
God send them both myschauns:
Ye scotts all the rabble
Ye shall never be hable
With us for to compare
What though ye sta^pe and stare
God send you sorrow and care
With us when ever ye mell
Yet we bear away the bell
When ye cankerd knaves
Must crepe in to your caves
Your heedes for to hyde
For ye dare not abide.
Sir duke of Albany
Right inconuenyently
Ye rage and ye rave
And your worship deprave
Not like duke Hamylcar
With the Romans yt made war
Nor like his son Hanyball
Nor like duke Hasdruball
Of Cartage in Aphrike
Yet somewhat ye be like
In some of their conditions
And their false sedycions
And their dealyng double
And their weywarde trouble:
But yet they were bold
And manly manyfolde
Their enemies to assail
In plain field and battle.
But ye and your host
Full of brag and boost
And full of waste wind
How ye will beres bind
And the devil down dynge
Yet ye dare do nothing
But lepe away like frogs
And hyde you under logges
Like pigs and like hogs
And like maungy dogs.
What an army were ye?
Or what actyuyte?
Is in you beggars braules
Full of scabbes and scaules:
Of vermyne and of lyce
and of all manner vice.
Sir duke: nay sir ducke
Sir drake of the lake: sir ducke
Of the donghyll, for smalllucke
Ye have in feats of war
Ye make naught but ye mar
Ye are a falls entrusar
And a falls abusar
And an untrue knight
Thou have to little might
Against England to fight
Thou art a graceles wight
To put thyselfe to flight
A vengeance and dispight
On the must needs light
That durst not bide the sight
Of my lord amrell
Of chiualry the well
Of knighthode the flower
In every marciall shoure
The noble earl of Surrey
That put the in such fray
Thou durst no field derayne
Nor no battle maintain
Against our stonge captain
But thou ran home again
For fear thou should be slain
Like a scottyshe keteryng
That durst abide no reknyng
Thy heart would not serve the
The find of hell mot sterue the.
No man has hard
Of such a cowarde
And such a mad image
Carried in a cage:
As it were a cotage
Or of suchea mawment
Carried in a tent
In a tent: nay nay
But in a mountain gay
Like a great hill. For awyndmil
Therein to couche still
That no man him kill
As it were a got
In ashepe cote
About him a park
Of a mad warke
Men call it a toil
Therein like a royle
Sir Dunkanye dared
And thus ye prepared
Your carkas to keep
Like a sely sheep
^ sheep of Cottyswolde
From rain and from cold
And from raynning of rappes
And such after clappes
Thus in your cowardly castle
Ye decte you to dwell
Such a captain of fors
It made no great fors
If that ye had taken
Your last deedly bane
With a gone stone
To make you to groan
But hyde the sir Topias
Now into the castle of Bas
And lurk there like an as
With some scotyshe as
With dugges dugges dugges
I shrewe thy scottishe lugges
Thy munpynnys and thy crag
For thou can not but brag
Like a scottyshe hag
A due now sir wrig wrag
A due sir dalyrag
Thy mellyng is but mockyng
Thou may give up thy cocking
Give it up. And cry creke
Like an huddy peke:
Whereto should I more speak
Of such a farly freke
Of such an horn keke
Of such an bold captain
That dare not turn again
Nor durst not crak aworde
Nor durst not draw his sword
Against the lion white
But ran away quyte
He ran away by night
In the owl flight
Like a cowarde knight
A due cowarde a due
Falls knight and most untrue
I render the false rebelle
To the flingande fend of hell.
Hark yet sir duke aworde
In ernest or in board
What have ye villayn forged?
And virulently dysgorged
As though ye would parbrake
Your auauns to make
With words enbosed
Ungracioufly engrosed
How ye will undertake
Our royal king to make
His own realm to forsake
Such lewd langage ye spoke:
Sir Du^kan in the devil way
Be well ware what ye say.
Ye say that he and ye
Which he and ye? let se
Ye mean Frau^ces french king
Should bring about that thing
I say thou lewd lurdayne
That neither of you twain
So hardy nor so bold
His countenance to behold
If our most royal Harry
List with you to varry
Full soon ye should miscary
For ye durst not tarry
With him to strive a stownde
If he on you but frounde
Not for a thousand pouned
Ye durst bide on the ground
Ye would ryn away round
And cowardly fourne your backs
For all your comely crackes
And for fear par case
To look him in the face
Ye would defoyle the place
And ryn your way apace
Though I trym you this frace
With english somewhat base
Yet saua voster grace
Thereby I shall purchase
No displesaunt reward
If ye well can regard
Your cankarde cowardnesse
And your shamfull doubleness.
Are ye not frantyke mad?
And wretchedly bestadde
To rail against his grace
That shall bring you full bace
And set you in such case
That between you twain
There shall be drawn a train
That shall be to your pain
To fly ye shall be feign
And never turn again:
What would Frau^ces our friar?
Be such a false liar
So mad a cordylar
So mad a murmurar
Ye muse somewhat to far
All out of joint ye iar
God let you never thrive
Wene ye daucockes to drive
Our king, out of his reme
Ge heme rank scot ge heme
With fond Fraunces french king
Our master shall you bring
I trust to low estate
And mate you with chek mate:
Your brains are ydell
It is time for you to brydell
And pype in a quibyble
For it is impossible
For you to bring about
Our king for to drive out
Of this his realm royal
And land imperial
So noble a prince as he
In all actyuite
Of hardy merciall acts
Fortunate in all his faytes:
And now I will me dress
His valiaunce to express
Though insufficient am I
His grace to magnify
And laud equiualently
How be it loyally
After mine allegyaunce
My pen I will auaunce
To extol his noble grace
In spyght of thy cowardes face
In spyght of king Fraunces
Deuoyde of all nobles
Deuoyde of good courage
Deuoyde of wisdom sage
Mad: frantyke, and savage
Thus he does disparage
His blood with fond dotage:
A prince to play the page
It is a rechelesse rage
And a lunatyke ouerage
What though my style be rude?
With truth it is ennewde
Troth ought to be rescude
Truth should not be subdude
But now will I expound
What nobleness does abound
And what honor is found
And what virtues be resydent
In our royal regent
Our perelesse president
Our king most excellent:
In merciall prowes
Like unto Hercules
In prudence and wysdom
Like unto Salamon
In his goodly person
Like unto Absolon
In loyalte and foy
Like to Ector of Troy
And his glory to incres
Like to Scipiades
In royal mageste
Like unto Ptholome
Like to duke Iosue
And the valiant Machube:
That if I would report
All the royal sort
Of his nobilyte
His magnanymyte
His animosite
His fragalite
His lyberalite
His affabilite
His humanyte
His stabilite
His humilite
His benignite
His royal dignyte.
My lernyng is to small
For to recount them all.
What losels than are ye
Like cowardes as ye be
To rail on his astate
With words inordinate.
He rules his cominalte
With all benignite
His noble baronage
He puts them in courage
To exployte deeds of armies
To the damage and harmys
Of such as be his foos
Where ever he rydes or goos
His subjects he does supporte
Maintain them with comfort
Of his most princely port
As all men can report:
Than ye be a knappishe sort
Et faitez a luy grant torte
With your enbosed jaws
To rail on him like dawes
The fend scrache out your mawes:
All his subjects and he
Most louyngly agree
With hole heart and true mind
They find his grace so kind
Wherewith he does them bind
At all hours to be ready
With him to live and dye
Their bodies and their good
And to spend their heart blood
With him, in all dystresse
Always in redynesse.
To assyst his noble grace
In spyght of thy cowardes face
Most false attaynted traitor
And false forsworn faytour.
Auaunte cowarde recrayed
Thy pride shall be alayd
With sir Fraunces of France
We shall pype you a dance
Shall turn you to myschauns:
I read you look about
For ye shall be driven out
Of your land in short space
We will so follow in the chase
That ye shall have no grace
For to turn your face
And thus saint George to borowe
Ye shall have shame and sorrow.
Lenuoy.
GO little quayre quickly
Show them that shall you read
How that ye are lykely
Over all the worlds to sprede:
The false Scotts for dred
With the duke of Albany,
Beside the water of Twede
They fled full cowardly.
Though your english be rude
Barreyne of eloquence
Yet breuely to conclude
Grounded is your sentence
On truth, under defense
Of all true englyshemen
This matter to credence
That I wrate with my pen.
Skeleton Laureat: obsequious et loyal.

To my lord Cardynals right noble grace. etc.

Lenuoy.
Go little quayre apace
In most humble wise
Before his noble grace
That caused yon to devise
This little enterprise
And him most lowly pray
In his mind to comprise
Those words his grace did say
Of an ammas gray.
Ie, Foy enterment

En sa bone grace.

The book compiled by master Skeleton, Poet Laureat called speak Parrot.
MY name is parrot, a bird of paradise
By nature devised, of a wondrous kind
Dienteli dieted, with diverse delicate spice
Till Euphrates that flood, drives me into Inde
Where men of that country, by fortune me find
And send me, to great Ladies of estate
Then parrot must have an almon or a date.
A cage curiously caruen, with silver pin
Properly painted, to be my couertowre
A myrrour of glass, that I may tote therein
These maide^s full mekely wc many a diverse flour
Freshly they dress, and make sweet my boure
with speak parrot I prai you, full courteously they say
Parrot is a goodly byrd, a pretty Popagey
With my beck bent, my little wanton eye
My feders fresh, as is the Emrawde grene
About my neck a circulet, like the rich rubye
My little legs, my fete both fete and clean
I am a minion, to wayt upon the queen
My proper parrot, my little pretty fool
With ladies I learn, and go with them to scole.
Hagh, ha, ha, parrot, ye can laugh pretely
Parrot has not dined, of all this long day
Like your pus cat parrot can mute and cry
In lattyn, in Ebrew, Araby and Caldey
In greek tongue, parrot, can both speak and say
As percius that poet, does report of me
Quis expediuit psitatio suum Chire.
House french of parrise, Parrot can learn
Pronousynge my purpose, after my properte
With perliez bien, Parrot ou perlez rien
With Duche, with Spanish, my tongue can agree
In English, to God Parrot can supple
Christ save king Henry the eight our roial king
The red rose in honor, to flourish and spring.
With Katherin incomparable: our roial queen also
That parelespo^garnet christ save her noble grace
Parrot sauies, habler castiliano
With sidasso de costo, in turkey and in trace
Uis consilii expers, as teaches me horace
Mole ruit sua, whose dices at pregnaunte.
My lady masters, dame Philology
Gave me a gift, in my nest when I lay
To learn al language, and it to speak aptely
Now pandez mory, wax frantic some men say
Proneles or freneses, may not hold her way
An almon now for Parrot, delicatly dressed
In salve festa dies toto, their does best.
Moderata iuuant, but toto does excede
Dicression is mother of noble virtues all
Niden agan, in greek tongue we read
But reason, and wit wants their provincial
When wilfulnes, is virar general
Hec res acu tangitur, Parrot parmafoy
Ticez vous Parrot, Tenez vous coye.
Besy, besy, besy, and besines again
Que pe^sez voz parrot, what meneth this besines
Uitulus in Oreb, troubled Arons brayn
Melchisedecke merciful, made Moloe merciles
To wise is no virtue, to meddling, to restles
In measure is treasure, cum sensu marturat^
Ne tropo saung, ne tropo mato.
Aram was fired, with caldies fire called Ur
Job was brought up, in the land of Hus
The lineage of lot, took supporte of Assure
Iereboseth is Ebrue, who list the law discus
Peace Parrot ye prate, as ye were ebrius
Howst the liver god, van hemrick ic seg
In popeting grew peers, wha^ parrot was ancg
What is this to purpose, over in a whinninmeg
Hop Lobin of Lowdeon, would have a bit of bread
The Iebet of Baldock, was made for Jack leg
A narow vnfethered, and without an head
A bagpype without blowyng, stands in no sted
Some run to far before, some run to far behind
Some be to churlish, and some be to kind.
Ic dien serves for Erstrych fether
Ic dien, is the lauguage of the land of Beme
In Affric tongue, Byrsa is a tongue of lether
In Palestina, there is Jerusalem
Collustru^ now for parot, whit bred and sweet creme
our thomase she does trip, our ienet she does shall
Parrot has a blackebeard, and a fair grene tail.
Morysh mine own shelf, the ostermonger say
Fate, fate, fate, ye trysh water lag
In flettering fables, men find but little faith
But moueatur terra, let the world wag
Let sir wrig wag, wrestle with sir declarag
Every man, after his manner of ways
Pawbe uene aruer, so the welche man says
Such shredis of sentence, strowed in the shop
Of ancient Aristippus, and such other mo
I gather together, and close in my crip
Of my wanton conceyt, vnde do promo
Dilemata docta, in pedagogio
Sacro vatum, whereof to you I break
I pray you, let parrot have liberty to speak:
But ware the cat parrot, ware the false cat
With who is there, a maid, nay, nay, I trow
Ware ryat parrot, ware riot, ware that
Meat, meat for parrot: meat I say how
Thus diverse of language, by learning I grow
with bas me sweet parrot: bas me sweet sweet
To dwell among Ladies, parrat is mete.
Parrot, parrot, parrot, praty popigay
With my beke I can pyke, my little pretty too
My delight is solas, pleasure: disport and play
Like a wanton when I will, I rele to and froo
Parrot can say, Caesar, aue, also
But Parrot, has no favor to Esebon
Above all other birds, set parrot alone.
Ulula, Esebon, for Jeremy does weep
Sion is in sadness, Rachel ruly does look
Madionita, Ietro, our moses keeps his sheep
Gedeon is gone, that Zalmane undertook
Oreb et zeb, of Iudicum read the book
Now Gebal, Amon, and Amoloch, hark, hark
Parrot pretends to be a bibil clarke.
O Esebon Esebon, to the is come again
Seon the regent amoreorum
And hog that fat hog, or basan does retain
The crafty coistroinus canaueorum
And assilum, whilom, refugium miserorum
Non phanum sed prophanum, stands in little sted
Ulula Esebon, for iept is stark ded.
Estbon, Maribon, wheston, next Barnet
A trim tram for an horse mil it were a nise thing
Deintes for dammoysels, Chaffer far fet
Bo ho does barkwel, but hough ho rules yt ring
From scarpary to tartari renoun therein does spri^g
With he said, and we said ich wot now what ich wot
Quod magnus est dominus judas scarioth.
Ptholomie, and haly were cunnyng and wise
In the vol vel, in the quadrant, and in the astroloby
To pronosticate truli the chance of fortunes dise
Some trete of their tirikis, some of astrology
Some pseudo propheta with Chiromancy
If fortune be friendly, and grace be the guide
Honor with renown, will run of that side
Manon calon

Agaton quod parato. In greca

Let parrot I pray you, have liberty to prate
For aurea lingua greca, ought to be magnified
If it were cond perfitely, and after the rate
As lingua latina, in schole matter occupied
But our grekis, their greek so well have applied
That they cannot say in greek, riding by the way
How hosteler, fetch my horse a bottel of hay.
Neither frame a silogisme, in phriese somoru^
For maliter et greece, cum medio termino
Our greeks ye walow, in the washbol argolicoru^
For though ye can tell in greek what is phormio
Yet ye seek out your greek, in Capricornio
For they scrape out good scripture, and set in a gal
Ye go about to amend, and ye mar all.
Some argue, secundum quid ad simpliciter
And yet he would be rekened, pro ario pagita
And some make distinctions, multipliciter
Whether ita were before uou, or uou before ita
Nether wise nor well learned but like hermophra dita
Set sophia a side, for every Jack raker.
And every mad medler must now be a maker.
In achademia Parrot, dare no problem keep
For grecisari, so occupies the chair
That letinum fari, may fall to rest and sleep
And silogisari, was drowned at sturbridge fair
Triuiale, and quatriuials, so sore now they appair
That Parrot that Popagay, has pity to behold
How yt rest of good lerning, is roulled up and trolde
Albertus de modo significandi
And Donatus, be driven out of schole
Prisians head broken, now handy dandy
And inter did ascolos, is rekened for a fool
Alexander, a gander of Menanders pole
With da cansales, is cast out of the gate
And da racionales, dare not show his pate,
Plaut si in his comedies, a child shall now rehers
And medil with Quintilian, in his declarations
That pety Caton, can scantly construe a verse
With Aueto, in Greco, and such solempn salutacio^s
Can skantly the tensis, of his comugacions
Setting their minds, so much of eloquence
That of their scole matters, lost is the hole se^te^ce
Now a nutmeg, a nut meg, cum gariopholo
For parrot to pike upon, his brain for to stable
Sweet synamum sticks, and pleris commusco
In paradise. that place of pleasure perdurable
The progeny of parrottis, were fair and fanorable
Now in valle ebron, parrot is feign to feed
Christ cross, and sanct nicolas, parrot be your good pede
The myrour that I tote in, quasi diaphonum
Uel quasi speculum, in Enigmate
Elencum, or else, Emtimaticum
For logicions to look on, somewhat sophistice
Retorcions and orators, in fresh humanite
Support parrot, I pray you with your suffrage ornat
Of confuse tantu^, avoiding the checkmate
But of that suposicion, that called is art
Confuse distrubitiue, as parrot has devised
Let every man, after his merit, take his part
For in this process, parrot nothing has surmised
No matter pretended, nor nothing enterprysed
But that metaphora, alegoria with all
Shall be his protection, his pauis and his wall.
For parrot is no churlish chough nor no flekid py
Parrot is no pendugum, that men call a carlyng
Parrot is no woodcocke, nor no butter fly
Parrot is no stamring stare, that me^ call a starii^g
But parrot is mine own dear heart, and my derli^g
Melpomene ye fair maid, she burnished his beke
I pray you let parrot, have liberty to speak.
Parrot is a fair byrd for a Lady
God of his goodness him framed and wrought
When parrot is dead she does not putrify
Ye all thing mortal shall turn unto naught
Except man's soul, that Christ so dear bought
That never may dye, nor never dye shall
Make much of parrot, that popegay royal.
For that pereles prince, that parrot did creat
He made you of nothing, by his magisty
Point well this problem, that parrot does prate
And remember among, how parrot and ye
Shall lepe from this life, as merye as we be
Pomp, pride, honor, riches and worldly lust
Parrot says plainly, shall turn all to dust.
Thus parrot does pray you

With heart most tender

To reken with this recule now

And it to remember

Psitacus ecce cauo nec sunt mea carmina phebo

Dignascio Tamen est

Plena camena dec.

Secundum Skeltonida famigeratum

In picreorum Cathalago numeratum

Gala thea.

Itaque Consolanimi inuicem

In uerbis istis.

Candidi lectores callide callete

Vestrum seuete, psitacum.

Galethea.

Now kus me parrot, kus me, kus, kus, kus

Gods blessing light on thy sweet little mus

Vita and anima

zoelzepsiche

Aquinates Amen,

Concubunt greece, Non

est hic sermo pudicus

Actica dictamina

Ergo Suus plumbilamina

Vel spuria Vitulamino

Auertat hoc Vxania.

Amen amen

and set to a. d

And then it is amend

Our new found a. b. c.

Cum ccrteris

Paribus.

Of the death of the noble Prince king Edward the forth, per Skeltonide^
Laureatum.
MIseremini mei, ye that be my friends
This world has formed me down to fall
How may I endure when yt every thing ends
What creature is borne, to be eternal
Now there is no more, but pray for me all
Thus say I Edward, that late was your king
And. xxiii. years ruled, this imperial
Some unto pleasure, and some to no likyng
Mercy I ask of my misdoyng
What avails it, friends to be my fo
Since I can not resist, nor amend your co^plaini^g
Quia ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
I sleep now in molde, as it is natural
As earth unto earth, has his reuerture
What ordained god, to be terrestrial
Without recours, to the earth of nature
Who to live ever, may be sure
What is it to trust, on mutabilite
Since that in this world, nothing may endure
For now am I gone, that late was in prosperity
To presume there upon, it is but a vanity
Not certain: but as a chery fair full of woe
Raygned not I of late: in great felicite
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
Where was in my life, such one as I
While lady fortune: with me had continuance
Granted not she me, to have victory
In England to rain, and to contribute France
She took me by the hand, and led me a dance
And with her sugared lips, on me she smyled
But what for her dissembled countenance
I could not beware, til I was begiled
Now from this world, she has me excild
When I was lothest, hens for to go
And I am in age, but as who says a child.
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
I had enough, I held me not content
Without remembrance, that I should dye
And more over to incroche, ready was I bente
I knew not how long, I should it occupy
I made the tower strong, I wist not why
I knew not to whom, I purchased Tetersall
I amended Dover, on the mountain hye
And London I provoked to fortify the wall
I made Notingam, a place royal
Wyndsor, Eltam, and many other mo
Yet at the last, I went from them al
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
Where is now, my conquest and victory
Where is my riches, and my royal array
Where be my coursers, and my horses hye
Where is my mirth, my solas, and play
As vanite to naught, al is wandered away
O lady Besse, long for me may ye call
For I am de parted, til domes day.
But love ye that lord, that is soueraygne of all
Where be my castles, and buildinges royal
But Winsore alone, now I have no mo
And of Eton, the prayers perpetual
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
Why should a man, be proud or presume hye
Saint Bernard, thereof nobly does treat
Sithe a man, is nothing but a sack of stercorri
And shall return, unto worms meat
Why, what came of Alexander the great
Or elsse of strong Sampson, who can tell
Where no worms ordened, their flesh to freat
And of Solomon, that was of wit the well
Absolon, proffered his hear for to sell
Yet for all his beutie, worms eat him also
And I but late in honor did excel
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
I have played my pageyond, now am I paste
Ye wot well all, I was of no great yield
This al thing concluded, shall be at the last
When death approaches, then lost is the field
Then sithen this world, me no longer up held
Nor naught would conserve me, here in my place
In manus tuas domine, my spirit up I yealde
Humbly beseching, the God of his grace
O ye curtesse commens, your hearts unbrace
Boningly now to pray for me also
For right well you know, your king I was
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
FINIS.
Skeleton Laureate against the Scotts.
Against the proud Scotts clatteryng
That never will leave their tratlyng
Wan they the field, and lost their king
They may well say, fie on that winning.
LO these fond sottes. And tratling scotts
How they are blind. In their own mind
And will not know. Their overthrow
At Branxston more. They are so srowre
So frantike mad. They say they had
And wan the field. With spear and shield
That is as true. As black is blew
And grene is gray. What ever they say
Iemmy is dead. And closed in lead
That was their own king. Fie on that winning
At Flodden hills. Our bows our bylles
Slew all the flower. Of their honor.
Are not these scotts. Foles and settes
Such boste to make. To prate and crake
To face to brace All void of grace
So proud of heart. So ouerth wart
So out of frame. So void of shame
As it is enrold. Written and told
Within this quaire. Who list to repair
And there in reed. Shall find in deed
A mad rekening. Considering all thing
That the scotts may sin. Fie on the winning
When the Scotte lived.
IOly Iemmy, ye scornful Scot
Is it come unto your lot
A solemn sumner for to be
It greeth naught for your degree
Our king of England for to fight
Your sovereign lord, our prince of might
Ye for to send, such a Citacion
It shameth al your noughty nation
In comparison, but king roppyng
Unto our prince, anointed king
Ye play Hop Lobbyn of Lowdean
Ye show right well, what good ye can
Ye may be Lord of Locrian
Christ sense you, with a frying pan
Of Edingborrow, and saint Ionis town
A dieu sir summer, cast of your crown.
When the Scot was slain.
COntinually I shall remember
The merry month of September
With the* xi. day of the same
For than began, our myrthe and game
So that now I have devised
And in my mind, I have comprised
Of the proud Scot, king Iemmy
To write some little tragedy
For no manner consideration
Of any sorrowful lamentation
But for the special consolacion
Of al our royal englysh nation
Melnomone, O muse tragediall
Unto your grace, for grace now I call
To guide my pen, and my pen to enbibe
Illumine me, your Poet, and your scribe
That with mixture of Aloes and bitter gall
I may compound, confectures for Accordiall
To anger the Scotts, and Irish kiteringes withal
That late were discomfect, with battle marcial
Thalia, my muse, for you also call I
To touch them with tauntes of your armonye
A medley to make, of mirth with sadness
The hearts of England, to comfort with gladness
And now to begin, I will me a dres
To you rehersyng, the sum of my process.
King Iamy, Iemmy, Iocky my joy
Summond our king, why did ye so
To you, nothing it did accord
To Summon our king, your sovereign Lord
A king a Summer, it was great wonder
Knowye not sugar, and salt a sonder
Your Summer to saucye, to malapert
Your harrold in arms, not yet half expert
Ye thought ye did, yet valiauntlye
Not worth three skippes of a Pie
Sir skyr galyard, ye were so skit
Your will, than ran before your wit.
Your lege ye laid, and your aly
Your frantic fable, not worth a fly
French king, or one or other
Regarded you should your lord your brother
Trowed ye sir Iemy, his nobel grace
From you sir scot, would turn his face
With gup sir scot, of Galawey
Now is your pride fall to decay
Male vrid, was your falls intent
For to offend your president
Your sovereign Lord, most reuerente
Your Lord, your brother and your regent.
In him is figured, Melchisedecke
And ye were disloyal Amalecke
He is our noble Scipione
Anointed king, and ye were noue
Though ye untruly your father have slain
His title is true, in France to raygne
And ye proud Scot, Dunde, Dun^ar
Pardy ye were, his homager
And suter to his Parliament
For your untruth, now are ye shent
Ye bare your self, somewhat to bold
Therefore ye lost, your copy hold
Ye were bond tenent, to his estate
Lost is your game, ye are check mate
Unto the castle of Norram
I understand, to sone ye came
At Branxston more, and Flodden hills
Our Englysh bows, our Englysh bylles
Against you gave so sharp a shower
That of Scotland, ye lost the flower
The white Lion: there rampaunte of mood
He raged and rent out your heart blood
He the White, and you the Red
The white there slew the red stark ded
Thus for your guerdon quyt are ye
Thanked be God in trinite
And sweet saint George our ladies knight
Your eye is out, a dew good night.
Ye were stark mad to make a fray
His grace being out of the way
But by the power and might of God
For your tail ye made a rod
Ye wanted wit, sir at a word
Ye lost your spurs: ye lost your sword
Ye might have busked you to huntly banks
Your pride was peuysh to play such prankes
Your pouerte could not attain
With our king royal, war to maintain.
Of the king of Nauerne, ye might take heed
Ungraciously how he does speed
An double dealing, so he did dream
That he is king, without a Reame
And for exaumple, he would none take
Experiens has brought you in such a brake
Your wealth, your joy, your sport, your play
Your braggyng bost, your royal array
Your beard so brym, as bore at baye
Your seven systers, that Gun so gay
All have ye lost, and cast away.
Thus fortune has turned you: I dare well say
Now from a king, to a clot of clay
Out of Robes, ye were shaked
And wretchedly ye lay, stark all naked
For lack of grace, hard was your hap
The Popes cures, gave you that clap.
Of the out yles, the rough foted Scotts
We have well eased them of the bottes
The rude ra^cke Scotts, like droncken dranes
At Englysh bows have fetched their banes
It is not sitting, in tower and town
A Summer, to were a kings crown
Fortune on you, therefore did frown
Ye were to hye, ye are cast down
Sir sumner now, where is your crown
Cast of your crown, cast up your crown
Sir Summer, now ye have lost your crown
Quod Skeleton Laureate, Oratoure to the kings most royal estate.

SCotica redicta in formam prouincie
Regis parebit nutibus anglie:
Alioquin (per desertum sin) super Cherubim
Cherubin, seraphim, seraphin que ergo. etc.
Unto diverse people that remord this
ryming against the Scot Iemmy.
I Am now constrained
With words nothing feigned
This inuectiue to make For some people sake
That list for to iangell
And way wardly to wrangell
Against this my making
Their males thereat shaking
At it reprehending. And venemously stingyng
Rebukynge and remordyng
And nothing according
Cause they have none other
But for that he was his brother
Brother unnatural. Unto our king royal
Against whom he did fight
Faslye against all right
Like that vtrue rebel
Falsse Cayne against Abell.
But who so there at pyketh mood
The tokens are not good
To be true Englysh blood
For if they understood
His traitourly dispight
He was a recrayed knighte
A subtle sysmatike
Right near an heritike
Of grace out of the state
And died excommunicate
And for he was a king
The more shameful reckoning
Of him should men report
In earnest and in sport
He scantlye loves our king
That grudgeth at this thing
That cast such ouerth wartes
Percase have hollow hearts
Si veritate^ dico, quare non creditis michi. Chorus de Dys contra Scotts, cum
omni processionali festiuitate solemn sauit hoc Epitoma. xxii. die
Septembris. etc.
Salve festa dies toto resonabilis euo
Qua scottus iacobus obiuius en se cadit
Barbara scottorum gens perfda plena maloruns
Vincitur ad Norran, uertitut inque fugam
Vasta paulus sed campestris (borie memoratur
Branxion more) scottins terra perosa fuit
Scottica castra fremunt Floddun sub mo^tibus altis.
Que Valide inuadens dissipat angla manus
Millia scottorum trusit gens anglica passim
Luxuriat tepido sanguine pi g^us humus
Pas animas miseri miseras, misere sub umbras
Pars ruit in foueas, pars subiit latebras
Iam quid ag't Iachobus, damnoru^ gremine cretus
Persidus Vt nemro'th lapsus ad iam ruit
Dic modo scottorum dudum male fane malorum
Rector nunc Regeris mortuus exce iaces
Sic Leo te Rapidus Leo candidus inclitus ursit
quo Leo in Rubins ultim^ f^ta luis
Anglia doc choreas Resonent tua tempana psallas
Da lauds domino. Da pia uot a deo.
Hec Laureatus Skeltonis Regine orator.
Chorus de dis. etc. supar triumph ali victoi^a centra gallos. etc. cantauit
solemniter hoc Elogium in profesto diui Iohannis ad de colationem.

Salve festa dies toto memorabilis euc.
Qua rex Henricus gallico bella premit
Henricus Rutilans Octauus noster in armis
Tir win gentis menit strauit humi
Sceptriger anglorum bello ualiaissimus hector
Francorum gentis colla superba terit
Dux armis nuper celebris modo dux mermis
De longuile modo dic quo tuo pomparuit
De cleremount clarus dudum dic galle superbe
Vnde superbus eris? carcere nonne gemis?
Discite francorum gens cetera capt^, britannum
Noscite magnanimum, subdite uos que sibi
Gloria cappa docis diue miles que Marie
Illius hic sub open Gallica regna reget.
Hoc insigne bonum diuino Numine gestum Anglica gens referat sempar, ouans que
canat Per Skeltonida Laureatum, Oratorem Regium.
Here after follows the book, entitled. Ware the Hawke. Per skeleton Laureat.
Prologus Skeltonidis Laureati super ware the Hawke.
THis work devised is
For such as do a mis
And specially to control
Such as have cure of soul
That be so far abused
They can not be excused
By reason nor by law
But that they play the dawe
To hawke or elsse to hunte
From the Altar to the funte
With cry vnreuerente
Before the Sacrament
Within the holy church boundis
That of our faith, the ground is
That pryest that hawks so
All grace is far him fro
He seems a sismatike
Or elsse an heritike
For faith in him is faynte
Therefore to make complaynte
Of such mysaduised
Parsons, and disgised
This book we have devised
Compendiouslye comprised
No good priest to offend
But such dawes to amend
In hope that no man shall
Be miscontent withal.
I Shall you make relacion
By way of a pestrofacion
Under supportacion
Of your pacient tolleracion
How I Skeleton Laureat
Devised and also wrate
Upon a lewd Curate
A parson beneficed
But nothing well advised
He shall be as now nameles
But he shall not be blameles
Nor he shall not be shameless
For sure he wrought a mis
To hawke in my church of Dis
This fond frantike fauconer
With his poluted pawtner
As priest vnreuerent
Straight to the Sacrament
He made his Hawke to fly
With hogeous showte and cry
The hye altar he strypt naked
There on he stood and craked
He shoke down all the clothes
And swear horrible oaths
Before the face of God
By Moses and Arons rod
Or that he thence yede
His hawke should pray and feed
Upon a pigeons mawe
The blood ran down raw
Upon the auter stone
The hawke tired on a bonne
And in the holy place
She muted there a chase
Upon my corporas face
Such sacrificium laudis
He made with such gambawdis.
Obseruate.
His second hawke waxed gerye
And was with flying weary
She had flow in so often
That on the rode loft
She perked her to rest
The Fauconer then was pressed,
Came running with a dow
And cried stow stow stow
But she would not bow
He then to be sure
Called her with a lure
Her meat was very crude
She had not well endude
She was not clean ensaymed
She was not well reclaymed
But the fawconer unfeigned
Was much more febler brained
The hawke had no list
To come to his fyst
She looked as she had the fronce
With that he gave her a bounce
Full upon the gorge
I will not feign nor forge
The hawke with that clap
Fell down with evil hap
The church doors were sparred
Fast bolted and barred
Yet with a pretty gin
I fortuned to come in
This rebel to behold
Whereof him I contrould
But he said that he would
Against my mind and will
In my church hawke still.
Considerate.
On saint John decollacion
He hawked on this facion
Tempore, vesperarum
Sed, non secundum sarum
But like a march harum
His brains were so parum
He said he would not let
His hounds for to fet
To hunte there by lyberte
In the dispite of me
And to halowe there the fox
Down went my offering box
Book bell and candell
All that he might handell
Cross staff, lectrine and banner
Feldone on this manner.
Deliberate.
With troll, citrace and trouy
They ranged hankin bouy
My church all about
This fawconer began shoute
These be my gospellers
These be my pistillers
These be my queristers
to help me to singe
My hawks to mattens ring
In this priestly giding
His hawke then flew upon
The rode with Mary and Iho^
Dealt he not like a fon
Dealt he not like a daw
Or elsse is this gods law
Decrees or Decretals
Or holy sinodals
Or elsse prouincials
Thus within the walls
Of holy church to deal
Thus to ringe a peale
With his hawks belles
Doutles such losels
Make the church to be
In small aucthorite
A curate in special
To snapper and to fall
Into this open crime
To look on this were time
Vigilate.
But who so that lokes
In the officials books
There her may see and reed
That this is matter in deed
How be it maiden meed
Made them to be agreed
And so the scribe was feed
And the Pharasaye
Than durst nothing say
But let the matter slip
And made truth to trip
And of the spituall law
They made but a gew gaw
And took it out in drink
And this the cause does shrink
The church is thus abused
Reproched and polluted
Correction has no place
And al for lack of grace
Deplorate.
Look now in Exodi
And de archa domini
With regum by and by
The Bibel will not lie
How the temple was kept
How the temple was swept
Where sanguis taurorum
Aut sanguis vitulorum
Was offered within the walls
After ceremonials
When it was poluted
Sentence was executed
By way of expiacion
Diuinitate.
Then much more by the rode
Where christ's precious blood
Daily offered is
To be poluted this
And that he wished with all
That the dowues donge down might fall
Into my chalis at mas
When consecrated was
The blessed sacrament
O priest vnreuerent
He said that he would Hunt
From the altar to the Funt
Reformate.
Of no tyrande I read
That so far did excede
Neither yet Dioclesian
Nor yet domisian
Nor yet crooked Cacus
Nor yet dronken Baccus
Another Olibrius Nor D^^^^^ius
Another Phalary
Rehearsed in valery
Nor Sardanapall
Unhappiest of all
Nor Nero the worst
Nor Clawdius the cursed
Nor yet Egeas
Nor yet sir Pherumbras
Another zorobabell
Nor cruel Iesabell
Nor yet tarquinius
Whom Titus Liuius
In writing does enroll
I have red them poll by pol
The storye of Aristobel
And of Constantinobel
Which city Miscreantes wan
And slew many a christen man
Yet the Sowden nor the turk
Wrought never such a work
For to let their hawks fly
In the church of Saint Sophy
With much matter more
That I keep in store
Pensitate
Then in a tabel plain
I wrote a verse or twain
Where at he made disdain
The pekyshe parsons brain
Could not reach nor attain
What the sentence mente
He said for a crooked intent
The words were paruerted
And this he ouerthwarted
Of the which process
Ye may know more express
If it please you to look
In the residue of this book.
Here after follows the Table.
Look on this tabul
Whether thou art a bull
To read or to spel
Vvhar these verses tell.
Sicculo lutueris est colo bunraard
Nixphedras uisarum caniuter ^auntantes.
Raterplas Natanbrian um sudus itnugenus,
18. 10. 2. 11. 19. 4. 13. 3. 3. 1. te^ualet.
Cartula stet precor hec uello temer and a petulco
Hos rapiet Numeros non homo sz mala bos.
Ex part. Rem carte aduerte aperte, pone musam are thusam hanc.
Where to should I rehers
The sentence of my verse.
In them be no schools
For braynsicke frantic foles
Construas hoc, domine dawcocke,
Ware the hawke.
Master Sophista
Ye simplex, silogista
The Deuelyshe dogmatista
Your hawke on your fista
To hawke when your lista
In ecclesia ista domine cacapisti
With thy hawke on thy fisty
Nunquid sic dixisti. Nunquid sic fecisti
Sed vbi hoc legisti
Aut vnde hoc, doctor dawcocke.
Ware the hawke.
Doctor Dialetica
Where find you in Ipotetica
Or in Cathagoria. Latina, sieve dorica
To use your hawks, forica
In propiciatorio, tanquam, diuersorio
Unde hoc, domine dawcocke
Ware the Hawke.
Say to me Jack haris
Quare accuparis Ad sacramentum altaris
For no reuens thou spares
To shake my pygeons federis
Super, arcam federis
Unde hoc, doctor dawcocke
Ware the Hawke.
Sir dominus vobiscum Par aucupium
Ye made your hawke to cum
De super candelabrum
Christi crucifixi
To feed upon your fistye
Dic inimice crucis christi. Ubi didicisti
Facere hoc, domine dawcocke
Ware the Hawke
Apostata Iulianus
Nor yet Nestorianus
Thou shall no where read
That they did such a deed
To let their hawks fly
Ad ostium tabernaculi
In quo est corpus domini
Cave hoc, doctor dawcocke
Ware the Hawke
This doutlesse ye raued
Dis church ye thus depraved
Wherefore as I be saved
Ye are therefore be knaued
Quare, quia euangelia
Concha, et conchelia
Ancipiter, and sonalia
Cetera, quoque talia
Tibi sunt equalia
Unde hoc domine dawcocke
Ware the Hawke
Et relis et ralis Et reliqualis
From Granado to galis
From winchelsee to wales
Non est brainsicke tales
Nec minus racionalis. Nec magis bestis
That singges with a chalis
Construas hor doctor dawcocke
Ware the Hawke.
Mased witles smery smyth
Hampar with your hammer upon thy styth
And make here of a sickel or a saw
For though ye live. a. c. year ye shall dye a daw
Uos valete doctor indiscrete
S^keltonis Apostrophat ad diuum Iohannem decollatum in cuius profesto ficbat
hoc a ucupium.
O Memoranda dies qua decolare Johannes Acupiu^ facit hod quandam quod fecerit
infra ecclesiam de dis uiolans sua sacra sacrorum rector de Whiphstocke doctor
cognomine daucocke, and dominus Wodcocke, probatis. probat hic. probat, hec hoc.

Idem. de liber a dicacitate poetica, in cextolem da probitate et in per fricam
da ignobilate.
LIbertas ueneran da piis concessa poetis, discendi est quecunque placent
querunque iuuabunte uell quecunque ualent ius^^s defendere causas uell
quecunque uolent stolidos mordere peculcos. Ergo da bi^ueniam.

Quod Skeleton Laureat

All noble men of this take heed
And believe it as your creed.
TO hastye of sentence
To fearse for none offense
To scarce of your expens
To large in necligence
To slack in recompens
To hawte in excellence
To light intelligence
And to light of credence
Where these keep residence
Reason is banyshed thence
And also dame Prudence
With sober patience.
All noble men of this take heed
And believe it as your creed
Then without collusyon
Mark well this conclusion
Through such abusion
And by such Illusion
Unto great confusion
A nobell man may fall
And his honor appall
That if ye think this shall
Not rub you on the gall
Then the devil take all
All nobell men of this take heed. etc.
Quod Skeleton Laureate.

Ye may hear now, in this Rhyme
How every thing, must have a time.
TIme is a thing, that no man may resist
Time is transitory, and Irreuocable
Who says the contrary, time passes as him
Time must be taken, in season couenable
Take time when time is, for time is ay mutable list
All thing has time, who can for it provide
Bide for time who will, for time will no man abide
Time to be sad, and time to play and sport
Time to take rest, by way of recreation
Time to study, and time to use comfort
Time of pleasure, and time of consolation
Thus time has his time, of diverse manner facio^
Time for to eat and drink, for thy repast
Time to be liberal, and time to make no wast
Time to travel, and time for to rest
Time for to speak, and time for to hold thy peace
Time would be used, when time is best
Time to begin, and time for to cease
And when time is, put thyself in prease
And when time is, to hold thyselfe a back
For time well spent, can never have lack.
The rotes take their sap, in time of vere
In time of summer, flowers fresh and grene
In time of harvest, men their corn shere
In time of winter the North wind waxes kene
So bitterly biting, the flowers be not seen
The Ralendis of Ianus, with his frostes hoar
That time is, when people must live upon the store
Quod Skeleton Laureat.

A prayer to the father of heaven.
O Radiant luminary of light interminable
Celestial father, potenciall God of might
Of heaven and earth. O lord inco^perable
Of al perfections the essenciall most perfighte
O maker of mankind, that formed day and night
Whose power imperial, co^prehe^deth every place
Mine heart, my mind, my thought, my hole delight
Is after this life, to se thy glorious face.
Whose magnificence, is incomprehensible
Al arguments of reason, which far does excede
Whose de^te doutles, is indivisible
From who^ al goodness, and virtue does proceed
Of thy support, al creatures have need
Assist me good Lord, and grant me of thy grace
To live to thy pleasure, in word thought and deed
And after this life to see thy glorious face.
To the second Parsone.
OBenigne Jesus, my souerain lord and king
The only son of God, by filiacion
The second parson, without beginning
Both god and man, our faith makes plain relacio^
Mary the mother, by way of incarnacion
Whose glorious passion, our souls does revive
Again al bodily, and ghostly tribulacion
Defend me with thy piteous wounds five
O pereles prince, painted to the death
Rufully rent, thy body wan and blo
For my redemption, gave up thy vytal breathe
Was never sorrow, like to thy deadly woe
Grant me, out of this world when I shall go
Thine endless mercy, for my preservative
Against the world, the flesh, the devil also
Defend me with thy piteous wounds five.
To the holy ghost.
OFiry sentence, inflamed with all grace
Enkyndeling hertes, with brandes charitable
The endless reward, of pleasure and solace
To the father, and the son, thou art co^municable
In vnitate, which is inseparable
O water of life, O well of consolacion
Against al suggestions deadly, and dampnable
Rescu me good Lord, by your preseruacion.
To whom is appropryed, the holy ghost by name
The third parson, one god in Trinite
Of perfyt love, thou art the ghostlye flame
O mirror of mekenes, peace and tranquilitye
My confort, my counsel, my parfit charity
O water of life, O well of consolacion
Against all storms, of hard adversity
Rescu me good Lord, by thy preservation.
Amen.
Quod Skeleton Laureate.

Here after follows the book called Elinour Rumming.
The tunnyng of Elynour Rummyng. Per. Skeleton Laureate.
TEll you I chill
If that ye will
A while be still
Of a comelye gyll
That dwelt on a hill
But she is not gryll
For she is somewhat sage
And well worn in age
For her visage
It would assuage
A man's courage
Her lothelye leare
Is nothing clear
But vglye of cheer.
Droupye and drowsye
Scuruy and lowsy
Her face all bowsy
Comelye crinckled
Wondersly wrynkled
Like a roste pigges ear
Brystled with here
Her lewd lyppes twain
They slauer men said
Like a ropye rain
A gummy glayre
She is vglye fair
Her nose some dele hoked
And camouslye crooked
Never stoppinge
But ever dropping
Her skin lose and slacks
Grained like a sack
With a crooked back
Her eyes gowndye
Are full vnsowndy
For they are blered
And she graye heared
Iawed like a Ietty
A man would have pity
To se how she is gumbed
Fingered and thumbed
Gently ioynted
Gresed and anointed
Up to the knockels
The bones her buckels
Together made fast
Her youth is far paste
Foted like a plane
Legs like a crane
And yet she will iet
Like a jolly set
In her furred flocket
And gray russet rocket
With simper the cocket
Her huke of Lyncole grene
It had been hers I wene
More then fortye year
And so it does appear
And the grene bare thredes
Look like sere wedes
Wythered like Hay
The woll worn away
And yet I dare say
She thinks herself gaye
Upon the holy day
When she does her array
And girdeth in her getes
Stitched and pranked with pletes
Her kirtell Bristowe red
With clothes upon her head
That they way a sow of lead
Wrythen in a wonder wise
After the Sarazins gise
With a whim wham
Knit with a trim tram
Upon her brain pan
Like an Egiptian
Capped about
When she goes out
Herself for to show
She drives down the Dew
With a pair of heles
As broad as two wheles
She hobbles as a Gose
With her blauket hose
Her shone smered with talow
Gresed upon dyrt
That baudeth her skyrt
Primus passus.
And this comelye dame
I understand her name
Is Elynoure Rumminge
At home in her wonnyng
And as men say
She dwelt in Sothray
In a certain stead
By side Lederhede
She is a tonnishe gyb
The deuell and she be sib.
But to make up my tale
She brueth noppy ale
And makes thereof poorte sale
To traueilers, to tinkers
To sweters, to swinkers
And all good ale drynkers
That will nothing spare
But drink till they stare
And bring themself bare
With now away the mare
And let us sley care
As wise as an hare
Come who so will
To Elinour on the hill
With fill the cup fill
And sit there by still
Earelye and late
Thither comes Rate
Ci^^ye and Sare
With their legs bare
And also their fete
Hardely full vnswete
With their heles dagged
Their kyrtelles all to iagged
Their smockes all to ragged
With titters and tatters
Bring dyshes and platters
With all their might runnyng
To Elynoure rumminge
To have of her tunninge
She leans them of the same
And thus begins the game
Some wenches come vnbrased
With their naked pappes
That flippes and flappes
It wygges and it wagges
Like tawny saffron bags
A sort of foul drabbes
All scuruy with scabbes
Some be fly bytten
Some skewed as a kytten
Some with a sho cloute
Bind their heads about
Some have no herelace
Their locks about their face
Their tresses vntruste
All full of vnluste
Some look strawrye
Some cawrye mawrye
Full vntidye tegges
Like rotten eggs
Such a lewd sort
To Elynoure resort
From tide to tide
Abide abide
And to you shall be toulde
How her ale is soulde
To mawte and to molde
Secundus passus
Some have no monye
That thither commye
For their ale to pay
That is a shrewde a ray
Elinoure sweared nay
Ye shall not bear away
My ale for naught
By him that me boughte
With hey dog hay
Have these dogs away
With get me a staff
The swyne eat my draffe
Strike the hogs with a clubbe
They have dronk up miswilling tub
For be there never so much prese
These swine go to the hye dese
The sow with her pigs
The bore his tail wrygges
Against the hye bench.
With fo, there is astench
Gather up thou wench.
See thou not what is fall
Take up drit and all.
And bear out of the hal
God give it il preuing.
Clenly as euel cheuing
But let us turn plain,
There we left again
For as ill a patch as that.
The hens run in the mash fat
For they go to roust
Straight over the ale ioust
And donge when it commes
In the ale tons
Then Elinour takes.
The mash bol and shakes
The hens donge away.
And skommeth it in a tray
Where as the yest is.
With her maungy fistis
And sometime she blens.
The donge of her hens
And the ale together.
And says gossip come hither
This ale shall be thicker
And flower the more quicker
For I may tell you
I learned it of a Jew
Wham I began to brewe
And I have found it true
Drink now while it is new
And ye may it broke
It shall make you look
Younger then ye be
Years two or three
For ye may prove it by me
Behold she said and see
How bright I am of ble
Ich am not cast away
That can my husband say
When we kyste and play
In lust and in likynge
He calls me his whiting
His mullinge and his nittine
His nobbes and his connye
His sweting and his honny
With basse my pretty bonny
Thou art worth good and monny
This make I my falyre fanny
Till that he dream and dronnye
For after all our sport
Than will he rout and snort
Then swetely together we ly
As two pigs in a stye.
To cease me seems best
And of this tale to reast
And for to leave this letter
Because it is no better
And because it is no swetter
We will no farther ryme
Of it, at this time
But we will turn plain
Where we left again.
Tertius passus.
Instead of coin and monny
Sum bring her a conny
And some a pot with honni
Some a salt, and some a spone
Some their hose, some there shone
Some ran a good trot
With a skyllet or a pot
Some fill their pot full
Of good Lemster woll
An huswife of trust
When she is a thrust
Such a web can spyn
Her thryfte is full thyn
Some go strayghte thither
Be it slaty or slider
They hold the hye way
They care not what men say
Be that as be may
Some loathe to be espyde
Some start in at the back side
Over the hedge and pale
And all for the good ale
Some run till they sweet
Bring with them malt or whete
And dame Elinoure entreaet
To byrle them of the best
Than comes an other gest
She swered by the rode of rest
Her lyppes are so dry
Without drink she must dye
Therefore till it by and by
And have here a pecke of ry
Anon comes another
As dry as the other
And with her does bring
Mele, salt, or other thing
Her harnest girdle, her wedding ringe
To pay for her scot
As comes to her lot
Some brings her husbands hood
Because the ale is good
A another brought her his cap
To offer to the ale tap
With flax and with towe
And some brought sour dow
With hey and with how
Sit we down a row
And drink till we blow
And pype tirlye tyrlowe
Some laid to pledge
Their hatchet and their wedge
Their hekell and their rele
Their rock, their spinni^g whele
And some went so narrow
They laid to pledge their wharrow
Their rihskin and their spindell
Their nedel and their thimbell
Here was scante thryste
When they made such shyfte
Their thrust was so great
They asked never for meat
But drink still drink
And let the cat wink
Let us wash our gommes
From the dry crommes
Quartus passus.
Some for very need
Lay down a skain of threde
And some a skain of yarne
Both Beans and pease
Small Chaffer does ease
Sometime, now and than
Another there was that ran
With a good brassepan
Her color was full wan
She ran in all the haste
Unbrased and vnlaste
Tawnye swart and swallowe
Like a cake of tallowe
I swear by all hallowe
It was a stare to take
The Devil in a brake.
And than came halting Ione
And brought a gambone
Of bakon that was reastye
But Lord as she was testye
Angrye as a waspye
She began to yane and gaspy
And bad Elynoure go bet
And fill in good meat
It was dear that was far fet
Another brought a spycke
Of a bacon flicke
Her tongue was very quick
But she spoke somewhat thick
Her fellow did stammer and stut
But she was a foul slut
For her mouth fomed
And her bellye groned
Ione said she had eaten a fyest
By Christ said she thou lie
I have as sweet a breathe
As thou with shameful death
Then Elinour said, ye callettes
I shall break your palettes
Without ye now cease
And so was made the dronken peace
Than thider came droncken Ales
And she was full of tales
Of tidinges in Wales.
And of saint James in Gales
And of the Portyngales
With lo gossip I wis
Thus and thus it is
There has been great war
Between temple bar
And the cross in cheap
And there came and heap
Of mil stones in a route
She speaks thus in her snoute
Sneuelynge in her nose
As though she had the pose
Lo here is an old tippet
And ye will give me a sippet
Of your stale ale
God send you good sale
And as she was drinking
She fell in a wynkynge
With a barlye hoode
She pyste where she stood
Than began she to weep
And forthwith fell on flepe
Elynoure took her up
And blessed her with acup
Of new ale in corns
Ales found therein no thorns
But supped it up at ones
She found therein no bones
Quintus passus.
Now in comes another rabel
First one with a ladell
Another with a cradell
And with a side sadel
And there began a fabel
A clatterynge and a babell
Of foles silly
That had a fool with willy
With iast you, and gup gillye
She could not lie stillye
Then came in a genet
And swear by saint Bennet
I drank not this sennet
A draughte to my pay
Elynoure I the pray
Of thine ale let us assaye.
And have here a pilch of gray
I wear skins of Conye
That causes I look so donny
Another than did hyche her
And brought a pottel pycher
A tonnel, and a bottel
But she had lost the stoppel
She cut of her sho sole
And stopped there with the hole.
Among all the blommer
Another brought a skommer
A frying pan and a slice
Elynoure made the price
For good ale each whit.
Than starte in mad kyt
That had little wit
She seemed some deal seek
And brought up a penny cheke
To dame Elinoure
For a draughte of lycour.
Than Margery milk ducke
Her kirtell she did up tucke
An ynche above her kne
Her legs that ye might se
But they were sturdy and stubbled
Mighty pestels and clubbed
As fair and as white
As the foot of a kite
She was somewhat foul
Croke necked like an Owl
And yet she brought her fees
A cantel of Essex chese
Was well a foot thick
Full of magottes quick
It was huge and great
And mighty strong meat
For the devil to eat
It was tarte and punyete
Another sort of sluttes
Some brought walnutes
Some apples, some pears
Some brought their clippinge sheres
Some brought this and that
Some brought I wot near what
Some brought their husbands hat
Some podynges and lynkes
Some tripes that stinkes
But of all this thronge
One came them among
She seemed half a leche
And began to preach
Of the tewesday in the weke
When the mare does keke
Of the virtue of an unset leke
Of her husbands break
With the feders of a quail
She could to bourde on sail
And with good ale barme
She could make a charm
To healpe with all a stytche
She seemed to be a wytche
Another brought. ii. goslings
That were noughty froslings
Some brought the^ in a wallet
She was a cumlye callet
The goslinges were untied
Elinour began to chide
They be wrethocke thou haste brout
They are shyre shaking naught
Sextus passus.
Maud ruggy, thither skipped
She was vglye hipped
And vglye thick lipped
Like an Onion sided
Like tan ledder hided
She had her so guided
Between the cup and and the wall
That she was there with all
Into a palsy fall
With that her head shaked
And her hands quaked
Ones head would have aked
To se her naked
She drank so of the dregs
The dropsy was in her legs
Her face glistring like glass
All foggye fat she was
She had also the gout
In all her joints about
Her breath was sour and stale
And smelled all of ale
Such a bedfellawe
Would make one cast his craw
But yet for all that
She drancke on the mashe fat
There came an old rybibe
She halted of a kybe
And had broken her shyn
At the threshold cummyng in
And fell so wide open
That one might se her token
Te devil there on be wroken
What need all this be spoken
She yelled like a calfe
Rise up on gods half
Said Elynoure rummynge
I be shrewe the for thy cummyng
As she at her did pluck
Quake, quake, said the ducke
In that lampatrams lap
With fie, cover the shap
With sum flip flap
God give it ill hap
Said Elynoure for shame
Like an honest daine
Up she stearte, half lame
And skantlye could go
For pain and for woe
In came another dant
With a gose and a gant
She had a wide wesant
She was nothing pleasant
Necked like an Oliphant
It was a bullifant
A gredy cormerante
A another brought her garlik heds
A another brought her bedes
Of Iet or of coal
To offer to the ale pole
Some brought a wimble
Some brought a thymble
Some brought a silk lace
Some brought a pincase
Some her husbands gown
Some a pillowe of down
Some of the napery
And all this shyfte they make
For the good ale sake
A straw said bele stand utter
For we have eggs and butter
And of pigeons a pair.
Than sterte forth a fisgigge
And she brought a bore pigge
The flesh thereof was rank
And her breath strongly stanke
Yet or she went she drank
And gate her great thancke
Of Elynoure for her ware
That she thither bare
To pay for her share
Now truly to my thinking
This is a solemn drinkyng
Septimus passus.
Soft quod one high Sibbil
And let me with you bib^ill
She sat down in the place
With a sorye face
Whey wormed about
Garnished was her snoute
With here and there a puscul
Like a scabbed muscull
This ale said she is noppy
Let us sippe and soppy
And not spil a droppy
For so mote I hoppye
It coleth well my copy
Dame Elinoure said she
Have here is for me
A cloute of London pinnes
And with that she begins
The pot to her pluck
And drank a good luck
She swinge up a quarte
At ones for her part
Her paunche was so puffed
And so with ale stuffed
Had she not hyed a pace
She had defoyled the place
Than began the sport
Among, that dronken fort
Dame Elynoure said they
Lend here a cock of hay
To make all thing clean
Ye wot well what we mean
But sir among all
That sat in that hall
There was a prick me deintie
Sat like a saintye
And began to paintye
As though she would fainty
She made it as koy
As a lege demoy
She was not half so wise
As she was peuysh nyse
She said never a word
But rose from the board
And called for our dame
Elynoure by name
We supposed I wys
That she rose to piss
But the very ground
Was for to compounde
With Elynour in the spence
To pay for her expense
I have no penny nor grote
To pay said she, god wot
For washinge of my throat
But my bedes of amber
Bear them to your chaumber
Then Elynour did them hide
Within her beds side
But some than sat right sad
That nothing had
There of their one
Neither gelt nor pawn
Such were there mennye
That had not a pennye
But when they should walk
Were feign with a chalk
To score on the balke
Or score on the tail
God give it ill hayle
For my fyngers ytche
I have written to much
Of this mad mummyng
Of Elynoure Rummynge
Thus ends the gest
Of this worthy felt.
Quod Skeleton Laureat.

Laurratiskeltonidis in despectu malignantium disticon.
QVdmuis infanis, quanuis marcescis inams
Iuuidi cantamus, hec loca plena locis
Bien men sounient.
OMnes feminas, que uel nimis bibule sunt, uel que scordida labe squaloris, aut
quamspuria feditatis macula, aut uerbosa laquatita te notantur, poeta inuitat
ad audicndum hunc libellum, etc.

EBric, squalida, sordida femini, perdiga uerbis
Huc currat, properet ueniat suafacta libellus
Iste uolutabit: pean sua plectra sonando
Materiam risus cantabit carmine rauco.
FINIS.
Quod Skeleton Laureate.

Here after follows a little (...) which has to name, why co^^ ye not to
Court Comoned by Master Skeleton poet Laureate. The relucent mirror for all
Prela Presidents as well spiritual as temporal sadly to look upon devised in
English by Skeleton.
All noble men of this take heed and leave it as your Creed.
TO hastye of sentence
To fearce for none offense
To scarce of your expense
To large in negligence
To slack in recompense
To haut in excellence
To light intellygence
And to light incredence
Where these keep resydence
Reason is banished thence
And also dame prudence
With sober patience
All noble men. etc.
Than without collusion
Mark well this conclusion
Through such abusion
And by such illusion
Unto great confusion
A noble man may fall
And his honor appall
And if ye think this shall
Not rub you on the gall
Than the devil take all. etc.
Hoc vates ille, de quo loquntur in ille.
Why come ye not to Court.
FOr age is a page
For the court full unmeet
For age can not rage
Nor basse her sweet sweet
But when age sees that rage
Does aswage and refrain
Than will age have a courage
To come to court again
But
Helas, sage ouerage
To madly decays
That age for dottage
Is recovered now a days
Thus age grant damage
Is nothing set by
And rage in a rerage
Does run lamentably.
So
That rage must make pillage
To catch that catch may
And with such forage
Hunte the boskage
That hearts will run away
Both Hearts and hindes
With all good minds
Fare well, than have good day
Than have good day a dew
For defaute of rescew
Some men may happily rue
And their heads mew
The time does fast ensew
That bales begin to brew
I dread by sweet Jesus
This tale will be to true
In faith dicken thou crew.
In faith dicken, thou crew. etc.
DIcken, thou crew doutles
For truly to express
There has be much exces
With banketyng braynlesse
With ryoting rechles
With gambaudyng thryftles
With spend, and waste witles
Treating of truce restless
Pratyng for peace peaslesse
They countring at Cales
Wrange us on the wales
Chief Councelour was careless
Gronyng grouching graceles
And to none intent
Our talwod is all brent
Our fagottes are all spent
We may blow at the cole
Our mare has cast her fool
And mock has lost her shoo
What may she do thertoo
An end of an old song
Do right and no wrong
As right as a rams horn
For thrift is threde bare worn
Our sheep are shrewdlye shorn
And truth is all to torn
Wisdom is laughed to scorn
Fauel is false forsworn
Iauel is nobly borne
Hauel and Haruy hafter
Jack Travel and Cole crafter
We shall hear more hereafter
With polling and shauynge
With borowyng and crauyng
With reuyng and rauyng
With swearing and staryng
There vayleth no reasonyng
For will does rule al thing
Will, will, will, will, will,
He rules always still
Good reason and good skyll
They may garlic pill
Carry sackes to the mil
Or pescoddes they may shil
Or else go roste a stone
There is no man but one
That has the strokes alone
Be it black or white
All that he does is right
As right as a Cammocke crooked
This bil well over looked
Clearly perceive we may
There went the hare away
The hare, the For, the Gray,
The heart, the hind, the bucke
God send us better luck.
God send us better luck. etc.
TWit Andrew, twit Scot
Ge heme, ge scour thy pot
For we have spent our shot
We shall have a tot quot
From the Pope of Rome
To weaue all in one lome
A web of Lylse wulce
Opus male dulce.
The devil kiss his cule
For whiles he does rule
All is warse and warse
The devil kiss his arse
For whether he bless or curse
It can not be much worse
From Baumberow to both a^bar
We have cast up our war
And made a worthy truse
With gup leuel suse
Our money madly sent
And more madly spent
From Croydon to Kent
Wot ye whither they went?
From winchelsy to Rye
And all not worth a fly
From wentbridge to Hull
Our army waxes dull
With turn all home again
And never a scot slain
Yet the good Earl of Surray
The french men he does fraye
And vexes them day by day
With all the power he may
The frenchemen he has fainted
And made their hertes attainted
Of cheualry he is the flour
Our Lord be his succoure
The french men he has so mated
And their courage abated
That they are but half men
Like foxes in their den
Like cankerd cowardes all
Like heons in a stone wall
Tey keep them in their holds
Like hen herted cokoldes
But yet they over shoot us
With crowns and with scutus
With Scutes and crowns of gold
I dread we are bought and sold
It is a wonders warke
They shoot all at one mark
At the Cardinals hat
They shote all at that
Out of their strong towns
They shote at him with crowns
With crowns of gold enblased
They make him so a mased
And his eyes so dafed
That he ne see can
To know God nor man
He is set so hye
In his Ierarchy
Of frantike frenesy
And folysh fantasy
That in the chamber of stars
All matters there he mars
Clapping his rod on the board
No man dare speak a word
For he has all the saying
Without any renaying
He rolleth in his records
He says, how say ye my lords?
Is not my reason good
Good euin good Robin hood
Some say yes. And some
Sit still as they were dome
Thus thwarting over thome
He rules all the roste
With bragging and with boste
Borne up on every side
With pomp and with pride
With trompe up alleluya
For dame Philargerya
Has so his heart in hold
He loves nothing but gold
And Asmodeus of hell
Makes his members swel
With Dalyda to mell
That wanton damsel
A dew Philosophia
A dew theologia
Welcome dame Simonia
With dame Castrimergia
To drink and for to eat
Sweet Ipocras and sweet meat
To keep his flesh chaste
In lent for a repaste
He eats Capons stewed
Fesaunt, and Partriche mewed
Hens, chickins and pigges
He foynes and he frigges
Spares neither maid ne wife
This is a postels life
Helas my heart is sorry
To tell of vain glory
But now upon this story
I will no further rhyme
Till another time
Till another time.
VUhat news what news
Small news that true is
That be worth two kues
But at the naked stews
I understand how that
The sign of the Cardinal hat
That Inn is now shit up
With gup whore gup, now gup
Gup Gilliam Trauillian
With iast you I say Iullian
Will ye bear no coals
A mainy of marefolles
That occupy their holes
Full of pocky moles.
What hear ye of Lancashire
They were not paid their hyre
They are fell as any fire
What hear ye of Chesshyre
They have laid all in the mire
They grudge and said
Their wages were not paid
Some said they were afraid
Of the Scottishe host
For all their crake and boste
Wild fire and thunder
For all this worldly wonder
A hundred mile a sunder
They were when they were next
That is a true text
What hear ye of the scotts
They make us all sottes
Poppyng folysh dawes
They make us to pyll strawes
They play their old prankes
After huntly banks
At the streme of Banokes burns
They did us a shrewde turn
When Edward of karnaruan
Lost all that his father wan
What here ye of the lord dakers
He makes us Jack rakers
He says we are but crakers
He calls us England men
Strong hearted like an hen
For the scotts and he
To well they do agree
With do thou for me
And I shall do for thee
Whiles the red hat does endure
He makes himself cock sure
The red hat with his lure
Brings al things under cure
But as the world now goose
What hear ye of the Lord Rose
Nothing to purpose
Not worth a cockly fose
Their hertes be in their hose
The Earl of Northumberland
Dare take nothing on hand
Our barons be so bold
Into a mouse hole they would
Run away and creep
Like a mainy of sheep
Dare not look out a dur
For dread of the maystife cur
For dread of the bouchers dog
Would wirry them like an hog
For and this curre do gnar
They must stand all a far
To hold up their hand at the bat
For all their noble blood
He pluckes them by the hood
And shakes them by the ear
And bring them in such fear
He baiteth them like a bear
Like an ox or a bull
Their wits he says are dull
He says they have no brain
Their estate to maintain
And make to bow their knee
Before his maiestee.
Judges of the kings laws
He countes them foles and dawes
Sergeauntes of the coyfe cke
He says they are to seek
^n pleating of their case
At the commune place
Or at the kings benche
He wringeth the^ such a wrenche
That all our learned men
Dare not set their pen
To plete a true trial
Within westminster hall
In the chau^cery where he sittes
But such as he admittes
None so hardy to speak
He says, thou huddy peake
They learning is to lewd
Thy tongue is not well thewde
To seek before our grace
And openly in that place
He rages and he raues
And calls them cankerd knaves
Thus royally he does deal
Under the kings broad seal
And in the checker he the^ checkes
In the ster chamber he nods and becks
And bears him there so stout
That no man dare rout
Duke, Earl, Baron, nor Lord
But to his sentence must accord
Whether he be knight or squire
All men follow his desire
What say ye of the scottish king
That is another thing
He is but an yonglyng
A tall worthy striplyng
Her is a whispring and a whiplyng
He should be hither brought
But and it were well sought
I trow all will be naught
Not worth a shittel cock
Nor worth a sour calstocke
There goes many a lie
Of the duke of Albany
That of should go his head
And brought in quick or dead
And all Scotland ours
The mou^tenaunce of two hours
But as some men sayn
I dread of some false trayn
Subtelly wrought shall be
Under a fained treat
But within months three
Men may happily see
The treachery, and the prankes
Of the Scottishe banks
What hear ye of Burgonions
And the Spanyardes Onions?
They have slain our Englishmen
Above three score and ten
For all your amitee
No better they agree
God save my Lord Admirell
What hear ye of Muttrel?
There with I dare not mel
Yet what hear ye tell
Of our graund counsel?
I could say some what
But speak ye no more of that
For dread of the red hat
Take peper in the nose
For than thine head of gose
Of by the hard arse
But there is some trauars
Between some and some
That makes our sire to glum
It is some what wrong
That his berde is so long
He morneth in black clothing
I pray god save the king
Where ever he go or ride
I pray God be his guide
Thus will I conclude my style
And fall to rest a while
And so to rest a while. etc.
ONce yet again
Of you I would fraine
Why come ye not to court
To which court?
To the kings court
Or to Hampton court?
Nay to the kings court
The kings court
Should have the exellence
But hampton court
Has the preeminence
And yorkes place
With my Lords grace
To whose magnificence
Is all the confluence
Suits and supplications
Embassades of all nations
Straw for law canon
Or for the law common
Or for law civil
It shall be as he will
Stop at law tancrete
An obstract or a concrete
Be it sour be it sweet
His wisdom is so discrete
That in a fume or an hete
Warden of the flete
Set him fast by the fete
And of his royal pour
When him list to loure
Than have him to the toure
Saunz altar remedy
Have him forth by and by
To the marshalsy
Or to the kings benche
He diggeth so in the trench
Of the court royal
That he rules them all
So he does vndermynde
And such sleightes does find
That the kings mind
By him is subverted
And so streatly coarted
In credensing his tales
That all is but nutshales
That any other says
He has in him such faith
Now, yet all this might be
Suffered and taken in gree
If that, that he wrought
To any good end were brought
But all he brings to naught
But God that me dear bought
He bears the king on hand
That he must pyl his land
To make his cofers rych
But he lays al in the dyche
And uses such abusion
That in the conclusion
All comes to confusion
Perceive the cause why
To tell the troth plainlye
He is so ambicious
So shameless, and so vicious
And so supersticious
And so much obliuious
From whe^s that he came
That he falls in Acisiam
Which truly to express
Is a forgetfulness
Or wylful blindness
Wherewith the Sodomites
Lost their inward sightes
The gommorians also
Were brought to deadly woe
As scripture records
A cecitate cordis
In the latin sing we
Libera nos domine
But this mad Amalecke
Like to Amamelek
He regards Lords
No more than pot shordes
He is in such elacion
Of his exaltacion
And the supportacion
Of our sovereign Lords
That God to record
He rules al at will
Without reason or skyll
Howbeit they be prymordyall
Of his wretched original
And his base progeny
And his gresy genealogy
He came of the sanke royal
That was cast out of a bouchers stall.
But how ever he was borne
Men would have the less scorn
If he could consider
His birth and rowme together
And call to his mind
How noble and how kind
To him he has found
Our sovereign lord, chief ground
Of all this prelacy
And set him nobly
In great aucthorite
Out from a low degree
Which he can not see
For he was parde
No doctor of deuinttie
Nor doctor of the law
Nor of none other saw
But a pore master of art
God wot had little part
Of the Quatriuials
Nor yet of triuials
Nor of philosophye
Nor of philology
Nor of good policy
Nor of Astronomy
Nor acquainted worth a fly
With honorable haly
Nor with royal Ptholomy
Nor with Albumasar
To treat of any star
Fyxt or else mobil
His latin tongue does hobbyl
He does but clout and cobbel
In tullis faculty
Called humanity
Yet proudly he dare pretend
How no ma can him amend
But have ye not heard this
How an one eyed man is
Well sighted, when
He is among blind men.
Than our process for to stable
This man was full unable
To reche to such degree
Had not our Prince be
Royal henry the eight
Take him in such conceyte
That he set him on heyght
In exemplyfieng
Great Alexander the king
In writing as we find
Which of his royal mind
And of his noble pleasure
Transcending out of measure
Thought to do a thing
That pertains to a king
To make up one of naught
And made to him be brought
A wretched poor man
Which his living wan
With planting of Leekes
By the days and by the weeks
And of this pore vassal
He made a king royal
And gave him a realm to rule
That occupied a showel
A mattoke, and a spade
Before that he was made
A king, as I have told
And ruled as he would
Such is a kings power
To make within an hour
And work such a miracle
That shall be a spectacle
Of renown and worldly fame
In likewise now the same
Cardinal, is promoted
Yet with lewd conditions noted
As hereafter been noted
Presumpcion and vain glory
Envy, wrath, and lechery
Couetes, and gluttony
Slothful to do good
Now frantike, now stark wode
Should this man of such mode
Rule the sword of might
How can he do right
For he will as soon smyght
His friend, as his foe
A proverb long ago
Set up a wretch on hye
In a trone triumphantly
Make him a great estate
And he will play check mate
With royal maiestee
Count himself as good as he
A prelate potenciall
To rule under Bellyall
As ferce and as cruel
As the feende of hell
His servants meniall
He does revile and brall
Like Mahound in a play
No man dare him with say
He has dispight and scorn
At them that be well borne
He rebukes them and rayles
Ye horsons, ye vassayles
Ye knaves, ye churles sons
Ye ribauds, not worth two plu^ms
Ye rainbeaten beggars reiagged
Ye recrayed ruffins all ragged
With stoop thou hauel
Run thou iauel
Thou peuishe pie pecked
Thou losel long necked
Thus daily they be decked
Taunted and checked
That they are so woe
They wot not whether to go.
No man dare come to the speech
Of this gentel Jack breche
Of what estate he be
Of spiritual dignity
Nor duke of hye degree
Nor Marquis, Earl, nor Lord
Which shrewdly does accord
Thus he borne so base
All noble men should out face
His countinaunce like a kayser
My Lord is not at layser
Sir ye must tarry a stound
Till better layser be found
And sir, ye must dance attendaunce
And take pacient sufferaunce
For my Lords grace
Has now no time nor space
To speak with you, as yet
And thus they shall sit
Choose them sit or flit
Stand, walk, or ride
And his laiser abide
Parchaunce half a year
And yet never the nere
This dangerous dowsipere
Like a kings pere
And within this. xvi. year
He would have been right fayn
To have been a chaplayn
And have taken right great pain
With a pore knight
What so ever he hight
The chief of his own counsel
They can not well tell
When they with him should mel
He is so fierce and fell
He rayles and he rates
He calls them doddy pates
He grinnes and he gapes
As it were Jack Napes
Such a mad Bedlem
For to rule this realm
It is a wondrous case
That the kings grace
Is toward him so minded
And so far blinded
That he can not perceive
How he does him disce yue
I dought least by Sorsery
Or such other loselry
As witch craft, or charming
For he is the kings derlyng
And his sweet heart rote
And is governed by this mad koote
For what is a man the better
For the kings letter
For he will tere it a sunder
Whereat much I wonder
How such a hoddy poule
So boldly dare control
And so malapertly withstand
The kings own hand
And settes not by it a mite
He says the king does write
And writes he wot not what
And yet for all that
The king his clemency
Despenseth with his demensy
But what his grace does think
I have no pen nor ynke
That therewith can mel
But well I can tell
How Fraunces Petrarke
That much noble clerk
Writes how charlemaine
Could not himself refrain
But was ravished with a rage
Of a like dotage
But how that came about
Read ye the story out
And ye shall find surely
It was by nicromansy
By carectes and coniuracion
Under a certain constellacion
And a certain fumigacion
Under a stone on a gold ryng
Wrought to Charlemain yt king
Which constrained him forcebly
For to love a certain body
Above all other inordinatlye
This is no fable nor no lie
At Acon it was brought to pas
As by mine auctor tried it was
But let my masters mathematical
Tell you the rest, for me they shall
They have the full intelligence
And dare use the experience
In there obsolute conscience
To practique such abolete science
For I abhor to smatter
Of one so deuillyshe a matter
But I will make further relacion
Of this Isagogicall colation
How master Gaguine the crownicler
Of the feats of war
That were done in France
Makes remembrance
How king Jews of Late
Made up a great estate
Of a pore wretched man
Whereof much care began
Johannes Balua was his name
Mine auctor writes the same
Promoted was he
To a Cardinals dignity
By Jews the king aforesaid
With him so well apayd
That he made him his chaunceler
To make all, or to mar
And to rule as him list
Till he checked at the fiste
And again all reason
Committed open treason
And against his lord souerain
Wherefore he suffered pain
Was heded drawn and quarterd
And dyed stinkyngly martred
Lo yet for all that
He ware a cardinals hat
In him was small faith
As mine auctor says
Not for that I mean
Such a casuelty should be seen
Or such chance should fall
Unto our Cardinal.
Almightye God I trust
Has for him discuste
That of force he must
Be faithful, true and just
To our most royal king
Chief rote of his making
Yet it is a wilye mouse
That ca^ bylde his dwelling house
Within the cattes ears
Withouten dread or fear
It is a nice reconing
To put all the gouernyng
All the rule of this land
Into one man's hand
One wise man's head
May stand somewhat instead
But the wits of many wise
Much better can devise
By their circumspection
And their sad direction
To cause the commune weal
Long to endure in heal
Christ keep king Henry the eight
From treachery and disceipt
And grant him grace to know
The Faucon from the Crow
The wolf from the Lamb
From whens that maistife came
Let him never confound
The gentil greyhound
Of this matter the ground
Is easy to expound
And sone may be perceived
How the world is conveyed
But hark my friend one word
In earnest or in board
Tell me now in this stead
Is master Mewtas dead
The kings french secretary
And his untrue adversary
For he sent in writing
To fraunces the french king
of our masters counsel in eueri thing
That was a perilous rekenyng
Nay nay, he is not dead
But he was so payned in the head
That he shall never eat more bred
Now he is gone to another stead
With a Bull under lead
By way of commission
To a strange jurisdiction
Called Diminges Dale
Far beyond portyngale
And has his pasporte to pas
Ultra sauro matas
To the devil sir Sathanas
To Pluto and sir Bellyal
The devils vicare general
And to his college conuentuall
As well calodemonial
As to cacademoniall
To purney for our Cardinal
A palace pontifical
To keep his court provincial
Upon articles judicial
To contend and to, strive
For his prerogative
Within that consistory
To make sommons peremptorye
Before some prothono^ory
Imperial or papal
Upon this matter mystical
I have told you part, but not all
Here after perchance I shall
Make a large memorial
And a further rehersall
And more paper I think to blot
To the court why I came not
Desiring you above all thing
To keep you from laughyng
When ye fall to redyng
Of this wanton scrowle
And pray for Mewtas soul
For he is well past and gone
That would god every chone
Of his affinity
Were gone as well as he
Amen, amen, say ye
Of your inward charity.
Amen.
Of your inward charity.
IT were great ruthe
For writing of truth
Any manne should be
In perplexity
Of displeasure
For I make you sure
Where troth is abhord
It is a plain record
That there wantes grace
In whose place
Does occupye
Full ungraciously
Falls flattery
Falls treachery
Falls bryberye
Subtyle Sym Sly
With mad folly
For who can best lie
He is best set by
Than farewell to thee
Welthfull felicitee
For prosperity
Away than will flee
Than must we agree
With pouertye
For misery
With penurye
Miserably
And wretchedly
Has made Askry
And out cry
Following the chase
To drive away grace
Yet say thou percase
We can lack no grace
For my Lords grace
And my Ladies grace
With trey deuse ase
And ase in the face
Some haute and some bace
Some dance the trace
Ever in one case
Mark me that chase
In the Tennis play
For sink quater trey
Is a tal man
He rod, but we ran
Hay the gye and the began
The graye goose is no swan
The waters wax wan
And beggars they ban
And they cursed datan
De tribu dan
That this work began
Palam et clam
With Balak and Balam
The golden ram
Of flemmyng dam
Sem, Iapheth, or came?
But how come to pas
Your cupboorde that was
Is turned to glass
From silver to brass
From gold to pewter
Or else to a newter
To copper, to tyn
To lead, or Alcumin
A goldsmyth your Mayre
But the chief of your fair
Might stand now by potters
And such as sell trotters
Pytchars potshordes
This shrewdly accordes
To be a cupborde for Lords
My lord now and sir knight
Good even and good night
For now sir Tristram
Ye must wear buckram
Or Canuas of Cane
For silks are wane
Our royals that shone
Our nobles are gone
Among the Burgonions
And spanyardes Onyons
And the Flanderkyns
Gyl sweates and Cate spinnes
They are happy that wynnes
But England may well say
Fie on this winnyng always
Now nothing, but pay pay
With laughe and lay down
Borough, City and town
Good Spring of Lanam
Must count what became
Of his clothe making
He is at such taking
Though his purse wax dull
He must tax for his wul
By nature of a new writ
My Lords grace names it
A quia non satisfacit
In the spite of his teeth
He must pay again
A thousand or twayn
Of his gold in store
And yet he paid before
An hunderd pound and more
Which pincheth him sore
My Lords grace will bring
Down this hye spring
And bring it so low
It shall not ever flow
Such a prelate I trow
Were worthy to row
Through the streytes Marocke
To the gybbet of Baldock
He would dry up the streams
Of. ix. Kings realm
Al rivers and wels
Al waters that swells
For with us he so mels
That within England dwells
I would he were somwhere else
For else by and by
He will drink us so dry
And suck us so nigh
That men shall scantly
Have penny or halpennye
God save his noble grace
And grant him a place
Endless to dwell
With the devil of hell
For and he were there
We nead never fear
Of the feendes black
For I under take
He would so brag and crake
That he would than make
The devils to quake
To shudder and to shake
Like a fire drake
And with a cole rake
Bruise them on a brake
And bind them to a stake
And set hell on fire
At his own desire
He is such a grym sire
And such a potestolate
And such a potestate
That he would break the brains
Of Lucifer in his chains
And rule them each one
In Lucifers trone
I would he were gone
For among us is none
That rules, but he alone
With out all good reason
And all out of season
For Folam Peason
With him be not geson
They grow very rank
Upon every bank
Of his herbers green
With my lady bright and sheene
On their game it is seen
They play not al cleen
And it be as I ween
But as touching discretion
With sober direction
He keeps them in subjection
They can have no protection
To rule nor to guide
But all must be tryde
And abide the correction
Of him will full affection
For as for will
The devil speed whitte
But brainsicke and braynlesse
Witles and reachlesse
Careless and shameless
Thriftles and graceless
To gether are bended
And so condiscended
That the commune wealth
Shall never have good health
But tatterd and tugged
Ragged, and rugged
Shaven and shorn
And all threde bare worn
Such gredines
Such nedines
Miserablenes
With wretchedness
Has brought in distres
And much heaviness
And great dolor
England the Flour
Of relucent honor
In old commemoracion
Most royal English nation
Now all is out of facion
Almost in desolation
I speak by protestacion
God of his miseracion
Send better reformacion
Lo, for to do shamfully
He judges it no folly
But to write of his shame
He says we are to blame
What a frensi is this
No shame to do amys
And yet he is a shamed
To be shamefully named
And often prechours be blamed
Because they have proclaimed
His madness by writing
His simplenes resiting
Remording and biting
With chiding and with fiting
Showing him gods laws
He calls the preachers dawes.
And of holy scriptures sawes
He counts them for gigawes
And puts them to scilence
And with words of violence
Like Pharao, void of grace
Did Moses sore manase
And Aron sore he thret
The word of God to let
This maumet in likewise
Against the church does rise
The preachoure he does despise
With crakyng in such wise
So bragging all with bost
That no preachour almost
Dare speak for his life
Of my lords grace, nor his wife
For he has such a bull
He may take whom he wul
And as many as him likes
May eat pigges in lent for pykes
After the sects of heretics
For in lent he will eat
Al manner of flesh meat
That he can any where geat
With other abusions great
Whereof to trete
It would make the devil to swet
For all priuileged places
He brekes and defaces
All places of religion
He has them in derision
And makes such provision
To drive them at division
And finally inconclusion,
To bring them to confusion
Saint Albons to record
Whereof this ungracious Lord
Has made himself abbot
Against their wills god wot
All this he does deal
Under strength of the great seall
And by his legacy
Which madly he does apply
Unto an extrauagancye
Pyked out all good law
With reasons that been raw
Yet when he took first his hat
He said he knew what was what
Al justice he pretended
Al things should be amended
Al wrongs he would redress
Al injuries he would repres
Al periuries he would oppress
And yet this graceles elfe
He is perjured himself
As plainlye it does appear
Who list to enquere
In the regestry
Of my Lord of Cantorbury
To whowe he was professed
In three points expressed
The first to do him reverence
The second to owe him obedience
The third with whole affection
To be under his subjection
But now he makes objection
Under the protection
Of the kings great seal
That he sets never a deal
By his former oath
Whether god be pleased or wroth
He makes so proud presence
That in his equipolens
He judges him equivalent
With God omnipotent
But yet beware the rod
And the stroke of God
The Apostel Peter
Had a pore miter
And a pore cope
When he was create Pope
First in Antioche
He did never approach
Of Rome to the sea
With such dignity
Saint dunstan what was he
Nothing he says like to me
There is a diversity
Between him and me
We pass him in degree
As legatus a latere
Ecce sacerdos magnus
That will head us and hang us
And straightly strangle us
That he may fang us
Decre and decretall
Constitucion provincial
Nor no law canonical
Shall let the priest pontifical
To sit in cansa sanguinis
Now god amend that is amiss
For I suppose that he is
Of Jeremy the whisking rod
The flayle, the scourge
Of almighty God
This Naman Sirus
So fell and so irous
So full of me lancoly
With a flap before his eye
Men wene that he is pocky
Or else his surgions they lie
For as far as they can spy
By the craft of surgery
It is manus domini
And yet this proud Antiochus
He is so ambicious
So elate, and so vicious
And so cruel hearted
That he will not be converted
For he sets God a part
He is now so overthwart
And so payned with panges
That al his trust hanges
In Balthasor, which healed
Domingos nose, that was wheled
That Lumberdes nose mean I
That stands yet a wry
It was not healed alderbest
It stands somewhat on the west
I mean Domingo Lomelyn
That was wont to win
Much money of the king
At the cards and haserding
Balthasor that healed domingos pose
From the puskilde pocky pose
Now with his gummes of araby
Has promised to hele our cardnals eye
Yet sum surgions put a dout
Lest he will put it clean out
And make him lame of his nether lims
God send him sorrow for his sins
Sum men might ask a question
By whose suggestion
I took on hand this warke
Thus boldly for to bark
And men list to hark
And my words mark
I will answer like a clerk
For truly and unfeigned
I am forcebly constrained
At Iuuinals request
To wryght of this glorious gest
Of this vain glorious beast
His fame to be encrcast
At every solemn feast
Quia aifficile est
Satiram non scribere?
Now master doctor, how say ye
What so ever your name be
What though ye be namelesse
Ye shall not escape blameless
Nor yet shall escape shameless
Master doctor in your degree
Yourself madly ye over see
Blame Iuuinall and blame not me
Master doctor diricum
Omne, animi uicium. etc.
As Iuuinall does record
A small defaute in a great Lord
A little crime in a great estate
Is much more inordinate
And more horrible to behold
Than any other a thousand fold
Ye put to blame ye wo^ nere whom
Ye may wear a cocks coome
Your fond head in your furred hood
Hold ye your tongue ye can no good
And at more convenient time
I may fortune for to rhyme
Somewhat of your madness
For small is your sadness
To put any man in lack
And say ill behind his back
And my words mark truly
That ye cannot bide thereby
For Smigma non est sinamomum
But de absentibus nil nisi bonum
Complain or do what ye will
Of your complaint it shall not skill
This is the tenor of my bil
A daucocke ye be, and so shall be still
Sequitur Epitoma
de morbilloso Thoma
Nec non obsceno
de poliphemo. etc.
POrro perbelle dissimulatum
Illum pandulohum tantum legatum
Tam formldatum nuper prelatum
Sen. Naman sirum nunc longatum
Insolitudine iam commoratum
Neapolitano morbo grauatum
Malagmate, cataplasmati statum
Pharma copoli ferro foratum
Nihilo magis alleuiatum
Nihilo melius aut medicatum
Relictis famulis ad famulatum
Quod tollatur infamia
Sed mayor patet insania
Amodo ergo Ganea
Abborreat ille Ganeus
Dominus male Cretecus
Aptius Dictus Tetricus
Phanaticus freneticus
Graphicus sicut Metricus
Antumat.
HOc genus dictaminis
Non egit examinis
In centilo quio nec centimetro
Honorati Grammatici Mauri.
Decasticon uirulentum in galeratum,
Licaonta marinum. etc.
Progh dolor, ecce maris lupus and nequissimus, ursus
Carnificis uitulus Britonumque dubulcus iniqus
Conslatus, uitulus, uel Oreb uel
Salmana, uel zeb.
Garduus, and crudelis Asaph que
Datan reprobatus
Blandus and Acchitiphel, regis scelus omne Britannum
Ecclesias, qui namque Thomas
Gonfundit ubique
Non sacer iste, Thomas
Sed duro cord, Goleas
Quem gestat Malus
sathane caret (obsero culus
Fundens Aspaltum (precor)
hunc uersum lege cautum
Asperius nichil est misero
Apostropha an Londini ciues (citando mulum asino aurco galerato) in occursum
aguile. etc.

EXitat eu asinus multum
(mirabile, uisu
Calcibus O uesro ciues
Occurite Asello
Qui regnum regemque regit
qui uestra gubernat
Predia diuitias, nummos
gasas spoliando.
Dixit alludens, immo illudens perodo xam de asino aureo galerato. xxxiiii.

Hec uatis ille, de quo loquntur utille.

FINIS.
Here after follows a little book called Colyn Clout compiled by Master
Skeleton Poet Laureate.
Quis consurgat mecum aduersus malignantes? aut quis stabit mecum aduersus
operantes iniquita tem? Nemo domine.

WHat can it avail
To drive forth a snayle
Or to make a sail
Of an herynges tail
To ryme or to rail
To write or to indyte
Either for delight
Or else for despite
Or books to compile
Of diverse manner style
Uyce to revile
And sin to exyle
To teach or to preche
As reason will reach
Say this and say that
His head is so fat
He wotteth never what
Nor whereof he speaks
He cries and he creketh
He pryeth and he peketh
He chydes and he chatters
He prates and he patters
He clytters and he clatters
He medles and he smatters
He gloses and he flatters
Or if he speak plain
Than he lacks brain
He is but a fool
Let him go to scoole
A three foted stool
That he may down sit
For he lacks wit
And if that he hit
The nail on the head
It stands in no stead
The Devil they say is dead
The Devil is dead,
It may well so be
Or else they would see
Otherwise and flee
From worldly vanity
And foul covetousness
And other wretchedness
Fickell falsenesse
Uaryablenesse
With unstableness
And if ye stand i dout
Who brought this ryme about
My name is Colyn Clout
I purpose to shake out
All my conning bag
Like a clarkely hagge
For though my rhyme be ragged
Tattered and iagged
Rudely rain beaten
Rustly and moothe eaten
If ye talk well therewyth
It has in it some pith
For as far as I can see
It is wrong with each degree
For the temporalty
Accuses the spiritualty
The spiritual again
Does grudge and complain
Upon temporal men
Thus each of other blother
The tone against the the other
Alas they make me shoder
For in hoder mother
The church is put in fault
The prelates ben so haut
They say and look so hye
As though they would fly
Above the sterry sky
Lay men say in deed
How they take no head
Their sely sheep to feed
But pluck away and pull
The fleces of their wull
Unnethes they leave a lock
Of wull among their flock
And as for their connyng
A glumming and a mummyng
And make thereof a iape
They gasp and they gape
Al to have promocion
There is their whole devotion
With money, if it will hap
To cath the forked cap
Forsooth they are to lewd
To say so all be shrewd
What trow ye they say more
Of the bishops lore
How in matters they be raw
They lumber forth the law
To herke Jack and Gyl
When they put up a bil
And judge it as they will
For other men's skill
Expounding out their clauses
And leave their own causes
In their principal cure
They make but little sure
And meddels very light
In the churches right
But Ire and venire
And sol fa, so a lamire
That the premenire
Is like to be set a fire
In their jurisdictions
Through temporal afflictions
Men say they have prescriptions
Against yt spiritual contradictions
Accompting them as fictions
And whiles the heads do this
The remnaunt is a mis
Of the clergy all
Both great and small
I wot never how they warke
But thus the people carke
And surely thus they say
Bishops if they may
Small houses would keep
But slumbre forth and sleep
And assay to crepe
Within the noble walls
Of the kings halles
To fat their bodies full
Their souls lame and dull
And have full little care
How evil their sheep fare
The temporality say plain
How bishops disdain
Sermons for to make
Or such labor to take
And for to say troth
A great part is full sloth
But the greatest part
Is for they have but small art
And right sclender cunnyng
Within their heads wunning
But this reason they take
How they are able to make
With their gold and treasure
Clerks out of measure
And yet that is a pleasure
How be it some there be
Almost two or three
Of that dignity
Full worshipful Clerks
As appears by their works
Like Aaron and Ure
The wolf from the door
To wary and to keep
From their gostly sheep
And their spiritual lammes
Sequestered from rams
And from the berded Gotes
With their hery cotes
Set naught by gold ne grotes
Their names if I durst tell.
But they are loathe to mel
And loathe to hang the bell
About the cattes neck
For dred to have a check
They are fain to play, deuz de ck
How be it they are good men
Much hearted like an hen
Their lessons forgotten they have
That Becket them gave
Thomas manum mittit ad forcia
Spernit damna spernit opprobria
Nulla Thomam frangit iniuria
But now every spiritual father
Men say they had rather
Spend much of their share
Than to be combred with care
Spend, nay but spare
For let see who that dare
Shoe the mockish mare
They make her winch and kick
But it is not worth a leeke
Boldness is to seek
The church for to defend
Take me as I intend
For loathe I am to offend
In this that I have pende
I tell you as men say
Amend when ye may
For us que ad montem fare
Men say ye cannot appare
For some say ye hunt in parkes
And Hanke on hobby Larkes
And other wanton warkes
When the night darkes.
What has laymen to do
The gray gose for to shoe
Like hounds of hell
They cry and they yell
How that ye sell
The grace of the holygost
Thus they make their host
Through every cost
How some of you do eat
In Lenton season flesh meat
Fesauntea Partriche and cranes
Men call you therefore prophanes
Ye pick no shrympes nor pranes
Saltfissh, Stockfish nor Herring
It is not for your wearing
Nor in holy Lenton season
Ye will neither Beans ne Peason
But ye look to be let loose
To a pygge or to a Goose
Your george not endewed
Without a Capon stewed
Or a stewed Cock
Under her surfled smock
And her wanton wodicocke
And how when ye give orders
In your provincial borders
As at sicientes
Some are in sufficientes
Some parum sapientes
Some nichil intelligentes
Some ualde negligentes
Some nullum sensum habent^s
But bestially and untaught
But when they have once caught
Dominus vobiscum by the head
Than run they in euere stead
God wot with dro^ken nolles
Yet take they cures of souls
And woteth never what they read
Pater noster nor Creed
Construe not worth a whistle
Nether gospel nor pistle
Their Mattins madly said
Nothing devoutly praid
Their learning is so small
Their prymes and hours fall
And lepe out of their lips
Like sawdust or dry chippes
I speak not now of al
But the most part in general
Of such vagabundus
Speaks totus Mundus
How some sing let abundus
At every ale stake
With welcome hake and make
By the bread that God brake
I am sorry for your sake
I speak not of the god wife
But of their Apostles life
Cum ipsis Vel illis
Qui manent in Villis
Est Vxor Vel ancilla
Welcome Jack and Gilla
My pretty Petronylla
And you will be stilla
You shall have your wylls
Of such Pater noster pekes
All the world speaks.
In you the faut is supposed
For that they are not apposed
By just examinacion
In conning and connersation
They have none instruction
To make a true construction
A priest without a letter
Without his virtue be greater
Doutlesse were much better
Upon him for to take
A Mattocke or a Kake
Alas for very shame
Some can not declyne their name
Some cannot scarsly read
And yet will not dread
For to keep a cure,
And in nothing is sure
This dominus Vobiscum
As wise as Tom a thrum
A chaplayne of trust
Layth all in the dust
Thus I Colin Clout
As I go about
And wandryng as I walk
I hear the people talk
Men say for silver and Gold
Miters are bought and sold
There shall no clergy appose
A myter nor a Cross
But a full purse
A straw for gods curse
What are they the worse
For a simoniake,
Is but a hermoniake
And no more ye make
Of Symony men say
But a childs play
Over this the foresaid lay
Report how the Pope may
A holy anchor call
Out of the stony wall
And him a bysshopp make
If he on him dare take
To keep so hard a rule
To ride upon a Mule
With gold all be trapped
In purple and paul be lapped
Some hatted and some capped
Rychely be wrapped
God wot to their great pains
In Rotchettes of fine raynes
White as morowes milk
Their tabertes of fine silk
Their stirops of mixed gold begarded
There may no cost be spared
Their Moyles Gold does eat
Their neighbors dye for meat.
What care they though Gill sweat
Or Jack of the Noke
The pore people they yoke
With Sommons and Citacions
And excommunications
About churches and market
The bishop on his carpet
At home full soft does sit
This is afeareful fyt
To hear the people iangle
How warely they wrangle
Alas why do ye not handle
And them all mangle
Full falsely on you they lie
And shamefully you as^ry
And say as untruly
As the butter fly
A man might say in mock
Ware the Wethercocke
Of thee steple of Poules
And thus they hurt their souls
In sclaunderyng you for truth
Alas it is great ruthe
Some say ye sit in trones
Like princes aquilonis
And shryne your rotten bones
With pearls and precious stones
But how the commons groans
And the people mones
For priests and for loves
Lent and never paid
But from day to day delaid
The commune wealth decayed
Men say ye are tunge tayde
And thereof speak nothing
But dissimuling and glosing
Wherefore men be supposing
That ye give shrewd counsel
Against the commune well
By pollyng and pillage
In cities and village
By taxyng and tollage
Ye have monks to have ye culerage
For coueryng of an old cottage
That committed is a collage
In the charter of dottage
Tenure par service de sottage
And not par service desocage
After old segnyours
And the learning of litleto^ tenours
Ye have so ouerth warted
That good laws are subutered
And good reason perverted
Religious men are feign
For to turn again
In secula seculorum
And to forsake their little
And vacabundare perforum
And take a fine meritorum
Contra regulam morum
Aut black monacorum
Aut canonicor um
Aut Bernar dinorum
Aut crucifixorum
And to sing from place to place
Like apostataas
And the self same game
Begone and now with shame
Amongst the sely Nuns
My lady now she runs
Dame Sybly our abbess
Dame Dorotho and lady Besse
Dame Sare our Pryoresse
Out of their clo yster and quere
With an heavy cheer
Must cast up their black vayles
And set up their fucke sails
To catch wind with their ventailes
What Colin there thou shailes
Yet thus with ill hayles
The lay fee people rayles
And all they lay
On you prelates and say
Ye do wrong and no right
To put them thus to flight
No Matins at midnight
Book and chalis gone quite
Pluck away the leads
Over their heads
And sell away their bells
And all that they have else
Thus the people tells
Rayles like rebels
Redeshrewdly and spells
And with foundations mels
And talk like titiuelles
How ye break the deades wills
Turn monasteris into water millis
Of an abbey ye make a graunge
Your works they say are strange
So that their founders souls
Have lost their beade roules
The money for their masses
Spent among wanton lasses
The Diriges are forgotten
Their founders lie there rotten
But where their souls dwell
Therewith I will not mel
What could the Turk do more
With all his false lore
Turk, Sarazen or Jew
I report me to you
O merciful Jesus
you support and rescite
My style for to direct
It may take some effect
For I abhor to write
How the lay fee dispite
You prelates that of right
Should be lanternes of light
ye live they say in delight
Drowned in deliciis
In gloria et diuiciis
Into honorable honor
In gloria et splendore
Fulgurantes haste
Viuentes parum cast
Yet sweet meat has sour sauce
For after gloria laus
Christ by cruelty
Was nailed upon a tree
He paid a bitter pencion
For man's redemption
He drank eisel and gall
To redeem us withal
But sweet Ipocras ye drink
With let the Cat wink
Ich wot what each other thynk
How be it per assimule
Some men think that ye
Shall have penalty
For your iniquity
Nota what I say
And bear it well away
If it please not the ologys
It is good for astrologis
For Ptholme told me
The sun sometime to be
In Ariete
Ascendent a degree
Whaa Scorpion descending
Was so then pretending
All fatal for one
That shall sit on a trone
And rule all things alone
Your teeth whet on this bone
Amongst you every chone
And let Collyn Cloute have none
Manner of cause to moan
Lay salve to your own sore
For else as I said before
After gloria laus
May come a sour sauce
Sorry therefore am I
But troth can never lie
With language thus poluted
Holy church is bruted
And shamefully confuted
My pen now will I sharp
And wrest up my harp
With sharp twinking trebels
Against al such rebels
That labor to confound
And bring the church to ye ground
As ye may daily see
How the Lay fee
Of one affinitee
Consent and agree
Against the Church to be
And the dignitee
Of the bysshoppes fee
And either ye be to bad
Or else they are mad
Of this to report
But under your supporte,
Till my dying day
I shall both write and say
And ye shall do the same
How they are blame
You thus to diffame
For it makes me sad
How that the people are glade
The church to deprave
And some there are that rave
Presuming on their wit
When there is never a whit
To maintain axgumentes
Against the sacraments
Some make epilogation
Of high predestitation
And of residenation
They make interpretation
Of an awquard facion
And of the prescience
Of divine essence
And what Ipostatis
Of Christ's manhodeis
Such logike men will chop
And in their fury hope
When the good ale sop
Does dance in their fore top
Both women and men
Such ye may well Know and ken
That again presthode
Their malice spread abroad
Railing hainously
And disdainously
Of priestly dignities
But their malignities
And some have a smacke
Of Luthers sack
And a brenning spark
Of Luthers warke
And are somewhat suspect
In Luthers sect
And some of them bark
Clatter and Carpe
Of that Heresy art
Called wicleuista
The Deuelishe dogmatista
And some behussians
And some be Arrians
And some be pollegians
And make much varians
Between the clergy
And the temporalty
Hew the church has to mickel
And they have to litel
And bring him in maierialities
And qualified qualities
Of pluralities
Of tryalities
And of tot quottes
They commune like scotts
As comes to their lottes
Of prebendaries and deanes
How some of them gleanes
And gathered up the store
For to catch more and more
Of persons and vicaries
They make many out cries
They cannot keep their wives
From them for their lives
And thus the losels strives
And lewdly says by Christ
Against the sely priest
Alas and well away
What ails them thus to say
They might be better advised
Then to be disgised
But they have enterprysed
And shamefullye surmised
How prelacy is sold and bought
And come up of naught
And where the prelates be
Come of low degree
And set in majesty
And spiritual dignity
Farwell benignity
Farewell simplicitye
Farwell humilitye
Farwell good charity
Ye are so puffed with pride
That no man may abide
Your high and lordly lokes
Ye cast up then your books
And virtue is forgotten
For then ye will be wroken
Of every light quarrel
And call a Lord a iauel
A knight a knave to make
Ye boste, ye face, ye crake
And upon you take
To rule king and kayser
And if you may have layser
Ye bring all to naught
And that is all your thought
For the Lords temporal
Their rule is very small
Almost nothing at al
Men say how ye appal
The noble blood royal
In ernest and in game
Ye are the less to blame
For Lords of noble blood
If they well understand
How conning might them auaunce
They would pype you another dau^ce
But noble men borne
To learn they have scorn
But hunt and blow an horn
Leap ouerlakes and dikes
Set nothing by politikes
Therefore ye keep them bace
And mock them so their face
This is a petious case
To you that over the wheel
Lords must couch and knele
And break their hose at the knee
As daily men may see
And to remembrance call
Fortune so turns the ball
And rules so over all
That honor has a great fall.
Shall I tell you more, ye shall
I am loath to tell all
But the communalty ye call
Idols of Babylon
De terrazabuloe
De terra Neptalym
For you love to go trim
Brought up of of poor estate
With pride inordinate
Suddenly vpstarte
From the dong cart
The Mattockes and theshule
To reygne and to rule
And have no grace to think
How they were wont to drink
Of a lether bottell
With a knauish stoppel
When mamockes was your meat
With mould bread to eat
Ye would none other geate
To chew and to gnaw
To fill therewith your maw
Lodged in the straw
Couching your drousy heads
Sometime in lousy beds
Alas this is out of mind
Ye grow now out of kind
Many one have but wind
And make the commons blind
But Qui se existimat star^
Let him well beware
Least that his foot slip
And have such a trip
And fall in such decay
That all the world might say
Come down on the devils way
Yet over all that
Of bishops they chat
That though ye round your hear
An ynche above your ear
And aures patentes
And parum intendentes
And your coursers be trapped
Your ears they be stopped
For master adulator
And doctor assentator
And blandior blandiris
With mentor mentiris
They follow your desires
That ye can not epsy
And so they blere your eye
How the male does write
Alas for gods will
Why sytte ye Prelates still
And suffer all this ill
Ye Bishop of estates
Should open the broad gates
For your spiritual charge
And confort at large
Like lanternes of light
In the peoples sight
In pulpettes antentike
For the well public
Of pri esthod in this case
And always to chase
Such manner of sismatikes
And half heretics
That would intoxicate
That would conquinate
That would contaminate
And that would violate
And that would derogate
And that would abrogate
The church is high estate
After this manner rates
The which should be
Both frank and free
And have their liberty
And of antiquity
It was ratefyed
And also gratefyed
By holy finodals
And bulls papals
As it is res certa
Conte ygned in magna Carta.
But master Damian
Or some other man
That clerkely is, and can
Well scripture expound
And textes ground.
His benefice worth ten pound
Or skant worth twenty mark
And yet a noble clerk
He must do this work
As I know a part
Some masters of Art
Some doctors of law
Some learned in other saw
As in divinity
That has no dignity
But the pore degree
Of the university
Or elsse Friar Frederick
Or else friar Dominike
Or friar Hugulinus
Or friar Agustinus
Or friar Carmelus
That gostly can heal us
Or elsse if we may
Get a friar Graye
Or elsse of the order
Upon Grenewiche border
Called obseruaunce
And a friar of France
Or elsse the poor scot
It must come to his lot
To shote forth his shot
Or of Babuell beside Bery
To postell upon a kyry
That would it should be noted
How scripture should be coted
And so clerkle promoted
And yet the friar doted
Men say

But your auctority
And your noble fee
And your dignity
Should be imprinted better
Then all the Freres letter
For if ye would take pain
To preach a word or twain
Though it were never so plain
With clauses two or three
So as they might he
Compendiouslye conveyed
Those words should be more weid
And better peceyued
And thankfully received
And better should remain
Among the people plain
That would your words retain
And rehearse them again
Than a thousand thousand other
That blaber, bark and blother
And make a Walshmans hose
Of the text and of the gloss
For protestation made
That I will not wade
Farther in this brook
Nor farther for to look
In devising of this book
But answer that I may
For myself always
Either analogice
Or else rathagorice
So that in diuinitee
Doctors that learned be
Nor bachelors of that faculty
That has taken degree
In the university
Shall not be objected for me.
But doctor bullatus
Parum litteratus
Dominus doctoratus
At the broad gatus
Doctor daupatus
And bacheler bacheleratus
Dronken as a mouse
At the ale house
Takes his pillion and his cap
At the good ale tap
For lack of good wine
As wise as Robin swine
Under a notaries sign
Was made a divine
As wise as waltoms calfe
Must preach a gods half
In the pulpyt solempnly
More meet in a pillory
For by saint Hillary
He can nothing smatter
Of logike nor scole matter
Neither silogisare
Nor of emptimeniare
Nor knows his eloquence
Nor his predicamence.
And yet he will mel
To amend the Gospel
And will preach and tell
What they do in hell
And he dare not well neuen
What they do in haven
Nor how far temple bare is
From the seven stars
Now will I go
And tell of other more
Semper protestandoe
De non impugnandoe
The four orders of friars
Though some of them be liars
As limiters at large
Will charge and discharge
As many a friar God wot
Preaches for his grote
Flattering for a new cote
And for to have his fees
Some to gather cheese
Loathe they are to lose
Either Corn or Malt
Sometime Meal and Sault
Sometime a bacon flicke
That is three fingers thycke
Of larde and of grease
Their covent to e^crace
I put you out of doubt
This cannot be brought about
But they their tongues file
And make a pleasant style
To Margerye and to Maude
How they have no fraud
And sometime they provoke
Both Gyll and Jack at noke
Their duties to withdraw
That they ought by the law
Their curates to content
In open time and in Lent
God wot they take great pain
To flatter and to feign
But it is and old said saw
That need has no law
Some walk about in melottes
In gray russet and hery cotes
Some will neither gold ne grotes
Some pluck a partrich in remotes
And by the bars if her tail
Will know a Raven from a rail
A quail, the rail, and the old raven
Sed libera nos a malo. Amen.
And by dudum their clementine
Against Curates repine
And say proprely they are Sacerdotes
To shryue, assoyle and reles
Dame margeries soul out of hell
But when the friar fell in the well
He could not sing himself therout
But by the help of Christian clout
Another clementine also
How friar Fabion, with other mo
Exiuit de paradiso
When they again thither shall come
Dc hoc petimus consilium
And through all the world they go
With Dirige and Placebo.
But now my mind ye understand
For they must take in hand
To preach and to with stand
Al manner of abiections
For bishops have protections
They say to do corrections
But they have no affections
To take the said directions
In such manner of cases
Men say they bear no faces
To occupy such places
To sow the sede of graces
Their hearts are so faynted
And they be so attaynted
With coueitous and ambicion
And other supersticion
That they be deaf and dum
And play scylens and glum
Cansay nothing but mum.
They occupy them so
With singing placeho
They will no farther go
They had lever to please
And take their wordly ease
Than to take on hand
Worship to wythstande
Such temporal war and bate
As now is made of late
Against holy church estate
Or to maintain good quarelles
The lay men call them barelles
Full of glotony
And of hipocrisye
That counterfaytes and paints
As they were very saints
In matters that them like
They show them politiks.
Pretending gravity
And sygnyorytie
With all solempnitie
For their indempnitie
For they will have no less
Of a penny, nor of a cross
Of their prediall lands.
That comes to their hands
And as far as they dare set
Al is fyshe that comes to net
Building royally
Their mancions curiously
With turrettes and with toures
With halles and with boures
Stretching to the stars
With glass windows and bars
Hangyng about the walls
Clothes of gold and palles
Arras of rich array
Fresh as flowers in May
With dame Dyana naked
How lustye Uenus quaked
And how Cupide shaked
His darte and bente his bow
For to shote a Crow
At her tyrly tyrlowe
And how Paris of Troy
Daunced a lege de may
Made lustye sport and joy
With dame Helyn the Queen
With such stories by deen
Their chambres well be seen
With triumphs of Caesar
And of his Pompeius war
Of renown and of fame,
By them to get a name
Now all the world stares
How they ride in goodly chares
Conveyed by Olyphantes
With Lauriat garlantes
And by vnycornes
With their semely horns
Upon these beasts riding
Naked boys striding
With wanton wenches winkyng
Now truly to my thinkyng
That is a speculacion
And a mete meditacion
For prelates of estate
Their courage to abate
From worldly wantonness
Their chamber thus to dres
With such parfetnes
And all such holiness
How be it they let down fall
Their churches cathedral
Squire knight and Lord
Thus the church remord
With all temporal people
They run against the steeple
Thus talkyng and tellinge
How some of you are mellynge
Yet soft and fair for swellyng
Beware of a queanes yellling
It is a besy thing
It is a besy thing
For one man to rule a king
Alorie and make rekenyng
To govern over all
And rule a realm royal
By one man's wit
Fortune may chance to flit
And when he weneth to sit
Yet may he mysse the quisshon
For I red a preposicion
Sum regibus amicare
Et omnibus dominare
Et suprate prauare
Wherefore he has good ure
That can himself assure
How fortune will endure
Than let reason you support
For the communalte
That they have great wonder
That ye keep them so under
Yet they marvel so much less
For ye playso at the chesse
As they suppose and guess
That some of you but late
Has played so check mate
With Lords of great estate
After such a rate
That they shall mel nor make
Nor upon them take
For king nor Rayser sake
But at the pleasure of one
That rules the rest alone.
Helas, I say Helas
How may this come to pass
That a man shall hear a mass
And not so hardy on his head
To look on god in form of bread
But that the paryshe clerk
There upon must herke
And grant him at his askyng
For to see the sacryng
And how may this acord
No man to our sovereign Lord
So hardy to make suit
Nor to execute
His commandment
Without the assent
Of our president
Nor to express to his person
Without your assentacion
Grant him his license
To preace to his presence
Nor to speak to him secretly
Openly nor preuyly
Without his president be by
Or else his substitute
Whom he wyldepute
Neither Earl ne duke
Permitted by saint Luke
And bysweet saint Mark
This is a wondrous warke
That the people talk this
Some what there is amiss
The devil cannot stop their mouths
But they will talk of such vncouthes
All that ever they ken
Against all spiritual men.
Whether it be wrong or right
Or else for dispighte
Or how ever it hape
Their tounges thus do clap
And through such detraction
They put you to your action
And whether they say truly
As they may abide thereby
Or else that they do lie
Ye know better than I
But now, debetis scire
And groundlye audire
In your conuenire
Of this premenire
Or else in the mire
They say they will you cast
Therefore stand sure and fast.
Stand sure and take good foting
And let be al your moting
Your gasing and your toting
And your parcial promoting
Of those that stand in your grace
But old servants ye chase
And put them out of their place
Make ye no murmuracion
Though I write after this facion
Though I Colyn Clout
Among the whole route
Of you that clearkes be
Take upon me
Thus copiously to write
I do it not for no despite
Wherefore take nodisdaine
At my style rude and plain
For I rebuke no man
That virtuous is, why than
Wreke ye your anger on me
For those that virtuous be
Have no cause to say
That I speak out of the way.
Of no good bishop speak I
Nor good pressed of the clargy
Good Friar nor good Chanon
Good Nun, nor good Canon
Good Monk, nor good Clerk
Nor of no good work
But my recountyng is
Of them that do amiss
In speaking and rebelling
In hindering and disauailing
Holy church our mother
One against another
To use such dispising
Is all my whole writing
To hinder no man
As near as I can
For no man have I named
Wherefore should I blamed
Ye ought to be ashamed
Against me to be grieved
And can tell no cause why
But that I write truly
Then if any there be
Of high or low degree
Of the spiritualty
Or of the temporaltye
That does think or wene
That his conscience be not clean
And feleth himself sick
Or touched on the quick
Such grace god them send
Themself to amend
For I will not pretend
Any man to offend
Wherefore as thinks me
Great ydeottes they be
And little grace they have
This treatise to deprave
Nor will hear no preaching
Nor no virtuous teaching
Nor will have no resiting
Of any virtuous writing
Will know none intelligence
To refourme their negligence
But live still out of facion
To their own damnation
To do shame, they have no shame
But they would no man should them blame
They have an evil name
But yet they will occupy the same
With them the word of God
Is counted for no rod
They count it for a railinge
That nothing is anayling
The preachers with evil hailing
Shall they daunt us prelates
That be their prymates
Not so hardy on their pates
Hark how the losel prates
With a wide wesaunte
Auaunt sir Guy of gaunt
Auaunte lewd priest auaunt
Auaunt sir doctoure diverse
Prate of thy mattens and thy mass
And let our matters pass
How dare thou daucocke mel?
How dare thou losell
Alligate the gospel
Against us of the counsel
Auaunt to the devil of hell
Take him warden of the Flete
Set him fast by the fete
I say lyuetenaunt of the toure
Make this lurden for to loure
Lodge him in little ease
Feed him with Beans and Pease
The kings bench or Marshalsy
Have him thither by and by
The villain preaches openly
And declares our villainy
And of our fre simpleness
He says that we are rechlesse
And full of wylfulnesse
Shameless, and merciles
In corrigible and insaciate
And after this rate
Against us does prate
At Paul's cross or else where
Openly at Westminster
And saint Mary spittel
They set not by us a whistel
At the Austen friars
They count us for liars
And at saint Thomas of Akers
They carpe us like crakers
How we will rule al at will
Without good reason or skyll
And say how that we be
Full of parcialitie
And how at a pronge
We turn right to wrong
Delay causes so long
That right no man can fong
They say many matters be born
By the right of a rams horn
Is not this a shameful scorn?
To be teared thus and torn.
How may we thus endure
Wherefore we make you sure
Ye preachers shall be yawde
Some shall be sawde
As noble Ezechias
The holy prophet was
And some of you shall dye
Like holy Jeremy
Some hanged some slain
Some beaten to the brain
And we will rule and rain
And our matters maintain
Who dare say there again
Or who dare dysdaine
At your pleasure and will
For be it good or be it ill
As it is, it shall be still
For all master doctor of civil
Or of oiuine, or doctor dryuil
Let him cough, roughe or sneuil
Run God, run devil
Run who may run best
And let take all the rest
We set not a nut shel
The way to heaven or to hell,
Lo, this is the gise now a days
It is to dread men says
Least they be saducies
As they be said said
Which determine plain
We should not rise again
At dreadful domes day
And so it seems they play
Which hate to be corrected
When they be infected
Nor will suffer this book
By hook ne by crook
Prynted for to be
For that no man should see
Nor read in any scrolles
Of their dronken nolles
Nor of their noddy polles
Nor of their sely souls
Nor of some witles pates
Ofdiuers great estates
As well as other men
Now to withdraw my pen
And now a while to rest
Me seems it for the best.
The fore castle of my ship
Shall glide and smothely slip
Out of the waves wode
Of the stormye floude
Shote anchor and lie at rode
And sail not far a broad
Til the cooste be clear
That the lode star appear
My ship now will I pere
toward the port salu
Of our savior Jesus
Such grace that he us send
To rectify and amend
Things that are amiss
When that his pleasure is,
In opere imperfecto
In opere semper perfecto
Et in opere plusquam perfecto
Here after follows a Little book of Philip sparow compiled by* master.
Skeleton Poet Laureate.
PLa ce bo
Who is there who
Di le ^i,
Dame Margery
Fa re my my
Wherefore and why why
For the soul of philip sparow
That was late slain at Carow
Among the Nuns blake
For that sweet souls sake
And for all sparowes souls
Set in our bead roules
Pater noster qui
With an Aue mari
And with the corner of a creed
The more shall be your meed.
When I remember again
How my philip was slain
Never half the pain
Was between you twain
Pyramus and Theshe
As than befell to me
I wept and I wayled
The tears down hayled
But nothing it auailed
To call Pptlip again
Whom Gib our cat has slain.
Gib I say our cat
Worrowed her on that
Which I loved best
It cannot be expressed
My sorrowful heauynes
But al without redres
For within that stound
Half slumbryng in a sound
I fell down to the ground
Unneth I kest mine eyes
Toward the cloudy skies
But when I did behold
My sparow dead and cold
No creature but that would
Have rewed upon me
To behold and see
What heaviness did me pange
Wherewith my hands I wrange
That my senowes cracked
As though I had been racked
So payned and so strained
That no life welnye remained
I sighed and I sobbed
For that I was robbed
Of my sparowes life
O maiden, widow and wife
Of what estate ye be
Of hye or low degree
Great sorrow then ye might se
And learn to weep at me
Such pains did me freat
That mine heart did beat
My visage pale and dead
Wanne, and blue as lead
The panges of hateful death
well nigh stopped my breathe.
Heu heu me
That I am woe for thee
Ad dum cumtribularer clamaui
Of god nothing else crave I
BUt Philips soul to keep
From the marees deep
Of Acherontes well
That is a flood of hell
And from the great Pluto
The prince of endless woe
And from foul Alecto
With visage black and blo
And from Medusa that ^are
That like a feende does stare
And from Megeras edders
From rufflinge of philips feathers
And from her fiery sparklinges
For burning of his wings
And from the smokes sour
Of Proserpinas boure
And from the dens dark
Where Cerberus does baike
Whom Theseus did afray
Whom Hercules did out tray
As Famous Poets say
For that hell hounde
That lies in chains bound
With ghastly heads three
To Jupiter pray we
That Phillip preserved may be
Amen say ye with me,
Do mi nus
Help now sweet Jesus
Leuaui oculos meos in montis
Would God I had zenophontis.
OR Socrates the wise
To show me their devise
Moderately to take
This sorrow that I make
For Philyp sparowes sake
So fervently I shake
I feel my body quake
So vrgently I am brought
Into careful thought
Like andromaca hactors wife
Was weary of her life
When she had lost her joy
Noble Hector of Troy
In like manner also
Increases my deadly woe
For my sparow is go^^^
It was so pretty a fool
It would sit on a stool
And learned after my scoole
For to keep his cut
With Phillip keep your cut.
It had a velvet cap
And would sit upon my lap
And seek after small worms
And sotime white bread cro^mes
And many times and often
Between my breasts soft
It would lie and rest
It was propre and pressed
Sometime he would gasp
When he saw a waspe
A fly or a gnat
He would fly at that
And pretely he would pant
When he saw an ant
Lord how he would pry
After the butter fly
Lord how he would hop
After the gressop
And when I, said, phyp phip
Then he would leap and skip
And take me by the lip
Alas it will me sloe
That Philip is gone me fro
Si in i qui ta tes
Alas I was evil at ease
Deprofundis clamaui
When I saw my sparow dye.
Now after my dome
Dame Sulpicia at Rome
whose name registered was
For ever in tables of bras
Because she did pas
In poesy to endyte
And eloquently to write
Though she would pretend
My sparow to commend
I trow she could not amend
Reporting the virtues al
Of my sparow royal
For it would come and go
And fle so to and fro
And on me it would leap
When I was a sleep
And his feathers shake
Where with he would make
Me often for to wake
And for to take him in
Upon my naked skin
God wot we thought no syn
What though he crept so low
It was no hurt I trow
He did nothing perdee
But sit upon my knee
Philip though he were nise
In him it was no vise
Phillip had leave to go
To pike my little too
Phillip might be bold
And do what he would
Phillip would seek and take
All the flees blake
That he could there espy
With his wanton eye
D pe ra
La sol fa fa
Co^fitebor tibi domiue toto cord me^
Alas I would ride and go
A Thousand mile of ground
If any such might be found
it were worth an hundredth pound
Of king Cresus gold
Or of Artalus the old
The rich prince of pargame
Who so list the story to see
Cadinus that his sister sought
And he should be boughte
For gold and see
He should over the sea
To wete, if he could bring
Any of the spring
Or any of the blood
But who so understood
Of Medias art
I would I had a part
Of her crafty magike
My sparow tha^ should be quycke
With a charm or twain
And play with me again
But all this is in vain
Thus for to complain
I took my sampler ones
Of purpose for the nones
To sow with stitches of silk
My sparow white as milk
That by representacion
Of his image and facion
To me it might Importe
Some pleasure and comfort
For my solace and sport
But wha^ I was so wing his beke
Me thought my sparow did speak
And open his pretty bill
Saying, maid ye are in will
Again me for to kill
Ye prick me in the head
With that my nedle ware red
Me thought of Philyps blood
Mine here right vpstode
And was in such a fraye
My speech was taken away
I kest down that there was
And said alas, alas
How comes this to pas
My fingers dead and cold
Could not my sampler hold
My nedle and threde
I thrue away for dread
The best now that I may
Is for his soul to pray.
A porta inferi
Good Lord have mercy
Upon my sparowes soul
Written in my bid roll
Au di ui vo cem
Iaphet came and Sem
Ma gni fi cat
Show me the right path
TO the hills of armonye
wherefore the birds yet cry
Of your fathers bote
That was sometime a flote
And now they lie and ^ote
Let some poets write
Deucalious flood it highte
But as verily, as ye be
The natural sons three
Of Noe the Patriarch
That made that great ar^
Wherein he had apes and owls
Beasts, birds and fowls
That if ye can find
Any of my sparowes kind
God send the soul good rest
I would yet have a nest
As pretty and as pressed
As my sparow was
But my Sparow did pas
All sparowes of the wod
That were since Noes flood
Was never none so good
King Philip of Macedony
Had no such Philip as I
No no sir hardely.
That vengeance. I ask and cry
By way of exclamacion
On all the whole nation
Of Cattes wild and tame
God send them sorrow and shame
That Cat specially
That slew so cruelly
My little pretty sparow
That I brought up at Carow.
O cat of churlyshe kind
The feend was in thy mind
When thou my byrd vntwynde
I would thou had ben blind
The leopardes savage
The lions in their rage
Might catch the in their paws
And gnaw the in their ia was
These serpents of Libany
Might sting the venemously
The dragons with their tunges
Might poison thy liver and lunges
The manticors of the mountains
Might feed them on thy brains
Melanchates that hound
That plucked Atteon to the ground
Gave him his mortal wound
Changed to a dear
The story does appear
Was changed to an heart
So thou foul cat, that thou art
The self same hounde
Might the confound
That his own Lord bote
Might bite a sunder thy throat
Of Inde the gredy gripes
Might tear out all thy tripes
Of Arcady the bears
Might pluck away thine ears
The wild wolf Licaon
Bite a sondre thy back hone
Of Ethna the brenning hyl
That day and night brenneth still
Set in thy tail a blase
That all the world may gase
And wonder upon thee
From Occion the great sea
Unto the Isles of Orchadye
From Tilbery fery
To the plain of Salisberye
So traitorously my byrd to kill
That never ought the evil will
Was never bird in cage
More gentil of courage
In doing his homage
Unto his sovereign
Alas I say again
Deate has departed us twain
The false cat has the slain
Fare well Phillip a dew
Our Lord thy soul rescewe
Farewell without restore
Farewell for ever more
And it were a Jew
It would make one rue
To se my sorrow new
These vilanus false cattes
Were made for mise and rattes
And not for birds small
Alas my face waxes pale
Telling this pyteous tale
How my byrd so fair
That was wont to repair
And go in at myspayre
And crepo in at my gore
Of my goune before
Flickering with his wings
Alas my heart it stynges
Remembering pretty things
Alas mine heart it sleeth
My Philips doleful death
When I remember it
How pretely it would sit
Many times and often
Upon my finger aloft
I played with him tittel tattel
And fed him with my spattell
With his bil between my lips
It was my pretty Phips
Many a pretty kusse
Had I of his sweet musse
And now the cause is thus
That he is slain me fro
To my great pain and woe
Of fortune, this the chance
Stands an varyaunce
Often time after pleasaunce
Trouble and greuaunce
No man can be sure
^way to have pleasure
(...) well perceive ye may
^ow my disport and play
from me was taken away
^y Gyb our cat savage
that in furious rage
^aught Phillip by the head
and slew him there stark dead.
^^rie eleyson Christ eleyson.
^^rye leyson.
FOr Philip sparowes soul
Set in our bead roll
Let us now whisper
Pater noster.
Lauda anima mea dominum.
^o weep with me look yt ye come
^ll manner of byrds in your kind
^ee none be left be hynd
To morning look that ye fawl
With dolorous songs funeral
^ome to sing, and some to say
^ome to weep and some to pray
^uery bird in his lay
^he Goldfinch the wagtaile
The iangling Iaye to rail
The flecked Pie to chatter
Of this dolorous matter
And Robyn red breast
He shall be the priest
The Requiem mass to sing
Loftly warbeling
With help of the red sparow
And the chattering swallow
This hearse for to halow
The Lark with his long toe
The spinke and the Martinet also
The shouelar with his broad beck
The doterell that folish pecke
And also the mad coote
With a balde face to toote
The field fare and the snyte
The crow and the kyte
The raven called rolfe
His plain song to solfe
The partryche, the quayle
The plouer with us to wayle
The wodhacke yt sings churre
Horsly as he had the murre
The lusty chaunting nightingale
The popingaye to tell her tale
That toteth often in a glass
Shall read the Gospel at mass
The mauis with her whistell
Shall read there the pistell
But with a large and a long
^ keep just plain song
Our chau^ters shall be yt Cuckoue
^he Culuer, the stockedoue
With puwyt the Lapwing
^he versycles shall sing
The Bitter with his bumpe
The Crane with his trumpe
The swan of Menander
The Goose and the Gander
^he ducke and the drake
Shall watch atthys wake
The Pecocke so proud
Because his voice is loud
And has a glorious tale
He shall sing the grayle
The Owl that so foul
Must help us to Houle
the Heron so gaunte
And the cormoraunte
With the Fesaunt
And the gaglyng gaunte
And the churlish Choughe
the rout and the kough
the barnacle the bussard
With the wild mallard
the diuendop to sleep
the water ben to weep
Thhe puffin, and the tele
Money they shall dele
To pore folk at large
That shall be their charge
The semew, and the titmose
The wodcocke with the long nose
The three still with her warblinge
The starling with her brablinge
The rooke, with the Ospray
That puts fisshes to afray
And the deinty curlew
With the turtil most true
At this Placebo.
We may not well forgo
The countring of the co
The storke also
That makes his nest
In chimneyes to rest
Within those walls
No broken galls
May there abide
Of cokoldry side
Or else Philosophy
Makes a greatly
The Estridge that will eat
An horshowe so great
In the stead of meat
Such fervent heat
His stomach does freat
He cannot well fly
Nor sing tunably
Yet at abrayde
He has well assayd
To solf a above Ela
Fa lorell fa fa
Ne quaando
Male cantando
The best that we can
To make him our belman
An let him ring the bells
He can do nothing else,
Chaunteclere our Cock
Must tell what is of the clock
By the astrologye
That he has naturally
Conceived and caught
And was never taught
By All bumazer
The astronomer
Nor by ptholomy
Prince of Astronomer
Nor yet by Haly
And yet he croweth daily
And nightly the tides
That no man abides
With partlot his hen
Whom now and then
He plucketh by the head
when he does her tred
The bird of Arabye
that potenciallye
May never dye
And yet there is none
But one alone
A phoenix it is
this hearse that must blis
With armaticke gummes
that cost great sums
the way of thurification
to make fumigacion
Sweet of reflarye
And redolent of air
This corse for sense
With great reverence
As Patriarch or Pope
In a black cope
Whiles he senseth
He shall sing the verse
Libera me
In de la sol re
Softly bemole
For my sparowes soul
Plinni shows al
In his story natural
What he does find
Of the Phoenix kind
Of whose incineracion
There rises a new creacion
Of the same facion
Without alteracion
Saving that old age
Is turned into courage
Of fresh youth again
This matter true and plain
Plain matter in deed
Who so list to read
But for the Egle does fly
Highest in the sky
He shall be thy se deane
The quere to demean
As provost principal
To teach them their Ordinall
Also the noble fawcon
With the gerfawcon
The tarsel gentil
They shall morn soft and still
In their amiss of gray
The sacre with them shall say
Dirige for Philips soul
The Goshauke shall have a roll
The querestrers to control
The lanners and marlions
shall sta^di^ their mourni^ggounes
The hobby and the musket
The se^sers and the cross shall fet
The kestrel in all this warke
Salbe holy water clarks
And now the dark cloudy night
Chaseth away phoebus bright
taking his course toward the weste
God se^d my sparoes soul good rest
Rcquie^ eternal dona eis domine
Fa fa fa my re
A por ta in fe ri
Fa fa fa my my
Credo Videre bona domini
I pray god philip to heaven may fly
Domine exaudi or acionem me am
to heaven he shall from heaven he came
Do mi nus vo bis cum of al good prayers god se^d him sum Oremus.
Deus cui propreu^ est miserere and percere
On Phillips soul have pity:
FOr he was a pretty cock
And came of a gentill stock
and wrapped in a maidens smock
And cherished full daintely
till cruel fate made him to dye
Alas for doleful desteny
But where to should I
Longer morn or cry?
To Jupiter I call
Of heaven emperial
That Philip may fly
Above the sterrysky
To tread the pretywren
That is our Ladies hen
Amen, amen, amen
Yet one thing is behind
That now comes to mind
An Epitaphe I would have
For Phillips grave
But for I am a maid
Timorous, half a frayde
That never yet a said
Of Elycones well
Where the muses dwell
Though I can read and spell
Recount report and tell
Of the talles of Caunterbury
Some sad stories, some mercy
As Palomon, and Arcet
Duke Theseus and partelet
And of the wife of bath
That works much scathe
When her tale is told
Among huswiues bold
How she controld
Her husbands as she would
And them to despise
In the homeliest wise
Bring other wives in thought
their husbands to set at naught
And though that red have I
Of Gawen and sir Guy
And tell can a great piece
Of the golden fleere
How Jason it wan
Like a valiant man
Of Arturs round table
with his knights comme^dable
And dame Gaynour his Queen
was somewhat wanton I wene
How sir Launcelote de lake
Many a spear brake
For his Ladies sake
Of Tristrom and king Mark
And all the whole warke
Of bele I sold his wife
For whom was much strife
Some say she was light
And made her husband knight
Of the common hall
That cuckoldes men call
And of sir Libius
Named Disconius
Of quarter fylz Amunde
And how they were sommond
To Rome to Charlemayne
Upon a great pain
And how they rode each one
On Bayard Mountalbon
Men se him now and then
In the forest Arden
What though I can frame
The stories by name
Of Judas Machabeus
And of Caesar Julius
And of the love between
Paris and viene
And of the duke of Hannyball
That made the Romans al
For dread and to quake
How Scipion did wake
The city of Cartage
Which by his unmerciful rage
He beat down to the ground
And though I can expound
Of Hector of Troy
That was al their joy
Whom Achilles slew
Wherefore all Troy did rue
And of the love so hot
That made Troylus to dote
Upon fair Cresseyde
And what they wrote and said
And of their wanton wills
Pandaer bare the byls
From one to the other
His masters love to further
Sometime a precious thing
An ouche or else a ryng
From her to him again
Sometime a pretty chain
Or a bracelet of her hear
Prayed Troylus for to wear
That token for her sake
How heartily he did it take
And much thereof did make
And all that was in vain
For she did but feign
The story tells plain
He could not obtain
Though his father were a king
Yet there was a thing
That made the male to wring
She made him to sing
The song of lovers lay
Musing night and day
Mourninge al alone
Comfort had he none
For she was quite gone
Thus in conclusion
She brought him in abusion
In earnest and in game
She was much to blame
Disparaged is her fame
And blemished is her name
In manner half with shame
Troylus also has lost
On her much love and cost
And now must kiss the post
Pandara that went between
Has won nothing I ween
But light for somer green
Yet for a special laud
He is named Troyllous baud
Of that name he is sure
Whiles the world shall dure
Though I remember the fable
Of Penelope most stable
To her husband most true
Yet long time she ne knew
Whether he were on live or ded
Her wit stood her in sted
That she was true and just
For any bodily lust
To Ulixes her make
And never would him forsake
Of Marcus Marcellus
A prosses I could tell us
And of Anteocus
And of Iosep hus
De antiquitatibus
And of Mardocheus
And of great Assuerus
And of Uesca his Queen
Whom he forsook with teene
And of Hester his otherwife
With whom he led a pleasant life
Of king Alerander
And of king Euander
And of Porcena the great
That made the romans to smart
Though I have enrold
A thousand new and old
Of these historyous tales
To fill bougets and ^ales
With books that I have red
Yet I am nothing syed
And can but Iytle skyl
Of Ovid or Uergil
Or of Plutharke
Or of Fraunces Petrarke
Alcheus or Sapho
Or such other Poets more.
As Linus and Homerus
Enphorion and Theocritus
Anacreon an Arion
Sophocles and Philemon
Pindarus and Dimonides
Philiston and Phorocides
These Poets of auncientie
They are to diffuse for me
For as I to fore have said
I am but a young maid
And cannot in effect
My style as yet direct
With englysh words elect
Our natural tongue is rude
And hard to be enneude
With pollyshed terms lustye
Our language is so rustye
So tankered and so full
Of frowardes and so dull
That if I would apply
To write ordinately
I wot not where to find
Terms to serve my mind
Gowers english is old
And of no value is told
His matter is worth gold
And worthy to be enrold
In Chauser I am sped
His tales I have red
His matter is delectable
Solacious and commendable
His english well allowed
So as it is enprowed
For as it is employed
There is no english void
At those days much commended
And now men would have amended
His english where at they bark
And mar all they warke
Chaucer that famous Clarke
His terms were not darcke
But pleasant easy, and plain
No word he wrote in vain
Also Ihon Lydgate
Wrytteth after an hyer rate
It is diffuse to find
The sentence of his mind
Yet writes he in his kind
No man that can amend
Those matters that he has pend
Yet some men find a faut
And say he writes to haut
Wherefore hold me excused
If I have not well perused
Mine englysh half abused
Though it be refused
In worth I shall it take
And fewer words make^
But for my sparowes sake
Yet as a woman may
My wit I shall assay
An Epytaphe to wryghte
In latyne plain and light
Whereof the Elegy
Follows by and by
Flos Volucrum formose Valo
Philippe sub is to
Marmore iam recubas
Quis mihi carus cras
Semper erunt niido
Radiantia sidera celo
Impressusque meo
Pectore semper eris
Per me Laurigerum
Britanum Skeltonida Vaten
Hec cecinisse licet
Ficta sub imagine texta
Cuius eris uolucris
Prestanti corpore Vrgo
Candida Nais erat
Formosior ista Ioanna est
Docta corinna fuit
Sed magis ista sapit
Bien men souient.

The commendacions.
BEati immaculati in uia
O glo rio sa femina
Now mine hole imaginacion
And studious meditacion
Is to take this commendacion
In this consideracion
And under pacient tolleracion
Of that most godly maid
That Placebo has said
And for her sparow prayed
In lamentable wise
Now will I enterprise
Through the grace divine
Of the muses nine
Her beauty to commend
If Arethusa will send
Me enfluence to endite
And with my pen to write
If Apollo will promise
Melodiouslye it to devise
His tunable harp stringes
With armonye that synges
Of Princes and of kings
And of all pleasant things
Of lust and of delyght
Through his godly might
To whom be the laud ascrybed
That my pen has enbibed
With the aureat drops
As verelye my hope is
Of Thagus that golden flood
That passes all the earthly good
And as that flood does pas
Al floudes that ever was
With his golden sands
Who so that understands
Cosmography: and the stremes
And the floudes in strange remes
Right so she does excede
Al other of whom we read
Whose fame by me shall sprede
Into Perce and Mede
From britons Albion
To the toure of Babylon
I trust it is no shame
And no man will me blame
Though I regester her name
In the court of fame
For this most goodly flower
This blossom of fresh color
So Jupiter me succoure
She florysheth new and new
In beauty and virtue
Hac claritate gemina
O gloriosa femina
Retribue seruo tuo uiuifica me.
L^bia mea laudabunt te.
BUt enforsed am I
Openly to askry
And to make an out cry
Against odyous envy
That evermore will lie
And say cursedlye
With his lether eye
And chekes dry
With vysage wan
As swarte as tan
His bones crake
Lean as a rake
His gummes rustye
Are full vnlustye
His heart with all
Bitter as gall
His liver his longes
With anger is wrong
His serpents tongue
That many one has stonge
He frowneth cuer
He laugheth never
Even nor morrow
But other men's sorrow
Causes him to grin
And rejoice therein.
No sleep can him catch
But ever does watch
he is so beat
With malice and frete
With anger and ire
his foul desire
Will suffer no sleep
In his head to creep
His foul semblaunte
Al displeasaunte
When other are glad
Than is he sad
Frantic and mad
His tongue never still
For to say ill
Writhing and wringing
Biting and stingyng
And thus this elf
Consumes him self
Him self does sloe
With pain and woe
This false envy
Says that I
Use great follye
For to indite
And for to write
And spend my time
In prose and rhyme
For to expres
The noblenes
Of my maystres
That causes me
Studious to be
To make a relation
Of her commendacion
And there again
Envy does complain
And has disdain
But yet certain
I will be plain
And my style dres
To this prosses
Now Phoebus me ken
To sharp my pen
And lead my fyste
As him best list
That I may say
Honor always
Of woman kind
Truth does me bind
And loyalty
Ever to be
Their true bedel
To write and tell
How women excel
In noblenes
As my maystres
Of whom I think
With pen and ynke
For to compyle
Some goodly style
For this most goodly flower
This blossom of fresh color
So Jupiter me succor
She florisheth new and new
In beauty and virtue
Hac claritate gemina
O gloriosa femina
Legem pone michi domine in uiam iustificationum tuarum.
Quemadmodum desiderat ceruus ad fontes aquarum.
How shall I report
All the godly fort
Of her fetures clear
That has none earthly peer
Her favor of her face
Ennewed with all grace
Confort pleasure and solace
Mine heart does so enbrace
And so has ravished me
Her to behold and se
That in words plain
I cannot me refrain
To look to her again
Alas what should I feign
It were a pleasant pain
With her aye to remain
Her eyes graye and stepe
Causes mine heart to leepe
With her brows bente
She may well represente
Fair Lucres as I ween
Or else fair Polexene
Or else Caliope
Or else Penolope
For this most goodly flower
This blossom of fresh color
So Jupiter me succor
She florisheth new and new
In beauty and virtue
Hac claritate gemina
O gloriosa femina
Memor esto Verbi tui seruo tuo
Seruus tuus sum ego
THe Indy Saphyre blewe
Her veins does ennew
The Orient pearl so clear
The witness of her lere
The lusty ruby ruddes
Resemble the Rose buddes
Her lips soft and merry
Emblomed like the chery
It were an heavenly bliss
Her sugared mouth to kiss
Her beauty to augment
Dame nature has her lent
A warte upon her cheke
Who so list to seek
In her visage a skar
That seems from a far
Like to the radyant star
Al with favor fret
So proprely it is set
She is the violet
The daisy delectable
The columbine commendable
This ielofer amiable
This most goodly flower
This blossom of fresh color
So Jupiter me succoure
She florysheth new and new
In beauty and virtue
Hac claritate gemina
O gloriosa femina
Bonitate^ fecisti cu^ seruo tuo domina
Et ex precordus sonant preconia.
ANd when I perceived
Her wart and conceived
It can not be denaid
But it was well conuaid
And set so womanly
And nothing wantonly
But right conveniently
And full congruentlye
As nature could devise
In most goodly wise
Who so list behold
It makes lovers bold
To her to sue for grace
Her favor to purchase
The sker upon her chin
Enhached on her fair skin
Whiter than the swan
It would make any man
To forget deadly syn
Her favor to win
For this most goodly flour
This blossom of fresh color
So Jupiter me succor
She florisheth new and new
In beauty and virtue
Hac claritate gemina
O gloriosa femina
Defecit in salutate tuum anima mea quid petis filio, matter dulcissima ba ba.

SOft and make no din
For now I will begin
To have in remembrance
Her goodly dalyaunce
And her goodly pastaunce
So sad and so demure
Behauing her so sure
With words of pleasure
She would make to the lure
And any man convert
To give her his whole heart
She made me sore amassed
Upon her when I gased
Me thought mine heart was crased
My eyes were so dased
For this most goodly flour
The blossom of fresh color
So Jupiter me succoure
She florysheth new and new
In beauty and vertew
Hac claricate gemina
O gloriosa femina
Quomodo dilixi legem tuam domina.
Recedant uetera noua sunt omnia.
ANd to amend her tale
When she list to auale
And with her fingers small
And hands soft as silk
Whiter then milk
That are so quickly vayned
Wherewith my hand she strained
Lord how I was payned
Unneth I me refrayned
How she me had reclaymed
And me to her retained
Enbrasyng there with all
Her goodly middle small
With sides long and streyt
To tell you what conceit
I had then in a trice
The matter were to nyce
And yet there was no vice
Nor yet no villainy
But only fantasy
For this most goodly flower
The blossom of fresh color
So Jupiter me succor
She florisheth new and new
In beauty and virtue
Hac claritate gemina
O gloriosa femina
Iniquos odio habui
Non calumnientur me superbi.
BUt whereto should I note
How often did I ^ote
Upon her pretye foot
It raised mine heart rote
To see her tread the grounds
With heles short and round
She is plainly express
Egeria the goddess
And like to her image
Importured with courage
A lovers pilgrimage
There is no best savage
Ne no tygre so wood
But she would change his mood
Such relucent grace
Is formed in her face
For this most goodly flour
This blossom of fresh color
So Jupiter me succor
She florysheth new and new
In beauty and virtue
Hac claritate gemina
O gloriosa femina
Mirabilia testimonia tua
Sicut nouelle plantaco^es in inuentute sua
SO goodly as she dresses
So properly she presses
The bright golden tresses
Of her hear so fine
Like Phoebus beams shine
Where to should I disclose
The garteryng of her hose
It is for to suppose
How that she can wear
Gorgiouslye her gear
Her fresh habilementes
With other implementes
To serve for all ententes
Like dame flora queen
Of lusty somer grene
This most goodly flour
This blossom of fresh color
So Jupiter me succoure
She florysheth new and new
In beauty and vertew
Hac claritate gemina
O gloriosa femina
Clamaui in toto cord exaudi me*
Mia tua magna est super me.
HEr kyrtel so goodly lased
And under that is braced
Such pleasures that I may
Neither write nor say
Yet though I writ not with ink
No man can let me think
For thought has liberti
Thought is frank and free
To think a merry thought
It cost me little or naught
Would god mine homely style
Were pollished with the file
Of Ciceros eloquence
To praise her excellence
The most goodlye flower
This blossom of fresh color
So Jupiter me succoure
She florysheth new and new
In beauty and virtue
Hac claritate gemina
O gloriosa femina
Principes persecuti sunt me gratis
Omnibus consideratis. Paradisus uoluptatis, hec uirgo est dulcissima.
MI pen it is unable
My hand it is unstable
My reason rude and dull
To praise her at the full
Goodly maistres Jane
Sobre, demure Diane
Jane this maistres hight
The lode star of delight
Dame Uenus of all pleasure
The well of worldly treasure
She does excede and pass
In Prudence dame Pallas
The most goodly flower
This blossom of fresh color
So Jupiter me succoure
She florisheth new and new
In beauty and virtue
Hac cla^itate gemina
O gloriosa femina
RFquiem eternam dona eis domine
With this psalm. Domine probasti me
Shall sail over the sea
With tibi domine commendamus
On pilgrimages to saint Iamys
For shrympes, and for pranes
And for stalkynge cranes
And where my pen has offended
I pray you it may be amended
By discrete consideration
Of your wise reformacion
I have not offended I trust
If it be sadly discust
It were no gentle guyse
This treatise to despise
Because I have written and said
Honor of this fair maid
Wherefore should I be blamed
That I Iaue named
And famously proclaimed
She is worthy to be enrold
With letters of gold.
PEr me Laurigerum Britonum
Skeltonida latem
Laudibus eximiis merito, hec remedita puella est
Formosam poc^cini qua non formosior Vlla est
Formosam pocius, quam commendaret homerus
Sic iuuat interdum regidos recreare labores
Nec minus hoc titulo tersa minerua mea est.
Rien que plaisere.

Thus ends the book of Philip sparow, and here follows an adicion made by
master Skeleton.
THe gyse now a days
Of some ianglyng iayes
Is to discommend
That they cannot amend
Though they would spand
All the wits they have
What ayle them to deprave
Phillip sparowes grave
His dirige: her commendacion
Can be no derogacion
But mirth and consolacion
Made by protestacion
No man to miscontent
With Phillippes enterement
Alas that goodly maid
Why should she be afraid
Why should she take shame
That her goodly name
Honorably reported
Should be set and sorted
To be matriculate
With Ladies of estate
I conjure the Phillip sparow
By Hercules that hell did harow
And with a venomous arow
Slew of the Epidaures
One of the Centaures
Or Onocentaures
Or Hipocentaurius
By whose might and main
An heart was slain
With horns twain
Of glittering gold
And the appels of gold
Of Hesperides withhold
And with a dragon kept
That never more slept
By marcial strength
He wan at lenght
And slew Gerion
With three bodies in one
With mighty courage
Auaunted the rage
Of a Lion savage
Of Dyomedes stable
He brought out a rabble
Of coursers and rounses
With leapes and bounses
And with mighty lugging
Wrestlyng and tuggyng
He plucked the bull
By the horned skul
And offered to Cornucopia
And so forth per cetera
Also by Ecates bower
In Plutus ghastly tower
By the vglye Eumenides
That never have rest nor ease
By the venomous serpent
That in hell is never burnt
In Lerna the Greeks ^en
That was engendered then
By Chemeras flames
And all the deadly names
Of infernal posty
Where souls fry and rosty
By the stigial flood
And the streams wood
Of Cocitus botumles well
By the feryman of hell
Caron with his beard hoar
That roweth with a rude ore
And with his fore top
Gideth his bote with a prop
I conjure Phillip and call
In the name of king Saul
Primo regum express
He had the Phitonesse
To wytchecraft her to dres
And by her abusions
And damnable illusions
Of merueylous conclusions
And by her supersticions
And wonderful conditions
She raised up in that stead
Samuel that was dead
But whether it were so
He were, idem in numero
The self same Samuel
How be it to Saul did he tell
The Philistines should him ascry
And the next day he should dye
I will myself discharge
To lettred men at large
But Philip I conjure thee
Now by these names three
Diana in the woods grene
Luna that so bright does shine
Proserpina in hell
That thou shortly tell
And show now unto me
What the cause may be
Of this perplexity
Inferia phillippe Scroupe pulchra Iohanna
Instanter persit, cur nostri camis nis illam
Nunc puder, est sero, minor est infamia Vero.
Than such as have disdayned
And of this work complained
I pray God they be payned
No worse than is contained
In verses two or three
That follow as ye may see
Luride cur liuor Voluctis pia funera damnas
Taliate rapiant, rapiunt que fata Volucrum
Est tamen inuidiu mors tibi contnua.
Skeleton Laureate against a comel Coystrowne that curiowsly chauntyd And
curryshly cowntred, And madly in his Musikes mokkyshly made, Against the ix.
Musis of politic Poems and Poettys matriculat.
OF all nacyons under the heuyn.
These frantyke foolys I hate most of all.
For though they stu^ble in ye sins seuyn.
In peuyshnes yet they snapper and fall.
Which men the. viii. deadly sins call.
This peuysh proud this prender gest.
When he is well yet can he not rest.
A sweet sugar lofe and sour bayards bun.
Besumdele like in form and shap
The one for a duke the other for dun.
A maunchet for morell thereon to snap.
His heart is to hy to have any hap.
But for in his game vt carp that he can.
Lo Iak would be a Ientylman
With hey troly loly lo whip here Iak.
Alumbek sodyldym syllorym ben.
Curyowsly he can both counter and knak
Of Martyn swart and all his merry men.
Lord how perkyn is proud of his Pohen.
But ask where he fyndyth among his monacordes.
An holy water clark a ruler of lords.
He can not find it in rule nor in space.
He solfyth to haute his Trybyll is to hy.
He braggyth of his birth that borne was full bace
His musyk without mesure to sharp is his my.
He trymmyth in his tenor to counter pridewy.
His discant is besy it is without a mean.
To fat is his fantsy his wit is to lene.
He lu^bryth on a lewd lewte roty bulle Ioyse.
Rumbill down tumbil down hey go now now.
He fu^blyth in his fyngering an ugly good noise.
It semyth the sobbyng of an old sow.
He would be made much of and he wist how.
Well sped In spyndels and turning of tauellys.
Abungler, a brawler, a pyker of quarellys.
Comely he clappyth a pair of clauycordys.
He whystelyth so swetely he makyth me to swet.
His descant is dashed full of discordes
Ared angry man but easy to intrete.
An vssher of the hall fayn would I get.
To point this proud page a place and a rome
For Iak would be a Ientilman that late was a grome
Iak would Iet and yet Iyll said nay.
He counts in his cou^tenau^ce to check with yt best.
A malaperte medler that pryeth for his pray
In a dysh dare he rush at the rypest,
Dreming in dumpys to wrangill and to wrest.
He finds a proporcion in his prycke song.
To drink at a draught a larg and a long
Nay iape not with him he is no small fool
It is a solemn sire and a solayne.
For lords and ladies learn at his scole
He techyth them so wisely to solf and to feign
That neither they singe well prike so^g nor plain
This docter dellias commensyd in a cart.
A master, a mynstrel, a fydler, a fart.
What though ye can cownter Custodinos.
As well it becomith you a parysh town Clarke.
To sing Supitati dedit Egros
Yet bear ye not to bold to braule ne to bark
At me, that medeled nothing with your wark.
Correct first thyselfe, walk and be naught.
Deem what you list thou knowist not my thought.
A proverb of old say well or be still.
Ye are to unhappy occasion to find.
Upon me to clater or else to say ill.
Now have I showed you part of your proud mi^d
Take this in worth the best is behind.
Written at Croydon by Crowland in the Clay.
On Candelmas even the Kalendas of May.
FINIS.
Contra alium Cantitatem and Organisantem
Asinum, qui impugnabat Skeltonida
Pierium, Sarcasmos.
PRponenda meis non sunt tua plectra camenis. Necquantum nostra fistula clara
tua est.
Sepelicet liricos modularis arundine psalmos, Et tremulos calamis concinis
ipse modos:
Quamuis mill tuus digitus dat carmine plausus, Nam tua quam tua uox est mage
docta manus:
Quamuis cuncta facis tumida sub mente superbus, Gratior est Phaebo fistula
nostra tamen.
Ergo tuum stude as animo deponere fastum, Et uiolare sacrum desine Stulte
uirum.
Skeleton Laureat upon a deedmans head that was sent to him from an honorable
Ientil woman for a token, Deuysyd this gostly meditacion in Englysh, Couenable
in sentence Comendable, Lamentable, Lacrimable, Profitable for the soul.
Your ugly tokyn,
My mind has brokyn,
From worldly lust.
For I have dyscust,
We are but dust,
And die we must.
It is general
To be mortal,
I have well espyde
No man may him hyde:
From death holow eyed.
With sinnews wyderyd,
With bonys shyderyd,
With his worm etyn maw,
And his ghastly Iaw.
Gaspyng aside,
Nakyd of hyde,
Neither flesh not fell.
Then by my council,
Look that ye spel,
Well this gospel.
For where so we dwell,
Death will us qwell,
And with us mell.
For all our pamperde pau^chis
There may no fraunchys,
Nor worldly blys,
Redeem us from this,
Our days be datyd,
To be chek matyd,
With drawttys of death,
Stoppyng our breath,
Our eyes synkyng,
Our bodies stynkyng,
Our gummys grynnyng.
Our soulys brynnyng.
To whom then shall we sew,
For to have reskew,
But to sweet Jesus,
On us then for to rue.
O goodly child,
Of Mary mylde,
Then be our shylde.
That we be not exyld,
To the dyne dale,
Of botemles bale,
Nor to the lake,
Of fendys blake.
But grant us grace
To se thy face,
And to purchase,
Thine heavenly place.
And thy palace,
Full of solace.
Above the sky,
That is so hy. Eternally.
To behold and se.
The Trynyte. Amen.
Mirres vous y.
VUomanhod wanton ye want.
Your medeling mastres is manerles.
Plenty of ill of goodness skant.
Ye rayll at riot recheles.
To praise your port it is nedeles.
For all your draffe yet and your dreggys.
As well borne as ye full often time beggys.
Why so koy and full of skorne.
Mine horse is sold I wene you say.
My new furryd gown when it is worn.
Put up your purs ye shall non pay.
By Creed I trust to se the day.
As proud a pohen as ye sprede.
Of me and other ye may have need.
Though angelyk be your smylyng.
Yet is your tongue an adders tail.
Full like a Scorpyon styngyng.
All those by whom ye have avail.
Good mastres Anne there ye do shayle.
What prate ye praty pyggys ny.
I trust to quyte you or I die.
Your key is mete for every lok.
Your key is commen and hangyth owte.
Your key is ready we need not knok.
Nor stand long wrestyng there about.
Of your doregate ye have no doubt.
But one thing is that ye be lewd.
Hold your tongue now all be shrewde.
To mastres Anne that farly sweet.
That wonnes at the key intemmys street.
The book of three fools M. Skeleton poet Laureate, Gave to my Lord Cardynall
The first fool.
The man that does wed a wife
For her goods and her richesse
And not for lygnage femynatyfe
Procures doloure and dystresse
With infynyte pain and heaviness
For she will do him much sorrow
Both at even and at morrow.
The second fool
The darts right cursed of envy
Has rayned sithe the world began
Which brings man euydently
In to the bonds of Satan
Wherefore he is a dyscrete man
That can eschew that evil sin
Where body and soul is lost in
The third fool
Diverse by voluptuousnes
Of women the which be present
Be brought in to full great dystres
Forgettyng virtues excellent
Of god the which is permanent
And suffers themself to be bound
In cords as it were a hounde.
COme hither and take this Book and read therein for your lernyng with clear
iyeu, and look in this book yt shows you folysh Fools, without wit or
understanding Pecunyous Fools that be auaryce, and for to have good time, and
to live meryly, weddeth these old wyddred women, which has sackes full of
nobles, claryfye here your syghte, and ye shall know what goodness comes
thereby, and what Joy and gladness Some there be yt habandoneth themself for to
gather together the donge that yssuethoute of their asses arse, for to find
evermore grese, it is great folly truly, but yet the young man is more
folyssher, the which weddeth an old wife, for to have her gold and silver. I
say that he is a great Fool that takes anne old wife, for her goods and is
much to blame

They the which do so, procures all trybulations. For with her he shall
neither have joy, recreacion, nor rest. He noryssheth stryfes, and great
debates, thought, pain, anguyshe, and melancoly. And if he would accomplysshe
the works of marriage, he may not, for she is so debylyte cold, vnpropyce,
unnatural, and vndyscur rent, for the coldenes that is in her. The husband
of this old wife has none esperaunce to have lygnage by her, for he never
loved her. The man is a very Fool to make his demoraunce upon such an old
wife, when he thinks sometime upon such things, he leseth his natural wit,
in cursynge himself more then a. M. times with the gold and the silver, and
the cursed hasarde of Fortune. And when he sees his poor life in such
dystresse, his heart is all oppressed with melancoly and dolor, but when the
unhappy man sees that it is force and that he is constrayneth to have
patience, he puttteth his cure to draw to him the money of the old wyddred
woman in making to her glade chere. And when he has the money and the bag
with nobles, God knoweeth what chere he makes, without thynkinge on them that
gathers it And when he has spente al, he is more vnhappyer then he was
before, if that the fool be unhappy, it is well right, for he has wedded
auaryce, mother of all euylles, if he had taken a wife that had been fair and
young after his complexion, he had not fallen into so great an inconvenience.
It is written in ancient books that he which weddeth a wife by auaryce, and
not for to have lygnage, has no cure of the honesty of matrymonye, and
thinks full evil on his conscience, The Unyon of marriage in decayed, for
under the color of good and loyal marriage is wedded auaryce as we secuery
day by experience through the world And one will have a wife, and that he mark
his to be demanded in marriage, they will inquire of his riches and conninge.
And on the other side he will demand great goods with her, to norysshe her
with. For and her father and mother and friends have no great riches, he will
not of her. But, and she be rich he demands none other thing. It is
written that one were better have his house in deserte, where as no mention
should be of him, then to bide with such wives, for they be replete with all
cursednes. And the pore fool breketh his heart, he loses his soul and
corrompeth his body. He sells his youth unto the old wife that weddeth her
for anaryce, and has but noise and discention, in vsyng his life thus in sin
Consydre you fools what seruytude ye put yourself in, when ye wedde such
wives. I pray you be chaste if that ye will live without unhap. My friends which
be not in that band, put you not therein, and ye shall be well happy
Notwithstanding I defend you not to mary but I exhort you to take a wife that
ye may have progeny by, and solace bodily and gostly, and thereby to win the
joys of paradyse.

Of Envy, the second Fool.
Approach you folly she enuyous, the which can say no good by them that ye hate,
come and se in this Book, your perverse and evil condycions. O envy that
deuoureth the condycions of men, and dyssypers of honor. Thou make to have
rauisshynge hearts famyshed, thou brennest the desires, and sleeth the soul
in the end, thou engendrest the darte enuyronned with mischefe that which
traueyleth diverse folks. Cursed fool how haste thou thy heart so replete
with cruelte, for if I have temporal goods thou will have envy thereat, or
if that I can work well, and that I apply me unto diverse things the which
be honest, or if that I have castles, lands, and tenementes or if that I am
exalted unto honor by my science, or won it by hardynes truly and iustyle,
or if that I am beloved of diverse persons which reclaymeth me good and
virtuous, and of a noble courage, thou wylt vilep end me with thy words, thou
wottest never in what manner thou may adnychell mine honor, Thy malicious
heart is hurt with a mortal wound in such wise that thou haste no joy nor
solace in this world, for the darte of Envy perceth thy heart like a spear.
Thou have wild lycoure, the which makes all thy stomach to be on a flambe.
There is no medicyne that may hele thy mortal wound. I being in a place,
where as mine honor was magnyfyed, thought for to have taken alyaunce with an
odyffe rau^t flower, but all sodaynely I was smyten with a darte of envy be
hind my back, wherthroughe all tho that were on my party turned their backs
upon me, for to agree to one of Uenus dissolate servants, procedynge, from a
heart, enuenymed with envy. Wherefore I shall specyfye unto you the condycyons
of the enuyous. who that holds him of the subgectes of envy, she constytueth
to devour, and byte every bodyegyuynge vnhappes and myseryes unto her
servants. Such folks does the innocente a thousand wrongs. They be
replenysshed with so many treasons, yt they can not siepe in their beds, they
have no sweet cantycles nor songs. They have their tongues honyed with sweet
words under the color of love, they be lene, and infecte of rygoure: these
enuyous more bytterer then the gall of the fyshe Glauca, with their eyes
beholdinge a trauers of stomachs chaufed syntillously, and without these
mouths as the vine that is new cut, they be enuyroned with rage and great
anguysshe, beholdynge evermore to destroy some body. Conceive the history of
Joseph in your minds, the which had vii. brethren that were enuyous against
him which was the yongeste and sold him unto the merchants of Egypt by
envy, and betrayed him. The which were delybered of a long time to have
destroyed him. These euuious never laughe, but wha^ some good man has damage
upon the sea or land, or at the disfortune of some body, he drynketh his blood
as milk, Notwithstanding, his heart is ever enbraced with envy, and as long
as he lives it shall gnawe his heart. He resembles unto Ethua which brenneth
always. As of Romulus and Remus his brother, the which Romulus edefyed first
Rome, and gave it to name Rome, after his own name. Nevertheless they were past
ours for they establyshed laws in the city And Romulus punished every body
egally. He did Instytute lymittes or marks about the city, and ordained that
he that passed the lymyttes should be put to death. His brother passed them,
wherefore he was put unto death incontinente in the same place. We read also
how Cayme slew his own brother by envy. Have we not ensample semblablye of
Atreus, of whom his brother occupied ye park, how well that they were in the
realm strong and puyssaunte, for to defend them, It was Thesius that
expulsed his brother out of the realm by envy, and was called again because
that he had taken the park, and finally was banyshed, and by envy and under
the color of peace he was sent for. And when he was commen unto a Feast, he
made his two children for to be rested, and made them to drink their blood. O
what horroure was it to see his two children dye that were so dyscrete? In
likewise Ethiocles by his brethren received great enormyties by that cursed
envy. O thou prudent man if thou will be discrete, good, and wise fly from
envy, and thou shall find thyselfe sound of body and soul.

Of the voluptuousnes corporal The third Fool.
Right heartely I beseech you folysshe and Lecherous people, that it will
please you for to come and make a litell Collacion in this Book, and if there
be any thing, that I can do for you, I am all yours both body and goods, for
truly I have an ardaunte desire to do you some meditorious deed, because
that I have ever frequented your service.

Now harken what I have found you cautellous women. They that the Pappes be
seen all naked, their heir combed and trussed in diverse places merueylously be
unreasonable Fools, for they dress them like voluptuous harlottes that make
their heir to appear at their brows yalowe as fine gold made in little
tresses for to draw young folk to their love. Some for to have their goods
presents to them their beds for to take their carnal desires And after
that they have taken all their disportes, they pill them as an Onion, The
other for to have their plesures mo^dayne cheseth them that we love best and
makes sygnyfyaunce to them saying yt she is anamoured on them Thou art a
very Idyot so to abandone thyselfe unto the vile sin of Lecherye, for thou
let thyselfe be wrapped therein, like as a calfe, or a sheep is bound in a
cord. In such wise that ye can not unbind youreselfe. O fool have aspecte
unto that which thou co^myttest for thou put thy poor soul in great
danger of damnation eternal, thou put thy goods, thine understanding,
and thy joy, unto dolorous perdicion and for all that ye be in your wordly
pleasures, yet it is mengled with dystres, or with mysery, great thought or
melancoly. I require thee leave thy wordlye pleasures that endures no longer
then the Grass of the feelde If you have joy one only momente thou shall have
twain of sorrow for it. We read of Sardanapalus that for his lecherye and
lybidinosite fell into hell, the which put himself in the guise of a poor
woman, his men saying him so obstinate in that vile sin, slew him, and so
fynished he his days for folowinge of his pleasaunce mondayne. The sovereign
creator was more puyssante then this wretched sinner, let us not apply
ourselfe thereto since that he punysheth sinners so asprely, but with all our
hertes enfarce we ourselfe for to (...) against that vile and abhom^n^^le
sin of lechery, the which (...) of enfeccion and bytternes, (...) it
^^stayneth the soul of man: flefrome the foolisshe women that pylleth the
lovers unto the hard bones, and you shall be beloved of GOD, and also of the
world.

En Parliament a Paris.
Justice est morte and verite sommeille,
Droit and raison sont allez aux pardons
Les deux premiers: Null ne les resueille,
Et les derniers, sont corrompus par dons.
Out of French into Latin.
Abstulit atra dies Astream: cana fides sed somno praessa iacet: ius iter
arripuit.
Et secum ratio proficiscens limite longo. Nemo duas primas euigilare parat;
Atque duo postrema absunt, and numera tantum Impediunt, nequeunt pro remeari
domum.
Out of Latin into English.
Justice now is dead,
Troth with a drousye head,
As heavy as the leed
Is leyd down to sleep,
And bidythe no keep
And right is ever fallow;
Gone to seek halows
With Reason to gidder
No man can tell whether
No man woll undertake
The first twain to a wake:
And the tweyne last
Be withholde so fast
With money, as men said
They can not come again,
Epithaphe.
This tretise devysed it is
Of two knaves sometime of dis.
Though this knaves be dead
Full of myschiefe and queed
Yet where so ever they ly
Their names shall never dye.
Compendium de duobus versipellibus John Iayberd and Adam ali. a knave Deque
illoru^ notissima vilitate.
A devout trentale for old John Clarke, sometime the holy patriarch of dis.
Sequitur trigentale
Tale quale rationale
Licet parum curiale
Tamen satis est formale
Ioannis Clerc hominis
Cuiusdam maltimonijs
Ioannes Iayberd qui vocatur
Clerc cleribus nuncupatur
Obijt sanctus iste pater
Anno domini. M. D. Sexto
In parochia de dis
Non erat sibi similis
In malicia vir insignis
Duplex cord and bilinguis
Senio confectus
Omnibus suspectus
Nemini dilectus
Sepultus est among the wedes
God forgive him his misdeeds
Dulce melos penetrans Celos.
Carmina cum cannis
Cantemus festa Ioannis
Clerk obijt vere
Iayberde nomen quae dedere
Dis populus natus
Clerk cleribus est quae vocatus
Hic vir caldeus
Nequam vir ceu Iebuseus
In christum domini
Fremuit de more cameli
Rectori proprio
Tam verba retorta loquende
Vnde resultando
Quae acheronta boando tonaret
Nunquam sincere
Solitus sua crimina flere
Cui male lingua loquax
Quae dicax mendax quae fuere
Et mores tales
Resident in nemine quales
Carpens vitales
Auras turbare sodales
Et cines socias
Asinus mulus velut and bos
O mne suum studium
Rubium pictum per amictum
Discolor and victum
Faciens semper maledictum
Ex intestinis ouium
Quae boum quae caprorum
Tendens ad quae forum
Fragmentum colligit horum
Dentibus exemptis
Mastigat cum quae polentis
Lanigerum caput caput
Aut vacce mugientis
Quid petis? hic sit quis
John Iayberd. Nicolas de dis
Cui dum vixerat is
Sociantur iurgia vis lis
Iam Iacet hic stark deed
Never a toth in his heed
A dieu. Iayberd. a due
I faith dikkon thou crew
Fratres orate
For this knauate
By the holy Rode
Did never man good
I pray you all
And pray shall
At this trentall
On knees to fall
To the foot ball
With fill the blak bowl
For Iayberdes soul
Bibite multum
Ecce sepultum
Sub pede stultum
Asinum and mulum
The devil kis his culum
Wit hey how Rumbelowe
Rumpopulornm
Per omnia secula seculorum.
Amen.
Requiem, etc.
Per fredericum hely
Fratrem de monte carmeli
Qui condunt sine sale
Hoc deuotum Trigintale
Vale Iayberd, valde male.
Finis.
Adam vddersale. alias dictus Adam all. a knave his Epitaph. Follows devoutly,
He was sometime the holy baillyue of dis.
Of dis.
Adam degebat
Dum vixit falsa gerebat
namquae extorquebat
Quicquid natiuus habebat
Aut liber natus. Rapidus
Lupus inde vocatus.
Ecclesiam quae satus
De belial iste Pilatus
Sub pede calcatus
Violauit nunc violatus
Perfidus iratus
Numquam fuit ille beatus
Vddersall stratus
Benedictus est spoliatus
Improbus inflatus
Maledictus iam laceratus
Sis tibi baccatus
Balians predominatus
Hic fuit ingratus
Porcus velut insaciatus
Pinguis crassatus
Velut aggag fit reprobatus
Crudelis quae cacus
Baratro peto sit timulatus
Belsabub his soul save
Qui iacet hic like a knave.
I am scio mortuus est
and lacet hic like a best.
Anima eius,
De malo in peuis
Amen.
De dis hec semper erit camena,
Adam vddersall sit anathema.
Auctore Skeleton Rectore de Dis.

Finis. etc.
Apud Trumpiton scripter per Curatum eiusdem quinto die Ianuarij Anno domini
secundum computat Anglie M. D. Vij.
Adam adam vbi es. Genesis vbi nulla requies. Vbi nullus ordo, sed sempiternus
horror inhabitat. Job.
Finis.
Diligo rustincum cum portant bis duo quonintum
Et cantant delos est mihi dulce melos.
1. Canticum dolorosum.
Lamentatio vrbis Norvvicen.
O lachrimosa lues nimis O quam flebile fatum
Ignibus exosis vrbs veneranda ruis
Fulmina sieve Iouis sieve vltima fata vocabant
Vulcani rapidis ignibus ipsa peris
Au decus au patrie specie pulcherima dudum
Vrbs Norwicensis labitar in cineres
Vrbs tibi quid referam? breuiter tibi pauca reponam,
Prospera raro manent, vtere sort tua.
Perpetuum mortale nihil, sors omnia versat,
Vrbs miseranda vale, sors miseranda tua est.
inifiranda. Skeleton.

Vilitissimus Scotus dundas allegat caudas contra, Angligenas
Caudatos Anglos, spurcissime Scote quid effers?
Effrons es, quo quae sons: mendax, tua spureaquae bucca est.
Anglicus a tergo
Caudant gerit.
Est canis ergo.
Anglice caudate
Cape caudam
Ne cadat a te.
Ex causa caude
Manet Anglica
Gens sieve laud.
Skelto^ nobilis Poeta,

Gup Scot. ye blot,
Laudate Caudate
Set in better
Thy pentameter
This dundas
This Scottishe as
He rymes and railes
That Englismen have fails.
Skeltonus laureatus,
Anglicus natus,
Prouocat musas
Contra Dundas
Norpacissimum Scotum,
Vndiquae notum,
Rustice fotum
Vapide potum,
Skeleton Laureat
After this rate
Defends with his pen
All Englysh men. Again dundas
That Scottishe ass
Shake thy tail Scot like a cur,
For thou beggest at every man's dur.
Diffamas patriam qua non est melior vsqm
Cum cauda plaudis dum possis ad hostia pultes
Mendicans mendicus eris, mendax quae bilinguis,
Scabidus horribilis, que^ vermes sex quae pedales
Corrodunt misere, miseres genus est maledictum.
Tut Scot I sey
Go shake thy dog hey
Dundas of Galaway
With thy versyfyeng rayles
How they have tails.
By Jesus Christ, falls scot you lie,
But behynd in our hose
We bear there a rose
For thy Scottyshe nose,
A spectacle case
To cover thy face
With tray deux ase
A tolman to blot
A rough foted Scot
Dundas sir knave
Why doste thou deprave,
This Royal Reame,
Whose radiant beam
And relucent light
Thou have in despite
Thou donghyll knight
But thou lakest might
Dundas, dronken, and drowsy
Skabed scuruy and lowsy
Of unhappy generation
And most ungracious nation.
Dundas that drunk ass
That ratis and rankis
That prates and prankes
On huntley banks
Take this our thanks
Dunde bar,
Walk Scot
Walk sot
Rail not to far.
Admonitio Skeltonis vt omnes Arbores viridi Laureo concedant.
Fraxinus in siluis, altis in montibus Ornus Populus in fluuijs, Abies
patulissima, Fagus
Lenta salix, platanus pinguis, Ficulnea Ficus, Gladifera and quercus, Pirus,
Esculus, Ardua pinus,
Basamus exudans, Oleaster, Oliua Mineruae, Iuniperus, Buxus, Lentiscus cuspide
lenta
Botrigera, and domino, vitis gratissima, baccho, Ilex and sterilis, Labrusta
parosa colonis,
Mollibus exudans fragrantia thura sabeis Thus redolens, Arabis panter,
notissima mirrha,
Et vos O Corili fragiles, humilesque Mirice Et vos O Cedri redolentes, vos
quoque Mirti.
Arboris omne genu viridi concedite Lauro.
Prenes en gre. The Laurelle.
Diligo rusticum cum portant bis duo quointum
Et cantant delos est mihi dulce melos
1. Canticum dolorosum.
M. D. XVIII.
In Bedell quondam Belial incarna^tum, deuotum Epitaphium.
Ismal eccae Bedel, non mel, sed fell, sibi des el. Perfidus acchitephel:
Luridus atquae lorell:
Nunc olet iste Iebal. Nabal. S. Nabal ecce Ribaldus Omnibus exosus atquae
perosus erat.
In plateaquae cadens Animam spirauit oleto, Presbiteros Odiens sic sine mente
ruit
Discite vos omnes quid sit violare sacratos Presbiteros, quia sic corruit iste
canis.
Cocitus cui sic petus per Tartara totus Sit peto promotus Cerberus hiuncquae
voret
At mage sancta tamen mea musa precabiturum atros Hos limures quod eat sic
bedel ad superes
Non eat, immo ruat, non scandat sed mage tendat, Inquae caput preceps mox
acheronto petat.
Bedel. Qua^ta malignatus est Inimicus in sa^cta^. psa. 73. Mortus est asinus
Qui vixit multum
Hic iacet barbarus
The devil kys his culum.
Amen.
Hanc volo transcribas, transcriptam mox quae remittas
Pagellam: quia sunt qui mea scripta sciunt
Read. Igitur quia sunt qui mala cu^cta frenuitur
Read. Igitur quia sunt qui bona cu^cta prenuitur
Nec tamen expaueo de fatuo labio,
Nec multum paueo de scolido Rabulo.
Poeta Skeleton Laureatus Libellum suum metrice Aloquitur.
Ad dominum properato meum mea pagina percy, qui Northumbrorum iura paterna
gerit. Ad nutum celebris tu prona repone Leonis, quequae suo patri tristia
iusta. Ast vbi perlegit dubiam sub me^te volutet, fortuna^ cuncta quae male
fida rotat, qui leo sit felix and nestoris occupet Annos, ad libitum cuius ipse
paratus ero.

Skeleton Laureat upon the doulours death and much lamentable chance of the
most honorable earl of Northumberlande.
I Wayle, I weep, I sobbe, I sigh fulsore
The dedely fate. the dolefulle desteny
Of him that is gone, alas without restore
Of the blood royal descending nobelly
Whose lordshyp doutles, was slain lamentably
Through treson, again him compassed and wrought
True to his prince, in word, in deed, and thought.
Of heavenly poems. O. Clyo calde by name
In the colege of musis gods hystoriall
Adres the to me which am both halt I lame
In elect vteraunce to make memoryall
To the for souccour to the for help I call
Mine homely rudnes and dryghnes to expel
With the fresh waters of Elyconys well.
Of noble Acts Aunciently enrolde
Of famous pryncis and lords of astate
By thy report ar wont to be extold
Regestringe trewly every formare date
Of thy bounty after the usual rate
Kyndell in me such plenty of thy nobles
These sorowfulle dites that I may show expres.
In sesons past who has herd or seen
Of formar writing by any presidente
That vilane hastarddis in their furious tene
Fulfilled with malice of froward entente
Confetered togeder of cominion concente
Falsely to slay their most singular good lord
It may be regestrede of shameful record.
So noble a man so valiant lord and knight
Fulfilled with honor as all the would does ken
At his commandment which had both day and night
Knights and squyers: at every season when
He calde upon them, as meniall household men
Were not these commons vncurteis karlis of kind
To slo their own lord: god was not i their mind
And were not they to blame I say also
That were a boute him his one servants of trust
To suffer him slain of his mortal fo
Fled away from him let him ly in the dust
They bode not till the rekenyng were discust
What should I flatter what should I gloss or paint
Fie fie for shame their hearts were to faint.
In England and france which greatly was redouted
Of who^ both Flaunders and Scotland stood in dread
To whom great estates obeyed and lowted
Amayny of rude villayns made him for to blede
Unkyndly they flew him, that holp the^ often at need
He was their bulwark their paues and their wall
Yet shafully they flew him ye shame mot the^ befall
I say ye comoners why were ye so stark mad
What frantyk frensy fill in your brain
Where was your wit and reason ye should have had
What wilful folly made you to rise a gain
Your natural lord: alas I can not feign
Ye armyd you with will, and left your wit behynd
Well may you be called comones most unkind.
He was your chefteyne your shield your chef defense
Ready to assyst you in every time of need
Your worship depended of his excellence
Alas ye mad men to far ye did excede
Your hap was unhappy to ill was your speed
What moved you again him to war or to fight
What aylde you to sle your lord again all right.
The ground of his quarrel was for his souerai^ lord
The well concerning of all the hole Land
Demandyng such duties as needs most acord
To ye right of his prince which should not be with stand
For whose cause ye slew him we your own hand
But had his noble men done well that day
Ye had not been able to have said him nay
But there was falls packing or else I am begylde
How be it the matter was euydent and plain
For if they had occupied their spear and their shilde
This noble man doutles had not been slain
But men say they were lynked with a double chain
And held with the comones under a cloak
Which kindeled ye wild fyr yt made all this smoke.
The commons Renyed there tares to pay
Of them demanded and asked by the king
With one voice importune they plai^ly said nay
They buskt the^ on a bushme^t themself in bail to bring
Again the kings pleasure to wrestle or to wring
Bluntly as bestis with boste and with cry
They said they forsed not, nor carede not to die.
The nobelnes of ye north this valiant lord and knight
As man that was Innocent of treachery or train
Presed forth boldly to withstand the might
And like marciall Hector he faught the^ a gain
Uygorously upon them with might and with maine
Trustyng in noble men yt were with him there
But al they fled from him for falshode or fere.
Barons, knights, squiers and all
To gether with servants of his famuly
Turned their back, and let their master fall
Of whom they counted not a fly
Take up whose would for there they let him ly
Alas his gold, his fee, his Annual rent
Upon such a sort was Ille bestowd and spent.
He was enuirond about on every side
With his enemies, yt were stark mad and wode
Ye while he stood he gave them wounds wide
Allas for ruth what though his mind were good
His courage manly, yet there he shed his blood
Al left alone alas he fought in vain
For cruelly among them there he was slain.
Alas for pite that percy thus was spylt
The famous Earl of Northumberland
Of knyghtly prowes the sword pomel and hylt
The mighty Lion doutted by se and Land
O dolorus chance of fortunes froward hand
What man remembryng how sha^fully he was slain
From bitter weping himself ca^ restrain.
O cruel Mars thou dedly God of war
O dolorous tewisday dedicate to thy name
When thou shoke thy sword so noble a man to mar
O ground ungracious unhappy be thy fame
Which were endyed with read blood of the same
Most noble earl: O foul mysuryd ground
Where on he gat his final dedely wound.
O Atropos of the fatal systers. iii.
Gods most cruel unto the life of man
All merciles in the is no pite
O homicide which sleest, all that thou can
So forcibly upon this earl thou ran
That with thy sword enharpit of mortal dread
Thou kit a sonder his perfight vital threde.
My words vnpullysht be nakide and plain
Of Aureat poems they want ellumynynge
But by them to knowledge ye may attain
Of this lords death and of his murdrynge
Which whils he lived had fuyson of every thing
Of knights of squyers chyf lord of toure and town
Till fykkell fortune began on him to frown
Paregall to dukes with kings he might compare
Surmountinge in honor al erlis he did excede
To all countries about him report me I dare
Like to Eneas benign in word and deed
Ualiant as Hector in every marciall need
Prudent, discrete, circumspect and wise
Till the chance ran again him of fortunes duble dyse.
What needs me for to extol his fame
With my rude pen enkankered all with rust
Whose noble acts show worshiply his name
Transendyng for mine homly muse. that must
Yet somewhat wright supprised with herty lust
Truly reportyng his right noble estate
Immortally which is immaculate.
His noble blood never destayned was
True to his prince for to defend his right
Doblenes hatyng, falls matters to compass
Treytory and treason he banysht out of sight
we truth to meddle was al his holl delyght
As all his country can testyfy the same
To sle such a lord alas it was great shame.
If the hole quere of the musis nine
In me all only were set and comprysed
Enbrethed with the blast of Influence deuyne
As perfytly as could be thought or devised
To me also all though it were promised
Of Laureat Phoebus holy the eloquence
All were to little for his magnificence
O young Lion but tender yet of age
Grow and encrese remember thyn estate
God the assyst unto thyn heritage
And give the grace to be more fortunate
Again rebellyones arm the to make debate
And as the Lyone which is of bestes king
Unto thy subjects be curteis and benygne
I pray God send the prosperous life and long
Stable thy mind constant to be and fast
Right to mayntayn and to resyst all wrong
All flateryng faytors abhor and from the cast
Of foul detraction God keep the from the blast
Let double delyngin the have no place,
And be not light of credence in no case.
With heavy chere, with dolorous heart and mind
Each man may sorrow in his inward thought
This lords death whose pere is hard to find
Al gife England and France were through saught
Al kings, all princes, al dukes, well they ought
Both temporal and spiritual for to complain
This noble man that crewelly was slain.
More specially Barons and those knygtes bold
And al other Gentilmen with him enterteyned
In fee: as menyall men of his housold
Whom he as lord worshyply mainteyned
To sorrowful weping they ought to be co^stresned
As often as they call to their remembrance,
Of there good lord the fate and dedely chance.
Perlese prince of heaven Emperyall
That with one word formed al thing of naught
Heaven, hell, and earth, obey unto thy call
Which to thy rese^blau^ce wo^dersly have wrought
All makynd, whom thou full dear have bought
with thy blood precious our finau^ce thou did pay
And us redeemed, from the fendys pray
To the pray we as prince Incomparable
As thou art of mercy and pity the well
Thou bring unto thy Joy eterminable
The soull of this lord from all danger of hell
In endless blys with the to bide and dwell
In thy palace, above the orient
Where thou art lord, and God omnipotent.
O Ouene of mercy O lady full of grace
Maiden most pure and gods mother dear
To sorrowful hearts chef comfort and solace
Of all women O flower without pere
Pray to thy son above the sterr is clear
He to vouchesaf by thy mediacion
To pardon thy servant and bring to salvation
In Joy triumphaunt the heavenly gerarchy
With all the hole sort of that glorious place
His soull mot receive in to their company
Through bounty of him that formed all solace
Well of pite, of mercy, and of grace
The father, the son, and the holy ghost
In Trinitate one God of myghts most.
Non sapit humanis qui certam ponere rebus
spem cupit est hominum Raraquae ficta fides
Tetrasticon Skeleton Laureati ad magistrum Rukshaw
Sacre Theology aegregium professorem
Accipe nunc demum doctor celeberrime Rukshaw
Carmina: de calamo quae occidere meo,
Et quaqua placidis non sunt modulata carmenis
Sunt tamen ex nostro pectore prompta pio.
Vale feliciter, virorum,

Laudatissime.

FINIS.
Elegia in Serenissimae principis and domine domine Margarete nuper Comitisse
de Darby Strenuissimi Regis Henrici Septimi matris funebre ministerium. Per
Skelonida Laureatum Oratorem Regium. XVI. mensis Angusti. Anno salutis. M. D.
XVI.
ASpirate meis eligis pia turma sororum
Et Margaretam collacrimate piam
Hac sub mole latet Regis celebrima matter
Henrici magni quem locus iste fouet
Quem locus iste sacer celebri celebrat poliandro
Illius en genitrix hac tumulatur humo
Cui cedat tanaquil (titus ha^c super astra reportat)
Cedat pennolope carus vlixis amor
Hec Abigail velut Hester erat pietate secunda
En tres iam proceres nobilitate pares
Pro domina precor implora pro principe tanta
Flecte deum precibus qui legis hos apices
Plura refer piget calamus torpore rigescit
Dormit Micenas, negligitur probitas
Nec iuuat aut modicum prodest nu^c vltima versu
Facta recensere (mortua mors reor est)
Queris quid decus est? decus est modo dicier
Cedit honos hirco, cedit honor que capro
Falleris ipse Charon iterum surrexit abyron
Et stigios remos despicit ille tuos
Viuitur ex voto: mentis precordia tangunt
Nulla sepulcra ducum nec monumenta patrum
Non regum non vlla hominum labentia fato
Tempora nec tociens mortua turba ruens.
Hunc statuo certe periturae parcere cartae
Ceu Iuuenalis ouat eximius satirus.
Disticon execrationis in fagolidoros
Qui lacerat, violat, ve rapit presens Epitoma
Hunc laceretque voret Cerberus absque mora.
Calon. Agaton. cum Areta. Re. in. Pa.
Hanc tecum statuas dominam (precor) o sator orbis,
Quo regnas rutilans rex sine fine manens:
Orator Regius Skeltonis Laureatus in singular meritis simumque praeconium
nobilissim i principis Henrici Septimi nuper strenuissime Regis Anglie hoc
Epitaphium edidit. Ad sinceram contemplationem reuerendi in Cristo patris ac
domini Dompni Ioha^nis Islip Abbatis VVestmonastericij optime meriti Anno
domini. M. D. XII. pridie domini Andree Apostoli. etc.
TRistia melpomenes cogor mode plectra sonare
Hos elegos foueat Cinthius ille meos
Si quas fata mouent lacrimas: lacrimare vide^
I am been maturum si been mente sapis
Flos Britonum, regum speculum Salamonis Ymago
Septimus Henricus mole sub hac tegitur
Punica dum regnat (redolens rosa digna vocari
Iam iam Marcescit ceu leuis vmbra fugit)
Multa nouercantis fortunae multa fauentis
Passus: and infractus tempus vtrumquae tulit
Nobilis anchises Armis metuendus Atrides
Hic erat: hunc Scottus rex timuit Iacobus
Spiramenta anime vegitans dum vescitur aura
Francorum populus conticuit pauidus
Inmensas sibi diuicias cumulasse quid horres
Ni cumulasset opes forte Britainie Luas
Vrgentes casus tacita si mente volutes
Vix tibi sufficeret aurea ripa thagi
Ni sua te probitas consulta mente laborans
Rexisset satius: vix tibi tuta salus
Sed quid plura can o? meditans quid plura voluto
Quis quae vigil sibi sit mors sine lege rapit
Ad domiuum qui cuncta regit pro principe tanto Funde preces quis quis carmina
nostra legis.
Vel mage si placeat hunc
Hunc timuit Iacobus
Scottorum dominus
Qui sua fata luit
Quem leo candidior
Rubeum necatense Leone^
Etiacet vsqu modo
Non tumulatus humo.
Refrigerij sedem quietis beatitudinem
Luminis habeat claritatem.
AMEN.
Eulogium pro suorum Temporum Condicione Tantis principibus non indignum per
Skeltonida Laure atum Oratorem Regium.
Hvc pia Calliope propera mea casta puella
Et mecum resona carmina plena deo
Septimus Henricus britonum memorabilis heroes
Anglica terra tuus magnanimus priamus
Attalus hic opibus rigidus Cato, clarus Aestes
Sub gelido clausus marmore iam recubit
Hic honor omnis opes, probitas sic gloria regum
Omnia nutabunt mortis ad nuperium
Anglia number lacrimas: rides: lacrimare quid obstas?
Dum vixit lacrimas: dum moritur iubilas
Cauta tamen penses, dum vixerat Angligenenses
Vibrabant enses. bella nec vlla timent
Vndiquae bella fremunt nunc vndiquae prelia surgunt
Noster honor solus fiilius ecce suus
Noster honor solus qui qondera tanta subire
Non timet: intrepidus arma gerenda vocat
Arma geranda vocat (superi sua cepta secundent)
Vt quatiat pallos egida sepe rogat
Sors tamen est versanda diu sors vltima belli
Mirmidonum dominus matter silente ruit
Et quem non valuit validis superare sub armis
Mars? tamen occubuit insidijs Paridis
Nos incerta quidem pro certis ponere rebus
Arguit and prohibet delius ipse pater
Omnia sunt hominum dubio labencia fato
Mart sub incerto militat omnis homo
Omne decus nostrum nostra and spes vnica tantum
Iam been qui regnat hunc Iouis vmbra tegat
Vt quamuis mentem labor est inhibere volentem
Pauca tamen liceat dicere pace sua
Pace tua liceat mihi nunc tibi dicere pauca
Dulce meum decus and sola Britanna salus
Summa rei nostre remanet celeberrime princeps
In te precipuo qui modo sceptra geris
Si tibi fata fauent precor atquae precabor
Anglia tunc plaude sui minus ipse vale.
Policronitudo Basileos.

Tetrasticon veritatis.
Felix qui bustum torniasti
Rex tibi cuprum
Auro setectus fueras
Fueras spoliatus
Nudus prostratus
Tanta est rabioso cupido
Vndique Nummorum
Rex pace precor requiescas.
Amen.
FINIS.
In the fleet made by me William Cornishe otherwise called Nyshewhete
chapelman with the most famous and noble King Henry the VII. his Reygne the.
XIX. year the month of July
A treatise bitwene Troth, and Information.
A. B. of. E how. C. for. T. was. P. in. P
Prologue.
The hoole content.
The knowledge of God, passyth comparison
The devil knowith all il thing, consented or done
And man knows nothing, save only by reason
And reason in man, is diverse of operation
How can then man be parfite of cognicion
For reason shall so reason that sometime among
A man by informatio^ may ryghtewisly do wrong
Gospel.
The auctorised gospel and reason holds there wc
Whose litterall sense agreith to the fore seeing
Qui ambulat in tenebris nescit quo vadit
Now moralyse ye farther and peyse the contriuyng
I mean, between trowth and sotele conueynge
Who gothe in the dark, must stumble among
Blame never a blind man, thou he go wrong.
Example.
A Judge to the Jury needs must give credence
Now what if they purpose falls matters to co^pase
The judge must proceed yet in him non offense,
For as they give verdit, the judgment must pass.
But where the fault is, non dormit Judas
For by falls informacion many times among
Right shall be rewled and ye righteouse shall do wrong
Evil information.
But woo to such informers who they be
That makes their malice yt matter of the power
And cruelly without conscience right or pity
Disgorgith their venom under that colowre
Alas not remembryng their souls doloure
When, dies illa, dies ire, shall be their song
Ite maledicti, take that for your wrong.
Aparable between informacion and Music

The examples.
Music in his Melody requiereth true soundes
Who sets a song, should give him to armony
who keeps true his tuenes may not pass his so^ds
His alteracio^s and prolacio^s must be pricked treuly
For music is true though minstrels makes maystry
The harper cares nothing but reward for his so^g
Merrily sou^dith his mouth when his to^g goth all of wrong.
The Harp.
A harp gives sound as it is set
The harper may wrest it vntunablye
If he play wrong good tunes he does let
Or by mystunyng the very true armonye
A Harp well playde on shewyth sweet melody
A harper with his wrest may tune the harp wrong
Mys tunyng of an instrument shall hurt a true song
A song.
A song that is true and full of swetnes
May be evil song and tunyd amyse
The song of himself yet never the les
Is true and tunable, and sing it as it is
Then blame not the song, but mark well this
He that has spit at an other man's song
Will do what he can to have it song wrong.
A claricorde.
The claricord has a tunely kind
As the wyre is wrested hye and low
So it tuenyth to the players mind
For as it is wrested so must it needs show
As by this reason ye may well know
Any Instrument mystunyd shall hurt a true so^g
Yet blame not the claricord ye wrester does wrong.
A trompet.
A trompet blown hye with to hard a blast
Shall cause him to vary from the tunable kind
But he that blows to hard must suage at yt last
And feign to fall lower with a te^perat wind
And then the trompet the true tune shall find
For an instrument over wynded is tuned wrong
Blame none but the blower, on him it is long.
True counsel.
Who plaieth on the harp, he should play true
Who syngeth a song, let his voye be tunable
Who wresteth the claricorde mystunyng eschew
Who blows a tro^pet let his wind be mesurable
For instruments in themself be ferme and stable
And of troth, would troth to every manes soge
Tune them then truly for in the^ is no wrong.
Colors of Musyke.
In Musyke I have learned iiij. colors as this
Blake, full blake, verte, and in likewise read
By these colors many subtle alteracio^s there is
That will begile one tho in cuni^g he be well sped
With a prike of Indicion from a body that is deed
He shall try so his nombre with swetnes of his song
That the ear shall be pleased, and yet he al wrong.
The practiser
I poor man unable of this science to skyll
Save litel practice I have by experience
I mean but troth and of good will
To remember the doers, that uses such offense
Not one sole, but generally in sentence
By cause I can skyll of alitle song
To try the true cord to be known fro the wrong
Treuth.
Yet troth was drownde he not sanke
But still did fleet a boue the water
Informacion had played him such a pranke
That with power the pore had lost his matter
Because that troushe begane to clater
Informacion has taught him to solfe his song
Paciens parforce, content you we wrong
Truth.
I assayde these tunes me thought the^ not sweet
The concordes were nothing Musical
I called Masters of Music cunyng and discrete
And the first prynciple whose name was tuballe
Guido ^oice John de Murris, vitr^ace and them al
I prayed them of help of this combrous song
Priked with force and l^ttred with wrong
True answer.
They said I was horce I might not sing
My voice is to pore it is not awdyble
Informacion is so curyous in his chauntynge
That to bear the true plainsong, it is not posible
His proporcions be so hard wc so high a quatrible
And ye plain song in the margyn so craftily bound
That yt true tunes of tuball ca^ not have ye right sound.
Truth.
Well quod treuth, yet ones I trust verily
To have my voice and sing a gain
And to flete out treuth and clarify truly
And ete sugar candy adaye or twain
And then to the deske to sing true and plain
Informacion shall not always entune his song
My parts shall be true, when his cou^treuers shall be wrong.
Information.
Information him enbolded of the monacorde
From co^sonaunts to co^cordes he Musyd his mastry
I assayde the Musyke both knight and lord
But none would speak, the sound board was to hie
The^ kept I ye plain keys y^ marred al my melody
Enformacion drove a crochet ye past al my song
With proporcion parforce, dreuen on to long.
Dialoge.
Sufferance came in, to sing a part
Go to quod troth, I pray you begyne
Nay sofft quod he, the gise of my part
Is to rest a long rest or I set in
Nay by long restyng ye shall nothing win
For informacio^ is so crafty and so hye in his song
That if ye fall to resting infayth in will be wrong
Trevveth.
Informacion will teache a doctor his game
From superacute to the noble dyapason
I a said to acute and when I came
Enformacion was mete for a doble dyatessaron
He song by a pothome yt has two kinds in one
with many subtel semetne^s most-met for his so^g
Patience parforce, content you with wrong
Troth.
I keep he round and he by square
The one is bemole and the other bequare
If I might make trial as I could and dare
I should show why these. ij. kinds do varye
But God knowyth al, so does not king Harry
For if he did thanchaunge should this. iiii. song
Pytye, for patience, and consience, for wrong
Nenyssvvhete Parabolam

FINIS, Finis.
SKELETON. LAVreate Oratoris Registertius. Against venomous tongues enpoysoned
with sclaunder and false detractions. etc.
Quid detur tibi aut quid apponatur tibi ad linguam dolosam? Psalm. C. xlij.
Deus destruet te, in finem euellet te, and emigrabit te de tabernaculo tuo. and
radicem tuam de terra viuentium. Psalm. lxvii.
AL matters well pondred, and well to be regarded
How should a falls lying tung the^ be rewarded
Such tunges should be torn out by yt hard roots
Hoyning like hogs that groynis and wrotes.
Dilexisti omnia verba precipitationis lingua dolosa. vbi. s. etc. For as I
have read in volumes old
A falls lying tunge is hard to withholde.
A sclaunderous tunge, a tunge of a skolde
Works more mischief than can be told.
That if I wist not to be controlde
Yet somewhat to say I dare well be bold
^ow some delight for to lie, thycke and threfolde.
Ad sannam hominem redigit comite and graphice.

For ye said, that he said, that I said, wot ye what
I made (he said) a windmil of an old mat.
If there be none other matter but that,
Than ye may command me to ge^til Cok wat.
Hic notat (purpuraria art) intextas literas Romanas in amictibus post
ambulonum ante and retro.

For before on your breast, and behind on your back,
In Roman letters I never found lack.
In your cross row, nor Christ cross you speed,
your Pater noster, your Aue, nor your Creed.
Who soever that tale unto you told,
He says untruly, to say, that I would
Controlle the cognisaunce of noble men:
Either by language, or with my pen.
Pedagogium meum de sublimiori Minerua constat esse. ergo. etc.

My scole is more solemn, and somewhat more haute
Than to be found in any such fault.
Pedagogium meum male sanos maledicos (sibulis, conplosique mantibus) explodit.
etc.

My scoles are not for unthrifts untaught,
For frantic faitours half mad, and half straught
But my learning is of an other degree,
To tau^t them like liddrous, lewd as they ^ee
Laxentergo antemnam elationis sue infla^^^ vento vanitatis. li. ille. etc.

For though some be lidder, and list for to rail,
Yet to lie upon me they can not prevail.
Then let them vale a bonet of their proud sail.
And of their taunting toies rest with il hayle.
Nobilitati ignobilis cedat vilitas. etc.

There is no noble man will judge in me,
Any such folly to rest or to be.
I care much the less what ever they say,
For tunges vntayde be renning a stray.
But yet I may say safely, so many well lettred
Embraudred, enlasid together, and fettred.
And so little learning, so lewdly allowed:
What fault find ye herein but may be auowed?
But ye are so full of vertibilite,
And of frenetyke folabilite.
And of melancoly mutabilite.
That ye would coarte, and enforce me.
Nothing to write, but hay the gy of three.
And I to suffer you lewdly toly,
Of me, with your language full of vilany.
Sicut nouocla acuta fecisti dolum, vbi. s.

Malicious tunges, though they have no bones,
Are sharper the^ swords, sturdier then stones.
Lege philostratum de vita tyanei Apollonij.

Sharper then raysors, that shave and cut throtes.
More stinging the^ scorpions yt stang Pharaotis
Venenum aspidum sub labiis eorum. Ps. More venomous and much more virulent,
Then any poisoned tode, or any serpent.
Quid peregrinis egemus exemplis, ad domestica recurramus. etc. li. ille.

Such tunges unhappy has made great division.
In realms, in cities, by such falls abusion.
Of falls fickil tunges, such cloked collusion.
Has brought nobil princes to ertreme co^fusio^.
Quicquid loquantur vt effeminantur ita effantur. etc. Sometime women were put
in great blame,
Men said they could not their tunges atame.
But men take upon them now all the shame.
with skeldig and sklau^derig make their tu^gs lame
Nouarum rerum cupidissimi. captatores. delatores. adulatores. inuigilatores.
deliratores. etc. id genus li. ille.

For men be now trailers and tellers of tales,
what tidings at Totma^, what newis in wales?
What shippis are sailing to Scalis malis
And all is not worth a couple of nut shalis
But lering and lurking here and there like spies.
The devil tere their tu^ges and pike out their ies.
Then ren they wc lesinges, and blow them about.
With he wrate such a bil withouten dout.
With, I can tell you what such a man said,
And you knew all, ye would be ill apayd.
De more vulpino gannientes ad aurem, fictas fabellas fabricant. li. ille.

In auspicatum. male ominatum. infortunatu^se fateatur habuisse horoscopum
quicunque maledixerit vati Pierio. S. L. etc.

But if that I knew what his name hight,
For clatering of me, I would him sone quight.
For his false lying, of that I spoke never,
I could make him shortly repent him for ever.
Although he made it never so tough,
He might be sure to have shame enough.
Cerberus horrendo baratri latrando, sub antro. Te rodatque voret lingua dolosa
(precor)

A falls double tunge is more fires and fell,
The^ Cerberus yt cur couching in ye kenel of hell
Whereof hereafter, I think for to write,
Of falls double tunges in the dispite.
Recipit se scripturum opus sancte, laudabile, acceptabile, memorabileque, and
nimis honorifica^du^.

Disperdat dominus vniuersa labia dolosa and linguam magniloquam.

Why were ye Calliope, embrawdred with letters of gold?
Skeleton Laureate Orato. Reg. makes this answer. etc.

CAlliope
As ye may se
Regent is she
Of poets al
Which gave to me
The high degree
Laureat to be.
Of fame royal
Whose name enrolde
With silk and gold
I dare be bold
Thus for to were
Of her I hold
And her household
Though I wax old
And somdele sere
Yet is she feign
Uoyde of disdayn
Me to retain
Her seruiture.
With her certain
I will remain
As my sovereign
Most of pleasure.
Maulgre touz malheureux.
Latinum carmen sequitur. Cur tibi contexta est aurea Calliope? Responsio
eiusdem vatis.
CAndida Calliope vatum regina, coronans
Pierios lauro, radiante intexta sub auro,
Hanc ego Pierius, tanto dignabor honor
Dum mihi vita manet, dum spiritus hos regit artus
Quamquam conficior senio marcescoque sensim
Ipse tamen gestare sua haec pia pignora certo,
Assensuque suo placidis parebo camenis
Inclita Calliope and semper mea maxima cura est.
Haec Pierius omni Spartane liberior.
CALLIOPE,
Musarum excellentissima,
speciosissima, formosissima,
Heroic is priest versibus.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Fletestreate, near unto S. Dunstones church by Thomas
Marshe.


