

GODS Arrovve against Atheists.

By Henry Smith.



Printed at London by John Danter, and are to be sold by William Barley at his
shop in Gratious-streete over against Leaden Hall. 1593.

To the Right Worshipful, Virtuous and Godly Lady Katherine Hayward, Wife to
Sir Rowland Hayward, the grave Father and Ancient Alderman of the famous City
of London, John Danter, wishes Health, with increase of Authority.
THe Gardner (right virtuous and Godly Lady) Walking in the prime of Summer,
in a fragrant and odoriferous Garden, where grows all sorts of sweet
Flowers, commonly gathers the pleasants Rose to gratify his Ma^^er: So I
(right Worshipful) having come to my hand many excellent works to be
published abroad the world: have from amongst them all, chosen this Book
Entitled, Gods Arrowe against Atheists, as the purest Rose for your Ladyship
to delight in: hoping upon this favor, that you will be the sweet Patroness
of this my poor good will, and to shadow it under the wings of your clemency
from the bitter storms of al Heretical Schismatics: In so doing my mind
will be fully satisfied, that long has waited the time, to show my bounden
duty to the Grave Fathers and ^untient Governors of this famous Ci^ie of
London, but especially to the right wor^hipfull Sir Rowland Hayward your
reverent Husband, who thrice has bin Lieftenant under her Majesty, and borne
the chiefest office in this City, to the preservation of Londons Charter: And
you sweet Lad^ ^is renowned wife, whose virtuous mind has ever yet bin
willing to prefer Scholars to the setting forth of Gods truth, and to
beautyfie the true endeavors of us Citizens, I therefore still expecting your
wonted and favorable liking, that you will spend away some part of winters weary
nights and Summers pleasant Euenings, in perusing over this worthy book, made
by that famous learned man Master Henry Smith, before he departed this life,
wherein is discoursed, the vain Heresies of sundry religions now used in
England, to the great hurt of this flowrishing Common wealth: In so doing I
have my desire, wishing you the increase of all dignity in this world, and in
the world to come everlasting happiness. Amen.

^^urs in all Humble and dutiful service to his poor power, John Danter
Printer.

A Table of such Chapters as are handled in this Book following.
IN the first Chapter, is contained the absurdity of Atheism and Irreligion,
with the confutation thereof. In the second and third Chapters, the Christian
Religion is approved to be the only true Religion, against the Gentiles and
all the Infidels in the world. In the fourth Chapter, the Religion of Mahomet
is confuted. In the fifth Chapter, the Church of Rome is disproued to be the
true Church of God. In the sixth Chapter, the Brownists and Barrowists, with
their detestable Schisms are confuted, and our Church approved to be the only
true Church of God.
Gods Arrovve Against Atheism, and Irreligion.
The first Chapter.
Atheism and Irreligion was ever od^ous even among the Heathen themselves:
insomuch as that Protagoras for that he doubted whether there were any God or
no, was by the Athenians vanished out of their Country. Diagoras was such a
notorious Infidel that he held there was no God; him and all such like
Atheists the very Heathens have abhorred and detested, as being more like rude
beasts than reasonable men: For Cicero the Heathen Philosopher does condemn
them all, and further says, Cice. (...) de nature.
that there was never any Nation so sauadge, or people so barbarous, but
always confessed there was a God: whereunto they were led even by the light of
Nature, and natural instinct. For the very same is confirmed by the common use
of all Heathens, Tertull in Apolog.
in lifting up their eyes and hands to heaven, in any sudden distress that
comes upon them. Yea, by experience of all ages it has been proved that
Atheists themselves, that is, such as in their health and prosperity for more
liberty of sinning, would strive against the being of a God, when they came to
die or fall into any great misery, they of all other would show themselves
most fearful of this God, Seneca lib. 1, de ira.
as Seneca himself declares: Insomuch as Zeno the Philosopher was wont to
say, that it see^ned to him a more substantial proof of this matter, to hear
an Atheist at his dying day, preach God ( when he asked God and all the world
forgiveness) then to hear all the Philosophers in the world dispute the point:
For that at this instant of death and misery, it is like that such do speak
in earnest and sobriety of spirit, who before in the wantonness impugned God.
It is remembered of Caius Caligula, (that wicked and incestuous Emperor) that
he was a notable scorner and contemner of God, Sueton in calig. 1.51* Dion in
caligula.
and made no reckoning of any other to be God but himself, yet this
abominable and wicked Atheist, as God left him not unpunished (for by his just
judgment he was slain by some of his own officers) so whilst he lived he
was wont (as the Historiographers report of him) at the terrible thundering
and lightning, not only to cover his head, but also to get himself under his
bed, and there to hide himself for fear. Whence I pray ^ame this fear upon
him? but that his own conscience did tell him (howsoever in words perchance he
would not affirm so much) that there was a God in heaven, able to quail and
cast down his pride and all the Emperors of the world if he listed, whose
thunderboltes were so terrible, as that justly by his own example he showed,
he was to be feared of all the world. And hereof it is that some say, that
God is called Deus, of the Greek word Theos, which signifies fear, because
the fear of him is planted and engraffed in the very natures and conscience
of all reasonable creatures, yea even in the conscience of the greatest
contemners, and ra^^kest Atheists of the world, who say what they list, and do
what they list, yet shall they never be able to root out this impression:
namely, that there is a God, whose fear is engraven in the hearts of all men.
And whence I pray you comes shame in men after an offense committed? Or why
should men (by natural distinct) put a difference between virtue and vice,
good and evil, if there were not a God, who because he loves the one, and
hates the other, has written that difference in every man's heart? Therefore
conclude, that every man's knowledge, conscience, and feeling, is in stead of a
thousand witnesses to convince him (whosoever he be) that there is a God which
is to be feared, which hates iniquity and wicked ways, and which in time of
trouble and deep distress is to be sought unto for refuge and relief (as the
acts of the very heathen themselves do plainly demonstrate.

2 Moreover, as God is to be felt sensible in every man's conscience, so is he
to be seen visibly (if I may so speak) in the creation of the world, and of
all things therein contained: for that this world had a beginning as all the
excellent Philosophers that ever were have agreeed, except Aristotle for a
time, who held a fancy, Vide Plutarch de placit philos. Aristotle. Lib. 8.
Aristotle. lib de mu^do and vide Plotin. lib. de mundo, Iustine in Apolog.
that this world had no beginning, but was from all eternity: but at last in
his old age, he confessed and held, the contrary in his book de mundo, which
he wrote to King Alexander, (which book Justin Martyr esteemed greatly, and
called it the Epitome of all Aristotle's true Philosophy.) This then being so,
that the world had a beginning, it must needs follow, that it had an efficient
cause or maker thereof. I demand then who it was that made it? If you say it
made it self, it is absurd, for how could it make it self before it self
was, and when it had no being at all? If you say that something within the
world made the world, that is, tha^ some one part of the world made the
whole, that is more absurd: for it is as much as if a man should say, that the
finger (and this before it was a finger or part of the body) did make the
whole body. Wherefore it may be confessed by force of this argument (which is
plainly demonstratiue) that a greater and more excellent thing than is the
whole world put together, yea, that some thing which was before heaven and
earth were made, was and must needs be the maker thereof and framer of this
world, and this can be nothing else but God the Creator of all things, who was
before all his Creatures, and is termed in the sacred writings Alpha and Omega
the first and the last: For that he only was without beginning himself, and
shall be and remain without ending. For he is eternal being the Primus Motor,
and the only Almighty Creator of all things: So true is it which Paul the
Apostle does testify, Rom 1.20.
when he says, that the invisible things of God (that is his eternal power
and divine Essence) are perfectly seen in the creation of the world, being
perceived by his works which he has made. If therefore men would but cast up
their eyes to heaven, and from thence look down again upon the earth and so
behold the excellent beauty and building of this world, he cannot be so
sottish or dull conceited, but he must know there was and is a God which was
the maker of them, and be mo^ued in some sort to glorify so incomparable and
excellent a Creator. Yea, the Poets and others have affirmed of God that he is
Pater hominum, the Father of men, to show that men have their original and
creation from him, so that if we should draw our eyes from the beholding of the
great world, and consider but Man: (who for his beauty and excellency is
called in Greek Michocosmos, the little world) still we shall be enforced to
acknowledge God the Author of us, the Father and Creator of us. So true is it
that which Paul the Apostle notes out of the Poet Aratus which says, Act.
17.^.^
that Eius progenies sumus We are the issue or offspring of God. And as true it
is, which he further says in that place, that in him we live, move, and have
our being. And therefore we owe all duetifull obedience and subjection unto him,
which duty and nature commands us to perform, in regard of our Creation. For
the son honors his father by natural duty, and all men are naturally
carried to be grateful to their founders to whom they are specially bound, and
whom they ought not to forget, neither will, except they be extreme
unthankful and dissolute.

3 Not only the Creation of the world, and of all things therein contained,
does proclaim that there is a God who is to be honored for his infinite
extended authority and almighty power (for he made all things of nothing, Heb.
11.2 Genesis 1.
only he spoke the word and they were created) but his daily blessings and
benefits sent down upon the earth do show also there is a God (which is
provident and has care of men, and therefore of men to be praised, thanked,
and glorified for ever.) For true it is which saint Paul says in this behalf,
Act. 14.17
that God left not himself without witness, when he bestowed benefits from
heaven, giving unto us rain and seasonable weather, and filling our hearts with
meat and gladness. By means of these and all other his blessings, men might,
and still may daily be induced not only to believe that there is a God from
whom they receive all these, but also to acknowledge and attribute all praise
and thanksgiving unto him, as to their first principal and special
benefactor. For the Ox does know his own, and the Ass his Master, feeder,
and maintainer. And therefore how can it be but reasonable men should much
more know God, not only their first founder and Creator, but their daily
feeder, preserver, keeper, and vpholder. For so of^ as they think upon these
things, and see and have them, they cannot choose but be put in mind of God
the sender and Author of them all, and be moved with a grateful mind toward
him. And hereof is it that he is called Deus, a dando, Of giving: And in
english we call God, Mat. 19.17 Iam. 1.17.
quasi good, because he is only and perfectly good of himself alone, and the
giver of all goodness, and of all good gifts and blessings unto others, from
whom as from the fountain al benefits whatsoever do come, Romans 1.8.19.
descend, ffow and be derived unto them.

4 I might here show how God is also known to the world by his judgments
upon wicked and unrighteous people, who diverse times he makes visible
examples of his severity and justice (if men did well consider them) for
hereby also has God ministered himself, as Paul the Apostle teaches. These
promises I trust may suffice, (if there were no more to be said) for by them
we may easily see and prove, that there is a God which created the world, and
all things therein: which preserves and vpholdeth the same with his mighty
puissaunce, which supporteth the earth, and all the creatures thereof with his
providence and helping hand: yea, behind the heavens and the earth, which are
the work of his hands. Every man's own conscience does plentifully teach (as I
said before) that there is a God which is to be feared. For howsoever many a
man that has spent his life in a wicked way, and most damnabl^ course, could
wish in his heart there were no God, because he sees God no otherwise than in
his vengeance: yea, hows^euer many a wicked person does ssooth himself in his
wickedness, Psa. 14.1.
and flatteringlie say unto himself (like the fool in the Psalms) There is
no God: yet at other times his own conscience will so provoke him, and enforce
this matter (that there is a God) that with the horror and dread of him, it
will make him quake, fear, and tremble, for the fear of him is so deeply
printed in the natures of all men, as that it is impossible to shake it off.
And (which is more) a kind of devotion to worship him being the Creator and
preserver of men, and of all things else, and the provident father of all is
planted, and inseparably fixed in the hearts of al men: though al men of all
nations know not how to worship him aright, and in such sort as he requires.
This is manifest by the examples of all nations and people in the world, who
all have some one kind of religion or other, though all find not the right
religion. All be devoted to the worship of God howsoever all do not find out
the true God, nor his right name of worship, but worship him according to the
devises of their own brain. Considering then that there is no Nation under
the sun so barberous (nor eu^r was) but aimed at the worship of God, and
either worshipped him or some thing else in his place. It appears to be a most
vain and foolish conceit which Atheists sometimes utter: namely, that religion
is nothing else but a matter of policy, or a politic devise of humane
Invention: For it is evident that a religious a^^ection to worship God is
naturally sealed (and ever was) in the hearts of all men: And the conscience of
every man, even of the greatest scorner and contemner of God, which sometimes
trembles before his judgment seat, does abundantly testify that a
religious devotion of fear toward, God is bred and borne with every man, and
therefore there cannot be any policy of humane Invention: in as much as if
there were no laws of men, yet this religious affection to worship God, and
the fear of him, would and does remain written by the finger of God, in the
hearts and consciences of all men living, how rude savage or barberous soever
they be. What law of men I pray was there to make Caligula the Emperor when
he heard the tirrible thundering in the air and saw the flashing flames of
lightning about him, to run under his bed and to hide himself for fear of
this tirrible and great God? Or what makes the rankest Atheist in the world
in the like case and at the like tempest to do the like? Or what made the
heathen in any dangerous or sudden distres to lift up their eyes or hands to
heaven, mightily to fear and to be astonished? None can say it is the law of
men for no law of men does enforce this attempt. But it is a natural instinct
of the Fear of God (whom he has offended, and whose vengeance he dreadeth)
and from whom he thinks succor may come, seated in all men's hearts even from
their Nativity, which does make him to fear, and cause him to seek to God
for refuge. Let this therefore remain firm and most undoubted, that the fear
of the great God and a Religious disposition to worship the same God, is not
enforced by laws of men, but naturaly sown in the hearts of all men, though
all find not out nor observe the right religion. Let us therefore now seek
and search out which is the true Religion, which is acceptable to God, and which
without wavering and doubting is t^* be observed of men. For all nations and
people have a kind of religion (as I said before) but all have not the true
and right religion.

Chap. 2. Wherein, and in the next Chapter is showed that the Christian
Religion, is the only true Religion in the world, and wherewith only God is
pleased.
IN ancient times all the world was divided and distinguished into Jews, and
Gentiles, and this distinction does and may still remain among us: If
therefore I can prove the truth of this our Christian Religion against both
Jews, and Gentiles: I shall then prove it against all the world. In this
Chapter I will first prove it against the Jews, and in the next against the
Gentiles. Concerning the Jews they will easily grant our Religion to be the
true Religion, if we can prove Jesus Christ (whom we believe) to be that
Messiah which was foretold by their prophets, being the true and undoubted
prophets of God. And this we are sure may easily be proved, and therefore in
vain do the Jews look for any other Messiah than he that is already come,
namely Jesus Christ our Mediator, Savior, and Redeemer, in whom God his
Father is well pleased, and for whose sake (if we believe in him,) he will not
be offended with us but be reconciled to us and save us. Whatsoever was
foretold to belong unto their Messiah, is fully performed and perfectly
accomplished in our Jesus Christ and in no other: And therefore our Jesus was,
and, is the true Messiah and no other. Let us herein consider the marks of the
Messiah whereby he might be known. And so shall I we see that our Savior Jesus
Christ is the only true Messiah and none but he.

1 One mark for us to know the Messiah by, Psalm. 118 22 Esaias. 6. Deu. 28.
Esaias. 65. Esaias. 53. Dan. 9.
is that when he came, he should not be known or acknowledged to be the
Messiah, but should be rejected and refused of the Jewish Nation, to the end he
might be put to death amongst them according to the fore-apointment and
determinate counsel of God: for had they received him for the Messiah they
would never have used him so shamefully as they did, neither should he then have
bin slain amongst them as was foretold he should. This then being one mark of
the Messiah that he should be refused for the Messiah of the Jewish Nation, and
of the chiefest rulers amongst them, is a great confirmation of our faith in as
much as it is found fully performed in our Savior Jesus Christ, whom they
scorned, rejected, condemned, and put to death. And therefore as if the Jewish
Nation had received our Jesus for the Messiah, It had bin an undoubted argument
that he had not bin the right Messiah, so on the other side because they did
refuse him; It is a very strong persuasion to us that he was and is the very
true Messiah indeed. In vain therefore it is if any do look for such a
Messiah as should be wholly received of the Jewish Nation for none such was
promised, yea it was foretold (contrary wise) that he should be refused of
them* As our Jesus was: that so he might be made an offering for sin,
according to the preordination of God.

2 It was foretold of the Messiah that he should be borne of a Virgin, Esaias. 7.
ver. 14. That the place of his birth should be Bethlem. Mich. 5. ver. 1. That
at his birth all the Infantes round about Bethlem should be slain for his
sake Ier. 31. ver. 15. That the King of the earth should come and adore him,
and offer gold and other gifts unto him. Psalm. 71.10. That he should be
presented in the temple of Jerusalem for the greater glory of that second
temple. Mat. 3. ver. 1. That he should fly into Egypt and be recalled thence
again. Osc. 11.2. That a star should appear at his birth to notify his
coming into the world. Number. 2. That John Baptist (who came in the spirit and
power of Elias, and therefore was called Elias. Luke 1.17. Mat. 11.10.14.)
should be the messenger to go before him, and to prepare the way and to cry
in the desert. Mal. 3.1. Mal. 4.1. Esa. 40.3. After this: that he should begin
his own preaching with all humility, quietness, and clemency of spirit. Esaias.
42.2. That he should be poor, abject, and of no reputation in this world. Esa.
53 Dan. 9. Zacha. 9. Ier. 14. That he should do strange miracles, and heal
all diseases. Esaias. 29.8.6. e 5.91. That he should die and be slain for the
sins of his people. Dan. 9. Esaias. 53. That he should be betrayed by one that
put his hand in the dish with him, which was his own Deciple. Psa 40. ver.
14.54. and Psa. 18. ver. 8. That he should be sold for thirty pieces of
silver. Zacha. 11. ver. 12. That with those thirty pieces there should be
bought afterward, a field of potsheards. Ier. 30. That he should ride into
Jerusalem upon an Ass before his passion. Zacha. 9.9. That the Jews should
beat and buffet his face, and defile the same with spitting upon it. Esa.
50.6. That they should whip his body before they put him to death. Esa. 53.2.
Psalm. 37.18. That they should put him to death among sheeues and malefactors.
Esaias, 53.12. That they should give him Vinegar to drink, divide his apparel,
and cast lots for his upper garment. Psalm. 68.22. and Psalm. 22.18. That the
manner of his death should be crucifixtion, that is nailing of his hanes and
his feet unto the cross. Psalm. 22.16. Zacha. 12. That his side should be
^serced, and that they should look upon him when they had so pierced him.
Zacha. 12. That he should rise again from death the third day. Psalm. 16.10.
Ose. 6.3. That he should ascend into Heaven and sit at the right hand of his
Father (in glory and loyalty, and like a conquering potentate ouerruling
all.) Psalm. 110.1.2. All these things, and whatsoever else belonging to the
Messiah are found perfectly fullfilled in Jesus Christ and in no other: And
therefore he alone and no other is the true Messiah.

3 Hitherto have I spoken of such circomstances and accidents, as did belong
unto the Messiah, concerning his incarnation, birth, life, death, burial,
resurrection, and assention into heaven, and there sitting at the right hand of
his Father: and also of his reiection by the Jews and Jewish Nation: which
things albeit they be very wonderful and sufficient to establishe any man's
belief in Christ Jesus our Lord, in whom only they are found faithful: yet if
we shall consider withal, the time of the Messiah his apearing, and when he
should come into the world our faith wilbee so much the more confirmed toward
him.

Daniell the prophet of God (who lived in the time of the first Monarchy, Dan.
2.39.44.
) foretold that there should he three Monarchies more, and the last of these
four Monarchies greatest of all: And that in the days of this fourth and last
Monarchy (which was the Romayne Monarchy or Empire:) The eternal King or
Messiah should come and build up Gods kingdom thorughout all the world. And
this happened accordingly, for Jesus came and was borne in the fourth Monarchy,
which was the Roman) namely in the days of Augustus the Roman Emperor.
But yet let us go more strictly to the matter.

The Temple of Jerusalem (as all men know) was builded twice, First by king
Solomon which lasted about 440 years, and then was destroyed by Nabuchodonozor
King of Babilo^: Wherefore about 70. years after it was builded again by
Zorobabell, who reduced the Jews from their Captivity. 1. Esd. 3. Agge. 2.4.
But this second Temple for pomp and riches of the material building was
nothing like unto the first (which the old men in the book of Esdras do
testify by their weeping, when they saw this second and remembered the first)
(and which Aggeus the prophet does expressly testify. Agge. 2.5.6.7.8.9.10.
And yet says God by his prophet Aggeus in the same place that after a while,
the DESIRED OF AL NATIONS shall come, and then should that second house or
Temple be filled with glory, and that greater should be the glory of this
last house than of the first: Which prophecy was fulfilled by the coming of
our Savior Jesus Christ into this second Temple, which being personally done,
was far greater dignity and more glory thereunto, than any dignity
whatsoever was found in the first Temple builded by Solomon. It is therefore
manifest that the Desired of al Nations, that is the Messiah should come whilst
the second temple stood. Dan. 9.26.
And so does Daniel also show that the second Temple (after the rebinding
thereof) should not be destroyed until the Messiah were first come and slain.
Mal. 3.1.
And Malachy the Prophet does also most plainly testefie that he should come
during the second Temple. And so indeed he did: for Christ Jesus came into the
world during that second Temple, and did himself likewise foretell the
destruction thereof, ere that generation passed, which came to pass
accordingly: for it was destroyed about 46. years after the ascension of our
Savior into heaven, by Titus Son to Vespasian the Roman Emperor. Most
vainly therefore do the Jews or any other expect for a Messiah to come after
the destruction of that second Temple.

Let us yet moreover consider the prophecy of old Jacob concerning the
particular time of the Messiah his appearing. Come hither my children (says
he) that I may tell you the things that are to happen in the latter days,
Genesis 49.
etc. The scepter shall not depart from Judah until Shilo come, which is the
expectation of the Gentiles. By Shilo is meant the Messiah (as both Jews and
Christians expound it.) This prophecy so long fortold, was performed at the
birth of Jesus Christ, in the days of Herod king of Iewrie. For from the time
that the scepter was given to king David (who was the first king of the Tribe
of Judah) it did not depart from that Tribe, but remained always in it until
the days of king Herod, in whose time, and not until whose time all
government was taken away, and clean departed from the Tribe of Judah, and
committed to a stranger: and therefore in the time of Herod was the Messiah
to be borne, and neither before nor after his time. That the scepter or
government was not clean taken away or departed from the house of Judah
(after it was once settled in it in the person of King David) even till the
days of Herod the King, is evident: for from David (who was the first king of
that Tribe) unto Zedechias that died in the captivity of Babylon, the
Scripture shows how all the Kings descended of the house of Judah: Talo^, in
tract. Sanhed, ca. Dinei Man mouth. Rab. Moses Egyp. in praef. Maimonim Eld.
lib. 1. cap. 1.2.3. Mac. lib. 1. cap. 2.3. Rab. Kimhi com. in Agg. Joseph. lib.
13. and 14. Antiq.
And during the time of their captivity in Babylon (which was seventy years)
the Jews were always permitted to choose unto themselves a governor of the
house of Judah (whom they called RESCHGALVTA.) And after their delivery from
Babylon, Zorobabel was their governor of the same Tribe, and so others after
him until you come to the Machabees, who were both governors and Priests, for
that they were by the mothers side of the Tribe of Judah, and by the fathers
side of the Tribe of Leui (as Rabbi Kimbi affirms) and so from these men
down to Hircanus King of Iewrie, who was the last King which was lineally
descended of the house of David, and of the Tribe of Judah.

For after Hircanus came the aforementioned Herod, a mere stranger, whose
Father (as Josephus (who well knew) reports) was called Antipater, and came
out of Idumaea: he came into acquaintance and savor with the Romans, partly
by his said Fathers means (who was (as Josephus says) a well monyed man,
industrious, and factious) and partly by his own diligence and ambition,
being of himself both witty, beautiful, and of most excellent and rare
qualities: by which commendations he came at length to marry the daughter of
Hircanus aforesaid King of Iewrie, and by this marriage obtained of his Father
in law to be chief governor and ruler of the province and land of Galilee
under him. But Hircanus afterward in a battle against the Parthians, fell
into their hands, and was taken and carried prisoner into Parthia.

Herod then took his journey to Rome, and there he obtained to be created
king of Jury without any title or Interest in the world: for that not only
his father in Law Hircanus was then living in Parthya, but also his younger
brother Aristobulus and three of his sons (viz. Antigonus, Alexander, and
Aristobulus) with diverse others of the blood Royal in Jury were alive also.

Joseph. lib. 15. Antiqu.
Herod then having procured by this means to be king of Jury, procured first
to have in his hands the king Hircanus and so put him to death. He brought also
to the same end his younger brother Aristobulus and his three sons likewise.
He put to death also his own wife Mariamnes which was king Hircanus daughter,
as also Alexandra her mother, and soon after two of his own Sons which he
had by the same Mariamnes, for that they were of the blood royal of Judah: And
a little after that again, he put to death his third son named Antipater:
He caused also to be slain forty of the chiefest Noble men of the tribe of
Judah. Philo. lib. de temp.
And as Philo the Jew (who lived at the same time with him) writes, He put to
death all the Sanhedrin, that is, the twenty seven Senators or Elders of the
tribe of Judah that ruled the people. He killed the chief of the Sectt of the
Pharisees. He burned the Genealogies of all the kings and Princes of the house
of Judah, and caused one Nicolaus Damascenus, an Historiographer, that was his
servant, to draw ^ut a petigree for him and his line, as though he had
descended from the ancient kings of Judah. He translated the Priesthood and
sold it to strangers. And finally, he so razed, dispersed, and mangled the
house of Judah, in such sort, as no one jot of government or principality,
remained therein. Now then in the days of this king Herod and not till then,
was the Scepter (that is) the government departed from Judah, and therefore
then and not till then was the Messiah to appear according to that prophecy
of Jacob, and so it came to pass accordingly: For Christ Jesus the very true
and undoubted Messiah was then borne, viz. in the time of Herod king of Jury.
In vain therefore do the Jews or any other look for any other Messiah to
come after the days of that Herod, in whose time (and not before) was the
Scepter and all principality and government departed utterly from the house of
Judah, and therefore in his time, and neither before nor after was the Messiah
to appear and come according to Jacobs prophecy.

Daniell the Prophet yet goes nearer to work, and foresheweth even the very
day and time of the day when the Messiah should be slain for the sins of
his people, for in the first year of Darius son of Ahasuerus king of the
Medes, about the time of the evening oblation he prayed to his God for the
people and their deliverance, inasmuch, as then he perceived that the
seauentie years of their captivity (foretold by Jeremy) were now come to an
end. So Daniel thus praying, about that time of the evening Oblation God sent
his Angel Gabriel to signify and show unto him, that at the very beginning of
his Supplications, the commandment came forth for the return of the people
from their captivity, and to build again Jerusalem, and shows likewise that
as the people had now been in the captivity of Babylon seauentie years and
then were delivered from that their earthly bondage: So it should come to
pass, that within seauentie weeks of years, the Messi^s should come, who
should finish wickedness, seal up sins, blot out iniquity, and bring in
everlasting righteousness, and be a deliverer not only from the outward but
from the spiritual Babylon, and hellish Egypt.

The words of the Angel be these following: At the very beginning of thy
Supplications, the commandment came forth: And I am come to show thee, Dan. 9.
for thou art greatly beloved: Therefore understand the matter and consider the
vision. Seauentie weeks are determined over thy people, and over thy holy
City to finish wickedness, and to seal up sins, and to blot out iniquity,
and to bring in everlasting righteousness, to seal up vision and Prophecy, and
to anoint the HOLY OF HOLYES, or the MOST HOLY. Know therefore and understand,
that from the going forth of the commandment to bring again the people, and
to build Jerusalem unto MESSIAH THE PRINCE, there shall be seven weeks and
three score and two weeks, etc. After these three score and two weeks shall
MESSIAH be slain, and not for himself, etc. He shall confirm the covenant
with many for one week, and in the midst of the week he shall cause the
Sacrifice and the Oblation to cease. For the better understanding of which
words, it must be remembered, that this word Hebdomada signif^yng a week, or
seven, is sometimes taken for a week of days, that is, seven days, and
then is it called Hebdomada dierum, a week of days, as in this prophecy of
Daniel he says of himself, that he did mourn three weeks of days: But at
other times it signifies the space of seven years, Dan 10.2.
and then is it called He^domada Annorum, A week of years, as in Leuiticus,
where it is said, Thou shall number unto thee seven weeks of years, that is,
Leuit. 25.8 and cap. 23. and alibi postea.
seven times seven years, which make forty and nine years.

Now it is most certain that these seauentie weeks are to be understood
weeks of years and not of days (for that even by the Jews own confession,
as also by the books of Esdras it is manifest that the Temple and Jerusalem
were many years in building before they were finished. These seauentie weeks
of years therefore are seven times seauentie years, which make in a sum
total four hundred and ninety years: within which time the Messiah should
be slain: for from the going forth of the commandment to bring the people
back again, and to builte Jerusalem (which commandment went forth at the
beginning of his supplications which were the first year of Darius, as the
Text shows) unto the time that Messiah the Prince was anointed to preach the
kingdom of God (which was after his baptism when he began to be about
thirty years of age) there must be seven weeks, and three score and two
weeks, that is, forty and nine weeks, which make four hundred four score
and three years: which number of years being rightly accounted from that
time of Darius, wherein the commandment went forth, are fully accomplished
in the fifteenth year of Tiberius Caesar, at which time, Christ Jesus was
baptized and anointed by the spirit of GOD descending down upon him in the
form of a Dove, A voice also being heard from heaven saying: This is my
well-beloved son in whom I am well pleased.

Yet is there one week more to make up the number of seauenty, in the midst
of which week the Messiah should be slain, which came to pass accordingly:
for in the midst of that week, that is, about three years and a half after
Christ's baptism, Christ Jesus the true Messiah was put to death, and dyed for
our sins, which was in the eighteenth year of Tyberius Caesar: In vain
therefore do the Jews or any other look for an other Messiah to come after
the days of that Tyberius Caesar the Roman Emperor.

4 The Scriptures do show that the Messiah should come of the seed of David,
Psalm. ^^. 2. King. 7. 1. Chro. 22.
according to the words of God, I have sworn to David my servant, I will
prepare thy seed for ever, and will build up thy seat to all generations:
Which cannot be applied to king Solomon his son (as the latter Jews apply
it) for these words, that his kingdom shall stand for ever, and for all
eternity, cannot be verified in Solomon, whose earthly kingdom was rent and
torn in pieces straight after his death by Ier^boam, and not long after as it
were extinguished: neither can they be understood of any terrestiall king,
but they must needs be understood of an eternal king, which should come of
David's seed: The promise then made to David for Christ to come of his seed is
again repeated after his death by many prophets and confirmed by God as in
Jeremy, where God uses these words, Ier. 23.6. etc. and 33.16.
Behold the days come on, that I will raise up to David a just seed, and he
shall raise a King, and shall be wise, and shall do judgment and Justice
upon earth, and in his days shall Judah be saved, and Israel shall dwell
confidently, and this is the name that men shall call him, Our just God. All
this was spoken of David above four hundred years after David was dead, which
proves manifestly that the promises and speeches were not made unto King
David, for Solomon his son, nor for any other temporal King of David's line,
but for Christ, who was particularly called the Son of David, for that David
was the first King of the tribe of Judah, and not only was Christ's progenitor
in the flesh, but also did bear his tipe and figure in many other things. For
which cause likewise in Ezechiel (who lived about the same time that Jeremy
did) the Messiah is called by the name of David himself: for thus says God at
that time to Ezechiel: I will save my flock, Ezech. 34.^. etc.
neither shall they any longer be left to the spoil, I will set over them a
shepherd, and he shall feed them, even David my servant, he shall feed them,
and he shall be their shepherd, and I will be their God, and my servant
David shall be their Prince. In which words not only we that are Christians,
but the latter Jews also themselves do confess in the Thalmud, that their
Messiah is called David, for that he was to descend of his seed.

Now then let us see whether Jesus Christ our Lord did come of the seed of
David, as was foretold the Messiah should. It is plain that he did, for never
any man doubted or denied but that Jesus was directly of the tribe of Judah,
and descended lineally by his mother of the only house of David (as was
foretold he should) which is confirmed most clearly by the two genealogies
and petigrees set down by Saint Matthew and saint Luke, Luke. ^. Math. 1.
of the blessed virgins whole descent from David to Joseph, that was of the
same tribe and kindred with her: for according to the law of the Jews, they
used to marry in their own tribe. And therefore the Euangeliste s showing the
line of Joseph, do thereby also declare the lynage and stock of Marie (the
mother of Jesus) as being a thing then sufficiently known unto all, though
they speak no more.

Secondly, it is confirmed by their repayring unto Bethleem (when commandment
was given by Augustus Caesar, Luke 2.1.2.3.4.5.
that every one should repair to the head City of their Tribe and family,
to be taxed or sessed for their tribute) for by their going thither it is
showed, that they were both of the lynage of David, in as much as Bethleem was
the proper City only of them that were of the house and lineage of David, for
that king David was borne therein.

Thirdly, it may appear by this, for that the Jews who sought out all
exceptions they could against him, yet never excepted this, nor alleged
against him that he was not of the house of Judah, nor of the house of David,
which they would never have omitted if they might have done it with any
color, for such a speech (if it could truly have been spoken) would easily
have convinced our Jesus not to be the true Messiah. But it appeared they
never doubted of this. Yea I add further, that it remains registered in the
Jews Thalmud it self, Thal. tract. Sanh. cap. Higmar.
that Jesus of Nazareth crucified was of the blood royal, from Zorohabel of
the house of David. Wherewith agrees that saying of Paul the Apostle, where
he testifies thus: Jesus Christ was borne of the seed of David according
unto the flesh, Romans 1.3.4
though he were also the Son of God in power, according to the spirit of
sanctification.

5 That the mother of Jesus was a Virgin, is plentifully testified by the
Evangelists, and that so the Messiah mother should be, the scripture of the Jews
do sufficiently show. For in Esaias. 7.14. it is told as a strange thing to king
Achas (and so it is in deed) that a virgin should conceive and bring forth a
Son (and they should call his name Emmanuel, that is, God with us.) Which could
not be strange, if the Hebrew word in that place did signify only a young
woman (as some later Rabbis do affirm) for that is no strange or new thing,
but common and ordinary for young women to conceive and bear children:
wherefore the Septuagints do rightly translate the word Parthenos, which
properly and fully signifies a Virgin, and so did also the Elder Jews
understand it, Rab. Sim. ^. Bea. Iohar. in cap. 2. Genesis Rab. Moses Hadars. in
Psalm. 14.
as Rabbi Simeon well notes. And Rabbi Moses Hadasan (of singular credit among
the Jews) upon these words of the Psalm, Truth shall bud forth of the earth,
says, that it is not said, Truth shall be engendered of the earth, but Truth
shall bud forth, to signify thereby that the Messiah (who is meant by the word
Truth) shall not be begotten as other men in carnal copulation: Rab. Mos.
Had. in Ge. 25.
he also cites Rabb^ Berechias to be of the same opinion: and finally Rabbi
Hacadosch proves by art Cabalisticall out of many places of Scripture, Rab.
Hacad ad quaest. 3. in ba. cap. 9 Rab. Hacad in Esaias. 9.
not only that the mother of the Messiah shall be a virgin, but also that her
name shall be Marie. Like as also the same Rabbi Hacadosch proves by the same
art out of many textes of Scripture, that the Messiah name at his coming shall
be Jesus. And that the mother of the Messiah should be a virgin may further
appear in the prophecy of Jeremy, where God says: I will work a new thing
upon earth, Ier. 31.22.
A woman shall enuiron or enclose a man: which were no new thing, but usual
and wanted, except it be understood of a virgin that should bear a child.

6 Now because Christ Jesus by the wonderful works and surpassing miracles
which he did, being such as no man could do (if he had been but a bare
man) as also by his heavenly doctrine, words, and deeds, did declare himself
to be the Son of God, sent from the bosom of his Father, let us also see as
we have found the Messiah to be man, so search whether he ought not to be God
also. The sacred scripture of the Jews give answer^, that he ought to be God
also, and so to be both God and man. Which thing is signified by the Prophet
Esaias, when he says: They shall call his name Emmanuel, Esaias. 7.14.
which is by interpretation, God with us. Again the same Esaias testifies, that
the^ shall call his name wonderful counselor, Esaias. 9.6.
the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace. Esaias. 4.2.
Again by Esaias he is called The issue of the Lord, and also the fruit of the
earth, to signify him to be both the Son of God and the Son of man. And
Jeremy the Prophet does testify of him, Iere. 23.6. and 33.16.
that he shall be called The righteous God, or God our righteousness. And God
himself says of him, Psalm. 2.7.
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And David proves him
plainly to be the Son of God, for though he knew he should come of his
s^ede as touching the flesh, yet does he also call him his Lord, Psalm. 110.1.
saying thus: The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand until I
make thine enemies thy foote-stoole. Since David calls him his Lord, it is
manifest that he takes him not only to be man, but God also, even the Son
of God, the second person in the Trinity. This matter is testified almost
every where in the scripture of the Jews, and therefore I need not further to
amplify.

7. Yet because the Jews do look for the Messiah to be a terrestrial king
which should reign in Iewrie, and subdue all their enemies with his
terrestrial power and force, wherein how grossly they err, as the premisse^
do partly show so is it not impertinent here to speak some what to convince
their so gross an opinion. For first the time is past long ago wherein the
Messiah should come, and yet no such terrestrial King as they dream of, has
been reigning in Iewrie: and therefore very experience and knowledge of the
times might teach them to abandon so foolish a conceit. Daniel calls him the
Eternal king: Dan. 2.44. Mich. 4.5.
Micheas says he shall reign for ever: which cannot be supposed of an
earthly kingdom. Again, Ask of me (says God to his son) the Messiah,
Psalm. 2.
and I will give unto thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the world for thy possession. Which word^ do show, that the Messiah
should be an universal king, to rule not only ever the Jews, but over the
Gentiles also, Psalm. 71.^
even over all the world. Again it is said, that he shall endure with the
Sun, and before the Moon from generation to generation, he shall reign from
Sea to Sea unto the end of the world: All kings shall adore him, and all
nations shall serve him, all tribes of the earth shall be blessed in him, and all
nations shall magnify him. Genesis 18.
And it was told Abraham, that in his seed (that is in the Messiah which
should come of his seed) all nations of the earth should be blessed. How then
should he overthrow any nations for the Jews sake (as they dream) when all
nations were to receive their blessing from him. In the prophecy of Es^y, the
commission of God his father unto him is thus set down. Esaias. 49.6.
It is too little that thou be unto me a servant to raise up the tribes of
Jacob, and to convert unto me the dregs of Israel, beho^d I have appeared unto
thee also to be a light unto the Gentiles, that thou be my salvation unto the
uttermost parts of the earth. Every where almost it is testified, that the
Gentiles should have every way as much interest in the Messiah as the Jews,
and should be as beneficial^ unto them. The Messiah therefore, though he be
termed a king, and is so indeed, yet is to be supposed a spiritual and
eternal king (as the Prophets declare him) for it is too childish and fond to
imagine him to be an earthly king, which should reign only in Judea, and be a
great and mighty terrestrial conqueror. Does not Zachary (as touching his
state in this world) show, Zachar. 9.
that he should come poorly riding upon an Ass? does not Esaias say, Esaias. 53.
that in this world he should be a man despised, Dan. 9.
abject, and of no reputation? does not Daniel expressly say, that he should
come to be slain, that with his sa^rifice he might take away sin, and cease
al other sacrifices? Zachar. 12.
does not Zachary say, that they should look upon him after they had pierced or
cru^ified him? And does not the Prophet Esaias say of him, that he gave his
soul an offering for sin, Esaias. 53.
and that he should be lead as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb^ dumb
before his shearer, so opened not he his mouth? Where then is his pomp, when
he was to be poor? Where was his earthly honor, when he was to be abject and
of no reputation? Where was his worldly conquest, when he was himself to be
slain: Where should his fles^ly resistance ^ee, when he was not so much as to
offer it, yea when his enemies were to lead ^im to death as the sheep to the
slaughter, and as a lamb dumb before his shearer, not opening his m^ut^ to
save himself? yea, how should the Jews think (if they would thoroughly
consider) that the Messiah should be such a one as they dream of, when they
were the men that should pursue him to death, and whom they should look upon
when they had pierced him.

These things which have been spoken (though in very brief and plain sort)
are I trust sufficient to convince the Jews, that our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ is that seed of the woman which should break the Serpents head, which
deceived Adam and Eve our first parents, and he in whom all the Nations of the
earth should be blessed, and is in all points the very, true, certain, and
undoubted Messiah, which was fore-promised and foretold by their prophets: for
all things which were fore-tolde of the Messiah, do fitly, fully, and only
agree to him, and to no other. And therefore I conclude against them, that the
Christian Religion (which we profess, and which we hold derived to us from
that Christ the true Messiah, the author thereof) is the only true Religion
which is acceptable to God.

CHAP. III. Wherein is showed that the Christian Religion is the only true
Religion, against the Gentiles and all Infidels of the world.
THat there is a God the heathen have evermore confessed, and that there is but
one God (as the Christian religion holds) all the learned sort of the heathen
philosophers have acknowledged: for howsoever they dissembled at some times,
and applied themselves outwardly to the error of the vulgar sort in naming of
gods, yet surely they never spoke of mo than of one God. Which thing may
appear by Plato in an Epistle which he writes unto Dionisius king of
Sicilie, Plato epist 13. ad Dyonis. Plotin. Enneae. 1. lib. 8 1.2. and En. 6.
lib. 4. cap 12.3.4. Porph. lib. 2. de Abst. and lib. de occa. cap. 2. Procl. in
Theolog. Platon. and lib. de Anima and daem 1.31.42.55.
wherein he gives him a sign when he spoke in jest, and when in earnest.
Hinc disces tu scribam ego serio, nec ne cum serio ordior^ pistolam ab vno Deo:
cum secus, a pluribus: hereby ((...) he) shall you know whether I write in
earnest or not, for when I write in earnest, I begin my letter with one God:
and when I write not in earnest, I do begin my letter in the name of many
Gods. And three of the most learned that ever professed the Platonicke Sect,
Plotinus, Porphyrius, and Proclus, do all testify and prove in diverse parts
of their works (being themselves but Heathens) that both themselves, and
their Master Plato, never believed indeed but one God.

Aristotle that insued Plato, Arist. lib. de mundo.
and began the sect of the Per^pateticks, though he were a man so much given to
the search of nature, as that sometime he seemed to forget God the author of
nature, yet in his old age, when he wrote the book of the world, he
resolves the matter more clearly, acknowledging also one God, and says
moreover in the same place, that the multitude of Gods was invented to express
the power of this one God by the multitude of his ministers, whereby does
appear, that belike the foolisher sort of heathens did imagine of God as of
earthly Princes, for they saw that every earthly Prince had a great many men
ministers, otherwise called servants, and attendantes upon him, thereby to
declare and show his power, his magnificence, and high honor, and therefore
they thought likewise that the great and high God could not be sufficiently
conceived of, except it were supposed that he had a great number of inferior
gods waiting and attending upon him, in like sort to show his greatness and
magnificence. This opinion of their Master concerning One God, Theophrastus and
Aphrodiseus, Theoph. in Metaph. Alex. Aphro. lib. de prouid.
two principal Peripateticks do confirm at large.

Zeno the chief and father of all the Stoics was wont to say (as Aristotle
himself reports) that either one God, or no God. Which opinion of One God,
is auerred every where by Plutarch and Seneca, two most excellent writers, and
great admirers of the Stoicke severity: And before them by Epictetus, a man of
singular account in that sect, whose words were esteemed Oracles, Dicondum
ante omnia vnum esse Deum, omnia negere, omnibus prouidere, Before all things
(says he) we must affirm that there is one God, and that this God governs
all, and has providence over all.

As for the Academickes although their usage was to doubt and dispute every
thing as Cicero seems to do in his discoerse concerning the gods, Cicero.
lib. de natura De. Apuleius. Aleg. and Laert. in vita Socra.
yet at last he concludes in this point with the Stoics, who believed One
God. And as for Socrates who was the father and founder of the Academicke Sect
(and who was judged by the Oracle of Apollo to be the wisest man in all
Greece) the world does know that he was put to death for ^easting at the
multitude of gods among the Gentiles.

All these four Se^^s of Philosophers then (who in their time ba^e the credit
of learning) made (as we see) profession of one God, Vide apud Plutarch. De
placit Philos. Trismeg. paeman. in^ Ascl. and^
when they came to speak as they thought. And yet if we will ascend up higher
to the days before these sects began, that is, to Pythagoras, and Archytas,
Tarentinus, and before them again to Mercurius, Trismegistus that was the
first Parent of Philosophy to the Egyptians we shall find them so plain and
resolute herein, as none can be more. It is true that the Heathen did honor
such men as were famous either for their valiant acts, their singular
invention in matters, their good turns to others, or their own rare gifts and
quallities above others) with their titled gods, but yet they believed not that
those men were gods: yea, they knew them to be no other than mortal men,
which thing Trismegistus shows, when he says, Trisme. in paeman. ca.
2.3.4.5. etc in Asclep. ca. 2.6. etc.
Deos non natura ratione, sed honor is causa nominamus: We name them Gods not
in respect of their natures, but for honors sake. That is, we call them gods
not for that we think them to be so, but because under that title, we would
honor some famous acts, or rare parts and quallities which were in them.
Cicero his opinion concerning the gods of the Painyms.
Cicero likewise testifies the same in these words: The life of man (says
he) and common custom have now received to lift up to heaven by fame and good
will, such men as for their good turns are accounted excellent. And hereof it
comes that Hercules, Perseus his opinion. Herod li. 1
Castor, and Pollux, Aesculapius, and Liber, (which were but men) are not
reckoned for gods. Persons likewise Zenoes scholar testifies the same: And
therefore did the Gretians truly think, who (as Herodotis reports) thought
that their gods (whom they so called) were no other at first than mortal men,
and so is the common opinion of all. And when men and women that were famous,
excellent, and surpassing others dyed, because the memory of them should not
dye with them, but remain as presidents to follow, or as persons to be admired
at, those that were living could not be content to honor them with the title
of gods and goddesses, The beginning of Idolatry.
but also would needs have their pictures or Images drawn, and s^t up some
where for posterity ^ behold: Her of it ame that they after a while began (as
man's natural corrupt inclination is too prone that way) to give honor and to
do reverence unto them and not so contented, they proceeded further and
builded Altars and Temples unto them, and at length consecrated Priests and
appointed certain rites, ceremonies, and sacrifices to be done there: The
Devil hereupon taking occasion and fit opportunity (purposing always to seduce
the world, and to hold them in error so far forth as he might) entered at last
into those Altars (which were dedicated to those men) and under the names of
those men, made a way to have himself worshipped, (in st^ede of the true God.)
For true it is which the sacred Psalm witnesses, That the Gentiles sacrificed
their Sons and their Daughters unto Devils: And which Paul says, Psalm. 105.
1. Cor. 10, 20.
that whatsoever the Gentiles offer, they offer unto Devils, and not to God.
For the devils being entered into those altars received their sacrifices offered
to them, being glad they had them in such a predicament, and because their
delusion should be the stronger, under the names (...) those men they would
yield forth (...) is to such as came to demand any questions of them, and
those their answers were written by their Priests, and called Oracles, and
with such fights those devilish spirits bewitched the world and deceiues them:
Of which their Oracles, more shall be spoken hereafter: But here first I make
this Argument against them.

They which (howsoever ignorantly) worship Devils, are far from the true
Religion: this is plain.

But the Gentiles worshipped Devils: Ergo, etc.

That the Gentiles worshipped Devils (not God) may appear, first by this
reason, for that those their Gods allowed (yea required) not beasts but men to
to be sacrificed unto them, delighting themselves in such infinite murders and
manslaughters, as were most cruel and unnatural, signifiyng themselves to be
thereby appeased, wherein God is most displeased. Polid. de Inuen. li. 5. cap. 8.
For (as Polydore Virgill has collected) the people of Rhodes sacrificed a man
to Saturn: In the Island Salamis, a man was acci^^ced to Agrauala: To Diomedes
in the Temple of Pallas, a man was offered, who being thrice led about the Altar
by young men, was at last by the Priest run through with a spear and put into
the fire and burnt: Among the people of Cyprus, Teucrus sacrificed humane
sacrifice unto Jupiter, and left the same to posterity to follow: To Diana
likewise humane sacrifices were offered: The like was done to Hesus and
Teutate^t Amongst the Egyptians three men a day which were sought out (if they
were clean) were sacrificed to Juno:: Amongst the Lacedaemonians they were wont
to sacrifice a man to Mars: The Phenicians in the calamitous times of war and
pestilence, were wont to sacrifice unto Saturn their dearest friends: The
people called Curetae sacrificed children unto Saturn: At Laodicia a virgin
was sacrificed to Pallas: And amongst the Arabians, every year a child was
sacrificed and buried under the Altar* Also the Thracians, Scythians, the
Carthaginian^, and almost all the Grecians (especially when they were to go to
war) sacrificed a man: All barbarous Nations have done the like: yea, the
Frenchmen and Germans: yea, the Romans themselves did the like sacrifice, as
namely to Saturn in Italy a man was Sacrifice^ at the Altar: and not only so,
but he was also to be cast down from a bridge into the river Tyher: Dionyl.
Halicar. 1. Antiqui.
Diony sius Halicarnesseus writes, that Jupiter and Apollo were (...) angry,
for that the tenth part of men were not sacrificed unto them, and therefore
sought they revenge upon Italy: Diodorus reports, that the Carthaginians when
they were overcome of Agathocles king of the Sicilians thought their Gods to
be angry with them, and therefore to appease them, sacrificed unto them two
hundred of the Noble men's sons at a time. Omonstrous cruelty! Who then can
possibly be persuaded otherwise, but that these gods of the Gentiles (which
they thus worshipped and sacrificed unto) were mere Devils, considering that
such monstrous unkind and unnatural slaughters at men (which must needs
offend God the more) were the appeasements of their anger and wrath?

Again these gods of the Gentiles were not only well pleased with the
sacrifices of the blood of men, but also well liked and allowed of
fornications, adulteries, and all uncleanness: For at Alexandria the Image of
Saturn was most devoutly worshipped, whose Priest Tyna^^us by name, Ruffin.
li. ^ Eccles. hist.
brought certain Matrons of the City, which he had selected out unto that
image, or idol, as being sent for by their god, and there when the lights were
put out had to do with them in the name of that their god. Also among the
Nasamones it was the custom that the Bride the first night after her marriage
should lie with all the guests, Polid. de Invent. lib. 5. cap. 8.
in honor ^f the ^oddesse Venus. I therefore conclude, that those gods of the
Gentiles which delighted in the slaughters of men, and likewise in their
filthiness and uncleanness, must needs be devils: for the kind and righteous God
ran abide none of these things (as any man's own reason, sense, and
understanding may teach him.)

2 An other ^^^ument to prove that the gods of the gentiles were devils, is
this: because the oracles which they gave forth in matters merely contingent,
were either false, or else so ambiguous and uncertain, Porphyr. lib. de
respons. and oracul.
as that they were deceitful, and therefore could not come from God, but from
the devil. This falsehood and deceitfulnes of their Oracles Porphyry himself,
the great patron of Paganisms testifies in a special book of the answers of
the gods, wherein he professes, that he has gathered truly without addition
or detraction, the Oracles that were most famous before his time, with the
false and uncertain event thereof: in consideration of which event, he sets
down his own judgment of their power in predictions after this manner. The
gods do foretell some natural things to come, for that they observe the order
of their natural causes: But in things which are contingent, or do depend
upon man's will, they have but conjectures, only in that by their subtlety
and celeritie they prevent us: But yet they oftentimes lie, and deceive us in
both kinds, for that as natural things are variable, so man's will is much
more mutable. Thus far Porphyry, of the prophecies of his gods: whereunto
agrees another Heathen among the Grecians named Oenomaus, Oenomaus de
falsitatis oraculoru^ and de artificibus maleficiis.
who for that he had been much delighted with Oracles, and more deceived,
wrote also a special book in the end of their falsehood and lies, and yet
shows that in many things wherein they deceived, it was not easy to
convince them of open falsehood, for that (cunningly) they would in^olue their
answers (of purpose) with such obscurities, Acquinotations, Amphibologies, and
doubtfulnes, as that always they would leave themselves a corner wherein to
save their credits. As for example, when Craesus that famous and rich king of
Lydia, consulted with the Oracle of Apollo, whether he should make war
against the Persians, and thereby obtain their Empire, the Oracle gave
answer thus: If Craesus without fear shall pass over Halys, (which was a
river that lay between him and Persia) he shall bring to confusion a great
rich kingdom. Upon which words Craesus passed over his Army in hope to get
Persia, but he lost Lydia his own Kingdom, and so was deceived by that
uncertain Oracle.

Like answer gave the Oracle of Apollo to Pyrrus king of Epirus, demanding
whether he should prosper in the war against the Romans, for it was
delivered in these words. Aio te Aeacid^ Romanos vincere posse: I say that the
Son of Aeacus, the Romans may overcome. Upon which Oracle, Pyrrus the son
of Aeacus thinking to be the Conqueror, was himself vanquished by the Romans.

A number more such Oracles there were wherewith the world was deceived, that
trusted them, but I need not recite them, for (as it appears) the Oracles
and answers which their wicked spirits gave forth in matters future and merely
contingent, were such as might be taken and construed two ways, and therefore
their worshippers (if they had been wise to have noted their cunning and
deceitful answers, concontaining no certainety at all) they had been as good
never to come at them to inquire of any matter future, for they had such
ambiguous answers, as whereby they might remain as doubtfully, and as
unresolved as they were at first, and so depart home as wise as they came, or
rather more fools than when they went. But what might be the reason why these
devils or devilish spirits, gave no cert^^^er aunsweres to their worshippers
in these matters future whereof they were demanded?

The reason is manifest, for no doubt they would if they could, that so their
credit might have been the more: But it was a thing not in their power, but
only reserved unto God to know and foretell certainly the things that are
to come, for here in God provoke all the gods of the gentiles to make trial
and experience of their power in these words: Declare unto us (says he) what
shall ensue hereafter, Esaias. 41, 23
and thereby we shall know that ye are Gods indeed. Which shows that the
certain foretelling of things future, does manifest a divine power, whereof
these devilish spirits are not pertakers, for had these wicked spirits such a
power in them, as certainly to know and foretell such things as were to come,
out of all doubt they would then have given such certain, plain, and
undoubted Oracles and answers in this behalf, as would have purchased them
everlasting credit in all the world: but now the falsehood and uncertainty and
deceitfulnes of them, have got them justly perpetual discredit in all the
world, and manifested them to be no better than lying spirits, whose
worshippers were miserably deluded by them (as even the Heathen themselves have
testified.

Having thus briefly, yet I trust sufficiently, disprooued the religion of the
gentiles, as being a cruel, wicked, false, lying, and deceitful religion
having in it no certainty at all, whereupon men might rely or assure
themselves, it remains now that I show and prove against them the truth of
the Christian religion, which we profasse. Where in the first Argument, to
show the powerful and undoubted truth thereof shall be this: namely, the
confession of the gods of the Gentiles, that is, of Devils and hellish spirits
themselves, who have given testimony thereof, even to their own worshippers,
especially when the time of Christ his appearing in the world (who should be
the light of the Gentiles) drew near an^ approached: for the manifestation
whereof, two Oracles of Apollo may su^^ice, the one whereof was to a Priest of
his own that demanded him of true Religion, and of God: to whom he
answered thus in Greek. O thou unhappy Priest, Suidus in Thulis, and Porphyr.
and Plut. de oraculis.
why do thou ask me of God, that is the Father of all things, and of this
most renowned kings dear and only Son, and of the spirit that conteyneth
all, etc. Alas that spirit will enforce me shortly to leave this habitation
and place of Oracles. The other Oracle was to Augustus Caesar, even about the
very time that Christ was ready to appear in the flesh: for the said Emperor
now drawing to age, would needs go to Delph^s, and there learn of Apollo who
should reign after him, and what should become of things when he was dead?
Apollo for a great (...) would make no answer, notwithstanding Augustus had
been very liberal in making the great sacrifice called Hecatombe: but in the
end, when the Emperor began to iterate his sacrifice, and to be instant for
an answer, Apollo (as it were enforced to speak) uttered these strange
words unto him: Suida^ in vita Augusti.
An Hebrew child that rules over the blessed gods, commands me to leeue
this habitation, and out of hand to get me to hell. Niceph. li. ^. hist. c. 17.
But yet do thou depart in silence from our Altars. Thus it appears, that
this Hebrew child (which is our Christ Jesus) has power over the gods of the
Gentiles, to command them unto hell from whence they came, to inioyne them
silence, and to remove them from their habitations. And therefore the religion
of this powerful Jesus (whereof he is the author) must needs, even by the
acknowledgement of the Devils themselves (whom he does command) be the true
religion.

3 Another Argument of the divinity and truth thereof is this: namely, that it
has removed by the puissant force thereof, all the gods of the Gentiles in
despite of them, ceased their oracles, and driven them clean out of the earth,
so that now they are no where to be found. Ioph-2.
And so it was foretold by the Prophets, that Christ (when he came)
Attennuabit omnes deos terrae, shall wear out all the gods of the earth. The
truth whereof all the world does now see clearly to be certain and undoubted
by the event.

The Oracles and aunsweres of of these gods, Cicero lib. de divine. 2.
even in Ciceroes time (as Cicero himself witnesses, who syued somewhat
before the coming of Christ) began to cease: and at last by little and little
they ceased altogether, Polid. lib. 5. cap. 8.
and were utterly extinct. It is reported that in Egypt (when Christ was there
with Joseph and his mother Marie) all the Adals of that foolish and
superstitious Nation fell down of their own accord. Afterward, in the time
of the Emperor Adrian, all sacrifices unto those gods ceased, as also the
Oracle of Apollo, and all other Oracles became d^nube. luuenad.
Wherefore Iunenal says, Cessant oracula Delphis, that is, The oracles cease
at Delphos. And another Poet says: Lucan.
Excessere omnes a ditis arisque relictis,
Dij quibus imperium hoc steterat, etc.
that is, All the gods whereby this Empire stood, have departed from their
Temples, and left their Altars and place of their habitation. Plutarch
affirms the like, Plutarch de defectus oraculoru^,
and is much busied to search out the cause and reason of the ceasing of their
Oracles, who being a heathen was much troubled heerewith, gessing at the
matter, and vainly devising fond conceits in his brain not able indeed to
pierce into the very cause thereof. But Porphiry (even that great patron of
Paganism, and enemy of Christian Religion) can teach him or any other the
true cause thereof, showing them that since the coming of Jesus their gods are
dumb, and can do them no good, but are all gone and departed from them. His
words be these, Nune vero mirantur (inquis) fi tam multos annos ciuit as peste
vexetur, Porphyr. ^ aduers. rel. Christ.
cum and Aesculopius and alii dii long absint ab ea: postea enim quam JESUS
colitur, nihil vtilitatis adiis consesequi possumus. Now (says he) they
marvel why this city is so many years vexed with pestilence, when as
(indeed) Aesculapius and other gods be far gone and departed from it: for
since the time that Jesus is worshipped, all our gods have been unprofitable
to us. Considering then that Jesus (the author of the christian religion) has
silenced and utterly destroyed the gods of the Gentiles (as histories and the
visible event them, his religion must needs be the only true religion.

4 What should I say more and even the Gentiles themselves, the most ancient,
and the best, have testified of Jesus Christ, and of the truth of his religion:
for in as much as Christ was appointed before the creation of the world, to
work the redemption both of the Jew and Gentile, and to make them both one
people in the service of his Father: heere-hence it is that he was fore-tolde,
and not altogether unknown or unheard of to both these Nations, and therefore
diverse fore-warnings and significations of him were lest, as well amongst the
Gentiles as the Jews, to stir them up to expect his coming. For first by
the consent of writers it is agreed, that in those ancient times there were
three famous men that lived together: namely Abraham (who descending from
Heber, Eusebius. in Chron.
was the father or beginner of the Hebrews, who were afterward called the
Jews) and with him Job and Zoroastres, that were not of that Iynage of Heber,
but (as we call them for distinations sake) heathens or Gentiles. Job.
19.25.26.27.
Job (we know) testifies of Christ, calling him the Redeemer, and was most
assured to see him one day with his own eyes, and none other for him, although
worms should destroy that body of his (as he himself testifies.) Zoroastres
living thus in Abraham's time also, might (by account of scriptures) see or
speak with Noe, for Abraham was borne 60 years before Noe deceased: and here
of it is, that in the writings of Zoroastres, Clem, Alex. lib. 1. Strom. and
Orig. lib. 6. contra Cel sum, and Procl. lib. 2, and 3 Parm, Plato.
which are yet extant, or recorded by other Authors in his name, there be
found very many plain speeches of the Son of God, whom he calls
Sucundam mentem, the second mind: but much more is to be seen in the writings
of Hermes Trismegestus (who received his learning from this Zoroastres) h^
whom appears, that these first heathen philosophers had manifest
understanding of this second person in Trinity: whom Hermes calls the first
begotten Son of God: Herm. in Paeman. cap. 1. and deinceps.
his only Son: his dear, eternal, immutable, and incorruptible Son, whose
sacred name is ineffable. (...) are his words. And after him again amongst
the Grecians, were Orpheus, Hesiodus, and others, that uttered the like
speeches of the Son of God, as also did the Plateniffs, whose words and
sentences were too long to repeat. Moreover the Gentiles must remember, that
they had also some Prophets among them: Nam. 24.
for Balaam was a Prophet among the Gentiles, and a Gentile, and he is such a
one as testified of Christ, and of the Star that should appears at his birth,
by means of whose prophecy (it should seem) the wise men in the East seeing
that Star, were assured that Christ was borne, and therefore came a long
journey to Judea to see him (as one Gospel shows.) The same Star is
mentioned by diverse heathen writers, Plin. lib. ^. cap. 25.
as by Plini^ under the name of a Comet (for so they term all extraordinary
Stars) which appeared in the latter days of Augustus Caesar, and was far
different from all other that ever appeared. And Pliny says of it, Is comet a
vnus tote orb colitur, that only Comet is worshipped throughout all the
world. Calcidius a Platonicke does say, Calcid. apud martil. vicin. tract. de
stella mag. Lact. contra gent.
that the Chaldean Astronomers did gather by contemplation of this Star, that
some God descended from heaven to the benefit of mankind.

The Gentiles also had certain women called Sibylla, which were Prophetesses,
who being endued with a certain spirit of prophecy, uttered most wonderful
particularities of Christ to come: one of them beginning her Greek m^eter in
these very words. Know thy God, which is the Son of God. Another of them
makes a whole discourse in Greek verse called Accresticki, expressly
affirming therein, that Christ Jesus (by name) should be the Savior, and that
he was the Son of God, and expressly saying that he should be incarnate of
a virgin, that he should suffer death for our sins, and that he should be
crucified, that he should rise again and be exalted into the glorious heavens,
and from thence (at the time appointed) and at the day of the resurrection of
all flesh come again to the last judgment. Of these Sybils there were ten in
number, Sibyl. Samia apud Betu^.
and talking of his first coming into the world, they also say, that Rutilans
cum fidus monstrabit, A blazing Star shall declare him. These Sybils speak so
plainly of Christ Jesus, as the Prophets among the Jews did, yea more
plainly, and as plainly as may be, and in a manner as fully as our Gospel
speaks: and therefore if the Gentiles will believe their own Prophets, they
must likewise believe the Christian religion (whereof Jesus Christ is the
author, of whom they abundantly testify.) Now least it might be thought by
some suspicious heads, that Christians have devised and invented these
things, as also that it may yet more fully appear, that Christ before his
coming was notified over the world, by means of those verses of the Sybils,
Varro lib. de reb. divine. ad Caesarem. Font. Max.
it must be remembered, that Marcus Varro a learned Roman (who lived almost a
hundred years before Christ) makes mention at large of the Sybils, (who in
number, he says, were ten) and of their writings, countries, and ages, as also
of the writers and authors that before his time had left memory of the^: and
both he and Fenestella (another heathen) do affirm, Fenest. cap. de 15. viris
that the writings of the Sybils were gathered by the Romans, See the oration
of Constant, in Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 32. de vita Constable.
from all parts of the world where they might be heard of, and laid up with
great diligence and reverence in the Capitol. Sybilla Erithraea, who made the
former accrostoick verses, testifies of her self (as Constantine the Emperor
does record) that she lived about fire hundred years after the flood of Na^:
And her countryman Apollidorus, Erithraeus and Varro do report that she lived
before the war of Troy, and prophesied to the Grecians that went to that
war, that Troy should be destroyed: (as it came to pass) which was more then
a thousand years before Christ was born. Cicero also (that died more than 40
years before Christ was borne) translated into latin the former accrosticke
verses (as Constantine says) which translation was to be seen in his works,
when Constantine wrote that his oration: see Cicero of these accresticke verses
of Sybilla, lib. 2. de diuinatione. Cice. lib. 2 de divine. Sueton. Tranq, cap,
3. de vita
And finally Suetonius an heathen records, that Augustus Caesar (before our
Savior Christ was borne) had such special regard of the sayings of the
Sybils, that he laid them up in more straighter order than before under the
Altar of Apollo in the hill Palatine, where no man might have the sight of them
but by special license. And so much for the credit of the Sybils, who gave
full testimony of our Savior Jesus Christ (by name) and therefore if the
Gentiles will believe them (who were their own Prophets, and highly reverenced
of all the world) they must also believe our Gospel, and the Christian religion
to be the only true religion. Lastly, the Gentiles might have the
understanding of Christ the Messiah by the Hebrew scriptures, which were in the
Greek language diverse ages before Christ was borne. For Ptolomy king of Egypt,
which had the famous library, was studiously inquisitiue to search out the
original of all nations and religions, and he found that the people of the
Jews was the most ancient, and that they only had the most certain and
undoubted history of the creation of the world, and therefore he sent unto them
to send to him from Jerusalem seventy men, by whose help the sacred Bible
might be translated out of Hebrew into their tongue, which was done
accordingly: as also the Gentiles might have knowledge of this Messiah, either
by access into the Jewish cuntry, or by the access of the Jews into their
country: as namely by their long bondage in Egypt, as also their long
captivity in Babylon, etc. But I conclude this matter thus: Since the Prophets
of both Jews and Gentiles (that is to say, the Prophets of all the world)
have given full, plain, and evident testimony of Jesus Christ the son of
God, that therefore his religion is the only true religion, and all other to
be rejected and detested.

5 That religion which is most ancient is the true religion (for truth was
first, insomuch as error is nothing else but the corruption of truth, or
wandering from truth:) but the religion whereof Christ is the author is the
most ancient (in as much as Christ the author thereof is the most ancient of
days, being the Son of God, as also because he is testified of by the
Hebrew records, which are the most ancient writings in the world:) Ergo the
Christian religion is that which must needs be the only true religion in the
world. Tertul. contra Pra^.
For it is a true saying of Tertullian, Verum quod primum, quod posterius
adulterinum est: that is true whatsoever is first, and that is adulterate which
is not the first. That the Hebrew records do testify and foreshew Christ to
come, is declared before in the second Chapter, and none can deny it. For he
was promised to Adam the first man that ever God made, under the name of the
seed of the woman, that should break the Serpents head: he was fore-tolde to
Abraham that he should come of his seed, in whom all the Nations of the earth
should be blessed.

Jacob fore-tolde of him, calling him Shilo, and that he should be the
expectation of the Gentiles. God tells Moses of him, and fore-sheweth to him
that he should be the Prophet whose voice all should hear and obey, etc.
Considering then that he is come, and that he is the very same that was
fore-tolde by the writings of Moses, and by the Hebrew records, which are the
most ancient records of the world, I conclude, that his religion (whereof he
is the author) is the only true religion.

The antiquity of the Hebrew history to be long before al other, is
acknowledged by the heathen them selves, and therefore I need not to prove it:
only this I say, that Eupolonius and Eusebius also do say, Eusebius. lib. 10. de
praepar. Euang
that letters (which are the beginning of words that should be written) were
first found out by Moses, and by him delivered to the Jews, and that the Jews
taught them to the Phenicians, and that lastly the Grecians received them of
the Phenicians: and therefore the Hebrews most needs be they, amongst whom
the first and most ancient records of the world were to be found, as Ptolemy
also king of Egypt did find, and affirm, and therefore made much of the Hebrew
scriptures. Now then for as much as the Hebrew wrytings and histories be the
most ancient, they must also needs be supposed true, in as much as in
themselves they all agree in a sweet harmony, and no other records are able to
disprove them: yea, if men will be so incredulous as to doubt of Moses history
(because it is so ancient) why may they not (with as good reason also) doubt of
any other history which is ancient, and long before their times? But because
some are of so little belief (although the history do sufficiently give
credit to it self) yet for better settling of their minds in this behalf, I
will briefly show, that even the heathen historiographers and writers do
confirm the same, that so the credit and reverence due unto Moses may be
reserved, and wicked tongues that bark against him may be stopped. The very
heathen and profane writers themselves that speak of Moses, speak of him
most reverently, Treb. Pol. in Claud.
insomuch that Trebellius Pollio speaking of Moses, Solum Dei familiarem vocet,
does call him the only man with whom God was familiar. Tacit. Annal, lib. 21.
Cornelius Tacitus although he speaks what he can against the religion of
the Jews, yet cannot discredit Moses history, but is enforced to confess
(according to the history written by Moses) that after there were botches and
swelling, sores sent into the land of Egypt, which were noisome both to men and
beasts, the king of Egypt then took order that the people of the Hebrews
should go out of his land, and depart whither they should be directed.
Procopius also mentions Iosuah the son of Nun, Moses successor, and says
that the people of Phenicia, for fear of Iosuah and of the Israelites, left
their own country, and departed into Affrike, he mentions likewise the
Iehusites, Gergesites, and the other people named in the sacred Bible. Orpheus
one of the most ancient writers next to Moses, and an heathen, does mention the
two Tables of stone wherein the law of God was written, and wishes moreover
all such as he studious of virtue, to learn out of his verses divine knowledge,
whereby (says he) they shall understand and know the author of the world,
which is one God which created all things, cherishes all things, nourishes
all things, who is not seen with humane eyes, but is perceived only by the
mind, which does no hurt to mortal men, insomuch as he is the causer and
procurer of all good things, Furthermore he adds that no man mortal has
seen God at any time, except only a certain most godly old man that came of
the Chaldeans (vz. Moses.) At last he concludes with this saying, that he
had learned these things out of the monuments which God in times past had
delivered in two Tables of stone, Linus also says that God created all
things, and in the seventh day had finished all things. Homer also and
Hesiodus testify the same, the one saying that the seventh day did perfect and
finish al things, the other, septimam lucem fuisse sancta^ and praefulgidam,
that the seventh day was most holy and bright. How the earth was without form
before it was fashioned by God; Ovid testifies, calling it a Chaos, which is
rudus indigestaque moles, a rude and unfashioned heap: which Homer and
Hesiodus also testify, calling it Hyle, a certain unshapen and rude matter,
which God afterward brought into good form and fashion. These have testified
we see of the creation of the world (which is the great marvel of maruels)
affirming in a manner the very words of Moses which he writes in Genesis, the
wing that the world had a beginning, and that God treated heaven and earth* and
at therein in seven days, and that the seventh day was holy unto the Lord.
Vide Plut de placit, philos.
And this truth of Moses history concerning the creation of the world; all
the chief and best learned Philosophers amongst the heathen did also firmly
believe. The flood that drowned the world, which we call the flood of Noe,
Joseph. li. de antique Iud. Eusebius. lib. ^. de praep* Euang,
not only Ovid testifies in his Metamorphosis, but also diverse ancient heathen
writers, namely Berosus, Chaldaeus, Ieronimus Egiptius, Nicholaus Damascenus,
Abydenus, and others (according as both Josephus and Eusebius do prove.)

Concerning the tower of Babylon, and institution of tongue^ (...) which Moses
records Genesis ^^^ testimo^^ (...) ^^en by A^ydenus that lived abo^^ king
(...)* ^useb. li. 9. de praep. ^^. 4.
the word^ of (...) of Sennar where ^ was (...): and these Gentiles do show by
reason, that ^ there had not been (...) such miracle in the din^^^on of
tongues, no doubt but that all tongues being derived from one (as all men are
of one Father) would still have retained the same (...) which we see and was
seen long, not to be the world: the difference of languages in the world is
a proose of that confusion of tongues.

Of the long life of the first Patriarchs, not only, the forenamed Baerosus,
Chaldeus, Ieronimus Aegiptius, Nicholaus Damascenus, Abydenus, but also
Manethus, that gathered the history of the Egyptians, Molus Hestians that
wrote the acts of the Phen^^ans, Hesiodus, Hecatenus, Abd^rica, H^lamicus,
Acusilans, and Epherus do testify, that these first inhabitants of the world
did live so long. And they allege the reason thereof to be for the
multiplication of people, and for the bringing of all sciences to perfection,
especially Astronomy and Astrology, which (as they write) could not be
brought to any sufficient perfection by any one man that had lived less than
six hundred years, in which space the great year (as they call it) returns
about. Alex. Poly hist. lib. de Indaica historia.


Of Abraham and his affairs I have alleged some heathen writers before, as
Barosus H^cataus, and Nicholaus Damasc^nus: but of all others Polyhistor
alleges Eupol^mus most at large of Abraham's being in Egypt, of his fight and
victory in the behalf of Lot, of his entertainment by king Melchisede^h, of
his wife and sister Sara, and of other his dooinges, especially of the
sacrifice of his son Isaac. To ^ehem agrees Melo in his books written
against the Jews, and Artabanus, of the strange lake whereinto Sodoine and
Gomorrha were turned, by their destruction called Mare m^rtuum, the dead Sea,
where nothing can live: both Galen, Pausanius, Galen de simpli. Paul, in Eliae.
Solin. in Poly hist. Tacit. lib. vlt. trift.
Solinus, Tacitus, and Strabo, do testify and show the particular wonders
thereof.

From Abraham down to Moses, writes very particularly the said Alexander
Polyhistor, albeit he mingleth sometime certain fables: whereby appears that
he took not his story wholly out of the Bible. And he alleges one Leodemus
who (as he says) lived with Moses, and wrote the self same things that Moses
did: and with these also do cancurre Theodorus a most ancient Poet, Artabanus
and Philon Gentiles. And therefore it is manifest that Moses history, (as also
all the rest of the sacred and canonical scriptures) is no fable or feined
matter (as the devil would make us believe) but a true; certain, and most
undoubted history in all points. All which matters be sufficiently and
substantially showed also even by the heathens writings, which are too tedious
to he here rehearsed.

But the great wonders and miracles which Moses did, being acknowledged to be
done not by his own power, but by the power of God, do sufficiently give
credit unto him: of whom and of whose acts do bear witness, not only the
forenamed (especially Artabanus in his book of the Jews) but many others
also (especially Eupolemus) out of whom Polyhistor recites very long
narrations of the wonderful and strange things done by Moses in Egypt. Yea the
miracles done by him, the greatest enemies that ever he had in the world,
Appion li. 4. contra Iudaeos. Porph. lib. 4. aduersus Christian.
that is Appion in the fourth book against the Jews, and Porphiry in his
fourth book against the Christians do confess. And Porphiry adioineth more
for proof thereof, namely, that he found the same things confirmed by the
story of one Sacontathon a Gentile, who lived (as he says) at the same time
with Moses: but all those miracles (say those two his great enemies) were done
by Art Magic, and not by the power of God. But first where could Moses a
simple shepherd learn so much magic? or why could not then the great
Magitians of Egypt either do the like, or at least wise deliver themselves
from those plagues that were in Egypt, (especially since their study was in Art
Magic from their infancy) yea why did they cry out The finger of God is
here, Exodus 8.18
when they could not do as he did? or let them answer why Pharao king of
Egypt did speak to Moses and Aaron, Exodus 8.9.10.11, etc.
saying: Pray ye unto the Lord, that he may take away the frogs from me and
from my people. His great Magitians belike could not do it, yea he signifies
in that speech that none can do it but God, yea and that neither Moses nor
Aaron could do it any otherwise than by praying unto God. And indeed Moses
and Aaron did by prayer unto God effect it, at the very same time that the king
did appoint it to be done: that he and all the world might know, that there
was not any like unto the God of Israel.

Where did you ever hear of such works done by Art Magic as Moses did? when
he divided the great and mighty read Sea, that the people of Israel might
go through on dry land? Exodus ^4.
when the waters came together again upon Pharao and all his host, and
drowned them and all their glory in the Sea? Exodus, 16.
when he called so many Quails upon the sudden into the Camp, as suffised
to feed six hundred thousand men, beside women and children? Exodus, 17.
when he made a very Rock by smiting it, to yield forth abundance of
water, sufficient for the whole company of Israel? Number, 16.
when he caused the ground to open and swallowe down alive three of the
greatest of his Army, Corah, Dathan, and Abyram together, with their
tabernacles, bags and baggages?

Beside, what wondrous works or miracles soever Moses did, he always
acknowledged to come from God, rejecting utterly all glory from himself, and
attributing and yielding all the glory unto God. Again, Deuteronomy. 32. Genesis 49.
Number. 12. Deuteronomy. 14.
in his writings he does not excuse nor conceal his own sin, nor the
sin of his people, no not the sin of Aaron his own brother, nor of Marie
his sister, nor of Leui his grandfather, nor of any other of his lynage and
kindred: neither did he once seek or go about (although he were in place of
power and authority to do it) to bring in any of his own Sons into the
rule and government after his decease (although he had many) but left the
only rule and government unto a stranger named Iosuah, as God commanded.
Deuteronomy. 3. Number. 37.


All which things do show (and many more too tedious to rehearse) that Moses
both in his writings, in his words, and in his works, was no man of ambition,
or of worldly spirit, but of a meek, humble, dutiful, obedient, and
faithful servant of God in all matters.

The history of Moses therefore being the most ancient, and the same being
most undoubted and certain true, insomuch as he and his history do plentifully
testify of Christ, which was to come, and should be heard in all that he
should say and teach, it remains that his religion which he has taught unto
the world, is the only true religion, and all other religions (not grounded of
the like antiquity and truth) to be abandoned.

6 None can discredit Moses, nor the Psalms, nor any of the Prophets amongst
the Jews, but they must withal discredit Christ: for Christ says thus of
himself, Luke 24.44
that All must be fulfilled which were written of him in Moses, the Prophets,
and the Psalms. And again he sends such as would know of him whether he
were the true Messiah, to the scriptures of the Jews, saying thus: Search the
Scriptures, for they are they that testify of me. So that Christ, Moses, John.
5.39.
the Psalms, and the Prophets, and in a word the whole canonical scriptures
of the Jews do got arm in arm, and be linked together like inseparable
friends that will not be sundred: and therefore the one is always a proof for
the other, as likewise a disproofe of the truth of the one, is a disproofe of
the other: and therefore is it that though the incredulous Jews be so false in
friendship, as that they will not (through unbelief) take part with the
Christians, yet the Christians be more firm, and will hold with the
Scriptures of the Jews to the death. Now if there were no more to prove the
divinity of Christ, but the great and wonderful miracles which he did (some
whereof were such, as never any did before, nor could do but God only) it were
sufficient to prove him to be the S^nne of God, and that he came from the
bosom of his Father. The great and many miracles that he did (being famous
not only in Judea, but in all the Roman Empire, and so over all the world)
are and were such as none of the heathen dare do, or can deny, but all
acknowledge. And therefore I conclude, that the Christian religion, proceeding
from so divine a power, and from one whose works and wonders is above all the
world, is the most undoubted true religion.

7 Christ did never any hurt on earth, but he did marvelous much good, he
healed all manner of diseases, he caused the dumb to speak, the halt to go,
the blind to see, and the deaf to hear: he stilled the raging of the winds
and seas, gave sight to him that was borne blind; raised the dead to life
again, cast out devils, knew men's thoughts, and did such works as no man could
do except God with him, yea except himself were God. Moreover his life was
such, as none was able to accuse him of any sin, so pure and vnreproouable
was he. Again, the doctrine he taught was far from a worldly spirit, being
most heavenly, most innocent, and most divine, for never any man spoke as he
spoke, nor with such authority. Again, he always pronounced that he sought
not his own glory (which deceivers are wont to do) but the glory of his
Father, and as he spoke so it was indeed. The whole course of his life and
death, resurrection, and ascension does show the same: for when the Jews
would have made him an earthly king, he would none of it, but conveyed
himself away. John. 6.15. teaching his Ministers to do the like also. Luke
22.25 26. for he proclaimed that his kingdom was not of this world. Job.
18.36. but that he came to do the will of his Father. Over and above all this,
he was the greatest Prophet that ever was, and foretold diverse things (as
namely, that he should be crucified of the Jews, and the third day rise
again: that Jerusalem and the Temple should be destroyed ere that generation
passed: that after his Ascension the holy Ghost should come down upon his
Disciples assembled at Jerusalem, and diverse others) all which the world does
know came to pass accordingly. And nothing which he has spoken but it shall
be performed, for there was never any fraud within his lips, or falsehood
within his tongue. And therefore I conclude, that the Religion of him (who was
most holy in his life, most harmless toward others, most beautiful toward
all, most wonderful in his works, most true in his propecies, most heavenly
in his doctrine, not sauouring of any carnal delight or worldly affection, nor
by any way or means seeking his own glory, but the glory of God, and to do
the will of his Father) is and must needs be the only true Religion.

8 An other argument I frame thus: that Religion which proceeds undoubtedly
from God, is the true Religion: But the Christian Religion proceeds
undoubtedly from God: Ergo etc. that it proceeds undoubtedly from God, I
prove thus. Either it must proceed from God, or from the Devil, or from men:
But it is too holy to proceed either from men or Deuilles, for it
overthrows the works and kingdom of the one, and forbids the revenging
spirit of the other (commanding men to love their enemies, to do good to
them that hate them and persecute them) it condemns their wanton eye, and the
adulterous thoughts of their hearts, and their covetous humor, admitting no
uncleanness or impuritie, and forbidding all iniquity and wickedness be it
never so secret or close: Since therefore it is so opposite and contrary to
men's affections, wherewith naturally they be carried, and that it commands
to be holy, even as God is holy, it is manifest, that it can neither be of
man's devising, nor of the devils invention, it remains therefore, that it
must needs be of God, and consequently the only true Religion.

9 An other Argument is this: that Religion which respects only the glory
of God, is and must needs be the only true Religion. But such is the
Christian Religion: for it allows not any man to glory in himself, but
shows that whatsoever gloryeth should glory in the Lord. 1. Cor. 1.30.31.
Romans 4.2. Therefore the Christian Religion is the only true Religion.

10 Lastly, the spreading and prevailing of the Gospel of Christ over the
universal world, when as all the world (both Jews and Gentiles) were set
and opposed against it, does demonstrate plentifully and effectually, that the
Christian Religion proceeded from God, and that God is the author thereof: for
if it had not had a God to protect and patronage it, and to make it pass
currantly through the world, it must needs have been utterly suppressed and
choked even in the springing and first rising thereof. For after the ascension
of Christ Jesus into heaven, what were his few Apostles (in the judgment of
reasonable men) able to do, for the spreading and prevailing thereof, against
the force and power of all the world, which was then ready bent with all both
fury and fraud, violence and vengeance, and with all their devises which they
could invent to suppress it? or what eloquence had his few Apostles to
persuade the world, or any therein, to the receiving and embracing of that
Christian Religion which they were appointed to preach: they (as al men know)
were reputed and known to be unlearned men, but only that they were taught and
instructed by the spirit of God, which (according to the promise of Christ
their master) at the time appointed descended down upon them, being
assembled at Jerusalem, by which spirit they were enabled to speak all
languages, and imboldned to preach his Gospel and religion, in such sort and
with such puissant and divine wisdom, as none should be able to resist that
spirit they spoke by, howsoever their persons might be hindered, molested,
vexed, and persecuted.

This, even this is a wonder of wonders, and an infallible demonstration of the
divine virtue of the Christian religion, that it having so few to publish it,
and such as they were, and being encountered by all the Princes and Potentates
of the world, it should notwithstanding so strangely prevail, as within a
short time to be universally spread over the face of the whole earth. Who can
now say but that it was protected and prevailed by the power of God: for the
power of all the world was against it: and if the Christian religion had been
no better protected by God than by men, alas it had perished long ago, yea, it
had never lived until this day, but it had been choked even at the first
vprising, and as it were in the cradle or infancy thereof. Let all wits
therefore throw down themselves, and let all tongues freely confess the
divine virtue of the Christian religion, which could not be stopped or
suppressed, but was so mighty, as that the power of all the world, and of all
the devils in hell joining with them, was not able to stay the course and
passage thereof, but that it did prevail, and that within short space over all
the earth. And therefore the Christian religion (without al doubt) is the only
true religion, which came down from heaven, being brought by Jesus Christ the
true Messiah, from the bosom of God his father. Of which (having so many and
so infallible arguments to prove to every man's sense the truth thereof) none
can doubt except he will also doubt whether the eye does see, the ear does
hear, and the heart does understand: the evidence thereof is so clear and
manifest, as that it is able, if not to convert, yet to convince all
gayne-sayers whosoever, and to make us that already profess, firmly to hold
the same, knowing for certain, that the Christian Religion is the only true
religion in the world, and that salvation is no where else to be sought. For run
over all the religions of the world, and where shall you find any so pure, so
divine, so powerful, so miraculous? It has all the signs, tokens,
arguments, and proofs that may be, for the splendent truth thereof, and to
demonstrate that undoubtedly it came from God.

CHAP. IIII. Wherein is briefly showed, the Religion of Mahomet to be a false
and wicked Religion.
IF I shall speak some thing of the Mahometish Religion, I think the truth of
the Christian Religion will appear so much the more: for when black and white
are laid together, the white carries the greater estimation and glory with
it. And beside, Mahomet himself testifies of Christ to be a great Prophet of
God, Math. Paris. hist. A^^n H^^. 3.
and a great worker of miracles, And that the same Jesus Christ was Borne of
the Virgin Marie, that he lived without sin among men, that he was a Prophet,
and more than a Prophet, and that he ascended into the heavens: and therefore
he reproved the Jews, for that they would not believe him to be borne of a
Uirgin. But on the other side, because he would not have Christ to bear credit
above him, he disliked that he should be called or reputed the Son of God.
But beside the testimony of all the former Prophets of the world, both Jews
and Gentiles (as is before showed) who all do teach, Suidas.
that he should be the Son of God, Suidas does moreover confute this false
Prophet, who reports in his history, that the Pharisees at Jerusalem called
a Council to find out the Father of Jesus. They enjoined certain women to
search his mother: the women affirmed they found her a Virgin. Then was it
recorded in the famous register book of the Temple, Jesus the Son of God,
and of Marie the Virgin. This proves, not only that the mother of Jesus was a
Uirgin (which Mahomet truly held) but also that Jesus was the Son of God
(which Mahomet allowed not.) And indeed Mahomets Religion is a patched
religion, mixed partly with Judaism, partly with Gentilism, partly with Papisme,
partly with Christianisme, being subtly contrived for the erecting of the
same, and to bring followers after him, whereof shall be spoken more hereafter.

The beginning of Mahomets vprising, and of his Sect, Mathaeus Palm. Mathaeus
Chro. li. 13 Drenchsle^r. chro. de Saracen. and Turc. orig.
was thus: Many hundred years after Christ, namely, in the year of our Lord,
597. and in the reign of Mauricius the Emperor, when as Gregorius magnus was
Bishop of Rome, this Mahomet was borne, being of the line of Ismael the Son
of Abraham, by Agar the bondwoman, having unto his Father one Abdara, and unto
his Mother* one Emma, being very obscure and base parents, in Mecha a City
of Arabia: his parents deceased, and left him a very young Orphan, who in
short time by misaduenture was taken captive. This being once known unto his
kindred, Volat. Geogr. lib. 12.
one Abdemonapl^s (says Volateran) and Israelite, bearing him good will, for
his favor and forwardnes of wit, paid his ransom, and made him servant and
factor in all his merchandise.

Not long after his master died without issue, and his servant Mahomet matched
with his mistress, a widow of fifty years of age, called Eadigam, and
(says Paulus Diaconus) his own kinswoman: so that his master being of
credit and substance, Paul. Dia^rer. Romans lib. 18.
and his mistress (afterward his wife) of no less account, and also shortly
after departing this life, he succeeds them both in credit, and al their
substance, and by this means grew of great power and estimation.

Diaconus further says, that this Mahomet for the space of ten years gave
himself secretly by persuasion to bewitch the people, and other ten years
after, with Rogues and vagabonds that repaired unto him, with force of Arms,
with sword, and shedding of blood, he spent in subduing of Countries: And
lastly, nine years he openly and manifestly enjoyed as a deceiuer, a false
Prophet, and a king over those whom he had already infected throughout Arabia.

Sabellicus writes, Sabel. Aenead. 8. li. 8
that Mahomets Father was an Heathen, and his Mother an Ismaelite, whereby it
came to pass, that whilst his Mother taught somewhat of the religion of the
Hebrews, and his Father on the other side the religion of the Gentiles, Mahomet
(like a dutiful child, but not like a discreet son) obeyed both, and that
was some cause of his mirt and patched religion. He had the falling sickness,
which took him extremely, so that he groueled along the ground, and fumed
piteously at the mouth. His wisbeeing of great honor and substance, bewailed
her hard hap in matching with a beggarly rascal, and a diseased creature: but
he (with his wily companions) having taught a Dove to feed at his ear,
wherein he had put grains of corn, persuaded his wife to be content, and that
he was another manner of man than she took him to be: namely, that he was a
Prophet, that the spirit of God tell upon him, and that the Angel Gabriel in
the form of a Dove came to his ear, and revealed him secrets from God, whose
presence he was not able to abide: and therefore was it that he so prostrated
himself, and lay in a trance. His wife being herewith satisfied, she began
to that the same amongst her Gossips, saying: Say nothing, my husband is a
Prophet. The women after their manner (whereof some of them all can keep no
counsel) blazed abroad that Mahomet was a Prophet, and so from women it came
to men.

This being once noysed, they flocked unto him from all parts of Arabia. He
being thoroughly instructed in Satan's school, and well seen in Magic,
observed the present opportunity. Auentin. Annal. li. 3.
The Romans and Persians then warred together, Mahomet with his Arabians want,
and first took part with the Romans, but afterward served them a life
touch, and forsook them, Zonaras Annal. Tom. 3.
and thereby weakened that side. In a while after he espied the Persians go to
wrack, and having despised the Romans, he sets less by the Persians, and
then sets forth himself with might and main with his Captains and
Lieutenants (called Amirai) to subdue Nations, and to destroy the Christians,
to the end that he might e^tablish that false religion, devised by himself and
his wicked confederates: he prevailed wonderfully, and in short time after his
decease (in the time of Ebubezer and Haumar, that successively reigned after
him in Arabia) there were got and subdued to the Arabians, the Region of Gaza,
the City Bostra in Arabia, Damascus Phenicia, Egypt, Palestina, the City
Jerusalem, all Syria, Antioch, Edessa, Mesopotamia, all Persia, yea, and in a
manner all Asia: But I may not forget the end of Mahomet, who in an evening
fitting up late in his palace, and having taken his fill of wine, wherein one
of his companions had powered some poison, felt his wonted sickness approaching
and made have forth, saying he mu^t needs depart to confer with the Angel
Gabriel, and go aside, least his glorious presence should be an occasion of
their deaths: forth he went, and remembering that a soft place was best for his
falling sickness, down he fell upon a dunghill, groueling along with great
pain, fuming at the mouth, and gnashing his teeth. The Swine came about the
dunghill, fell upon him, wounded him sore, and had eaten him up* had not his
wife and others of his house heard the noise of the hogs, and rescued the
false Prophet. Antoninus reports, Antonin. chro. part. a. tit. 13. ca. ^
that he was not without sundry diseases, which his intemperate diet brought
him: namely, the Plurifie, and a kind of Lithargie, for oftentimes his senses
seemed to be taken from him. He continued drooping the space of fourteen
days, at length he departed this life, his belly had such a swelling that it
seemed ready to burst, and his little finger bowed backwards. In the time of
his sickness, he commanded them that were about him that when breath departed
his body, they should not straightway bury him, for he said, that within
three days he would ascen^ into heaven: but hereby appeared that he was a
false Prophet, for they kept him above the ground the third and fourth day, yea
(as Flores historiarum testifies) the space of thirty days, in great hope
he would rise and ascend according to promise, but they saw nothing, saving
that they felt an intolerable stinch, so that in great disdain (says
Antoninus) Eum long a domibus proiecerunt, they cast him far from houses.
But his companions (such as consulted with him, and concealed his falsehoode
and treachery) remembering themselves, and iudginge that the disdain of Mahomet
would be their discredit, and his fall their foil and shame, they fetch him
again, Sabel. Enead. lib. 6. Naucl. Gene. 22.
they chest him in an iron coffin, (says Sabellicus and Nauclerus) they bring
him unto the famous Temple of Mecha (in which City he was borne) with great
solemnity, as if he had never been seared upon the dunghill with swine: they
convey to the roof of the Temple mighty loadstones, they lift up the iron
Coffin, where the loadstones according to their nature draw to them the iron,
and hold it up, and there hangs Mahomet* on high.

Anton. Chro. part. ^. cap. 5. Volfgang. Drenchsle^er Chron. Naucler. Genesis 22.
Sabel. Enead. 8, lib. 6.
Those that embrace the Religion of Mahomet, are called Saracens, for it was the
pride of Mahomet to have them so called, to advance his own doctrine and
profession, because he knew himself lineally descended of Ismael the son of
Agar the bondwoman: therefore to avoid this reproach, he bare the world in
hand that he came of Sara the freewoman, the wife of Abraham, and called
himself and his followers Saracens. Sabellicus writes, that the Grecians of
spite are wont to call the Saracens, Agarens: for that they came not of Sara,
but of Agar.

This Mahomet while he lived used the company of Christians, Jews, and
Infidels. Sabel. Enead. 3. lib. 6
Et vt popularior esset eius lex, ex omnium gentium sectis aliquid assumpsit,
and to the end his law might be the more favored, he borrowed some thing of
every sect. Fascicul. Temp.
Satan furnished him with three instruments, as helys to bring his mischeeuous
intent about. The first was a Jew, a great Astronomer, and a Magitian, who
opened to him at large the Jewish follies: the second, one John of Antioch: the
third, one Sergius a Monk, both abominable heretics. Every one played his
part. To slatter the Christians, he was content to be baptized of Sergius,
Sabel. Enead. 8. lib. 6.
and of these heretics he learned with the Sabellians to deny the Trinity,
with the Manichees to establish two beginnings, with Eunomius to deny the
equal power of the Father and the Son, with Macedonius to call the holy Ghost
a creature, and with the Nicolaites to allow many wives, and wanton lust. Ant.
Chro. part. 2. tit. 15. cap. 2.
Sergius the Monk also persuaded Mahomet in his Alcoran (so is the book of
his law termed) to commend the humility of Christian Monks and Priests, he
made him also deliver the Saracens a Monks coule, which they use to this day.
Also instar Monachorum multos genuflexiones, many duckings and crouchings like
the Monk. Matthias a Michou adds, Mathias a Michou de Sarmat. Asian. lib. 1.
lib. 7.
that they use shauing: and this no doubt was the Monks doctrine. They commend
the blessed virgin Mary, confess God to be the governor of al things, and that
Jesus Christ was the Apostle of God, begotten by the Angel Gabriel on Mary the
virgin, who never knew man, Laonic. de Turc. lib. 3.
and that he was greater and worthier than man: they allow the miracles that
Christ did, and the Gospel (so far forth as it agrees with the Alcoran) and
Moses, Sabel. Enead. 8. lib. 6.
and the old Testament, correcting therein (so presumptuous is the spirit)
certain errors. He called himself a Prophet, and that he was sent of God to
supply the imperfections of all laws, he forbad his followers all pictures
and images in their Temples, he forbad the eating of swines flesh, he
commanded purifiyngs and washings, and similitudinem Iudaeorum, after the
manner of the Jews. The Christians have Sunday for their Sabbath, the Jews
Saturday, and Mahomet Friday, to dissent from the Hebrews and Christians: or
as Antoninus writes, in the honor of Venus the Goddess of Arabia, thereby
the rather to win that country people: and thus it pleased him to devise a
Religion mixed of all these, to the end he might have of all religions some to
build up his kingdom. And indeed Mahomet took the advantage of the time, for
that time was a time of dissentio^ among Princes, and of division amongst those
which called themselves Christians. Heraclius the Emperor, and Chosdroes King
of Persia were at deadly enmity, one warring against an other. The Scithian
Nation were of neither side, but at last against both, raising a power of
themselves, having Mahomet their ringleader. The Church was troubled with
diverse sects and heresies, as with Nestorians, Iacobites, Monothelites, etc.
And then was there contention amongst the Bishops, who should have the proud
title of universal Bishop. God was highly displeased with this wickedness, and
suffered Nations to rise as a rod or scourge to whippe his people: for where
the hedge is broken; there it is easy for the beasts of the field to enter
and spoil. Now the vanity and falsehood of this Religion may be proved thus.

1 First by the newnes of it, for it is but of late years begun, and there was
never any prophecy that did allow of such a Prophet, or of the doctrine of
such a one. And therefore he comes in his own name, and so consequently not
to be received.

2 Secondly, he did no miracle at his coming, Math. Paris. hist. An. in Hen.
3.
and therefore no reason that any should believe on him. He spoke unto the
Saracens of himself, Non sum miraculis aut iudiciis ad vos missus, I am not
sent unto you with miracles and signs. There was no divine power showed in all
his practice. Flor. hist.


3 Thirdly, it is manifest that Mahomet was a false Prophet, because he said
that within three days after his death he should ascend into heaven, which was
notoriously false, as before appears. Jacob de Vorag. legend. 1^7. Laonic. de
reb. Turc. lib. 3.


4 Fourthly, the Religion of Mahomet is fleshly, consisting in natural delights
and corporal pleasures, which show that man, and not the divine spirit of God,
is the author thereof: for it is permitted the Saracens by that his law to have
four wives (though these be of nigh kin) yea five, marrying them virgins,
and to take beside as many of them which they have bought and taken captives,
Ant. Chro.
as their ability will serve to maintain. The paradise likewise promised to
his followers is this, namely, they shall have garments of silk, with all
sorts of colors, bracelets of gold and Amber, parlours and banqueting houses
upon floods and rivers, vessels of gold and silver, Angels serving them
bringing in gold, milk, silver, wine, lodginges furnished, cushions, pillowes,
and downe-beds, most beautiful women to accompany them, maidens and virgins
with twinkling eyes, gardens and orchyards with harbors, fountains, springs,
and all manner of pleasant fruit, rivers of milk, honey, and spiced wine, all
manner of sweet odours, perfumes, and fragrant sentes, and to be short,
whatsoever the flesh that desire to eat. Thus fleshly people have a fleshly
religion, and a fleshly paradise to inhabit. But like Prophet like people, and
like religion: for Mahomet himself was such a fleshly fellow, as that though
modest ears are both to hear, yet because the filthiness of this Prophet may
not be concealed, I must utter it: he committed buggerie with an Ass,
Bonsin. lib. 8. Decad. Berna d. in Rosar. part 1. sermon. 14. Ant. Chro. part. 2.
tit. 15. cap. 2. Caelius. Nichol. Clen. 1. epi. Anton. Chro. part. 2. cap. 5.
Auicenna metaphys.
Bonfinius writes it. Again, he committed adultery with an other man's wife,
that upon displeasure was from her husband, and when he perceived the murmur
of the people, he feigned that he had received a paper from heaven, wherein it
was permitted him so to do, to the end he might beget Prophets and worthy
men. Again Mahomet (as Caelius reports) had forty wives, and further he
gloryed of himself, that it was given him from above to exceed ten men
(says Cleonard) fifty men (says Antoninus) in carnal lust and venery.
Auicenna one of Mahomets own sect, is himself brought in disliking of this
Religion, for this reason: Because Mahomet (says he) has given us a law,
which shows the perfection of felicity to consist in those things which
concern the body, whereas the wise and sages of old had a greater desire to
express the felicity of the soul than of the body, as for the bodily
felicity though it were g^^nted them yet they regarded not, neither esteemed
it in comparison of the felicity which the soul requires: his paradise and
doctrine is such, as there seems small difference between Epicurism, Atheism,
and Mahometisme.

5 Mahomets law is a tyrannical law, for he made it death to dispute of it,
Ant. chro. part. 2. tit. 13. cap. 5.
and if any man speak against it (says he) Proditorie occidatur, Let him be
traitorously put to death: and again, sine audientia occidatur, Let him be put
to death without coming to his answer. Sabel. Aenead. 8. li.
Qua sanctione (says Sabellicus) pala^ fecit ^ihil sinceri in ea lege esse,
etc. By which decree he manifested, that there is nothing sincere in that law,
etc. Moreover he wrote in the Arabian tongue, Math. Paris hist. Ang. in Hen. 3.
and taught his followers, that his religion, A gladio cepit per gladium
tenetur, and in gladio terminatur, began by the sword, is holden by the sword,
and is finished or ended in the sword: which shows that the sword and arm of
flesh is all the author and protector that his religion has. Again, Mahomet
made this law amongst them, saying: He that slays his enemy, Paul. Olac.
rer. Romans lib. 18.
or is slain of his enemy, let him enter and possess paradise: he spoke like
a man, with a carnal spirit, teaching revenge to the uttermost, and pr^mising
paradise to such: but no proof of a divine spirit appears in him.

6 As Mahomets religion is defended by force of sword and fraud, insomuch as
he made it death to call it into question: so likewise did it begin, as by
force of sword, so likewise by notable fraud, and was established through
wiles, deceit, subtlety, and lies: for first he having the falling sickness,
persuaded his wife and others, that it was the power of God* and the presence
of the Angel Gabriel that caused him to fall down. Sergius the heretical
Monk was at hand, and bare false witness to the same (says Zonaras. Zonaras
Annal. Tom. 3.
) He told them that the same Deue which he taught to feed at his care, was
sometime an Angel, and sometime the holy Ghost. He had three companions all of
a confederacy, to devise and face out lies with him. When he perceived that
men gave ear to him, he feigned that the Angel Gabriel had carried him to
Jerusalem, and thence to have lifted him up to heaven, and there to have
learned his law.

Antonio. chro. part. 2. tit. 13. ca. 5
He made the Saracens believe, that before God made the world, there was
written in the throne of God, There is no God but the God of Mahomet. When he
had framed his Alcoran, and bound it up fair, he caused secretly a wild ass
to be taken, and the book to be bound about his neck, and as he preached
unto the people, upon a sudden he stood amazed as if some great secrecy were
revealed to him from above, he brake out and told the people: Behold, God has
sent you a law from heaven, go to such a desert, there ye shall find an
Ass, and a book tied about his neck. The people ran in great have, they
found it so as he had said, they take the Ass, they bring the book, Auierus
li. 2. cap. 12. John Leo. lib. 3. ca. 23 Aph^^c.
they honor the Prophet. Touching divorced and separated wives, he told the
Saracens he had received a paper from heaven. He used sooth-saying and
divination, the which at Fessa, a City of Mauritania, Bernard. in Rosar. part
1. sermon. 10.
unto this day is called Zarragia. He persuaded his followers, that at the end
of the world he should be transformed into the form of a mighty Ram, full
of lacks and long fleeces of wool: and that all that held of his law, should
be as fleas shrouding themselves in his fleeces, and that he would iumpe into
heaven, and so convey them all thither. These and such like were his sleightes,
to beguile a foolish, rude, and barbarous country people: the foolerie, pride,
and vanity of whose religion, I trust every one does sufficiently perceive.

7 Mahomets Religion is no true Religion, but a mere devise of his own, and
of three others his false conspirators: for he has patched together his
Alcoran of the doctrine of Heathens, Indians, and Arabians, of superstitious
Jews, of Rechabites, of false Christians and Heretics, as Nestorians,
Sabellians, Manichees, Arrians, Cerinthians, Macedonians Eunomians, and
Nicholaits, of illusions, and inventions of their own: and lastly (for further
credit) he borrowed some out of the old and new Testament. But God will not
thus be served: for he delivered his mind of old unto Israel, and he is not
changed, but continues the same God still. Deuteronomy. 12^
Ye shall not (says God) do every man what seems him good in his own
eyes: Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it, thou shall put nothing
thereto, nor take ought there from. Satan being coniured to deliver the truth
of the Alcoran of Mahomet, said, Fascicul. Temp.
that therein were comprised twelve thousand lies, and the rest was truth: by
all likelihood very little. And therefore I conclude, that there is no evidence
to prove Mahomet a true Prophet, many to prove him to be a false Prophet, and
blasphemous, and presumptuous, and his Religion to be a wicked, carnal,
absurd, and false Religion, proceeding from a proud spirit, and humane subtle,
and corrupt invention, and even from the devil, the crafty father of lies, a
murderer, and mankiller from the beginning. And so much hereof may suffice.

CHAP. V. Wherein is showed that the Church of Rome is not the true Church of
God, nor observes the right Religion.
I Am now entering into that great controversy between the Protestants and
the Papists, whether of them should be the true Church, and true worshippers
of God in Christ: for they both acknowledge God and Christ his son, and all the
sacred and canonical books of the scriptures they confess* to come from God,
and from his divine spirit, as indeed they could come from no other. But
whiles they both confess this book, it is good reason that they should both
stand to the arbitrament and judgment of these books, for the trial of the
true Church: which if they do (as indeed they must) this controversy is at an
end and not worthy to be made a question, or to be doubted of: for by the
sacred and canonical writings it shall by and by be manifest, that the Church
of Rome cannot be the true Church possibly. But first let us hear what it
says for it self, and what good grounds it has for the fortification
thereof. For if it be not builded upon a good foundation, and upon such sure
grounds as will hold, the whole building is like to lie in the dust, and to
come to ruin.

1 They hold very stiffely (but not so strongly) that the Church of God
militant here upon earth, is ever visible to the outward eye, and may be
pointed out by the finger at al times, in such sort as that any one may know
thither to resort, as to the congregation of Gods people, there to join
himself unto them, and to praise and pray unto God with them, and to do those
things which he requires at their hands. But all this gain of profit them,
Visibilitie ^^sol. n^len (...) of the ^^urch in ^^tward (...), is no (...) or
(...) ma^^e of the tru^ Church.
nor hurt us: for as in the Primitive Churches persecuted by those tyrannical
and heathen Emperors, there was a Church of God (though not seem of them) who
had their meetings and assemblies amongst themselves (though secretly because
of their enemies:) so likewise in the days of Queen Marie, as also in all
other times of the persecution of our Church by the Romish Bishops and their
partakers, our Church no doubt was and might be, and they likewise have their
meetinges, and assemblies, though both they and the place of their resort were
unknown to those their persecutors.

In the time of Dioclesian the Emperor (especially) Christians were so wasted,
as to the judgment of men none were remaining, their books were burned, the
Churches destroyed, and themselves put to death: in the end when this great
hauock was made, and cruelty had wasted and destroyed all that could be found,
where was then the visible church? It must needs then be enforced to hide it
self, and so it was, and the glory thereof so eclipsed, that for a w^yl^ it
shined no where. And therefore the Church is not always visible and seen to
the outward eye, nor splendent in the faces and sight of men, and yet a true
church notwithstanding, as then it was: for it is the Sum^e though it be
sometimes overwhelmed with a cloud, and it is fire still, though it be
sometime raked up in Embers: and so the true Church is and may be, although
not seen or known to the world, yea though it seem overwhelmed with
tyrannical malice, and hide it self as though it were clean extinct.

2 Let them tell me where the Church was visible, when being assembled at
Jerusalem, Acts. 8.1.
there arose a great persecution against it, insomuch as they were all
dispersed and scattered as the Text shows? Or let them tell me where or how
the Church was visible, when Christ was smitten, and all the rest were
scattered and hid, and concealed themselves: Mar. 12.27
the face of the visible Church was then not in Christ and his Apostles, but in
the Jews among the Scribes and Pharisees: and therefore it visibility be such
a mark of the true Church, then these (who crucified Christ) were the true
church, and not Jesus Christ and his Apostles. Which who dare affirm? yea, who
will not deny yea, when the shepherd was smitten, and the sheep scattered,
and yet a true Church, who can deny b^^ that a true Church may be, though it
be not apparently visible and seen to the world? What should I say more? Does
not S. John in his Revelation testify expressly, Reu. 12.6, 7
That the Church of Christ (signified there by a woman) fugit in solitudinem,
fled into a desert or wilderness, where she had a place prepared for her of
God, and where she could not for a certain season be found of her
persecutors? Let them further show me how the Church was visibly in the time
of Elias the Prophet, when he complained that himself was left alone? 1. King.
19.11. etc.
O Lord (says he) they have forsaken thy covenant, they have destroyed thine
Altar, and slain thy Prophets with the sword: and I am left alone. Elias did
not think himself to be solus Propheta relictus (as Campion answered in the
Tower) I say he spoke not of himself only in that respect: but in this
respect, that he took him to be the only true worshipper that was left in
Israel, which is manifest by the answer which God gave him: namely, that
beside him he had seven thousand true worshippers yet remaining, which had not
bowed their knee to Baall. I demand of the Papists, when Elias knew no other
true worshippers of God but himself, how the church was visible, for whither
he should go to find a true worshipper he knew not. Again it is written in
2. King. 16. 2. King, 16.
that under the reign of Achas there was taken a pattern of the Altar of the
Idolaters of Damas^us, and that Vrias the high Priest removed the Altar of the
Lord, whereby it appears, that the Priesthood was corrupted, the Altar
removed, and consequently the sacrifices ceased, etc. What visibilitie of the
true Church could there be in those days, either of Achas, Manasses, and other
kings being Idolaters, when the Temple it self (where only by the law of God,
the Jews were to offer the sacrifices) was polluted and defiled with
heathenish Idolatry? What Church or Congregation could any man (in this case)
have resorted unto to have performed a true and acceptable sacrifice unto God
in those times, when the Temple of Jerusalem (which was the place to worship
at) would admit no true worshippers, but only Idolaters? It is therefore
manifest, that a true Church may be, though they know not a congregation of God
to resort to, yea though it be close and not seen or known one to the other,
nor yet to the world. And consequently visibility (which the Papists make a
mark of the Church) is no perpetual mark thereof. Yea, if such visibility
should be a mark of the true Church, then were the Idolatrous people in the
time of Elias, in the time of Achas, Manasses, and many other kings of Israel
that were Idolaters, the true Church, who indeed were the false Church: And
then were Elias and all other the true worshippers of God, who had in those
times no places left to sacrifice in, the false Church, which is absurd.
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Mat. 24.
that in the times of the abomination of desolation (spoken of by Christ Jesus
in Math. 24.) that is, in the time of wicked heresy which is the army of
Antichrist (as he expounds it) Nulla probatio potest esse Christianitatis,
neque effugium potest esse Christianorum aliud volentium cognoscere fidei
veritatem nis^ scripturae diuinae: No proof can be made of Christianity,
neither can there be any other refuge for Christians which are desirous to
know the tru^ faith, but only the divine Scriptures. And therefore I conclude
(which is apparent) that the true Church sometime is in such a state, as that
visiblenes cannot discern or prove it, but only the divine scriptures must
demonstrate and declare it: And consequently, it is demonstratiuely manifest,
that it is no true position of the Papists, that the Church of God is always
and evermore visible, seen, and splendent, to the outward eye and view of the
world. Wherefore the Papists do us great injury, and bewray their own
ignorance, when they would have us to show our Church in all times and ages
(which notwithstanding perhaps may be done) for our Church was always, though
it were not seen or known to them, but lay bid and kept it self close from
their fury and tyranny, as the first and primitive Churches did from their
bloody persecutors. Our Church was then persecuted in those times when it could
not be seen, and many then like constant Martyrs, endured the tyranny of that
Romish religion, so that some were banished, others fled into other Nations,
some endured Martyrdom at home, some other hid themselves, but the whole
Church generally was vexed, and oppressed. And therefore when our Church was
thus persecuted, it is a good argument (I think) to say, We had our Church
then and always, though a persecuted Church, though a Church chased and
pursued, though a Church scattered, though a Church not seen or visible to
them, yea, though in it self it were enlightened from God many ages together.
Namely, till the tyrranny e^ Antichrist were ouerpast.

Secondly, Another erroneous position, whereby they are miserably deceived is
this: They hold the Church cannot err: 2 Thessalonians. 2, 3, 4.
And therefore suppose because the Church of Rome was once the true Church of
God, therefore it is so now and evermore. As though there might not be an
Apostacy in the Church, which Saint Paul affirms there should. Or as though
a particular Church (for the Church of Rome is but a particular Church) could
not err? Yea, as though general Counsels (which represent the whole Church)
could not err? for so they affirm, but how truly let the world judge. And if
it may be showed that general Counsels have erred, or may err, then they
yield their cause in this behalf. I wish they would for their own sakes: for
false Jesuits and Seminaries do but deceive themselves and others to their
own confusion in this world, and except they repent in the world to come. That
general Counsels may err, is manifest by Augustine, who plainly teaches that
only the Scriptures cannot err, al other writers may err, Provincial
Counsels may err, lastly, he says, Concilia quae fiunt ex vniuerso orb
Christiano, August. Tom. 6. li. 2 contra Donatist.
priora posterioribus sape emendari; cum aliquo experimento rerum aperitur quod
clausum erat, and cognoscitur quod latebat: That general Councels which are
gathered of all the Christian world, are often corrected, the former by the
latter, when by any trial of things, that is opened which was shut, and that
is known which was hidden. A general Council may be corrected (says
Augustine) Ergo, it may err. And therefore Augustine speaks plainly to
Maximinian the Bishop of the Arrians, August. contra Maximin. lib. 3. cap. 4
Neither ought I to allege the Council of Nice, nor thou the Council of
Arrimine, to take advantage thereby; for neither am I bound, nor held by the
authority of this, nor thou of that; Set matter with matter, cause with cause,
or reason with reason, try the matter by the authority of Scriptures, not
proper witnesses to any of us, but indifferent witnesses to us both.

In the time of Constantine that Christian Emperor, Theodor. lib. 2. ca. 18.
was the first and last Counsel of Nice, wherein according to our Creed was
decreed, that Christ was God as well as man. In the time of Constantius (
Constantinus son) favoring the error of the Arrians; it was decreed in the
Counsel of Arimine, that Christ was not God but only man. This Counsel of
Arimine did err, (and that grosely in a matter of faith) Ergo, it is palpable
that a general Counsel may err, even in matters of faith.

Again, general Counsels have been contrary one to the other, and that in
matters of faith: as the Counsel of Constantinople condemned the setting up of
Images in the Church: and the Counsel of Nice afterward allowed Images. One of
their (being contrary) must needs be errors: Ergo, A general Counsel may
err. Consil. Tom. 1. de ord. celeb. cons^l.


The general Counsel confesses of it self that it may err: For the whole
Counsel prays in the end of a general Counsel (in a set form of prayer
that i^ appointed to be said after every Counsel) namely, that God would
Ignorantiae ipsorum parcere, and errori indulgere. Spare their ignorance, and
pardon their error. Ergo, a general Counsel may err.

The Pope of Rome (whom the Papists hold for head of their Church) may err:
Ergo, their whole Church may err. Lib. 2. ad Bonif. contra epist. Pelag. ca. 4
Augustine proves it erres, Beatae memoria Innocentius Papa, sine baptismo
Christi, and sine participatione corporis and sanguinis Christi vitam non
babere paruulos docet. Behold Pope Innocentius of blessed memory does teach
that young children cannot be saved, except they receive the baptism of Christ,
and also the communion of the body and blood of Christ.

But this is taxed for an error, Ergo the Pope of Rome can err, and
consequently the whole Church under him, except perchance members have a
privilege above the head. Part. 1. distin. 40* ca.
But what shall I need to stand hereupon, their own Cannon law (as is evident
in the decrees) does say expressly, that if the Pope be found negligent of
his own and his brethrens salvation, yea though he lead innumerable people by
heaps to the devil of hell, no mortal man may presume to reprove him: because
he himself being to judge all, is to be judged of none, nisi deprehendatur a
fide deuius, except he be found erring from the faith: whereby it appears,
that they thought he might err in matters of faith, or else that exception
was put in in vain. But the Pope is no other than a man, as also all the
members of his Church be, and humanum est errare, all men are subject to
error. Let every man take heed how he trusts the Pope or any man mortal,
for it is written Iere. 17. Maledictus homo qui in homine confidit, Cursed is
that man that puts his trust in man. And why? because (as the kingly Prophet
David says Psa. 116.) All men are liers in their words, and sinners in their
works. But when the doctrine of that man of Rome and of his Church is in diverse
things cl^ane contrary to the express word of God, who can deny but it is an
apparent erring Church?

As when it stablished ignorance to be the mother of devotion, which Christ
calls the mother of error, saying, Ye err not knowing the Scriptures,
Math. 22.^9. Who can choose but think that it has no good meaning in it, but
purposed only to build vy the pride of the Pope, of his Cardinals, Bishops,
Priests, Monks, and other their ecclesiastical men. Christ bids the
people, to search the Scriptures: John. 5.39. ^^is Antichrist forbids them,
saying, it is per^lous, it causes schisms, sects, and heresies, as though
they were wiser than Christ. Again, the Apostle Paul commands, That the
word of God should dwell plenteously in the people, whereby they might teach
themselves. Collos. 3.16. But the Pope of Rome and his Church, allows not
plentif^l knowledge of the word in them, yea ignorance is the knowledge that
he would desire them to have. Who would not justly suspect such a Church, and
such a Religion, yea condemn it, when to maintain and continue their Church
in errors, they would have none of the people to search any scriptures,
whereby they might be discovered. Thus the silly Papists (whom I pity) are
lead like blind men they know not whither, and with their implicita fides
(which is to believe (for their part) they know not what) are lamentably
seduced. It is good themselves should see and know what they believe, and that
their faith and belief be right, least at last they be (through ever much
trust of their teachers) extremely deceived. The people of Berca were highly
commended, and it is noted to their praise, that they searched the scriptures,
to see whether those things were true or no which Paul himself teached. Acts
17. For whosoever he be, yea though it were an Angel from heaven, if he
teach matters contrary to the doctrine of the holy and canonical scriptures, we
are to held him accursed, yea and accursed again, as the Apostle of Christ
Jesus S. Paul commands. Gal. 1.8.9.

Again, the Church of Rome when it taught and holds, that the Scriptures
were to be made unto the people or congregation in an unknown tongue, what
were the people the wiser? Saint Paul would have all things own to ediffyng
in the Church. For says Saint Paeule, Is qui supplet locum indoctiquomodo
dicturus est Amen ad tuam gratiarum actionem, qua^ do quidem quid dicas nescit?
How shall he that supplyeth the place of an unlearned man say Amen to thy
thanks giving, when he understands not what thou say? 1. Corinthians. 14.
And in that whole Chapter be utterly disliketh service in an unknown tongue.
And therefore if the Church of Rome will not confess their error herein, she
is past all shame, and has the impudent and shameless face of an harlot.

They have all devised and defend a place of Purgatory, wherein all that
depart this life be put, and there punished (being a punishing fire) until
they help to fetch them out with their Masses, and other their inventions and
devises: which they will not do, nor think they have reason to do, except they
have good current coin for the same.

And therefore it may be well and justly called Purgatory pickepurse: and it
is manifestly apparent hereby, that wealth and great riches of the Clergy was
the only mark they ayu^ed at. For it has no warrant in the Canonical books
of the scriptures: yea the Canonical books of the scriptures show the
contrary, and so do the ancient Fathers. Christ in the Gospel, Luke 16. shows
only but two places, namely, heaven and hell, saying, that the rich man's soul
(which was unmerciful to Lazarus) went after his death to hell, and there was
tormented, and that Lazarus soul (being dead) was carried into Abraham's bosom,
a place of joy and comfort. To the Thief which was executed at the passion and
suffering of Christ; and believed in him, Christ answered, Hodi^ eris mocum in
paradiso, This day shall thou be with me in paradise. Luke 23.43. Which
shows that the souls of the faithful never come in Purgatory fire to be
boiled and punished, for all their sin is forgiven, and consequently the
punishment incident to the same is forgiven also, and their souls pass from
death to life and into paradise, a place of comfort, delectablenes, and all
sweetness: namely heaven where Christ is. Verily verily I say unto you (says
Christ) he that hears my word, and believes him that sent me, has eternal
life, and comes not into condemnation, but passes from death to life. John.
5.25. What is become then of this Purgatory* Saint Paul says, I covet to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. showing thereby, that presently
after his dissolution he was to be with Christ in glory. For we know (says
he) that when this earthly tabernacle of ours is dissolved, we shall be a
building not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. 2. Cor. 5.1. Saint
John in his Revelation says, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from
henceforth they rest from their labors, and their works follow them. Reu.
14.13. If from the time of their death they have blessedness and rest (as he
shows) then are they not in any Purgatory fire to be scortched and
molested. Saint Peter tells the Saints and children of God, and assures them
of it, That the end of their faith is the salvation of their souls. 1. Pet.
1.9. If salvation of their souls begin at the end of their faith which lasts
unto the end of their life (and no longer for then they have the fruition and
possession of that which they believe and hope for, Amb. lib. 2* de bono mortis.
then is it manifest there is no Purgatory. Ambrose says, Qui hic non
receperit remissionem peccatorum, illic non erit is in coelo: quia remissio
peccatorum vita aeterna est: He that here in this life receives not remission
of sins, shall never come in the kingdom of heaven, for life eternal is
remission of sins. Cyprian says, Cyprian contra Demet. tract* ^
Quando ^stine excessum fuerit, nullus iam locus poenitentiae, nullus
satisfactionis effectus: hic vita aut amittitur aut tenetur: hic saluti
aeternae cultu Dei and fructu prouidetur. And again by and by he says: Tu sub
ipso licet exitu and vitae temporalis occasu pro delictis Deum roges, quiverus
and vnus est, venia datur confitenti, and credenti indulgentia salutaris, and
ad immortalitatem sub ipsa morte transitur. That is: when men are once departed
hence, there is then no more place of repentance, no effect of satisfaction:
here life is either lost or kept: here provision is made for eternal
salvation by the worship of God and fruits. And therefore says he: Do thou
call upon God, though it be at thy last gasp, and departure of this thy
temporal life, but call upon that God which is one and true, pardon is given
thee if thou confess thy sins, and saving forgiveness if thou believe: and from
death presently thou shall pass to immortality. Jerome says, Ierom. in Gal.
cap. 6.
that the time of sowing their saede for Christians is this present life, and
that as soon as this life is ended, they reap everlasting life. August. li.
hypog. 5.
Augustine says, Primum fides catholicorum diuina authoritate regnum esse
crescit calorum: secundum gehennam, vbi omnis Apostata, vel a Christi fide
alienus, supplicia experitur: Tertium peni^us ignoramus, nec esse in scripturis
sanctis reperimus. The first place (says he) the faith of Catholics does
(by divine authority) believe to be the kingdom of heaven: the second, hell:
a third place we are utterly ignorant of, neither can we find any such in the
holy scripturs. And the same Augustine writes in another place, Aug. Enchir.
ad L^^rent. cap, 67.
That they which believe a purgatory fi^e are much deceived, and that through
an humane conceit. How then can the Papists be the true Catholics, which
believe not the faith of the Catholics, which Augustine does affirm?

They also hold that a man since the fall of Adam, batl, free will of himself
and of his own power to come unto God, and to do things acceptable and well
pleasing in his sight. Whereas God says after that time, that the imaginations
of men's hearts are only evil every day. Genesis 6. If they be only evil, then
have they of themselves no affection to goodness acceptable to him. And Christ
says, no man can come unto me, except my Father draw him. John. 6.44.65. If
her must be drawn before he can come, he has no procliuitie or willingness
of himself to come. And therefore is it that the Prophet says, Convert thou me,
and I shall be converted. Ier. 7. showing that he has no power in himself
to be converted. And S. Paul shows, that till God give grace, there is none
that does good, no not one. Romans 3.10. etc. For all the philosophical virtues
and good deeds which men do before they have faith (which is the gift of God)
are sin, and not acceptable to God. John. 6.29. For the Apostle witnesses
that without faith it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11.6. and that
whatsoever is not of ^aith is sin. Romans 14.23. Christ himself again says, that
except men be ingraf^ into him, they can bring forth no fruit. John. 15.1.2.
etc. Paul often teaches that we must be new men, and cast off the old man.
Romans 1.2.^. And again he bids to be renewed in the spirit of our minds. 1.
Cor. 2.14. And moreover he says, that the natural man perceives not the
things that are of God, neither can he: for they are spiritually discerned.
And again, that it is God that works the will and the deed. Phil. 2.13. And
he plainly confesses of himself, and of all others, that we are not able of
our selves so much as to think a good thought: and that all our sufficiency
is of God. 2. Cor. 3.5. Which premises do show that our understanding is
blind, and our will perverse in any divine matter, or acceptable service unto
God, till God do enlighten the one, and draw and move the other unto himself.
Thus has God ordered matters, to the end himself might have all the glory
ascribed to him, as good reason he should. For what is a man since his fall in
Adam, but an abject and runnaway from God, of himself seeking bypath and
crooked out-waies, leading from God, and from his worship: except he be
assisted from above? (which is signified by Adams hiding himself from the
presence of God after his fall.) And therefore Augustine says well and truly,
Hominem libero arbitrio male vsum, August. ad Arasf. epi^ 44. and Ench^r. ad ^
aur. cap^ 30. and lib. ^ cap. 7. and a^ Boni^ cap. 8. and 3. and a lib. pas^^
and se and illud per didisse, That man having ill used his free will that he
had, has now both lost himself and that. And again, Liberum arbitrium
captiuatum ne quid possit ad iustitiam, that free wl^ is taken captive, that it
can do nothing toward righteousness. And again* Hominis non libera, sed a Deo
liberata volunt as obsequitur. Not the free will, but the freed will of man,
(which is set free by God) does obey and yield obeisance: and again, Liberum
non fore quod Des^ratia non liberauerit, that the will is bound and not free,
til God deliver it and set it at liberty. Cyprian (which S. August. so often
cites) says, De nullo gloriandu^, etc, many must glory of nothing, Lib. de
praede^^. sanct. i^^m ad Bonifa. lib. 4. in Genesis Homil. 1.
because nothing is curs, therefore every man annihilating his own power, must
learn wholly to depend upon God. And Chrisostom says, that Omnis homo non modo
naturaliter peccator sed totus peccatum est. Every man is not only sinful
naturally, but is altogether sin. And therefore S. Paul shows, that till a
man be regenerate or born anew, and until he be renewed in the spirit of his
mind, he has in him nothing else but concupiscentias erroris, lusts and
affections after error, Ephesians. 4.23.24. saying likewise, that by nature we are
the sons of wrath, Ephe. 2.^. Which also Christ himself testifies to
Nicodemus* saying: that that which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that
which is borne of the spirit is spirit, and that except a man be born anew by
that spirit, he can never so much as see the kingdom of God, John. 3.3. etc.
And therefore S. Paul tells, that there must be a new creature, whosoever
will be in Christ Jesus, and a renewing and Metamorphosis of the mind (he uses
the very word) before men can find out the good and acceptable will of God,
and what pleases him. Romans 12.2. I therefore conclude, that the Papists are
far wide, and know not the misery and thraldom of men whereinto they are
fallen by that great sin an^ disobedience of Adam, whilst they stand to
defend free will in natural men: indeed it appears to be free and too
free unto evil, but it is so bound and fast tied from desire of any divine
duties, that God must first draw it out of that servitude wherein it is, and
set it at liberty, and move it to come before it will show any readiness that
way. I trust therefore they see that their Church not only may err, but
erreth most grossly in many points.

They hold that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, it is lawful to debar
the people of the Cup: And so they use, which is contrary to the institution
of Christ, Bibite ex hoc omnes, Drink ye all of this, Math. 26.27. And as
well, and by as good authority may they take the bread from the people
likewise: And it is contrary to the express doctrine of Saint Paul, 1. Cor.
11.23.28. (who as himself testifies, delivered the Institution of Christ) for
he says, Let a man examine himself, Et sic edat, and bibat, And so let him
eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup. So that he must drink as well as
he must eat. And that the people should be pertakers, and receive in both
kinds, was observed many hundred years in the Church after Christ. Insomuch,
as Pope Gelasius decreed, that all they should be excommunicate, C. comperimus
de confera distinct.
which would receive but in one kind. But Rome that now is, is not Rome that
then was, but with her Council of Constance, is not ashamed to go against all
Antiquity, and all Divinity.

But they hold (which is a marvelous gross error also) Transubstantion in
the Sacrament, namely, that after the words of Consecration, the Bread and
Wine are changed into the very substance of the Body and Blood of Christ: And
this they would seem to ground upon these words, Hoc est Corpus m^um, This
is my Body, Math. 26.26. which they will have to be expounded literally. But
why then do they not expound the other words of Christ literally also,
concerning the Cup: For the Text says, in the 27. and 28. verses, That he
took the Cup, etc. and said, This is my blood. I am sure they will not say,
that the cup was the blood of Christ (as the words be) but they will grant a
figure in those words: namely, Contineus pro continent^, that by the cup is
meant the wine in it. If then they will admit a figure in this, why may there
not be a figure in the other? namely fignatum pro figno, that these words,
This is my body, should be understood thus: This bread is a sign of my body
(which was broken for you.) If we look into the old Sacramantes of the
Jews, namely, Circumcision, and the Paschall lamb, we^ shall find the phrase
of speech observed. For Circumcision was called the Lords covenant, when indeed
it was not the covenant (as all men do know) but a sign and seal of the
covenant: for the covenant was this to Abraham, Ero Deus tuus, and seminis tui,
etc. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, etc. Genesis 17. Romans 4.11. So
likewise the Paschall Lamb is called the Passover, when indeed it was but a
sign of their passe-ouer, or passing over or through the red Sea (which was a
mighty and most wonderful deliverance, Pharao and all his host being in the
Sea, when they passed through as on dry land.) Insomuch therefore as it is
usual in Sacraments so to speak, it is not against reason, but stands with
very good reason to think, that Christ Jesus in instituting this Sacrament,
which to the Christians is the same that the Paschall Lamb was to the Jews,
did likewise call the bread his body, in such sort as the Paschall Lamb was
the Passover: that is to say figuratively, that as the Paschall Lamb was
called the Passover, and yet was but a sign and remembrance of their
Passover, so the bread was called his body, and yet it was but a sign and
remembrance of his body.

And that this is the right exposition, may appear by the words of Christ,
where he says, Do this in remembrance of me. Tertul. contr. Mar. ^iod. lib.
4.
Luke. 22.19. Tertullian likewise does so expound them: for he says, Christ
said, Hoc est corpus meum, id est, figura corporis me^, This is my body, that
is, a figure of my body. August. in Psalm. 8.
Augustine likewise says, Christi miranda patientia adhibuit Iudam ad
conuinium in quo corporis and sanguinis sui figuram discipulis tradidit^, The
admirable patience of Christ admitted Judas to the banquet, wherein he
delivered to his Disciples a figure of his body and blood. And again he
says, August. i^ Tom. 6. contra Adamant. ^
Non dubitauit Dominus dicere hoc est corpus meum, eum daret fignum corporis
sui, The Lord doubted not to say this is my body, when he gave but the sign
of his body. And this exposition must needs be true, for Saint Paul says
plainly and expressly, 1. Cor. 11.26.28. That the Communicant does eat
bread, Ergo it remains bread after the words of consecration. For if it
were transubstantiance into the body of Christ, then were there no bread to
eat, but the body of Christ is the thing that should be eaten. But none do
eat the very body of Christ: for if every Communicant did eat the very
body of Christ naturally, carnally, and really (as they grossly suppose)
Christ should have a number of bodies, which inpalpably absurd and monstrous:
and beside then every Communicant should be saved; yet, even Judas himself
(which is known to be the ch^^^ of p^rdition:) for Christ says, He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life: John. 6.54. Indeed
the elect and godly do eat Christ, and drink Christ, but how? not carnally,
but spiritually, and by a true faith, apprehending Christ, and applying Christ
with all his benefits as firmly unto their souls, as the bread and wine is
applied to their bodies.

B^^^des, if Christ gave his body to be eaten really by his Disciples, at the
time of the Institution of this Sacrament, what was it that did hang on the
cross on the morrow? Moreover Saint Peter says, Act. 3.21. that as touching
the body of Christ, the Heavens must contain him unto the end of the world:
If his body be in heaven, and that he has a true body (as all men know he
has) how can it be that he should be both in heaven and in earth, as touching
his body at one time. For though he have a glorified body, yet he reteineth
the nature and property of a true body still, which can be but in one place
at once: August. 2. Johan. tract. 3.
And so says Augustine, saying, Corpus Domini in quo resurrexit vno tantum
loce esse potest: The body of the Lord wherein he rose again, can be but
in one place only. But the Papists to help themselves, are driven to this, to
say that there is a miracle in the Sacrament, and that Christ is there
miraculouslie: Whereto I answer, that if the bread be turned into the very
body of Christ by a miracle, then should it appear visibly so, for the nature
of every miracle is to be visible to the outward eye and senses: as when
Christ turned water into wine, it was visibly wine: When Moses rod was turned
into a Serpent, it was visibly a Serpent: And so if the bread be turned into
the very body of Christ, it is visibly his body, if you will hold a miracle
to be wrought therein. But Augustine answers there is no miracle in the
Sacrament, Augustine Tom. 3. de ^ Trinit. lib. 3. cap. 10.
saying thus: Honorem tanquam Religiosa poscunt habere stuporem tanquam mira
non poscunt: The Sacraments may have honor as things religious, but they are
not to be admired at as miracles. Theodoret also is most expressed against
Transubstantiation, Theodor. Dialog. 2.
for thus he says: Neque enim signa ^istica post sanctificationem recedunt a
natura sua manent enim in priore substantia, figura and forma, and videri, and
tangi possunt sicut prius. That is, The mystical signs after consecration,
do not depart from their nature, for they abide still in their former
substance, figure and form, and may be both seen and felt as before.

Gelasius a Pope himself, does say most plainly, that there is no
transubstantiation in the Sacrament: his words be these, Non desinit substantia
vel natura panis and viui, and certe Imago, Gelas. contra Eurich.
and similitude corporis and sanguinis, Christiin action miseriorum corporis
Christi celebratur. The substance or nature of bread and wine does not cease,
and verily there is the image and similitude of the body and blood of Christ
celebrated in the action of the mysteries of the body of Christ. And therefore
I conclude, that the Church of Rome which now is, is not the same which it was
in former times, but it is become degenerate and revolted from that former
puri^^^ which once was in it: And conseq^^ntly it is expressly manifest, that
that Church both may and does err.

The Church of Rome does further hold, that their Pope has authority to
depose kings and Princes: But by what Title? It is clear that in his either
so doing, or attempting to do he is both a notable Traitor unto God whose
authority he does claim and arrogate^, and unto Princes to whom he should
be subject. For the raising and pulling down, of Princes God has reserved to
himself alone and in his power: For it is he (not the Pope) that deposes the
mighty from their seats, and exalts them that are of low degree, Luke, 1.
It is he (not the Pope) that puts down Kings, and gives Kingdoms to
whomsoever he will. And it is he that testifies of himself, saying: Per me
Reges regnant, and principes dominantur, By me Kings reign, and Princes
bear dominion, Dan. 2.20. and cap. 4.14. and 22. Seeing therefore, It is God
that has this high authority proper to himself which way can the Pope claim
it, without injury and treason unto God? Will he claim it by reason of his
keys, and in his Apostolical right? That he cannot do: For he must
remember that the keys given, were the keys of the kingdom of heaven, Math.
16.19. And therefore by authority of the keys h^^ cannot meddle with
terrestrial kingdoms to open an entrance for any into them, or to shut out or
exclude any that be in them. And beside Saint Paul the Apostle does say
expressly both of himself, and of the rest of the Apostles, that how great
authority soever they have for the overthrowing of ^^^ang holds (that is, of
rebellious thoughts, and proud cence^^^^, and stiffenecked opinions seated in
men's hearts against God, as himself expounds in the same place) that all
their power and means to convert men is only by the sword of the spirit which
is the word of God, and by the power of the keys committed to them. In all
which their authority, given unto them from Christ, he confesses plainly, 2.
Cor. 10.4. That the weapons of their warfare, are not carnal, but mighty
through God, that is, spiritual: Which words do demonstrate, that by their
ecclesiastical ministry, they have clearly no civil authority committed
to them.

And moreover it is manifest, by the practice of the Apostles and all their
precepts (commanding all Christians to obey their Rulers, their Kings and
Princes, yea, though they were persecutors) that the Apostles never had any
such authority committed to them, Romans 13.1.2.3.4. 1. Pet. 2.13. Tit. 3.1. And
therefore it is undoubtedly true, that the Pope of Rome cannot claim it by any
such authority. Again, the Bishop of Rome can claim no more authority by
the power of the keys, or of binding and loosing, than any other Bishop
elsewhere may do, for the keys, that is to say, the power of opening and
shutting, and of binding and loosing, John, 20.22.23. were given to all the
rest of the Apostles as well as to Peter: And consequently for any Minister of
the Gospel thereby to claim^ authority above another is absurd: For they be
all indifferently joined in one commission, and therefore have al equal
authority, and therefore the Bishop of Rome by virtue of the keys has no
more authority than any other Bishop has: That is to say, none at all to
depose Princes, their duty is rather to practice obedience themselves to
them, and to teach the same obedience to others as the Apostles of Christ did.
Yea, Christ himself said, his kingdom was not of this world, Ioh. 18.36.
Himself likewise refused to be made a king, Ioh. 6.15. Himself paid tribute
unto Caesar, and commanded others to give the same, and all other duties of
subjection and obedience unto Caesar, Math. 22.21. If he were subject to
Caesar, it is a shame for the Bishop of Rome to exalt himself above Caesar.

But perchance the Bishop of Rome, will challenge this his Sovereign
Authority over Princes by donation from Constantine, or some other Christian
Emperor: Indeed such Fables sometimes he is not ashamed to utter, but let it
be the strongest way for him if you will, that some Christian Emperor was so
foolish as to give him his Empire (which is neither likely nor credible) yet
s^y I, it was neither lawful nor tolerable for him to take it, if he will
be a Minister of the Gospel, or a Successor of the Apostles. For Christ has
expressly forbidden his Apostles, and in them all the Ministers of his
Gospel, all such dominion, and civil jurisdiction, saying thus unto them, The
Kings of Nations reign over them, and they that be great amongst them, bear
rule or dominion: But it shall not be so with you. Matthew, 20, 25.26. Mark,
10.42.45. Luke, 22.25. and 26. verses.

Which words be most prohibitorie, and show that they may not reign like
kings of Nations, nor bear rule as great men in those Nations do: But they
must serve in the Church, and be diligent to discharge that great charge in
the Church which their Master Christ Jesus has laid upon them: And therefore
every way the Pope of Rome has no title, but is herein an usurper, and an
intruder, and a notorious and odious Traitor both to God and Princes. And
besides, all the ancient Churches have affirmed and acknowledged the supreme
authority of Princes, above and over all both Priests and people: And
therefore says Tertullian, Colimus Imperatorem vt hominem a Deo secundum,
Tertullian ad Scapulam.
and solo Deo minorem: We honor the Emperor as the next man to God, and
inferior to God only. And again he says, that Princes are A Deo secundi,
Tertul. in Apologet. ^
post cum primi, ante omnes, and super omnes. The second to God, the first next
after God, and before and over all men.

Optatus in like sort says, Optatus contr. Parmen. lib. 1^ Chrysostom. ad
populu^ Antioch. homil. 2. Gregor. epist. lib. 3. cap. 100. and cap. 103.
Super Imperatorem non est, nisi solus Deus qui fecit Imperatorem, There is
none above the Emperor, but God only which made the Emperor. And
Chrysostom says, Parem vllum super terram non habet^ He has no equal on
earth. And Gregory Bishop of Rome himselfelf affirms, That power is given to
Princes from heaven, not only over soldiers, but priests. And therefore I
conclude, that the Church of Rome which now is, is not the Church which once it
was, but is wonderfully fallen into corruption, and grown into pride, both
against God and his anointed Prince, and consequently not only may err, but
does err, and that most detestably and abhominably in the highest degree.

The Bishop of Rome does further hold, that he has authority from God to
forgive sins: and thereupon he sends forth his Charters of pardon, his
Bulls and Indulgences, to such as he means to assoyle. The Scribes in the
Gospel could say, None can forgive sins but God. Mar. 2.7. Job, 14.4. Esaias.
43.25. If therefore the Pope of Rome will take upon him to forgive sins (in
that sort he does) he must prove himself to be God, otherwise his actions
will not be warranted: how often in the Scriptures is it said of God that he
forgiueth iniquity and transgressions? ascribing that authority only to God and
to no other.

I need not recite any particular places, the whole book of God is plentiful
herein. I do not deny, but Ministers of the Gospel have power to bind and
to loose sinners (as Christ himself shows, Math. 16.) but how, and whom?
They can neither justify the unrighteous whom God abhors, nor yet condemn
the godly and faithful, whom God dearly loves: In as much therefore as they
cannot pardon such as God condemns, nor yet condemn such whom God acquiteth,
Romans 8.33.34. it is manifest that al their power of binding and loosing
sinners, is limited and bounded within the compass of Gods word, which they
may not pass: for if they do, they go beyond their warrant, and so all that
they do will be of no force. The incredulous and obstinately wicked persons,
they may by warrant of Gods word pronounce condemnation against, except they
do repent, and to the assuredly faithful repentant and godly persons, whose
centinuall care is to please God and walk in his ways, they may pronounce the
sentence of undoubted and certain salvation, because the word of God does
affirm as much: and this all the binding and loosing of sinners which they
have. For in all their pronunciations of pardons, and forgiveness of sins,
they must be sure they speak not in their own names, nor their own wills and
pleasures, but they must do it in the name of God, being first assured that
it is his word, will, and pleasure which they utter. But the Bishop of Rome
observes not the rule of Gods word to sqare and measure his pardon by: but
pardons whom he lift, and as he list, as if he were a God himself, having
absolute power in himself (without respect of Gods word or will) to do what
he list. Insomuch as Traitors and rebels against God and their lawful Princes,
he will not only pardon without exception, but he will abette them in their
deuilish devised, and persuade them forward in their damnable courses, till at
last (when it is too late for them to repent) they will (if they take not good
heed in time) feel the ^^art of it in hell torments together for ever. What
the religon of Rome is, may appear by this, that any man for money may get a
pardon for his sins: and then what sin need rich men fear to commit, when a
Popes pardon will saiue all* or how can it be otherwise than a religion of
licentiousnes, when for money a man may have a license of dispensation against
any sin whatsoever. These things be such open blottes to the Romish religion,
as that worthily every good and godly mind has it in detestation, and does
justly condemn it. Yet further will I prove, that the Church of Rome cannot
be the true Church possibly.

1 The Church of Rome does hold, that the divine and sacred Scriptures do not
contain all things necessary to salvation: but their unwritten traditions
must (forsooth) all be received with equal and like authority, for so has
their Council of Trent determined. Council, Trent. 1. decree. 4. Session.
Distin. 20. cap. in libellis. Distin in cap. in canonicis. Distin. 19. cap. sic
omnes.
And Pope Le^ the fourth fears not to pronounce with a loud voice, That he
that receives not without difference the Popish Cannons as well as the four
Gospels, believes not aright, nor holds the Catholic faith effectually. The
decretall Epistles also they number with the Canonical scriptures. And Pope
Agathe says, that all the sanctions and decrees of their Romish Sea are to be
taken as stablished by the divine voice. Which blasphemies who can abide* For
hereby they make both the Scriptures imperfect, and not so content, do
further add unto those Scriptures.

Wherein they commit two notable sins, first accusing the sacred and
canonical scriptures that they contain not al matters necessary to salvation:
which is directly contrary to the testimony of S. John, who says, that these
things are written that ye may believe, and that in believing ye may have life
eternal: and clean contrary to the testimony of Saint Paul, who says, That
the Scriptures (given by divine inspiration) are profitable to reprove, to
teach, to correct, to instruct, and perfect the man of God. 2. Tim 3.15. Ergo
the Scriptures or word of God written, is a true, sound, and perfect whole
doctrine, containing in it self fully all things needful for our salvation.
Yea Saint Paul says expressly to Timothy, That the Scriptures are able to
make him wise unto salvation. 2. Tim. 3.13. And therefore the Church of Rome
being clean contradictorie, does marueilously err: and therefore also we
need none of their unwritten traditions.

And again, how should we be assured that those traditions which they call
Apostolical, be Apostolical, considering them not written by the Apostles?
Augustine speaking hereof, says thus: Si qua retinuit Jesus Christus, August.
in epist ad Ianuar.
quis nostrum dicet hoc vel illud esse? Et si quis hoc dicat, quomodo probabit?
That is, If Jesus Christ have kept any thing close, which of us shall say that
it is this or that? And if any say it is this, how will he prove it? For all
the errors of the Church of Rome, shroud themselves under the harbor of
traditions. And Chrysostom says flatly, whatsoever is requisite for our
salvation, Chrysostom. in Math. 24. hom. 4: Chrysostom. in 2. These. 2.
is contained in the Scriptures. And again he says, All things be clear
and plain in the Scriptures, and whatsoever things be needful be manifest
there. And Jerome in the prologue of the Bible to Paulyne, after he had
recited the books of the new Testament and the old, says thus: Ierom in his
prolog of the Bible.
I pray thee (dear brother) among these live, muse upon these, know nothing
else, seek for none other thing. And again upon the books of the old and
new Testament: These writings be holy, these books be sound, there is none
other to be compared to these, whatsoever is beside these, may in no wise be
received amongst these holy things. Iero. upon Agge, 2.
And again he says, All other things which they seek out or invent at
their pleasure, without the authority and testimony of the Scriptures (as
though they were the traditions of the Apostles) the word of God cutteth off.
Let us therefore stand fast to the written word of God, and as for their
traditions, which they cannot prove but obtrude unto us without testimony of
Scriptures, let us contemn them. Athana^, contra gentiles*
For as Athanasius says, the holy Scriptures inspired from God, are sufficient
to all instruction of the truth. And as for the other point of the Papists in
equalling and adding of their traditions, their decretall Epistles and Canons,
to the pure and divine word of God, it is a blasphemy intolerable, and who can
endure it? For does not God say thus, Deu. 4.
Ye shall put nothing to the word which I command you, neither take ought
there from. Deu. 12.
Deuteronomy. 4. And again he says, whatsoever I command you, that take heed ye
do only to the Lord, put nothing thereto not take ought therefrom. And does
not S. John in his Revelation, Reave. 22.
say that if any man add to this thing God shall add unto him the plagues
which are written in this book and shall take away his part out of the book
of life. I conclude therefore that the Church of Rome which does not content
her self with the sacred and Holy Scripture (which the chaste spouse of Christ
evermore does) is not the true Church of God: for there she shows her self
to bear the mark of a strumpet. But when she proceeds and adds her own
traditions, Decretall Epistles, and Cannons to the word written: and makes
them to be of as good and equal authority as the Canonical and sacred
Scriptures themselves, What greater pride could have bin showed, or what higher
blasphemy? But these are the right notes of an adulteress, to equal hirself
with her husband. Yea, What should I say more? They hold that the authority
of the Church is above the Scriptures, which shows fully the notable pride
and spiritual whoredom of their Church.

2 The Church of Rome is Idolatrous, and therefore it is not the true Church.
They fall down before Idols and Images as the heathen did, and therefore
commit Idollatrie as the heathen did: I speak for the manner of their worship,
for the heathen how soever they worshipped not the true God, yet they thought
they worshipped the true God, and their meaning was to worship the the true God
in the Image or Idol, as the Papists likewise do mean: for they say, they be
not such fools as to think or believe that an Image or Idol (made of wood or
stone) could be God: neither were the heathen so foolish as to think or
believe that their Idolles or Images were God, (for they knew they were made of
wood or stone or such like) but (as they took it) they worshipped God in the
Image, as the Papists say they do: and therefore the case for the manner of
worship is all one: Again if the Papists do not worship the Idol or
Image, why do they bow down unto it? God commands saying: Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven Image, Exodus 20.
so that the very making of Images to represent God withal (who is a spirit
eternal and invisible) is Idollatry. Again he says: Thou shall not bow
down to them, nor worship them, etc. So that to bow down unto them (though
they be supposed to represent God) (...) Idollatrie, for God must be
worshipped in such sort as himself has prescribed, and not otherwise: and
that it is flat Idollatrie to worship God in any Image, is express and
manifest by the Children of Israel, when they made the golden Calfe to be a
representation of God, Exodus 32.
for the Tert shows that it was Idollatrie, for which many of them were
plagued and punished, and yet their meaning was to worship the true God in the
Calfe: for they were not so simple as to think or believe that that dead Idol
or Image was God, and therefore the Idollatrie of the church of Rome is as
gross and wicked as theirs was. Neither can the Papists help themselves in
their wonted distinction of (...) and (...) affirming that they give to Images
but Duliam that is service and to God Latriam that is worship, 2. Cor. 6.15.16.
showing thereby that both they worship God and serve Images: But how agrees
the temple of God with Images, says Paull: or what warrant have they to serve
Images beside God? When Christ him self says (it is written:) Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, Math 4.10 Deu. 9.13. and 10.20.
and him only shall thou serve.

And Paull the Apostle does likewise persuade expressly: that men should turn
from Idols or Images to serve the living God, (where the word Dulia is used)
whereby the Apostle does show that there is such an opposition between Images
and the service of God, that he that serves the one, cannot serve the other.
God himself disliketh Idolles and Images utterly, Abac. 1.
saying by his Prophet that they are so far from being Laymens Books (as
the Papists term them) that they are no better than teachers of lies. And
Saint John himself commands all Christians to keep themselves from Idols:
1. Ioh, 5.21.
Besides it is Idollatry to pray unto any but God: For Christ hiddeth when men
pray, not to call upon the Uirgin Mary, nor any other Saint departed this life
but upon God only: When ye pray (says he) say thus. Math. 6.
Our Father whinh art in heaven etc. Again Saint Paull says, how shall they
call upon him on whom they have not believed? Romans 10.14
declaring thereby that faith and prayer go together. We can call upon none
but we must consequently also believe on him: But we are to believe none but
God, therefore we may pray to none but God; and therefore the Church of Rome
calling upon Saints departed, commits gross Idollatry, for the Scripture
shows that God only is to be prayed unto. Besides, They that in their
Idolatrous Mass or Sacrament of the altar (as they term them) after a
certain mumbling of words by the Priest, there is no bread nor wine remaining
but the very body and blood of Christ, and that piece of bread which is showed
(for bread it still appears to be, for all their magical mourning) they
commanded to be adored and worshipped. To adore or worship any creature (such
as bread is) is Idolatry: the Papisticall Church does the same: Ergo it is
Idolatrous. I have proved it before, that it remains bread after
consecration, and that Christ cannot possibly be there as touching the
bodily substance because in that respect he is ascended up into heaven and
there sits on the right hand of God his Father, until he come to judge the
quick and the dead, and if they will not believe Divine testimonies therein:
Yet the authority of Cicero a heathen man might somewhat move them, for in one
place he says: Que^ tam Amentemesse putas qui illum quo vescator Deum credat
esse? That is, Cicero. lib de natura.
Whom do you think so mad as to believe that which he eats to be God.
Insomuch therefore as the Church of Rome does worship bread, as if it were God,
It is manifest they be gross Idollaters. And consequently their Church cannot
be the true Church of God on earth.

3 The Papists do not deny Christ in words, but if we examine them by
perticulars we shall find that in deed they do: as for example, we know that
the right faith believes Christ Jesus to be both God and man, which the Church
of Rome in words will so affirm: But urge them in this point of the
Sacrament, and then they bewray themselves, that they believe not Christ to
have a true body: for when they are preassed with this, that the body of
Christ cannot be both in heaven and in earth at once, and the self same time,
because it is against the nature of a true body so to be: then they become
vbiquitaries and say, that because the Godhead of Christ is every where,
therefore his humanity is every where. But this is no good consequent, for
the Godhead and humanity are of several nature. And if his body and flesh
were every where as his Godhead is: how is that true which the Angel spoke
saying surrexit non est hic. He is risen he is not here. For these words
shows that his body and flesh is not every where. Mat 28.6.
Again if he were every where in respect of his humanity, how is it true
that he ascended into heaven? For that word ascension does show that his
bodily presence did remove from one place to another, and then was it not in
that place from whence it did remove.

Lastly it is the property of a Divine nature to be every where, and
therefore whilst they defend this vbiquitie of the flesh of Christ: It is as
much as if they should say that the flesh of Christ is turned into God (which
is a groosse Herisie. And thus it appears, that the Papists do with the
Eutichians, deny that Christ has a true body when they hold that (contrary
to the nature of a true body) it may be in diverse places at once: yea, every
where: and therefore denying Christ to have a true body, they are not the true
Church: and so much for their error concerning the person of Christ.

4 Now for the office of Christ, (for his person and his office be two chief
things which we are all to regard.) The Papists will yield with us that it
consists in these three points, namely: that he is both a Prophet, a Priest,
and a king. This I say in words they will acknowledge, but in deeds and
verity they do not, for in respect that Christ is our Prophet which should
and did reveal his Fathers will unto the world, we ought to be content with
his voice, and search no further then he has revealed in his Scriptures. But
the Papists are not so contented, but they hold that their unwritten
traditions and Popish Cannons, must also be received upon like peril of
damnation, as before it showed concerning the Priesthood of Christ. It
consists in two things, namely the offering up of himself once for a full
perfect and sufficient Sacrifice: And his intercession with his Father, which
yet remains also and shall do to the worlds end. Both these the Papists
annihilates as I will prove. First concerning the Sacrifice and Oblation of
Christ, there is noe doubt but being once done upon the Cross, it was a most
full, perfect and satisf^ctorie Sacrifice to deliver both a culpa and pana:
from the guiltines and the punishment incident to that guiltines: for otherwise
how should Christ be Jesus, that is a Savior, Mat. 1.^1^
if he did not deliver us from the punishment, as well as from the sin. But the
Papists hold that Christ has obtained by his passion, remission for our sins
going before Baptism: but sins committed after Baptism, that his passion
has taken away only the guiltines, but that the punishment remains
notwithstanding, which is to be paid in purgatory (as they say) and to be
redeemed by our own satisfactions, and so they make the punishment due to
sin (which is indeed eternal in hell) to be but temporary in purgatory
upon satisfactions (as they have devised). But what can a man give for the
ransom of his soul? And it appears before, even by the report of Augustine
that the Catholic faith believes in Purgatory, such as they have invented.
1. Ioh. 1, 6^*
For as Saint John says the blood of Christ is that which purges us from all
sin, and that his most precious blood is the only Purgatory we hold, and
does deliver his people from the punishment due to sins, as well as from
sins: for our punishment was laid upon him and with his stripes are we
healed, Esaias. 53.
as the Prophet Esaias speaks: Again the Papists do say they offer up Christ
in their Mass, which Mass they say is propitiatory, both for the living and
the dead: First for the dead it cannot be propitiatory nor do good unto, for
as the tree falls, Eccle. 1^.
so it lies: and as a man is found to die, so be goes either to heaven or to
hell. A third place which the Papists call purgatory there is not. And if any
be in heaven their Masses can do them no good: for they enjoy all good
already: And if any be in Hell, Luk* 1^.
we know that Ex inferno nulla redemptio, from hell there is no redemption.
And therefore for the dead it cannot be propitiatory, nor any thing else
availeable: And for the living it cannot be propitiatory. Yea it is blasphemo
us and derogatorie to the passion of Christ once for all, for in as much as he
is a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck, he is to die but once
which he did upon the Cross: whose obligation being perfect (as the Author to
the Hebrews speaks: Heb. 5. and 6.7. and 8, and 9,
) needs not any other help (as of mask or whatsoever else) to make it
perfect: yea it is wicked, gross, blasphemous, and damnable to suppose any
imperfection in the sacrifice and ablation of Jesus Christ, for God twice cried
with a voice from heaven saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased. Math. 3.17 Math, 17.8


5 As touching the other part of his Priesthood: namely, Romans 8.34. Heb, 7.25.
his intercession with his father, whereby he makes request unto God for us,
although the Papists ascribe them chiefly unto Christ, yet what do they else
but clean rob him of it, when they associate others with him. As namely the
virgin Mary, They call her the Queen of heaven; the gate of Paradise; their
life and sweetenes; the Treasurer of Grace; the refuge of sinners; and the
Mediatrix of men. I pray what do they now leave to Christ: Yea when they say
thus to her,

O felix puerpera nostra pians scelera, iure matris impera Redemptori, that is,
O happy mother satisfieng for our sins, by thy motherly authority command
the Redeemer.

What greater blasphemy to Christ could they have uttered? It is clear that
saint Paul says there is but one God, and one Mediator between; God and men,
the Man Christ Jesus, 1. Tim. 2.5. But the Papists be not content with him,
but will have many Mediators. Saint Paul says moreover, that by him we have
b^ldnes and access unto God, Ephesians. 3.12. And therefore what foolish fear is it
of the Papists to appoint to themselves other Mediators? Since therefore the
Church of Rome does not repute the once Oblation of Jesus Christ, and his
Intercession to be perfect, but accuse them of imperfection (as appears by
their doctrines) it cannot possibly be the true Church. Christ himself bids
to ask in no other name than in his, and promises that whatsoever shall be
asked in his name, it shall be done, Ioh. 14.13.14. Chrysostom, Chrisose.
homil. 12. de Cana^neae.
speaking of the woman of Canaan, who though she were a sinner was hold to
come unto Christ, says thus, En prudentiam huius mulieris non precatur Iacobum
non supplicat Iohanem, non adit ad Petrum, nec Apostolorum caesum respicit, aut
vllum eorum requirit, sed pro his omnibus penitentiam sibi comitem adiungit and
ad ipsum fontem progreditur. Behold the wisdom of this woman. She does not
pray James, she does not beseech John, she goes not to Peter, she looks
not to the company of the Apostles, neither does request any of them, but for
all this she takes repentance for her companion, Iadem ^mil.
and goes to the very fountain it self. And again he says, that to have
access unto God, Nihil opus est atriensi seruo vel intercessore, sed dic
miserere mei Deus, is enim te audit quocunque sis loco and vndecunque
innocetur. VV have no need of any Courtly attendant or intercessor, but say,
have mercy upon me O God, for he hears thee in what place so ever thou art,
and from what place soever thou call upon him. Ambrose likewise answeareth
the carnal reason of the Papists, Ambro. in Rom, 1.
solent (says he) misera vti excusatione dicentes, per istos posse ire ad Deum
sicut per comites itur ad reges, ideo ad regum per tribunos and comites itur
quia homo vtique est rex: ad deum autem, quem vtique nihil latet, suffragatore
non est opus sed mente deuota. Vbicunque enim lelis locutus fuerit and
respondebit illi. That is, They are wont to use a pityfull excuse saying, by
these (Saints.) They may have access unto God, as by Earls there is access
to Kings, Therefore is it that by Officers and Earls access is made to the
King, because the King himself is a man. But to come to God (from whom nothing
is hid) there is no need of a spokesman, but of a devout mind: for
wheresoever such a one speaks to him, he will answer him. The Church of Rome
therefore which accounts not of the sufficiency and perfection of that one
Oblation of Christ, nor of his continual intercession: cannot possibly be the
true Church.

6 The Papists in words will not deny but Christ is a King, which has all
power in heaven and in earth: But indeed it appears they do exile and banish
him out of his kingdom, or at least leave him but a small portion or rather
none at all: for in respect that he is a spiritual King and the King of his
Church, Iam. 4.12.
he is also (as Saint James speaks) the only law giver thereunto, and
therefore-by his laws only, the Church is to be governed, which they cannot
abide, for they add their Popish cannons, constitutions, and customs, whereby
they will have the Church governed: yea they will have these take place though
they utterly displace the word of God, for the maintenance of them. Secondly
Christ only is to reign in the consciences of men, and yet the Pope claims
power to bind men's consciences by his laws, statutes, and decrees. Thirdly
he claims most traitorously to be the head of the whole universal Church,
which title by way of prerogative is given and attributed only to Jesus Christ
(to whom it only appertains. Ephe. 1.22.
) But before I proceed any further herein, I demand of the Pope and Papists:
when and by what right he their proud Pope takes up on him this title to be
head of the Church or universal Bishop over all the Christian world (by virtue
of which title he takes upon him to rule as he list, and to do what he list.)
First to claim it as successor to Peter, is impossible for that Peter the
Apostle, never had any such title, prehemince, or authority over the rest of
the Apostles. Mat. 16.18.


It is true that Christ said to Peter (after he had confessed Christ to be
that Christ the son of the living God.) Thou art Peter and upon this rock
will I build my Church. These words hitherto give no superiority to Peter
above the rest: only they show that the Church is builded non super Petrum sed
super Petram: not upon the person of Peter but upon the rock: and upon what
rock? namely upon that Christ Jesus whom Peter confesses to be the son of
the living God. For that confession of Peter concerning Jesus to be that
Christ the son of the living God, is the rock whereupon the Church is
builded: for (as Saint Paull expounds and affirms.) Other foundations can
no man lay, 1. Cor. 3.11
but that which is laid already, namely Jesus Christ: And in another place he
says expressly: 1. Cor. 10.4
that that rock was Christ: And Christ himself affirms likewise, Mat. 7.24.
that he that hears his words and does them is likened to one that builds
his house upon a rock, showing thereby that he, and his words, and Doctrine be
the rock, against which the gates of hell shall never prevail. Agreeably
whereunto speaks Saint Paull again, Ephesians. 2.20
when he says that the Church is builded upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus himself being the head stone in the
corner. Where then shall we find that Peter was made Prince of the Apostles
to rule over all the rest, Mat. 16.19
as the Pope now does: The Papists answer that in the next words, when
Christ gave unto Peter by speaciall name, the keys of binding and loosing, he
thereby made Peter the Prince and universal Bishop of the whole Church. But
hereunto I say, that Christ therein gave no authority more to Peter than to
the rest, that is at this time: The keys were not given to him nor to the
rest, only there was a promise that they should be given: for the words be not
in the present tense, Do tibi I give unto thee: But in the future tense, Dabo
tibi I will give unto thee, which promise of Christ was afterward truly
performed, and when it was performed, the keys, Ioh. 20.22.23.
that is the power of binding and loosing sinners, was given not only to
Peter, but to Peter and all the rest together, as Saint John in his Gospel
clearly declares and avoucheth. Now because Peter was the man that gave
answer for himself and the rest, and so both Cyprian and Augustine do
expound and declare it: And therefore neither in the promise of the keys, nor
yet in the receipt of the keys, by Peter did he receive any more authority or
superioritye than the rest of the Apostles did. I grant he was called Primus
because he was of the first that was called to the Apostleship, or because he
was the first of all the Apostles that confessed Christ to be the Messiah and
Son of the living God, or because he was readiest always to speak and
answer. But all this, does not prove that he had authority over the rest, or
a larger Commission than the rest: Yea the words of their Commission do show
the contrary, namely that they had all equal authority, for it was thus made
unto them all indifferently, and without putting a difference, namely, Go ye
and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you, Math. 28.19.20. Run over all that remains written and
you shall find that Peter was one of the twelve equal with the rest, and
their fellow but not their Lord: Where was Peter's superiority, when Paul
reproved him to his fate? Gallathians, the second Chapter, and the eleauenth
verse, when being accused, he pleads no privilege, but for the clearing of
himself, and satisfaction of others, he answers to that accusation?

Where was Peter's authority over the rest, when the rest sent him and John into
Samaria? Acts, the eleauenth Chapter, the third and fourth verses: and also in
Acts, the eighth Chapter, and the fourteenth verse. In that he went at their
sending, he plainly shows that he had no principality over them.

Where was his pre-eminence or authority, when in a Council held at Jerusalem,
where the Apostles were, yet not Peter, but James, ruled the action, and
according to his sentence was the Decree made, Luke, 22.25.26. etc.

Yea, I say moreover, that when there was contention amongst the Apostles, who
should be chief amongst the, Christ told them plainly, that kings of Nations
might bear rule over their people, and that great men under those kings might
likewise exercise authority over other, but so might not they do one over
another, Luke 25.26. etc. But the greatest amongst them should be as the least,
and as a servant: yea, should be the least, and should be a servant, as it is
declared in Matthew, 20.25, 26 and in Mark, 10.42, 43.

If the greatest must be as the least, what authority has he above the
least? For then has the least as great authority as the greatest: That is,
they been all equal authority. I marvel therefore what the Pope and Papists
mean, contrary to the tenor of the Commission of Christ, contrary to the
practice of Peter himself, and contrary to this decree made by Christ of their
equallity, to say notwithstanding that Peter was Prince of the Apostles, and
had authority over them all, when as indeed, it is manifest by all the
Scriptures and course of his life, he neither claimed nor had any authority
over the rest, more than the rest had over him, and consequentlye the Pope of
Rome can never claim that as successor to Peter, which was never in Peter his
supposed predecessor.

The Papists perceauing that the scriptures make nothing for them, but against
them, (because they would have the matter colored with some Antiquity, or
show of Antiquity at the least:) have devised some counterfeit and forged
Authors, (as Amacletus, and Amissetus and such like) to speak something for
them. But the falsehood of all those, is discovered by other writers (if they
be well marked.) In Cyprians time it was deemed a matter odious for any to
take upon him to be a Bishop of Bishops, as appears by that voice which he
cried in the Counsel of Carthage. It was likewise decreed in the Affricans
Counsel that none should be called Priest of Priests, or Archpriest, or any
such like. The Counsel of Nice did decree that the Bishop of Rome should keep
himself within the compass of his province and not exceed his bounds, as
likewise the Bishop of Antioch, Jerusalem, and Constantinople were ^^ do the
like. Other Counsels did affirm as much, (which because they are sufficiently
known I need not to recite. But they all show that at those times the Bishop
of Rome had no greater Jurisdiction than within his own Province, and that he
could not meddle within the Provinces of other Bishops. And Jerome of his time
says, Hierome ad Euagrium.
that the Bishop of Engubium, or any other the least Sea, is equal to the
Bishop of Rome. The Title of Uniuersall Bishop, was much desired of John Bishop
of Constantinople, and much contention there was about it. But it was never
obtained of the Bishop of Rome until the time of Boniface the third, who
procured that Title of Phocas that wicked Emperor of Rome: after which, the
Bishops of Rome never ceased still to augment their dignity, and increase the
pride of their Romish Sea: And even at that very first time when John Bishop of
Constantinople, sought to get that Title of Uniuersall Bishop to his Sea,
Gregory then Bishop of Rome, vide Greg. lib. 4. epist. 32.34, 36, 38.39. and
lib. 6. epist. 24.28.29, 30.
did himself stand against it mightily, and affirmed that he could be no
less than Antichrist whosoever did take unto him that Title. First therefore
it is manifest, that until the time of Gregory Bishop of Rome, an universal
Bishop was not heard of in the Church, and Boniface the third was the first
Bishop of Rome that got this title which was above 600. years after Christ.
And besides how will the Bishop of Rome that now is, avoid himself to be
Antichrist, Since by the express determination of Gregory Bishop of Rome his
predecessor, he is condemned for Antichrist, in as much as he has this
Title, and is not ashamed thereof. For what is this else, but to come in the
place of Christ, and consequently to be Antichrist, usurping the prerogative
Title of Christ Jesus? But the Pope says, that though he claim thus to be
the head of the Church, yet he does not name himself to be otherwise than a
Ministerial head, and to be Christ's Vicar on earth. But why will he be so
arrogant as to challenge this Title without ^^^full ^onueyance made unto him
from Christ, which he cannot show. For who dare take upon him to be a
^i^uetenant to an earthly Prince without S^st^rs Pattents first had from the
Prince. Again, the Church of Christ on earth, being as a chaste Spowse to her
Husband and head Christ Jesus: neither can or ought to acknowledge any other
for her head, than that her husband to whom she has plighted her troth.
Lastly, there can be no successor but when the Predecessor is gone and
absent, but Christ is always present with his Church according to his own
words, Behold I am with you to the end of the world, Matthew, 28.20. And
therefore he can have neither Successor nor Vicar to represent his person, or
to guide his Church: For his spirit (since his bodily ascension) is the guide
and gouernesse of the Church in his room, John, 14. and 15. and 16. For no man
mortal is appointed thereunto.

I conclude therefore that for all these causes the Church of Rome can not
possibly be the true Church.

7 The Church of Rome does not ascribe Justification to faith in Christ Jesus
only, but says that men's works be meritorious, and to them partly is
Justification to be ascribed, and so they make men's imperfect works to be
causes of salvation, which is a gross error even in the foundation or
fundamental point. Saint Paul says, That all are justified freely by his
grace, Romans 3.24. If they be Justified gratis, freely, (as he affirms) then
are they Justified withoot any desert of theirs. And Saint Paul sets down
the Axiom in the Conclusion, We hold that a man is justified by faith
without the works of the Law, Romans 3.28. And the Apostle in very many places
(whereof mention shall he made hereafter) does expressly exclude Weeks from
being any causes of our Justification: (...) indeed they are the effects
thereof: And therefore it appears to be a true position, that Faith only
does Justify, in as much as Justification is (in the sight of God) imputed to
our Faith, not to our Works: For Abraham believed God, and that was imputed to
him for righteousness, as Paul speaks Romans 4.8. And he shows that Abraham
was not justified by Works before God, for if Abraham were justified by works,
then should he have wherein to glory, but not before God, and because he had
not wherein to glory before God, therefore he was not justified in the sight
of God. I grant that saint James in his second Chapter does say that Abraham
was justified by his Works, when he offered up his Son Isaac at Gods
commandment: And likewise that he says, that a man is justified by Works,
and not by Faith only: But before whom is he justified by Works? Not before
God, but before men, that is to say, his works do declare unto men that says
whereby he is justified before God: And that this is the meaning of saint
James may appear by that his saying, where he says, Show unto me thy Faith by
thy Works, thou say thou have faith, that is not enough, thy words does not
prove it, thy works will, therefore (says he show me thy faith by thy works.
This word ( Show me) does manifest what manner of justification he speaks
off, namely, that he speaks of a justification before men. For it is God that
respects the faith of a man, whereby only he is justified in his sight: And
it is men which respect the works, whereby indeed they testify unto the
world their faith to be good before God. For (as saint James says truly)
faith without works is but a dead faith, and not good, nor found, nor
available. But faith and works must go together, and indeed where a true
faith is, there good works will show themselves as the fruits thereof. And thus
Paul and James are to be reconciled, which thing Thomas Aquinas a schooleman
of the Papists does himself plainly testify saying, that Christ Jesus does
justify effectiue effectually: Faith does justify apprehensiue, by taking
hold of Christ: and good works do justify declaratiue, that is, do declare
unto men their justification before God: And so it is clear, that howsoever, a
true faith cannot be without works, as fire cannot be without light and
heat, yet our justification before God is to be imputed to our faith, not to
our works: as warmth is to be imputed to the heat of the fire, not to the
light of the fire. For so says saint Paul expressly, That God imputes
righteousness without works, Romans 4.6. And again, That it is by grace not of
works, Romans 11.6. And again, Not of works, Romans 9.11. Again, saint Paul
tells the Saints at Ephesus, that God has ordained men to walk in good
works, yet he says that they may not trust to be saved by them, for he
affirms, and assures them, That they are saved by grace, and not by their
works, Ephesians. 28.9.10. Again, he speaks in the person of himself, and of all
the children of God, and says, that we are saved not by works, but by his
predestination and grace, Hillary in Mat. cap. 8
2. Tim: 1.9. And again, God is our Savior, not for any-workes which we have
done, but according to his own mercy he has saved us, Tit. 3.5. And diverse
other like places be: Wherefore saint Hillary has these very words (which we
hold) Sola fides iustificat, Faith only does justify. Amb. in Romans 3.
And Ambrose among other sentences has this, Non iustificari hominem apud Deum
nisi per fidem, That a man is not justified before God but by Faith. Which is
as much, as Faith only does justify before God. Saint Basil does say, that
this is perfect and sound rejoicing in God, when a man does not boast of his
own righteousness, but knows that he wants in himself true righteousness,
and that he is justified by faith only. And Gregory Nazianzen says, that to
believe only, is righteousness. And therefore it is evident both by the express
testimony of the Scriptures, and of the Fathers, that we hold the truth in
this behalf, and that the Church of Rome is in a marvelous error. It is true
which is written, that every man shall be rewarded according to his works:
because the faith of men is esteemed and estimated by their works, as the free
is known by the trust: But there is no Text of scripture to show, that any
man is saved propter merita, for his works or merits, but many Texts of
scripture to the contrary, as before appears. For when we have done all that
we can, yet we must say (as Christ commands) We are unprofitable servant,
Luke, 17.10. And therefore the Papists which teach works meritorious, yea
works of supererogation availeable to salvation, as well for others as for
themselves, hold not the right faith, and consequently are not the true Church.

8 But if I should show all the corruptions of the Romish Church, I should be
infinite, neither am I able to number them. I will therefore conclude all this
discourse only with this argument following. The Pope of Rome being the head
of that Church, is that famous Antichrist that was foretold by Paull the
Apostle, and that is presignified in the revelation of Saint John, Ergo it is
impossible that the Church of Rome, should be the true Church, for the Church
of Antichrist (though it boast never so much) cannot be the true Church though
it would feign be so accounted, as many an harlot desires to be reputed an
honest woman, one mark of that Antichrist, Paull shows to be this: 2. These.
2.8. that he should exalt him self above every one that is called God: he
does not say above God, but above every one that is called God: John. 10.34.
Now those whom the Scriptures calls God we know to be such as be the Judges
and Magistrates of the earth, Psa. 81.6. who for that they be in the place of
God and his Lieutenants, are vouchsafed (in Scripture) this high and Honorable
title is to be called Gods. That the Pope of Rome is such a one as does exalt
himself above any such God of the Earth, namely above all Princes and
Magistrates is a thing so well known as I need not to prove it: himself by
his wicked practices, and his Jesuits Seminaries, and Patrons do in their
books manifest the same unto the world.

2 An other mark of Antichrist Paul sets down to be this, namely: 2. These.
2.4. that he should sit in the Temple of God as God, showing himself to be
God. And I pray what does the Pope else but sit in the Temple of God as God:
When claiming the Apostolic Sea, he takes upon him to be the head of the
Church and to rule it as he list: to erect Princes, and to depose them again
from their thrones: that he cannot err: that he can forgive sins: matters
that belong peculiarly to God and to no other? What does he else but by these
demonstrations show himself to be God, insomuch as he arrogateth to himself
most proudly the authority of God himself: which things the Sixth book of the
Decretals, the Clemantines, and the Extrauagants do abundantly testify. For
these men were not content with that which Angelicus wrote in his Poetry (the
beginning whereof is, Papa stupor mundi, the Pope is the wonder of the world.
Nec Deus es, nec homo, sed neuter, and inter vtrumque. Thou art not God, ne art
thou man: But neuter mixed of both. But these Popes were bold to take unto
themselves the very name of God, and to accept it given of others, according
as Pope Sixtus the fourth, when he should first enter into Rome in his dignity
papal, had made for him a Pageant of Triumph, cunningly fixed upon that gate
of the City he should enter at, having written upon it this Blaspemous verse,
dedicated unto him.

Oraclo vocis mundi moderaris habenis,
Et merito in terris, crederis esse Deus.
By Oracle of thine own voice the world thou gouernest all.
And worthy lie a God on Earth men think and do thee call.
Yea shall I say more? The Pope (if any man in the world) does take upon him
such more than Luciferian pride (howsoever to deceive the world with words,
he calls himself seruus seruorum Dei, a servant of the servants of God) that
he exalts himself above God himself and his worship: for he takes upon
him to be above the Scriptures and to dispense with them at his pleasure, and
to allow matters contrary unto them: which God himself (whose will is
immutable and revealed therein) will not do: for he and his word will not be
contrary. Again hereby it is manifest that he exalts himself above God,
inasmuch as there is less danger and punishment, for any that breaks any of
Gods laws, than for one that breaks any the least constitution of the Pope.
Moreover, He claims authority in three places: Heaven, Earth, and
Purgatory, and that is the reason he wears a triple Crown: so that by this
account and claim, he has more and larger extended authority than God
himself: for such a third place as purgatory is, he knows not of. And what
do these things but manifest him to exalt himself even above God and all that
is worshipped?

3 Antichrist is described to be such done as should come in lying signs and
false miracls, and wonders 2. These. 2.9. (whereby, if it were possible, he
would deceive the very elect.) And that this is verified in the Pope and
Popish Church, as all men know that have been acquainted with their
knaueries, deceits, and frauds, so let their Aurea Legenda and book of
Trophes testify to the whole world.

4 S. Paul 2. These. 2.8. Shows by his name that he that he speaks of should
be O'anomos, that is, a lawles person, or one subject to no law which is also
manifestly verified in the Pope, for no laws will hold him, neither divine nor
humane, for he claims to be above them all, and to change and alter what he
list, and when he list, and to whom he list: which the gloss upon the
decretalls does testify, saying thus of the Papists, Legi non subiacet vlli,
that is, He is not subject to any law. What is this else but to be O'anomos, a
lawles person even the very same whom Saint Paull speaks of.

5 Saint John in his Revelations does portraye Antichrist and his seat by the
name of the great whore, with whom have committed fornication the kings of the
Earth, and the Inhabitants of the Earth have bin drunk with the wine of her
fornication. This woman is that great City which has dominion over the kings
of the earth at the time of this Revelation as Saint John expressly affirms.
Reuela. 17.18. It is well known that there was then no other City which
reigned over the kings of the earth but only Rome: And therefore Rome only is
and must needs be the Sea of Antichrist, for no other can be by this evident
and plain description of Saint John, for Rome was the only City of the
world, that reigned over the kings of earth, the head whereof was then the
Emperor, but now the Pope: for the condition of the first beast (namely of the
Roman Empire civil) is altered and changed into an Ecclesiastical and
Roman Empire.

6 Saint John in his Reave. 13.1^. saw a beast rising out of the Earth which had
two Hours like the Lamb: but he spoke like the Dragon, and then all that is
spoken of this beast does fitly and only agree to that man of Rome the Pope,
who though in show he were the Lamb, for what is more mild or humble than to
call himself, the servant of the servants of God? Yet indeed he plaieth the
part of the Dragon or Devil, having learned this cunning of Satan, who though
he be never so bad a spirit: yet will transform himself into an Angel of
light to deceive souls, 2. Cor. 11.14. as the Apostle shows. But here is
wisdom says Saint John in that Revelation: Let him that has any wit count
the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is 666.
Now because the number of this wicked beast contains six hundredth sixty and
six Ireneus thinks that this Antichristian beast should be (...) that is a
man of Italy, for the number of the beast is set down in great letters, and
this Greek word ( Lateines) does make it up the just number of 666. which is
the number of the beasts name. If any do think, that though this Revelation
were written in Greek, as being the more known and common language, yet that
it was uttered to Saint John in Hebrew, because the Hebrew tongue is the Holy
tongue: and that John himself was an Hebrew or Jew by nation, and that
likewise diverse Hebrew words are found in the Revelation: Whose opinion is not
unlikely but very probable, then let him seek out an Hebrew word which
contains that just number, and herein be needs not to search far or to
study much upon the matter, for the Hebrew word (...) (that is Romanus a man
of Rome, in English) does in those Hebrew letters contain the just number of
666. which is the number of the name of that Antichristian beast. And so by the
number of the name to be accounted, either by Greek letters, or by Hebrew
letters, it is perfectly agreeing to that man of Rome the Pope: all the marks
agreeing to Antichrist (whatsoever they be) are found fully and only
accomplished in the Pope, and therefore there is no doubt but he is that
notable Antichrist, of who^ Paull and Saint John in his Revelation do testify,
and consequently the Church of Rome, being not the true Church of Christ, but
contrariwise, the visible Church of Antichrist is justly forsaken, and for ever
to be forsaken of all Christians as they tender their salvation in Jesus
Christ, to whom only they have betrathed themselves, and to whom they must
remain constant for evermore, which God grant us all to do. Amen.

Against Schism and Schismatic Synagogues, CHAP. VI.
MAny there be who of a godly and zealous mind, do in good sort seek for
Reformation and for that Church government, which Christ himself has
instituted in his Church, whom I neither dare, nor do remove: others there
be, that seek Reformation amiss, with venomous and (...) tongues, railing,
and reuiling against those which with stand it, which things do neither grace
themselves, nor yet the cause which they would prefer, other some there be,
who to make the cause of reformation odious, do say that it abolisheth her
Majesty's supreme government and authority in causes ecclesiastical: I would
wish all men to speak the truth, and to seek the preferment of Gods truth in
a dutiful, peacable, and charitable sort, let the cause be made no worse than
it is, for my part I desire no more, then every Christian ought, namely that
the truth of God should carry the pre-eminence (whatsoever it be.

And I would to God that all malice and contention) all of all parts would grow
more charitablye affected both in their words and in their writings, one
toward another: for so would this controversy sooner come to an end, and the
more speedily be decided. Others there be (who for that in so long time they
cannot see their desired discipline and Church government to be established,
run from our Church, and make a schism and separation from us, erecting
Disciplne by their own authority, condemning our Church to be no Church,
that they may make their detestable Scisme the more allowable: these are the
Brownists and Barrowists, who will not stay the chief Magistrates pleasure
for the establishing thereof, nor yet allow unto us any Church in England, but
themselves, But they (for against them I deal) you must understand that a
Church may be, yea a true Church may be and is, though it have neither
Elders, nor Deacons, nor Disciplines in it. For we read in Act. 2. ver.
41.42.43.47. of an ass^mblie of people of Jerusalem, that received the word of
God and believed, and which are expressly called a Church, (and who can or dare
deny them to be the true Church of God, since the Holy Ghost does so testefie of
them? and yet at that time no Deacons were chosen, nor consistories of Elders
erected. For they were not erected till afterward. And therefore a true Church
of God may be: though as yet it have not these, for this desired Discipline is
not an essential part of the Church, for it does but resemble the wall of a
City, or an hedge or ditch about a vineyard, and it is a City though the wall
be wanting, and it is a vineyard though the hedge or ditch be wanting: though
so much the less fortified I grant. In as much therefore as we have the
preaching of Good holy word, and the right administration of the Sacraments
(which be the essential marks of the true Church.) None ought to forsake our
Church for any other defect, corruption, or imperfection. For there may be
corruptions both in Doctrine and Discipline some, and yet the Church where they
be, the true Church of God. Admit (if they will) that Ministers in the Church
of England be not rightly created and brought into the Church, will they
therefore count they be no Ministers? By as good an argument they may say^ that
he that is brought and borne into the world not according to the right course
or order of nature, but otherwise (as by ripping of his Mothers belly) is no
man, for the one comes as unorderly into the world as the other does into the
Church, I am sure the corrupt ordination of a Minister does not prove him to
be no Minster: Neither does any other corruption in our Church take away the
life and being of a Church: for if a man be diseased and full of corruptions,
Will any man therefore say he is no man? They say we do not only want the
right Discipline; but we have also put a wrong Discipline in the place
thereof. But what of thi^: The error then I confess is great, but yet not such
as does make a Nullitie of our Church, so long as it holds Christ Jesus, the
life and soul of his Church, and is ready to reform her error, whenever by
good proof it shall be manifested unto her. In the mean time their argument
is nothing worth, for if a man loose a leg or arm; yet none will deny him to
be a man, for all this blemish or defect, yea though he put a wodden leg
insteede of his leg which he wants, yet he remains a man still, because
his principal parts remain. So though we want that Discipline, yet we have
the principal parts of the Church, namely the right preaching of the word of
God and administration of Sacraments and therefore a true Church of God
undoubtedly. And if we have a true Church, though not a perfect church let the
Brownists and Barrowists consider from whence they are fallen, for if the
Church of Christ be the body of Christ, as Saint Paull affirms: * what (...)
they else but by their schism and separation sent themselves from the body of
Christ? and then let them remember whose members they be until they be
^^^nised. Let them no longer for sh^^^e charge ou^ Church with Idolatry, except
they were better able to prove it, which neither they nor all the wor^ shall
(...). To say (as they say) that a set form of prayer used in the Church and
exhibited unto God, the prayer being framed according to the rule of Gods word
is Idolatry: is detestable. For by as good reason they may condemn al prayer
made unto God by the Preacher or Pastor of the Congregation, which they will not
do: And besides all the reformed Churche^ in Christendom have a set form of
public prayers for public meetings and Congregations.

They say that we observe Saints days, and dedicate Churches unto them, but
they should show that we do these things in Honor of the Saints, else have
they no reason to that (...) our Church with Idolatrye (as wickedly they do:)
for the Statute it self does express, that our Church does call them
Holy Days, not for the Saints sake, but for the Holy exercises used upon them
in the public assemblies. Again: True it is, that diverse Churches amongst us
are called by the name of those Saints they are dedicated unto: But to say
therefore we do Dedicate Churches unto them, is very ridiculous. For when we
call Saint Peter's Church, or Saint Paul's Church: It is but to Distinguish them
from other Churches by their names.

In Athens there was a place which bare the name of Mars, and Saint Luke in
Act. 17. calls it Mars ^^xeete, so any (...) ^^^e^^re so foolish, or so fond,
as to say therefore be commits Idolatry, or that therefore be Dedicated
that place to that heathen God of battle. Done I think will be so wicked or
absurd.

Moreover it is true that we observe Fasting days: But therein we observe no
Romish fasts, nor place therein the worship of God, nor the Remission of our
Sins, nor the merits of Eternal life (as the Papists do). That the
Politic laws of this land which ^^^out that men shall not eat flesh upon
certain days, do it in respect of the Commonwealth, as to maintain
Navigations so much the better, and for the spare of the breed of young cattle,
appointing moreover a pennaltie for such as shall take the days to be
observed as meritorious Romish fasts.

I therefore wish them to cease their slander against this Church, and to cease
their damnable schism, and to be reconciled to that Church of ours, from
whence they have foolishly departed, for how imperfecte a Church soever it be
(whose imperfections God cure in his good time, yet shall they never be able
to show otherwise but that the Church of England, is the true Church of God,
from which it is utterly unlawful to make a separation, God for give us al,
and reconcile us unto him. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by John Danter, and are to be sold by William Barley, at
his shop in Gracious street over against Leaden Hall.


