A motion to the East India Company by Thomas Smethwike (an Adventurer with
them) upon the reasons following.
WE have now in India upon the old stocks account and charge by the Committees
own showing, 13 good ships of 5500 tonns, besides 860 tons of trading ships
and certain frigots, etc.

Whereof 5 of 2200 tons arrived there 28 months ago, 5 of 2200 tons 15 months
ago, and 3 of 1100 tons may be arrived there about 4 months since.

What should cause our ships to stay so long, if there were stock to buy their
lading?

Or how should they be reladen thence in due time, if stock be wanting there?

All our Factors in their letters (both formerly and of late received) cry out
amain for want of stock to trade withal, which has maimed the trade, And
say, they cannot dispatch the ships in due time, without means aforehand, and
that 200 M. l more then they have, is little enough to dispatch the ships
already there.

5500 tons in ordinary good wares, (by the Comittees own showing) will cost
there 236 M. l.

By their showing we have in all India but 90 M. l. whereof 60 M. l. not yet
known to be arrived.

So (admitting all arrived) there wants to lade the ships already in India 146
M. l.

This great want has not happened by any late disaster, but is rather lessned
by 1200 tons of shipping lately fired and laid up there without any goods lost
in them, and by opening the trade of Bantam where pepper is cheap, neither
has this want of stock been unknown here, for a year, or two, or more.

It seems the 2 ships now going for the old stocks account (of 1600 tonns) are
not to carry much more then will relade them with good wares (though not
diminished by charges of ships and Factors already there) and if we trade in
course and bulky wares only, it is granted already we had better sit still.

Nay unless we send this year means aforehand to provide good lading for
ships to go hence the next year with fresh capitalls, we shall still trade to
loss.

The sending of 50 or 100 M. l. this year aforehand (in all probability) will
be as good as twice so much sent the next year, and so from year to year,
And then half the treasure yearly to be transported will serve the turn; but
sparingly sent, and many ships there upon charge, it will be consumed before
its arrival.

Our ships (now adays) do usually stay 18 or 20 months too long in India to
their Ruin, and spending as much (brought a year or two after in other ships)
as being sent aforehand might well buy and pay for their lading in due time,
and so return strong. Yet our Factors continually owe there mnch money at a
high ratc of interest.

By sending means aforehand Merchantlike, we may profit much by trading there
from port to port, and buy our wares at the best hand. We may avoid the great
and needless charge of many great ships staying long in India; of paying a
high rate of interest there, the loss of our Mariners, the decay of our
shipping, and so their coming home in much danger. And then doubtless this
trade may again yield the Adventurers 3 for one every 3 years (as usually it
did) by the blessing of God. Yea if examination be had, it will appear the
returns from India this year (upon a reasonable freight allowed) produce
near 3 for one without help of stock aforehand; and therefore very strange
the old stock (so great and so long employed) should produce so dismal a
reckoning as it does.

The motionis. That the next week may be appointed for the Company to parlee,
and consult together for the good of the trade in general, and of the old
decayed stock in particular. Such as are Adventurers in the old stock, and
not in the new, to meet by themselves, and the new Adventurers by themselves.
And then doubtless (met together) they will agree upon some good course to be
taken that the Trade may be amply maintained, and the Adventurers stock not
still run (as long it has) to perdition for want of means in India
aforehand: And perhaps put an end to all the controversies that now are (and
like to be) amongst the Company.

FEBR. 19. 1628.

