

Gaze on with wonder, and discern in me,
The abstract of the worlds Epitome.
THE NEW-YEERES GIFT: PRESENTED AT Court, from the Lady PARVULA to the Lord
MINIMUS, (commonly called Little JEFFERIE) Her Majesty's Servant, with a Letter
as it was penned in shorthand: wherein is proved LITTLE THINGS are better then
GREAT. Written by MICROPHILVS.

Printed at London by N. and I. Oaks, dwelling in Little St. Bartholmewes. 1636.

To the Reader.
AS they are not always most valiant who are most violent: so commonly the
most censorious, be the least judicious. I expect the judgment of the wise, and
the censure of the over-wise; and wish I were of the formers pardon as
certain, as the latter are of mine. The censures of the learned ought to be
judicious, the censures of the unlearned humble, the censures of them both,
charitable. Howsoever if any shall say, when I undertook this work I had but
little to do, it shall no way displease him, who is, and will remain to his
friends a servant, and to his foes a

MICROPHILUS.

TO HIS HIGH and Mighty friend, WILLIAM EVANS, Surnamed the Great PORTER.
WILL, be not angry, this small book is read
In praise of one no bigger then thy head.
It Is not in envy of thy greatness made
Which might be unto twenty such, a shade:
Though he be small in Body, and in Limb,
Yet we commend somethin^ that is great in him.
The greatness of his spirit and his mind,
Whose virtues are not lik^ thy strength confined
Unto his bulk: but pure with out a dreg:
And has a body streighte^ then thy leg.
Doubt not, in emulation some will strain
His sinewy Muse, for to advance thy fame,
Then be not angry, this smal^ Lord is praised,
Since thou by Nature, he by wit is raised.
S. M.
To his worthy friend Microphilus.
HOw should one blaze the worth of little things?
Thus; they are as sparkling Diamonds to rings:
But what needs praise from any, since thy pen
Has proved a Dwarf the miracle of men.
D. L.
To Microphilus.
THe less the Subject, greater is the Wit,
That undertaking for to treat on it,
Makes almost nothing something, wherefore I
Thy rare invention dare to deifie.
T. Little.
To the Author.
THou show (Dwarfes Champion) that Nature sets
Her rarest Gems in smallest Cabinets:
Muses on tip-toes stand to reach his praise,
Whose work deserves a never-fading Bays.
W. Lo.
In Laudem operis.
^uta solet parvis rebus inesse fides. W. Short. (...).

Aris^ V. cap. XI. (...).

Aristot. de repub. Lib. V. cap VIII. Sunt quae ob id ipsum grat^ quod minuta,
veluti gemmae ^ sculpturae: idem us^ venit in ep^stolis et libris, qui non raro
ip^ brevitate redduntur commendat^ores. Sunt in delic^^s et pumili^nes non ob
aliud quam insigne^ corporis parvitatem.

Erasmus Adag. In minimis rebus omnia an^ quae consuetudinis monume^ta se^vanda.

Valerius Maximus Lib. I TO THE MOST exquisite Epitome of Nature, and
compleatest Compendium of a Courtier, the Lord MINIMVS; the Lady PARVULA
wishes health and happiness.
SIR,
MAY it please your diminutive eminence, permit a devoted lover of your concise
dimensions, to present very lowly, as most fitting to your person, (in
remembrance of this New-yeare) a small Token of my unparralleld affection.
Confess I must Compendious SIR my gift is fomewha^ of the least, but my hope
is, being there in so like your self it will not displease you. And if,
whatsoever is received, is received according to the measure or size of the
receiver, be a true rule in Philosophy; then, bootlesse had it been for your
Obsequious Handmaid, to have meditated any Present for size Greater; since how
great soever, it would have been but as very little, your self so very
little, being the receiver: Nor is your littleness (mistake me not) mentioned
as any derogation to worth: Diamonds of most precious value, are but little in
substance: And if it might not appear in me presumption to trouble you with
further Discourse, I could with easy, or no labor, prove things little to be
far better then things that are Great.

Is not a Microcosme better then a Macrocosme, the little-world, Man, then the
Great world, Earth? nay Man the lesser world is, Lord of the Greater; and in
the Greater world, which is the Creators Library, (the several Creatures being
as so many Books in it) have we not rarer Documents from the little
decimo-sexto's, the Ant and Dove, then from the Great Folio's, the Elephant and
Whale? Recollect your memory of the ancient times, who was it presently after
the Flood of Ducalion and Pyrrha violated the Golden Age, vitiated those most
candid manners of men, but the Great Giants, cloud aspiring Enceladus,
hundred-handed Gyges, big-bon'd Porphyrion, and massy Tytius? perceive you not
the fruits of Greatness? how it swelled them with pride, and puffed them up
so high, as to dare wage war even with Heaven? On the contrary, who sees not
the sweet effects of littlenesse^ how humble and lowly it makes you, how far
from pride, for the World cannot but testify, you have ever seemed little in
your own eyes: I pass over ( for brevities sake) the innumerous impieties and
immense cruelties of those Great ones, Saul and Goliath, only adding for
observation, this latter was vanquished by little David. Turn from sacred to
profane Histories, little Ulysses stood the Grecians at the expugnation of
Troy in more steed then Great Ajax with all his might. Many others famous in
their times, as Lycurgus and Solon for Law, this of Athens; the other of
Sparta: Demosthenes and Hortensius for eloquence; this of Rome, the other of
Greece; Miltiades and Themistocles for Valor, both of Greece? Virgil and
Horace for Poetry both of Rome, with that excellent Historian Salust, whom
antiquity has delivered to be men of very little stature. And that men of
little stature should be both more valiant and wiser then men of Great,
sufficient reasons may be fetched, even from Nature: For seeing that those
which are little have all their members contracted, and as it were closer
knitted and joined together, but those which are Great have theirs more spread
abroad and severed; it is necessary, that in the^ forces united, and nearer
gathered, render the structure of their bodies, more vigorous and agile; and in
these, being scattered, make their bodies less valid, a^ also ponderous and
burdensome: and whereas the two mansions of Wisdom are the heart, and the
brain, which in short and little bodies are not so far distant from each
other as in Long and Great; by consequence it is undeniably evident, that the
littler sort must be wiser then the Great: and indeed the Greater sort of
people in the World generally, what are they? but vain and idle, and therefore
in ordinary discourse, we ever distinguish them from the better sort, which by
consequence will fall out to be those which are the lesser.

And as men that are little are very excellent: So likewise that which is
excellent in or about men is very little: Wit, the thing so admired, is not
that in men very little? Money, the thing so desired, though a man have much,
yet he esteems it as little; and things ever are to be judged as they are
valued: Is not honesty in men very little? when Sophistry has fled the
schools, and is become a shopkeeper, and Tradesmen think if they lose their
lying, they lose their living: Look for obedience, of things the best, is it
not little? when Princes commands are rather questioned then obeyed. Look for
Malice, of things the worst, is it not very Great? when Fools had rather spend
much in Law, then forgive somewhat in charity. Whose desires more rectified
then the desires of a moderate man? and he desires but little. Is there any
thing more sought, and less found then content? yet Nature (the Mother of us
all) is content with a little. Little is the rule of judgment, for we
commonly use to say, (Ex pede Herculem) you may judge by a little of the whole:
Little is the only discourse of wise men, they talk but little: the best
remedy for sick men, for they eat but little: and to speak truth little is
the delight of most men, for what do men take more pleasure in, then the real
courtesies of a friend, and are not the real courtesies of friends, now a
days very little: On the other side, how many hopeful young Heirs have Great
Estates undone? (but if not through the possessing of a Great estate, yet I am
sure, through the wanting of a little wit.) How odious does Covetousness
render a man in the eye of the wise. and what is Covetousness bu^ a Great
desire and Longing after Much? you have seen, Sir, the commodity of little,
and discommodity of Great at Large in others; in brief, take notice of them in
your self: Had you been Big and Great ten to one you never had prooved a
Courtier; 'twas only your littleness preferred you. According to these rules
I cannot conceive how any judicious indifferent man can deny little to be
better then Great: Nevertheless (such are the high-flowne times) this modest
opinion is peremtorily opposed by those whose high towering and ambitious
thoughts vainly aim at Greatness; who crush the little ones that are under
them, crouch to all Great ones above them; are your friend in a complement, but
not in a business; familiarly give you the hand without the heart,
skuller-like rowing toward Westminster look toward the Bridge, pretend one
thing, intend another; who if but once in an age, and that too by chance; they
do you a trifling courtesy, no gratuity will satisfy, if not Great; for if
little, they disdain it, though seemingly accept it their mad humor being, to
account all Great things amiable, little things despicable. But to convince
those men (for your little sake) of their error, which is no little one, but
like themselves, very Great; what Gassendus in his Book of Paradoxes against
Aristotelians, says of Court malcontents: Improbant aulam in qua tamen
consenescunt, They speak ill of the Court, and yet are so troublesome, as to
live and dye there: So may be said of these; how happens it, Great Estates
which (as all things Great else) belike they so love, they so often part with,
and exclaim against little, when as they keep little? or what is it that feeds
or clothes them their future hopes, which are so Great, or their present
revenues which are little? and then too, is not one bird in the hand worth two
in the bush, their little possessions more comfortable then their Great
expectations of I know not what which because they look after I know not why,
they may obtain I know not when. In the fancy of a man not acquainted through
observation with the absurdities of the World, it would raise a combustion to
immagine there were being such a crew of Heritiques: for is it not very plain
and evident, performances are better then promises, and are not promises Great,
performances but little? Why, every ordinary Gallant almost you meet with will
rise up an argument in this, for in his easy ambling Discourse you shall find
though he cannot speak much to the purpose, yet he can speak little to the
purpose, and is not that which is to the purpose better then that which is not?
It Is true, the Vulgar people of the World, are likewise of opinion with the
former. But wrong not your self ( most perfect abridgment of Nature) so as to
be led by the inconstant opinions of the vulgar, who account this a Paradox,
which is most Orthodox; little better then Great: the vulgar, that Hydra-headed
multitude whose very reasons (not much unlike those in their shops, frail
ones) because of their rarity wi^h them are to be suspected, but as for their
obstinat tenants of all wisdoms followers to be detested and abhorred. I will
not deny but that there may be some oblique, seeming-faire, colorable reasons
pitifully forced by them for the inveagling of men to bestow credit on their
poor assertion, yet it can never be beaten into my brain but that they may
be gently confuted in it by their own homespun Proverbs. A Great Head is
sign of a little wit; that is one of them; then I demand, which is better, a
Great Head without a little wit, or a little wit without a Great Head? for any
Head will serve with a little wit, better then a Great Head without any Wit:
Another of them is this: A little head is sign of a Great Wit: Which (but by
granting their assertion, Great is better then little) confutes their
assertion, and proves little better then Great: For if a Great Wit be found
in a little head, then a little head must be better then a Great Head, because
it contains the better, that is, the Greater Wit; and if a little wit be
found in a Great Head, then a little wit must needs be better then a Great
Wit, because it grows in a better soil, the Greater Head: I hope therefore
that as they will not deny to turn upon them their own proverbiall weapon,
Too much of one thing is good for nothing: so being thus convict, they cannot
but confess, A little of every thing is excellent in all things. I, but they
never thought (because it was generally received) there were any reasons to the
contrary; there would be a great scarsity of reasons sure in the World, if
there were no other then those they could think of; and though they do not
perceive a reason why little should be better then Great; there may be a
reason which they do not perceive; well though they have lived in ignorance,
it were to be wished they would give us some hope, they meant not to dye so,
by recanting their error.

What though little better then Great, seem to the vulgar a Paradoxe? may it
be ever the less Orthodoxe, considering all things are not as they seem? as
for example, some men want not only that which they have not, but also that
which they have: This seems to be an incongruous speech, and yet though seeming
so, it is not so, for it is verified of the Covetous. One would think this to
be an absurd saying: If he be a fool he is a wise man; if he be a wise
man he is a fool, yet though seeming so, it is not so, for it is verified (as
a Philosopher avouch'd it) of a man that is silent. How confident are men in
believing the world is very big, and that the Sea is of an unk^owne
profund^^y, when as the World is but a d^yes walk (...) the Sun goes about
it in 24 hours, and the Sea which men think so deep is but shallow, for it is
but a stones cast to the bottom. The Impuritans of the time who set their
Sermons on the tenters, and use most prolixe and long winded sentences, casting
their auditory into a holy nap, through the illness of their matter, and waking
them again by the shrilnesse of their clamor, may be (happily) by wise men
censured to do it out of tedious ignorance, and it is a grave conjecture: yet
(under favor) wise men are but men, and may mistake, for it is out of
conscience to allow long measure to their course ware: If then speeches which
seem improper, yet may be nothing less, and many men, even wisemen, have
been, are daily, and to the worlds end more or less will be mistaken in their
opinions; why may not little be better then Great, although it seem not so,
or though some men (reputed in other things very Wise) have thought to the
contrary.

And if a man but seriously observe, he shall find very few things such as
they seem: and by reason wise men also have their weak times, their verdict
to be no sufficient argument to command universal belief, especially where
reason is pregnant with probable proofs on the adverse side, add to this,
diffidence being so necessary a part of wisdom.

Besides, admit this position little better then Great, seem very strange, yet
stranger then this have bin admitted, after a rational examination, and
therefore why not this upon the like consideration? When I had one servant, I
had a servant; when I had two servants, I had half a servant; when I had
three, I had never a one: this speech I presume may be believed to be a very
mad one, and yet it is a most wise one; for it is resolved thus: A Master having
but one servant, thought him over-burthened with work, and therefore took
another to help him, (now he had two) but each so trusted to the others
observance, that they were often missing, and the work not done; he chose
another, (so he had three) and was then worse served then before: All things at
Sea are mad: This saying likewise I presume would be reputed a very mad one
(especially by Seafaring men, they would storm at it) and yet why may not it
be a most true one? The Ship is mad, for it never stands still: The Mariners
are mad to expose themselves to such imminent dangers: The Waters are raging
mad in perpetual motion; and the Winds are as mad as the rest, they know not
whence they come, nor whither they would go. Was not the quadrature of the
circle maintained by men of approved judgment Hippocrates Chius among the
ancient, and by Orontius Finaeus among the modern? Did not that excellent
Philosopher Copernicus affirm the earth we stand on did not stand still, but
move circularly? the good old man was to be commended in that he dealt roundly
with the world, and told them the truth of his opinion, which (happily) was the
opinion of truth: for why may not the Earth moove, we departing from the
Heavens, and they stand still, as well as the Earth be thought to stand still,
and the heavens moving, seem to depart us? Did not Pythagoras avouch the
Spheres to be musical? but our souls locked up in our bodies, for the
present can not hear the Harmony? such Music certainly there is, the like
was never heard of. And Lucian, that splendid wit, did in his Judgment
believe, that the souls of griping Usurers (if they had any) at their Deaths,
for certain thousands of Years transmigrated into the bodies of Asses, and
why should not others believe it? it were but fitting, that poor men with whip
and cudgel might take their pennyworths out of them.

And not only men's Opinions, but likewise many of their Actions demonstrate
All things are not as they seem: For what think you of him who made diligent
search at all the Innes of the Town to find his young chestnut colored
Gelding, with a Star in his forehead, and a white foot, when as the knave
had none, but came thither a foot: of another, who going to the Fair, after
he stately stalked through the chief Streets, cheapning Orient Jewels, choice
pictures, new-fashion'd plate, rich hangings, and the dearest imbroideries,
departed home with the buying only of a wooden dish: or of a third, who going
to their shops that sell costly apparel, calls confidently to see a suit of
an hundred pounds, and when they were agreed of the price, quarrels with his
boy for following him without his purse.

Nor is this verified only in such Peripateticall madcaps, but in
contemplating Philosophers, in conquering Commanders: Did not Diogenes, seeing
a company of unskilful Archers shooting (that he might save himself from the
Arrows) run and stand at the mark, that in his knowledge being, and in
success proving, though not so to standers by at first seeming, the only
place of safety. Did not Bessus a Captain, who thought for fear with his
company to have fled; mistaking his way, run headlong with them upon his
enemies, and so gave them a famous overthrow, his side by that means getting
the day: If errors in wars be the way to get Conquests, and shooting-markes
be places for men to stand at for safety, the former proved in the happy
success of a Commander, the latter ratified in the wise choice of a
Philosopher, and such a one as Alexander vouchsafed to say; If I were not
Alexander, I would be Diogenes: doubtless then the World is in credit engaged
to recant many of its credulous customs; ( custom without verity being but an
old heresy) that so men being disburthened of those Great errors wherewith
their opinions have been loaded so long, they may prove more capable of the
entertainme^t of truth and her propositions, of which one of the most refinedst
is this now treated of, little better then Great: which now for any to deny as
impossible, could be reputed no less then presumptuous obstinacy, since so
really has been demonstrated, All things are not as they seem, by various
Arguments, fetched from the speeches, opinions, and actions of the better sort
of men.

And not only some particular persons in their speeches, opinions, and actions,
but whole professions, nay flourishing Nations by their apparent customs
demonstrate this assertion: First, for Professions; who seem more devout then
Clergymen? or who seem to take more delight in Law then Lawyers? or in
medicines then Physicians? and yet (according to the saying of a learned
Archbishop of Florence) Lawyers go not to Law, Physicians take no physic,
and some Divines are scarce good Christians. Secondly for Nations, it is the
fashion of the women of Muscovy, to love that Husband best which beats them
most, and to think themselves never loved or regarded, unless they be two or
three times a day well favouredly swadled. In Tartaria a man sees not her he
intends to wed, till they be married, but hearing a good report of the young
woman, sollicits her father for her; If he be willing they meet at the
Chancell of the Church in which there is a partition, through a hole whereof
he puts his hand, and takes his wife by hers; then her mother with a sharp
instrument all to be pricketh his hand, if he let her go they deem it a
refusal, but if he hold her fast and wring her by the hand till she squeake,
then is he accounted a most loving husband, and her friends rejoice for her
happy match.

In general to conclude, have you not heard of men that stumble at strawes,
and leap over blocks: Of Democritus a Philosopher, who having put his eyes out,
that he might the better contemplate, yet saw more then all Greece: and in
that Greece that there was never less wisdom then in the time of the seven
Wise men, of Brutus when he seemed maddest was the wisest of the Tarquines;
and of one Supputius who to converse but with one Wise man, traveled all over
Europe, which men thought so full of them, and yet returned without his errand,
and could find none. Omne meum, and nihil meum, that saying of Macrobius is not
so known as true. Is it not true, that when Princes (prompted by Heaven)
confer dignity on excelling men, though the Greater sort think the Honor only
does accrue to the receivers, yet the wiser few in their hearts confess, and
then in their tongues to the world express it chiefly to be in the givers. A
man may see much, and yet perceive little; a strange position, and yet verified
of a weak Traveller. A man may be seen abroad, and yet walk invisible; and
unusual speech, and yet verified of an able reserved man. One may have bad
policy in him, and yet be a good man; a suspected sentence, and yet verified of
a faithful profound Statist, (that has by Art his Engines to foresee
foreign mischiefs, and prevent them, to the advantage of his Masters honor,
not only dexterity, when they are fallen, to shift them, to his Masters
content) for bad policy may be in the knowledge of good men, but in the
practice of wicked. Some man pays not so much for any thing, as for that which
is given him; an unlikely, yet a certain truth: for it is known of the
generous, who by taking a courtesy, parts with that he accounts most dear,
his liberty: I could be yet infinite in instances, ( most Honored Sir) but
that I study brevity, that I may like you in all things: I presume any clear
judgment may have satisfaction by these, so as not any way to offer to deny,
since so many things are not as they seem (especially adding to consideration
things more unlikely are true, as for a creature to eat iron, as the Estridge;
or to live in fire, as the Salamander) but that it is in it self possible,
little may be, and upon reasons alleged probable, little is, better then
Great.

When the Lapidaries dig in the earth, what is al their pains for, but to
find parvum in Magno, a little of gold in a Great deal of Ground; and if
Great were so excellent as men do fancy it, yet you may find Magnum in parvo
that Great excellency in sundry little things. We know there are four parts of
the World, and among them Europe the least; yet in fertility of grounds,
variety of people and kingdoms, and in the flourishing wits of most learned
men, it surpasses the Greatest, nay them all: In Europe how little was Rome,
yet she has visited Europe, Asia, and Afric with wars and victories, and to
the whole world given Laws and command. Among beasts what more valiant then
the Lion? who compared with a Bull, Horse or Elephant is but little; or if it
be objected, a Lion is somewhat Great, it must be confessed a Cock is wondrous
little, at whose crowing the Lion for all his Great valor will tremble. Quid
solertius prudentia apum? parvae sunt. Quid laboriosius diligentia formicarum?
parvae sunt. Quid subtilius ingenio aranearum? parvae sunt. (as the Orator
aptly. Among the chirping Quiristers of the Air, those which sing sweetest or
fly swiftest, are of birds the least. What excellent soule-ravishing notes
hear we from a little Nightingall?

And as on things little, Nature has bestowed a kind of excellency, for which
they become so admired: so with that excellency, potency, least they should be
despised, and utility that they might be desired of all. The potency of little
appears, in that life it self depends but on a small thread, and the least
gnat in the air can choke one, as it did a Pope of Rome; a little hair in
Milk strangle one, as it did a Councellor in Rome; a little stone of a Raisin
stop ones breath, as it did the Poetical pipe of Anacreon: and well known it
is by men experienced in Histories, how Themistocles little army overcame
Xerxes Great Host. And can any thing be more commodious for Scholars and
Travelers, then little maps in which are perfectly delineated the Greatest
Kingdoms? But why call we any kingdom Great, when as all things in the World,
as it self, are very little? Alcibiades braggeth of his lands, Socrates
reaches him a Map, bids him demonstrate where they lie; alas he could not
find them, nor scarce discern Athens it self, it was so small a point in
respect of the World, and the World is but as a point in respect of Heaven, and
Heaven being finite, is but as a little point compared to its maker, which is
infinite. The Sun how Big in compass soever it be in it self, it is the
pleasure of Heaven to show it to us according to the smalnesse of a peck: and
those celestial Glowormes the Stars, we ^ee but as little pibbles. What so
vexes the Sea, and makes it roar, but its Greatness? how angry and furious
grows it, even to the loss of many men's lives, when the Wind presumes to
puff it into Bigge-swelling waves; whereas let it have but its own liberty in
a vent, how swiftly runs it, as eager of lessening it self, and though
imprisoned, yet through natural policy it secretly undermines by degrees
those banks which violently keep it in its full Greatness, as endeavoring
ever to be little. What though Rivers so commodious to commonwealths be very
Great, yet the Springhead from whence they flow are but little. Flumina Magna
vides parvis de fontibus orta, Ovid. The Clouds weep not down their
grateful tears in Great Floods, but by drops. Great and High Mountains,
natures Bulwarks, cast up (as the Spaniard says) at God Almighties own
charges; what are they but heaps of rubbish, and offals left of the creation of
the World, as so many warts or pimples, disfiguring the smooth face of the
earth? the difficulty of their ascent, the horridness of their crags, the
wildness of their inhabitants (beasts or people) the chillness of their frosty
tops; with the inhospitable barrenness of their rugged sides leave often an
imputation of poverty and barbarousnes to that Country that has most of them:
Whereas the low valleys are most pleasant, most fruitful, most hospitable,
enriching the inhabitants, refreshed with wholesome springs, beautified with
curious structures; among which likewise the Cedarbuilt Palace is often struck
with thunder, when the shrubby cottage is secure.

Would a man live happily and well? let him ever be getting a little, for
Horace says: Vivitur parvo been. Is he not yet content, but would live better?
let him still continue his endeavors of getting, though never so little, for
Claudian says: Vivitur exiguo melius: Nay, little is so lovely, that we
should not only endeavor for it, as a thing necessary (for is it not most
necessary every one should have a little?) but rejoice in it as a thing
pleasant; and Great is so cumbersome, that we should not only not desire it,
but fly from it, and both these prooved out of Catullus. Quod nimium est
fugito, parvo gaudere memento.

But you perhaps ( Sir) may demand, is a little wit better then a Great Wit? or
a little estate, better then a Great Estate? or little honesty, better then
Great Honesty? or little knowledge, better then Great Knowledge? I will not
presume, being of the weaker Sex (admired Sir) herein to decide any thing;
only be your self the judge: The Philosopher says, There is no Great Wit
without a mixture of madness; then probably (by the rule of contraries) no
little wit without a mixture of prudence; now judge you which is better, to be
with a Great Wit mad, or with a little wit wise? As for Estates, the practice
of the World (contrary to their opinions) in effect maintains the affirmative;
for every man possessing a Great Estate accounts money but as dirt, but when
once by any casualtie it beco^es little, then he makes much of it: Yet
howsoever, grant a Great Estate were better, yet all know it is commonly gained
but by degrees, that is, by little and little. A Lord who has Great Revenues,
is often found melancholy, sighing; when his hired Groom (who has little or
nothing) is blithe, whistling. As for honesty, wheresoever it is found, it is
(I confess) very excellent; yet more excellent (likely) where it causes,
besides love, admiration; then where it barely moves affection: We love it in
good men, we both love and wonder to discover it in knaves; now is not good
men's honesty very Great? and find we not it in knaves very little? Lastly,
how little knowledge is better then Great, may be thus demonstrated, the
Greatest-Clerkes are not the wisest men.

Little children (as most innocent) best for imitation; little women (as most
nimble-spirited) best for generation; little men (as most witty) best for
negotiation. Ask every Schoole-boy, and he can tell you, parvi penditur
honestas, honesty it self is but of little account: Ask the tradesman, and he
will tell you, that a short term is better then a Long Vacation: Ask the
Scholar, and he will tell you, nothing is better then Wisdom, and then ask
any Courtier, whether little be not better then nothing.

Go on, go on therefore, ( diminutive Sir) with the guide of Honor, and
service of Fortune, your loveliness being such, as no man can disdain to
serve you, your littleness such, as no man needs to fear you, the first
having put you without hatred, the latter below envy: Your little low person
(me thinks) is natures humble pulpit, out of which she reads graces diviner
lectures to High-aspiring Mortals: and whereas some in the world (wedded to
error) may fondly imagine your residence at Court, to be rather for wonder
and merriment, then for any use or service; you may require from them no less
satisfaction then a public recantation: For as it has been the custom of
famous Princes to use (at chief times) some ceremony which represented some
hidden Moral: as at the Court of Bel-gian David, or Prester John, the
powerfullest Potentate in all Afric, the first Dish served in at their
Festivalls is a Deaths-head; and it has been in use, that the Coronation of
Kings was celebrated at the Sepulcher of their Fathers; and the Pope at his
Inaugura^ion has 4. Marble stones presented unto out of which he chooses his
toombe-stone: So (at all times) the residence of dwarfes in Courts has a
twofold Representment, Theological, and Political, the first to the
Sovereign, the second, to the Subject: For the first, as Philip King of
Macedon betimes every morning had a little boy came unto him, and cried,
Philippe, memento te esse mortalem, O Philip, remember how thou art mortal: So
little dwarfes (boys in proportion, though perchance men in discretion) being
about a Monarch, though silent, yet their very persons (being with Princes of
the same natural extraction) are as a voice crying, Rex, memento te esse
minimum: O King remember how thou art little, borne like others little, to
teach thee to Heaven, humility, to Earth, humanity: For the second, the civil
regard in relation to the subject: the residence of dwarfes about Monarchs has
been by those who are grounded Politicians accounted emblemattically
necessary, to denote those who desire to approach near Princes ought not to
be ambitious of any Greatness in themselves, but to acknowledge all their
Court-lustre is but a beam of the Royal Sun their Master, which when, and
to whom, he please he can send forth or withdraw.

Mind not, mind not therefore ( most perfect abridgement of Nature) the Great
neglect which the ignorant vulgar cast upon littleness, considering it has
made you an attendant of Princes, and is in it self so full of worth, that for
it only you were thus preferred. And though it seems a mere riddle to say,
You are always at Court, and yet are very little there; yet your person makes
it so famous a one, that were Homer alive, and had his eyes again, again he
would by this loose them, or else weep them out, that he lost them before by
that lowsy one of Fishermen ( Quod capimus perdimus, Quod non capimus tenemus:
What we take we loose, what we take not we keep) and missed the happy
aenigma of your admired corpusculum. And since little is prooved better then
Great, little Schoole-boyes (I doubt not) will wisely relinquish their old
theame-exordium: Vt olim Alexander ille Magnus Macedonum Rex: and learning out
by enquiry some of your splendid deeds, will learnedly front their exercises
thus, Ut nuper Galfredus ille parvus Britanniae pumilio. Certainly if there be
any thing in the World worth the relying on, it is very little; no Great or
Long happiness here to be expected, but very little and short. When one's
undone by fire or shipwreck, or goods taken by Pirates, what sets him up but the
Kings Breve.
brief? and alas, how would many a poor Knight live, if he had not a little
to keep him? Consider little morally, and virtue is in the mean; consider
little theologically, and the whole Church is but a little flock; consider
little civilly, and who dare deny, (I assume spirit from truth) but that the
little prince is a better man then the Kings Greatest Subject? Nay, the King
himself, who is Gods Epilogue, and man's Prologue, take him in the better
consideration, with God, he is minor; take him in the other, with man, he is
Mayor; for so Tertullian, Imperator est Mayor omnibus, solo Deo minor: A King
is Greater then all others, less only then God. And I will for ever heartily
pray Heaven bless our Queen, because she has made the Kingdom happy by
bringing his Majesty so many little ones.

In short, who desires not in debt to be as little as may be? and what a rare
temper is it in men of desert not to be ambitious of Greatness? and even in the
Highest matters which men attempt, how commonly the most do come short, and in
their Greatest business effect but little. And therefore as it was said of
Scipio that he was nunquam minus solus, quam cum solus, never less alone, then
when alone: so it may be said of you ( excellent abstract of Greatness) that
you are nunquam minus parvus, quam cum parvus, never less little, then when
little. I hope you will pardon me, if in my style I have used a little
boldness, and familiarity, you knowing it to be so commendable, and that it
is Nimia Familiaritas, Great Boldness only which breeds contempt; especially
since you are no stranger, but of my own Country, an Englishman, though some
(judging by your stature) have taken you to be a Low-country-man. Many merry
New-yeares are wished unto you, by

The sworn servant of your Honors perfections, PARVULA.
Postscript.
If the Great Length of my Letter has molested your more serious Affairs, you
may thence gather the convenience of little; and yet that it might not
displease, I appointed it (by my servant Microphilus) to be written in your
own hand.



FINIS.

