THE TRVMPET OF the Soul, sounding to Judgment. By Henry Smith.

Eccle. 12.1. Remember thy maker in the days of thy youth.

AT LONDON Printed for John Perrin, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Church yard, at the sign of the Angel. 1591.

Ecclesiastes 11. Chap. 9. Verse.
The Text.
Rejoice O young man in thy youth: and let thy heart be merry in thy young days:
follow the ways of thine own heart, and the lusts of thine eyes: But
remember for all these things thou must come to Judgment.
WHen I should have preached under the Cross, I mused what text to take in
hand to please all, and to keep my self out of danger: and musing, I could
not find any text in the Scripture that did not reprove sin, unless it were
in the Apocrapha, which is not of the Scripture: this text bids them that be
voluptuous, be voluptuous still: let them that be vain glorious, be vain
glorious still: let them that be covetous, be covetous still: let them that be
drunkards, be drunkards still: let them that be swearers be swearers still: let
them that be wantons, be wantons still: let them that be careless prelates, be
careless still: let them that be Usurers, be Usurers still: but says Solomon,
Remember thy end, that thou shall be called to Judgment at the last for all
together.

This is the counsel of Solomon the wisest then living, what a counsel is
this for a wise man, such a one as was Solomon?

In the beginning of his book he says, All is vanity, and in the end he
says, Fear God and keep his Commandments, in the 12. Chapter he says,
Remember thy maker in the days of thy youth, but here he says, Rejoice O
young man in thy youth: Here he speaks like an Epicure, which says, eat,
drink, and be merry: here he counselles, and here he mockes: yet not after the
manner of scorners, although they deserved it in showing their foolishnes, as
it is in the first of the Proverbs. He laughed at the wicked in derision. As in
the second Psalm, God seeing us follow our own waves: For when he bids us
pray, we play: and when he bids us run, we stand still: and when he bids us
fast, we feast, and send for vanities to make us sport: then he laughes at our
destruction. Therefore when Solomon gives a sharp reprose, and makes you
ashamed in a word, he scoffingly bids you do it again, like a Schoolemaister
which beats his Scholar for playing the truant, he bids him play the
truant again: O this is the bitterest reproof of all, but least any Libertine
should misconster Solomon, and say that he bids us be merrye and make much of
our selves, therefore he shuts it up with a watchwoord, and sets a bridle
before his lips, and reproves it as he speaks it before he goes any
further, and says: But remember that for all these things thou must come to
Judgment. But if we will understand his meaning, he means when he says,
rejoice O young man, repent O young man in thy youth: and when he says let thy
heart cheer thee, let thy sins grieve thee: for he means otherwise then he
speaks, he speaks like Michai in the Book of Kings. 2. chap. Go up and
prosper: or like as Ezechiel, Go up and serve other Gods, or as S. John
speaks in the Revelation. Let the that be wicked, be wicked still: But if
there were no ^udgment day, that were a merry world: Therefore says Solomon
when thou art in thy pleasures slaunting in the feelds, and in thy brave rusts
and amongst thy lovers, with thy smiling looks, thy wanton talk and merry
jests, with thy pleasant games and lostye looks: Remember for all these things
thou shall come to Judgment.

Whilste the thief steals, the hemp grows, and the hook is covered within
the bait, we sit down to eat and rise up to play, and from play to sleep: and
a hundredth years is counted little enough to sin in, but how many sins thou
have set on the score, so many kinds of punishments shall be provided for
thee: how many years of pleasure thou have taken, so many years of pain: how
many drammes of delight, so many pounds of dollor: when iniquity has played
her part, vengeance leapes upon the stage: the Comedye is short, but the
Tragedy is longer: the black guarde shall attend upon you, you shall eat at
the table of sorrow, and the crown of death shall be upon your heads, many
glistring faces looking on you, and this is the fear of sinners: when the
devil has entised them to sin, he presumes like the old Prophet in the
book of Kings, who when he had entised the young prophet contrary to the
commandment of God, to turn home with him and to eat and drink, he cursed
him for his labor, because he disobeyed the commandment of the Lord, and so
a Lion devoured him by the way. The foolish Virgins think that their oil
will never be spent: so Dina stragled abroad whilst she was defloured: what a
thing is this to say rejoice, and then repent: what a blank to say take thy
pleasure, and then thou shall come to judgment: it is as if he should say,
steal and be hanged: steal and thou dare, strangle sin in thy cradle, for
all the wisdom in the world will not help thee else: but thou shall be in
admiration like dreamers which dream strange things and know not how they
come: he says Remember Judgment, if thou remember this always, then thou
shall have little list to sin: if thou remember this, then thou shall have
little list to fall down to the devil, though he would give thee all the
world, and the glory thereof: Solomon says, the weed grows from a weed
to a cockle, from a cockle, to a bramble, from a bramble to a brier, from a
brier to a thorn: Lying breeds perjury, perjury breeds hautines of heart,
hautines of heart breeds contempt, contempt breeds obstinacy, and bringes
forth much evil. And this is the whole progress of sin: he grows from a
liar to a thief, from a thief to a murderer, and never leaves until he
has searched all the roome^ in hell, and yet he is never satisfied: the more
he sins, the more he searches to sin: when he has deceived, nay he has
not deceived thee: as soon as he has that he desires, he has not that he
desires: when he has lest fighting, he goes to fighting again: yet a little
and a little more, and so we slit from one sin to another. While I preach,
you hear iniquity in gender within you, and will break forth as soon as you
are gone: So Christ wept and Jerusalem laughed: Adam brake one, and we break
ten, like Children which laugh and cry, so as if we kept a shop of vices, now
this sin and then that, from one sin to another. O remember thy end says
Solomon, and that thou must come to Judgment. What shall become of the^ that
has tried the^ most, be condemned most? Rejoice O young man in thy youth. But
if thou mark Solomon he harpes upon one string, he doubles it again and
again, to show us things of his own experience, because we are so forgetful
thereof in our selves, like the dreamer that forgets his dream, and the
swearer his swearing. So we beg of every unclean spirit, until we have
bumbasted our selves up to the throat, filling every corner of our hearts
withal uncleanness, and then we are like the Dog that comes out of the
sink, and makes every one as soul as himself: therefore says Solomon, if
any one will learn the way to hell, let him take his pleasure: me thinks I
see the dialogue between the flesh and the Spirit: the worst speaks first,
and the flesh says: soul take thine ease, eat, drink, and go brave, lie
soft, what else should you do but take your pleasure, thou know what a
pleasant fellow I have been unto thee, thou know what delight thou have had
by my means: but the Soul comes in, burdened with that which has been
spoken before, and says, I pray thee remember Judgment, thou must give
account for all these things, for unless you repent, you shall surely perrish:
no says the flesh, talk not of such grave matters, but tell me of fine
matters, of soft beds and pleasant things, and talk me of brave pastimes,
Apes, Bears, and Puppits: for I tell thee the forbidden fruit is the sweetest
of all fruits, for I do not like of your telling me of Judgment: but take
thou thy Iuels, thy Instruement, and all the stringes of vanity will strike at
once, for the flesh loves to be brave, and tread upon corkes, it cannot tell
of what fashion to be of, and yet to be of the new fashion.

Rejoice O young man in thy youth.

O this goes brave, for while wickedness has cast his rubs, and vengeance casts
his spurs and his foot, and thus she reeles and now she tumbles, and then
she falls, therefore this progress is ended.

Pleasure is but a spur, riches but a thorn, glory but a blast, beautye but
a flower, sin is but an Ipocrite, honye in thy mouth and poison in thy
stomach: therefore let us come again and ask of Solomon in good sooth
whether he means in good earnest, when he spoke these words: O (says
Solomon) it is the best life in the world to go brave, lie soft, and live
merrily, if there were no Judgment But this Judgment mares all, it is like a
damp that puts out all the light, and like a box that mareth all the ointement:
for if this be true, we have spunne a fair third, that we must answer for
all, that are not able to answer for one: why Solomon makes us fools, and
gives us gaudes to play withal: what then shall we not rejoice at all? yes,
there is a godly mirth and if we could hit on it, which is called be merrye
and wise: Sara laughed, and was reproved: Abraham laughed and was not reproved.
And thus much for the first part.

But remember that for all these things thou shall come to Judgment.

This verse is as it were a dialogue betwixt the flesh and the spirit, as the
two counselors, the worst is first, and the flesh speaks proudly, but the
spirit comes in burdened with that which has been spoken. The flesh goes
laughing and singing to hell, but the spirit casts rubs in his way, and puts
him in mind of judgment, that for all these things now ends rejoice, and
hear comes in but, if this but were not, we might rejoice still, if young men
must for all the sportes of youth: what then shall old men do, being as they
are now? surely if Solomon lived to see our old men live now, as here he says
of young men, so high as sin rages, yet vengance sits above it as high as
high Babell. Me thinks I se a Sword hang in the air by a twine third, and all
the Sons of men labor to burst it in sunder: there is a place in hell where
the covetous Judge sits, the greedy Lawyer, the griping Landlord, the
careless Bishop, the lustye youth, the wanton dames, the thief, the robbers of
the commonwealth, they are punished in this life because they never left sin as
long as they could, while mercy was offered unto them: therefore because they
would not be washed, they shall be drowned, now put together rejoice and
remember, thou have learned to be merrye, now learn to be wise: now therefore
turn over a new lease and take a new lesson, for now Solomon mocketh not as he
did before, therefore a check to thy russes, a check to thy cusses, a check to
thy robes, a check to thy gold, a check to your riches, a check to your
beautye, a check to your muck a check to your graves: woe from above, woe from
below, woe to all the stringes of vanity: do thou not now marvel that thou
had not a feeling of sin? for now thou see Solomon says true, thine own
heart can tell that it is wicked, but it cannot amend: therefore it is high time
to amend: as Nathan comes to David after Belsebub, so comes accusing
conscience after sin: me thinks that every one should have a feeling of
sin: though this day be like yesterday, and to morrow like to day, yet one
day will come for all, and then woe, woe, woe, and nothing but darkness: and
though God came not to Adam until the evening, yet he came: although the fire
came not upon Sodom until the evening, yet he came, and so comes the Judge
although he be not yet come, though he have leaden feet, he has iron hands,
the arrowe flies and is not yet fallen, so is his wrath: the pit is dug,
the fire kindled, and all things are made ready, and prepared against that
day, only the small sentence is to come, which will not long tarry: you may
not think to be like to the thief that steals and is not seen: nothing can
be hid from him, and the judge follows thee at the heels, and therefore,
whatsoever thou art look about thee, and do nothing but that thou would do
openly, for all things are opened unto him: Sara may not think to laugh, and not
be seen: Gehezi may not think to lie, and not be known: they that will not
come to the banquet, must stand at the door. What, do ye not think that God
does not remember our sins which we do not regard? for while we sin, the
score runs on, and the Judge sets down all in the Table of remembrance, and
his scrole reaches up to heaven

Item, for lending to Usury. Item, for racking of rents. Item, for deceiving
thy brethern. Item, for falsehood in wares. Ite^ for starching thy ruffes. Item
for curling thy hair. Item for painting thy face. Item for selling of
Benifices. Item, for staruing of Souls. Item, for playing at Cards. Item, for
sleeping in the Church. Item for profaning the Saboth day, with a number more
has God to call to account, for every one must answer for himself: The
fornicator for taking his filthy pleasure, O Son, remember thou have taken
thy pleasure, take thy punishment. The careless Prelate, for murdering so many
thousand Souls. The Landlord for getting money from his poor Tenants by
racking of his rents: Se the rest, all they shall come like very sheep, when
the Tromp shall sound and the Heaven and earth shall come to judgment against
them: when the heavens shall vanish like a scrole, and the earth shall consume
like fire, and all the Creatures standing against them: The rocks shall cleave
asunder, and the mountains shake, and the foundation of the earth shall
tremble, and they shall say to the mountains, cover us, fall upon us and hide
us from the presens of his anger and wrath, whom we have not eared for to
offend: but they shall not be covered and hid: but then they shall go the
black way, to the snakes and serpents, to be tormented of devils for ever: O
pain unspeakable, and yet the more I express it, the more horrible it is, when
you think of a tormente passing all torments, and yet a tormente passing all
that: yet this torment is greater then them and passing them all.

Imagine you see a sinner going to hell, and his somner gape at him, his
acquaintance look at him, the Angels shoute at him, and the Saints laugh at
him, and the devils rail at him, and many look him in the face: and they
that said they would live and dye with him, forsake him, and leave him to pay
all the scores. Then Judas would restore his bribes. Esaw would cast up his
pottage. Achan would cast down his gold, and Gehezi would refuse his gifts.
Nabucadnezzar would be humbler. Balam would be faithful, and the Prodigal
son would be tame.

Me thinks I see Achan running about where shall I hide my gold that I have
stolen, that it might not be seen nor stand to appear for a witness against me?

And Judas running to the high Priests saying: hold, take again your money, I
will none of it, I have betrayed the innocent blood.

And Esaw crying for the blessing when it is too late, having sold his
birthright for a mess of pottage.

Woe, woe, woe, that ever we were borne. O where is that Dives that would
believe this, before he felt the fire in hell, or that would believe the poorest
Lazarus in the world, to be better then himself, before that dreadful day
come, when they cannot help it if they would never so saine, when repentance is
too late. Herod shall then with that he were John Baptist. Pharaoh would wish
that he were Moses, and Saul would wish that he had been David.
Nabuchadnezzar, that he he had been Daniell Hammon, to have been Mardocheus
Esaw would wish to be Jacob, and Balam would with he might dye the death of the
righteous: Then he will say, I will give more then Ezekias: cry more then Esaw:
Fast more then Moses: pray more then Daniell: weep more then Mary Magdilen:
suffer more stripes then Paul: abide more imprisonment then Michai: abide more
cruelty then any mortal man would do, that it might be, Item, go ye
curssed: might become ye blessed. Yea, I would give all the goods in the world,
that I might escape this dred full day of wrath and judgment, and that I might
not stand amongst the go: O that I might live a beggar all my life, and a
leaper. O that I might endure all plagues and sores from the top of the head to
the sole of my foot: sustain all sickness and griefs, that I might escape this
judgment.

The guilty conscience cannot abide of this day: the silly sheep when she is
taken will not bleate, but you may carry her and do what you will with her, and
she will be subject: but the swine, if she be once taken, she will roar and
cry, and thinks she is never taken but to be slain. So of all things the
guilty conscience can not abide to hear of this day: for they know, that
when they hear of it, they hear of their own condemnation. I think if there
were a general collection made through the whole World, that there might be no
judgment day: then God would be so rich that all the world would go a
begging and be as a waste wilderness: Then the covetous Judge would bring
forth his bribes: then the crafty lawyer would fetch out his bags: the Usurer
would give his gain, and the idle servant would dig up his talent again,
and make a bubble thereof: But all the money in the world will not serve for one
sin: but the Judge must answer for his bribes: he that has money, must
answer how he came by it, and just condemnation must come upon every soul of
them: then shall the sinner be ever dying and never dead, like the Salamander
that is ever in the fire and never consumed.

But if you come there, you may say as the Queen of Saba said of King Salomo^,
I believed the report that I heard of thee in my own Country, but the one half
of thy wisdom was not told me: if you came there to see what is done, you
may say, now I believe the report that was told me in my own Cuntry
concerning this place, but the one half as now I feel I have not heard of:
Now choose you whether you will rejoice, or remember whether you will stand
amongst you blessed or amongst you cursed: whether you will enter while the gate
is open, or knock in vain when the gate is shut: whether you will seek the
Lord whilst he may be found, or be found of him when you would not be sought,
being run into the bushes with Adam to hide your selves: whether you will
take your heaven now hear, or your hell then there: or through tribulation to
enter into the kingdom of God: and thus to take your hell now hear, or your
heaven then there in the life to come with the blessed Saints and Angels so
that hereafter you may lead a new life, putting on Jesus Christ and his
righteousness.

FINIS.

