CERTAIN NOTES of M. HENRY AYNSWORTH HIS LAST SERMON.

Taken by pen in the public delivery by one of his flock, a little before his
death. Anno 1622.

Published now at last by the said writer, as a love token of remembrance to
his brethren, to inkindle their affections to prayer, that scandalls (of many
years continuance) may be removed, that are bars to keep back many godly wise
and judicious from us, whereby we might grow to farther perfection again.

Matthew. 9. 37. 38.

Surely the harvest is great, but the laborers are few. Wherefore pray the
Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his harvest.

Imprinted 1630.

To my beloved brethren in the faith and fellowship of the Gospel in all
places specially those my native countrymen resident in Amsterdam, grace and
peace from our God in Christ.
BEloved the Scripture tells us that while the Ark of God tarried in
Kiriath-jearim, the time being long (for it was twenty years) all Jsraell
lamented after the Lord 1. Sam. 7. 2. The same affections me thinks I perceive
in many of you, even for the sundry years absence of the Lords ministers,
whereby our comfortable portion in the Lords house is greatly lessened, for
being left now as sheep upon the bare commons, I fear we may truly cry with
the Prophet, My leannes, my leannes, and with all being diverse times hurryed
and torn with the loud out cries, and hard handling of furious and unmercifull
spirits, who under pretense of godly zeal and hatred against sin, ungodlily
massacre the true and living members of Christ's body, and by pulling out the
squared living stones endanger the fall of the house. And herewith considering
what reproach not only our selves, but also the truth it self sustains by
reason of such courses, for now the ways of Syon mourn, in that few or none
come to her solemnityes so that we may truly take up that complaint of the
Prophet Lament. 1. 8. Jerusalem has greivously sinned, therefore she is in
derision: all that honored her, despise her, because they have seen her
filthiness: yea, she sigheth and turns backward. And besides all this, the
vigilant adversary is as forward to discourage and dishearten us by slaundering
our holy practice with scisme and profanesse. Who duly weighing these things
brethren ca^ refrain pitying us as our savior Christ did the multitude,
because they were dispersed, and scattered abroad, as sheep having no
shepherd. But this being now toward the end or last days, love in men toward
others is grown cold, every man seeking his own and not that that is Christ's,
Therefore brethren let us at last learn to be wise for our selves, in weighing
the danger of biting and devouring one another which tends to the consuming
one of another Gallat. 5. 15. Let us hereafter study to be quiet. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
11. and if any yet lust to be contentious, we must answer with the same
Apostle, We have no such custom. 1. Cor. 11. 16. And touching those that seem
to be possessed with Diotrephes spirit, who are unwearyed to prate against us
with malicious words, and not therewith content thrust them out of the Church
that witness for us, and testify against their iniquitye, what shall I say of
them (since they reject the word of God, and all wholesome counsel for their
amendment, contrary to the very letter of the 38. Article of our published
confession of faith) but only leave them to the Lord who only has power to
change them or cut them of. In the mean time read and consider that
affectionate exhortation of the Apostle Romans 16. 17. Now I beseech you brethren
mark them diligently which cause division and offenses, contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them, for they that are such serve
not the Lord Jesus Christ but themselves. Yet least they should take themselves
hereby to be wronged if nothing be said farther, amongst the many evils done
us, I have thought fitting to give the Christian reader a taste of some, to will
them in the fear of God to consider their ways in their hearts, and judge
without partiallity their courses by the law of God, so may they soon see, how
injuriously and irregularly they have walked ever since the death of our wise,
faithful, and honored guides, who spoke enough to declare our danger, and
the means (through Gods blessing) to avoid it, for who can forget those often
pressed speeches of our Teacher upon his death bed when he earnestly exhorted
even to his last breath, to Christian moderation in the affairs of the Church,
as the main thing wherein our tranquilly would consist, and he had great
reason to urge it upon some, because many years experience bad taught him how
feirce, unadvised, and preposterous he had found some (to be left now in main
trust as the principal) from time to time, in kindling fire that their wisdom
and understanding found work enough to quench. And the last deceassed Elder
that best knew him that was principally aimed at, said in direct words, that it
would never be well with the Church while it was guided by a strangers head,
and who can deny his words to be true hitherto, nay let even himself and his
privy counselors speak, whether in their firey zeal they did not instantly
so far forget our Teachers counsel for moderation, that they sought up and
forced into the Church new causlesse troubles contrary to the Law and Gospel,
as the Church of Leyden plainly proved to them, and contrary to the very letter
of the 8. Position of our Apology.

For when even in a mere matter of advise (desired of us by another Church)
the Church here had come to a peacable conclusion to the content of each part
that differed in matter of judgment, and that the Elder had solemnly promised
to write a letter accordingly, certain discontented brethren made a meeting to
change that solemn agreement of the Church, the Elder consenting and acting
with them, which he bringing and reading to the Church, it was instantly blamed
in the Elder, for writing contrary to the Churches joint agreement, and his own
promise, and so he was turned back (after much striving by him and his
confederats, who were afterward discovered as guitly of that they unjustly had
censured others for) and willed to write the first peacable agreement, that the
church might not be farther troubled, but in soms absence (minded chief) the
next Lords day, there was advantage taken of the time, and the letter brought
again unaltered in the least, and by a strong and violent hand those many
masters then so far prevailed against those that pressed the former conclusion,
that the letter was consented to by the Church to be sent away as it was, only
crossing out my name, because I could be no testimony, in that my name was
produced for, and now the Church was so transported, that they refused so much
as to signify under their letter, either that some brethren were differing
minded thereto, or to take the advice of the Church of Leyden that were jointly
interessed with them.

But farther here was another thing yet worse, for either the Elder alone, or
these privy counselors with him, stood not to this second agreement the Church
made, but wrote another with alterations, additions, and diminishings besides
the Churches knowledge or consent, and sent it for the Churches mind and act;
yet behold the other brethren that never saw or heard this new forged letter,
till near two years after they were cast out of the Church (which was
dispatched in have, even in 14. days time least they should be prevented)
upon the very suspision, that a few of the^ met to write to co^tradict the
Churches action, in her letter of advise, by the sole, yet false, information
of the Elder, two of them were singled out, and selected from the rest, and
produced to the Church for evil, which yet the informer professed, that the
thing informed and accused, might be holy just, and good, for ought he knew,
yet being desirous to get matter, the matter was prosecuted in the Church by
interrogatoryes to find out sin, which the brethren testified against, as
contrary to the law of love which thinks no evil, and rule of Christ Matthew.
18. Yet offered they the suspected act to sight and correction wherein soever it
should be found amiss, and with all protesting solemnly they had neither done
the thing so suspected, nor intended it; and yet behold the brethren were cast
out without the knowledge of sin or due dealing for sin, save that for refusing
to answer intrapping demands, which they urged submission unto as Gods word
and Christ's government, they were Consured as contemners of both, and the
maintenance of this both Elders and Church are now so wedded to, that the chief
of them blush not to affirm, that rather then they will go back from what they
have done herein, they will go on in it, yea though two of them do not remain
together. And yet who sees not their palpable gross partiallity in sparing
their offending favorites in matters of scandalous and evil nature, least
their evil combination be weakened, discovered, or broken. Oh how much better
were it they would cease to abound in their own sense, and take counsel from
such as in the fear of God are both able and willing to direct them better. O
that they would learn to be wise at the last, so through the good hand of our
God there might be some recovery of what is lost. Whereas now their irregular
proceedings have made our brethren in all places to hang down their heads, as
they have been plainly certifyed from sundry Churches. Now from these and the
like offenses diverse that were of us turn their backs upon us, and betake
themselves to live at large, as if now the door of indifferency or
libertinisme were set open, that it matters not whom they hear, or where they
walk, any where or no where, and measuring these men's sins with others they
think they can hardly go to worse: And whence rises all this, and much more
of the like, but even for the want of faithful Pastors and Teachers, and godly
discreet and able guides or Rulers in the Church? but what hope of ever such
worthyes coming in, when there is such an hideous noise in the house, by such
unruly masters which cruelly smite some, wound others, and cast their dear
brethren out at the windows. Hence come familyes to be divided, the loving
husband from his beloved wife, the affectionate parents from their dear
Children, hence come familyes to be spoiled by remissnes in neglect, nay, in
utter laying aside of joint family duties; the new vessels want their
seasoning, the tender plants their due watering, and so become barren before
their full growth. So that we may justly take up the complaint of the Prophet
Habakuk 1. 2. 3. 4. Oh Lord how long shall I cry and thou will not hear! even
cry out to thee for violence and thou will not help! Why do thou show me
iniquity, and cause me to behold sorrow? for spoiling and violence are before
me: and there are that raise up strife and contention, etc. Oh consider this
ye that are so bent to spoiling, repent and turn in time, least the living
stones crying in the wall of the spiritual house, the corner stone be
offended, and fall upon you and grind you to pieces. But I desire your
conversion and not subversion, if the will of the Lord so be, though ye have
been bold to vent your worst you can imagine against me upon all occasions, and
for your presumptuous determining my eternal estate, the Lord forgive you. If
you please to read what is here writ, I hope through the Lord it may turn your
courses, that ye may see your duty is to build and not to destroy. They were
the instructions our late faithful Teacher M. Aynsworth, delivered to us all,
the last time he ever executed his ministry with us, which was at such a time
as his body and natural strength were so decayed, that he wanted (as ye know)
ability to come up again, even that very Lords day in the afternoon as his
usual manner was, wherein his faithfullnes may be seen even to his last gasp,
in striving to feed the flock even when the hand of God was heavy upon him in
that sore perplexing and tedious disease of the stone, of which in a few days
after he dyed, yet since even in his strong pains (that sometime by reason of
the extremity caused a stay of speech, to the grief of the hearers and
beholders) he was delivered of this, as the last fruit of his ministry, let
the Israel of God love it as Jacob did Benjamin the dear son of his beloved
wife, of whom she dyed. It is not for nothing that the Holy Ghost expressly
tells us. These be the last words of David 2. Sam. 23. 1. Give me leave
therefore (though not to call you together as Jacob did his sons when he was to
deliver his last words to them Genesis 49.) yet to entreat you to read what our
loving Teacher as a father spoke in his charge last to us. And though some or
the most of you heard them set out in the lively voice Gods solemn ordinance
of preaching, yet let it not greive you, that I write to you some of the same
things, so far as my slow hand could extend to compass, the fullnes of his
words I profess not to report, no nor yet the sum or substance of every
thing he hence delivered, no nor yet have I published things so well as J might
have done, had I set upon the work to write it out fair instantly, while
things were green in my own and others memoryes, but now these notes having
layen by me near 8. years before I set upon this resolution, it is more
defective then is requisite for the report of a work of so able and faithful a
man, yet I trust none will be offended at me for this my service of love, since
if ought shall be found amiss, I am willing the blame lie upon my
misunderstanding or forgetfullnes, and so let him be free, who ever approved
himself in his ministry to every man's conscience. Besides, had I been exact in
taking, yet considering his condition at the time of the delivery, it is not
probable to come so refined to satisfy this curious carping age, whom nothing
almost pleases, but novelly garnished with humane art. But as the contents of
the sermon tend not that way, so neither do J pass to please the world
herein. My chief drift is, to commend the remembrance both of the person and
work, that ye may be affected with the days of old, when we went together to
the house of God with joy, as those that keep a feast, that so we may resolve
with the Prophet Esai. 62. 1. 6. 7. Not to hold our tongues for Ierusalems
sake, nor give the Lord rest till he repair and set it up, that so the
righteousness thereof may break forth as the light, and salvation thereof as a
burning lamp. I end with the heavenly words uttered when our great and good
shepherd came into the world. Luke 2. 14. Glory to God in the highest, and on
earth peace, good will toward men.

Your brother in all Christian affection SABINE STARESMORE.

1. PETER 2. 4. To whom coming as unto a living stone disalowed of men, but
chosen of God and precious.

5. Ye also as living stones, be made a spiritual house, an holy priesthood,
to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.


THe purpose of the Apostle in these words and those following, is to exhort
all Christians to the increase of faith and holiness of life. He having before
mentioned the bounty of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has affoarded the sincere
milk of his Word, that they might grow thereby: Now because Paul may plant, and
Appollos 1. Cor. 3. 5. 6
may water, but it is only God that gives the increase, he does thereby lead
them to the Lord Jesus Christ, who has so provided for his newborn babes that
they may have wherewith to grow up.

First he speaks of coming to Christ, describing him a living stone as he is
elsewhere called the chief corner stone in this building, upon whom all the
people of Matthew. 21. 22.
God ought to rely, he being then the chief corner stone, notwithstanding he be
disalowed of men, yet to God he is elect and precious.

The first duty the Holy Ghost here teaches us is, That we should be careful
to get faith and holiness in our persons which we do obtain by coming to
Christ: secondly we are next to come to his house, that is, to become members
of his visible Church. Now we come to Christ first by his call of us by the
preaching of his word, as Christ says Come Matthew. 11. 28
to me, etc. secondly by the drawing of the father. So that there are two
ways or Ioh. 6. 44.
means to come to Christ, the one is outward, the other inward, the first is
the Word, the second is the Spirit, by persuading our hearts and bringing us to
the obedience of the Gospel.

Next we are to consider from what we are called, namely from that that is by
nature sinful, from our sinful estate, secondly whereto we are called, that
is, to Christ, that we may become living stones, to be built a spiritual house.

Christ is called a living stone as having life in himself, and giving life to
his John. 5. 26 and 1. 4.
church, he is called the chief corn stone in way of similitude; for as the
corner stone to the building, is to join the walls together, so Christ is to
the whole Church, he joins all his, both Jews and Gentiles into one spiritual
house. Again he is called a stone in respect of his firmnes of grace given of
God by him; so that all that are built upon him, are as a Matthew. 7. 24. 25. and
26.
house built upon a rock which stands sure against all assaults, opposed by our
Savior to an house built upon the sand which falls when tempestuous assaults
come: so is it with us, we have a firm foundation which is Gods decree, his
love stablished to us in Christ.

Is Christ then such a firm and sure foundation, it is for the exceeding
comfort Use.
of all his people, that however they be opposed by the world and satan yet
they shall remain firm for ever, the gates of hell shall never prevail against
them. Matthew. 16. 18.


Again has Christ life not only for himself but for us, this is to show us
our Use.
duties that we carry our selves as living stones in his spiritual house which
is his Church, he that is Christ's must be a new creature, by faith he must put
on Christ, for unless we come to Christ by faith, we shall depart from him
without fruit: and by these several comparisons laid down in scripture we are
to know the grace of Christ is set forth to us. He is a living stone and he
makes us living stones, he gives life to the whole body.

He is called also living bread, whosoever eat him (that is believe in him)
shall live by him, if any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever. John.
6. 50. 51.


He is called the vine and we the branches, he that abides in him brings forth
fruit, but without him we can do nothing, John. 15. 5.
by him alone we bring forth fruit, and expect salvation in the day of the Lord.

Disalowed of men.) First this was in his own person when he was here, so also
in his after. In himself, in that he had neither house nor home; for he was a
carpenter and brought up without school learning, and because of his base and
Mark. 6. 3.
low estate, he was despised and men regarded him not.

2. The Jews were crossed in their error, while they expected salvation by
the works of the law, but he declares, if they will have salvation they must
Romans 10. 3.
have it by him, without him none can see God, to the Jews then Christ was a
stumbling block, by them judged an enemy to God and Moses.

3. Christ came preaching the death 1. Cor. 1. 23.
of the cross, which to the Gentiles is foolishnes, and in respect of his
plain and simple administration of the Gospel, for these causes he may be said
to be disalowed of men.

This is spoken to comfort us against Use.
the scandal of the cross, when we see he is rejected of the world not only
in himself, but in his servants, Is Christ then not respected? let us not be
offended, for Christ was to enter into glory Luke 24. 26
by suffering, let us then willingly endure despising here, that we may have
glory in the life to come, for this cause 1. Pet. 4. 1.
are we to arm our selves against the temptations of this world, because if the
master of the house was thus entreated and disalowed of men, we his servants
Matthew. 10. 24. 25.
must not murmr if we drink also of the same cup, therefore we are not to
think that the Kingdom of Christ here Ioh. 18. 36.
is a pompous outward Kingdom, but it consists in righteousness peace and joy in
the Holy Ghost, and those that are his Romans 14. 17
subjects must be meek and humble; and therefore let all take heed that they
be not offended at Christ's meannesse, nor Matthew. 11. 29.
yet stumble at the afflictions that come for his sake.

The 3. thing, (elect of God and precious.) Whence we may observe, how opposite
the actions of God and men are, men make no account of Christ, but count him
vile, but God honors and preferres him, it is prophesied of him that he should
grow as a branch out of a dry ground, so says the Prophet Esaie of him, and
David compares him to a worm and no man, Esai. 53. 2.

Psalm. 22. 7.


despised of men, yet this hinders not Gods respect of him, for after suffering
he came to glory: Thus it is with all Hob. 12. 2.
his people, although they are despised of men, yet are they in account with
God, God accounts them his treasure, he pitcheth his tabernacle amongst them,
with whom he will dwell.

Christ is called the elect of God by the Prophet Esaie, my servant whom I
Esai. 44. 1. 2.

Ephesians. 1. 4. 2.

Tim. 1. 9.

Ioh. 10. 10. and 28.


have chosen, so we are chosen in Christ, before the world was, God givs us
eternal life by him.

In that Christ is elect and we in him, Use.
it is to show the assurance of salvation by Christ, as Christ dyed and went to
glory, so shall we also, even as God did regard him as his only begotten
Matthew. 3. 17
son, in whom he is well pleased, notwithstanding all his baseness in the
worlds esteem; so does God account of all true Christians, for this is for
farther manifestation of the glory of God in accepting them in his sone Christ.

(Ye also as livinge stones are builte up a Spiritual House.) As in the first
place we said, it is not enough to come to Christ in our persons, but we must
adjoyn to his Church, so now we must not content our selves with personal
good, but we must seek farther perfection to become members of his visible
Church, It is not lawful for Christians to wander in the world or to live
alone, nor to adjoyn themselves in communion with false Churches, but as it is
in the Acts, The Lord added to the Act. 2. 47
Church such as should be saved, unto this estate all are bound to come, and so
to be made pertakers of all Christ's graces, who couples all the body together,
for this cause are they called living stones in similitude from the stones of
the temple co^pacted into one body, but the stones of the Temple were liveles,
these living, and herein they differ. As the first Temple was a figure of
Christ, so also it signified all the body of the faithful, who Heb. 10. 21.
make all one house, over which Christ is set. If we then be his house let us
hold fast our rejoicing to the end.

Moreover although those stones in that first Temple built by Salomo^ were
without 1. King. 8. 10.
life, yet God took possession of it; and dwelt in the midst of it, how much
more with them that are a temple joined together of living stones.

Now as this is for encouragement to Use.
all to become members of his Church, so also it shows who are the fit
members of his Church, even those only that are living stones.

And in that the members of the Church ought to be living stones, it should
teach us, not to be idle in good Use.
works, faith without works is dead, Iam. 2. 17.

Hab. 2. 4.


and just men live by faith, by faith we are made pertakers of the death of
Christ and all other benefits, Christ is the head of the body: As is the nature
of the head, so must the members be, and Ephe. 5. 23.
as the parts of the body natural, have life from the head, so also we from
Christ, as he is the head and is living, so ought all true Christians that come
to him; it is a thing against nature that a dead body should be fastened to a
living head, and therefore whoever is not fastened to him by faith, cannot be
made partakers of 10 hn 8. 24.
his life, therefore however hypochrites may come into the Church by their
seeming regeneration, yet not having the life of God in them, they can receive
no benefitt from Christ by the ministry of man. But because we are to insist
upon the similitude of a building we will return to that.

We are built into an house three manner of ways, first by the gifts of the
spirit, 1. Cor. 12.
when God gives ability to build up one another by the graces we receive from
the Spirit of God, 2. Besides these, there verse. 4.
are offices proceeding from the Lord Christ, of which some were master
builders verse. 5.
as the Apostles, and Prophets, next after them the Evangelists, upon the
Doctrines they taught and writ the church is builded, as the Apostle testifyes
to the Ephesians. 2. 20. 21. To these he adds the ordinary ministry of the church,
Pastors and Teachers Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. Unto these two we have a third namely the
operations of God the father, who makes verse. 6.
his word powerful and effectual, giving us grace to understand and apply it;
and to bring forth the fruit of it: so that from the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, we receive life and these benefitts here spoken of, and so become a
spiritual house. This spiritual house is opposed to the matereall house
builded by Solomon, which was but a figure as the Apostle says to the
Hebrews. Hebr. 9. 9.


We are therefore to be careful that Use.
the graces of God be not received in us in vain, but that we grow in grace in
faith and holiness, that we may be built up 2. Pet. 3. 18.
an holy house and habitation by his spirit. In this life we are but in the
growth, but in the life to come, we shall come to be perfect men, now in the
mean time we Luk 2. 52

1. Sam. 2. 26.

Prove. 3. 4.


are to know we are in this world as Christ was in this world, still growing.

There is all ways an end of building, as the Apostle says Ephesians. 2. 20. The
whole church is built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets Jesus
Christ himself being the chief corner stone, in whom all the building is
coupled together. 1. grows to be an holy temple in Lord, whereby the holy
Ghost shows, the state of the Church figured by the Temple. The second end is
in the 22. verse, to be the habitation of God by the Spirit, hence is it the
holy Ghost says, know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost?
1. Cor. 6.


Thus being the temple of God, we may build upon the assurance of the Lords Use.
promise of dwelling amongst us, as it is Lev. 26. 11. 12.

2. Cor. 6. 16


said, I will walk and dwell amongst them and pitch my Tabernacle amongst you,
I will be your God and ye shall be my people, thus the most heavenly promises
are set down under this mystery, the full accomplishment whereof shall be
fullfilled in the world to come: In the mean time as Solomon prayed at the
dedicatio^ of the Temple, behold the heaven of 1. Kin. 8. 27
heavens cannot contain thee, so we may say, what are we, that God should dwell
amongst us, or that he should pour out the graces of his spirit upon us? and
forasmuch as we should be a spiritual house, we are to take heed that we
defile not our bodies or souls: see what care Use.
God had of old of the Temple, none defiled, might enter therein, if a
matereall house was so carefully kept, how much more the living house the
church of God, if the former were carefully watched and looked to, to keep it
from pollution, how much more should we be careful to keep our selves from our
own or others sins, therefore let us take heed that we 1. Tim. 5. 22.
harbor not uncleannes within us, but that we labor to be holy as he is holy,
because we are built a spiritual house. Salomons 1. Pet. 1. 16

1. Kin. 6. 38


house was seven years in building, so we in this house of God must be still in
building in that faith to which God has called us.

The end of that house was to declare Gods word amongst them, and there did the
Lord promise he would accept their offerings.

From the house we are now to speak of the priesthood, for that he speaks of
next, (an holy priesthood.) As of Christ, we are called Christ^ans, so from the
particular offices of Christ, as of Prophet, Act. 11. 26.
Priest, and King, we are ever with him made partakers of the same, we have the
annoynting of Christ to make us prophets priests and Kings, of his priesthood
we see here, that we should be an holy priesthood. Touching the holiness of the
priesthood it was appointed by the Lord only Exodus 28. 1

1. Chro. 23. 13.

Heb. 5. 4.


to some, for none might take that honor upon them but he that was called of
God as was Aaron, so no spiritual priest now, but he that is called of Christ,
therefore there is now no true priests but of Christ, as Christ offered to his
father a spiritual sacrifice acceptable, so we by him are made able to offer
spiritual sacrifices.

The second thing belonging to the priesthood, they must be without blemish,
Lev. 21. 17
if any were blemished they were to be putt from their office, signifying
thereby that he that is our high priest, must be Heb 7. 26.
holy harmless and undefiled, separate from sinners, the priest must abstein
from unclean things, we are not to marvel the Lord should be so careful of the
priests, since he will be honored in those that Levit. 10. 3.
come near him, they were to be tried and known to be of holy conversation in
the sight of God; the same thing is required of us, that we purge out that
natural corruption wherein we were born, that we should be changed from our
deformityes, and shake off our corruptions in the sight of God, that we may be
holy as the priests of God, to offer holy sacrifices to him.

The sacrifices that the priests did offer of old were of two sorts, some were
to putt away sin, some for thansgiving to God. These sacrifices are now
ceased, for Christ once offering himself has satisfied all, and has putt an
end to all those legal types, therefore now no sacrifice Heb. 10. 4. with 11.
12.

1. John. 1. 7


either bloody or unbloody is any sacrifice for our sin, but only the blood
of Christ which cleanses us from all sin.

First for the burnt offerings they were signs of our offering our bodies and
souls to the Lord, for in it the whole creature was given unto God, only the
priest had the skin for his labor, other Lev 7. 8.
free will offerings, some were of beasts, some of fowls, and other of corn,
now in those offerings of beasts ad fowls, they were not to be brought dead:
but living, and therefore no fish that dies so soon as it is out of the water
was fit for sacrifice.

God hereby teaches us, not to bring Use.
lame and dead sacrifices, but to present ourselves as living sacrifices, holy,
acceptable Romans 12. 1.
to the Lord in Jesus Christ. These things did the law of Moses teach them in
those legal sacrifices, but unto us we know all those outward sacrifices are
abolished, and therefore we are not to do so, but we are to kill our worldly
lusts, we must present our bodies and souls to Matthew. 22. 37.

Mark 12. 30. 33.


God, and serve him with all our hearts, with all our soul, and with all our
strength, and this more then all burnt offerings and sacrifices.

For first spiritual sacrifices do consist in the heart, of which David
speaks in the 51. Psalm, The sacrifices of God are a broken Psalm. 51 17.
heart, a broken and contrite heart, O God thou will not despise. Then is there
the fruit of the lips, so that we must not Hose. 14. 2.

Heb. 13. 15.

Psalm. 69. 30 31.

Ephesians. 4. 29.


only have holy affections, but also out mouths and lips must sing to his
praise, we must have no unproffitable and profane words to come out of our
mouths. 3. Likewise all our actions and benefits to the poor are acceptable
sacrifices, To Heb. 13. 16.

Act. 24. 17.

Philip. 4. 18


do good, and to distribute forgett not, for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased, so that in general, all good works God appoynts us to walk in, in
prayer, in thansgiving, in performing duties one to another, in releife of our
brethren, wherein 1. Cor. 8. 5.
we are poured out as in sacrifice for our brethren.

Acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. These sacrifices then must be so offered as
they may be accepted in Jesus Christ. If a man offered sacrifice not accepted,
he both lost his charge and his reward, so God does not respect sacrifices that
are not offered in Jesus Christ.

He then that would have his service pleasing to God, must first have his
person accepted, otherwise his sacrifice cannot be well pleasing to God, so in
Cain and Abell, the Lord had respect to Abell, and his offering, first his
person was accepted Genesis 4. 4.
then his offering, the reason is, because the the sacrifice of the wicked is
abominable Prove. 15. 8.

Psalm. 69. 18.


to God, therefore no wicked man can offer a sweet smelling sacrifice to God,
because himself being wicked all his actions the Lord has no respect to.
Secondly God does not only require holiness in our persons, but he farther
requires that they be done at his command, for if men had offered any other
sacrifice then he commanded, it was a thing that he abhorred, therefore in
offering their children to Moloch the Lord protests against Ier. 7. 31.

2. King. 23. 10.


it as a thing he never commanded, whatsoever worship then is done by the
precepts of men without the commandment of God it is vain and sinful, In
vain do they worship me (says Christ) that teach for Doctrines the
commandments Matthew. 15. 9.
of men.

3. As we have a care to do what God commands, yet are we not to think for
the worthiness of the work done to be accepted; but simply to delight to do it
as a thing commanded of God in obedience to him.

4. We must have faith, that so it may be well pleasing to him, we must perform
it Heb. 11. 6.
in him in whom the father is well pleased, that is in Jesus Christ, the reason
is, because every man by nature being corrupted, we cannot offer any thing
wherewith God is pleased, As it was impossible Hebr. 10. 4.
that the blood of bulls and goats should purge sin, so is it not possible to
offer any other sacrifice pleasing to God, but only that that is done in
faith of Christ. 2. It must be by and through Jesus Christ, because he is the
Mediator of the new testament, because God and we are not at one, therefore we
must have a Mediator, and Hebr. 12. 24
there is no other Mediator between God and man but Jesus Christ, therefore
whosoever offer any duty and not in faith 1. Tim. 2. 5
in Christ, they cannot please God, be they prayers or any other service. In
the sacrifices of old they were still to have salt, Lev. 2. 13.

Mark 9. 49.


as salt keeps from putrefying, so it also alters the relish of the flesh:
which is to teach us, not to think to come to God in Use.
the taste of our own works, but by the Covenant of Jesus Christ.

The sum of all is that we are called of God from our natural and corrupt
state, to the state of grace in Jesus Christ, which is despised in the world,
but rich in the sight of God, and so ought it to be esteemed of us above all
things, even the greatest riches and honors of this world. Let us not then
pass for the reproach of the world, for having Christ we have all, therefore
we are to esteem of this privilege aright, and forasmuch as God requires
holiness should be in his house of old, and we are his spiritual house, let us
not think that God requires less of us the^ of old. Labor we to keep our
selves without spott, As Christ was said to be Heb. 3. 6.
faithful in his own house, whose house we are if we hold fast the confidence,
and rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end, for this is our happiness that we
are called to the communion of himself and spirit, he defends us from evil,
and does us good, here and for ever, and so should we be thankful to God, for
if God would be honored of the fathers in the matereall temple, how much more
of us, to whom he has given the spiritual house and spiritual sacrifices,
the fathers saluted the promises a far off, God providing some better thing
for us, that they without us should not be made perfect. Heb. 11. 46.


A Postscript to the Brethren absent.
BRethren, it may happily seem strange Did you but know the wholesome counsel of
Mr. Thorp our Elder which would have prevented all. See the answer to the 14
que stio^ in our Loving Tender, published 1623.
to you, that the people here complained of, should be so irregular, in their
proceedings, and so singular, as to reject the help of all, but since they had
their reasons, I thought it requisite to give the^ their due herein. The reason
why they proceeded not by the rule Matt. 18. was, because in this case, they
had nothing to do with it, but Joshua 22. and 1. These. 5. 22. And the reason
why they rejected all others help was, because they said they were 1 Thessalonians. 2.
15.
contrary to all me^. As for farther things observed, J referr myself to the
indifferent present, whether I have not set down their offenses sparingly,
they having bee^ mostly in addition in a constant course more then 7. years:
yet (with grief I speak it) they are so confident Notwithstanding all this,
the Lord in mercy has here raised another church void of these scandalls that
walk in the fear of God.

Act. 9. 31.


and overjust in their courses, that they continue wearylesse condemning all
others, and censure those within their power that withstand them in it, and
this in deed and truth, is the fountain whence all our present troubles have
issued. This I thought necessary to declare, because it ministers just occasion
to many godly persons to stumble at us. Things thus proposed: Let the Brethren
judge between us. Genesis 31. 37.


FINIS.

