THE PREACHERS Proclamacion.

Discoursing the vanity of all earthly things, and proouing that there is no
contentation to a Christian mind, but only in the fear of God.

Ecclesiastes. 1.2. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of
vanities, all is vanity.

HENRY SMITH.



Imprinted at London by William Kearney dwelling within Creeple-gate. 1591.

THE PREACHERS Proclamacion.
Ecclesiastes. 1.2. Vanity of vanities ( says the Preacher) vanity of
vanities, all is vanity.


THis book begins with all is vanity, and ends with fear God and keep his
commandments: Eccl, 12.13
If that sentence were knit with this which Solomon keeps to the end as the
haven of rest, after the turmoiles of Vanity: it is like that which Christ
said to Martha, Math. 10.40.
thou art troubled about many things, but one thing is necessary. That which
troubles us Solomon calls vanytie; that which is necessary he calls the
fear of God: From that to this should be every man's pilgrimage in this
world. We begin all vanity, and never know perfectlye, that we are vain,
until we repent with Solomon. Therefore this is his first greeting and lesson
to all after his conversion, to warn them that all is vanity: as if God had
said to him as he said to Ezekiel. Cause Jerusalem to know her abominations;
Exe. 16.2.
as though men did not know their sins how vain they are, Job. 15.31.
(as Eliphar says) he believes not that he is vain, which makes every man
defer his repentance, until the hour come that sin will leave him, and the^
he is unwilling to depart because he is not ready. Therefore I have chosen
this sentence, which speaks of nothing but vanity, to show how we take the
way to misery, for the way to happiness, and turn the day of Salvation, to
the day of vanytie. Let every man think as I go why he should love that which
Solomon repented, if we think Solomon happier now then he was before. This
verse is the sum or contents of all this book, and therefore Solomon begins
with it and ends with it, as if he should say, first this is the matter which
I will prove, and after this is the matter which I have proved: now ye see
whether I told you true that all is vanity, I may call it Salamons Theme: or
the Fardell of vanities, which when he has bound in a bundell, he bids us cast
it into the fire: for after he has done with them in his last Chap: and 13.
ver. as though he would have no more thought of the^, he turns away from them
as if he had buried them, and goes to another matter saying: now let us hear
the end of all: Fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole
duty of man. As though he were exceeding glad, that after so many dangers
through the root of vanity, yet God let him see the haven of rest, and
brought him to the right end, and set him upon the shore, where he might see
all his vanyties: as Moses looked back upon his enemies, and saw the^ drowned
behind him. The whole narration does show, that Solomon wrote this book after
his fall, when he had the experience of vanyties, and had seen the sollie of
the world, what evil comes of pleasure, and what fruit grows of sin, he
was bold to say Vanity of vanities, etc. which he avouches with such
protestation, as though he would justify it against many Adversaries, for all
the world is in love with that which he calls vanity. Therefore he puts to
his name in the midst of his sentence, as if he would defend it against all
comers: if any man ask who broched this strange Doctrine, the Preacher (says
Solomon:) to testify his hearty conversion to God, he calls himselffe a
Preacher, besides all the titles he had before: as a witness of his vnf^yned
repentance, as, if God had said unto him then being converted, convert thy
brethren: so, when we are converted we should become Preachers unto other, and
show some fruits of our calling, as Solomon left this book a monument to all
ages of his conversion. Therefore they which write thar Solomon died in his
sin, and that such a famous Instrument of God went to the damned, do great
wrong to the worthy King, which gives them such an example to repent, and
would correct their rash Judgment, if they considered, First, Psa. 45.7.
that he was the cleerest figure of christ (except Melchisedech) which passed
all prosperity and all men in wisdom. Secondlye, that he was inspired with
the holy Ghost like the prophets, 1. Cro. 17.13.
to be one of the Pens of God to write his holy word, the word of salvation,
which was not fit for a reprobate. Thirdlye: that God promised to his Father,
that he would not take his truth and his mercy from him, as he did from
Saul, 2. Sam. 1^* 24
nor forsake him as he did Saul, but correct him in an other sort. Fourthly,
Nehe. 13.6
that God is said to love him, Romans 9.
therefore as Paul concludes, that Jacob was elected, because God says, Jacob
have I loved: Genesis 27.
so we may conclude that Solomon was elected, because he says, Solomon have I
loved. Lastly, we may gather out of the seventh Chaptet of this Book, and 30.
verse, and out of the 5. of the Proverbs 14. verse, that Solomon had left his
concubines and vanities, before he wrote these books.

Therefore to say that the figure of Christ, the pen of the holy Scriptures,
the man whom God loved, the wisest man that ever was died a reprobate, is
presumption against the word, impiety against god, and wrong to the dead:
although because of his grievous fall, in Idolatry and vnclea^nes, God left
him in disgrace, and makes no mention of repentance, where he speaks of his
death, 1. Cor. 10.12.
that they which stand may take heed least they fall, and see how easy it is
to slip, by the example of him that was wiser then they.

Thus having found as it were the mine, now let us dig for the treasure.
Vanity of vanities, etc. This is Salomons conclusion when he had given over
the world, and tried all things like a spy sent into a strange Country, as
if he were now come home from his pilgrimage; they gather about him to enquire,
what he has heard, and seen abroad, and what he thinks of the world, and
those things which are so loved amongst men: like a man in admiration of that
which he had seen, and not able to express partitularlye one after another,
he contractes his news into a word, you ask me what I have seen, and what I
have heard, Vanytie says Solomon, and what else, Vanytie of vanities, and what
else, all is vanytie: this is the history of my voyage, I have seen nothing
but vanity over the world, carrye this for the news from the Preacher,
Vanity of vanities, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, and more then
vanity. So the further he did go, the more vanity he did see? and the nearer
he looked, the greater it seemed, till at the last he could see nothing but
vaninitie: when he was come to this that he did see all things vain, upon
which men set their hearts, he was moved with compassion and could be silent
no longer, but needs he must write to them which seek felicity (as he did)
in transitorye things, to warn them that they seek not any longer in these
foolish things which have no stabilitie nor contentation, but fly from them to
the fear of God which has the promises of this life and the life to come.
Therefore he begins with all is vanity; as if he should say, love not the
world nor the the things of the world, for I have tried that there is no
certaintye nor contentation in them. Eccle. 12.13.
Thus he draws them first from the wrong way, and then sets them in the right
way to happynes, which he desineth at last to be, fear God and keep his
commandments. When he had gone through a thousand vanities, then that comes
in at the end: even like our repentance which stays till death. So his driste
is to show that man's happynes is not in these things which we count of: but
in those things which we defer. His reason is, they are all vanitye; his
proof is because there is no stabilitye in the^, nor contentation of mind, his
coclusion is, therefore contemn the world, and look up to heaven from whence
ye came and whether ye go. This is the scope which Solomon aims at, as though
we did seek happynes, but we go a wrong way unto it, therefore he sounds a
retire, showing that if we go on as we have begun, we shall not find happynes
but miserye, because we go by vanities: therefore to fright us out of this way,
he breaks forth into an exclamation Vanity of vanities etc. Now, Solomon full
of wisdom and schooled with experience, 1. C^^ ^
is licenced to give his sentence of the whole world. For the spiritual man
judges all things, his judgment is so certain, that it runs before the
evidence, and condemns all for vanitye, before he convince them to be vain.
Never any Judge did condemn so many together. Solomon resolved all the doubts
of the Queen of Shaeba, yet Solomon never answered so many questions at once,
as now: for what can ye inquire, but here you have an answer? ask him as the
soldiars or harlots, or Publicanes asked John, Master what is sin? vanitye
says Solomon. what is pleasure? vanitye too. what is beauty? vanity too. what
is riches? vanitye too. what is honor? vanitye too. what is long life?
vanitye too. This is the state of things after the fall, all turned to vanitye.
This is no reproach to the things, but a shame to him, which so abused them,
that all things should be called vain for him. What a testimony is this of
him which should be the only servant of God upon earth, whom he created in
holiness and righteousness, whom he framed to his own image, whom he placed in
Paradise, and would have raised to heaven, to hear that he has so poluted him
self with every sin, that now he is nothing but vanitye? this is a
lamentable song, that will make him weep that tunes it, if he think what he
says, how his state is changed since Adam his Father dyed. Once God said that
all was good, Genesis 1.
and now he says that all is naught and vain, as though he forbad man that
which he created for man: that is not Salomons meaning, to debar me^ from the
use of creatures, although all things changed with man and became worsse then
they were, Romans 8.20.
yet he does rather show that man reapes nothing but vanity out of these
things by reason of his corruption, then that the things them selves are vain,
if they were well used: for even since the creation, Paul says, 1. Tim. 4.
that every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected, if it be
received or used with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the word of God
and prayer: that is it which makes them profitable to us, which because it is
wanting for the most part, therefore Solomon says that all things are vain
to us, not of the^ selves, but because they are not sanctified as they should
be: therefore in the 2.24. the 3. 12, 22. the 5.17. the 8.15. he shows a way
how we may make profit of all and rejoice in our labors, and find a lawful
pleasure in earthly things, so often as he calls to the use, least we should
err is the monks and Eremites have done before, mistaking these words, when
he says that all is vanity, they have forsaken al company and government, and
office and trade, and get them selves into the wilderness among beasts, to live
in quiet and silence, saying that men could not live in the world and please
God, because all is vanity: so while they counted all things vain, they
became vain themselves, and left those blessings which Solomon enjoyed after
this knowledge, more then he did before.

Psalm. 62 9.
Therefore it is vain man which Solomon reproves which is not only called
vanitye, but lighter then vanity: if he did not use things vainly, nothing
should be vain in the world, whereas now by abuse we may see sometime as
great vanitye in the best things as in the worst; for are not many vain in
their knowledge, vain in their polices; vain in their learning, as other are
vain in their ignorance? Was not the wisdom of Achitophell a vain thing, the
swiftnes of Hasael a vain thing, the strength of Goliath a vain thing, the
treasure of Nebuchadnezer a vain thing, the honor of Hammon a vain thing, the
beauty of Absolon a vain thing, the knowledge of the Scribes a vain thing,
the devotion of the Pharisees a vain thing? By this you may see that vanity is
bold when she breaks into howses and Churches and palaces. Now we may say,
and none will redress, vanity may come to infect, where truth may not come
to reprove, is it not time then to sound this alarm again Vanity of
vanities, vanity of vanities, all is vanity? If we could hear how vehemently
and how pittifullye Solomon pronounced this outcry, happily it would move us a
little to hear, how he did exclame of his own life, and condemned him self
as it were by the sound of a Trumpet that al might hear, for we are all by
nature such deaf adders, that whether the Prophets come pyping, or mourning,
or crying, they go away from us again like Jeremie, crying, Ier. 51.9.
we would have cured Babel, but she could not be cured. Therefore Solomon
speaks thrice like a crier, Vanity of vanities etc. as the mother which would
feign make her son to hear, she doubles and trebles her words, and what my
son? and what my son of my womb? and what O son of my desires? so when
God would stir up men to heaven, he cries thrice to the earth, earth, earth,
hear the word of the Lord: so when Solomon would dissuade from the company of
the wicked, read Pro. 4.14. how often he repeates the charge, Enter not into
the way of the wicked, walk not in it, avoid it, go not by it, turn from
it, and pass by it, as though he would never have done, or as though we would
never hear. So Christ when he taught Peter what was his duty, rehearsed it
thrice, feed, feed, feed. Ioh. 21.1*
Joseph shows the reason of these repeticio^s when he tells Pharaoh why his
dream was doubled, because the matter was important and certain: therefore
when Solomon repeats this saying so often, Go. 41.32
he calls for audience, as though he had some weighty and great matter to
utter, such a point of wisdom is it for every man to know, that all is
vanity, if we direct not things to their right end as when the holy Ghost
would signify that God is all holy, he repeats thrice, Esa. 6.3
holy, holy, holy: so when he should show that man is all vain, thrice he
repeateth vanity, to show, how hardly man believes that he is vain: Job 15.3
therefore he bringes in three assertions as it were witnesses to prove it, all
agree upon the same words, but that the last is more plain and says, that
all is vanity, that is, that man is not only changed and become vain, but
for the vanity of man as the Apostle says, the creatures are subject to
vanity, Romans 8 20
and have not that glory and liberty that they should have for the sin of man:
A spiritual eye does see some vanity or other in every thing, as appears
betwixt Christ and his Diciples at Jerusalem, Luke 21.5.
they gazed upon the building of the Temple as a brave thing, and would have
had Christ to behold it with them, but he did see that it was but vanity, and
therefore said, are these the things that ye look upon? as if he should say,
how vain are you to gaze upon this? If Christ thought the beauty of his Temple
were but a vain thing, and not worth the sight which yet was built and
beautified, so by his own prescript, how should Solomon express all the
vanity of the world, to which al me^ have added more and more since the
beginning? therefore as if he wanted words to express it, as he did see it,
he breaks forth into an exclamation, and repeates the same often, Vanity of
etc. as if he should say, I cannot speak how vain the world is, but vain it
is, and very vain and naught but vain, speaking as if he had the feeling and
sense of it, as though the world stood naked before him, and it grieved him to
see it, he cuttes his words in chiding manner, and makes short rida^ce, as if
it grieved him to speak all that he knew: therefore that which he speaks, he
speaks roundly, that if they read no more but sleep all the Sermon time
after, yet the first sentence shall strike a sting into their hearts, and leave
a sound behind to waken them when they are gone, as many (you know) remember
this sentence, which remember no sentence in all this book besides: who has
not heard vanity of vanities etc. though few have conceived it, this is the
phrase of Scripture, when the holy Ghost would commend the song of Solomon
above all other songs, he calls it the song of songs: when he would exalte
the heavenly King above all other Kings, he calls him the King of Kings: so
when he would note a vanity, and yet a greater, and a greater then that which
is the greatest of all, he calls it vanity of vanities etc. as when we would
note a great fool, we will say a fool of fools, a sin of sins, a servant
of servants. These are scornful names of the world and homely tytles to give
our pleasures, to call them vanity of vanities, and again vanity of
vanities, and yet again vanity, as though we would provoke them to fall out
with us, like a man which sharpens his enemy with tauntes, when he would egg
him to fight, he might have mollified his terms before he condemned the world
thrice: but the world is no chaungeling that Solomon should change his
judgment, but vain it was, and vain it is, and vain it will be: and therefore
thrice vain world he may call it. First vanity, straight vanity of vanities,
and so dainlye all is vanity, what a transcendant is this? as though it
increased while he spoke, so fast grows this weed to worsse and worsse like
the Image which appeered to Nabuchadnezer, the first part was of gold, the
second of silver, the third of brass, Dan. 2.
the fourth part of iron, the fifth of clay, and so by many changes the world
grows worsse and worsse and all they which follow it: when a man begins to
like of pleasure and opens the door of one vanity which he loves, straight as
many vanities flock to him as Solomon had concubines, till the Temple of God be
like a den of thieves. Therefore when Solomon beheld such a plurality and tot
quot of vanities, like surges coming one upon another in pleats and foldes, he
spoke as though he would show us vanity, hatching vanities, Vanity of
vanities, all is vanity. The first saying does pass without let, but the last
rubbes and sinckes not into the hearts of men so easilye as it is spoken. Me
thinks I hear some dispute for Baal, and bids Solomon stay before he comes
to all is vanity, it may be that sin is vanity, but shall we condemn all
for sin and pleasure? what say you to beutie which is natures dowry and
cheereth the eye as sweet meat does the taste? beutie is like a fair
picture, take away the color and there is nothing left: beutie in deed is but
a color and a temptation, the color fades and the temptaton snareth. But
what say you to riches which make men Lords over the rest and allow them to
go brave, lie soft, and fare daintilye, and have what they list? riches are
like painted grapes, which look as though they would satisfy a man, but do not
slake his hunger nor thirst: riches in deed do make a man covet more, and get
envy and keep the mind in care. But what say you to honor, which sets a man
aloft, and makes the kne bow, and the tongue sooth, and the head stand bare, as
though they were other kind of creatures, above the nature of man? honor is
like a King in a play, when his part is done his ornaments are taken from
him, he which held the basin to him is as good as he: honor in deed may
command all but life, he makes a fair show now, but when death comes all is
one. But what say you to profound knowledge in deep mysteries which makes men
sought unto, and called deep Clerks and great Doctors? 2. Sam. 11.
knowledge is like the letters which Vriah carried against him self, so
knowledge carries a greater judgment, and often times condemns the bearer:
knowledge in deed without virtue, leaves a man without excuse, and is a witness
against him because he understands what is good and will not do it. Yet there
is an other darling of account behind, what say you to long life, which
causes a man to see his childrens children, and makes him reverent before the
people? long life is like a long night, when a man cannot sleep, so age is
wearisom with sickness, and strives with it self, because it cannot walk, nor
talk; nor hear, nor taste, nor sleep as it is wont, therefore it wishes
often the night were gone, that the pain were past: in deed he which sees
many days, sees many miseries, and therefore what is not vain in life, since
life it self is vain? show me the light which will not darken? show me the
star which will not fade? show me the fruit which will not corrupt? show me
the garment which will not wear? show me the beauty which will not wither?
show me the strength which will not weaken? show me the time which will not
pass? and I will reclaim it, all is not vanity: but if all things vanish
then all things are vain: yet this will not go for truth before men have
smarted for the trial. Pro. 12.12
Some are so vain that they count nothing vanity: Pro. 14.9.
but that which is vayner then the rest, delights them most: for there is as it
were a commonwealth of vain persons, and he which can be vainest is like a
King of the rest. Pro. 28.4
Some are of this mind that they think all is vanity, but that which they
love, and therefore they call them vain, and curious, and fantastical, which
speak against their vanities, and say that it is necessary to be vain, for
they can not live unless they deceive: they cannot please unless they flatter:
they can not be believed unless they swear: Act. 19.24
they cannot be esteemed unless they royste: Jonah. 2.^
as Demetrius thought that he should beg unless he might sell images.

There is an other sort, like the buier in the Proverbs: 20.14. which says, it
is naught, it is naught, but when he is gone a part, he boasts: so they will
say of the world it is naught, it is naught, before men and swear that all is
vanity, but when they are gone a part, they reconcile them selves unto it, and
kiss with her, and promise to be vain still, but they cannot abide to be
counted vain, the vaynest man that is. This shows the folly of the world is
so open and shameful, that her lovers must needs condemn her: you shall hear
them say often times it is a vain world wicked world, a naghty world, yet they
will not forsake it to die: like dastard soldiers who rail against the enemy,
but dare not fight against him. Al is vanity, but this is vanity of vanities,
that men will follow that which they condemn, but this is that every sinner
might condemn himself: for the conscience must judge first, then God, as our
Savior says, out of thine own mouth, and so out of thine own heart I will
condemn the naughty servant: showing that the wicked condemn themselves
before they are condemned of God. These are the worlds fools, which care not
what is their end, so their way be pleasant. O that here were an end of
vanities, but a greater vanity is behind; for our religion is vanity, like the
Scribes and Pharisees, having a show of holiness, as the apostle says; he
could call it but a show of holiness, not worthy to be called holiness, but like
holiness: yet the most part have not so much as the show of holiness, as the
pharisees had, but are vain in show, inside and outside too. Thus we find
nothing yet but vanity. I cannot lead you from one to an other, to show you the
several vanities of every person, or every thing, because Salo. says all is
vanity. How many sins then have we to condemn us, whose vanity is
sprinckeled in every thing, which have not only so many vanities as there be
things, but many vanities in every thing. As in our fare, how many vanities
are there? which make us rise sometime sick, sometime slepy, sometime dronk.
Yet there are mo vanities in our sports, laughing, swearing, and jesting, and
scoffing, and dalying, and playing with the scriptures: which oftentimes leaves
such a sting behind, that we had rather have lost our sport, then feel the worm
after. Yet there be mo vanities in our aparrel; ruff upon ruff, lace upon lace,
cut upon cut, 24. disorders, to the third and fourth degree, as if our apparel
were appareled, that if ye could see how vanity her self would go if she did
wear aparel, she would go eue^ like our vain women, for she could not go, nor
look, nor speak vayner, who does not know that these are vanities, and that
they might leave the^ if they would, but that ye might see there is a heart
within, vayner then the apparel which is without? therefore when these vanities
are worn out, they will have new, and when those are worn they will have new,
and still new till all be spent upon vanity, and then they begin (like the
prodigal child) to see how vain they were when they have bought wisdom with
sorrow. What would Sal. say, if he should see how vanity is grown since his
time, unto what a height she is mounted, what a train follows her? that there
is no prince in the world has so many attendants as vanity: she was but an
ympe then, but now she is a mother, and who ca^ number her sons and
daughters? the child reigns in playing, the mother reigns in dandling, the
Father reigns in giuinge, the courtier reigns in spending, the soldiar reigns
in boasting, the smith reigns in striking, the traveler vain in talking, the
merchant vain in swearing, the gentleman vain in building, the husbandeman
vain in carking, the seruingman vain in soothing, the young man vain in
sporting, the old man vain in coveting, the papist vain in superstion, the
protestant vain in conversation: every Vanity is so pleasant to one or
other, that they cannot miss one. So she gads by sea and by land, and mo
disciples flock unto her, of gamesters, and swearers, and players, and tiplers,
and huckslers, and suitors, and courtiers, as thick as the flies of Egypt,
which buzzed in their ears, and their eyes, and their necks, before and
behind, that a man cannot set his foot but upon Vanity. As the waters covered
the earth when but eight persons were saved: so Vanity has covered it again:
a worse deluge then the first, because it has not suffered eight persons to
escape, but every man is taynted with some vanity or other: which God seeing
in that place and city which should be best in the world, (that all men in the
City were vain) calls it the city of vanity: so we may say the world of
vanity, because she has an interest in every person of it. She sits upon
the earth like a serpent, and hatcheth all the sins which ye see among men:
as full as heaven is of bliss, so the world is fraught with vanity, court,
city, and country, whether does not vanity go, but to heaven? Seeing then
that vanity is so extolled amongst men, Solomon geues this sentence, Lu. 10.40
that all is vanity. Christ, like a moderator, concludes upon it, that there is
but one thing necessary: therefore let our sentence be like his, for surely if
we had Sal. repentance, we should see such an image of vanity before us, as
would make us cry again and again as often as Solomon, Vanity of vanities,
vanity of vanities, and all is vanity. What a sweet sentence is this from a
king? (whom one would think may live as he lift) to say that all is vanity.
O that we might hear kings speak so again, for it is a speech which had need
to have some to countenance it: for none are counted vain now, but they that
speak against vanity. Yet many had rather try it with Solomon, tha^ believe
it with Sal. and while they try wandering with him, some are taken out of their
way, and cut short of the time which they set to repent; from others God
takes away his grace, so they never return, because their guide is gone. This
the holy ghost pointed at, when he says, they followed vanity, 2. Kin. 17.13
and became vain: showing that the things which we follow, will make us like
themselves, and lead us, whether they belong to heaven or hell. In Romans 8.20.
vanity is put for destruction, but it is never put for salvation. If other
creatures are subject to a kind of destruction for the sin of man, as Paul
shows, what destruction shall light on man for his own sin? therefore let our
sentence run with Sal. vanity etc. We would aford the world better words and
fayrer titles then vanity of vanities. But call it what you will, Solomon
shows what it is, and what we will say in the end when we have tried it, then
vanity of vanities: yet it is comfort of comforts, glory of glories, life of
lives. But as Laban showed himself at parting, so at parting you shall see how
it will serve you: they seem pleasant vanities, and honest vanities, and
profitable vanities, but David calls them deceitful vanities. Imah oomes
after and cales them lying vanities: that is, which promise pleasure and
profit, and all, but deceive all. When they should perform they play Laban,
which gave Leah for Rachel. If they be lying vanities, and deceitful vanities,
then are they wilful and miserable vanities. Therefore if we be not come to
Salomons conclusion, to think that all is vanity, it is because our vanity
will not suffer us to see the vanity of other things. When we have proved
like Solomon, as fast as every man grows in knowledge and experience, so he
begins to cry vanity, and after that vanity of vanities, and at last, all is
vanity: so we contemn not al at once, but one sin after another, one lust
after another, one pleasure after another, til at last we count all vanity:
and then we are come home with Solomon, and may be preachers unto other. Thus I
have showed you, as it were, a line of vanity, you may look about you and see
the whole body, for if she be any where in this land, this is her Pontifical
sea, where she is never non resident. Now I will leave you to examine this
saying, whether all things have not been vain unto you yet: if they have bin
vain to you, and yet are good in their own nature, then think you how vain you
are, who have turned so many good things to vanity. Yet to set you in the way
before I end, I will answer them which ask if all things be vanity (as
Solomon says) tell us what we shall choose that we be not vain. Christ says
that one thing is necessary. Is Solomon contrary to Christ? No: therefore one
thing. Salo, excepts two, Fear God, and keep his commandments: this does
extol godliness, that al things are put under her feet, and counted vain
besides her. Therefore if all be vain but this, let the tempter take thee up
again, and show thee the kingdoms of the world, when he says, All these will
I give thee: thou may say, all these I contemn, for all is vanity. What
then? turn away mine eyes says David, and mine ears, and my heart too from
vanity. Try and prove thou no longer, for Sal. has proved for thee, it is
better to believe him, then try with him. Therefore now it remains that as
they brought forth their vain books after Paul's preaching, and cast them
into the fire: so ye should cast out al your vanities this day, and sacrifice
the^ to God, for they have been your idols, therefore bury them as Jacob did the
Idols, that never man see them after: and as God gave Job other children, so
he will give you other pleasures. Fear not that your joys will go away with
your vanities, as many think they shall never be merry again, if they should be
converted to religion, but as David daunced before the arc, as merely as
Herodias daunced before the king: so know undoubtedly, that the righteous find
more joy in goodness, then ever the wicked found in filthiness: nay says
David, more then they can find in riches or honors, when their wheat and wine
abound. As a horse is a vain thing to save a man, so al these things are too
vain to make a man happy. I appeal to your selves, if ye have tried the
pleasures of vanity already, as I know you have, whether ye may say with Paul,
what profit have we of those things whereof we are ashamed? no profit, but
shame, and grief, and guilt, and dreadful execution of judgment. As Solomon
calls folly the inheritance of folly, Pro. 14.18*
so vanity is all the inheritance of vanity. Ten times Laban changed Jacobs
wages, but ten thousand times sin has changed your wages, and deceived you
with other success then you looked for, Esa. 22
like Shebna, which built his sepulcher in one country, and was buried in
another: and yet how many changes are behind you know not, for if ye did, you
would make inquisition, and banish them at first, for whenever you go about
to cast them out, they will say still like the devils, that thou tormentest them
before the time. It seems that many are touched with compassion of this, and
therefore repriue their vanities and slack the execution, as though they were
afraid to offend the devil. Even we perhaps are yet in the trace of vanity,
hunting with Solomon to find that which we love, and find it not, because we
seek out of the way, what is the remedy? so run; says Paul, that ye may
obtain, you have tried the evil way to happiness, now try the good way, and
then that which ye love now, shall not only seem vain, but vanity of vanities,
that ye will marvel how ye could love them so long, and would not be in that
dotage again with them for all the world: until these earthly things seem
vain, no heavenly thing shall seem precious, therefore lose no more time, the
day comes when vanity of vanities shall be turned into misery of miseries, and
al is vanity too, all is misery: there is a certain place called hell, there
God keeps general sessions, there Justice shall sit to examine vanity, who
has embraced her, and who has forsaken her for God, and he which made his
pleasure of sin, so soon as he hears this doom, depart ye wicked, shall go
down by a black way, with many a sigh and sob, from God, from the Angels,
from the Saints, from joy, from glory, from bliss; with the fiendes of hell,
to sup in the palace of darckenes, with the princes of horror, at the table of
vengeance, in the chair of calamity, with the crown of death upon his head,
and he which tempted him to sin shall plague him for sinning, until he cry
with Cain, my punishment is greater then I can bear. Genesis 4.13. for all the
griefs, and fears, and thralles, and troubles, which fed upon him while he
lived, shall meet in an hour, and exceed them so far, that he shall think
that he suffers for all; and marvel how any torment can be lest for other.
What faith or fear have they which go dancing and leaping to this fire, like
a fool which runs to the stocks? how happy were it for me^ as we live in
these days, if there were no judgment at all? what will we answer when he who
made Solomon to write this, shall ask why we would not believe it? what shall we
say when he which came from his kingdom to bring us unto it, dema^ds why we
did turn the day of salvation into the day of vanity? If ye cannot excuse it
here, how will ye defend it there? we were born in vanity, we live in vanity,
but we would not die in vanity, because no man looks for any good of his
sins, after he is past this world: therefore let us remember, that whither
the vain men are gone, thither vain men shall go: there be not two ends for
sinners, but one; what a woeful bargain will it seem then to remember, that thou
did sell thy soul for vanity. If any thing will reclaim us, this will be a
terror in our hearts, to think that we shall give account unto him that will
measure to us as much misery, as we have taken vanity. Therefore as Abner
said to Joab, know thou not that it will be bitterness in the later end, Sa.
11.26
so let every man consider with himself, though his vanity be sweet now, yet
they will be bitter in the end. As Ammon, after he had fulfilled his lust, did
hate Thamar (which defiled him) more then he loved her before: so when the
spurt is past, and death looks us in the face, we shall hate our vanities
more, then we love them now. All this does conclude that which our Savior
said to Martha, but one thing is necessary, which God grant we may choose for
his son Jesus Christ, and then we have learned this lesson.

FINIS.

