SINNERS CONfession. By Henry Smith.

Pro. 28. verse 13. He that hides his sins, shall not prosper: but he that
confesses, and forsakes them, shall have mercy.



At London printed for William Leake, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Crane. 1593.

The Text.
Luke Cap. 19. Verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. 6 Then he came down hastily, and received him
joyfully.

7 And when all they saw it, they murmured, saying, that he was gone in to
lodge with a sinful man.

8 And Zaccheus stood forth, and said unto the Lord, Behold, Lord, the half
of my goods I give to the poor: and if I have taken from any man by forged
cauillation, I restore him four fold.

9 Then Jesus said to him, This day is salvation come unto this house,
forasmuch as he is also become the son of Abraham.


YOU heard the last Sabbath, how Zaccheus the Publicane was called to be a
Christian: Now you shall hear the fruit of his conversion. No sooner had
Christ called him from the tree, but that he came down hastily, and received
him joyfully.

This was the fruit which it had in the heart of Zaccheus, namely obedience to
the voice of Christ: a fruit more precious and acceptable unto God, than the
most pleasant fruits which Eden yielded, and a sacrifice more sweet and
acceptable unto him, than all the sacrifices which the Law required. This is
the sacrifice where with the Lord is pleased, even when his voice is obeyed, 1.
Sam. 15. 22. The voice of the Lord 1. Sa. 15. 22. Psalm. 29.
is a glorious voice, and mighty in operation, dividing the flames of fire,
and shaking the Cedar trees. So the voice of Christ is a glorious voice, his
word is mighty in operation, Heb. 4. 12.
dividing the soul and the spirit, and shaking Zaccheus from the wild
fig tree, whereinto he had climbed.

The same God to whose command, the winds, the sea, the devils and death it
self obey, here commands Zaccheus to come Matthew. 8.
down at once, and he comes down hastily to receive him to house, and he
receives him joyfully. As Zaccheus could not come at Christ till he was
called, so no man can come to Christ except the Father draw Ioh. 6. 44.
him: and as Zaccheus could not choose but come; when he was called by the
voice of Christ, so when any man is called effectually by the preaching of the
Gospel, he cannot choose but come to Christ; for where there is an effectual
calling, there is grace given also to obey the same, Romans 8. 30. The Romans 8. 30
Lord is feign sometime to call us often, because we know not the voice of him
that calls us, as he called Samuel three times; before he answered:
because at that time Samuel knew not the Lord, 1. Sam. 3. 7. But 1. Sam. 3. 7
as soon as he understood that it was the Lord that spoke unto him, he
replied presently, Speak on Lord, for thy servant hears: So when the Lord
calls any man effectually by the preaching of his Word, all the parts and
powers of his body do yield their obedience, the ear listneth, the tongue
confesses, the heart believes, the head deuiseth, the hand performs, the
foot runs, the eye directs, and all concur To do thy will, O God,
Psalm. 40. Psalm. 40. 7.


Such and so effectual is the voice of Christ in the hearts of his chosen, that
it makes Saul of a bloody perfecuter to become Paul a painful preacher: it
causes Act. 9.
Peter of a silly fisherman, to become a Matt. 4.
catcher of men: and Zaccheus here of a vile publican, to become a zealous
christian. And such also is the nature of the word preached, wheresoever it
pleases the Lord to give success and increase thereto, that it 1. Cor. 37.
is able to transform the minds of men, to beget faith in the hearts of
infidels, and (in a word) to save such as are ordained to eternal Romans 1. Act.
13. 48.
life, Acts. 13. This is the power of the word of God, even to cause a
consenting to the truth thereof: and this is the property of the children of
God, to yield all obedience to the word of God. As Soon as Christ calls
Zaccheus, he comes down presently, like the Light in the creation, that was
made as soon as God said, Let there be light. Here therefore of Zaccheus that
obeyed the voice of Christ, let us learn obedience to the voice of Christ: for
as Christ bids Zaccheus to come down, because he was too high: so he
says to every one of us, Come down, because we are too high minded. But with
us the voice of Christ is not so effectual, as it was with Zaccheus: for he
was content to come down at the first bidding, but we must be often bidden to
beware of pride and ambition, and yet we will still be climbing. There are few
so high that are content with their calling, but as Haman was always aspiring
till he came to Hest. 7.
the gallows, so many amongst us are always climbing, till they catch a
fall.

Again, as Christ said to Zaccheus, To day I must abide at thy house: so
Christ says to us, To day my poor afflicted members should receive some
succor at your hands. But as the Priest and the Leuite Luc. 10. passed Luc. 10.
by the wounded man leaving him half dead: so we (for the most part) pass by
our needy brethren, leaving them vnreleeued. Thus are we every way
disobedient to the voice of Christ. He teaches us to be humble as he himself
is, Matt. 11. 29. and we Matt. 11. 29.
wax proud and insolent as Satan is. He wills us to be merciful, as our
heavenly father is, Luc. 6. 36. and we are cruel and unmerciful, Luc. 6. 36.
Luc. 16.
as the rich glutton was, Luc. 16. This is the cause why the earth deceives
and renders not her fruit, Esa. 24. 5. This is Esa. 24. 5.
the cause why the sword deuoureth abroad and the pestilence destroys at
home, Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 28. 15 Leuit. 26. 24 25.
28. 15. Leuit. 26. 24, 25. and in a word, this is the cause of all the
mischiefs and calamities that are threatened, even because we are obstinate and
rebellious against the Lord, we are undutiful and disobedient to the voice
of Christ, that calls us so lovingly to come unto him, Mat. 11. 28. Matt. 11.
28.


Zaccheus was called but once, and he comes quickly: but we are called
oftentimes and almost every day, and that by the voice of Christ himself: for
he that hears you Luc. 10. 16.
(says Christ, Luc. 10. 16.) hears me: and yet we cannot find the way to
Christ. The word of GOD which is the lantern unto Ps. 119. 105.
our feet, and the light unto our paths, Psalm. 119. has been plainly and
plentifully preached amongst us these many years; and yet many amongst us
have not yet learned to come to Christ. Zaccheus comes quickly when Christ
calls him, let us therefore learn of Zaccheus to come quickly when Christ
calls us. We must be quick in the Lords business, for God cannot abide
loyterers standing all the day idle, Mat. 20. and as he loves a cheerful
giver, 2. Cor. 9. 7. so he Matt. 20. 2. Cor. 9. 7.
likes a cheerful follower.

It follows therefore that Zaccheus received him cheerfully. Still Zaccheus
is a Receiver: before he was a receiver of custom, now he is a receiver of
Christ. Zaccheus received Christ two ways: first, into his heart when he
desired to see him, and then into his house when gave him hospitality. Many
received Christ to house, but not into their hearts, and therefore received him
grudgingly: but Zaccheus received Christ first into his heart; and then into his
house, and therefore received him joyfully. Of Zaccheus his ioyfulnes, we must
learn to be joyful when we do any thing for the cause of Christ: we must
be glad to harbor Christ in his members, as Zaccheus was joyful to harbor
Christ himself. As before in coming down from the tree, Zaccheus showed his
obedience: so here in receiving Christ into his house, he shows the love
that he bare unto him. If Zaccheus had not loved Christ, he might have sent him
to some common Inn: but Zaccheus is content to receive Christ into his own
house, yea, he rejoices to have gotten so good aguest, like Abraham that used
to sit at the Genesis 18.
door of his Tent, and rejoiced to enterteine strangers that went by the way:
and therefore though Zaccheus were a Gentyle borne, yet herein he shows
himself the child of Abraham, because he does the works of Abraham, John
the eighth chapter John 8. 39.
the nine and thirtieth verse. So did Abraham, and so must we do, if we will
show our selves to be the children of Abraham.

When Abraham thought only to have enterteined men, he received Angels in
the shape and likeness of men: and when Zaccheus thought to enterteine the
son of man, he receives the son of God himself. Let us therefore (as the
Apostle wills us Heb. 13. 2.) be mindful to enterteine strangers, forasmuch
as thereby some have received Angels into their Abraham. Genesis 18. 3. Lot. Genesis
19. 3.
houses unawares: and why should not we hope to entertein the like or better
guests, if we be given to hospitality, as those godly fathers were? For as the
Angels came to them in the likeness of men, so Christ himself comes to us in
the likeness of a poor man, of a lame man, and of a blind man: and when he
comes, he comes hungry, or thirsty, or naked, or harborlesse, or sick,
or imprisoned, and happy are they that feed, or cloathe, or harbor, or visit
him, when he comes thus afflicted. When Abraham enterteined the Angels, he
was not only busy himself, but his wife and all his household were careful
to make provision for them: so when Zaccheus received Christ into his house,
his whole family (no doubt) were no less willing and careful to enterteine
Christ, than their Master was: and therefore not only to Zaccheus, but even
to his whole house Salvation is promised, because the whole family rejoiced at
Christ his coming. Let rich men learn of Zaccheus, to enterteine Christ in
his needy members, and let rich men's servants learn of Zaccheus family, to
show themselves merciful like their merciful masters, that they may receive
the reward of mercy and hospitality at the last day, Come Matthew. 25.
ye blessed, for I was harborlesse, and ye took me in. Generally, as
Zaccheus gladly received Christ: so let every one that is able, be glad to
distribute to the necessity of the poor Saints: if we have much, let us give
plentifully: if we have little, let us give gladly of that little: if we be
not able to give a penny, yet happily we may afford a morsel of bread: but if
not that, yet there is none so needy, that cannot give a cup of cold Matthew. 10.
water, and even so small a gift shall not lose his just reward, Matthew. 10. 41.
Zaccheus received Christ into his heart, but many amongst us are ready to
drive Christ out, and to receive satan in stead of him: Zaccheus received
Christ into his house, but there are many rich men amongst us, that like Dives
Luc. 16.
Luc. 16. will not afford poor Lazarus the crummes that fall from their
table: but as the damsel Act. 12. opened not the door Act. 12.
for joy when she heard Peter's voice: so by contrary, these men for very
grief shut their gates, when they perceive a beggar there. Finally, Zaccheus
was joyful when he enterteined Christ, but many amongst us are sorrowful
when they should relieve the poor: like churlish Nabal, 1. Sam. 25. 1. Sam. 25.
that reviled David, when he should have relieved him.

So long as Job prospered, he kept a worthy and a worshipful house, he
suffered not the stranger to lie in the streets, but opened his door to the
trauailer that went by the way, Job. 31. 32. but now many Gentlemen Job. 31.
32.
of the country, are content to suffer the stranger, the fatherles and the
widow, not only to lie, but even to starve and die in the streets with
hunger and cold, and never receive them to house or harbor, nor afford them
any relief or succor. But as the voice of Abels blood did cry from the
earth to God, for vengeance against his Genesis 4. 10.
brothers cruelty: so the voice of the poor and their piteous cries, shall
enter into the ears of the Lord, and their guiltles blood (which is powered
forth in every place without all compassion) shall pull down hasty and
sudden vengeance from heaven upon the heads of these unmerciful cormorants,
unless while this time of mercy lasts, they show mercy to their distressed
neighbors. Thus you have heard how Zaccheus behaved himself in enterteining of
Christ: now you shall see the behavior of the Pharesies in disdaining at
Christ. When all they saw it, they murmured, saying, that he was gone in to
lodge with a sinful man. Before they hated Zaccheus for his vices, because he
was covetous: now they envy him for his virtues, because he was given to
hospitality. For the wicked will always have something to find fault with in
the children of God, like the sons of Jacob, Genesis 37. that Genesis 37
hated their brother Joseph, because of his dreams: and like Saul that unhappy
King, that envied David for his happy victoryes, 1. Sam. 18. 29. Thus the
wicked when they 1. Sam. 18.
cannot charge the godly with any grievous crime, they begin to grudge at their
weldoing: and therefore not only Zaccheus is hated for receiving Christ, but
Christ is hated also for being his guest. When they could not accuse Christ for
sin, they accuse him for companying with sinners: for they must still be
accusing some or other, for one thing or other, like their father the devil,
that both by name, Revel. chapt. 12. verse 10. Revel. 12.
and by nature, Job. 1. 6. 7. is a continual accuser Job. 1. 6.
of the brethren. It had been the duty of the Pharesies to have received
Christ, and made much of him as Zaccheus did: but they are so far off from
enterteining him themselves, that it greeueth them to see Zaccheus give him
enterteinement. And surely, such is the perverse nature of the wicked, that
they will neither receive the grace of God when it is offered them, nor
willingly suffer any other to embrace the same: like the wicked Jews, Acts.
13. 50. Act. 13. 50.
that would neither believe the doctrine which Paul preached, nor could abide
that the Gentiles should be brought to the faith of Christ. The high Priests
thought them selves too high, to have poor humble Christ amongst them: the
Scribes and the Pharesies in their own conceit, were too good, too wise, and
too holy to receive him into their company: and not content to sequester and
estrange themselves from Christ, they disdained also that he should be
conversant with Publicans and sinners, as though he were not worthy to be
conversant amongst men.

If it were the office of Christ to convert Matt. 9. 13.
sinners, why should the Pharesies be offended at him, if he were sometime
conversant with sinners to work their conversion? If Christ were a Physician to
cure the sickness Matt. 9. 12.
of the soul, that is, to save the people from their sins, why should the
Pharesies murmur at him for keeping company with Zaccheus, that was sick in
soul: for as it is expedient for the Physician to visit his patients for
their better recovery, so it was convenient Christ should visit sinners for
their speedier conversion. But as the Physician that resorteth to sick
persons, is not straightway infected: so the souls Physician that conuerseth
with sinners, is not thereby polluted. And therefore, as Christ performed his
office, though the Pharesies murmured, so let the ministers of GOD learn by
his example, to perform their duties, though the wicked be offended. It was
the office of Christ to call sinners to repentance, yea he came to call
Pharesie sinners as well as Publican sinners, if the Pharesies would have
confessed themselves to be sinners, as the Publicanes did: but because Luc. 18.
they stood so much upon their own righteousness, and despised others,
therefore Christ denounces so many woes against Matthew. 23.
them, and prefers the penitent Publican that trusted in the Lords* mercy*
before the proud Pharesie that trusted in his own merits. Though Paul was a
Pharesie, Act. 23. 6.
and the son of a Pharesie, yet he shameth not to confess himself one of
the chief sinners which Christ came to save. So 1. Tim. 1. 15
if the Pharesies that murmured at Zaccheus would have been saved, they should
have confessed themselves chief sinners, as Paul did. They should not have
accused Christ for keeping company with sinners, but they should have accused
themselves for not keeping company with Christ. The just man (says Solomon,
Pro. 18.) is the first accuser of Prou. 18.
himself: but the Pharesies are so far from accusing of themselves, that they
begin to accuse Zaccheus and Christ together. Thus the Pharesies of our time,
that make religion a cloak to cover their corrupt dealing, have this property
to think other men to be heinous sinners, and themselves only to be
righteous: insomuch, as they will not stick to speak like that proud people
that was wont to say, Depart from me, for I am holier than thou: and like that
presumptuous pharesie, Luc. 18. I. thank God I am not as others Luc. 18.
are, extortioners, usurers, adulterers, drunkards, or such like: I sanctify
the Saboth, which other men profane: I frequent sermons, which they neglect: I
reverence the name of God, which they blaspheme: I pay tithe, which others
with-holde: and I fast oftentimes, which they do seldom, or never. These were
the speeches of the Pharesies, that lived in the time of Christ, whom he so
often calls hypocrites: and these are the speeches Matt. 15. 7. Luke. 11. 44
Luc. 12. 1. Act. 26. 5. Matt. 23. 25. 27.
of the hypocrites of our age, that seem to live after the straightest sect of
our religion, Act. 26. They wash the outside of the cup, and of the platter:
that is, they justify themselves, and seem marvelous holy in the sight of
men, which can discern by the outward appearance only: but unto God, that
sees and searches the secrets of the hearts and reins, they appear like
painted tombs full of dead men's bones, and all filthiness: that is, they have
their inward parts full of ravening, and all kind of wickedness. Wherefore, as
Christ said to his Disciples, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness
Matt. 5. 2^.
of the Scribes and Pharesies, you cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven: so
I say unto you, that except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of these
Pharisaicall hypocrites, ye cannot be saved. These holy Pharisees did use to call
the Publicans, not usurers nor extortioners, as they themselves were: but by
the general name of sinners, as though they themselves were free from sin.
Thus the papists at this day do use to call the most sincere professors of the
Gospel, not Lutherans, Caluinists, Zuinglians, or protestants, as they were
wont to call them: but now they term us heretics, a name more odious than
any other, whereas in the mean season, they themselves are of all other the
great heretics. So the Atheists of our time, when they cannot accuse the
godly that are amongst us of usury, or briberie, or extortion, or drunkenness,
or any such notorious sin, they call them hypocrites, which is the sum of
all: when as in very truth, they themselves do best deserve that name: but it
makes no matter what they call us, neither are we to be moved at their
despiteful speeches; for as the bitter taunts of these murmuring pharisees could
not hinder Zaccheus in his conversion, so the slanders of these godles men,
must not discourage the servant of God from their good profession. The
Pharisees did Zaccheus great wrong for calling him sinner, when he had repented
of his sin: and the Atheists at this day do greatly wrong the true
professors, in calling them hypocrites, which have truly repented of their
former sins, and endeavor by all good means to lead a godly life. Therefore as
Zaccheus preferred his souls health before al their murmuring: so it behooves
us to look to our souls salvation, notwithstanding all the reproaches and
slanders that are devised against us. And as the Pharisees might call Zaccheus
sinner, but could not hinder his Conversion: so the malicious worldlings may
take away our goods, our good names, yea, and our lives also, but cannot
deprive us of our salvation. Wherefore as our Savior said to his Apostles,
Fear not Matt. 10.
them that can kill the body, and then can do no more: so I say unto you,
Fear not the frowns of the wicked, for they are not able to hurt your better
part: seek not to gain the favor of the world, for the whole world is not
able to save a soul, but fear to offend him that is able to destroy both
body and soul in hell, and seek to please him that is able to save them both
in heaven for ever.

Now follows another fruit of Zaccheus conversion; namely, his good
confession: for, as he believed with the heart unto righteousness, so he
confessed with the mouth Romans 10. 10
unto salvation. When Zaccheus was mocked of the Pharisees, it seems that he
should stoup down for shame: but when he was thus reproved and reviled by
them, the scripture says that he stood up in sign of gladness. As the Apostles
went away rejoicing Acts. 5.
that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Christ: so
Zaccheus the Publican went forth rejoicing, that he was reproched for the
cause of Christ. Before Zaccheus was a Publican, and therefore stood in sin
very dangerously, like the house that is builded upon the sand, ready Luke.
6. 49.
to be ouerturned with every tempest: but now Zaccheus is become a true
Christian, and therefore stands in righteousness very safely, like the house
that is built upon a tocke, free from any danger of falling. Behold Lord, the
half of my goods, etc.


There are two parts of this confession. The first is his gift to the poor:
the second is, the restitution of his unjust gotten goods. Before, Zaccheus was
an oppressor of the poor, now he is a great benefactor to the poor: before,
he was an encroacher upon other men's goods, now he is a distributer of his own
goods: before, he was a receiver and a taker, now he is a restorer and a
giver: neither does he give sparingly, but he gives liberally, laying up a
good foundation 1. Tim. 6.
against the time to come. Now has Zaccheus found that precious pearl, and
for joy Matt. 13.
thereof he is content, not to sell, but to give all that he has to enjoy the
same. When the rich Ruler (in the former chapter) was Luke 18.
willed to sell all that he had, and to give it to the poor, he went away
very sorrowful, for he was very rich: but Zaccheus, perhaps as rich as he,
is content of his own accord and unbidden, to bestow half his goods upon the
poor, and that with a cheerful mind. If Zaccheus had given only the third
part of his goods, no doubt but Christ would have accepted it, for he accepts
the widows farthing, because it was given with Luke 21.
a willing mind: but if he had given all his goods to feed the poor, as the
Pharisees gave their alms to be seen of men, yea, or his body to be burned,
as some Romans have 1, Cor. 13.
done to get renown, it should have been to no purpose, because it was done to
a wrong end Now, as Zaccheus was rich in the goods of this life, so was he
rich in faith also: neither was it an idle or dead faith that Zaccheus had, but
it was a fruitful and a lively faith, a faith that works and labors by
love, Gal. 5. 6.
such as is required at the hands of Christians. S. James says, Show me thy
faith by thy works, and here Zaccheus does show his faith by his works.
Before, he was exercised in ungodly works, which are the fruits of
infidelity: but now he is exercised in the works of mercy, which are the
fruits of a lively faith. Zaccheus is very liberal in releeuing the poor,
but he is liberal of that which is his own: so there are many now a days that
are very liberal, but it is of that which is none of theirs: for as Nadab and
Abihu offered Leuit. 10.
strange fire unto the Lord, so these men offer strange goods unto the Lord.
There are some amongst us, that think to make amends for their unjust dealing,
by giuyng part of that to some good uses, which they have gotten by bad means:
if they have gotten a pound by usury and oppression, they are content perhaps
to give a penny to relieve the poor. But, as it was not lawful for the
Israelits to bring the price or the hire of a harlot into the house of the
Lord: so it Deuteronomy. 23.
is not lawful for us to apply the gain of our ill gotten goods to the service
of God. The half of my goods, I give, etc.


Zaccheus faith not, I have given, as an vpbraider of God: or, I will give, as
a delaier, that means to give away his goods after his death, when he can keep
them no longer: but he says, I give, to signify that his will is his deed,
and that he means not to take any days of payment for the matter. For, as
before he ran apace to see Christ, and came down hastily to enterteine Christ
in his own person: so does he here give quickly to relieve Christ in his
needy members. This is Zaccheus last will and testament, that he makes
before his death, and sees the same proved and performed before his eyes, If
therefore we desire to do any good to any of our poor brethren, let us
learn of Zaccheus to do it quickly, while we are alive, for time will
prevent us, and death will prevent us. I know there be many that would be willing
to give some part of their goods to the poor before their death, as Zaccheus
did: but that they know not what need themselves may have thereof before
they die, and therefore for the most part they will hardly forsake or leave
their goods, till their goods forsake and leave them. But herein they show
themselves to doubt of Gods providence, and as it were to distrust of his
payment, who has promised to repay what soever is given unto the poor, as if
it were lent unto himself, and that not secretly, though they did their alms
never so secretly, but Prou. 19. 17.
the Lord will reward them openly, as our Savior speaks. Math, 6. The wise
Preacher, Matt. 6. Eccle. 11.
Eccle. 11. wills us to cast our bread upon the waters, that is, to be
liberal to the poor, whose watery eyes bewray their great necessity: or, (as
others expound it) to hazard and adventure some of our goods upon our needy
brethren, as Merchants do adventure their goods upon the seas; For although
they may seem to be in great perril and danger of perishing in the waters, yet
commonly it falls out, that by the blessing of God they return with far
greater profit. So albeit the relief that is bestowed upon our distressed
neighbors may seem to be lost, yet as the wise man says, after a time we
shall find it again: and as the precious oil descended from Aarons beard to
the Psalm. 133.
skirts of his clothing, so certainly the oil of mercy and charity which we
power into the wounds of our distressed brethren, shall descend into our own
souls; and as the widows Luke, 10.
oil was increased in the cruse, because she relieved the Lords prophet, so
1, King. 17.
shall this precious oil bestowed upon the poor, be returned upon our heads
in greater measure. Thus is Zaccheus liberal, as you see: for he gives away
half his goods, but he gives it not to the rich, that might give to him
again, but he gives it to the poor that cannot requite him: to teach us upon
whom we should bestow our alms. As GOD that is rich in mercy, gives all
things unto us that cannot requite him: so the rich men of this world (if they
have any spark of mercy in them) should give unto the poor that cannot
requite them. But amongst us in every place almost, it is far otherwise: for
if any thing be to be given, not they that are poorest and stand in greatest
need, but they that can make best friends are best preferred. Thus Dives is still
enriched Luke. 16.
and Lazarus is still rejected. If we send to a great man, we send an ox for
a present but if we send to a poor man we send a crust for an alms.
Therefore, as Christ said to the Jews, that the Ninevites should rise in
Matthew. 12
judgment against them, because they repented at Jonas preaching: so it may be
said unto us, that Zaccheus shall rise in judgment against us and condemn us:
for he showed great mercy upon the poor, but we are void of all
compassion. Thus you have heard the first part of Zaccheus confession, wherein
you see his liberality to the poor.

Now you shall hear the second part of his confession, wherein he promises
restitution of his unjust gotten goods. Before, Zaccheus gave to the poor the
half of that which was his own: now he restores that which is none of his, to
the right owners. And because he had detained their goods so long, to their
great loss and hinderaunce, therefore he does not only restore the principal,
which he had taken from them, but he allows them their costs and damages they
had sustained. As Ioram king of Israel caused 2. King. 8.
to be restored to the Shunamite her house and land, with all the fruits and
profits of the same, which were wrongfully kept from her seven years together:
so Zaccheus the customer, restores to those that he had oppressed, their goods
which he had gotten from them by fraudulent dealing, with all the fruits and
profits that might come thereof during the time of his unjust possession. So
liberal was Zaccheus to the poor, that he gave them half his goods: and so
little got Zaccheus by his usury and oppression, that for every penie he
restored four. If the usurers and extortioners of our time would restore
fourefold for that they have wrongfully gotten, I fear me they would have but a
small half to give to the poor, and but a little left to help themselves.
There was no law to compel Zaccheus to make such restitution, except he will
confess himself to be a thief, because he was an usurer, and then the law
of God requires such restitution. And surely Zaccheus seems after a sort to
confess his theft, because he promises four fold restitution. If a man had
stolen a sheep, the law of God required that he should restore Exodus 22. 1 2.
Sam. 12.
four sheep for one: and the ancient Romans had this law, that usurers, should
forfeit four times so much as they took for usury. If the same law were now
to use against our theeuish usurers, as it was sometime among them, we should
not have such complaining of the poor both in prisons and streets. But if
these great thieves (I mean our biting usurers) that rob and spoil without
ceasing when they have no need, might find no more favor, than those petty
thieves which rob and steal sometime, when they are driven thereto by extreme
necessity, then surely the commonwealth would soon be disburdend of that
pestilent brood of caterpillars wherewith it is pestered. I wish them betimes
to look to their own estate, and with Zaccheus to forsake their damnable trade.
If they have lived hethertoo by the gain of usury, let them now lament their
sin, and call to God for mercy and forgiveness: let them make restitution of
that they have wrongfuly taken, and grieve that they have so long detained that
which is none of theirs. For as no sin is pardoned without repentance to God,
so usury is not pardond without repentance to God: and as the sin of theft
is not removed, before restitution be made to men (if the party be able,)
so the sin of usury (which is a secret theft) is not remitted before
restitution be made to those that are oppressed and spoiled by this secret
theft. Thus you have seen how Zaccheus that was once a hoorder of his goods, as
our rich men are: is now a liberal disposer of his goods, as I wish they were.
He that lately was a Camel laden with riches, and Matthew. 19.
therefore unapt to go through a needles eye, has now like the Camel cast off
his rich Matt. 7.
lading, and therefore may enter in at the narrow gate. Some rich men would
rather have lost their lives, than forgone their goods, and for half that
loss would have proved very pensive, but this was the ioyfullest news that
ever came to Zaccheus house, sweeter to him than all his gold and silver: that
where as before he was in the state of damnation, now salvation is promised to
him and his house: and whereas before he was the servant of Satan, now he is
become the child of Abraham. Now Zaccheus house is become Gods house, and
Zaccheus himself is the son of Abraham, and therefore no cause why Christ
should not resort to Zaccheus house. As Christ said to the penitent theife,
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, so he Luke. 23.
says here to the penitent publican, This day salvation is come unto thy
house, and this day thou art become the child of Abraham. Christ loves not
to be long in any man's debt, for as he says to Zaccheus, To day I must abide
at thy house: so he says to the same Zaccheus, To day and hence forth for
ever, thou and thy house must abide with me in heaven. Here is a happy
change: in stead of a little worldly treasure, subject to loss by thieves, and
to spoil by rust and moths, to have all store of heavenly treasure, which
neither thieves can steal, nor canker can corrupt: in stead of an earthly
house, subject to fire Matt. 6.
and falling, to have a house given of God, not made with hands, but eternal
in heaven, 2. Cor. 5. 1.

Who would not rather choose with Zaccheus to give half his goods to the poor,
that he may be an heir of salvation, and the son of Abraham to rest in his
fathers bosom; than with Dives to keep all from the poor, and to be tormented
in those eternal flames. That rich glutton that denied the crummes Luc. 16.
from his table, challenged Abraham for his father, but he was refused,
because he had not the faith nor works of Abraham: but John 8. 39.
Zaccheus, though by nature he were not the child of Abraham, yet by grace he
is become the child of Abraham, because he walked in the steps of that
faithful father. Abraham believed before he was circumcised, Romans 4. 12.
so Zaccheus believed before he was circumcised. As Abraham left his country,
Genesis 12. 1. Act. 7. 3.
and all that he had when God called him, so Zaccheus left his office and the
most part of his riches, when he was called by the son of God: and as Abraham
desired to see the Ioh. 8. 56.
day of Christ, and saw it, and rejoiced; so Zaccheus desired to see Christ,
and he saw him, and rejoiced. Now is Zaccheus a Gentile become the child of
Abraham, and not only he, but his whole house also is become the house of
Abraham: for when Zaccheus is converted, his whole house is converted. As the
master is, such are the servants: if he be godly and religious, they prove
godly and religious: if he be an Atheist, they prove Atheists likewise.
Therefore keep no company Psalm. 18.
with the wicked, for it is most pernicious: but associate thy self with those
that fear the Lord, that thou also may learn to fear the Lord: who for his
mercy grant that we may with Zaccheus be desirous to see Christ, joyful to
receive Christ, liberal to relieve the members of Christ, and ready to make
amends when we have wronged any of our brethren, that so with Zaccheus we may
be heirs of salvation, and the true sons of Abraham, to reign with Christ in
heaven for ever, by the means and merits of him, that died and rose again
for us. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all glory.

Amen.
FINIS.

