To the Reader.
HEre thou have the Sermons which have been often desired, because of the
matter fit for this City. One says, that he would never speak to Usurers,
and Bribemongers, but when they be upon their deathbeds: for he which lives
by sin, resolves to sin, that he may live. But when he goes to hanging,
Judas himself will say, I have sinned. Mat. 27. 4.
If I speak not to Usurers upon their deathbed, yet I speak to Usurers which
shall lie upon their deathbed. Three things do give me hope. One is, that all
hearts are in the hands of God, to call them at what hour he list, and
therefore Saul may become an Apostle. Act. 9. 15.
The next is, that the third crow does waken mo then the former, and therefore
after the crowing of other, this crow may happily be heard. The last is, that
there is no sin, but some men have been reclaimed from it, and so may Usurers
from their sin.

Therefore go my book like David against Goliath, 1. Sam. 17. 51.
and fight the Lords battles against Usurers. The Lord give that success to
his doctrine in these leaves, that it may consume Usurers, as Ioshuah drove out
the Chananites before him. Josh. 5. 1.
If I could take but this one weed out of the Londoners Garden, I were answered
for my health and my strength spent amongst them. Read with thy best mind, and
thou shall profit more.

Thine H. S.

The Examination of Usury, in two Sermons.
The first Sermon.
Psalm. 15. verse. 1. and 5. Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle?
Who shall rest in thine holy mountain?
He that gives not his money to Usury.

THese two verses must be considered together, because one is the question, and
the other is the answer: Verse. 1.
David demands who shall come to heaven? and God tells him that usurers shall
not come thither: as if he should say, they go to hell. Therefore as Paul
taught Timothy to warn them which are rich, as though they had more need to
be warned than other: 1. Tim. 6. 17.
so this sentence seems to be penned for a warning to the rich, because it
strikes upon the rich man's vice.

I have spoken of Bribery and symonie, and now I must speak of their sister
Usury. Many times have I thought to speak of this Theme; but the arguments
which are alleged for it, have made me doubtful what to say in it, because it
has gone as it were under protection. At last you see it falls into my text,
and therefore now I cannot bauke it any longer. Therefore if any here have
favored this occupation before, let him now submit his thoughts unto Gods
thoughts; for I will allege nothing against it, but that which is built upon
the rock.

Usury is the sin which God will try now whether you love better than his
word: that is, whether you will leave it if he forbid it: for if he flatly
forbid it, and yet you wilfully retain it, then you love Usury better than
Gods word. Usurers Heretics.
Therefore one says well that our Usurers are Heretics, because after many
admonitions, yet they maintain their error, and persist in it obstinatly as
Papists do in Popery. For this cause I am glad that I have any occasion to
griple with this sin, where it has made so many spoils, and where it has
so many patro^s: for it is said that there be mo of this profession in this
City, than there be in all the land beside. There be certain sins which are
like an unreasonable enemy which will not be reconciled to death, and this is
one of those everlasting sins which live and die with a man. For when he has
resigned his pride and his envy and his lust, yet Usury remains with him,
and he says as Naaman said, 2. King. 5. 18.
Let the Lord be merciful unto me in this: let me have a dispensation for
this, as though this were a necessary sin, and he could not live without it.
Three sins counted no sins.
There be three sins which are counted no sins, and yet they do more hurt than
all their fellows, and those are Bribery, Nonresidencie, and Usury: these
three because they are gainful are turned from sins to occupations. How many
of this city for all that they are Usurers, yet would be counted honest men,
and would feign have Usury esteemed as a trade: whereas if it were not so
gainful, it would be counted as great a sin as any other, and so it is
counted of all but the^ which live by it. This is the nature of pleasure and
profit, to make sins seem no sins if we gain any thing by the^, but the more
gainful a sin is, the more dangerous it is, and the more gainful usury is,
the more dangerous it is. I will speak the more of it, because happily you
shall not hear of this matter again.

The conte^ts of this Treatise.
First I will define what usury is: Secondly, I will show you what usury does
signify: Thirdly, I will show the unlawfulness of it: Fourthly: I will show the
kinds of it: Fifthly, I will show the arguments which are alleged for it:
Sixthly, I will show the punishment of it: Seue^thly, I will show you what
opinion we should hold of the^ which do not lend upon usury, but borrow upon
usury. Lastly, I will show you what they should do which have got their riches
by usury.

The definition of Usury.
Touching the first, Usury is that gain which is gotten by lending, for the
use of the thing which a man lends, couenanting before with the borrower to
receive more than was borrowed: Usurers steal by law.
and therefore one calls the usurer a legal thief, because before he steal,
he tells the party how much he will steal, as though he stole by law. This
word more, comes in like a sixth finger, which makes a monster, because it is
more tha^ should be. Another defining usury, calls it the Contrary to
charity: for Paul says, Love seeks not her own, but usury seeks
another which is not her own: therefore usury is far from love, but God is
love, says John, 1. John. 48.
therefore usury is far from God to.

Now, all the Commandments of God are fulfilled by love, which Christ notes
when he draws all the Commandments to one Commandment, which is, Love God
above all things, and thy neighbor as thy self: Mat. 22. 37.
as if he should say, he which loves God, will keep all the Commandments
which respect God, and he which loves his neighbor will keep all the
co^ma^deme^ts which respect his neighbor, therefore to maintain love, God
forbids all things which hinder this love: and among the rest here he
forbids Usury, as one of her deadliest enemies: for a man cannot love and
be an Usurer, because Usury is a kind of cruelty, and a kind of extortion,
and a kind of persecution, and therefore the want of love does make Usurers: for
if there were love there would be no Usury, no deceit, no extortio^, no
slaundering, no revenging, no oppression, but we should live in peace, and joy,
and contentment like the Angels; whereby you see that all our sins are
against our selves: for if there were no deceit, then we should not be
deceived; if there were no slander, the^ we should not be slaundered; if there
were no envy, then we should not be envied; if there were no extortion, the^
we should not be iniuried; if there were no Usury, the^ we should not be
oppressed. Therefore Gods law had been better for us then our own law: for if
his law did stand, then we should not be deceived, nor slau^dered, nor envied,
nor iniuried, nor oppressed. God has commanded every man to lend freely,
Luke. 6. 35.
and who would not borrow freely? Therefore they which brought in Usury,
brought in a law against themselves.

The first Usurers which we read of, were the Jews, which were forbidden to be
Usurers, yet for want of faith and love, Ezekiel and Nehemiah does show how the
Jews, even the Jews which received this law from God himself, did swerve from
it as they did from the rest. Ezech. 18. 22. Nehe. 2. 5.
First, they did lend upon Usury to strangers; after they began to lend upon
Usury to their brethren, and now there be no such Usurers upon earth, as the
Jews which were forbidden to be Usurers. Whereby you may see how the malice of
man has turned mercy into cruelty. For whereas lending was commanded for
the benefit of men, Deuteronomy. 15. 10.
Usury has turned it to the undoing of men: for they take when they seem to
give; they hurt when they seem to help; they damage when they seem to
va^tage: therefore it is well noted that usury 2
has her name of biting, and she may well signify biting: for many have not
only been bitten by it, but devoured by it, that is, consumed all that they
have: therefore as the Apostle says, Galat. 5. 15.
If you bite one another, take heed you be not devoured one of another: so I
may say if you be usurers one to another, take heed you be not devoured one of
another, for usurers are byters. As the name of the devil does declare what an
enemy he is; so the name of usury does declare what an enemy she is. Because
it signifies an adversary.
That you may know usury for a byter, her name does signify biting. Neschec.
If there were one biting usury, and another healing usury, then usury
should have two names; one of biting, and another of healing: but all usury
signifies biting, to show that all usury is unlawful. Now, you have heard
what usury is, and of what it is derived, you shall hear the unlawfulness of
it.

The unlawfulness of Usury.
more than our own; but Usury requires more than her own, and gives not to
other their own. Charity rejoices to communicate her goods to other, and
Usury rejoices to gather other men's goods to her self.



A similitude.
You see a river when it goes by an empty place, it will not pass until it
has filled that empty place, and then it goes forward to another empty
place and fills it, and so to another empty place and fills it, always
filling the places which are empty: so should we, the rich should fill the
poor, the full should fill the hu^gry, they which abound should fill them
which want, for the rich are but Gods Amners, and their riches are committed to
them of God to distribute and do good as God does him self. As the water is
charitable after a sort, so is the air, for it goes to empty places to, and
fills them as the water does. Nature cannot abide that any place should be
empty, and therefore the air though it be a light body, and so naturally
ascends upward: yet rather than any place in the earth should be empty, the
air will descend as it were from his throne, and go into caves, into dens,
and into du^geons, to fill them. If the rich were so good to their empty
brethren, as the air and water are to other empty things; as there is no
empty place in the world, so there should be no empty person in the world:
that is, the rich in Israel would fill the poor in Israel, but the rich make
the poor to fill them, for Usurers feed upon the poor even as great fishes
devour the small. Therefore he which said. Let there not be a beggar in
Israel; Deuteronomy. 15. 4.
said to, let there not be an Usurer in Israel; for if there be Usurers in
Israel, there will be beggars in (...) another. For Christ said to his
disciples, Love one another as I have loved you. John. 13. 34.
But it may be said of the Usurer, see how he hates other, and loves
himself. For when he says that he lends for compassion, he means for
compassion of him self, that he may gain by his pity. The Usurer loves the
borrower, as the Iuye loves the Oak: The Iuye loves the Oak to grow up by it,
so the Usurer loves the borrower to grow rich by him. The Iuye claspeth the
Oak like a lover, but it claspeth out all the juice and sap, that the Oak
cannot thrive after: So the Usurer lends like a friend, but he couenanteth
like an enemy, for he claspeth the borrower with such bands, that ever after
he diminishes, as fast as the Usurer increases.

Understand that his Sermon upon the mount, is an exposition of the
Comma^deme^ts, or else the text will not seem to implie this. Luke. 19. 8.
Christ expounding the commandment which forbids to steal, says, lend
freely, showing that Usury, because she lends not freely, is a kind of
theft, and the Usurers a kind of thieves, for else this exposition were not
right. Therefore Zacheus, as though he had stolen other men's goods, when he
began to repent, he restored them again four foulde, even as thieves are
enjoined to restore four foulde for that which they have stolen, so Zacheus
restored four fould, as though he had stolen. In some kind of theft. Exodus 22.
It seems that Zacheus was no great thief, because he restored four foulde
for all that he had gotten wrongfullie, for he got but the fourth part of his
goods wrongfullie at the most, or else he could not have restored four foulde
again. But now, if some should restore four foulde, for all that they have
gotten wrongfullie, they should restore more than they have, because all which
usurers get, they get wrongfullie: for their occupation is a sin, and
therefore one says, Because they cannot restore four foulde here, they shall
suffer an hundredth foulde hereafter. 2. Chron. 25.
Amaziah is forbidden to strengthen himself with the armies of Israel, only
because Israel, had offended God; if Amaziah might not join the armies of
Israel with his armies to strengthen him, dare thou join the goods of the
poor with thy goods to enrich thee? When God set Adam his work, he said, In
the sweat of thy brows shall thou live: Gene. 3. 19.
not in the sweat of his brows, but in the sweat of thy brows; but the
Usurer lives in the sweat of his brows, and her brows: that is, by the
pains and cares, and labors of another, for he takes no pains himself, but
only expects the time when his interest will come in, like the belly which
does no work, and yet eats all the meat. When God had finished his
creation, he said unto man, and unto beasts, and unto fishes, Increase and
multiply, Gene. 1. 28.
but he never said unto money, increase and multiply, because it is a dead
thing which has no seed, and therefore is not fit to engender. Therefore he
which says to his money, increase and multiply, begets a monstrous birth,
like Anah, Gene. 36. 24.
which devised a creature which GOD had not created before. Christ says to his
Disciples, Mat. 5. 46.
If you love but them which love you, what are you better than the Publicans,
for they love their brethren: so I may say, if you will lend to none but to
them which will pay you Usury for it, what are you better than the Jews? for
the Jews would lend for Usury; and if you be no better than the Jews, then
you shall speed no better than they: for as Christ said, Mat. 5. 20.
Except your righteousness do exceed the righteousness of the Pharisees,
your reward shall not exceed the reward of the Pharisees: so, except your
charity do exceed the charity of the Jews, your reward shall not exceed
the reward of the Jews. All this does show, that the Usurer is like Esau, of
whom God said, Mala. 1. 3.
Esau have I hated. Now in the 112. Psalm, you shall see who is like Jacob, of
whom God says, Verse. 5.
Jacob have I loved: for there David says, a good man is merciful, and
lends, and straight upon it he sets this crown, he shall never be moved,
but be had in perpetual remembrance: as if he should say, this is the good
ma^s Usury, this is his increase, eue^ a good name, and everlasting joy. Again,
in the 23. of Exodus it is said, Le^d unto him which wants without Usury,
that the Lord may bless thee: as if he should say, let the Lord pay the
increase, fear not to be loosers by doing good, for God has given his word to
requite it him self Mala. 3. 10.
. As he says to them which were afraid to pay tithes, and offer sacrifice,
Deuteronomy. 25. 10.
Try me if I will not power down a blessing upon you: so he seems to say
unto them which are afraid to le^d, try me if I will not power down a
blessing upon you. Who^ will you trust, if you do not trust your creator, your
father, your redeemer, your preserver, and your Savior?

Now you have heard the unlawfulness of Usury, you shall hear how many kinds
there be of it. As other crafts are called Mysteries, so I may fitly call it,
the Mystery of Usury, for they have devised mo sorts of Usury, tha^ there be
tricks at cards, I cannot reckon half, and I am afraid to show you all,
least I should teach you to be Usurers, while I dissuade you from Usury, yet I
will bring forth some; and the same reasons which are alleged against these,
shall condemn all the rest.

The kinds of Usurers.
will have the use of your pasture, or your land, or your orchard, or your
teame, or your kine, until you pay the money again, which in that time will
grow to a greater gain to the Usurer, and a greater loss to the borrower,
than if he had paid more money than other usurers are wont to take.

Amos, where God complains faying, They lie down upon the clothes which are
laid to pledge: showing, that we should not lie down upon such clothes, that
is, we should not use or wear the thing which is laid to pledge.

forfetteth his pawn: which day the Usurer knows, that the poor man is not
able to keep, and so keeps the pawn for his money, which is worth twice his
money. This Usury is forbidden in Leuit. 25. where it is said, Thou shall not
take Usury or vantage: as if he should say, thou shall not take the
forfeiture; for then thou take vantage, when thou take more than thou
lendest.

Thessa. 4. where it is said, Let no man defraude or circumuent his brethren in
any thing.

gains, but not in their losses: so one takes all the pains and abides all
the venture, and the other which takes no pains, reapeth half the profit.
This usury is forbidden in 2. These. 3. 10. where it is said, He which will not
work let him not eat.

Luke. 10. 7. where it is said, The labourer is worthy of his hire.

When he sells the day, he sells the light, and when he sells the night
he sells rest: therefore when he would have the light of heaven, and the rest
of Paradise, it shall be said unto him that he has sold both already. For he
sold light when he sold the day, and he sold rest when he sold the night: and
therefore now he can have neither light nor rest. Hereafter let not the
Londoners say that they give time, but that they sell time.



Wesels, and Fulmers, of whom may be said the same which is said of the devils,
they seek whom they may devour. 1. Pet. 5. 8.


10 Vsuries Cosins.
There be other Cosins to usurers, which are not counted usurers, such as take
money for that which they should give freely: such as take as much for a
counterfeit as for the best: such as take a fee of a Client and do him no
pleasure: such as take money for Masses, and Dirges, and Trentals, and Pardons,
and such like drugs, which do no more good tha^ fire out of the chimney. This
is a kind of usury and deceit beside, which one day they will cast away as
Judas did his thirty pence.

Objections made by usurers.
Now you have heard the kinds of usury, you shall hear the arguments which are
devised for usury.

Sin is never complet until it be excused: this is the vantage which the
devil gets by every sin, whenever he can fasten any temptation upon us,
we give him a sin for it, and an excuse to boot as Adam our father did. Genesis
3.
First he sinned, and then he excused: so first we sin, and then we excuse:
first an usurer, and then an excuser. Therefore every usurer will defend usury
with his tongue, though he condemn it with his conscience. If the Image makers
of Ephesus had not lived by Images, Act. 19. 25.
they would have spoken for Images, no more than the rest: for none stood for
Images but the Image makers: so if the usurers did not live by usury, they
would speak for usury no more than the rest: for none stand for usury but
usurers.

It is an easy matter, if a man be disposed, to speak something for every
vice, as some defend the Stews: some defend treason; some defend Nonreside^cy:
some defend swearing by my faith: some defend bowling upon the Sabbath: and
some defend usury. But, will you plead for Baal? (says Ioash) Iud. 6. 31.
that is, will you plead for sin which will plead against you? A sin is a
sin when it is defended: nay, a sin is two sins, when it is defended: for
he which breaks one of the least commandments (says Christ) Matthew. 5. 19.
and teaches others to do so, is the least in the kingdom of heaven. A
Squire of low degree is a Squire of no degree: so the least in the kingdom of
heaven is none of the kingdom of heaven. Who the^ is the least in the kingdom
of heaven? not he which breaks the least of the commandments, but he which
teaches others to do so: that is, he which by defending, and excusing, and
minsing, and extenuating his sin, incourageth others to sin too.

To defend Usury, they distinguish upon it, as they distinguish of lying: as
they say, there is a pernicious lie, and an officious lie, and a merry lie, and
a godly lie: so they say, there is the Merchants Usury, and the Strangers
Usury, and the Widows Usury, and the Orphans Usury, and the poor man's
Usury, and the biting Usury, and the charitable Usury, and the necessary
Usury. As God said, Genesis 2.
ye shall dye, and the woman said, peradventure ye shall dye, and the Serpent
said, ye shall not dye; Three opinions of Usury.
so there be three opinions of Usury: some say like God, thou shall dye, they
think that Usury is utterly unlawful, because God has utterly forbid it:
some say like the woman, peradventure thou shall die, they doubt whether Usury
be utterly unlawful or no, because it is so much tolerated: some say like the
Serpent, thou shall not die, Genesis 3.
they think that Usury is lawful, because it is gainful, as Saul thought
that the Idolaters beasts should not be killed, because they were fat. But as he
was commanded to 1. Sam. 15. 9.
kill the fat beast, as well as the lean, so we are commanded to kill fat
sins as well as lean sins; gainful sins as well as prodigal sins.

Objections for Usury.
Deuteronomy. 23. it is said of a stranger thou may take Usury. I perceive no
scripture speaks for Usurers. Of a stranger (says God) thou may take
Usury: but thou take Usury of thy brother, therefore this condemns thee,
because thou use thy brother like a stranger. Here stranger does signify the
Jews enemies, whom they were commanded to destroy: therefore mark how much
this makes against Usury, which they object for Usury. God does not license
the Jews to take Usury of any, but their enemies, whom they might kill: They
might not be Usurers unto any, but to them of whom they might be destroyers,
whom they might slay, of the^ only they might take usury: showing that Usury is
a kind of punishment, and such a kind of punishment, as if we are to kill a
man, it were a very fit punishment for him, and therefore the Jews might take
Usury of none, but them whom they might kill. I hope Usurers will allege this
scripture no more.





Jews without it? Did God think it good for the state of their common weal
to be without Usurers? and is it good for the state of our common weal to have
Usurers? this is wisdom against God.

from them which need, as to lend thy money for Usury. For Christ says Matthew.
5. 42.
, from him which borrows turn not away thy face. Therefore thou art bound to
lend. As he has a curse in Prou. 11. which keeps his corn, when he should
sell it to the^ which hunger; so he has a curse in Eze. 18. which keeps his
money when he should lend it to them which want.



Jews, which said, John. 19. 7.
We have a law, and by our law he shall die: when they could not say by Gods
law he shall die, then they said by our law he shall die: so when they cannot
say by Gods law we may take usury, they say by man's law we may take usury,
this is the poorest defense of all the rest: for if Gods law forbid thee, can
any law of man excuse thee? As it would not serve Adam to say, Genesis 3.
the woman bad me; so it will not serve the usurer to say, the Law does license
me. But he cannot say the Law does license me: for though peradventure our Law
do tolerate more than should be tolerated, yet I would have you know, that
our Law does not allow ten in the hundredth, nor five in the hundredth, nor one
in the hundredth, nor any usury at all: but there is a restraint in our Law,
that no usurer take above ten in the hundredth, it does not allow ten in the
hundredth, but punishes that tyrant which exacteth above ten in the hundredth.
It is much like that tolleration which we read of divorces. For the hardness
of men's hearts, Christ says, that Moses did suffer the man and wife to part a
sunder: So for the hardness of men's hearts, Matthew. 19. 7.
our Moses our Prince is feign to suffer as it were a kind of usury, because
otherwise no men would lend.

These are the best excuses which our Usurers have to plead for themselves,
against they come before the tribunal of God; and if their reasons will not
stand before men nor their own conscience, how will they stand before the
Lord? And yet he which speaks to these, makes himself a mock. Christ
preached many Sermons, and was never scorned at any, but when he preached
against covetousness, the^ it is said that he was mocked: Luke 16. 14.
showing that these kind of men are most incorrigible and wedded to their sin
till death make them part. Yet for their greater condemnation, we are commanded
to speak to them which will not hear: Ezekiel. 2. 5.
of which number is every reader of this Sermon if he be a Usurer after.

What the usurer is like.
Now, you long to hear what the Usurer is like. To what shall I like^ this
generation? They are like a Butlers box: for as all the counters at last come
to the Butler; so all the money at last comes to the Usurer, ten after ten,
and ten after ten, and ten to ten, til at last he receive not only ten for an
hundredth, but an hundredth for ten. This is the only difference, that the
Butler can receive no more than he delivered: but the Usurer receives more
than he delivers. They are like a Moth; even as a Moth eats a hole in
cloth, so Usury eats a hole in silver: If you have a piece of silver which
is as much as an hundred pounds, in one year usury will eat a hole in it as
big as ten pounds: in two years she will eat a hole as big as twenty pounds:
in three years she will eat a hole as big as thirty pounds. Nay, now they say,
he is but a bad husband which cannot eat a hole as big as fifty pounds in a
year: that is, which cannot gain half in half: how many holes have these
Moths eaten in poor men's garments? They are like Nonreside^ts, that is, such
bad members, that no man speaks for them but themselves. As no man stands
for Nonresidencie, but he which is a Nonresident, or he which would be a
No^reside^t: so no man stands for Usury, but he which is an Usurer, or he
which would be an usurer. They are like Iezabel, which said, 1. King. 21. 7.
Let me alone, I have a way. If there be no way to live (says the false
Steward) I know what to do I will deceive: so if there be no way to live (says
the usurer) I know what to do, I will oppress: Luke 16. 4.
If I cannot live by buying, nor by selling, nor by flattering, nor by
laboring, I will live by oppression. But as one in his Co^me^t speaks to the
false Steward. Thou say I know what to do, but do thou know what thou
shall suffer? So I say to usurers, you say you know what to do, but do you know
what you shall suffer? In deed he knows not what to do, which knows not to
do well: and therefore Christ said of his persecutors, that they knew not what
they did. Luk 23. 34.
Here I will end the first days examination.

Now I may conclude with Paul, 1. Cor. 7. 10.
I have not spoken, but the Lord: and therefore as the Lord said unto Saul, Act.
9. 22.
that he persecuted him; so they which resist this doctrine do contemn him, and
not me.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE EXAMINATION of Usury.
The second Sermon.
IT remains that we speak of the usurers punishment: Then, what may be
thought of them which do not take usury, but give usury. Lastly, what they
should do, which have got their riches by usury.

The punishments of usurers.






will, as though his goods were not his own: for nothing is ours but that
which we have rightly got: and therefore we say, It is mine by right, as though
it were not ours, unless it be ours by right. This is the judgment of man's law.

Now you shall hear the judgment of Gods law. A usurer does receive two
Incomes; one of the borrower, and another of the reue^ger; of the borrower he
looks for gain; but of the revenger he looks for punishment: therefore all
the Scripture prophesies evil unto him, as Michatah did to Achab. Solomon
says. Prou. 28. 8.
He which increases his riches by Usury, gathers for them which will be
merciful to the poor. As if he should say, when he has laden himself like a
cart, he shall be vnloden like a cart again, and they shall inherit his money
for whom he did never gather it. For, he which is unmerciful to the poor,
means not to gather for them which will be merciful to the poor: but
Solomon says, That they shall be his heirs which will be merciful as he was
unmerciful.

Now mark whether this prophecy of Solomon be true, I know not how many in
this City do increase by usury; but this prophecy seems to be verified of
many: For it is noted, that the riches and lands of Aldermen and Merchants,
and other in London, do not last so long, nor endure so well, as the riches and
lands of others in the country, and that their children do not prove so well as
others, nor come to that place in the Common weal, which for their wealth their
parents looked that they should come to, I can give no reason for it, but the
reason of Solomon, He which increases by Usury, gathers for them which will
be merciful to the poor. That is, their riches shall go from their heirs to
Gods heirs, according to that, The riches of the sinner is laid up for the
righteous: Prou. 13. 22.
that is, the righteous shall enjoy that which the wicked gathers. All riches
are uncertain, but the riches which are evil gotten, are most uncertain:
They may be called moveable goods, for they are very moveable, like the clouds
which never rest till they fall as they climed. God says, Ezec. 22. 13.
that he will smite the usurer with his fist, not with the palm of his hand,
but with his fist, which gives a greater blow. As his hands were shut against
the poor, so Gods hands shall be shut against him, that his punishment may be
like his sin. But if you will hear their final sentence, David says here,
That they shall not dwell in Gods temple, nor rest in his holy mountain. The^
we will seek no more punishments, for this punishment is all punishments. If
they shall not come to heaven, whose the^ shall those riches be? Nay, whose then
shall the honor be when that day comes? If he shall not rest in heaven, then
he shall rest in hell where no rest is. Then says one, Note.
the usurer shall cry unto his children, Cursed be you my children, because
you were the cause of these torments, for least you should be poor, I was an
usurer, and robbed other, to leave riches unto you. To whom, the children shall
reply again, nay, Cursed be you father, for you were the cause of our
torments; for if you had not left us other men's goods, we had not kept other
men's goods. Thus when they are cursed of God, they shall curse one an other,
curse the Lord for conde^ning the^, curse their sins for accusing the^, curse
their Parents for begetting them, and curse themselves, because they cannot
help themselves: As they which are blessed do nothing but bless, so they
which are cursed, do nothing but curse. This is the second Usury which the
Usurer shall receive of God, after he has received Usury of men, then the name
of Usury shall be fulfilled, as it signifies biting, so when it has bitten
other, it shall bite the Usurer to, and never rest biting; then they shall wish
that they could restore again as Zacheus did, and shall not restore, because
their money is gone. Therefore if Christ be come to your hearts, as he came to
Zacheus house, Luke. 19.
restore now as Zacheus did, and escape this judgment. This is the end of the
usurer and his money, if they stay together till death, yet at last there shall
be a division. Note.
The devil shall take his soul, the earth shall take his body, the strangers
shall take his goods, and the mourners shall rejoice under their blackes, and
say, wickedness is come to the grave.

Therefore, if thou would not be counted an Usurer then, refrain to be an
Usurer now, for they which are Usurers now, shall be counted Usurers then. Thus
you have heard the usurers payment.

Whether it be unlawful to give usury.
Now if you will know whether it be unlawful to give usury, as it is unlawful to
take usury, I wish that you could resolve your selves, that I might not speak
of it: for I have heard some preachers say, that there be some truths which
they would be loath to preach, and so there be some truths which I would be
loath to preach, because many hear by halues, and some for malice or ignorance,
will take things otherwise then they are spoken, yet because I have promised, I
will speak some thing of it.

Well then, may we neither take usury, nor give usury? Jeremy says, Iere.
15. 10.
I have not lent upon V surie to others, neither have others lent upon V surie
to me: as though both were unlawful, not only to take usury, but to give
usury. Jeremy does signify, that he was no medler in the world, whereby they
should envy him like other men, and therefore he clears himself chiefly from
usury, because usurers were most enuyed. And to show that he was not an usurer,
he says that he was not a borrower, which is more lawful the^ to be an
usurer, like a man which says, I do neither hate him nor know him. Why it was
lawful to know him, but to prove that he did not hate him, he says, he does
not know him. So Jeremy, to prove that he had not lent upon usury, does say,
that he never borrowed upon usury, which many will do that will not lend.

ods between the^, as there is between giving and taking, or between
covetousness and necessity, for one is covetousness, and the other is
necessity. He which lends for usury, lends for covetousness, but he
which borrows upon usury, borrows for necessity.

Now, for necessity God has allowed many things, as for necessity it was
lawful for Adams sons to marie with Ada^s daughters, because there were no
other women. For necessity it was lawful for David to eat the shewbread, 1.
Sam. 21. 6.
because he had no other food. For necessity it was lawful to work, and
heal, and fight upon the Saboth, which was not lawful, but for necessity.
Luke. 13. 10.
Therefore for necessity why may not a man pay more then he borrowed, seeing
no Scripture does forbid us to pay more tha^ we borrowed, but to require more
the^ we le^d. Some do think, that as God did use the ambition of Absalon, and
the malice of Pharao, and the treachery of Judas unto good: so men may use the
covetousness of usurers unto good, that is, to help at a need when a man is
like to be undone, and his children cast away, and his lease forfeited, and
many inco^ueniences beside like to ensue, which you know better than I, unless
he have present money at sometime to prevent a mischief. For example hereof, I
may allege how Jacob did use the sin of Laban. Gene. 31. 53.
Laba^ did evil in swearing by Idols, but Jacob did not evil in receiving such
an oath of him though it was an unlawful oath. So, though the usurer do evil in
taking usury, yet a man does not evil in giving usury. Beside, I may allege
the example of Abraham and Abimilech: Gene. 21. 31.
Abraham made a covenant with Abimilech: to confirm this covenant Abraham
swear, and Abimilech swear, Abraham swear by the true God, but Abimelech swear
by his false Gods, and yet Abraham did receive this oath and sinned not. So if
her Majesty and the Turk should make a covenant the Turk would not swear as
the Queen would swear; for the Queen would swear by the Lord, but the Turk
would swear by Mahomet: if it be lawful then to receive such an oath, though
it be an unlawful oath, why may it not be lawful for me to give more than I
borrowed, though it be unlawful for the Usurer to take more then he lended?
Beside, a Prince may not pardon a wilful murderer, yet I think that no man
will say in have, that he which has committed murder may not take a pardon.
As this unlawful giving does not make the taking unlawful; so the other
unlawful taking does not make the giving unlawful. Beside, it is lawful to
suffer injury, though it be unlawful to offer injury: it is lawful to suffer
injury, as Christ paid tribute, Mat. 17. 17.
which was injury; but, it is not lawful to offer injury, because there are
six Commandments against it.

Now, to take usury, is as it were to offer injury: but to give usury, is as
it were to suffer injury, therefore though I may not take more than I borrowed,
yet I may give more than I borrowed.

Moreover, I may compare giving of usury to swearing; if a man swear without
cause, he sins, but if he swear as the word teaches him to swear, he
sins not: so, if a man borrow upon usury, and borrow without cause, he
sins, because he feeds the usurer: but else, as a man may swear in some
case, so in some case a man may borrow upon usury, that is, in case of
necessity, when a man must needs borrow, and can borrow of none but of usurers.

Lastly, I may allege that usury and usurer, are never read in the Scripture,
but they signify him that takes usury, not him which gives usury: and
therefore the Scripture seems to forbid taking, but not giving.

Many reasons more are alleged which I cannot refute, and therefore I will not
co^tradict them: yet I mean not to decide the question, because I will not
bemistake^; but if some should come unto me in that necessity and extremity
which I ca^ imagine, and ask; may I borrow money of these usurers to save my
life, or my credit, or my living, seeing no man will lend me freely? I would
answer him as the Prophet answered Naaman, neither do, nor do not, but go in
peace. I will not forbid thee, nor I will not condemn thee, but if thy
conscience condemn thee not, I think thy sin one of the least sins; and
as Naaman prayed, 2. Reg. 5. 18.
Lord be merciful unto me in this: so I think the Lord will be merciful unto
thee in this: but if thy conscience go against it: then do it not, for it is
sin to thee, though it be free for another, because whatsoever is not done of
faith is sin. Romans 14. 23.
I charge you in the fear of God, that you do not mistake that which is said,
for I know no learned Preacher, nor learned writer of other mind. Yet least you
should mistake the matter, as I distinguished of le^ders, so I will distinguish
of borrowers.

Diverse kinds of borrowers.
If some may borrow upon usury, it does not follow that all may borrow upon
usury, because all have not the like cause: therefore do not say that I teach
you to borrow upon usury, for I think that the most in this city which borrow
upon usury, should not borrow as they do, because they rather maintain
usury, then supply their necessity. Some I know borrow for mere necessity;
if any may be allowed, those are they: but there is a kind of borrowers in
this City, which feed Usurers as the bellows kindle the fire, for they have
no need to borrow, but because they would be rich, and richer, and richest of
all: therefore they will employ all the money which they ca^ borrow, thinking to
get more by the use of it, the^ the usury of it does come to. This makes them
sell their wares so dear, because they must not only gain the price but the
interest beside, and more than the interest to, or else they gain nothing.
These borrowers are in another predicament than those which borrow for
necessity, and therefore if they be not old enough to answer for themselves, I
am to young to answer for them. There are other borrowers as I have heard,
which for some secret cause would seem barer and needier than they are, either
because they would not be charged deeply with Subsidies, or else because they
would compound with their Creditors for a little: therefore they will have
always some thing for usury, that their creditors may think them bare of
money, or that other may pity them in their charges. These are like those
foxes which have wealth enough to pay their debts, and yet lie in prison
because they would defraude their creditors. I doubt not but there be more
sorts the^ I know, I cannot hunt every corner because I want experience: Note.
but this is my conclusion, I would have no man pay interest unto usurers but
for necessity, even as a trauailer gives his purse to a thief, because he
cannot choose. Thus you have heard what I can say of the^ which take usury, and
them which give usury.

What Usurers should do with their gains.
Now you would understand the last question. If you have been Usurers already,
what you should do with that money which you have gained by usury? Surely
even as Zacheus did, restore it again. If you cannot say as Samuel said, 1.
Sam. 12. 3.
whose goods have I taken? then you must say as Zacheus said, Luke. 19. 8.
whose goods have I kept? The best thing is to do no man wrong, but the next
to that is, to make him amends. This God signifies when he says. Josh. 6. 18.
Put away the execrable thing from you, that is, let no unlawful thing stay in
your hands, like the wedge of Acha^, which he had got by sin. The same law
serves for all which is got wrongfully, which was instituted against thieves,
Restore it again: Exodus 22.
the reason of this law is, because the sin is not remitted, until the debt be
restored, for as humility is the repentance of pride, and abstinence is the
repentance of surfeit, and alms is the repentance of covetousness, and
forgiveness is the repentance of malice, so restitution is the repentance of
usury; as he which is not humble does not repent his pride, he which does not
abstain, does not repent his gluttony, he which does not forgive, does not
repent his malice, so he which does not restore, does not repent his usury.
For how ca^ he be said to repent for his usury, which lives by usury still.
Therefore Daniell says to Nabuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 24.
break off thy sins by righteousness, showing, that nothing but
righteousness ca^ break unrighteousness. As diseases are healed by the
contrary, so pride is healed by humility, gluttony by abstinence, malice by
forgiveness, covetousness by alms, and usury by restoring. This Paul
calls, The revenge of a Christian, 2. Cor. 7. 11.
when he takes revenge upon his sins, and punishes his lusts, so that he
makes the^ do contrary to that which they would do. Therefore you must
restore that which you have got by usury, or else you do not repent of your
usury. As a Camel when he comes home casts of his burden at the door,
that he may enter into his stable, so they which are laden with other men's
goods, when they go to heaven, must leave their burden where they had it,
least they be to gross to get in at the narrow gate. But as the disciples of
Christ said, John. 6. 60.
This is a hard speech, so to the^ which have got most that they have by
unlawful means, this is a hard speech, to bid the^ restore it again, there
be two great rubs in the way.

Two objections.
First, the loss which they shall sustain, if they restore again all which
they have got unjustly. Then the difficulty to restore it again to the right
parties. If you ask me, as Amaziah asked the Prophet, 2. Chro. 25. 9.
How shall we do for those hundredth tallents? How shall I live when all is gone
that I have got wrongfully? I can say no more than the Prophet said to him, The
Lord is able to give thee more then this. Iuke. 19.
Zacheus did not fear how he should live, but Zacheus did fear to offend: so
thou should not fear to restore other men's goods, but thou should fear
to keep other men's goods: and as Zacheus lived when he had restored, so thou
shall live when thou have restored. He which says, Mala. 3. 10.
Try me if I will not power down a blessing, try him whether he will not
power down a blessing; for he has promised to bless the lender as well as
the Sacrificer. He which is the Lord of all, can give thee more tha^ thou
need: Deuteronomy. 15. 10.
but if you cannot restore to the owner, nor to his heirs, then give it to the
poor, for they are the next heirs, and repent that thou have kept it so long:
but in no wise thou may keep it to thy self, because it is none of thine.

When Hezekiah was like to dye, Esaias said unto him, Esaias. 38. 6.
Set thy things in order before thou dye. That which he advised him, he
advises all; set your things in order before you dye. What is this to set
things in order, but to restore unto every one his own? When thou bequeathest
thy body to the earth, then thy body is set in order: when thou bequeathest
thy soul to God, then thy soul is set in order: when thou bequeathest thy
goods to the owners, the^ thy goods are set in order: therefore if thou dye
with other men's goods in thy hand, then thou dyest before thou have set things
in order, and then thou dyest in thy sins, and then no promise in all the
Scripture appertains unto thee, because nothing is promised unto sinners, but
unto penitent sinners. Therefore that you may not dye in your sins, it is
necessary to make restitution before you dye, or else you dye in your sin,
and are crossed out of all the joys of heaven. Wherefore as Abner said to
Ioab, 2. Sam. 2. 26.
Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? So remember
whether this course will be sweet or bitter in the end. If they be condemned
which give not their own goods to them which need, like the rich glutton, how
can they be saved which draw other men's goods from them, that have more need
of theirs?

Thus you have heard the definition of usury, and the deriuation of it, and
the unlawfulness of it, and the kinds of it, and the punishment of it, and the
arguments which are alleged for it, and what may be thought of them which do
not take usury but give usury, and what they should do which have got their
living by usury.

Now, seeing you may not be usurers to men, let every man hereafter be an usurer
to God, which promises; If thou leave father, or mother, or wife, or children,
or house, or land for him, not ten in the hundredth, but an hundredth for ten;
may an hundred for one, and in the world to come, life everlasting: that is, a
thousand for one. Mat. 19. 26.
That we may receive this usury, let us pray that the words which we have
heard out of this Psalm, may dwell with us till we dwell in heaven.

FINIS.

