THE WEDDING Garment.

ROMANS 13. 14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.



LONDON. Printed for W. Wright.

1590.

To the Reader.
TO control those false coppies of this Sermon, which were printed without my
knowledge (patched as it seems) out of some borrowed notes, and to stop the
Printing of it again without my corrections, as it was intented, because they
had got it licensed before, although utterly unwilling for some respects to
have it published, which made me withstand their importunity so long, yet
seeing more inconvenience then I thought of, I suffered that which I could not
hinder. And now hoping that it is Gods will to profit some by it, as Iaakob
parted from Genesis 43. 11.
Benjamin, so that which must be let he, and the Lord give thee a blessing
with it.

The Wedding Garment.
Romans 13. 14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.
I Have chosen a Text which is the sum of the Bible. For all Scripture runs
upon Christ like the title of a book, Reu. 1. 8.
because Christ is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end of man's
salvation, therefore he is figured in the law, foretold in the Prophets, and
fulfilled in the Gospel. Some places point to his Divinity, some to his
humanity, some to his kingdom, some to his Priesthood, some to his Prophecy,
some to his Conception, some to his birth, some to his life, some to his
miracles, some to his passion, some to his resurrection; some to his Ascension,
some to his glorification, all point unto the Savior like John Baptiste, Ioh.
1. 29.
when he said, This is the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the
world. Therefore learn Christ, and learn all. Now to teach us how we should
hear, and how we should love, and how we should fear, and how we should
believe, and how we should follow Christ, that we may know when we have
learned him. The Apostle says, Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ: as though
this word did contain all our duties unto Christ, To put him on, (which
seems to be the level of this phrase, if you mark how it comes in, for
before Paul says, Cast away the works verse. 12.
of darkness, and put on the Armor of light. Then he names the works of
darkness, which we should cast off: viz. gluttony, drunkenness, strife, envy,
chambring, verse. 13.
wantonness, after he names the armor of light, verse. 14.
which we should put on, and calls it by the name of the giver, The Lord
Jesus Christ. In sted of gluttony, and drunkenness, and strife, and envy, and
chambering, and wantonness, and other patches of the devil, wherewith man
clotheth himself Psalm. 109. 18.
as with a garment. The Apostle gives him another garment, which he calls
Jesus Christ. He does not oppose virtue to vice, as one would think when he
had said, Cast off gluttony, he should have said, Put on sobriety, when he
had said, Cast off wantonness, he should have said, Put on continency, when
he had said, Cast off envy, he should have said, Put on love, but in stead of
all virtues, he commends the example of Christ for every virtue, and
opposes it to every vice, as if he should say, He which thinks only to
follow Christ, needs not be lead by the hand from virtue to virtue, but his
example will teach him what he shall follow, and what he shall flee better
then all precepts in the world. Therefore this is the best thought in every
action for a man to think, what Christ would do, which was made not only
redemption and salvation to save us, but wisdom and 1. Cor. 1. 30. Mat. 11.
29. Mar. 10. 21.
example to guide us. Therefore he says, Learn of me, and follow me, as
though we should think before we speak, whether he would speak so, and
consider before we do whether he would do so, and do all by his example as
the scholar writes by his copy, or else we do not learn of him, but of our
selves, and then we go awry, like a child which scribleth without a rule. If
thou resoluest to speak and do no otherwise then Christ would speak and do
himself, thou shall be sure to do all things well, because thou followest a
straight pattern. Therefore study what this means. To put on Christ. It is a
strange speech, Ioh. 3. 4.
and a strange Garment, they which cannot tell like Nichodemus, what Christ
means when he says, that we must be borne again, cannot tell what Paul
means, when he says, Put on Christ: as if one man should put on another. I
think many here may go to the Apostle, as the Apostles went to Christ, and
ask, What is the Luke 1. 9. Gal. 3. 27.
parable? This phrase is read in none but Paul, which has written most of
Justification by Christ: and therefore he uses all phrases to express how we
should apply Christ unto us, and in no terms he has showed it more lively
then in this phrase, Put on Christ. For it signifies that Christ does cover
us like a Garment, and defend us like an armoure. He hides our
unrighteousness Romans 4. 7.
with his righteousness, he covers our disobedience with his obedience, he
shadoweth our death with his death, that the wrath of God cannot find us,
judgment cannot spy us, the curse cannot see us, for the garment which
covers and hides us. But as Iaakob got Genesis 37. 29.
the blessing in the name and apparel of Esau his elder brother: so in the
name and apparel of Christ our elder brother, we receive the blessing, and are
receued into favor like Christ himself. For God says not, This is my beloved
Son which pleases me, but In whom I am pleased: meaning Mar. 3. 17.
that not only Christ pleases God, but we please God in Christ, For Christ is
our head. Therefore as one looking in the face of a man, does like 1. Cor. 11.
3. Ephe. 5. 23.
him straight, if he like his face: so God beholding us in the face of Christ,
does love us straight, because the face does please him: But Christ is not our
head, unless we be his members: Christ is not out Garment, unless we put him on:
as Christ did put on our garment, when he clothed himself with our flesh, and
took our infirmities, and bore our curse: So we must put on his garment, that
is, his righteousness, his merits, and his death, which is as strange a
vesture to us, as our flesh was to him, and much ado we have to Reave. 3. 4.
put it on, and when it is on, there is great cunning to wear it cleanly and
comely, from soyling and renting that such a precious garment be not taken from
Mat. 22. 11. Mat. 7. 23.
us again. Therefore many seem to wear this Garment which shall be thrust from
the banquet, because they wear it not: as those which will say when the Lord
shall come to judgment. We have seen thee in our streets, Luke 13. 26.
we have heard thee in our sinagoges, we have prophesied, we have cast out
devils, we have wrought miracles by thy name: As though if any had put him on,
or borne his marks, they were the men which were marked like his servants,
therefore who but they shall enter into heaven? Yet Christ says, I know ^uk.
13. 27.
you not, there is their reward, I know you not,, as if he should answer,
you wear not my livery, you wear not my cognizance for all your shows,
therefore depart from me: so he put them off because they had not put him on:
for though they had seen his person, and heard of his virtues, yet they had
not faith to apply his mercies, his merits, his death and his righteousness
unto them, without which no man can put on Christ nor wear him. Faith is the
hand which puts him on. Faith takes first his righteousness and covers her
unrighteousness, then she takes his obedience, and covers her disobedience,
then she takes his patience, and covers her impatiency, then she takes his
temperance, and covers her intemperancy, then she takes his continency, and
covers her incontinency, then she takes his constancy, and covers her
inconstancy, then she takes his faith, and covers her diffidence, then she
takes his humility, and covers her pride, then she takes his love, and
covers her rancor. And so takes one roabe after another, and tricketh her
self until she have put on Jesus Christ, that is, until she appear in the
sight of God, like Jesus Christ, clothed with his merits and graces: that God
has no power to be angry with her, because she comes so like his Son.
This is to put on Jesus Christ, as you shall see more lively, when you have
taken a view of the garment, for we are to speak of Christ the Garment, and of
our putting it on. There be many fashio^s of apparel, but they are too light,
or too heavy, or too sad, or too course, or too stale, and all wear out. At
last the Apostle found a fashion, that surpasses them all: it is never out of
fashion, meet for all seasons, fit for all persons, and such a profitable
weed, that the more it is worn, the fresher it is. What fashion have you seen
comparable to this? Is it not like the clothes of David's ambassadors, which 2.
Sam. 10. 4.
covered their upper parts, but not their lower parts: nor like Saul's armor,
which tired David 1. Sam. 17. 29.
when he should fight with it: Nor like the counterfaite of 2. King. 14. 2.
Ieroboams wife, which disguised her self to go unknown, Ioh. 9. 4. 5.
nor like the old rags of the Gibeonites, which deceived Joshua, nor like the
paultry suit of Michah which he gave once a year to his Leuite, nor like the
gluttons flaunte which ietted in purple every day, nor like the light clothes
which Christ said are in kings Iud. 17. 10. Mat. 11. 8.
Courts, and make them lighter that were them. But it is like the garment of
the high priest, which had all the names Luke 16. 19. Exodus 28. 21,
of the Tribes of Israel written upon his breast: so all the names of the
faithful are written in the breast of Christ, and registered in the book of his
merits. It is like Elias mantell which divided Mal. 3. 16. 2. Kin. 2. 8.
the waters: So he deuideth our sins and punishments that they which are
clothed with Christ, are armed both against sin and death. It is like the
Garments Deuteronomy. 29. 5.
of the Israelites in the wilderness, which did not wear: forty years together
they wandered in the desert, and yet says Moses, their shoes were not worn,
but their apparel was as when they came out of Egypt: Psalm. 136. 1.
so the righteousness of Christ does last for ever, and his mercies are never
worn out. As Mardochai shined in the kings robes before the people: Hest. 6.
11.
So and more glorious are the faithful in the robes of Christ before God. When
Christ was transfigured upon the mount. Mat. 17. 2.
Mat. says, that his face shined like the Sun, and his clothes were as white
as the light: So when we are transfigured into the image of Christ, we shall
shine before other men like lights: and therefore Christ's disciples are called
Lights, because they were Mat. 5. 14.
clothed with light, and shined to the world. Solomon was Mat. 6. 29.
not so glorious in all his royalty, nor the lillyes which are brauer then
Solomon, as he which is clothed with Christ, because the apparel upon him is
better then all the world about 2. Sam. 1. 14.
him. Therefore if David said, Weep ye daughters of Israel for Saul which
clothed you in purple. I may say, rejoice ye daughters of Israel, for Christ
which has clothed you with righteousness, as it were with a vesture, before
you come to the banquet.

This is the wedding garment Math. 22. 12.
without which no man can feast with the Lord. This garment is called an
Armor, because Ephe. 6. 11.
it defends us from all the assalts of the devil, the flesh the world, the
heat of persecution, and the cold of defection. This Garment is called Light,
because it is the beauty and glory of them which wear Romans 13. 12.
it. This Garment is called a Kingdom, because none but Kings do wear it,
that is, Mat. 6. 33.
they are inthroned in the kingdom of Christ, and made kings over the world,
the flesh and satan: which wear this Garment, like the hair Samson, Iud. 16.
6.
which while he wore, he was like a King, and all his enemies had no power to
hurt him.

This Garment Paul has sent unto you, to go before the king of heaven and
earth, a holy Garment, a royal Garment, an immaculate Garment, an everlasting
Garment: a Garment Romans 5. 1.
whereof every hem is peace of conscience, every pleat is joy in the holy
Ghost, every stitch Romans 14. 17.
is the remission of some sin, and saves him which wears it. Mat. 9. 20.
If she which touched the hem of Christ's garment was healed, he which wears
the garment nay, he which wears Christ himself, shall not he be healed of
all his sores, though he were wounded from head to foot? You need not cloth
him now which says, When I was naked Maih. 25. 43.
ye did not cloth me, nor cast your garments in his way, as Math. 21. 8.
they did, when he came to Jerusalem, but take his garments and suffer your
selves to be clothed, Genesis 9. 23. Luke 10. 34. This Sama ritane does not
signify Christ, but yet may be resembled to Christ.
as Noah did, to cover your nakedness. As the good Samaritane put him upon his
own beast, which was spoiled with thieves, and bound up his sores when he was
wounded: So Christ JESUS mounteth the faithful upon his righteousness, and
heals their sins, as though he should cover them with his garments, whom the
world, the flesh, and the devil have robbed of their Genesis 3. 1
garments, that is, the righteousness which they had in Paradise before the
serpent came: so if we put on Christ, we are clothed with his obedience,
whereby our wickedness is covered: we are clothed with his merits, whereby our
sins are forgiven: we are clothed with his death, whereby our punishment is
released: we are clothed with his spirit, whereby our hearts are mollified
and sanctified, and renewed till we resemble Christ himself. This is the
Apostles meaning, to put on Christ, as it is unfolded in Col. 3. 12. Where he
brigns Col. 3. 12.
forth all the robes of Christ, and sorts them, and says, put on mercy, put
on meeknes, put on verse. 30.
humility, put on patience, put on love, all which before he called the new
man. So that to put on Christ, is to put on the new man with all his virtues,
until we be renewed to the image of Christ, which is like a new man amongst
men. They which labor to be righteous, and yet believe that Christ's
righteousness shall save them, have put on Christ as Paul would have them.
We are not taught to put on Angels, nor Saints, nor the virgin Mary, nor
Paul himself to cover our sins with their righteousness, as the Papists
do, but we are commanded to put on Christ, and cover our sins with his
riygteousnesse. The body has many Garments, but the soul has one Garment.
Every cloute will cover our sores, but the finest silk will not cover our
sins. Therefore when we seem brave to others, we seem foul to God, because
his eye is upon our sins, which lie naked, when all the rest is covered,
until we put on Christ, and then we hear that voice, Thy sins are covered.
And then Math. 9. 2. Psalm. 32. 1.
we have that blessing: Blessed is the man whose sin is covered. So we are
clothed and blessed together. Yet this Garment is out of request, too roughe
for some, too grave for others, too base for others. And therefore in stead of
putting on Christ, they put him off, in sted of welcomming him, they discharge
him, like the Gadarens, that Luke 8. 37: Math. 8. 34.
they may keep their swine, that is, their beastly pleasures, which he would
cast into the Math. 27. 35.
sea: These are like the foolish soldiers which should have made Christ
their Garment, and they cast lots upon his garments, and divided them, and so
spoiled them. So do the Papists deal with this Garment, they say it is not
fit for them, and therefore they break it and mangle it, and piece it with rags
of their own inventions: they say it is too light, and not able to bear off
the storms of death, and heat of hell, and therefore choose rather to make
themselves Garments of their merits, and their masses, and their penance, and
their pardons, and their pilgrimages: like Adam and Eve, which made them selves
coats of figleaues, Genesis 3. 7. and 21.
which God destroyed again, to show that when men have patched al their leaves
of masses, of pardons, of pilgrimages, and satisfactions together, yet they
will not cover their nakedness, nor keep of the heat of Gods wrath, but are
like the curtall skitrs of David's 2. Sam. 10. 4.
Ambassadors, which hid not their shame. Therefore when we may go in our
masters attire, shall we scrubbe like beggars patched in our rags? Mine own
Garments defile me, says Job: Our own Garments, Job. 9. 31.
our own righteousness defiles us, for what garment, what righteousness have
we of our own, but that Isa. 64. 6.
which like a monstrous cloth, which had more need to be washed it self,
then to wipe that which is foul. Therefore Christ must make us garments, or
else when our backs flant it like courtiers, our souls shall strippe like
beggars. And the Devils will sport themselves Genesis 9. 22.
like Cham, to see our nakedness.

First, the Father made us Gen, 3. 21.
Garments in paradise, now the Son makes us garments in the wilderness:
nay, the Son is made our Garment, as Paul says, Christ is made unto 1. Cor.
1. 3^
us righteousness: that is, Christ's righreousnesse, must be our Garment, or
else we shall be ashamed when our righteousness does not reach to cover our
nakedness, but still some part will peep bare until he cast his
righteousness upon it, and then all is covered. Sam. 17. 40.
As David needed no other armor against the Giant, then a sling: so we need no
other garment against sin then Christ. There wa^teth nothing but this to put
it on.

Now let us see how to put this Garment on. Many sumble about it, like
children which had need of one to put on their clothes. Some put on Christ as
a cloak, which hangs upon their shoulders, and covers them when they go
abroad to be seen of men: they can cast on the cloak of holiness and seem for
a while as holy as the best, but so soon as they come home, the cloak goes
of, and the man is as he was, whose vizarde was better then his face. Thus
hypocrites put on Christ, as many retain unto noble men, not to do them any
service, but to have their countenance. Many put on Christ like a hat, which
goes off to every one which meets them: so every temptation which meets
the^, makes them forget what they heard, what they promised, what they
resolved, and change their way, as though they had not repented at all. So the
common people like your selves, put on Christ, they are zealous so long as they
are in the Church, and beat their breasts, and cast up Luke. 18. 11.
their eyes, like the Publican, when they hear a sentence which moves them, as
though they would do no more against that saying while they live. But the next
business puts all out of mind, till they come to the Church again. Some put
on Christ as a glove, which coueteth but the hand, so they put on the face of
Christ, or the tongue of Christ, but their hands work, and their feet walk as
they did before. So many professors of Religion put on Christ, which call but
for discipline and reformation, that they might get a name of zeal and
sincerity, to cover some fault, which they would not be suspected of. Thus
every man would cover himself with Christ, but they have not the skill, or
they have not the will to put him on. What will you do then? Though the
Garment be never so good yet it is not good to them that do not wear it. For
what profit have we of the garments which we never wear, they neither
keep us from heat nor cold. Therefore Paul does not bring you a Garment to
lay by you for the mothes, but he bids you put it on. Here is the cunning now
in putting it on. If Paul had taught us this, then you would hearken unto him.
Well, you shall hear what Paul says to the putting of it on. First (says
Paul) you must cast away the works of darkness, und then put on the Armor of
light. First you must verse. 12.
put off, and then put on: As the Eagles feathers will not lie with any other
feathers, but consume them, which lie with them: So the Wedding Garment will
not wear with filthy garments, but scorns like the Arc, that Dagon should
stand by it. If any man may 1. Sam. 5. 8.
not wear women's apparel for lightness, may he wear the Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
devils apparel, and cloth himself with pride, with coueteousnes, with
envy, with hypocrisy, with uncleanness, and when he is like the devil sit at
Gods table? No man says Mat. 2. 21.
Christ, patcheth a new piece to an old garment, and will thou patch an old
piece to a new Leuit. 19. 19.
garment? God forbad his people to wear linsey wolsey, because it was a sign
of inconstancy, but this is inconstancy it self. He does not put on Reu: 3.
15. Ioh. 19. 23.
Christ, but puts off Christ, and puts on Belial, which fashions himself
to God and the world too. As Christ's coat was without seame, so they must be
without stain, that wear it. For when a man puts on fair clothes, he
makes himself fair too, and auoideth every foul thing, least it should
foul his clothes: So must he which puts on Christ, for the finest garment
is soonest stained. Therefore when thou have put on this Garment, thou must
wash thy self, and pick thy way, and choose thy works, and handle nothing
that is foul for marring thy clothes, that is, thou must not think as thou
did, nor speak as thou did, nor live as thou did, but remember that
thou have changed thy master, and serve him with whom thou art bound. For if
God and the devil could not agree Iud. 9.
upon Moses body, for one to have one part, and the other another part, but God
would have all. Much less will God agree that the devil should have part of the
soul, which would not yield him part of the body. Thus have you heard what
you must put off: now hear how Christ must be put on. As the Angel taught
John to Reu. 10. 9.
read the book when he bad him eat it: So we must put on Christ, as if we
did eat him, not as the Papists do in their Mass, but as the meat is turned
into the substance of the body, and goes through every part of man: So Christ
and his word should go from part to part, from ear to heart, from heart to
mouth, from mouth to hand, till we be of one nature with them, that they be
the very substance of our thoughts and speeches, and actions, as the meat is
of our bodies. This is to eat Christ and his word, or else we do not eat
them, but chew them, and when our taste is satisfied, spue them out again. Thus
we must put on Christ, for the word signifies so to put him on, as if thou
would put him in, that he Ephe. 3. 30.
may be one with thee, and thou with him, as it were in a body toherher. As
he has put on all our infirmities, so we must put on all his graces, not
half on, but all on, and claspe him to us, and girde him about us, and wear
him even as we wear our skin, which is always about us. Then there shall be
no need of wiers, nor curls, nor periwigges, the husbands shall not force to
rack their rentes nor inhance their fines, nor sell their lands, to deck 2.
King. 2. 13.
their wives. But as the poor mantle of Eliah seemed better to Elisha then all
the robes of Solomon, so the wedding Garment shall seem better then all the
flants of vanity, and put every fashion out of fashion, which is not modest and
comely like it self. If you will know farther how to put on Christ, you shall
see how your text will Catechize you (in three names of God) Lord, Jesus,
Christ. The Apostle seems to spell out the way unto us, how we should wear
this garment. First we must put him on as Lord, then we must put him on as
Jesus: Lastly, we must put him on as Christ. Thou must put him on as Lord, that
is, thy ruler to command thee, and thy Tutor to govern thee, thy master to
direct thee, thou must be no man's servant but his, take no Act. 4. 19.
man's part against him, but say with the Apostle, Whether is it meet to obey
God or you? Thou must put him on as Jesus, that is, thy Savior, in whom thou
trustest, thy protector on who^ thou dependest, thy redeemer in whom thou
belieuest. Thou must not look for thy salvation Joshua has the like name, but
not from God nor to that end.
from Angel, nor Saint, nor any thing beside him. For the name of Jesus
signifies a Savior, and is given to none but him, and he is not only called
the Savior, but the salvation, in the song of Simeon, to show Luke. 1. 69.
that he is the only Savior, for there may be many Saviors, Iud. 3. 9.
but there can be but one salvation: as there may be many tortures, and yet
but one death. Therefore when he is called the salvation, it implies that
there is no Savior beside him. Thou must put him on as Christ, that is, a
King to rule, a Prophet to Luke. 3. 33
teach, a Priest to pray, and sacrifice, and pacify the wrath of Act. 3. 22.
God for thee. For this name Heb. 8. 3,
Christ does signifye that he Mat. 1. 16.
was anointed a King, a Priest and a Prophet: for man, a king Heb. 1. 8.
to rule him, a Priest to offer sacrifice for him, a Prophet to teach him, so
that he puts on Christ as Lord, which worshipeth none but him. He puts
on Christ as Jesus which believes in none but him, and he puts on Christ
as Christ which worshippeth none but Call. 3. 27.
him, believes in none but him and hears none but him. You put on Christ
first, when you are baptized: then you were sealed and consecrated to his
service: so soon as you came into the world, you vowed to renounce the
world, and follow God: how many have put on Christ so, and since have put him
off again, which have broken the first promise that ever they made, and were
never Romans 6. 3.
faithful to God since. You put on Christ again, when you are called and
sanctified, that is, Ephe. 4. 22.
when you cast off the old man, which is corrupt with the lusts of the flesh,
the pride of life, and the cares of this world, and put on the new man, which
is regenerate in righteousness and holiness to the image of Christ, or likeness of
Adam in his innocency, for to put on the new man, is to become a new man, as if
thou were borne again and conceived of the holy Ghost. Romans 12. 2. Job. 29. 14.
Of this Job speaks when he says, I put on justice, and it covers me.
You put on Christ again, when you receive his holy 1. Cor. 10. 16.
Sacrament, and are partakers of his body and blood, that is, the merits of his
obedience and passion by faith, which hears him, as if he did see him, and
sees him, as if she did feel him, and feels him, as if she did taste him,
and tastes him as if she did digest him, the^ Christ is become yours, and
dwells in you, and feeds you with his grace to eternal life, as the bread
and wine sustaineth the life present, Lastly, when you have put on Christ in
these three sorts, which is your garment for this world, after you Phil. 3.
21. 1. Cor. 15. 49.
shall put on Christ in heaven, and be clothed with his glory, and that shall
be your last vesture, which shall never wear out.

Thus have you heard what is meant by putting on Christ, first to cloth our
selves with righteousness and holiness like Christ, and then because our own
righteousness is too short to cover our arms, and legs, and thighs of
sin, but still some bare place will peer out and shame us in the sight of
God: therefore we must borrow Christ's garments, as Jacob Genesis 27. 15.
did his brothers, and cover our selves with his righteousness, that is,
believe that his righteousness shall supply our unrighteousness, and his
sufferings shall stand for our sufferings, because he came to fulfill the
law, and bear the curse, and satisfy his Father for us, that all which
believe in him might not die, but have life everlasting. Ioh. 3. 16.


Now I have showed you this goodly Garment, you must go to another to help
you to put it on, and none can put this Garment upon you, but he which is the
Garment, the Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore to him let us pray.

FINIS.

