THE FALL OF King Nabuchadnezzer.

Dan. 4. 28. 29. 30.

By Henry Smith.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed by Thomas Scarlet, 1591.

Dan. 4. 28. 28 While the word was in his mouth, a voice came from heaven,
saying. O King Nabuchadnezzer, to thee be it spoken, thy kingdom is departed
from thee.

29 And they shall drive thee from men and thy dwelling shall be with the
beasts of the field, they shall make thee to eat grass with the Oxen, and
seven times shall pass over thee, until thou know that the most highest
God bears rule over the kingdoms of men, and gives to whomsoever he will.

30 The very same hour was this thing fulfilled upon Nabuchadnezzer, and he
was driven from men, and did eat grass as the Oxen, and his body was wet with
the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown as Eagles feathers, and his
nails as birds claws.


FRom the 26. verse, to the end of this chapter, is laid down the pride,
fall, and restitution of Nabuchadnezzer. The two first verses are like a banner
of his pride, which show him in his ruffeling as it were in the air, before
he knew God, or him self. The three next verses are the discovery of his
shame, which show him in his misery, as it were groueling on the ground, after
God had cooled his courage. The four last verses are the celebration of his
recovery, which show him in holiness as it were rapt into heaven, and singing
with the saints for joy, that God had brought him unto his knowledge, though it
were through shame and trouble, and loss of all that he had seven years
together. Of his pride we have heard already: yet because we are friends to
vices, as we are to men, so long as they prosper and flourish, but when they
decay and fall, then we shrink away, and are ashamed of them: so it may be, if
ye could see pride take a fall, though ye love her well yet ye would forsake
her, like a banquerout, when ye see that she can pleasure you no longer.
Therefore ye shall see Nabuchadnezzer upon his feet again: before you beheld
him upon his knees, that when ye see what a king he was in his galleries, and
after find his servants in his palace, and his subjects in his throne, and
himself like a beast in the wilderness, God may give you hearts to think a
little of this sin, what it is which cost so dear, and is as common now in
every house, as it was then in the Kings court.

After twelve months (says Daniel) that is, twelve months after GOD had
warned this king by dreams and by Daniel, to repent his sins, he was strouting
in his galleries, and thought what sin should be next, as though he had never
heard of dream or Prophet.

By this computation of sin, wherein the months are observed so exactly,
how long Nabuchadnezzer rebelled after he was warned, Daniel shows what a
reckoning God keeps of our months, and weeks and days, which he gives us
to repent, as he did to Nabuchadnezzer, and what an account we shall make of
them, as Nabuchadnezzer did, though we count no more of our age then the child
does of his youth, and have done no more of our task at twenty then when we
were but ten, nor at thirty then when we were but twenty, nor at forty then
when we were thirty, yet we shall give account of mo hours in the day of
judgment, and it shall be heavier to the old than to the young, to you which
have the word, then to them which want it: and there is great ods between
Nabuchadnezzer and us, for he which challenged Nabuchadnezzer for twelve
months since he was warned, may challenge us of twelve years since we were
warned, and yet we look not for so great punishment as fell upon
Nabuchadnezzer for twelve months. Daniel names three twelve months, as though
he would speak of a great matter, and shows how worthy Nabuchadnezzer was to
be punished, because he might have reformed his life since he was warned: for
there were twelve months between his dreams and his banishment. But that
year wherein he had so many warninges and teachinges, was as vain as the
rest, and vainer then the years before: for now he should have bin a mourner
like the king of Niniuie, when Jonas threatened destruction unto them.

But like a victor of a country returned from battle, to solemnize his
triumph, first he decked his palace as brave as himself, and then he walks
his stations in it, and when he has set all things before him, which might
make him forget God, and hoist himself in pride, like a serpent that would
burst unless he discharged some of his poison, he breaks out and says, Is
not this great Babel, which I have built by the might of my power, for the
honor of my majesty? Wherein observe first what a glorious opinion this vain
king had of his vain buildinges. Secondly, how that he names himself the
founder of them, as though he had done all without an help. Thirdly, that in
all his works he sought nothing but vain-glorie, as he witnesses against
himself, saying: which I have built for the honor of my majesty, not for the
honor of Gods majesty, but for the honor of my majesty. So first that which
he should have contemned, as Christ did the beauty of the temple, he admired
it, Math. 24 2
and nothing seemed so glorious to him, as that which made him shameful to
God. Secondly, that City which was built by Semiramis, he arrogateth to him
self, and never joined the chief workemaister with him, but says which I
have built by the might of my power, when he should have said, by the might of
Gods power. (...)sal. 127. 1.
For unless God build the house, the builders (says David) builds but in
vain. Kin. 4 10.


Lastly, that which he should have builte for the honor of God, as the man
built a chamber for the Prophet, he builded for his own honor, as our
Nabuchadnezzers do. Therefore when al his pleasures were prepared like a feast,
and he came to sit down at the banquet, it happened to him as to the churl in
the Gospel, after he had filled his barnes, when he came to sing in his
heart, be merry my soul, that night his soul was taken from him and the
devils made merry with it in hell: so he had feathered his neast, and
began to crow upon his roof, Is not this great Babel, etc. As if he should
say, Now Nabuchadnezzer, make thee merry, that hour his honor was taken
from him, for a voice came down from heaven like the terrible hand which wrote
upon the wall, when Baltazar sat at his banquet, and dashed his pride upon
such a rock, that within an hour all his pomp and pleasures and treasures,
suffered such a shipwreck, that his that his fall was more admired of all,
than his glory and buildinges were admired of himself. Thus all the joy, and
pleasures, and glory of pride are spoken with a breath, and stopped with another.

Yo^ have heard what the voice spoke from earth, now you shall hear what the
voice sounds from heaven. These three verses following declare this Kings
fall, when and how, and from whom it was. While the words were yet, etc.
there is the time. A voice, etc. there is the judge. O king, etc. there is the
arraignment, Thy kingdom, etc. there is the judgment, He was driven from men,
and lived with beasts in the wilderness, till his hairs were grown like Eagles
feathers. There is the execution and manner of his punishment. First of time,
While, etc.

As Daniel observed the time when Nabuchadnezzer sinned, so he observes the
time when Nabuchadnezzer is punished, as if God had lien in wait to catch him
in his words, and take him at the trip: even as he watched Lots wife, when she
looked back, Ge. 14
and transformed her into a pillar of Salt, so soon as she looked behind.
So now the Lord lay as it were in the scout, to watch when Nabuchadnezzer
spoke treason, and to apprehend him upon it. O Nabuchadnezzer, thou have
vaunted these twelve months, since I warned thee, and I made as though I heard
not, but suffered thee to do and speak thy pleasure, and vauntest thou still?
Surely, thou shall escape me no longer, I will not hear a word more against
mine honor: so he cut cut him off while the words were in his mouth, and
propundeth the words of judgment against him. If you mark the time when the
voice spoke from heaven, you may see three wisdoms of God, first God takes
him in his fault, that he might see his falt, (...). Kin. 13 4.
as Jeroboam was stricken when he stroke the Prophet, that he might know why
he was stricken. Then he takes him suddenly, because he contemns his warning,
as the fire came upon Sodom while they contemned Lots warning. Genesis 19 24
Thirdly, God takes him where he is pleasantest, and lustiest, and safest, in
his palace, which was like a castle, as he took Herod, when his guard stod by
him, Acts. 12. 23.
that he might see that nothing can guard him from God, but God must guard him
from danger, or else Princes be not safer than subjects: so though a man sin
often, and steal his sins as it were without punishment, yet at the last he is
took napping while the wickedness is in his hand: as the Jews were, Number
while the quails were in their mouths, and his day is set when he shall pay
for all, whether it be after twelve months, or twelve years, whenever it
comes, it will seem to soon. Vengeance does stay till sin be ripe, and
watch the time when they are most occupied: then judgment steps forth, like
the Angel to stop Balaam in his way. Number
Because the punishment is more terrible and grievous when they look not for
it (for the worst that is, wish like Balaam to die the death of the righteous)
therefore God will cross them in that: though they prosper always before, yet
their ends shall be a kind of judgment upon all their life, and a prophecy
of torment, for all men to see what becomes of the wicked after death, that
they may fear to be like unto them. As when we see some stricken dead while
they forswear themselves at the bar: some fall down under the table, while
they sit swilling at the wine: some stricken dumb in the pulpit, while they
preach untruths: even as the Philistines were slain while they feasted: and
as Herod was shamed while he vaunted: Act. 12 23
and as Jeroboam was stricken while he stroke. 1. Kin 13. 4
What does this teach us, but that our sins depart from us, so soon as they
are done, unto the judge, and there they accuse us, as Cains murder cried out
against him, so soon as he slew his brother, Genesis 4
I know thy words, says God: Reu. 3 15
he may say, I know thy words and thy thoughts too. For Judas could not
go so closely about his treachery, Mat. 26 14 15, 16
but that Christ did know when his thought entered into his heart, and heard
when he conferred also with the Scribes, and saw likewise when he took the
bribe, though he kept a time to punish him, as he says in the seven and
thirty Psalm the second verse: When I see a convenient time, then will I
execute judgment.

Now the time was come, when this king should be made an example unto all other
kings after him, to amend their lives and reform their realm. When the
Prophet comes from God unto them, to tell them what they should do, when
dream and Daniel had done what they could: now God calls forth his
judgments and bids them see what they can do, and commands them to chase
Nabuchadnezzer, until he have lost his kingdom, until he be driven out of his
palace, until he be fled into the wilderness, until he be degenerat like a
beast, until his subjects and servants, and pages, make their sport, and gaze
and wonder at him, like a fool which goes unto the stocks, or a trespasser,
which is gazed at upon the pillorie: So this king was debased, when God heard
him but vaunt of his buildings.

Therefore let us take heed, and be careful, after what sort we speak, and
what words slip from us, least God take us in our lies, or oaths, or slanders,
or ribauldrie, as he took Nabuchadnezzer, when his tongue walked without a bitt:
for if he had supposed that God had bin so near, and that he would have
answered him as he did, he would have held his peace, and laid his hand
upon his mouth, rather then pay so dear for a vain word, which did him no
good when it was spoken.

The second note is of the judge. A voice came down from heaven: the
controuling voice came down from heaven* God is most offended with our sin:
for Nabuchadnezzer might have spoken more than this, before any other man: and
no man could control him, because he was a king: and kings delight in greater
vanities than buildings, yet no man says, why do thou so: because Solomon
says: Pro
He which repeateth a matter, separateth the Prince, that is, he which tells
Princes their fault, makes them his enemies: therefore since John Baptist
died, only God is left to reprove almost all that sin by authority, yet
one is in heaven has an ear and a tongue, and cheeketh the king as boldly as
ever the king checketh his subjects. When the voice from earth spoke vainly,
the voice from heaven spoke judgment. Here is the king of heaven against the
king of earth, the voice of God against the voice of man: a divine wrath,
warring with a humane pride: the fire is kindled, woe to the stubble. The Lord
of hosts is in arms against the Lord of Babel, and begins to lay hands on him,
and to thrust him out of his throane. First he rattles him like a thunder, O
king Nubuchadnezzer, as if he should say* for all thou art a king, thou shall
see whether another be above thee. Now guard thy person, now defend thy honor:
for he whom thou have despised, threatens to take thy kingdom from thee: go
now and walk in thy gallery, fetch one turn more before thou be turned out of
door, and walk with the beasts in the forest. Now he comes to the
arraignment, and calls him to the bar, O king Nab. to thee be it spoken: he was
never called king with less reverence, nor had such pay for sin in all his
reign. God gives him his title, but he tells him his lot, he calls him king,
but without a kingdom, as if he said, late king of Babel, hold up thy hand,
here a king is araigned in his own kingdom, and no evidence given against him,
but as though he had witnessed against himself, as all sinners do, God
condemns him out of his own mouth, and to open his ears, he calls him by
his own name, O king Nabuchadnezzer, as the prisoner is called when he holds
up his hand at the bar. Then he pronounces the judgment, To thee be it
spoken, to thee which aduancest thy self like God, to thee which would not
take heed by the dream, to thee which would not be warned by the prophet, to
thee which did all for thine own honor. Now hearken to thy judgment, Thy
kingdom is departed from thee, thou shall be driven out of thy palace, they
which should honor thee shall expulse thee, thou shall reign with the beasts
in the desert, there shall be thy dwelling seven years, go now and stalk in the
woods, as thou did in thy palaces, and when thou art among the lions and
wolves, and Bears, look unto Babell which thou have built. How does this
speech differ from Nabuchadnezzers speech? his words were but words, but Gods
words were, He spoke, and it was done. Genes(...)
For in the same hour that which was spoken was done (says Daniel) and
whatsoever the same voice threatens unto our sins or unto the sinner, shall
be done at first or at last. To Nabuchadnezzer it was said, Thy kingdom shall be
taken from thee: to us it is said, Thy life shall be taken from thee: to him it
was said, Thou shall be thrust forth into the desert: to us it is said, Thou
shall be thrown forth into darkness: to him it was said, Thou shall be like
beasts: to us it is said, Thou shall be like the damned. Shall not the voice
spoken to us be remembered with God, as well as the threatening menaced to him?

This voice came from heaven, and therefore it spoke home, not like them which
glide by the faults of Princes, and whisper behind their backs, as though they
would reprove them if they durst, but for fear least the Prince, or
Counselor, or Judge, or Magistrate, should take it as he means it, and
think that he aims at them, which makes them speak in parables, as though
they would cast a veil over their reproof, and eat their message before
they have spoken it. The holy ghost teaches us here to reprove, so that
whosoever sins, may know, that thou speak to him. He which speaks from
heaven (as this voice did) must speak like John Baptist among the Publicanes
and harlottes, and soldiers, as though he went from one to another, and said,
this is spoken to thee, this is spoken to thee, this is spoken to thee. For
unless we come near this mortal Gods and proud Nabuchadnezzers, as near
as Elias came to Achab, when he said, It is thou that troublest Israel, 1.
Kin.(...)
they will post it over, and think that thou speak not to them, until thou
speak plainly, as the voice spoke from heaven, To thee be it spoken. And
then they will reform the matter, or else God show some judgment upon them,
as he did here upon this great King Nabuchadnezzer. Now the decree goes
forth, that Nabuchadnezzer shall be king no more. Thy kingdom is departed from
thee. This is such a saying, as if Nabuchadnezzer had thought of it before, he
would have wept when he vaunted, to think that his honor was going from
him, when he thought it was coming to him: yet his kingdom was not departed
from him, and yet God says, Thy kingdom is departed from thee, because thy
decree was past, which should as surely come to pass, as if it were past
already, Therefore because we care not so long as the Prophet says, we shall
die, we shall suffer, we shall answer, he leaves Shall, and says Now, as God
said to Abimelec: Thou art a dead man, (...)ene. 20 3
not thou shall die, but thou art dead, which roused him more, then if he had
threatened him an hundred deaths, because he thought that he should die
presently: so the holy Ghost is forced as it were to exceed, and speak more
than we think he should speak, for the hardness of our hearts, which hear
like stones, and go like snails. If we have but a week to repent, we will
defer it to the last day, that we may sin all the rest.

Therefore it was meet to say, Thy kingdom is departed from thee. That seeing
his judgment should not stay, he should not stay his repentance. If this
voice had said, Thy Babell shall sinck, as Nemrods Babel did, it seems he
would have thought his honor buried, but when he was stripped, not only of his
palace, but also of his kingdom, what heavy news was this unto him, which
thought himself equal with God, and now may not be a king. But when he was
thrust among beasts to eat grass with oxen, what a downfull was this to be
brought under all his subjects, which spoke even now as though there none but
he: and now his servants servant would not be like unto him? So the king of
kings will be honored of kings, as they are of their subjects, or else he will
tread upon their crowns, and they shall hear the same at last, Thy kingdom
shall depart from thee. Now follows the execution of this judgment, for
Daniel says, The same hour all this was fulfilled. So he shows the order of
it: as a prisoner is brought to the bar, and lead to gybbet, so this king was
drawn from his throne, and turned into the wilderness, where he abode among
wild beasts so long, Till his hairs were grown like Eagles feathers, and
his nails like Birds claws.

When God began, he made haste, it was long before he spoke, but when he
spoke, he did it, and effected in an hour all that the dream, and the
Prophet had foretold. Then was fulfilled, The pride of man shall bring him low:
Even in that hour that Nabuchadnezzer advanced himself more then before, in
the same hour he was brought under al his subjects, al his servants and
pages: so he which sets up can pull down, he which gave can take, he which
made can destroy.

Therefore let no man vaunt though he were a king of his house or land, or
farm or children, but know that he should have nothing, if God did not
regard him more than other: and think when thou do read this story,
whether thou be not as proud of thy wealth, as Nabuchad. was of his palace:
whether thou be not as proud of thy children, as Nabuchadnezzer was of his
kingdom: whether thou be not as proud of thy parentage, as Nabuchadnezzer
was of his honor: whether thou be not so proud of thy learning, as
Nabuchadnezzer was of his train. If thou be not so proud, then God does say no
more, O king, to thee be it spoken, O subject to thee be it spoken, these
blessings shall be taken from thee, For, has God taken no man's kingdom from
him but Nabuchadnezzers? Has he taken no man's office from him but Judas? has
he taken no man's riches from him but Jobs? how did Antiochus and Julian, and
Herod, and Saul, and Athalia, and Iezabel, and Richard the third go from their
thrones, as if God had pulled them out by the ears: he had no respect unto
their persons, but used them like beasts, as he did Nabuchadnezzer, and
fulfilled his threatening. The candle of the wicked shall be put out. Therefore
as Christ says unto them which turn back, Remember Lots wife: so I say to
them which bear high minds, and proud looks, and stout words, remember king
Nabuchadnezzer, how God resists the proud. Now if any man long to be
resolved, how this king was changed to a beast, he must not imagine any
strange metamorphosis, or popish transubstantiation, as though his shape were
altered, or his manhood removed, or that he put on horns and hoof, as the
Poets feign of Acteon, for the voice does not say that he should become a
beast, but that he should dwell with the beasts. Daniel does not say that his
head or arms, or legs were transformed, but that the hair of his head and the
nails of his fingers did grow like Eagles feathers, and like birds claws, as
every man's hair and nayls will if he do not pare them. Lastly, Nabuchadnezzer
says not, that his shape was restored unto him, but that his understanding was
restored unto him: all which declare that he was not changed in body, but in
mind: not in shape, but in quality. A savage mind came on him, Genes. 4 12
like that which drove Caine from the company of men, and he became like a
Satire or wild man, which differs not from a beast but in shape: though he
was not turned to a beast, yet this was a strange alteration, to be so
changed in an hour, that his nobles abhorred him, his subjects despised him,
his servants forsook him, none would company with him but the beasts.
Consider this all that advance themselves against God and despise his word, as
Nabuchadnezzer did. Take warning by a king, which even now walked in his
galleries, and his nobles served him in his palace, with all dishes that the
air, or sea, or land could afford: now he is turned to grase and feed like
an ox with the beasts in the wilderness. This was to show that God makes no
more account of the wicked then of beasts, and therefore the holy Ghost
calls them often by the name of beasts: showing how that sin and pleasure
make men like beasts, when they have abused their wits often, and perverted
their reason, at last God takes their understanding from them, and they become
like beasts, loathsome to themselves and others: many such beasts we have still
like Nabuchadnezzer, who were fitter to live in the desert among lions, where
they might not annoy others, then in towns amongst men, where they infect more
then the plague. Thus if you have not considered the beastlines of sin, look
upon Nabuchadnezzer, Genes. 4 12
like a beast. If you would see the guilt of it, look upon wandering Cain, 1.
Sa. 16. 14
If thou would see the frenzy of it, look upon frantike Saul. If thou
would see the fear of it, look upon trembling Baltazar. Dan. 3.(...)
If thou will see the shame of it, Hester. (...)1
look upon Haman hanging upon his own gallows. If thou will see the end of
it, look upon the glutton frying in hell. Luke. 1(...)2
These are the pictures of sin, which God has set for a terror before us: like
the pillar of salt, Gene. 1(...)2
or Achans sepulcher to speak to us. Take heed by those, Joshua. (...)2
when I have warned you, as I warned them, I will punish you, as I punished
them.

This is the Epitaph, as it were, which God ingraueth upon Nabuchadnezzers
sepulcher.

Be thou an example to kings and rulers, for all the children of pride to
beware how they set themselves against him who advanced them.

Thus he which sets up, can pull down. Did not I send thee dreams to warn
thee? Did not I send a Prophet to warn thee? If either of them would have
served, thou might have ruled still, and walked in thy galleries, and
feasted in thy palace, and judged upon thy throne, and died a king: but now
thy kingdom is departed from thee, who would be like Nabuchadnezzer, now the
king is like a beast? If this heathen was thus challenged for his warning,
which had heard but one Prophet, we may tremble to think what we shall
answer for our warninges, which have bin threatened as often as the
Israelites, and yet provoke the Lord whil he serves us, like those which curse
the sun while it shines upon them.

Thus have you seen the fall of pride. Even now he said, Is not this great
Babel? Now he may say: Is not this unhappy Babel? eue^ now he said, Which I
have built by the might of my power: and now he may say, which I have built by
the vanity of my pride: even now he said, for the honor of my majesty: now
he may say,, for the ruin of my kingdom: yet after this he rose again, and
came to himself, and received his kingdom, and honored him which punished him
so: but the time will prevent me to speak of his restitution, therefore here I
end.

FINIS.

