THE SINNERS Conversion.

By Henry Smith.

Math. 18. verse, 3. Verily, I say unto you, except ye be converted, and
become as little children, y^^ ^^all not enter into the kingdom of Heaven. ET
VSQVE AD NVBES VERITAS TVA^
printer's or publisher's device PS



At London printed for William Leake, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Crane. 1594.

The Text.
Luke, 19. verses, 1. 2. 3. 4 5. 1. Now when Jesus entered and passed through
Jericho, 2. Behold, there was a man named Zaccheus, which was the chief
receiver of the trybute, and he was rich. 3. And he sought to see Jesus, who
he should be, and could not for the prease, because he was of a low
stature. 4. Wherefore he ran before, and climbed up into a wild fig tree,
that he might see him: for he should come that way. 5. And when Jesus came
to the place, he looked up, and saw him, and said unto him, Zaccheus, come
down at once: for to day I must abide at thine house.
IN the end of the Chapter before going, we may see how Christ healed a man,
blind in his bodily sight, namely Bartimeus, whereby he shows himself to be
the physician of the body: Here we shall see how he cured one blind in mind,
namely Zaccheus, whereby he shows himself to be the Physician of the soul,
Ephesians. 5. 23
and therefore the Savior of the whole man.

In speaking of Zaccheus and his conversion, we will observe four
circumstances. First, the place where he was called, which was Jericho.
Secondly, the person that was called, Zaccheus the Publican. Thirdly, by whom
and how he was called, by the voice of Christ. And lastly, the effect and
fruit of his calling, his good confession.

The first Circumstance.
First therefore for the place where he was converted, it appears to be
Jericho, a City not far distant from Jerusalem. It was sometime a notable
City, till it was subverted and ruinated by the Lords Champion Joshua. Joshua,
6,
It was builded again in the days of Ahab, 1. Reg. 16, 34
by Hiel the Bethelite, and remains at this day with the rest of that
holy land, under the Turkish Empire. Unto this Jericho, the Lord of heaven and
earth vouchsafes to come, in the likeness of a servant. And as Joshua
compassed Jericho seven times, minding to destroy it, so Christ the true Joshua,
resorted oftentimes to Jericho, minding to save it. But as in the destruction
of Jericho, Joshua spared none but Rahab the harlot: so Jesus in his journey to
Jericho, converted none but Zaccheus the Publican. When Joshua had conquered and
rased Jericho, he sowed salt in it to make it barren, and cursed him that
should attempt to build it up: yet in this barren soil Christ has his
spiritual haiuest, and in this cursed Cytty he has a holy Temple a blessed
building. Samaria that wicked City affords many that believe in Christ.
John, 4, 49.
John, 4, 39. And out of Galile, John, 1, 46
from whence they thought no good thing might come. John, 7, 52,
John, 1, ver. 46. Christ called diverse of his Apostelles, and even in Jericho
this cursed City, Christ has a rich man that is to be saved. In every place
Christ has his chosen. There is neither Jew nor Gentile, Barbarian nor
Scythian, bound nor free, Rom, 10, 12
but Christ is all in all, to all that call upon him. Romans 10, 12.

The second circumstance.
Now follows the description of Zaccheus, which is most plainly and fully
set forth unto us. The holy Ghost speaking of Zaccheus and his conversion,
comes in with an Ecce, behold, as if it were a wonder that Zaccheus should be
converted. Zaccheus was a Gentile, a Publican, and a rich man, and therefore
behold a miracle, as if in the conversion of Zaccheus, these three should be
converted al once.

Zaccheus was a Gentile, a marvel to see a Gentile become a Jew: Romans 2. 28.
that is, to believe in Christ. He was a principal Publican. A strange thing
to see a chief Customer to give over his office: and he was rich also, a rare
matter to see a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God: Mat. 19. 23.
and therefore behold a miracle, as if at this day, the Turck: the Pope, and
the King of Spain, were at once persuaded to forsake their Idolatry and
superstition. Christ going to Jerusalem, conuerteth a Gentile, to signify the
calling of the Gentiles: he conuerteth a Publican, to show that notorious
sinners may hope to be saved, if they repent and amend, as Zaccheus did. He
co^uerteth a rich man, to show that all rich men are not excluded from the
kingdom of heaven,

He was called Zaccheus before his conversion, but he was never truly called
Zaccheus till Christ called him so. His name signifieng, simple, pure honest,
but his life was subtle, impure, and most detestable. Thus many are called by
honest names, whose deeds bewray their dishonest natures, and vices oftentimes
are shrouded in the habites of virtue, like Esops Ass, masking in the Lions
skin, till his long ears detect his folly; or like the Crow that is decked
in other plumes, till every byrd do pluck his feather.

Zaccheus by his profession was a Publican, and therefore much detested of the
Jews: for Publicans were the Roman Officers, appointed to gather and receive
public custom or tribute of the Jews, who were at that time in subjection
unto the Romans. And amongst these Officers, Zaccheus was the chief, and (as
it seems) Ouer-seer of the rest that where in Ierico, and therefore in chief
hatred among the Jews, as one that chiefly favored the Romans tyranny, and
served to abridge their Country liberty, which ought not be subject to any
Nation.

Besides, he contemned the ceremonies of the Jews, and regarded not their
Religion, nor lived after their Law, and therefore with the rest of the
Heathen Publicans, was excommunicate out of their Sinagogue Math. Math. 18.
18.

Thus was he hated for his profession, because he was a Publican, and for his
religion, because he was a Heathen. Yet was he beloved for his wealth, for
rich men have many friends. Prou. 14, 20
Prou. 14. 20. And though they do never so wickedly, yet have they some to
take their parts. If they speak never so proudly, yet are there some to praise
their saying. Eccle, 13, 23 24.
Eccle 13, 23, 24.

Zaccheus was a Publican, and therefore rich: for Publicanes must needs he
rich, and Usurers will be welthy. But rich Publicans make poor princes, and
wealthy Usurers make many beggars. In every Province there were many Publicans,
and therefore much poor people in every place: for where there be many
Caterpillars, the fruit is soon consumed, and where there be many
extorcioners, beggars must needs abound.

By the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 15
there might be nobegger in Israel, but when so many Publicans were suffered
to receive tribute of the Jews contrary to Gods Law, no marvel though so
many sat and begged, contrary to Gods Law. Luke, 18
Luke. 18. John, 9. Acts. 3 By the Law of God. John, 9
There ought to be no beggars among Christians. Acts, 3 Psalm, 37, 25
Psalm. 3. 2. 25. but when so many Usurers are tolerated in a Christian
Commonwealth, contrary to the Law of Chirst, Luke, 6. 35.
Luke. 6. 35. no marvel though we have so many beggars, Leuit. 25. 36. 37.
contrary to the mind of Christ. Mark. 14. 7.
The poor (says Christ) ye shall have always with you, but when you will
you may do them good: and we shall be sure to have the poor amongst us
always, Psalm. 37.
but we must make such good provision for them, that they be not feign to
beg their bread.

Thus was Zaccheus rich to himself, Luke, 12. 21
for he was a Publican, but he was rich toward God also, for he had a desire
to see Christ. Almighty God, Ephe, 2.
who is rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2. has so inspyred his heart with the desire of
heavenly riches, that whereas before, his whole delight was in seeking of
worldly wealth, now his greatest care is to seek for heavenly treasure. He
now forgets what his profession is, and begins to be of a new profession:
and he whose heart was wholly set upon earthly profit, is now like old
Simeon, most desirous to see his Savior. The Tetrach Herod desired to see
Christ, and despised him when he saw him. Luke, 23. 8.
Luke. 23. 8. 11. but Zaccheus the Publican, desired to see Christ, and
rejoiced when he saw him, like Abraham that desired to see the day of Christ.
John, 8, 56.
John. 8. 56. and therefore of the servant of Satan, Zaccheus is now become
the child of Abraham, which rejoiced to see the day of Christ. Happy were his
eyes that saw so blessed a sight, for many Prophets and righteous men have
desired to see and to hear those things that Zaccheus both saw and heard,
Luke. 10.
and could not see nor hear the same. If Jacob thought himself happy, Gene.
45.
if that he might but see his Son Joseph before his death, then surely
thrice happy Zaccheus, whose hap it was, not only to see (as Jacob did) but
to rejoice (as Marie did) in Christ his Savior.

As Zaccheus was desirous to see Christ in earth, so I would have the rich men
of our time, desirous to see Christ in heaven. For although with the eyes of
our body we cannot see Christ as Zaccheus did, yet with the eyes of our faith
we may behold him as Stephen did. Acts. 7.
Acts. 7. But if our faith be so weak sighted that we cannot see Christ, yet
let us have a desire to hear Christ in his word, whereby our faith may be
increased, for faith comes by hearing the word of God. Romans 10.
And as the Queen of the South desired to hear the wisdom of Solomon, 1.
Reg. 10.
so let us be desirous to hear the wisdom of Christ our Savior.

King Solomon left some books in writing, wherein is seen some part of his
wisdom, and Christ our king, has left unto us his most sacred word, as it
were a taste of his wisdom, John. 20. 31
sufficient matter for our salvation. This is that heavenly food, Math. 4, 4
Math. 4. 4. whereby our souls are fed unto eternal life, let us therefore
labor for that heavenly food: and as the Israelites were careful to gather
Manna to sustain their bodies, Exodus 16
so let us be as careful to hear the word to feed our souls. The people in
the time of Christ, Iobn, 6, 24
John, 6. 24. took great pains to follow Christ both by land and sea, and
many now a days (I confess) are very forward to follow his faithful
Ministers, but as they followed Christ so fast to Ioh. 6, 26
fill their bellies, so these frequent Sermons for fashion to serve the time.

Zaccheus is desirous to see Christ, a godly care, but yet he could not
obtain his purpose: a thing common, for every one that has any good motion,
has always some hinderaunce to cross the same, Two impediments.
and Zaccheus has a double impediment to hinder his honest enterprise: The
prease of the people, And his little stature. Whereof the former, that is, the
multitude, is always wont to be an enemy to those that would come to Christ.
This hindered the blind man from receiving his sight. Luke, 18
Luke, 18. for the people rebuked him that he should hold his peace, till
Christ called him and opened his eyes. This hindered them that brought the man
sick of the Palsy. Mark, 2
Mark, 2. for they could not come at Christ for ye prease, till they uncovered
the roof of the house, and let down the bed wherein the sick of the Palsy
lay.

This hindered the healing of the deaf and dumb, Mark, 7
Mark, 7. till Christ took him aside out of the multitude and cured him. This
hindered the raising of the Rulers daughter. Math. 9
Matthew, 9. till Christ had thrust out the Minstrels and the multitude, and
then restored the maid to life. Finally, this hindered Zaccheus here from
coming unto Christ, till Christ vouchsafed to call him to himself. Thus
always a multitude that is prone to evil, does withdraw and hinder us from
approaching unto Christ: and therefore we must not follow a multitude to do
evil, nor decline after many to overthrow the truth. Exodus 23
Exodus 23.

The second impediment that hinders Zaccheus from seeing Christ, is his
little stature. He was so low of stature, that he could not see Christ
above the multitude: but Christ was above the multitude, and therefore could
see Zaccheus though he were so low of stature. For God looks not on the
countenance, Sam. 16. 7
nor on the height of a man's stature, but the Lord beholds the heart, and
prefers little David before Eliab his eldest brother, 1. Sam. 16 12.
because he finds in him a better heart to serve the Lord. And Zaccheus in
his little body, has a heart and mind prepared to seek and see the Lord.
Zaccheus was so low that he could not see Christ, but many amongst us are so
high that they will not see Christ. The common people in the time of Christ,
were so desirous to follow Christ, that neither lamenesse, nor blindness, nor
sickness, could stay them from coming to him: but the Common people in our
time, are more ready to follow their sport and pastime, then to come to the
Church to hear of Christ. And as for our rich men, who sees not that they
will make great have to see a commodity, but will scarce come out of doors to
hear a Sermon?

They come to Church, John, 32
as Nichodemus came to Christ by night, as if they were ashamed to come to
Church: but they run after profit to get riches, 2. King. 5
as Gehezi ran after Naaman the Syrian to get a bribe.

Thus has Zaccheus two lettes, that he could not see Christ, the one in the
people, the other in himself: and we have many lettes to withdraw us from
Christ, some are external and without us, as the inticementes of the world,
and some are internal and within us, as the lusts of our own flesh. The
prease of the people, hinders Zaccheus from seeing Christ in his humility,
and the multitude of our sins, Esaias. 59. 2
do press us down that we cannot see Christ in glory. Zaccheus was a man
of little stature, and that hindered him from seeing Christ in earth, and we
are men of little faith, and that is the cause we cannot behold Christ in
heaven.

Though Zaccheus was a man of little stature, yet it appears that he was not
a man of little wit: For when he could not come to the sight of Christ for
the multitude, he had the wit to run before, and to clime up into a tree to
obtain his purpose. And for the most part it falls out, that men of low
stature, are men of high conceit, and the shortest bodies, have the sharpest
wits, God so providing, that the defectes of their bodies, might be supplied
with the gifts of their mind. Now Zaccheus that before was loath to move his
foot from the Custom-house for loosing his profit, begins to run after
Christ for fear of a greater loss, like Elisa that left his plowing, and
ran after Elias to follow his new vocation. 1, Reg. 19
But Zaccheus does not only run, but also clymbe up into a Tree to see
Christ: A strange thing, that Zaccheus a rich man, and a chief Customer,
should behave himself so childishly in the sight of so great a multitude: but
the desire he had to see Christ, made him forget himself, and to commit such
things as were not fitting for his state and credit. So they that will follow
Christ, must make account to do many things contrary to the Romans 12
fashion of the world, and their own liking. If Christ himself were content
to leave the glory which he had with his father to come down to us, shall not
we be content to leave the reputation which we have with men, to go up to him?

But alas where is there any almost, that prefers not the fruition of this
earthly prison, before the possession of that heavenly mansion: and had rather
hazard the hope which they have of eternal glory, then leese the present
enjoying of their fading pleasure.

The ambitious man hunteth after honor, and will not leese an inche of his
estimation. The covetous man seeks after profit, and counts (like Judas) all
lost that comes not to his bags. And the voluptuous man bestows his time in
pleasure, John. 12. 6.
and thinks that his chief felicittie. Thus every man makes his heaven of
that wherein he most delights, and is content to take great pains to
accomplish his fond desires. But here Zaccheus is of another mind, for being a
public officer, he climbes into a tree, which stood not with his gravity:
and being a rich man, he runs to see Christ, which was not for his worldly
profit; yea he takes great pains to see Christ, not respecting his ease or
pleasure.

Thus must we be affected if we desire to come to Christ, that neither honors
nor preferments, nor profit nor pleasure, nor kyndred nor friends, be able to
hold us back. Mat. 8. 22.
We must be ready not only to run, Luke 14. 26.
but also to climb (if need require) as Zaccheus did: that is, to take some
pain and travail to have a sight of Christ.

The Queen of the South, 1. King. 10.
undertook a great and tedious journey, to hear the wisdom of Solomon, but
we are loathe to take any pain to hear one that is greater then Solomon.

The people in David's time, brought so much treasure, 1. Chr. 29. 9.
and so many gyfts to the building of Gods Temple, that the Priests were feign
to bid them cease, but a great part of the people in our time, are so sparing
of their pains and cost, that they think that very time misspent which is
employed in the service of God: and that money ill bestowed, which is given to
the maintenance of his Ministers.

When Zaccheus could not see Christ for the multitude, he climbes up into a
tree, that grows in the way where he was to pass, that from a tree he might
behold him, which was to suffer on a tree for man's salvation. So when we
cannot draw near to Christ by reason of our sins that press us down, we
must clymb up by a lively faith, which is the tree of life, that grows in
the way to eternal life, that so with the eyes of our faith, we may behold
him that dyed for our sins upon a tree.

It was a wild fig tree that Zaccheus clymbed, Math. 21, 19
but not like that unfruitful one which our Savior cursed: for this bare most
precious fruit, even such as Christ himself vouchsafed to pluck. A happy
tree that bare such precious fruit as Zaccheus was, but thrice happy
Zaccheus, that so happily clymbed on that happy tree.

This tree grew in the way that Christ was to pass, for else Zaccheus might
have climbed to no purpose: So if we desire to find Christ, we must seek him
in the way where he has promised to show himself unto us, that is, in his
holy Temple, where his word is duly preached, Math. 18, 20
and his Sacraments reverently administered, for where two or three are so
gathered together, he has promised to be present amongst them.

The third Circumstance.
When Christ came to the place, he looked up and saw Zaccheus.

As Zaccheus ran before to see Christ, so Christ followed after to see
Zaccheus. Satan for his part, went about like a roaring Lion, 1, Pet. 5, 8
seeking to devour him, but Christ for his part, John, 10
goes about like a good Sheepeheard, minding to save him. Luke, 11, 21
And although Satan a strong armed man, had taken some possession in ye heart
of Zaccheus, yet Christ a stronger then he, comes unarmed, and takes from
him his harness wherein he trusted, and rescueth the spoil.

Christ comes to the place where Zaccheus was, because otherwise, it had been
impossible for Zaccheus to come to his presence: for unless the Lord
vouchsafe to come unto us, we cannot attain to the presence of God. As no man
might have any access to King Assuerus, Hester. 4
except he stretched out his golden Scepter, so no man may come to Christ,
unless he be called by the golden scepter of his sacred word.

Christ looked up and saw Zaccheus, before Zaccheus could look down to behold
him. Thus does the Lord prevent us with his mercy, whom he might cast off in
his justice: and if he perceive in us a willing mind to come unto him, he is
content to come first unto us. And like that good Father, Luke, Luke, 15
15. to behold us while we are yet a great way off, and to have compassion on
us.

When Jobs three friends that came to visit him in his great calamity, Job.
2. 12.
lift up their eyes a far of, they knew not Job, because he was so sore
afflicted: but Christ who is the myrror of true friendship, cannot so soon
forget his friends, howsoever they be disguised. He knows his own sheep
where soever he seethe them. John, 10,
John 10. whether they be under the fig tree as Nathaniell was, John. 1.
or upon the fig tree as Zaccheus was, he has respect unto them. And if
they have a desire to seek, they shall be sure to find. Math. 7.
Math, 7. And if they labor and are heavy laden, Math. 11.
he will refresh them. Math. 11. Christ is now come to the place where
Zaccheus is to be called, and as Abraham, Gene. Gene. 22.
22. lift up his eyes and saw in the bushe a Ram that was to be sacrificed,
so Christ lifting up his eyes, saw in the tree, Zaccheus the sinner that was
to be converted. And now begins the conversion of Zaccheus, for now Christ
begins to speak unto him.

Zaccheus desired only to see Christ, but now Christ calls him by name, and
offers his own self unto him. This was more then Zaccheus expected, and yet
no more then Christ vouchsafes, namely, to give more then is desired. The
sick of the Palsy that asked health, Luke. 5.
obtained also forgiveness of sins. Solomon desired wisdom, 1. Kings, 3,
12. 13.
and the Lord gave him wisdom and abundance of wealth beside. Jacob asked
but meat and clothing, Genesis 28 20.
and God made him a great rich man. And Zaccheus desired only to have a sight
of Christ, and was so happy as to entertain him into his house.

Thus the Lord that is rich in mercy to all that call upon him, Romans 10. 12.
phes. 2. 4.
uses oftentimes to give more then we ask: and he that is always found of
them that seek him with their whole heart, Ierem, 29.
is found also sometime of Gentiles that knew not God. Esaias, 65. 1.
Esa. 65. 1. Let us therefore that were sometime sinners of the Gentiles, Romans
10. 20
seek the Lord as Zaccheus did while he may be found, Esaias, 55.
and call upon him while he is nigh. He will be found of them that seek him
heartily, and is nigh to all them that call upon him faithfully. Psalm.
Psalm, 145,
145. 18.

Zaccheus come down at once. Now Christ begins to call Zaccheus from the tree
to be converted, as God called Adam from among the trees of the Garden to be
cursed. Gene, 3.
Gene, 3. Before, Zaccheus was too low, and therefore was feign to climb, but
now he is too high, and therefore he must come down. And we (for the most
part) are either too high, or too low, too hot or too cold, too quick, or too
slothful in the Lords business. Sometime we flock together to hear a Sermon,
Luke. 5
like the people Luke, 5, that pressed upon Christ to hear the word: and anon
we run to see some pleasant pasttime, like the Athenians, Acts. 17
whose ears always itched to hear some news. Who make more show of
conscience and religion, then they that show themselves most irreligious and
unconscionable? Who seemed more confident and virtuous in Christ his cause then
Peter? Math, 26
and not long after, who more traiterous and faint-harted.

Many can say with Peter, that they will not stick to die before they will
deny Christ, but when it comes to the trial they are ready to abjure Christ
and his religion, before they will hazard either life or living.

He that will come to Christ, must come at once, without delay, for delays
(specially in the matter of our salvation) are most dangerous, and repentance
may not be deferred. We must make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, Eccle, 5,
7
nor put off from day to day, least the wrath of the Lord break forth
sudainelie and we be destroyed in our security and perish in the time of
vengeance. When the Lord is minded to do us good, he will have us come quickly
like Joseph, Gene, Gene. 45
45. 6. that in the time of famine, would have his Father Jacob to come down
quickly unto him, to soiourne in Egypt, where there was some plenty of food.

As the children of this world are very nimble to work wickedness, so the
children of light, should be as nimble to follow goodness. Judas was nimble
to betraie Christ, John. 13. 27. and the badde debtors, Luke. Ioh, 13, 27
16. Luke, 16
could sit down quickly to misreckon their creditor: so let us come quickly
to hear of Christ, that Christ may accept of us quickly, let us be nimble to
make our account before, Luke, 14. 28
that we do not (like the foolish builder) come short of our reckoning.

But why must Zaccheus come down so hastily? even to entertain Christ into
his house. For to day (says Christ) I must abide with thee. This was joyful
news to little Zaccheus. Not long before, he wanted means to see Christ, but
now he has opportunity to entertain him into his house. There was more
humanity in Christ then in Zaccheus, for if Christ had not bidden himself to
dinner, he had not been bidden for Zaccheus. So if Christ do not offer
himself unto us in his afflicted members, he may go long enough before we
will offer him any entertainment. Math, 25, 40
As often as the poor craves any relief at our hands, let us imagine that
Christ asks something of us: but as Zaccheus must entertain him presently
without delay, so let us be ready to help them presently, because they stand
in need of present help. And as he must receive Christ into his house, so
we must make account to receive his needy members into our houses: Luke, 16.
And as the unjust Steward procures himself friends with his masters
goods, so let us make the poor to be our friends, by our beneficence and
bounty toward them, that so receiving the^ (when they have need) into our
earthly houses, they may receive us when we stand in greatest need, into
everlasting habitations.

They that were invited to the marriage, Math. Math. 22.
22. refused to come, but Christ is content to come to Zaccheus house before he
was invited. Wherein also, he shows his great humility, in coming before
he was requested, as they bewrayed their great arrogancy, in refusing to come
being solemnly bidden. It was a part of great humility, that he that was
most free from sin, would vouchsafe to come into a sinners house: but it was
a sign of greater humility, that he would be wray his great necessity, and
seek for succor at a sinners hand.

Alas poor humble Savior, who though thou be Lord of heaven and earth, as
thou art the son of God, yet as thou art the son of man, have not whereon
to lay thy head, Math. Math. 8.
8. How justly did thy Prophet Jeremy wonder at thy humble poverty, saying. O
thou hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in the time of trouble, Iere. 14.
why art thou as a stranger in the land, or as one that passes by to tarry
for a night? The son of GOD vouchsafes to come and that unrequested, to a
sinful man's house, a special favor: but he disdaineth not to make his
necessity known unto him, O strange humility!

Here therefore appears the singular humanity and great humility of Christ
to sinful men; he offers himself to be their guest if he find them
willing to entertain him for their guest. And Zaccheus no doubt was willing to
entertain him: for although Christ heard not the voice, yet he heard the
affection of Zaccheus inuiting him to dynner. As therefore Zaccheus was willing
to receive Christ into his house, so let us be ready to receive him into our
hearts. For as Christ said to Zaccheus: This day I must abide at thy house, so
he says to every one of us, This day I must abide in your hearts.

Wherefore as the Prophet David says, Psalm, 24
Open your gates that the King of glory may come in, so I say unto you, Open
your hearts that the word of God may enter in. This day the word of God may
abide in your hearts, for this day the word is preached unto you, and who
knows whether he shall live to hear it the next Saboth. Psalm, 95
To day therefore if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: as did ye
Israelites, least if you harden your hearts, his voice be heard no more amongst
you. This day you may gather this heavenly Manna, as the Isralites might
gather their Manna six days together, Exodus, 16
but to morrow (perhaps) and six days after you, may not gather it, as on the
seventh day Manna might not be found.

The Lord grant that you may gather sufficient food for the sustentation of
your souls, that as Elias the Prophet iournied in the strength of the meat
that the Angel brought him, 1, Reg. 19.
even unto Horeb the Mount of God, so you in the strength of this spiritual
meat which here I bring you, may be able to pass through the dangerous
ways of this troublesome world, unto Gods holy Mountain, the Haven of all
happiness, whither he bring us that has dearly bought us with his precious
blood, even Christ Jesus the righteous: to whom with the Father and the holy
Ghost, three persons and one GOD, be given all glory and majesty, world
without, end Amen.

FINIS.

