THE FIRST SERMON OF Noah's drunkenness.

A GLASS WHEREIN all drunkards may behold their beastliness.

Noah also began to be an husbandman and planted a vineyard, and he drank of
the wine and was drunken, and was uncovered in the midst of his tent.

Genesis 9.20. HENRY SMITH.



Imprinted at London by William Kearney dwelling within C^ceple-gate. 1591.

THE FIRST SERMON of Noah's drunkenness.
GENESIS 9.20, 21. Noah also began to be a husbandman and planted a vineyard. And
he drunk of the wine and was drunken, and was uncovered in the mids of his
tent.


FIrst we are to speak of Noah, then of Caine his wicked son, and after of
Shem and Iapheth his good sons: In Noah first of that which he did well, and
then of his sin. In Caine first of his sin, and then of his curse. In his
brethren, first of their reverence, and then of their blessing.

Now we will speak of the Father, and after of his Children. Then (says
Moses) Noah began to be a husbandman, This is the first name which is given to
Noah after the flood, he is called an husbandman, and the first work which is
mentioned* was the plantinge of a vineyard: one would think, when all men were
drowned with the flood, and none left alive to possess the earth but Noah and
his sons, that he should have found him self some thing else to do, then
to plant vineyardes: and that the Holy Ghost should have entitled him King
of the world, and not an husbandman of the earth, seeing there be no such men
as Noah was, which had more in his hand, then any King has in the world or
shall have to the worlds end: but heerby the holy Ghost would show that God
does not respect Kings for their tytles, nor men for their riches as we do, and
therefore he names Noah after the work which he did, not after the possessions
which he had, an husbandman. It seems that there was great diversity
between their age and ours. For if we should see now a King go to plough, a
noble man drive the teame, a gentleman keep sheep, he should be scorned for
his labor more then Noah was for his drunkenness: yet when we read how this
Monarche of the World thought no scorn to play the husba^dman, we consider
not his princely calling, nor his ancient years, nor his large possessions to
commend his industry, or modesty, or lowlye mind therein. Which may teach us
humility, though we learn to disdain husbandrye: of whom will we learn to
be humble, if Kings give examples, and the son of God humbles himself from
heaven to earth, and yet we contenine the example of the Kings of the earth;
and the example of the King of heaven.

The time was when Adam dug and delued* when David kept Sheep, and all the
house of Jacob were called men occupied about Cattle: but as they for this
were abominable to the Egiptians (as Moses says in the same verse) so they
which do like them, are abhorred of their brethren: and they which live by
them, scorn them for their work, which would be chastned them selves, because
they work not: There was no art nor science which was so much set by in
former times, and is now profitable to the Co^monwelth, bringing less profit
unto it self, that may so justly complain of her fall without cause, and her
despite from them which live by her, as this painful science of husbandry:
that it is marvel that any man will take pain for the rest to be contemned for
his labor, and be a scorn for the rest, which might hunger and starve, if he
did not labor for them more then they do them selves. No marvel then though
many in the poor Countries, murmr and complain that other cannot live by
them, and they cannot live themselves: but it is marvel if their complainte do
not grow in time to rebellion, and pull other as low as them selves: for why
should the greatest pain yield the least profit? yet this is their case, for
if you mark, you shall see that the husband man does bate the prise of his
fruits so soon as the dearth is past, though he raises it a little while the
dearth lasts: but they which raise the price of their wares with him, seldom
fall again, but make men pay as dear when the dearth is past, as if it were
a dearth still. Thus a plentiful year does damage him, and a hard year does
vantage them. So this painful man, is feign to live poorly, fare meanly,
go barely, house homely, rise early, labor daily, sell cheap and buy dear,
that I may truly say, that no man deserves his living better, no man
fulfilleth the law nearer: that is, thou shall get thy living in the sweat of
thy brows: Then this poor son of Adam, which picks his crummes out of the
earth, therefore he should not be mocked for his labor, which has vexation
mough though all men spoke well of him, and in my opinion, if any deserve to
be loved for his innocence, or for his truth, or his pain, or the good which
he bringes to the Common wealth: this Realm is not so much beholding to any
sort of men (but those that feed the soul) as those which feed the body, that
is, those that labor the earth: yet you see how they live, like drudges, as
though they were your servants to provide food for you, and after to bring it
to your doors: as the beasts serve them, so they serve you: as though you were
an other kind of men. I can not think upon their misery, but my thought tells
me, that it is a great part of our unthankfulness, that we never consider what
an easy life and living God has given unto us in respect of them If the
Apostles rule were kept, they which do not work should not eat: but now,
they which do not work, eat most: and the husbandmen which work, eat not
but are like Bees, which prepare food for other and pinch them selves. Let us
consider this, for they had not one law and wean other: but the same curse
which was denounced upon Adam, was denounced upon all his Children that every
man should get his living in the sweat of his brows. Although I know there
be diverse works and diverse gifts and diverse callings to work in, yet always
provided: they which do not work should not eat, for in the sweat of thy
brows, that is, in labor and travel, thou King and thou judge and thou
prelate, and thou landlord, and thou gentleman, shall get thy living as Adam
thy father did, or else thou do avoid the curse and a greater curse shall
follow: that is, they which will not sweat in earth, shall sweat in hell.

Adam had food as well as thou, and so had Noah and more then thou, unless
thou had all, for they had all, and yet they might not be idle, because their
hands were not given them for nothing: Some work with their pen, some with
their tungs, some with their fingers: as nature has made nothing idle, so God
would have no man idle, but that he which is a Magistrate, should do the work
of a Magistrate: he which is a Judge, should do the work of a Judge: he
which is a Captain, should do the work of a Captain: he which is a Minister,
should do the work of a Minister: as when Noah was called an husband man, he
did the work of an husband man: This contempt of the Country, does threaten
danger to the land as much as any thing else in our days, unless their burden
be eased and their estimation qualified in some part to their pains. Thinking
that you have not heard of this Theme before, seeing the words of my Text did
lie for it, thus much I have spoken to put you in mind how easilye you live in
respect of them: and to certify our minds toward our poor brethren which
in deed seem too base in our eyes, and are scorned for their labors, as
much as we should be for our idleness.

Then (says Moses) Noah began to be an husband man, In that it is here said
that Noah began, it does not disprove that he gave not himself to husbandry
before, but it imports that Noah began to set up husbandry again after the
flood before any other: so this good man recomforted with the experience of
Gods favor (which had exempted him and his seed out of all the world) and
rejoicing to see the face of the earth again after the waters were-gone, though
an old man, and weak then he was, yet he returns to his labor a fresh, and
scorned not to till and plant for all his possessions, as though he were as an
husband man: such a lowlines is always joined with the fear of God, that they
that are humbled with religion, do not think themselves too good to do any
good thing. Here note by the way, that none of Noah's sons are said to begin
this work, but Noah himself, the old man, the hoarie head and careful
Father begins to teach the rest, and shows his sons the way how they should
provide for their sons: and how all the world after should live by labor
and travel, till they return to dust: so the old man whom age dispenceth
withal to take his ease, is more willing to provide for the wantes of his
Children, then they are which are bound to labor for them selves and their
Parents too, as the Storke does feed the dam when she is old, because the dam
fed her when she was young. What a shame is this to Shem and Iapheth, that is to
us which are young and strong, that the father should be called a labourer when
the sons stand by. Now, the ground was barren because of the flood, and could
not bring forth s^ute of it self, because of the curse: therefore it pitied
Noah to see desolation and barrennes, and slime upon the face of the earth,
which he had seen so glorious and sweet, and fertile, with all manner of
herbs and fruits and flowers before. Therefore he sets him self to manure
it, which waited for nothing now, but a painful labourer to till and dress
it, that it might bring forth delights and profits for sinful man, as it
did before. By this we may learn to use all means for the obtaining of Gods
blessings, and not to loose any thing which we might have or save for want of
pains, for that is sin. As Solomon notes in the 24* Proverbs, when he
reproves the stouthfull husbandman, because his field brought forth Nettles
and Thistles in steed of Grapes* not because the ground would not bear
grapes, but because the slothful man would not set them. Shall God command
the earth and all his creatures to increase for us, and shall not we further
their increase, for our selves? as we increase and multiply our selves, so we
are bound to join hand and help, that all creatures may increase and multiply
too, or else the Fathers should eat the Childrens portion, and in time there
should be nothing left for them that come after: this regard Noah seems to
have unto his posterity, and therefore he gave himself unto husbandry, which
is commended in him unto this day, and shall be recorded of him so long as
this book is read: whereby we are warned that he which lives only to
himself, is not to be remembered of them which live after: But as David cared
how the Realm should be governed after his death, as well as he did during his
life: so though we dye and depart this world, yet we should leave that example,
or those books or those works behind us which may profit the Church and
Common wealth when we are dead and buried, as much as we did when we lived
among them. Even as Noah planted a vineyard, not for him self but for the ages
to come after.

Some do think that Noah planted the first vineyard, and drunk the first
wine, and that there was no use of grapes before: which opinion they are led
unto that they might excuse Noah and mittigate his fault; If he did sup too
deep of that cup, the strength and operation whereof was not known unto him
nor unto any man before: but it is not like, that the excellent liquour and
wholesome mice of the grape did lie hid from the world so many hundredth years,
and no dout but there was vines from the beginning, created with other trees:
for how could Noah plant a vineyard, unless he had slippes of other vines or
grapes that grew before, seeing he did not create fruits but plant fruits as we
do? for this is principally to be noted, that so soon as he had opportunity to
do good, he omitted no time, but presentlye after the flood was gone, and that
earth began to dry, he plied it with seeds and wrought it till he saw the
fruits of his labor. By this we learn, to omit no occasion to do good, but
when so ever we may do good, to count it sin if we do it not. But if we be so
excercised, the^ all our works shall prosper like the vineyarde of Noah,
because the fruit of the vine does cheer the countenance and glad the heart of
man. Therefore some have gathered upon the planting of this vineyard, a
signification of gladness and thankfulness in Noah for this late deliverance, as
the Jews by their solemn feasts did celebrate the memorial of some great
benefit: but I rather judge, that God would have us see in this example, what
men did in those days, and how we are degenerate from our parents, that we
may prepare against the fire as Noah prepared against the water. This is
worthy to be noted too, that God did not so regard his. husbandrye, but that
he had an eye to his drunkenness, and speaks of his fault as well as his virtue:
whereby we are warned, that though god bless us now while we remember him, yet
he will chasten us so soon as we forget him: Though we be in a good name now,
infamy will rise in an hour: though we be rich at this present, poverty may
come so dainlye: though we be well while we are here, yet we may fall sick
before night, even as Noah is praised in one verse and dispraised in an other:
even now God commends him for his lowlines, and now discommendes him for his
drunkenness: as though he had forgot all his righteousness so soon as he sinned,
and would call in his praise again. This was to show that Noah was not saved
from the flood, because he deserved to be saved, but because God had a favor
unto him: for he which was not drowned with water, was drowned after with
wine. As the Pharisees when they had done well were proud of it and lost their
reward: so when Noah had done a good work he spotted it with sin, and was
dispraise where he was praised, as though God repented him that he commenmended
him. He planted well, but he drunk not well: therefore that which was good did
him hurt, that seeing he was trapped with a good work, what so ever we do, we
may remember how easy it is to sin, if we miss in the matter or in the
manner or time, or the place, or the measure, as Noah did. He which planteth
the vineyard is worthy to taste of the grape, but if thou have found honey (says
Solomon) eat not too much least thou surfeit. So if thou have found wine, drink
not to much lest thou surfeit. A little wine is better the^ a great deal, and if
thou will follow the Apostles counsel, thou must drink it but for thy
stomachs sake, least that happen to thee, which thou shall hear of this noble
patriarch. Though he was never so righteous before God and men, though he
escaped the destruction, which lighted upon all the world, though he had all
the souls of the aier and beasts of the land at his command, though he
passed the pilgrimage of man nine hundredth years, yet Noah was but a man: so
ancient, so righteous, so mighty, so happy: Noah showed him self but a man,
for drinking the wine which him self had planted: he was drunke^. This is
Noah's fault, he was dru^ken with his own wine, as Lot was defiled with his
own daughters. If Cain his son had taken to much and stripped himself as his
father did, the holy ghost would scarce have spoken of it because he was a man
of no note: but when the father forgate him self and gave this offense, mark
the manner of the holy Ghost, as though he would show you a wonder: he
displayeth Noah's drunkenness, as Cain displayed his nakedness: as if he would
say, come and see the the strength of man? he which was counted so righteous,
he which believed the threatening like Lot when the rest mocked, he to whom all
the fowls of the air and the beasts of the earth flocked in couples as they
came to Adam. He which was reserved to declare the judgments of God, and to
begin the world again, Noah the example of sobriety, the example of
moderation is overcome with drink; as if he had never been the man. How
easily, how quickly the just, the wise, the prudent, has lost his sense, his
memory, his reason, as though he had never been the man. And how hard it is to
avoid sin, when occasion is at hand, and pleasant opportunity tempts to
sin? it is easier for the bird to go by the net then to break the net: so
it is easier for a man to avoid temptations the^ to overcome temptations:
therefore God forbad Baalam, not only to curse the people as Balack would have
him, but he forbad him to go with Balackes servants, knowing that if he went
with them and saw the pomp of the Court, and heard the King him self speak
unto him, and felt the tikeling reward, it would strain his conscience, and
make him doubt whether he should curse or bless. Peter but warming him self
at Cayphas fire, was overcome by a silye Damsel to do that which he never
thought, even to forswear his Lord God: therefore Daniel would not eat of the
Kings meat, least he should be tempted to the Kings will, showing us that there
is no way to escape sin, but to avoid occasion. Therefore David prays, Turn
away mine eyes from vanity: as though his eyes would draw his heart as the
bait tilleth on the hook. Noah thought to drink he thought not to be drunk:
but as he which comes to the field to sound the Trumpet, is slain as soon
as he which comes to fight: so the same wine distempereth Noah which has
distempered so many since. Where he thought to take his reward and taste the
fruit of his own hands, God set an everlasting blot upon him, which sticks
fast till this day, like a bar in his arms, so long as the name of Noah is
spoken of, that we can not read of his virtue but we must read of his sin,
whereby every man is warned to receive the gifts of God reverently, to use
them soberly, and to sanctify him self, before he reach forth his hand unto
them, that they may comfort and profit us, with that secret blessing which God
has hid in them, or else every thing the best gifts of God may hurt us: as
this pleasant wine, stained and confounded the great Patriarch, when he
delighted too much in it which he might have drunk as Christ did at his last
Supper, and this disgrace had never ben written in his story, but god would
have a fearful example like the Pillar of salt, to stand before those beasts
whose only strife is to make trial, who can quaff deepest, and she wall their
valiantness in wine. Because there is such warning before us, now we have the
drunkard in schooling, I will spend the time that is left to show you the
deformity of this sin, if any hear me which have been over taken with it, let
them not marvel why he cannot love his enemies, which loves such an enemy as
this: which leads till he reeleth: dulles him till he be a fool, and
steals away his sense, his wit, his memory, his health, his credit, his
friends: and when she has stripped him as bare as Noah, then she exposes him
like Noah to Cham, and all that see him do mock him: it is a wonder almost
that any man should be drunk that has seen a drunkard before, swelling and
puffing, and soming, and spuing, and groueling like a beast: for who would be
like a beast for all the world? Look vdon the dru^kard when his eyes stares,
his mouth driuels, his tongue falters, his face flames, his hands tremble, his
feet reele: how vglye, how monstrous, how loathsome does he seem to thee? so
loathsome do thou seem to others when thou art in the like taking. And how
loathsome then do thou seem to God? Therefore the first law which Adam
received of god was abstinence, which if he had kept, he had kept all virtues
beside, but intemperancie lost all. In abstinence the law came to Moses, and he
falled when he received it, to show that they which receive the word of God,
receives it soberly: A temperate man seldom sins, because the flesh which
does tempte is mortified least it should tempt: but when the handmaid is
above the mistres, and a man has lost the image of God, and scarce retayneth
the image of man: all his thoughts, and speeches, and actions must needs be
sin, and nothing but sin, because the bond of virtue is broken sobriety,
which kept altogether: when did thou want discretion to consider? when did
thou want patience to forgive? when did thou want continency to refrain?
when did thou want heart to pray, but when sobriety was fled away, and
intemperancie filled her room? if shame let to sin, it casts out sin: if
fear let to sin it casts out fear: if love let to sin, it expulseth
love: if knowledge let to sin, it expulseth knowledge, like a covetous
Landlord, which would have all to him self and dwell alone.

There is no sin, but has some show of virtue, only the sin of
drunkenness is like nothing but sin: there is no sin but although it hurt
the soul, it beautifyeth the body or promises profit, or pleasure, or
glory, or something to his servants: only drunkenness is so impudent, that it
discryeth it self: so unthankful that it makes no recompense: so noysom that
it consumes the body, which many sins spare, least they should appear to be
sins. Every sin defiles a man, but drunke^nes makes him like a beast:
every sin defaceth a man, but dru^kennes takes away the image of a man:
every sin robs a man of some virtue, but drunkenness steals away all
virtues at once: every sin deserves punishment, but drunkenness vpbraids a
man, while the wine is in his stomach and though he would desemble his
drunkenness, yet he is not able to set a countenance of it, but the child
discrieth him, the fool knows that he is drunk, because his face bewrays
him, like the leprosy which brast out of the forhead: so woorthily has he
lost the opinion of sobriety, which has lost it self. His son thinks
himself more master now then his father: his servant makes him a fool: his
children leads him like a child: his wife uses him like a servant: and
although his drunkenness leaves him when he has slept, yet no man seeks to
him for counsel after, no man regards his word; no man reckens of his
judgment, no man is persuaded by his counsel, no man accounts of his
learning, no man has any glory to accompany with him, but so soon as
dru^kennes has made him like a beast, every man abhors him like a beast
as they did Nebuchadnezer: the spirit flies from him least he should grieve
it, his friends go away least he should shame them, and no virtues dare come
near least he should defile them. How many things fly out when wine goes in?
how is it then that he which loves himself, can be so cruel to himself,
that he should love his life and shorten his life? that he should love his
health and destroy his health? that he should love his strength and weaken his
strength that he should love his wealth and consume his wealth? that he should
love his credit and crack his credit? that he should love his understanding
and ouerturne his understanding? that he should love his beauty and deforme
his bis beauty? The Poets need fayning no more that men are transformed into
beasts for if they were living now, they should see men like beasts: some like
lions, some like wolves, some like foxes, some like bears, some like swine: who
is the beast when the beasts satisfy nature and man satisfies appetite? when
the beasts keep measure and man exceeds measure? when the beasts are found
laboring and man found surfeting? who is the beast? I have read of a bird
which has the face of a man, but is so cruel of nature, that sometime for
hunger she will set upon a man and slaie him: after when she comes for thirste
unto the water to drink, seeing the face in the water like the face of him
who^e she deuowred: for grief that she has killed one like her self, takes
such sorrow, that she never eats nor drinks after, but beats and frettes
and pines her self to death. What will thou do then which have not slain one
like thy self, but thy self, thy very self with a cup of wine, and murderest
so many virtues and graces in one hour?

As Esaw sold his land and living for a mess of potage, so the drunkard
sells his fence, and wit, and memory, and credit for a cup of wine. Thou
have not murdered thy brother like Cain, but thou have murdered thy self
like Judas: as the Rechabites abstain from wine as Ionadab bad them, obtained
the blessing which God had appointed to the Israelites: so let us take heed
least they which we account idolaters, whilste they fast and watch, obtain
the blessing which God has appointed for us (get away the blessing) while we
sit down to eat and rise to play. Therefore as Christ said remember Lots wife,
so I say remember Lot: one hour of drunkenness did him more hurt then al his
enemies in Sodom: remember Noah one hour of drunkenness discovered that which
was hid six hundred years. Ten times more might be said against this vice: but
if I have said enough to make you abhor it, I have said as much as I would.
Some go about to excuse Noah because he was an old man, and therefore might
soon be taken cupshort: some because the wines were hotter in those Countries
then they are with us: some because of his change of drinks which had not
wonted himself to wine before: some because as most men delight in that which
by great labor they have brought to pass of the^ selves. So no marvel though
Noah had a longing to his own grapes? following heerin the example of a curious
Cook, which does sup and sup his broth, to taste whether it be well seasoned,
that he may mende it if he can, or mende the next: but as the fly by often
dallying with the candle, at last scorcheth her wings with the flame: so
taking, he was taken, and at last was drunk: yet this is imputed to him for
his fault, that he was drunk, as the punishment which follows does witness:
Such is the providence of God, that his mercy might be glorified in all, he
has concluded all under sin, and suffered the best to fall, that no man
might trust in his own strength, and that we seeing their repentance, may
learn to rise again how grievous soever our sins be. If we have been
idolaters, if adulterers, if persecutors, if murmurers, if murderers if
blasphemers, if drunkards: Aron and Moses and Lot and Abraham and David and
Solomon and Peter and Paul and Noah have been the like: who reign now in the
kingdom of Christ with his angels, and so may we if we repent like them.
These examples says Paul are not written for our imitation but for our
admonition.

Thus you have seen Noah sober and Noah drunken. Whereby we may see that a man
may be drunk with his own wine, he may surfeit with his own meats, he may
lust with his own wife, he may offend with his own gifts, his own honor may
make him proud, his own riches may make him covetous, his own strength may
make him venturous, his own wit may make him contentious: therefore as the
child pluckes out the sting before he takes the honey, so let every man
before he receaues the gifts of God, sit down and look what baits, what
snares, what temptations Satan has hid in them, and when he has taken out
the sting, then eat the honey and he shall use the blessings of Christ as
Christ did him self.

FINIS.

