THE Restitution of King Nabuchadnezzer.

DAN. 4. Verses. 31. 32. 33. 34.

By Henry Smith.

Printed by Thomas Scarleti 1591,

Daniel. 4. 31. 31 And at the end of those days, I Nabuchadnezzer lift up mine
eyes to heaven, and my understanding was restored to me, and I gave thanks to
the most high, and I praised and honored him that lives for ever, whose power
is an everlasting power, and his kingdom is from generation to generation,

32 And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing, and according
to his will he works in the army of heaven, and in the inhabitance of the
earth, and none can stay his hand, nor say unto him, what do thou.

33 At the same time was my understanding restored to me, and I returned to the
honor of my kingdom, my glory, and my beauty was restored to me, and my
counselors and my princes sought unto me, and I was established in my
kingdom, and my glory was augmented toward me.

34 Now therefore I Nabuchadnezzer, praise, and extol, and magnify the king
of heaven, whose works are all truth, and his ways judgment, and those that
walk in pride, he is able to abase.


NOw we are come to his Restitution. First Nabuchadnezzer was humbled, as God
humbles his enemies: now he is humbled, as God humbles his Children: that
although he has more honor than he had before, yet he is not proud of it,
as he was, but cries with the Prophet, Not unto me Psa^
Lord, not unto me, but unto thy name give the honor. So he which said, not
only in heart, but almost with his mouth too, There is no God, now Ps^
with heart and mouth honors none but God. His pride, and fall, Daniell
declares: when he came to his restitution, he makes Nabuchadnezzer to speak
with himself, and give thanks in his own person, like a witness brought in
to testify the truth of this wonderful story.

When the Prophet had showed how this king vaunted, and how he was debased for
it, presently after he had spoken, he calls in as it were the king himself
to witness his report, and he declares how he was raised again, like a man,
which having received grace of a Prince or great personage, is brought in
before him, to give thanks for his favor received, and then he is dismissed.

In these verses two things show themselves at first view: Nabuchadneezzers
restitution, and his thankfulness. In his restitution, first he shows the
time when he was restored in these words: At the end of those days. Then he
shows the manner how he was restored, in these words: I Nabuchadnezzer,
lift mine eyes to heaven, and mine understanding was restored unto me, and my
Counselors sought unto me, and my glory was augmented more then it was. In his
thankfulness, first he extolleth gods power, in setting him up and pulling
him down, and raising him again: then he commends Gods truth and justice,
which deserves to be praised for his judgment as much as his mercy, as if he
reioiced that God made him like a beast, that he may die like a man, At the end
of those days. As the time of his pride was noted, when he walked in his
palace, to show how pride grows out of building, and wealth, and apparel,
and such roots, so he noted the time of his fall, when the words were in his
mouth, to show that he was punished for his pride and arrogancy, that he
might know where to begin his conversion, and abate his pride, and when he had
taken away the cause, then God would take away the punishment: so likewise he
notes the time of his restitution, At the end of those days: That is, after
seven years were expired, to show how long the sickness of pride is in
curing, and to show how euerything was fulfilled, as it was prophesied, even
unto the point of time: for it was told him by Daniel, and by his dream, that
he should be like a beast seven years. Therefore Nabuchadnezzer is prompt,
as it were to confess the truth, and says as the Prophet says, At the end of
those days: That is, at the end of seven years, I was restored again to my
understanding and honor, as Daniel foretold me.

Yet an other note is set upon this, least we should think, that God
regarded only the season, and think seven years punishment enough for such a
sinner: he says not barely that his understanding and honor were restored to
him, when seven years were ended, but that they were restored unto him, when
he began to lift up his eyes unto heaven, to show that his blessing came
from above, and that he which had humbled him, had restored him again: as if
he would say unto all that are cast down with sicknesses, or poverty, or
infamy, or any trouble in body orminde: he which has humbled you, will raise
you, as he has done me, but you must look up to heaven, and lift up your
hearts unto him, and then your understanding, and comfort, and peace, and
health, and wealth, and liberty, and good name and all, shall return unto you
again, like Iobes ^ob. 42.
sheep, and cammels, and oxen, in greater number the^ he had before, as all
the blessings of God returned to Nabuchadnezzer, when he looked up to heaven:
lo they shall come back like a river upon you, when your eyes can go by these
vanities, and look upon him which looks upon you, or else seven and seven
years shall pass over you, and you shall be never the better, but worse and
worse, like Saul, which was ^. Sa. 31 4
vexed more and more, till he had killed himself. Therefore as the Jews
looked up to the brazen serpent, which was a figure of Jesus Number. 21 8
Christ, when they would be healed: so all which would recover that they have
lost, or obtain that which they want, Nabuchadnezzer does teach them here to
lift up their eyes to heaven, from whence, says Christ, comes every
blessing of man.

At the end of those days, I Nabuchadnezzer lift up mine eyes to heaven. Like
a man which is wakened out of a long trance, now he began to stir and lift up
his eyes. When the heart is lift up, it will lift up the eyes, and the hands,
and the voice and all, to heaven. He which never looked up to heaven, so long
as his comfort was upon the earth, now his mind is changed, his looks, and
gestures, and speeches, and all are changed with it, as though God would show
a visible difference between the spiritual and the carnal, even in their
gate, and looks, and gestures, as there is between a child and an old man.
The spiritual minds are heavenly minds, and look up, because their joy is
above. The carnal minds are earthly minds, and look down like beasts,
because their treasure is beneath. As the serpent grouels upon the ground, so
does the serpents seed, and has not so much as the Genes. 3. 14.
countenance of grace. Therefore by lifting up his eyes to heaven, is
signified, that the time was come which the Lord had set down that he should
be like a beast, until he had well learned that lesson: That the most high
bears rule over the kingdoms of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will.

Therefore Nabuchannezzer does show that he had learned this lesson: for he
looked not up to heaven, to behold the sun, or the moon, or the stars, like
an Astronomer: but thinking how he had set himself against heaven, from whence
came all his honor, in a godly shame and holy anger toward himself, he
turns his face from earth to heaven, to magnify him that had humbled him so,
that contemned him, that advanced him so.

Now he talks no more of his palace, nor his power, nor his majesty, though
it be greater then it was: but he looks above his own palace, up to another
palace, from whence that terrible voice came down unto him, Thy kingdom is
departed from thee: which expresses his contrite heart, and wounded spirit,
how many passions batled within, as if he should chide himself, and say, O
unthankful man, my power descended from above, and I ever looked upon the
earth, mine honor came down from heaven, and I never lift up mine eyes
before: Go up my eyes, and my heart, and my voice, and mine hands, how long
will ye pore upon the earth, like a beast? so he lifted up his eyes unto
heaven. After he had lift up his eyes, he begins to pray, and gave praise
and thanks unto God: which shows that he did not only lift up his eyes,
but his heart too. For unless we can say with David, I lift up mine heart, it
is in vain to lift up Psalm. 15 1
hands, or eyes, or voice, as the hypocrites do, because he that is a spirit,
requires the spirit. Therefore Mary says, Mine heart does magnify Ioh. 4. 24
the Lord. As for the infidels and idolaters, they have no heart service, but
their religion is like an occupation which is done with the body: for when we
read of the sacrifice or prayers of Idolaters, we do not find that they lift
up their hearts to their idols, but their hands 1. Kin. 18 28
or eyes, or voice, as the Baalites rored to Baal, as the mariners cried
Jonas. 1 5 Act. 19 28
to their sea oods: as the Ephesians shouted to Diana: but the lifting up of
their heart, the hearty service is always appropriat to God, which says, My
son give me thy heart. Therefore Pro. 23. 26
Nabuchad. lifted up his heart to God, showing that he had learned the lesson
God gave him 7. years to study, that the most high bears rule over the
kingdoms of men. Now God thinks the time long enough, and as he reformed
the ground after the flood, with fruits, and herbs, and flowers again: so
he reformed Nabuchadnezzer with an understanding, and beauty, and honor
again, as if he repented himself and said, I will drown the earth no more,
I will Genesis 8 21
change Nabuchadnezzer no more: now he knows there is a king above him, he
shall be a king again: now he seeks my honor, I will give him honor: now he
magnifieth him, that debased him, I will return to exalt him. So the voice
which thundered from heaven: Thy kingdom is departed from thee, sounds again,
Thy kingdom is returned to thee. For it was not told him, that he should be
like a beast until he died, but until he knew That the most high bears
rule over the kingdoms of men. Therefore when he knew this, nothing could
stay him from his kingdom, no more then they could stay him in his kingdom
before.

Thus the displeasure of God is but an Interim, until we know some thing
that we should know, and then Nabuchadnezzer shall be king again, then the
sick man shall be whole again, then the bond man shall be free again: his
mercies Psa. 136 1, 2. 6
are called Everlasting, because they endure for ever, but his anger is
compared to the clouds, because it lasts but a season: whom he loves, he
loves to the end, but whom he scourges, he scourges till they repent, as
Ezechias was sick until he wept, Nabuchadnezzer was banished but till he
repented. Now the first cure of this kings restitution, was of his mind: Mine
understanding, says he, was restored unto me, which he repeateth again in the
33. verse: Mine understanding was restored unto me, to show what an
inestimable gift our understanding and reason is, whereby we differ from beasts,
for which we cannot be thankful enough. Therefore he records it twice, as
though his heart did slow with gladness, and his tongue could not choose but
speak often of it: as a man thinks and speaks of that which he loves,
Mine understanding was restored unto me: that which was first taken away, came
first again, which so soon as it was gone, he was counted a man no more, but
a beast, as David Psalm. 23. 9.
says, Like horse and mule, which have no understanding, accounting them which
are void of understanding, no better then a horse or mule.

Therefore they which have left their understanding at the Tauerns, (as many
here have done sometime) and they which understand not yet what is the book
of God, are but horse and mule, though they bear the visors of men. After he
had said, Mine understanding was restored unto me, he annexeth also, Mine
honor was restored unto me, and so he grew to be a king again. As he was
wont to put on one robe after another when he was king: so when God would
make him king again, first he puts upon him the robe of understanding, as
it were the foundation ofaking: like the princely spirit which came upon Saul,
and when he had a princely heart, then God 1. Sa. 10 9
gave him a princely power, and proclaimed like a voice from heaven,
Nabuchadnezzer king of Babel. So gloriously he rose again like the sun,
with a triumph of his restitution, and welcome of his subjects: like the shout
that went before king Solomon, God save king Solomon, It does not appear, that
2. Kin. 1 34
his nobles and subjects were converted like himself, to receive him to his
kingdom again, because he repented, or because it was Gods will: but because
it was Gods will, they could not resist it, but fulfilled his ordinance, as the
wicked do those things which are foretold that they should do, and never
think how they are moved to it, nor which way it comes to pass, no more
then the Raven knew, who had sent her to feed 1. Kin. 17 4
Elias, she did as God commanded her, but she knew not that God had
commanded her: so they do as God inforceth them, but they know not how God
inforceth them.

One would think, when Nabuchadnezzer was a king, that God could never have
made him like a beast, and when he was like a beast, one would think, that God
could never have made him like a king: for who would suffer a beast to rule
over them, unless they were beasts themselves. We will not have this man to
rule over us, say the Jews (such stomachs are in men, that they will hardly
abide any man to rule over them) Therefore it is strange that these men should
receive one that had been seven years a beast: it is even as if one should
lie seven years in the grave, and after come again to challenge his goods,
and lands, and house, and money, from them that have taken possession, and
count it their own: he should have a cold suite of it I think, unless it
were some few that loved him in his life, he might go again to his grave,
for a house to dwell in. So no body looks now for Nabuchadnezzer to come out
of the wilderness, he was the vnlikest man in the world to be king after
such a change. But see what God can do, though all be against it, he which made
a king like a beast, raised a king of a beast. Mine understanding (says
Nabuchadnezzer) was restored unto me, and more then that, Mine honor was
restored unto me: and more then that, I was established in mine honor: and
more then that, Mine honor was augmented more then it was, when I was so proud
of it. As God turned his heart: so he turned the heart of his nobles and
people, that they received him for their king again, and reverenced him, for
all his former disgrace, for which they contemned him before as a beast: here
a wise man may stand and wonder, like Elizeus, when his master was rapt to
heaven: for as though a ^. Kin. 11 11. 12
snuff had been taken from the ground, and set up again in the candlestick,
and shined brighter then it did before: so the king was raised from the dust,
and set in the throne: even now no man cared for him, and now no man durst
displease him: then was fulfilled that which Solomon says: When the ways of a
man please the Lord, he ^rou. 16 7
will make all his enemies at peace with him: so when Nabuchadnezzer pleased
the Lord, God gave him grace with men, and his glory was augmented. My glory
(says Nabuchadnezzer) was augmented to me: that is, he received not only
his kingdom, and power, and honor again, but he received usury of them for
his seven years banishment: they have been put out seven years to the bank
for him, to receive more when he came again. So when he sought his own
honor, honor departed from him, his palace could not hold it, his treasures
could not redeem it, his guarde could not stay it, but pride chased it away,
whilst he followed after it: but when he sought Gods honor, and cared not for
his own, then his honor was increased, according to that, I will honor him,
which honors me. What encouragement is this for all Nabuchadnezzers to seek
the honor of God, seeing he has so linked his honor with their honor, that
they cannot seek Gods honor, but they shall find their own honor.
Therefore what would Nabuchadnezzer say to our Nabuchadnezzers, who think it
against their honors, if they should seek Christ's honor, and that if his
kingdom went up, their kingdom should go down: like Herod, who thought he
could not be king, if Christ should reign: and the Pharisees, which thought
they should be despised, if Christ were regarded. If Nabuchadnezzers honor
came to him, for the honor which he gave to God, how long will their honor
last, which eat and drink, give and take, bid and forbid, set up, and pull
down, favor, and wrong, and do all they do to honor themselves, as
Nabuchadnezzer built Babel: until that voice thunder from heaven: Thy kingdom
is departed from thee: thy office is departed from thee: thy life is departed
from thee. Some have exalted themselves like Nabuchadnezzer, and are not fallen
yet: some mounted up, and are fallen already. Some are fallen lower and lower
like Babylon, but they are not yet at the ground. They have ruled like beasts,
longer then he, and yet look not up to heaven, that they may be changed.
Thus Nabuchadnezzer is welcome to his throne again. Now he has received
grace, let us examine his thankfulness. If you mark every thing in his order,
you shall see a marvelous consequence observed both in his fall, and
restitution. When he looked on his palace, he waxed proud, when he waxed
proud, then God threatened him, when he was threatened, then God bannished him:
when he was banished, then he lift up his eyes to heaven: when he lift up his
eyes to heaven, then his understanding came unto him, then he gave thanks to
God, showing us the use of our understanding, why God has given reason unto
man: videlicet, to serve him, and praise him upon earth: as Nabuchadnezzer
worshipped God, so soon as he came to his understanding: so, so soon as we
come to years of discretion, and begin to understand, we should begin a new
life, and serve him whom all creatures do serve with us, or else our
understanding is vain, and we are like beasts still. For by this
Nabuchadnezzer shows, that he had understanding, and was like a man, because
he gave praise unto God, and was moved in heart to worship him which made him,
according to that definition which David makes of understanding. Psalm. 111 10.
They which observe them, have a good understanding. They which observe the
commandementes, have a good understanding, not they which speak of the
commandments, nor they which write of the commandments, nor they which
preach of the commandments, but they which keep the commandments, have a
good understanding, the rest have a false understanding, a vain understanding,
an understanding like the Scribes and Pharisees, which was enough to condemn
them, but not to save them. Besides every man should try his wisdom: for so
soon as understanding comes to him, as it came to Nabuchadnezzer, it will
extort prayer and obedience from him, whether he will or no.

Therefore our Nabuchadnezzers are beasts still, for this is no part of their
understanding: but he which can go beyond all in shifts and policies, is
counted the wisest man in Court or City. Oh if Nabuchadnezzer had lived in our
country, what a Monarch might he be, to what honor, and wealth, and power,
might he have risen in a short time, whether he had been a Lawyer, or a
Courtier, or a Prelate. Me thinks I see how many fingers would point at him in
the streets, as they do at his Apes, and say, there goes a deep fellow, he
has more wit in his little finger, then the rest has in the whole body: but
we speak to the belly, which has no ears.

Now let us see the parts of this kings confession, that we may see how his
thankfulness did answer to his sin, before he had robbed God of his honor.
Now as though he came to make restitution, he brings praise, and thanks, and
glory in his mouth: first he aduaunceth Gods power, and says, That his
kingdom, is an everlasting kingdom: under which words he confesses, that God
was above him, because his kingdom was not an everlasting kingdom, but a
momentary kingdom: like a spark, which rises from the fire, and falls to
the fire again: therefore he shows, what a fool he was to vaunt of his
kingdom, as though it were like Gods kingdom, which lasts for ever. Secondly
he magnifieth the power of God, and says, That God does what he lists, in
heaven and in earth, and nothing can hinder him, nor say unto him, What do
thou? Under which words he confesses again, that God was above him, because
he could not reign as he listed, but when he thought to live at his
pleasure, then he was thrust out of the doors, and God said not unto him, What
do thou? but, Thy kingdom is departed from thee. Therefore he shows,
what a fool he was to vaunt of his power, as though it had been like Gods
power, which could not be checked. Thirdly, he commends the justice of God,
and says, That his works were all truth, and his ways were all judgment.
Under the which words Nabuchadnezzer confesses again, that God was above
him: for his ways were all errors, and his works were all sins, as the
end proved. Therefore he shows, what a fool he was to vant of his works,
as though they had been like Gods works, which cannot be blamed. Therefore he
concludes, I Nabuchadnezzer, praise, and extol, and magnify the king of
heaven. When he lighted on the right string, mark how he harps upon it, and
doubles and trebles it, like a bond, which is ratified with many words of like
sense, so he ratifieth his bond to God, with many words of like meaning: I
will praise, and extol, and magnify the king of heaven, as though he would
praise, and more then praise him: So they which love from the heart, and repent
from the bottom, praise and praise, pray and pray, give and give, serve and
serve, that is, when they have served him, they are ready to serve him again.

Here is a glass for all the children of pride. First look upon
Nabuchadnezzer, ye which are great men like Nabuchadnezzer, for thus will God
make his examples of greatmen, because they should be examples to others. Many
wicked men died in Jury, and scarce a man was by to see their end: but Herod
was stricken before the people, that all might see, because he was a wicked
king. There were many in Babel as proud as Nabuchadnezzer, but none but
Nabuchadnezzer was made like a beast, because he was a proud king: so God
does stomach sins in those that bear his own person. As princes use to
pick out the principal and chief of the rebellion, to make them examples of
terror, which were ringleaders in the treason, so does God bend his shotagainst
the captains of his enemies: like the king of Aram, which charged his
soldiers, that they should fight against none but against Achab the king. For
as 2. Chapter 18 30 Prou. 19 25
Solomon says: Strike the scorner, and the rest will beware: so justice showed
upon a great man, does terrify many. If we could see but one of the
Nabuchadnezzers of our days so disgraced, it would make all the rest better
in their office, and think when they sit in their majesty's, as Queen
Hester did, that their power is given them to minister justice, and not to do
wrong. Paul does not wish unto Agrippa more wealth, nor more honor, nor more
friends, but more religion, which is the greatest want of princes and
magistrates, They sit in Gods chair, says David, and are called Gods, but
they are not like God, but like Mammon, Psalm. 82.
except their names and their crowns. Peradventure there is a David, or a
Solomon, or a Joshua, that is, a few that remember whose person they bear. The
rest are like Herod, and Saul, and Nabuchadnezzer, which know not from whom
their kingdoms come. Nabuchadnezzer built for his honor, and they build for
their honors: he gathered for his wealth, and they gather for their wealth: he
sought his pleasure, and they seek after their pleasures: he vaunted of his
power, and they vaunt of their power: what did Nabuchadnezzer, that they do
not, but repent, which they do not? I cannot wish them beasts to do them
good like Nabuchadnezzer, because it is a question whether they be worse then
beasts already: but if we could drive them out of their palace, to live in
the wilderness, it were a a good riddance, for there they should do less
harm.

Thus you see why Nabuchadnezzer was made like a beast, that he may die like a
man: for he could never learn from whom his kingdom came, or who gave him his
name, unless he had been seven years a prentise unto the cross. When he
perceived who took his kingdom from him, then he gave his kingdom unto him,
and learned his thankfulness in the wilderdernesse.

When all the blessings were gone which he should have been thankful for,
he thought God was no body, until he became like no body himself: and then
who but God, no power but of him, no honor but from him, his first honor came
from God, as well as the last, but then he was like a beast, which knows not
his owner: like a babe, which knows not his father: like an Image, which
knows not his maker. But now he knows from who^ kingdoms come, and has
learned to say, Thy kingdom, as well as my kingdom: and is like the Elders in
the Revelation, which cast down their crowns before the Lamb: such a
scholemaister is affliction, to teach that which prophets and angels cannot
teach. For the Prophet and his dream had told him as much before: yet he
could never say, The Lord has given, before he saw the Lord had taken. They
say, a friend is never known before he be lost: so when God fled,
Nabuchadnezzer followed, but when God called, Nabuchadnezzer contemned when he
has all things, he is unthankful, and when he has nothing, he begins
to be thankful. So we must learn Gods love, out of Gods wrath: spell his
goodness, out of his justice. Therefore we preach judgment to you, to make you
fly unto mercy: we denounce the law against you, to make you love the
Gospel: We show you hell, to make you seek heaven: because we are all like
Pharaos sorcerers. Though we receive never so much, yet we never say, The
finger of God has done this, but when he begins to plague us, then we cry,
the finger of God has done this: therefore if we will not be invited, it is
good to be compelled. To conclude, he which made Nabuchadnezzer a king, when he
was like a beast, is he that makes the^ rich, which were poor, and he which
makes them free, that were bond, and he which makes them beloved, that were
hated, and he which makes them wise, that were rude, and he which makes them
whole, that were sick, they must stay a time, seven days, or seven weeks, or
seven months, or seven years, as Nabuchadnezzer did, when they are ready for
it, it will come suddenly, as the Angels came to refresh Christ so soon as he
was hungry: yet a little while, yet a little longer, comfort is on foot, and
that God which is coming, will come, as the sun which was rising, is risen.
For as Nabuchadnezzer said, mine honor is restored to me: so I am sure, many
here that have been afflicted may say, my right was restored unto me, my
liberty was restored to me, my goods were restored to me, my health was
restored to me in less time than Nabuchadnezzers honor was, and what then?
Therefore I Nabuchadnezzer praise and extol and magnify the king of heaven.
This is the conclusion of all Gods benefits. They which do not praise, and
extol, and magnify the king of heaven, are worse then Nabuchadnezzer.
Therefore letal those which have said in their heart like Nabuchadnezzer, Is
not this the house which I have built? Is not this the land which I have
purchased? Is not this the money which I have gathered? Are not those the
children which I have begotten? Say now with Nabuchadnezzer for all, I praise
and extol and magnify the king of heaven, which can take all again as he did
from Nabuchadnezzer.

Thus have you seen pride and humility, one pulling Nabuchadnezzer out of his
throne, the other lifting him unto his throne, whereby they which stand, may
take heed least they fall, and they which are fallen, may learn to rise again.

FINIS.
Printed by T. S. and are to be sold by William Wright. 1591.


