A SERMON PREACHED IN THE CATHEDRAL CHVRCH OF DVRHAM, JULY, 7, 1628.

BY PETER SMART.

PSALM. 31.7. V. I hate them that hold of superstitious vanities. Printed in the
Year, 1640.

Psalm, 31. part of the 7. verse.
IN the common translation, I have hated them that hold of superstitious
vanities.

In the n^w translation, Them that regard lying vanities.

In the Geneva translation, Them that give themselves to deceitful vanities:
whereupon they give this good note. This affection ought to be in all Gods
childr^n, to hate whatsoever thing is not granted upon Gods word, as deceitful
and vain.

Such are all humane Traditions, Ethelothreskiai, superstitious will-worships
the inventions of man's brain.

The vulgar Latin has Odisti, thou O God hate. And Vatablus has, Odi
observantes vanitates frustra, or Vanitates mendacij, vain vanities, or
vanities of a lie. That is says he; Odi observantes opera qua prae se ferunt
vanitatem and mendacium: id est eos qui superstitioni student, and ea
observant, quae a vero Dei cultu animos piorum avocant.

I hate them that observe works carrying a show of, or which uphold and
countenance vanity and falsehood. That is, hate the followers and favorers of
superstition, observing things which withdraw godly minds, from the true
worship of God.

Now whereas some have Odi, other Odisti, God hates, or I hate; they are all
one, to one effect, for we m^st hate what God hates, we must love what God
loves; we must apply our selves to Gods will, and conform our selves to the
similitude of God, after whose image we are made, as much as we can.

Be you perfect, says our Savior, as your heavenly Father is perfect.
Therefore we must hate with a perfect hatred, whatsoever God hates: as David
did, Psalm. 139.21. ver.

Do not I hate them o Lord that hate thee? Do not I earnestly contend with
those that rise up against thee: Yea I hate them with a perfect hatred, or
unfeigned hatred, I count them mine enemies.

On which words one observes well^ The Prophet teaches us boldly to contemn
all the hatred of the wicked, and friendship of the world, when they would
hinder us from serving God sincerely^

God is good, yea goodness it self; Therefore it is not possib^^ but God
should love best that which ^s most like himself, and hate the contrary: So
must we do, not love our selves, or that which is like our selves, for we are
naught.

Omnis homo mendax, every man is a liar, and the imaginations of man's heart are
only evil continually says God.

Therefore we must not love but hate our ow^e imaginations, inventions, and
lies; and love God who is good, and Christ who is truth, under whose lips, no
vanity, no guile, no lie can lie.

As a Father says, expounding my text: Recte veritas odit vanitatem, quia
vanitas in falsitate consistit, odisse enim dicitur id quod reprobat.

Christ being truth, must needs hate vanity, because vanity consists in
falsehood; for what a man hates, that ^e rejects.

Esau was a reprobate, rejected of God, because God h^ted him: As we read in
the first of Mala^chy, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated; yet herein we
may not imitate God, in hating any man under pretense, that we think him a
reprobate.

We may not presume to enter into Gods judgments, and give sentence of
election, or reprobation upon any. Because we know not; he that now stands,
whether he may fall, and he that has fallen, whether he may rise again and
stand.

Therefore in that respect w^ must hate none; we must love our enemies and all.

As our Savior says in the 5. of Math. Ye have heard that it has been said
of old: Love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy: but I say unto you, Love your
enemies.

And St. John says, 1 Epist. 3, chap. He that loves not his brother abides
in death, and again. he that hates his brother, walks in darkness, and yet
^gaine, he that hates his brother, is a man^sl^yer.

Was David a manslayer? did he walk in darkness, and abide in death? because
he hated them that hold of superstitious vanities?

No ve^ily: for he hated not their persons, bu^ their iniquities, their evil
works, and affections, he did wish their amendment, and salvation, taking God
for an example, of whom thus he speaks, in his 5. Psalm.

Thou art not a God that loves wickedness, thou hate all them that work
vanity. Yet he says elsewhere. Thou o Lord savest both man and beast, how
excellent is thy mercy O God.

Which appears, in that he makes his Sun to shine, and his rain to fall
upon just, and unjust. And as St. Paul says, he would have all to be saved,
and come to the knowledge of the truth^

Therefore he loves the man, though he hate their manners, their
naughtiness, and vanities.

So must we do, as the Prophet Amos bids us, in his 5. chapter 15. v. Hate the
evil, and love the good^ we must not simply hate, not simply love, because no
man is so absolutely evil, but he has some goodness, nor so absolutely good,
bu^ he has some badness: As our Savior says, There is none good but God.

How then? They that hold of superstitious vanities, must we not hate them? Not
their persons, which may perhaps have some sparks, some tincture of goodness;
but their badnesse is to be hated, and themselves, quatenus, so far forth, as
they invent, and maintain superstitious vanities, opposite to Gods Law, which
they ought to love.

As David professes, in his 119 Psalm. 113. verse. I hate vain inventions, but
thy law do I love.

So must we love Gods law, which forbids Idolatry, and hate vain
inventions, and the inventours of vaniti^s, when they would ins^are and
entangle us with their fra^dulent impostures, to seduce, and allure us to their
superstitious and idol services.

So far forth we must hate them, though they be never so near, and dear
unto us: As our Savior teaches us, Luke 14.26. verse.

If any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, brother and sister,
wife and children, he can not be my Disciple.

That is, he that casts not off all affections, and desires, which draw him
from God to the world, from Christ to Antichrist.

So then it is no impiety to hate our carnal and natural friends, when they
become our ghostly enemies, hindering Gods glory and our salvation.

Neither must we hate them secretly, hold our tongues, and let them alone. As
the Prophet Hosea says, Ephraim is turned after Idols, Let him alone; that is,
trouble not your selves with him, he is incorrigible, in a desperate case; Let
him alone, let him perish in his sins: But we must endeavor to amend our
Ephraimites, hoping to reclaim them from their Idols, after which of late they
have hastily turned.

But if they prove stubborn, and stifnecked, then must we cry aloud, and
proclaim their folly: we must discover their blindness, and nakedness to the
world; we must persecute them with fire and sword; fire of z^ale, and sword of
Gods word having the laws of God, and the King on our side.

As it is said in the 7. Apoc. 16. ver. The 10 Horns, that is, the 10 Nations
shall hate the Whore of Babylon the Church of Rome, and shall make her^
desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.

But what are those vain superstitions, the holders whereof ought to be hated?
Some think Magical arts are meant ther^by; to which says Pliny, Orientales
populi ad insaniam usque addicti sunt. The Eastern people ran mad after
Magick^ which Gods law utterly condemns.

But the superstitious vanities in my text, are more general: Vanity of
vanities (says S^lomon) all is vanity, beside the fear of God and keeping of
his commandments.

Those vanities, says a learned interpreter, are humane traditions,
superstitious Ceremonies, which undermine and overthrow both the Law and the
Gospel; after which Ceremonies, Orientales, our East-worshippers run mad in
a manner.

And what are Ceremonies? are all vain? are all superstitious: God forbid.

Many are tolerable, a few necessary?

Most are ridiculous, and some abominable.

Indeed in the beginning, when the law was first published, it pleased almighty
God to train up the people of Israel, under a multitude of C^remonies, to
keep them in exercise, and help their infirmity.

By the external observation of which, he would accustom them, to his
spiritual worship, and nurture them, in his fear and obedience; till the
coming of Christ, who was the end, the complement, the consummation of
Ceremonies.

For when Christ had appeared, who was the truth and substance, the Shadows
departed: neither would he burden his Church with ^raditions and rudiments any
longer.

Only to preserve the memory of his benefits, he ordained two Sacraments, and
left to his Church liberty to m^ke laws and Canons, for order and comeliness
agreeable to his word.

For Ceremoniarum anima, says one; est verbum Dei: The life and soul of ev^ry
Ceremony is the word of God; without which, it is dead and damned.

But Popes, and papal Prelates, not content with that simplicity which pleased
the Apostles, and primitive Church; would needs add Ceremony to Ceremony,
increasing their number in infinitum, till they had heapt up a world of
Ceremonies, which they adorned with worldly splendour and bravery.

Adeo ut, and Gentes and Iudaeos, externi cultus superstitione Christiani
vicerint, says Szege^ine. Insomuch as Christians have surpassed both Jews and
Gentiles in the superstition of external worship.

Which malady, or plague rather of the Church began then to prevail, says he;
Quando relicto verbo Dei mundana sapientia administrari caepit religio Christi:
When the government of Christ's religion began to be managed, nay mard, and
mangled with worldly wisdom; Gods word being abandoned.

For now, says he, not one among a thousand, can (...) content to serve God,
in spirit and truth; but he will affect some superstitious Ceremony, to
worship God therewith.

Whereas Christ's Church, in stead of many rites and signs, of which the ^ewish
religion consisted: A Chris^o acceperit paucam, says he, eademque factio
facillima, intellectu augustissima, observatione ^astissima.

The Church has received of Christ but a few; and those most easy to be done,
majesticall for contemplation, chaste and undefiled in observation.

Quid haec ad insulsas Caerimoniarum nugas? Quid ad superstitionem plusquam
Iudalcam? Quid ad Philaricam tyrannidem quae excrucia^ miseras conscient^as?
Quid ad tot Idolatriae portenta?

What are these to the trifles of vnfavoury Ceremonies? To superstition more
then Judicial? To their divelish tyranny in tormenting wretched consciences?
Nay, what are they to the prodigious monsters of Popish Idolatry?

Whereupon he concludes: Non esse Caeremoniarum multitudine o^erandum
Ecclesiam: Christ^ Church may not be overwhelmed with an Ocean Sea of
Ceremonies.

It must ^lye the supers^uous furniture of pompous ^ites, and Papal Pageants,
devised only to astonish simple people, to ravish their eyes, and minds, and
to amaze them with admiration.

Now indeed the original cause of most of our superstitious Ceremonies, is
that Popish opinion; that Christ's Church has yet Priests Sacrifices and altars.

Whereas in truth Christ was sent of God to be the last Priest, which should
offer the last Sacrifice, upon the last altar, that ever the world should have.

He had; says Paul, Hebr. 7. Aparobaton jerosun^^; a Pries^hood which could
not pass or be resign^d to any other: He was not to have any successor, being
a Priest forever after the order of Melchisedeck.

Having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but made like unto the
Son of God abides a Priest continually.

Not made as the sons of Aaron were after the law of a carnal commandment;
but after the power of an endless life; says he, in the 16. verse. For they
being mortal men could not otherwise continue but by their lineall succeeding
of their dying fathers one after another till the passion of Christ.

After whose Sacrifice offered on the Cross, which was the conclusion and
consummation of all Sacrifices: the whole Ceremonial Law, Mosaicall
Sacrifices, and Priesthood, were to end, with the beautiful Temple, and altar
therein.

Only the Sacrifice of prayer, of praise, and thanksgiving, which every
faithful man and woman must offer to God upon the most holy altar Christ, is
left to the Church.

So Ireneus calls him, lib. 4. Altar nostr^m Christus, Christ is our altar. And
Epiphanius says, Christus est Victima, Sacerdos, altar, Deus and homo, omnia
in omnibus pronobis factus: Christ is the Sacrifice, the Priest, the altar,
both God and man, made all in all for our sakes.

To revive therefore and raise up again I^wish types and figures long since
dead and buried; in bringing in altars in stead of Tables, Priests in stead of
Ministers; propitiatory Sacrifices in stead of Sacraments. It is not
Antichristian p^esump^ion, and sacrilegious impiety, robbing Christ of his
honor, and us of our salvation?

What is it else but an apostasy? a public protestation to renounce the only
sacrifice, and the only sacrificer Christ Jesus.

It is the reiteration, says a learned writer, of the expiatory sacrifice
offered by Christ upon the altar of the cross, and the surrogation of an
vpstart Priest, for Christ the eternal Sacrificer, and Priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedeck.

The ordinary Gloss says well. Externi ritus and ceremoniae Legis, quia
fuerunt vmbra Christi tum venturi, and mysteriorum, ideo adveniente veritate
Evangelica, illicita facta sunt, and evanuerunt: The external rites and
Ceremonies of the Law, because they were shadows of Christ to come, and of his
mysteries; therefore the truth of the Gospel being once come, they are made
unlawful, and have vanished out of sight.

They ought not then to be patterns or presidents for Christians to follow
since the coming of Christ who has accomplished all.

And the renewing of them derog^teth much from Christ's sovereign sacrifice,
for it implies imperfection in the same, As St. Paul proves, by the legal
sacrifices offered so often because they were imperfect.

Origin writes thus in his Treatise on Matthew, veniente Principe Sacerdotum,
the Prince of Priests being come, the Priest in figure ceased. The temple made
of stones is destroyed to give place to the Temple made of lively stones.
Effossum est altar quod erat Deorsum: The altar below on Earth was broken
down because the heavenly altar had appeared.

What have we then to do with them if they be past and gone? Surely nothing.
True Christians ever since their Lords death, have left them both Priests and
altars to Jews and Gentiles.

But the Whore of Babylons bastardly brood, doting upon their Mothers beauty,
that painted Harlot the Church of Rome, have labored to restore her all her
robes and jewels again: especially her looking glass the Mass, in which she
may behold all her bravery.

For they despising the plain simplicity and modest attire of that grave
matron Christ's holy spouse have turned her of^icers all out of doors withal
her household stuff, her Tables, her cups, her books, her communions, the very
names of her Ministers, and such like words used by the holy Ghost through the
new T^stam^nt.

In stead whereof the words Priest, and altar, ar^ taken up by them; because
without Priest no S^crifice can be offered, without Pri^st and Sacrifice there
is no use of an Altar: and without all thr^e, Pri^st, Sacrifice, and altar,
there can b^ no M^sse.

But the Mass^ coming in b^ings in with it an inunda^ion of Ceremonies,
cross^s, and Crucifixes, and Challices, and Imag^s, Copes, and Candlesticks,
and Tapers, and Baso^s, and a thousand such Trin^ke^s, which attend upon the
Mass: All which we have se^ne in this church since the Communion table was
turned to an Altar.

Yet indeed it is no altar, that is but a nickname, it is wrongfully so called.
For if it be an altar there must needs be a Sacrifice offered by a Priest to
God; but in the communion nothing is offered to God but prayers, but praise and
thanksgiving, which the hearts and lips of all faithful communicants offer to
God by their Mediator Christ.

They lay them not on a Table, they lay not their thanks, they lay not their
prayers upon an al^ar, either of wood, or stone; as the Aaronicall Priests,
laid their burnt offerings and incense.

We set indeed the bread and wine upon the table, besigning them to a
Sacramental use by the consecration of Gods holy word: we do not offer them
to God, but God offers them, and gives them to us, and with them his sonn^
Christ, if we be faithful and worthy receivers.

To such they are indeed and in truth spiritually, and Sacramentally, the very
body and blood of Christ, then which more holy things the whole world affords
not.

But if it be an Altar as Mass Priests and our Priests use to call it; and
the body and blood of Christ a Sacrifice to God offered thereon, then is the
Altar better, and more holy then the body of Christ, for it sanctifies it.

Mark this, if the table whether wood or stone be an altar, it is better then
the body of Christ, and holier, (which to say or think is horrible blasphemy)
it is holier I say, because it sanctifies Christ's body and blood if it be an
altar^

For without cont^adiction says the Apostle, Heb. 7, 7. v, The less is
blessed of the better, proving thereby that Melchised^ck was a better man then
Abraham, and we know that to bless is to consecrate or sanctify.

So says our Savior in the 23. of Matthew. 3. v. reprooving the Phari^ees, who
taught, whosoever shall swear by the altar it is nothing, but whosoever shall
swear by the gift, that is the sacrifice upon the altar, he is guilty. Ye
fools and blind, whether is greater the gift or the altar that sanctifies the
gift. So say I to such fond and ignorant teachers, who call themselves Priests
and the Table an altar.

Y^ blind popish Priests understand ye not, that by erecting an altar ye
advance it above the body of Christ, ye make it better then Ch^ists body, by
making it a sacrifice sanctified by the altar^

And I am verily persuaded that some there are, who esteem more of it then
they do of Christ's body.

For I have seen, I have seen I say the Priest (so will he needs be called)
take up the body and blood after consecration, and holding them in his hands,
make a low leg to the altar; and before he set them down again bow
himself devoutly and wo^ship the altar.

He yielded no reverence at all to Christ's body, neither when he held it in his
own, nor when he had delivered it, into the receivers hands^

Wh^^ is it to prefer a ston^ or a piece of wood before ^he body of Christ if
this be not, to bow to his altar, and not to his body, to make many legs to the
Kings chair, and none to the King himself.

And this is evident by their daily practice, for the altar is ev^ry day
worshipped with ducking to it, though there be no Communion, nor any man there;
Christ's body is not worshipped with ducking, no not at the Communion: Is it not
worse then Popery?

But the Fathers many times call it an Altar. It is true, for the mystery of
iniquity began betime to work by small beginnings lurking in words.

Sacerdotes, altaria, Priests, and altars, and rejecting them which Gods spirit
had taught, and the Apostles ever used, Ministros and Mensas, Ministers and
Tables, that way might be made for Antichrist and his abominable sacrifice of
the Mass.

Yet the Fathers worshipped not their altars: Tertullian^ says Bellarmine was
the first that mentions geniculation, that is ducking to Altars, which he
learned of his Master Montanus, the first founder of crossings, and duckings,
and many other Ceremonial fooleries, to which he annexed the gift of the holy
Ghost.

For Tertullian, says Chemnitius, was the author, omnium fere Ceremoniarum
Papisticarum, in a manner of all Popish Ceremonies.

Whereupon arose an opinion that Montanus the her^tick was the holy Ghost; that
he claimed the name, virtue, and dignity of the holy Ghost, which is not
credible so learned a Doctor as Tertullian could believe.

But he ascribed as the Papists do, such po^er and holiness to the C^remonies
which Montanus had devised, that without them none could be partake^s of the
holy Ghost.

As if the holy Ghost were annexed to Ceremonies, included in Ceremonies,
collated by Ceremonies.

Whereupon says Bugenhagius a learned German, The Church of Rome condemned
Montanus for an heretic, and yet nevertheless retained his heresies.

Which, says he, hereby is manifest, in that the books which defend his
heresies are preserved, but the works of those Fathers which confuted them are
lost.

Montanus therefore was the first Altar worshipper, and they that now imitate
him in ducking to Altars are little better then heretical Montanists.

But give me leave I pray you to ask this question, why bow you not the knee
to the font also, it being Lavacrum regenerationis, the laver of regeneration,
as honorable, and a more necessary Sacrament.

For without Baptism none can be saved, as some teach; but many that are
baptized dye, before they come to the years of discretion, and probation, that
they may be fit to receive the Communion, yet we see none make legs to the
Font.

Why do they not? Christ is as much present there and as really, and the Font
is an Altar as well as the Table, and so it was termed in the primitive Church
by Prudentius, who lived 1300. years ago.

Who speaking of a combat between Chastity and Lust, after Chastity had
killed Lust.

Abolens Baptismate labem.
Catholico in Templo divini Fontis ad Aram
Consecrat gladium: (says he) Having washed away her spots in Baptism she
consecrates her Sword, wherewith she slew her enemies, to the Catholic Church,
and hangs it up, Fontis ad Aram, at the Altar of the Font. Lo here the Font
also is called an Altar.

Therefore honor ye the Font as well as the Table, with one and the same
worship of bowing the knee to it, or else you are Heretics, affording more
holiness and more dignity to one Altar, and to one Sacrament, then to the
other.

For either your worship is religious, or civil; if it be civil, ye are
absurd idiots in honoring stocks and stones, more then any poor man who is
the image of God; for who will lowt too low to a beggar as to sweep the ground
with his beard, if it be not very short.

If it be religious, you are more absurd in preferring the memory of Christ's
body and blood, before the whole Trinity: Seeing you are baptized in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and not in the Name of
Christ alone.

The Lords Table therefore and the Font they are Altars both alike, as an apple
and an egg are onions both alike; that is neither of them properly and truly,
though they have a kind of resemblance: and being both alike, and of equal
worthiness, why are they so far put asunder, the whole length of the Church,
one at the head, the other at the foo^e?

Why are they not set in the body of the Church or quire, being the fittest
place to receive the greatest assemblies and most Communicants.

Why is the Altar lifted up to the top of the Sanctuary or Chapel, or the
Font not admitted so much as to the bottom? It is not suffered to stand in the
wonted place behind the quire door, why is one preferred as holier then the
other, being Sacraments of equal dignity.

In St. Peter's Church at Zur^cke the Lords Table and the Font or Baptistery
stood both in one place, as witnesses Hospinian: and so they stood here all
the time of our former Bishops, till the proud Altar mounting aloft, shouldered
the poor Font out of the quire, and ^ossing it from post to pillar thrust it
almost quite out of doors.

Do I say almost? it is out of the Church quite, for one thing is Templum,
another thing is Ecclesia.

Ecclesia is the Church where a congregation of people uses to assemble, to
hear the word preached, which in Latin is Concio, and it signifies not only
the Sermon, but caetum, the multitud^ meeting together to hear Gods word.

And the Preacher is called Ecclesiastes, or Concionator, derived from the same
words.

Whereupon I conclude that where no congregation uses to meet to hear
Sermons, that place is no Church; and cons^quently the Font being set in no
place of assembly, it is not in the Church: I confess it is, in Templo, in
part of this vast fabrike, but there it is where the people never meet to hear
Gods word preached, no more then they do in the steep^^ where the bells hang.

For this cause S. Bernard reprehended in his time, Templorum immensas
altitudines, et immoderatas longitudines; the excessive height, and immoderate
lengths of Temples.

Why so? because he misliked worldly magnificence in the spiritual service of
God, who dwells not in Temples made with hands.

Also, because he would not have the Minister and people sundred, nor
scattered abroad in spacious rooms, but joined together as near as might be.
Who standing in the midst, vulgi stante corona, the people all about him, round
in a ring, he may better be heard, and they edified.

For all things in the Church, ought to be done to edification, says Paul,
which then is best, when the Minister abides with the people, or they draw
near to him: He may not run away in a Cope, as far as he can get him from
the congregation.

But what a trick is this which our newfangled Ceremony-mongers have taken up
of late, to go in a Cope to the Altar, to say two or three prayers after the
Sermon? why use they this ceremony, not mentioned in the Communion book or
Canons?

Why suffer they not the Preacher to dismiss the congregation with the
blessing of Gods peace as was wont to be done, and our last Bishop esteemed to
be best?

How dare ^hey put off, and put on a Cope so often in one service, not only to
pray, but to read the Epistle and Gospel, and ten commandments at the Altar
only, and no other place where the Letany and other service is read, there
being no such thing appointed in the Book of Common prayer? And the Canons
according to the advertisements published in the seventh year of Queen
Elizabeth, commanding no Copes to be used, but Surplices, when all other
Prayers are said at the Communion Table; save only at the administration of
the holy Communion.

Why do they these things contrary to law, and never done in our Church before
since the Mass was banished?

Is it because they are enamoured with Copes? do they dote upon Copes?

Or are Psalms and Chapters read in the body of the Church not for good
Gospel, nor so worthy to be coped?

Or is there so near affinity between Copes and Altars, are they so married
together that they can not be parted?

Or think they their prayers and other service more holy in such Priestly
vestments, in sancto sanctorum, in that most holy place so devoutly duckt unto,
by our foolish, bewitched, and besotted Galathians.

Again, why sing they the Nicen Creed in a Cope at the Altar, the book
appointing it to be said as the Apostles Creed is said, not sung.

Why make they the people to stand up when it is sung, that ceremony of
standing being forbidden by law, by which you that stand, (mark what I say)
you that stand are to be punished for obeying such unlawful commands, as I
mean to prove when time shall serve?

Lastly, why forbid they singing of Psalms in such a tune, as all the people
may sing with them, and praise God together, before and after Sermons, as by
authority is allowed, and heretofore has been practiced both here and in all
reformed Churches.

How dare they in stead of Psalms, appoint Anthems, (little better then
profane Ballads some of them) I say, so many Anthems to be sung, which none of
the people understand, nor all the singers themselves, which the Preface to the
Communion book, and the Queens Injunctions, will have cut off, because the
people is not edified by them?

It is for spite they ^eare to Geneva, which all papists hate, or for the love
of Rome, which because they cannot imitate in having Latin service, yet they
will come as near it as they can, in having service in English so said and
sung, that few or none can understand the same? I blame not the singers, most
of which mislike these profane innouations, though they be forced to follow
them?

Their guides are in fault, blind guides, members of our Church, rotten
members I doubt, of higher degree; to whom all men and women are rank puritans
and schismatiks, to be thrust out and expeld, if they refuse to dance after
their fantastical pipe in every idle ceremony.

These cry with the Jews, Templum Domini, Templum Domini: The Church of God,
the service of God; when indeed their whole service is little else then
superstitious vanity.

What is it but hypocritical and Pharisaicall devotion? Under the color of
long prayer, morning, and evening, and Midday, they devour, what devour they?
Not poor widows houses, but rich benifices, whole towns and villages.

For seldom shall you see a stout ceremony-monger, but the same will also be a
notorious Non-resident, a very Tot-Quot; not content with one or two little
ones, but four or five great preferments and dignities.

And still he aspireth and climeth higher, never thinking himself sufficiently
rewarded for his great learning, and service of God, in sitting at Church three
times a day, to hear men Pipe, and chaunt, and chaunt himself where he
lists.

A base employment, prohibited by Pope Gregory himself; who speaking de cantu
Ecclesiastico, has these words.

Prohibitum est ne quis in Ecclesia cantet, nisi inferiores ordines, vtpote
Subdiacont; Diaconi vero lectioni and praedicationi incumbant. It is forbidden,
says the Pope, that any chaunt in Churches, but men of mean degree, none
above Subdeacons; but Ministers or Deacons, must apply themselves to reading
and preaching; for that makes most for the peoples edification, to which all
must be done.

And when we take orders of the Bishops, charge is given to read, and preach
Gods word, not to sing: any lewd Layman can do that, without laying on of a
Bishops hands, without consecration.

St. Paul says, I was not sent to baptize (much less to sing in a quire) but
to preach. And woe to me, says he, if I preach not the Gospel: he says not,
woe to me, if I observe not the canonical hours of devotion in singing.

This makes me call to remembrance, a strange speech little better then
blasphemy, uttered lately by a young man, in the presence of his Lord, and many
learned men.

I had rather go forty miles to a good service, then two miles to a Sermon.
(Os durum.)

And what meant he by a good service? his meaning was manifest; where goodly
Babylinish robes were worn, imbroydered with images.

Where he might bear a delicate noise of singers, with Shakebuts, and Cornets,
and Organs, and if it were possible, all kind of Music, used at the
dedication of Nabuchodonosors golden Image.

To such a dainty service of heavenly Harmony, the singular devotion, and hot
zeal of this holy man, would carry him over hills and dales, through fire and
water, rather forty miles, then two miles to a Sermon.

How think you? was not this a profane, witless, graceless, Antichristian
saying, which prefers piping, and singing before Gods ordinance of preaching.

Yet learned Aretius, that famous Helvetian Divine, sticks not to say: In
Papatu, cantus Ecclesiastiasticus omnia pessundat, adeo ut pro do^trina,
perpetua regnet Musica. In the Popes Kingdom Church chaunting marrs all,
insomuch as in stead of the perpetual sounding of Gods holy word, in the
hearts of the faithful, the sound of musical melody, rings in their ears,
and reigns in their minds, they are so tickled nay ra^ished with the delight
thereof.

But what say you by him who accusing our fathers, not long since said when
they had banished Popery by taking away the Mass, that they took away all
religion, and the whole service of God; they called it a reformation, says he,
but it was indeed a d^formation, whereby Gods service was disordered and marred.

But now the case is altered, for of late years, Religion has been begun,
prettily well to be restored again in this Church: and by the boldness of
resolute and courageous Officers, way is made for reducing of the Mass.

For before we had Ministers, as the Scripture calls them, we had Communion
tables, we had Sacraments: but now we have Priests, and Sacrifices and
Altars, with much Altar-furniture, and many Massing implements. Nay what want
we? have not all Religion againe^

For if Religion consist in Altar-ducking, Cope-wearing, Organ playing, piping
and singing,

Crossing of cushions, and kissing of clouts, often starting up, and squatting
down, nodding of heads, and whirling about, till their noses stand Eastward,

Setting Basins on the Altar, Candl^sticks and C^ucifixes; burning
Waxe-candles, in excessive number, when and where there is no use of Lights.

And that which is wo^st of all, guilding of Angels, and garnishing of Images,
and setting them up aloft; whereas Lactantius says procul dubio ibi nulla est
religio vbi sunt Simulacra: without doubt there is no religion in that Church,
where Images are placed.

If I say Religion consists in these and such like superstitious v^^ities,
ceremonial ^o^l^^i^s, ^pish ^oyes, and popish trinckets, we ha^ nev^r mo^e
Religion then now.

And though our Liturgi^ be not in ^atine, yet order is taken by confusedness^
of voices some squ^aking, some bleating some roa^ing and thandering with a
multi^ude of melodiou^ instruments, that the greatest part of ^h^ s^rvice, is
no better understood, then if it were in H^brew or Irish.

Nay the Sacrament it self is turned well near into a theatricall stage play,
that when men's minds should be occupied about h^^venly meditations, of Ch^ist^
bi^ter death and p^ssi^n, of their own sins, of faith and repentance, o^ the
joys of heaven, and ^he ^orments of hell: at that very season, very
unseasonably, their ears are poss^st wi^h pleas^nt tunes, and their eyes fed
with pompous sp^ctacles, of gliste^ing pictures, and histrionicall gestures,
represen^ing unto us Apollo'^ solemnities in his Temple at Delos, which the
Po^t describes in his fourth of his AEneids.

Austauratq, choros, mistique Altaria circum,
Cretesque Dryopesque fremunt pictique Agathyrsi.
Our young APOLLO repaireth the quire, and sets it out gaily, with str^nge
Babylonish ornaments, the hallowed Pri^sts dance about the altar, making pretty
sp^rt, and fine pastime, with ^rippings, and turnings, and crossi^gs, and
crouchings; while Cretes, Dryopesque ^ic^ique Agathyrsi, Cho^ist^rs, and
singing men, an^ p^rti-colou^ed Cope wea^e^s, fremunt, they sh^ut and cry, and
m^ke most sweet Apollinian harmony.

Are these ceremonies fit for the holy Communion? Do this, says Christ, in
remembrance of me.

Can these paltry toys bring to our memory Christ and his bloodshedding?

Did Christ minister the S^crament in such man^ner to his Discipl^s at his last
Supper?

Was there an alt^r in the chamber where he supt? Did Christ put on a Cope
laden with imag^s? Or did he change his garments, says Hamingius.

Apage ineptias, fie upon fopperies, and superstitious vanities, I hate them.

A decent Cope is commanded by our canons to be used sometim^s, only at the
Communion.

Whether a stately Cope, a sump^uous Cope, a Cope imbroydered with Idols, of
silver, gold, and pearl: a mock-Cope, a scornful Cope, used a long time at
Mass and Ma^-gam^s, as some of ours were^ Whether I say such a Cope, be a
decent cope, fit for the Lords table judge ye belov^d.

And if you condemn them, as you cannot choose if you be good Christians, how
d^re ye communicate with us in our sup^^stitious vanities.

Have you not Churches at home in your own Parishes not yet polluted wi^h
Idols, and Communion Tables not yet changed into altars?

Where you may receive with comfort the holy Communion, (without such
All-a-flantara) in plain and simple m^nner, as our Savior ordained, and the
primi^ive church practiced, till Antichrist arose, and mightily prevailed
against the truth.

St^y at home in the name of God, till things be amended, and reduced to the
state and form they were in our less ceremonious, and more preaching Bishops
time.

Duck no more to our altar when you come in and go out: I assure it is an
Idol, a damnable Idol, as it is used.

Remember Gods commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self, the likeness of
any thing in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, thou shall not bow d^wne to
them, nor worship them: How dare you disobey God, nay mock God, as the Priest
does, who stands at the altar in a Cop^, and there reads with a loud voice,
Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them; and as soon as he has
done reading, as when he began to read, he turns him about, bows down
again and wo^ships the altar.

Is not this derision of God and mockery? Be not deceived, says Paul, Theos ou
mucterizetai, God is not, God will not be mocked.

Believe not those Balaams, which lay stumbling blocks in your way, to make you
fall into spiritual fornication, telling you, when you bow to the Alt^r, you
worship God, not the Altar, for so answer all popish and heathenish Idolaters.

Tell me this? Is not that woman a Whore, who yields her body to an adulterer:
though she say her mind is chaste, she ke^pes her heart true to her husband.

So say J, They are Whores, and Whoremongers, they commit spiritual
fornication, who bow their bodies, before that Idol the Altar; notwithstanding
they say, their minds are cle^ne, they lift up their hearts to heaven.

God appointed altars to be set up by King Solomon, in his Temple at Jerusalem:
They were true Altars, types and figures o^ Christ to come, as the Pri^sts and
Sacrifices were: yet Gods people bowed not to them, nor worshipped them.

No nor the Arc of the Covenant, a symbolicall sign of Gods perpetual
presence; which was so sacred, that none but consecrated hands might touch it,
no ^or the cart that carried it; they might not look into it, as the men of
Bethshemis did, of whom 50. thousand dyed presently for that trespass.

David indeed danced before it, on the way as it came from the house of Obed
Edom, and by consequence he turned his back toward it, (unless he leapt
backward all the way in hi^ dance,) we read not that he bowed his body to it,
or duckt so low, as to touch the ground with his nose.

How dare ye then bow down and worship an Altar, a counterfeit Altar, the
Image of an Altar, and no better.

Why fear you to turn your backs to the Altar? Are the backs of Christian
men and women more profane then the backs of the Jews, that by no mea^es
they may sit, or stand, or kneel, with their backs Eastward?

But they must turn about, and look on the Al^tar when they pray, or hear
the Gospel, or rehearse the articles of their faith.

Ye foolish Galathians, what Iannes, and Iambres, Egyptian Sorcerers have
bewitched you, that you should follow so readily such vain superstitions and
begge^ly rudim^nts.

Ye may not behold altars, ascribing holiness to them: you must look up to
God and his Son Christ when you pray.

The I^w^s had only two altars, they we^e figures of Christ to come: those
sh^dowes are p^st and gone: the alt^rs are demolished: you may not m^ke new to
gaze upon superstitiously, but you must look to your Mak^r.

As God himself expressly commands in the 17. chap of the P^ophecy of Esaias,
7. v. Read i^. (...) that day shall a man look to his Maker, and his eyes
shall have respect to the holy one of Israel.

An^ he shall no^ look to the altars, the works of his hands, neither shall
he respect that which his fingers have made, either groves or Images, ^apers
or candl^sticks.

Why will y^ be Th^omachoi, fighters against God in r^sisting his will, and
doing the thing he^ so earn^s^ly ^o^bids.

God will wound the hairy s^alpe, says David, of him that continu^th in his
wickedness. Take heed of Gods veng^^nce, if you continue in your folly, which
I pray G^d give you grace to leave.

H^^rken wh^t Peter Martyr says, that excellent Divi^e, dispu^ing against
Winchester. Si vel Angelus de coelo nos pro vocare velit ad adora^da vel
Sacramenta, vel altaria, vel h^norem divin^m rebu^ creatis exhib^ndum, anath^ma
sit. If an Angel from heaven would provoke unto a^o^e e^ther Sacrament or
altar, or any oth^^ ^r^ature^ let him be acc^^sed.

And it is mos^ c^r^aine that ^v^^y crea^u^e that is bowed unto in respect of
any holin^ss^ therein ^or Religions sake, that religious worship makes it an
Idol: of which sort the altar is one, a notable one, religiously adored in
this church every day.

Therefore le^rned Chemni^i^s, in treati^g of Images, and reckoning up all
manner of Idols, he n^mes altaria, ^xpr^sly altars among the same.

Again, I do not think; says Peter Martyr, that any of the Fathers were
pollut^d with so gross Idolatry, as to bow their bodies before alt^rs,
especially when there is no Communion, ^s is daily d^ne at Dorham, not to the
pl^ce, b^t to the very st^ne, when they stand close by the altar.

But if at any time, s^ith he, they shall be discovered to have bin such (alt^r
worshippers) let none o^ us be led by their books or examples, vt a j^sta
observantia divinae legis aberret, to decline from ^h^ str^ct observation of
G^ds law, which peremptorily fo^biddeth the making of Idols, and bowing to them.

But the Lords table is no Idol, no nor altar, if it be the Lords board, as
the Communion book rightly names it.

For which Stephen Gardener sco^fingly accuses us, that we have no altars,
but Tables, or Boords, ad comedendum and bibendum, to eat and drink at.

To which Peter Martyr answers very well: Quid opus est altar^, vbi nec ignis
ardeat, nec victimae caedan^ur, what use is there of an altar, where no fire
burns, ^or beasts are slain for sacrifice:

Show me either out of the words of C^rst, or the Apostles doctrine, any
commandment for the erecting of altars.

We have tables, as St. Paul in his Epistles calls them, who knew well enough,
that Christ did institute the mystery of the Eucharist, at his last Supper, not
an altar, but a table.

There he supt, there he brake bread, and we know, men use to sup, and
break bread, not upon altars, but at tables.

Origin and Arnobius testify, that the Gentiles in their time, 1400. years
since, made the same objection against Christians, that they had not altars.

If therefore there were none in the primitive Church, which was most pure; why
should we borrow them now of the corrupt Popish Church?

But what say you? says one of our Ceremony-masters, are not Altars mentioned
in the new Testament, we have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat
which serve the Tabernacle, Heb. 13.

And in the 6. of the Revel. 9. v. I saw under the altar the souls of them
that were slain for the word of God. Lo^ here altars are plainly named. Is not
this a substantial proof, that our Church now has Altars?

O learned hea^! Thinks he indeed that all the Martyrs souls, which since
Christ's time have suffered, for the testimony of Jesus, are lodged so coldly
under an altar stone; wailing and crying, some of them sixteen hundred years,
How long Lord, how long will thou avenge our blood? and yet poor souls there
must abide till doomes day. A damnable heresy.

I would feign learn of such a dreaming Divine, there being so many Altars in
the Christian world, under which of them lie so many millions o^ souls: for St.
John spe^k^s but of one Altar, I saw under the Altar. I p^ay you is not this
Altar Christ the Altar of the faithful, E^a 56.

So it is expounded by all learned Divines, both Papists and Protestan^s. And
among the rest, by one whose authority the proud^st al^ar worsh^pp^r dare not
gainsay: I mean the King, Theologus Rex^ that divine Prince King James, who in
his paraph^as^ on the Revelation, has these words, interpreting the ^ext. I
saw under the Altar the souls of the Ma^t^rs, which cyred with a loud voice,
how long will thou d^lay o Lord, since thou art holy and tru^ to revenge our
blood.

For persecution it makes so great a ^umb^r of Martyrs, that the souls lying
under the Altar, to wit in the safeguard of Jesus Christ, (who is the only
Altar, wher^upon, and by whom it is only lawful for us to offer the sacrifice
of hearts and lips, to wit, our humble prayers to God the Father.)

They did pray, and their blood did cry to heaven, and crave at the hands of
their Father a just revenge of their ^orments upon the wicked.

Then white robes were given to every one of them: Which, says he, ought to
be a wonderful comfort to all the Church militant.

Since by this they be assured, that the souls of the Martyrs, so soon as
their bodies are killed shall immediately be rewarded, with bright glory in
heav^n, not going into any other place by the way, which is ^ignifi^d by the
white robes.

Thus for his Majesty's royal pen: by whom we are taught, that Christ is our
one and only Altar, and that the souls of the Saints, being presently
rewarded with glory in heay^n, and not going to any other pl^ce by the way,
none of them are under our Al^ar (though it be a brave one) for it is ^ut of
their way to heaven from ^he place where they ^uffered Martyrdom.

As for that plac^, Hebr. 13. W^ have an Altar^ etc. S^. Paul himself ^xpoun^s
^^ ^^^^rwards in ^he ^5. v ^o be Christ, saying, by him therefore let us offer
the sacr^fice of praise to God continually, that is, the f^uit of ou^ lips
giving thanks to his name.

Which, says Aquinas^ cannot be understood of a ma^eriall ^ltar in the Church,
and whosoever thinks it to be so, he is therein more popish, then Friar Thomas
himself.

But now I come to their maine argument, which they think qui^e overthrowes
all that I have said concerning Altars and Ceremonies.

The Kings Chapel, say they, has an Altar, and all ^urniture belonging
thereunto: Da^e you disallow in ours, what the King has in his? It is little
better then treason, as one ^aid^

^ answer, It was never out of the Kings Chapel, (at least the name of an
altar) since the first reformation in King Edwards time, if it had, I suppose
it had never come in again^, in his r^ligio^s successors reign.

B^t it h^th bin by Law ^j^cted out of this Church, and changed into ^ sacred
Table, ^ieran trapezan, as Chrysostom calls it, I marvel therefore, what
lawless man could restore it without law.

Again, what have we to do with imitation of the court? May we be so saw^y,
as to imitate the King in all things? Is it not treason? Is it not rebellion so
to do^

What bold presumption is this in a Priest or Prelate to take upon him to be
like the King without his leave, and not to suffer for his M^j^sty to have
something extraordinary, above the vulgar sort in magnificence and state.

The King comm^nds us to obey his L^wes, not imitate his Chapel contrary to
his laws, which bind Cathedral Churches as well as the rest; none are
exempted, none can be dispenst withal.

The law is this, The Communion Table, not Altar, shall stand in the body of
the Church, or Chancell, where morning and evening prayer be appointed to be
said, and the Minister shall stand at the north side of the Table.

Therefore our Communion table must stand as it had wont to do, in the midst
of the quire: not at the east end, as far as is possible from the people,
where no part at all of evening prayer is ever said^ and but a piece of the
morning, and that never till of late.

Neither must the table be placed along from north to south, as the Altar is
se^, but from E^st to W^st as the custom is of all reformed Churches:
otherwise, the Minister cannot stand at the north side, there being neither
side toward the North.

And I trow there are but two ^^des of a long table^ and two ends: making it
square, and then it will have four sides, and no end, or four ends, and no
side, at which any Minister can stand to celebrate.

I confess, it is not ma^eriall, which way a man turn his face, when he
ministers and prays, if it be left as a thing in^iffer^nt, without
superstition.

As St. Augustine saith^ Cum quis quaerit orare, collocat membra ^icut ei
occurrit: when any man goes about to pr^y ^e places his body, as occasion
serves.

And St. Paul exhorte^h every man to lift up pure hands, whether toward the
East, or West, it makes no matter.

Yet indeed, it is more dangerous to pray toward the east, because the
idolatrous Heathen which worshipped the Sun rising, did so.

And it was the custom of the Jews, to pray westward, le^t they should be
entised, to worship the Orien^all Sun, as the Heathen did.

Which God himself in the 8 cha^p. of Ezekiel. 16. v. reckons among the
abominatio^s of the idolatrous Israelites, who turning their backs toward the
Tem^le, worshipped the Sun toward the East.

But the Jews, says Bellarmine which served the Lord prayed toward the West:
Therefore Christians must turn them toward the E^st.

A bold reason: The Jews did well in avoiding all occasion of Idolatry, unto
which the vulgar sort is too prone: as appears by the people of this place,
how soon learned they to bow down to the Altar, and worship it! The Jews I say
did well, therefore may Christians do ill, in imitating the idolatrous
Gentil^s, in that foolish, popish, superstitious observatio^, of turning their
faces eastward when they pray.

And why may we not imitate the Jews, in the t^ing they did w^ll, the reason
of their so doing being not ceremonial, but moral?

The ceremonial law is indeed abrogated, therefore we may not retain it; but
the moral law is still in f^rce, binding both Jews and Christians to avoid
Idolat^y.

But see the shamelessness of a do^ing Jesuit: he is content we should imitate
the Jews in their ceremonies, long since disanulled and ended, in having
Alta^s, Sacrifices, Priests, priestly vestiments, ointments, incense: But he
will not have us be like the Jews, in casting Idols out of our Churches, and
in shunning all occasions of idol^try, by ^urning our backs on the East, when
we pray as they did.

Our good Princes, and learned Bishops, when they b^gan to reform the Church
of England, were careful that we should be like the Jews rather in this
point, then the idolatrous Papists, or Gentiles.

And therefore they ordained by Law, that the Communion Table should not stand
Altar-wise, the two ends looking to the South and North, as of purpose Altars
were set in Popery, that the Mass priest might stand on the West side, with
his face toward the East, and his back to the people.

But contrariwise, they appointed the table to be placed in the midst of the
Church, to be moveable, fastened neither to wall, nor floor, the ends standing
from East to West, as I said before.

And they precisely enjoined the Minister to stand at the celebration of the
Lords Supper, on the north side of the Table, to the intent they should not be
like superstitious shavelings.

Which makes me to wonder at the presumptuous ^oldn^s of him, or the^, which
immediately after the death of our last learned Bishop, before we had another,
about 11. years ^goe, took upon him (I know not by what authority) to alter
the situation of the Communion table, from the old manner of standing which it
had kept in all Bishops times, from the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign,
save only when ^he Rebels poss^st this church^ and sang Mass therein^ The
Lords table J say eleven years ago was turned into an altar, and so placed,
that the Minister cannot stand to do his office on the north side, as the law
expressly charge him to do, because there is no side of the table st^nding
Northw^rd.

He J say that contrary to law durst do this, in imitation of Papists and
Rebels, deserves he not to be sharply c^nsured? Why do I say durst he do it?

Non audet s^ygi^s Pluto tentare quod aude^
E^frenis Monachus.
The Devil in hell dare not attempt more then an
vnr^ly Monk or Friar dare do.
A Devil and a Friar will adventure strangely: J have heard of a Devil that
preached, I have heard of a Friar that preached in a rope; but J never heard of
either Devil or Friar, that preached in a Cape.

But why is the Communion table set in the E^st end of the Church, and not in
the West end, or middle rather; whereas Socrates says, in his 5 book, 21.
chap. that in a Temple at Antioch, the Altar was placed at the west end.

And Gentean Herv^t, a popish writer, describing the fashion of the Greek
Church a^ this time, says, In ^raecorum Templis, vnicum est Altar, idque in
medio Choro: The Graecians have but one Altar in a Church, and that in the
middle of the Quire.

Therefore neither the Graecians, nor the people of Antioch, looked eastward,
but rather westward when they prayed.

Bi^ius also and Bawnius say, that because the Manichees which did worship the
Sun prayed toward the East, L^o the first ordained, that to discern
Catholics from He^etickt, Ad Occiden^em conver^i Deum colerent: The Catholik^
should worship toward the W^st.

Afterward by the constitution of P^p^ Vigiliu^, it was ordain^d, that the
Minister s^an^ing at the Al^ar should pray toward the West.

It came th^^efore ^^om Antichrist to r^straine Christian liberty, by
comman^ing will-w^^ship, the doctrine of men, without any warrant out of Gods
word.

Again Necromancers and Sorcerers turn their faces to the E^st, when they act
their enchan^ments: and it li^^l^ b^comes Christians to follow Wi^ches, and
Co^jurers, in their supe^stitious, and divellish devotions, by preferring E^st
before West.

It being a Ceremony of all other most fooli^h, heretical, Papisticall,
Paganicall, and Magical.

Let us therefore in the name of God, hate with the Prophet David, the
abomi^ations and superstitious vanities.

If we hate them not, God will hate us, and abhor our festivities with all
the pomp and glory of our Church.

As he told the Israelites in the fifth of Amos, v. 21. I hate and abhor your
feast days. I will not smell your solemn assemblies. Take away from me the
noise of thy songs, I will not hear the melody of thy instruments: f^r ye have
born the Tabernacle of Molock, and Chiun your Images, the star of your God
which you made to your selves.

Such Molocks, such Chiun^, such Images and stars, some of us here have made
to themselves, lift ^p your eyes, you praised them; set up alo^t, ro^nd this
Church.

Hark then what Christ says to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Revel. 2.

Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works;
else I will come quickly and remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except
thou repent.

This is done, their Candlestick is removed, that precious pearl the Gospel
is taken from the Eph^sians, and in stead thereon. Mahometisme raigns there.

So if w^ rem^mber not from whence we are fallen and do the first works, and
worship our God sincerely, abandoning Idolatrous, and supers^itious vanities,

Our Candlestick will be removed, and the light of Gods truth will be taken
from us.

Then shall we be overwhelmed again, with Antichristian clouds of Egyptian
darkness, which God for his merci^s sake give us grace to avoid.

By repenting, by amending our lives, by forsaking our Idols, and by hating all
manner of superstitious vanities. To God the Father, God the Son, and God the
holy Ghost, three persons in Trinity, one God in unity, be ^scribed all honor,
and glory, all might and majesty, all power and dominion, now and evermore.
Amen.

FINIS.

