THE AFFINITY of the faithful: Being a very Godly and fruitful Sermon,
made upon part of the eight Chapter of the Gospel of Saint Luke.

By Henry Smith.

AT LONDON, Printed by William Hoskins and Henry Chettle, for Nicholas Ling,
and John Busbie. 1591.

Luke 8. 19, 20, 21. Then came to him his mother and his brethren, and could
not come near him for the prease: and it was told him by certain which said;
thy mother and thy brethren stand without and would see thee: but he answered
and said unto them, my mother and my brethren are those which hear the word of
God and do it.
HEre Christ is preaching, a great prease hearing, and his mother and his
friends interrupting, and Christ again withstanding the interruption, with a
comfortable doctrine of his mercies toward them which hear the word of God
and do it. When Christ was about a good work, and many were gathered to hear
him, the devil thought as the Priests and Sadduces did in the fourth of the
Acts; If I let him alone, all the world will follow him, and I shall be like
Rahel without children: therefote devising the likeliest policy to frustrate
and difgrace but one of his Sermons, thereby to make the people more unwilling
to hear him again; As he set Eve upon Adam, and made Jobs wife his
instrument, when he could Genesis 3. 6. Job. 2. 9.
not fit it himself: so he sends Christ his mother, and puts in the
mind of his kinsmen to come unto him, at that instant when he was in this
holy exercise; and call upon him as he was preaching, to come away, and go
with them.

Christ seeing the Serpents dealing, how he had made his mother his tempter,
that all this auditorie might go away empty, and say where they came; We
heard the man which is called Jesus, and he began to preach to us with such
words as though he would carry us to heaven; but in the midst of his Sermon
came his mother and brethren to him, that it might be known what a kinsman
they had, and so soon as he heard that they were come, suddenly he brake off
his Sermon and sl^pt away from us to go and make mercy with them. Christ, I
say* seeing this train laid by Satan to disgrace him as he would do his
mini^^ers, did not leave off speaking, as they thought he would: but as if God
had appointed all this to credit it and renown him; that which was noysed here
to interrupt his doctrine, he takes for an occasion to teach another doctrine,
that there is another conjunction between Christ and the faithful, than
between the mother and the son which are one flesh: and therefore when they
say; Thy mother and thy brethren a^e come to speak with thee, he points to
his hearers and says; These are my mother, and my brethren, which hear the
word of God and do it; as if he should say, I have a mother in deed which
brought me forth, but in respect of these which hear the word of God and do
it, she is like a stepmother, and these are like a natural mother. With this
wise answer he quieted the auditors, and made them hear him better than they
did before: for now they thought with themselves; what man is this which
loves us more than his mother? his mother called him, and yet he would not go
from us: his brethren stay for him, and he makes as if he did not know them,
but says: Who is my mother? Who are my brethren? Thus Christ stood up (as I
ween) in an indignation against Satan, and said; Satan, this sermon was not
begun for thee, neither shall it end for thee: this work was not done for my
mother, neither shall it be left for my mother. Thus he caught the Devil with
his own bait, and made the people more loving and attentive to him, by that
which Satan thought to disgrace him. He was so armed with the spirit, that
let Devil tempt, or the woman tempt him, or Princes tempt him, all is one.

Here are two doubts, the first is, the difference between the Evangelists:
for Mathewe says, that Math. 12. 47. Mark. 3. 31. Luke 8. 10.
one brought this message unto Christ, Mark and Luke attribute it unto more;
Both may stand: for the word which his mother gave of calling him forth was
received of the rest, and so passed amongst many till it came unto Christ; so
that one and many may be said to bring this message, because one may send it
first, and many noise it after.

The second doubt is, because Christ had no brethren, how then they said; Thy
brethren would speak with thee.

You must understand that they which are here called Christ's brethren, were
his Cousins by the Mothers side, that is to say, his Mothers sisters children:
for there were three Mary's, and these three were sisters: Marie the virgin,
and Marie the mother of James, and Marie the wife of Cleophas, whose sons
these were; their names were James and Joseph and Judas and Simon; and they are
called the Lords brethren, because they we^e kin unto him. Therefore note
that in holy Scriptu^es, there be iiij. sorts of brethren; brethren by
nature, so Esau and Jacob are called Genesis 25. 25
brethren, because they had one father and one mother; Brethren by Nation, so
all the Jews are called brethren, because they were of one Deuteronomy. 15. 22.
country; Brethren by affinity, so all are called brethren which were of one
family, and so Abraham cal^ed Genesis 12. 5.
Lot his brother and Sara his sister, because they were of one line; Brethren
by profession, so all Christians are called brethren, because they are of one
Religion: these were brethren of the third order, that is by affinity,
because they were of one family.

Now when his mother and his brethren were come to see him, it ^s said, that
they could not come near him because of the prease; here were auditors
enough: Christ saw now, that his mother could have no rome to hear him; but
after a while it was low water again. When the shepherd was stricken, the
sheep were scattered; when he preached in the streets, and in the Temples,
and in the fields, then many flocked after him: but when he preached upon the
Cross, then they left him, which said they would never forsake him, then there
was as great a prease to see him die, as there was here to hear him preach;
and many of these which he calls his mother, and his brethren, and his
sister, were his betrayers and accusers, and persecutors; so inconstant we are
in our zeal, more than any thing else. Thus much of their coming to the
doctrine.

Here be two speakers: one says; Thy mother and thy brethren are come to
speak with thee: the other says; These are my mother, and my brethren, which
hear the words of God and do it. The scope of the Evangelist is this, First,
to show that Christ would not hinder his doctrine for mother or brethren or any
kinsmen: then to show that there is a nearer conjunction between Christ and
the faithful, than between the mother and the son. The first is written for
our instruction, and the latter is written for our comfort. Touching the first:
he which teaches us to honor our father and mother, does not teach us here to
contemn father or mother; for it is said, that he was obedient to his parents.
This he showed, Luke. 2. 51
when being found in the Temple among the doctors, he left all to go with his
mother, because she sought him; so he honored her, that he left all for her.
This he showed again at his death, being upon the cross, he was not unmindful
of her: for pointing unto John, he said Woman behold thy son: and pointing
unto him he said, Behold thy mother; so he commended her to his beloved
Disciple John. 19. 26.
before he died; therefore this is not a doctrine of disobedience, but a rule
how to obey. As he taught his disciples, to give unto Caesar, that Luke. 20.
25.
which is Caesar's, and to God that which is Gods: so he teaches them here,
Mat. 19.
to give unto parents that which is parents, and to the Lord that which is the
Lords. When God said, Honor thy father and thy mother, he did not Exodus 20. 12.
give a commandment against himself, and therefore he says Honor me, before
he says Honor them. The first commandment of the first table is, Honor God:
and the first commandment of the second table is, Honor Parents; lest you
should honor your parents before God. When Solomon 1. King. 2. 16.
bad his mother ask him any thing, and denied her that one thing which she
asked; he shows that the mother should not be obeyed in all things. When
Christ said, You have but one father but one master, hespake of faith and
religion; showing, that when it concerns our faith and religion, we should
respect but one father and one master which is the giver of our faith, and the
matter of our religion.

When Paul said, Children obey your parents in the Lord, he means Ephesians. 6.
1
that we should not obey them against the Lord: as when he says, Obey Princes
for conscience; he means that we should not obey them Romans 13. 5
against conscience. Therefore, when it comes to this, that the earthly
father commands one thing, and the heavenly Father commands another
thing, then as Peter answered the Rulers, so thou may answer thy parents,
Whether is it Act. 4. 19.
meet to obey God or you? then these are the hands which thou must cut off,
then these are the eyes which thou must pull out; or else they should be as
dear unto thee as thy hand or thine eye. In MATTHEW, Aman must for sake his
father and mother Mat. 19. 5.
to dwell with his wife; but in LVKE, He must for sake father and mother, and
wife to dwell with Christ; for, He that for saketh father or mother or wife for
me, shall receive more (says our Savior:) nay, he which does not hate father
and mother and wife for me, Luke 14. 26
cannot be my Disciple (says he again in the same Evangelist): showing that
our love toward God should be so great, that in respect of it, our love
toward men should seem to be but hatred. Thus he that obeyed his parents
more than we, yet would have us search some sentence, some example in
scripture of not obeying them too; because it is such a hard point to know how
far they are to be obeyed which are set in authority over us. As none but God
spoke always right; so none but God must always be obeyed: we are not
called only the sons of men, but the sons of God. Therefore, as Christ
answered his mother when she would have him turn water into wine; Woman what
have John 2. 4.
I to do with thee? So we should answer father, and mother, and brethren, and
sisters, and rulers, and m^sters, and wife too, when they will us to do that
which is not meet; Satan what have I to do with thee? for else it were to
turn wine into water. Peter was not Satan: but when he tempted Christ like
Satan, Christ answered him, as he answered Satan, Come behind me Satan;
showing, that we should give no more attention to father or mother, or master
or wife, when they tempt us to evil, than we should give to Satan, if he
should tempt us him self.

Three things children receive of their parents, life, and maintenance, and
instruction: For these three they owe other three: for life they owe love; for
maintenance they owe obedience; for instruction they owe reverence: For life,
they must be loved as fathers: for maintenance, they must be obeyed as masters:
for instruction, they must be reverenced as Tutors. But as there is a King of
Kings which must be obeyed above Kings: so there is a father of fathers, which
must be obeyed above fathers. Therefore, you must answer like the son when
he was bid to go unto the vineyard, I will go: and sometimes you must
answer as Christ answered, I must do my Fathers business, I have no other
business.

When two milch kine did carry the Ark of the Lord unto Bethshemesh, their
Calves were shut up at home, because the Kine should not stay, when they
heard their Calves bleat after them: so when thou go about the Lords
business, thou shall hear a cry of thy Father and mother, and thy brethren and
thy sisters, and of thy kindred to stay thee; but then thou must think of
another father, as Christ thought of another mother: and so as these Kine went
on, till the Lord brought them where the Arc should rest; so shall thou go
on, till the Lord bring thee where thou shall rest. It is better to fly from
our kindred as Abraham did, than to stay with some friends as Sampson did with
Dalila.

I may say, beware of kinsmen, as well as our Savior says, Beware of men;
for this respect of cosenage 1. Sam. 2.
has made Elie his sons priests, and this respect of cousenage has made
many like priests in Europe This respect of cousenage brought Tobia into the
Levites chamber: and this respect of cousenage has brought many gentlemen,
into Preachers livings: as Christ preferred his spiritual kinsmen, so we
prefer our carnal kinsmen: many privileges, many offices, many gifts, we
being by this tempted, have stooped to this voice; Thy mother calls thee; or
Thy kinsmen would have thee.

As this voice came to Christ whiles he was laboring: so many such voices
come to us whiles we are laboring; One says, pleasure would speak with
you; an other says, profit would speak with you; Another says, ease would
speak with you; an other says, abundance would speak with you; Another
says, a promotion would speak with you; Another says, Delight would
speak with you.

When a man is in a good way, and studyeth the Scriptures to be a teacher in
the Church of GOD, a voice comes into his ear, as this came to Christ, and
says; thy friends would have thee to study the Law, or thou shall attain
to no preferment: For the reuerendest of that profession, are by the vylest of
the people contemned; and so sometimes Jonas turns his sails from Nineveh to
Tharshish. Ioh. 1.


If he be a Divine already, and preach his conscience in reproouing sin, a
voice comes to him again, as this did to Christ, and says; Thy friends
would have thee be quiet, or thou will be enuyed for that which thou say; or
there be fellows which lie in wait to return scornings for thy pains. so
sometimes with a little entreaty, he begins to draw up his hand and lay
his fingers to his mouth, and preach peace when he is sent with war.

Thus are we cumbred like our master before our sermons, and in our sermons,
and after our sermons; even of those sometimes which should encourage us, and
therefore as Christ says, Beware of men; so Mat. 10. 14.
I say, beware of kinsmen.

So soon as the children be borne, their Parents bring them to the Temple and
baptize them, and offer them unto GOD: but as soon as they are able to serve
him, they tempt them away from him, some to the Law, some to Physic, some
to marchaundise, and some to husbandry, and had rather they should be of any
other Tribe than of the Tribe of Leni, which serves in the Temple: he which
will be hindered, shall have blocks enough: but we must learn to leap over all
as Christ did over this. If we should leave father and mother* and wife, and
children for Christ; much less should we care for labor, or loss, or
shame, or trouble, or displeasure: for we would venture these for our friends.
Thus much of his natural kindred: now of his spiritual kindred.

Here is another Genealogy of Christ, which MATTHEW and LVKE never spoke of;
As CHRIST says, I have another bread which you know not: So he says, that
I have other kinsmen, which you know not.

Saint JOHN writing to a Christian Lady which brought up her children in the
fear of God, calls her The elect Lady; showing, that 2. John. 1.
the chiefest honor of Lords and Ladies, and Princes, is to be elect of God.
LVKE speaking of certain Beroeans which received the word Act. 27. 11.
of GOD with love, calls them more noble men than the rest; showing that God
counts none noble but those which are of a noble spirit. As Saint John
calls none elect but the virtuous, and Saint Luke calls none noble but the
religious; so our Savior Christ calls none his kinsmen but such as are
righteous: these are my mother, and my brethren which hear the word of God
and do it.

As Abraham's children are not counted after the flesh, but after the Spirit:
So Christ's kinsmen are not counted after the: flesh but after Genesis ^.
the Spirit: for the flesh was not made after the Image of God, but the
Spirit: therefore God is not called the father of bodies, but the father Heb.
12. 9.
of Spirits.

Now God which is a Spirit prefers them which are kin unto him in the
spirit: therefore Esau was not blessed, because he was of Isaacks flesh: but
Jacob was blessed because he was of Isaacks spirit. As we love in the flesh,
so Christ loves in the spirit: therefore he calls none his kinsmen, but
them which hear the word of God and do it.

It seems that Paul thought of this saying when he said, till Christ Galla.
4. 10
be reformed in you. If Christ be found in us, as Saint Paul says, then we
are Chists mother: every one which will have Christ to be his Savior, must be
Christ his mother.

The virgin asked the Angel, how she could bear Christ, seeing she had not
known a man: so you may ask how you can bear Christ seeing he is borne
already. As there is a second coming of Christ: so there is a second birth
of Christ. When we are regenerate and borne again, then Christ is borne in us
again. The virgin Marie was his mother by the flesh, and the faithful are his
mother by the Spirit. Again, the Holy Ghost did conceive him in her: and the
Holy Ghost likewise did conceive him in them: He was in her womb, and he is
in their hearts: She did bear him, and they do bear him: She did nurce
him, and they do nurce him. This is the second birth of Christ. As the soul
of man may be called The Temple of the Holy Ghost: so it may also be called
the womb of the son; that is, the mother of Christ.

Before those words, it is said, that Christ asked, Who is my mother? and who
are my brethren? As if he should say; You think that I am affected to my
kinsmen as you are: But I tell you, that I count them my kinsmen, which hear
the word of GOD and do it.

To show that Christ loves us with an everlasting love, he shows, that he
does not love us for any temporal things, but for that which endures for
ever. If Christ loved us as ISAAC loved ESAV for Venison; then we might miss
the blessing as ESAV did. But as JOHN says, He loved in the truth; so Christ
loves in the truth. To love in the truth, is the true love. Every love but
this, at one time or other, has turned into hatred; but the true love
overcomes hatred, even as the truth overcomes falsehood.

No we see this love, Christ calls them by the names of love, his mother, his
brethren, and sisters. In the sixth to the ROMANS, they are called his
servant; If that be not enough, in the fifteenth of saint JOHN, they are
called his friends; If that be not enough, in the third of MARK, they are
called his kinsmen; If that be not enough, in the 24 Chapter of LVKE, there he
calls them his brethren; If that be not enough, in the first of MARK, they
are called his children; If that be not enough, here they are called his
mother; If that be not enough, in the fifth of the CANT. they are called his
spouse: to manifest that he loves them with all loves; the mothers love, and
the brothers love, and the sister love, and the masters love, and the friends
love. If all these loves could be put together, yet Christ's love exceeds
them all; and the mother, and the brother, and the sister, and the child, and
the kinsmen, and the friends, and the servant, would not do and suffer so
much amongst them all, as Christ has done and suffered for us alone; Such a
love we kindle in Christ, when we hear his word and do it; that we are as
dear unto him as al his kindred together.

Now as we are his mother, so we should carry him in our hearts, as his
mother did in her arms; as we are his brethren, so we should prefer him, as
Joseph did Benjamin; as we are his spouse, so we Genesis 43. 34
should embrace him, as Isaac did Rebecca: if thou be a kinsman, do like a
kinsman.

Now we come to the marks of these kinsmen; which I may call the arms of
his house. As Christ says, By this all men shall know my Disciples; if they
love one another: So he says: by this shall all men know my kinsmen, if
they hear the word of God and do it. Here it is continually said, He
which Psalm. 11^.
hears the word of God, and does it: both are one: for his word is his
will: and therefore it is called his will.

As he spoke (therefore) of doing; so he speaks of a certain rule which
he calls The word of God: whereby all men's doings must be squared: for if
I do all the works that I can to satisfy an others will, or mine own will,
it avails me nothing with God, because I do it not for God. Therefore he
which always before followed his own will; when he was stricken down to the
ground, and began to repent, he cried out, Act. 9.
Lord, what will thou have me to do? as if he should say; I will do no more
as men would have me, or as the devil would have me, but as thou would
have me. So David praide, Teach me O Lord to do thy will; not my will: for
we would not to be taught to do our own will, every man can go to hell
without a guide. Here is the rule, now if you live by it, then you are knit to
Christ. As other kindreds go by birth or by marriage, so this kindred goes by
faith and obedience. Hearers are but half kin, as it were in a far degree:
But they which hear and do, are called his mother, which is the nearest kin
of all. Therefore if you have the deed, then you are kin in deed. There is
no promise made to bearers, nor to speakers, nor to readers, but all promises
are made to believers and to doers.

If you ask God, Who shall rest in the holy mountain? he says, the Psalm.
15. 2
man which walks uprightly and does Justice: Here are none but doers.

If ye ask Christ, Who shall enter into the kingdom? He says, Not they
which cry Lord, Lord, though Mat. 7. 21
they cry twice Lord; But they which do the will of my Father: Here are none
but deeds. If you ask him again, how you may come to heaven? he says,
Keep the commandments. If you ask him Luke 18.
again, who are blessed? He says: Blessed are they that hear the word Luke
11.
of God and do it. If you ask an Angel, who are blessed? He says, Blessed
are they that keep the words Revel. 21. 7.
of this book. If you ask the Prophet David, who are blessed? He says, The
man is blessed that keeps Psalm. 106. 3.
judgment, and does righteousness. If you ask Solomon, who are blessed? He
says, The man is blessed Pro. 29. 18
that keeps the Law. If you ask Esaias, who are blessed? He says, He which
does this, is blessed. If Esa. 56. 2.
you ask James, who is blessed? He says, The doer of the word is blessed
Iam. 1. 25.
in his deed. Here you see al these are none but doers. Thus blessing and
doing run together, lest any man should look to be blessed without
obedience. Christ calls Love, the greatest commandment: but Solomon calls
Obedience, the end of all: as though without obedience, all were to no end.
When Micah had gotten a Leuite into his house; now he says, I know the Lord
will be good unto me, seeing I have a Leuite in my Iud. 17. 13.
house: so many think, when they have gotten a Preacher into their parish, now
the Lord will be good unto us: now Christ will love us: now we are good sons
seeing we maintain a Preacher amongst us: But Micah was not blessed for a
Leuite, nor you for a Preacher. But as you would have us do as we teach; so
GOD would have you do as you hear: for you shall be no more saved for
hearing, than we for speaking.

When God created the tree, he commanded it to bring forth fruit; so when he
created Faith, he commands us to bring forth works; and therefore it is
called a lively Genesis 1.
faith. When our Savior would prove himself unto John Baptist to be the
Messiah in deed, he says to his disciples; tell what things you have heard and
seen: not only heard but Luke 7. 22.
seen. So if we will prove our selves to be Christ's kinsmen in deed, we must
work that which may be seen as well as heard. John Baptist was not only
called the voice of a crier, Ioh. 1. 13. and 5. 35.
which might be heard, but a burning lamp which might be seen: so all which
are crying voices, must be burning lamps. James does not say, let me hear thy
faith, but let me see Iam. 2. 18.
thy faith. As the Angels put on the shape of men, that Abraham might Genesis 18.
2.
see them: so faith must put on works that the world may see it. The works Ioh.
5. 36.
which I do (says Christ) bear witness of me: so the works which we do must
bear witness of us. Therefore Christ linketh faith and repentance together;
Repent, and believe the Gospel: Therefore I conclude, Mar. 1. 15.
That which Christ has joined, Mar. 10. 9.
let no man separate.

Thus I have showed you Christ preaching, and a great prease hearing; The
conclusion.
his kinsfolks interrupting, and Christ again withstanding the interruption.
By this you may see what a spite the devil had to hinder one sermon; therefore
no marvel though he cause so many to be mute, no marvel though he stand so
against the learned ministry; No marvel though he raise such slanders upon
Preachers; no marvel though he write so many books against the Christian
government in the Church; no marvel, though he make so many ingrossers of
church living, that being themselves without conscience, are unwilling to have
the cure of souls committed to any other tha^ such as themselves: for these
men make him the god of this world. The Devil is afraid that one Sermon will
convert us, and we are not moved with twenty: so the devil thinks better
of us, than we are.

Again, by this we may know how to withstand temptations: whether it be
the father, mother, brother, sister, kinsman, rulers, master, or wife, that
tempts. As Christ would not know his mother against his father: so thou
should not know any father or mother, or whosoever against God. If a mothers
suit may be refused sometimes, a mighty man's will may be refused too; he which
can turn his hinderance to a furtherance, as Christ did here, may make use of
every thing.

Again, by this you may learn how to choose your friend. As Christ counted
none his kinsmen, but such as hear the word of God and do it: So we should
make none our familiars, but such as Christ counts his kinsmen.

Again, by this you may see the difference between Christ and the world:
Christ calls the godly his kinsmen, though they be never so poor: we scorn
to call the poor our kinsmen, though they be never so honest; so proud is the
servant above his master. Again, by this ye may know how Christ is to be
loved; for when he calls us his mother, he shows us the way how to love
him like a mother: for in deed he is the mother of his mother, and his
brethren too.

Again, by this all vaunting and boasting of kindred is cut of. Glory not
that thou have a gentleman to thy father, but that thou have God to thy father.
Glory not that thou have Kings to thy brethren, but glory that thou have the
Lord to thy brother. He which called Abraham his father, fried in hell fire,
because God was not his father. Luke. 16.
If Marie might not be proud of such a son as Christ, much less may we
brag of any friend or son that we have.

Again, by this you may know whether you be kin to Christ: as those
priests were shut out of the Temple which could not count their Genealogy
from Aaron; so they shall be shut out of heaven which cannot reckon their
pedigree from Christ.

Here are the Arms now whereby you may show what house you come of: If you
hear the word of God, and do it, then Christ says unto you, as he said unto
them: these are my mother and my brethren and my sisters; you women are his
sisters, and you men are his brethren: and if you be Christ's brethren, then
are you Gods sons: and if ye be Gods sons, then are ye his heirs, for
all Gods sons are called heirs. Romans 8. 17


Lastly, by this ye may know the devils kinsmen: for if Christ counted none
his kinsmen, but they which hear the word of God; then they which do not,
hear the word of God, but contemn it, are the devils kinsmen: and therefore
Christ says, You are of your father the aiuell; for the devil and the wicked
John. 8. 44
are as nere kin, as Christ and the faithful.

Now as David says, Seems it a light thing unto you to be the son of a
King, seeing I am a poor man and 1. Sam. 18. 23
of small reputation? so I may say, seems it a light thing unto you to be the
sons of a King, the King of Kings, seeing you are pooremen, and of small
reputation? It is counted a great honor to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, that God
was not ashamed to be called their God. What an honor than is this, that God
is not ashamed to be called our Father, nay our brother; as though we were
matches with him. If the Israelites had such care to marry with the servant
of God; what a blessing is this, to marry with the son of God. Therefore, if
any affect rich kinsmen, or great marriages: here is a greater than Solomon to
marry with you; this kinsman of ours is now gone up into heaven, that we may
have a friend in the court. JOSEPH desired the Butler to remember Gene. 40. 14.
him when he stood before PHARAOH, and he forgot, though he had pleasured
him: but a thief desired Christ to remember him when he came into his
kingdom, and Luke. 13. 42
he received him into Paradise the same day, though he had always offended
him; to show that though we have been as bad as thieves, yet wet may have
hope in Christ. Therefore I may conclude, you have heard the word. If you go
away and do it: then you are mother, brethren and sisters of this heavenly
King: to whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be all honor and glory
for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

