A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE KING at White Hall, the third of December.

By Robert Skinner Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Published by His MAJESTY'S command.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Imprinted by I. L. for Andrew Hebb. 1634.

PSALM. 96. VERSE. 9. O worship the Lord, in the beauty of Holiness.


INTERPRETERS vary about the occasion of this Psalm: Some referring us to the
placing of the Ark of God, in the city of David; when with great solemnity it
was brought from the house of Obed-Edom: Some resolving it was ordered to be
sung at the finishing of the Temple: but others, when the Temple was re-edified
after the Captivity. And the truth is, all three opinions may well consist, and
be true all. For that it was sung at the placing of the Arc, we have it
expressly 1. Chron. 16. And (all inducements according) why might it not serve
and be sung, as well in the Temple, as before the Arc? and in the second
Temple, as well as in the first? which occasioned the Seventie to inscribe it
as they did, A Song (...), after the Captivity, upon the restoration of the
house of God. It matters not whether exposition we take; all give equal light
to my Text; show us what to understand by the beauty of Holiness, even the
solemn place of his holy service whom we are to worship; O worship the Lord in
the beauty of Holiness.

In the words at first hearing, four particulars are observable. I. An humble,
devout, religious act: Adorate, worship: II. the proper and peculiar object of
this Act: Dominum, the Lord. III. The special place of this worship,
recommended unto us by two properties: for first it is an holy place, in atrio
Sancto, a place of Holiness; Then it is a beautiful place, in decore
Sanctitatis, in the beauty of Holiness. IIII. We meet with a strong
persuasion; an earnest entreaty, Thus in this place to worship the Lord: O
worship the Lord, etc.

We see therefore what we must do; we must worship: And whom we must worship;
the Lord; And where the Lord will be worshipped, in his holy place: that if
either beauty here, or sanctity, or duty, or the Lord by his presence can
win upon us, we will be worshippers all; the powerful1 example of a King,
the awful incitement of a Prophet (both in the Text) shall incline our hearts,
and bend our knees, and direct our steps, O worship the Lord, in the beauty of
Holiness.

What, first; Adorate Dominum: where, afterward: worship the Lord we must; So
we are commanded; but we cannot worship him aright, before we rightly conceive
what it is to worship: Now take it at large, and to worship truly, is to give
honor to another, according to his worth; secundum excellentiam according to
some excellent worth: For worship is not due to any, but to that which is
well worthy and that is of eminent vvorth: To worship one that is no way
eminent, nor in any sort above us, is an act of unworthiness, nor do we so
much honor him, as dishonor our selves: ye may call it baseness, or
flattery, or pusillanimitie; to all which, true worship is a stranger. Honor
and Worship, in the judgment of S. Paul, belong to some certain persons;
Honor to whom Honor belongs, Romans 13. And who are they? eminent at least:
nay, but the highest Honor is not due, save potestatibus supereminentibus, to
those of the highest rank, that are supereminent.

True, we are taught by the same Apostle, In giving honor, to go one before
another: but we shall find it to hold upon this ground, That in lowliness of
mind each esteem other better than themselves, Phil. 2. He must be our
better, so we must esteem him, (for some grace or other) we cannot so
properly honor him else; and if not honor him, much less adore him: for
adorare is a great deal more than honorare: Ye may honor him for his
singular gifts whom ye never saw, by a gracious tongue, or some honorable
favor; but to adore, is so far to honor, as to bow down before him: As
when David stooped with his face to the earth, and bowed himself before King
Saul, 1. Sam. 24. And Nathan the Prophet bowed himself before King David, with
his face to the ground, 1. King. 1. To adore then, is to honor in the highest
degree, that is, with the lowliest expression; briefly, to acknowledge
another exaltation, by our own humiliation.

For, that I be not long in laying a foundation, there is ever employed in
Adoration a threefold act: first, an apprehension of some excellency or
other; for if no kind of preeminence be apprehended, we do not adorare, but
adulari, worship we know not what; whereas all true worshippers are ready to
say as our Savior to the woman of Samaria, We know what we worship, Ioh. 4.22.
Nor is it sufficient to apprehend what is excellent, but we must acknowledge
also what we apprehend; and our acknowledgement must be serious, and unfeigned:
there will be otherwise, in stead of Adoration, plain derision.

Nay, moreover it is not complete worship, without a clear Demonstration of
our subjection: without genuflection, or prostration, or some other inclination
or submission of the body. The very word here does import as much: for the word
in Hebrew (so often rendered by adorare) properly signifies incurvari, to
assure us, our adoration is lame and imperfect, unworthy the name, without an
outward manifestation: And we may note it in the Wisemen, that took so long a
journey to worship, and knew the right form we may be sure (...), They fell
down and worshipped, Matthew. 2.11. And let me tell you, this was the manner of
old when they came into the Sanctuary; Venite adoremus, O come let us worship
and fall down; yes, and when they went out from the Sanctuary too; good
Hezekiah and all his company, when they had made an end of offering, bowed
themselves and worshipped, 2. Chron. 29. ver. 29. And now perceiving what it is
to worship, let us further consider whom we are to worship; O worship the Lord,
etc.

Dominum, the Lord, even the Lord that made us, and not we our selves, (...),
the Lord Paramount, Lord of Lords, and God of Gods, even Jehovah, the Lord
Almighty; And none I hope is so graceless, as to stick at his worship: All
will adore their Maker and Redeemer, the Author and preserver of all things.
Certainly, none are exempted or quit of his worship: Not the Angels in heaven;
of them it is written; And let all the Angels of God worship him, Hebr. 1. Not
any that are called Gods on earth; they are all commanded to do their homage,
Worship him all ye Gods, Psalm. 97. Not any Saints above: They all cast down
their crowns and fall down and worship him that lives for ever and ever,
Rev. 4.10. Nor any Saints below: They daily cry out with the Prophet; Exalt the
Lord our God and fall down before his footestoole for the Lord our God is
holy, Psalm. 99. There can be no question, all are to worship, a vermiculo ad
Angelum, from the basest worm to the most glorious Angel; from him that
sits on the throne, to her that grindeth at the Mill, all come under Adorate
Dominum; And know they must, in adoring the Lord, they honor themselves;
approaching thereby, and drawing near unto the Lord; for if to be near about
a gracious King, be justly counted a singular grace, what an honor must it
needs be, to be joined to the Lord, 1 Cor. 6. to adhere and cleave to the King
of Kings; to go boldly to the throne of grace, and all this is daily done by
adoring: We see then the duty is general, All are to worship, the Lord all,
and that because he is Lord of all.

A chief point will be, for the manner, how: for we may not imagine, when the
Prophet enjoynes us to worship the Lord, that his meaning is, we should
worship him ad libitum, every one his own way, according to his own fancy:
Indeed we would have it so; are strangely taken with our own inventions; and
were we at a Loose, what a various prodigious worship would be found amongst
us? For the manner, one sitting, another standing, a third kneeling, a fourth
walking, a fifth leaning: For the matter (when their tongues were their own
once) one seditious, a second ridiculous, a third blasphemous; and yet (if ye
believe them) all true worshippers, for all that.

No, but Dominus the Lord, the very Name puts us in mind how he will be
worshipped; with what preparation, and with what devotion: Do but remember
what a Lord, and then resolve what kind of worship will suit him best. If
such a Lord as none like him, fit his worship should be such, as none the
like. As no Lord equal to him, so no worship equal to his: No, but as we are
praise him, so we are to worship him; both according to his excellent
greatness, Psalm. 150.

All Lords have one sort of worship, or other; Sovereign Lords ad terram
usque, down to the ground. Thus to the King, and thus to the man whom the King
will honor, Hest. 6. But when all is done, all is but bodily worship, and that
too Civilly intended, in Civil rerespects: because indeed, their highest
Jurisdiction, jus vitae and necis, extends no further, is confined to the body:
They have power only (says our Savior) to kill the body, and after that, have
no more, that they can do, Luke 12.4. But the Lord here, has absolute power
over soul and body and all we have, and so we to worship him with all: our
soul he inspired, our body he ordained, our worldly goods what we have, he
gave unto us; and our worship should be answerable: shall I show you how?

As briefly then as may be;

God is a spirit (says Saint John) and they that worship him must worship in
spirit and in truth: Ioh. 4. and look we well unto it, there is no deceiving
him; for He searches the heart, and tries the spirits, Ier. 17. He is styled
by Moses, the god of all spirits, and all spiritual worship is due unto him:
So peculiar is it to the Creator as uncommunicable to any creature. Nor
Saints, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers have any Dominion over the
soul, to save or to destroy it, and therefore the bowings, and bendings of the
soul belong not to them; Nay but all religious Divine, devout Adoration of the
spirit or in the spirit, is entirely to be offered to the Father of spirits. If
imparted to any other, sive humilitate nimia, De C. D. lib. 10. cap. 4.
sive adulatione pestifera (as Saint Augustine speaks) whether by too much
humility, or too much flattery, clear it is, they that do it, rob God of his
honor; which he tells us he will not endure: I am the Lord, that is my name,
and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven Images,
Esai. 42.8.

And when we worship God with our bodies, is it not also in a singular way?
else it is not as it should be; for Nathan to bow himself before the Lord, and
to bow before the King was it all one think we? True, his body was the same,
and his bowing much alike, but infinite ods in his Adoration: Before the King
as the Lords anointed, as the supreme minister of God for the Common good, In
our Churches phrase -- In thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed word and
ordinance. But before the Lord; as the work of his hands (and that by a word of
his mouth) in a plenary subjection as well for being, as well being: Before the
King, within certain circumscriptions, of time, and place, and occasion; But
before the Lord, unrestrainedly, in all places, at all times, upon all
occasions: whereby we confess his illimited power his eternal essence, his
ubiquitary presence; when we worship the Lord without bodies, it ought to be
with a special Adoration: Quoniam si honos idem tribuitur allis, Lib. a.
Instit.
ipse omnino non colitur, A good rule it is in Lactatius, If the same worship
be given to any other, God is not worshipped at all; What King will admit of a
sharer or co-partner, in his tribute or Homage? and what says the Prophet? I
am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 1.14. It were sacrilege them to
offer him a sharer.

Now for our Temporal estate, Adorate Dominum extends and comes up to that
also: Honor the Lord with thy substance; so we are commanded, Pro. 3.9. and
good reason for it; for the blessing of the Lord it makes rich, Pro. 10. And
without this blessing, in vain were it to rise up early, and sit up late,
and eat the bread of carfulness. And though the World be unapt to believe it
(incredulous ever in what is chargeable) the Lord expects we honor him as
well with our personal estates, as with our persons: And how may that be?
By giving to the Lord in a proper way; by devoting some part of your plenty
and superfluity to those sacred uses which redound immediately to Gods glory.

The truth is, the Prophet chiefly intends it here; the words immediately
before my Text are, Bring, an offering, and come into his Courts: an Oblation
was ever of old accounted a part of Adoration; but I forbear: Bring and offer
are no pleasing words, I know, though it be to the Lord; Take away, and hold
fast, without any thought of restitution, this is the manner of too many, that
yet would be thought to deal very worshipfully too; to worship God as well
as the best, when they spoil him of that should maintain his worship. And
will a man rob God? Mal. 3. Yes, and make the World believe they do it for his
honor: but their doom follows, without repentance; Cursed with a curse,
verse. 9. But I leave them to the mercy, of God: And it is high time I left
this Point. I have done with the Act and the Object, Worship the Lord; only
remember, I beseech you, How we must worship, and how the Lord; it follows
Where the Lord will be worshipped: O worship the Lord in the beauty of
holiness.

In his holy Courts, in his holy Sanctuary, in his glorious magnificent
Sanctuary; Thus, Interpreters vary: But Vatablus joins with the Chaldee, and
our Translation follows both, In decore sanctitatis, in the beauty of
holiness: And the Scripture calls the Sanctuary it self, the beauty of
holiness, because it was full of beauty and holiness. So (if ye mark it)
the Points are three: The Lord will be worshipped in a certain place, proper
for his worship; And the most proper place, is a sacred place, or a place of
Holiness; And a place of Beauty, as well as Holiness: O worship the Lord in
the beauty of holiness.

And it is well we are directed to a certain Place: for should the Place be
uncertain, our Service would be as uncertain as the Place. Time and Place have
been ever of singular moment in Gods Service: Were no Time prescribed, It were
much to be doubted When: and were no Place appointed, it were hard to say,
where we would worship: We may justly fear it, were no place assigned,
adorate Dominum would be soon out of Date; For who would think to worship,
when he saw not where?

We may note it successively in all ages never any took upon them to worship
the Lord, but the place was resolved on. Can we imagine, but Cain and Abel had
where to bring their sacrifices? And they that called on the name of the Lord,
Genesis 4. had a place for their meetings, a meet place. After the flood Noah had
his Altar where to adore, Genesis 8. And so had Abraham his; even where the Lord
appeared unto him, Genesis 12. expressly called the place of the Altar, Genesis 13.
Isaac also erected an Altar, and there he called on the name of the Lord, Genesis
26. And when we read that Rebeckah went to enquire of the Lord; quo perrexit?
whither went she may we think? even to the place of his holy worship; where
the Lord would answer her, Genesis 25. And had not father Jacob his Bethel, named
by himself, the house of God, and the gate of heaven, Genesis 28.

When afterward the Children of Israel were upon often remooves in the
wilderness, the Lord ordained them a mooveable Tabernacle; to which every one
resorted that sought the Lord, Exodus 33.7. and it was therefore called, The
Tabernacle of the Congregation. But when the Church began to be happy in a
settled state, in the days of King David, his religious heart could no longer
endure the Arc should abide within Curtains, when he dwelt himself in a
house of Cedar, 2 Samuel.7. And thereupon he vowed a vow unto the mighty God of
Jacob, Psalm. 132. But Solomon built him an house, Act. 7.47. And now the Lords
people come hither all, whether to receive instruction, or express devotion;
Here they address their vows, commence their prayers, present their oblations
before the Lord; And this was the manner, till Christ came in. the flesh.

And what? when our Lord was incarnate, did he ever disallow of this local
Adoration? no, but in his infancy it pleased him, to be presented in the
Temple. And at twelve years old to dispute in the Temple, Luke 2. And after
his baptism, he daily taught in the Temple, and preached in the Synagogues.
After his ascension where were his Apostles? but continually in the Temple,
Luke 24. Or where were the faithful? but daily with one accord in the Temple,
Act. 2.46.

Now when the Temple was demolished by Titus Vespatian, not a stone left upon a
stone, as our Savior had foretold, Then Christian Churches began to be
frequent, which yet were extant before in Saint Paul's time; for see I pray you,
what disparitie he puts betwixt ordinary houses, and the house of God: What?
have ye not houses to eat and to drink in, or despise ye the Church of God?
1. Cor. 11. Again, Let your women keep silence in the Churches, and let them
ask their husbands at home, 1. Cor. 14. Now let Saint Ignatius speak for the
next Generation -- (...), and, (...), All to one place, all to the Temple of
God, in his undoubted. Epistle to the Magnesians. As for succeding Ages, all
testimonies are superfluous; the furious edicts of persecuting Tyrants for
rasing and ruinating Churches, abundantly show how Churches did abound. And is
not this enough, to put to silence those unreasonable men with their sectaries
that survive, who in the height of malice and sacrilege, endeavored
presumptuously this last age, to lay desolate and wast, all the Synagogues of
God in the land? What should the Prophet have said to such a generation? O
worship the Lord; Where? no matter where: in a Barn, or a Shop, or a Wood: no,
but the Prophet has told us where; and the practice of the Saints make it
manifest, that before the Law, under the Law, and under the Gospel, there have
been ever due to the celebration of Gods worship sequestered places, either
Altars, or Tabernacles, or Temples, or Churches, or Chapels, or the like; that
we are justly directed by the Prophet here, to a proper place,; Let us now
descend to the properties of the place; And an holy place it is, a place of
Holiness; and a beautiful place, the very beauty of Holiness, -- O worship,
etc.

In atrio Sancto, or in Sanctuario, In his holy Courts, or in his holy
Sanctuary; for who can doubt but the beauty of Holiness must needs be holy?
And that apparently in a double regard: First, because the place of Gods
worship was hallowed ever, and set apart to holy uses; for so were Altars before
the Law, and after them the Tabernacle, and after that the Temple; And by the
same right Churches, and Chapels at this Day. The dedication of the
Tabernacle, we have at large let down, Numb. 7. The dedication of the Temple, 1
Kings 8. And it stands with all good reason and religion, that houses of God,
be sequestered now by solemn consecration, as well as heretofore. For wherefore
I pray you, did Solomon dedicate the Temple? and after him Ezra the Priest upon
the restoration? And the Priests again under Judas Maccabeus, when it had
been polluted? Or wherefore did Jacob consecrate a pillar of stone by pouring
oil upon it; Genesis 28. Did the Lord command him, or Solomon, or any of them
all? where? it will no where be found. It was rectified reason, and godly
wisdom, which directed them by a public dedication, as it were by a
public declaration, to manifest to the world the religious conveiance of
Sacred places, to Sacred uses; And then it follows, that as Bethel of old, and
the Sanctuary: so likewise our Bethels are holy, being solemnly hallowed and
devoted in the name of God, and to the glory of God, as they were.

Holy again, because our Lord God, most holy, does inhabit and possess them,
as his proper Mansion, or dwelling House; for did he not take possession, when
the Cloud covered the Tent, and the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle?
Exodus 40.34. What did he else by that sacred inumbration, but take as it were
Liverie and Seisin? And just so it was at the finishing of the Temple: The
glory of the Lord filled the House of the Lord, 1. Kings 8. And they were
thereupon called and counted his dwelling Place for ever after; by David, O
thou that dwell between the Cherubins, Psalm. 80. by our Savior, Who so
shall swear by the Temple, swears by it, and by him that dwells therein,
Matthew. 23.21.

And can any Christian doubt, whether he be present in our Christian
Congregations? where holy Prayers are powered forth, his holy Gospel preached,
his holy Sacraments administered, his most holy Body and Blood communicated. Is
it not deep infidelity and heresy, to think Christ to be absent from his
Body and Blood? Most certainly present he is, though not by his glorious, yet
in a singular way, by his gracious presence. Ye may as well (says S.
Chrysostom) shut God out of Heaven, S. Chrysostom. horn. 36. in 1. Cor.
as exclude him hence. For (...), this indeed is Heaven upon Earth; and here
the Tabernacle of God is with men, and God himself is with them, Revel. 21.
Holy then we see, because the Lord is there by his holy presence.

And now it begins to be open day with us, we may clearly perceive, why the
Prophet would have us worship rather in the place of holiness than elsewhere:
Because the Lord is sure to be found there. And we are to seek the Lord, as
well where, as while he may be found. Where will ye enquire of the Master,
but at his House? And the House of God is the House of Prayer, Esa. 56. Where
shall ye hope to find the King, so soon as in his Court? So the King of
Heaven will be found (...), in his holy Court, above any other place.

True, the Lord will be found of his humble devout servants in what place
soever; and I would have nothing understood, to the prejudice of private
prayer: For Moses in the Sea, Job on the Dunghill, Jeremy in the Dungeon,
Daniel in the Den, Jonas in the Whale, the Children in the Furnace, S. Peter
and Paul in Prison, calling upon God, were heard, as S. Basil notes. And
therefore the Apostle would have men pray every where, lifting up holy hands,
1. Tim. 2. Yes, every where, with holy hands. But are holy hands every where?
What shall the sinner do, that is destitute of holy hands? What else, but to
the Temple with the Publican? There he shall meet with holy hands, in the holy
Assembly, and may speed the better, be graciously accepted for their sakes, as
Jobs friends for his sake, Job 42. In my devotions, let me join with the
righteous, and then his prayer (I shall hope) will make way for mine: Nay, and
how shall my charity be augmented, my zeal kindled, my faith confirmed, when
I hear the whole congregation, quasi manu facta, to implore and send up an
army of prayers, Tertull.
for the pardon of my sins: For thus it is ever in these sacred meetings; All
for every one, and every one for all, that God may be gracious and have mercy
upon all; great reason then we should worship there.

And so often as we worship there, would God we would remember where we are,
that the place whereon we stand is holy ground: It was certainly part of the
Prophets meaning, that the very name of Holiness should make us beware of
profaneness. He terms it rather a place of Holiness, than the Tabernacle,
or the Temple; to put us in mind of that venerable, grave, religious
behavior, evermore requisite and expected here. For Holiness becomes thy
House, O Lord, for ever, Psalm. 93. to put us in mind to look well to our
feet when we go to the House of God, Eccl. 4. To our Feet, not to make that
a walking place; and to our Tongues, not to make that a talking place; and to
our Eyes, not to make that a gazing place. And he that whipped the buyers and
sellers out of the Temple, would he not, think we, have silenced our praters
in the House of Prayer, and have charged our Church-walkers to leave the
Church? Antiquity so understood it, I am sure; (...), Hom. 36. in 1. Cor.
In the Church unlawful even to speak but to a neighbor (says S.
Chrysostom) and much more unlawful to contrive and drive a Bargain there, as
if at a Mart or common Market: And how unsufferable then, that the Church
should be made a place of rude contentions and uncivil contestations?

But was not Antiquity too precise? No: they knew Religion is upheld by
nothing more than Reverence; that we can never be too clean in the
Sanctuary, nor too holy in the place of Holiness, where we are to meet with
our Maker, and to worship the Lord most high, and most holy. Let us pass on
now from this holy place (as it is holy) and behold it a while as beautiful;
for beautiful it is, as well as holy, even the beauty of Holiness; O worship
etc.

Expositors find themselves at a loss, and therefore strive to make it up as
they may, by various expressions. Some say, in Sanctuario magnifico, in the
stately Sanctuary: Some, in magnificentia Sanctitatis, in the sumptuousness
or magnificence of Sanctity: Some, in splendore Sacrarii, in the splendor or
glory of his holy Place: Some, in decore Sanctitatis, in the comeliness or
Beauty of Holiness. Now put them together, and the Place recommended, is
holy, comely, stately, sumptuous, glorious; not more holy, than comely; nor
more sacred, than sumptuous: A most fit Place this to worship the Lord in: O
worship the Lord in the beauty of Holiness.

But is not our Prophet mistaken here? Or is not this combination made up of
inconsistents? For, can Holy and Stately, Beauty and Sanctity, run in a
Line? Yes, may and ought, as much as may be: and where they part and go
asunder, both abate of their perfection: for as nothing magnifies Greatness,
more than Godliness; so nothing sets off Godliness, more than Greatness.
Poor and godly, are as little esteemed of the many, as poor and wise; and ye
know what the Wise man says and shows too, The poor man's wisdom is
despised, Eccl. 9.16. And on the other side, what is a great ungodly man
(without amendment) but like a great unsound Cedar, every day fitter and fitter
for the fire? But where Greatness and Goodness, Highness and Holiness,
Sanctity and Sublimitie meet, there Gods worship is in the full, there God is
magnified indeed; and we cannot but hope, the Lord will go on to magnify
with the full measure of his Blessings.

And we shall quickly perceive Gods worship to be advanced as well by the
dignity of the place, as the person: And it will not do amiss, to appeal in
this case to common experience; for do we not find our selves otherwise
affected, when we come into a naked, deformed, ruinous Temple, adorned with
nothing but dust and cobwebs, and when we come into a goodly reverend
beautiful Church, wherein we may behold on every side remarkable testimonies
of devout Magnificence? Does not the very Fabric and fashion, and solemn
accommodation beget in our hearts a religious regard, and venerable thoughts?

True, a sort of Christians there are, so transelementated and refined, as to
despise all succors and supplies of this kind, as matter of distraction, and
palpable inducements to superstition: Talk, as if God regarded no longer any
other Temples, but the bodies and souls of his Saints. And we cheerfully
profess, we can never too carefully preserve, the inward beauty of these
living Temples; for that is the beauty of Holiness indeed; and if any man
shall pollute this beauty, or defile this temple, him shall God destroy, 1.
Cor. 3. But how the inward grace of these living Temples, should be thought
prejudicial to the outward grace of the beauty of Holiness, is I confess
beyond my capacity.

For whether we look back to the manner of Gods Service under the Law, or to
the choicest times under the Gospel, we shall soon discover Beauty and
Holiness sweetly accorded, till the love of the World had gotten the upper
hand of the love of God. For first, what can we almost imagine, more rich and
gorgeous than the Tabernacle was? wherein all the Instruments and Vtensils
were of pure Gold, even to the Snuff-dishes, Exodus 25. And afterward, the
Temple what was it else; but very matter of wonder and astonishment? a glorious
Spectacle of admiration to all the World. When the Queen of Sheba beheld it,
the majesticall beauty and service thereof so filled her heart, that there was
no more spirit in her, 1. Kings 10.5. And very memorable it is; when the
foundation of the later House was laid, the Fathers and ancient men mourned and
wept, because it was like to be less glorious than the first, Ezr. 3.12. Now
what might be the reason of this incredible magnificence in the first, or of
this religious emulation in the second Temple? Take the reason from King
Solomon, who had studied the point; The house which I build is great, for great
is our God above all Gods, 2. Chron. 2.5. And if -- quia magnus Deus, be a good
argument, the Lord at this day, is as great as ever, and then is this argument
as good as ever.

And had not (think we) the Founders of Churches in Christendom a special
Eye to his glorious Majesty, for whose service they were erected? yes verily:
This made Constantine the Great, and Justinian the Emperor, and Charles the
Great, and Charles the fourth, to honor the Gospel of Christ with so many
stately monuments of their piety all the world over: Saint Cyrill describing
one of them in Jerusalem, calls it (...), Catech. 14.
A Church all adorned and embossed with silver and gold. And Eusebius reporting
of the spacious and beautiful Church at Tire, which was built anew by the
famous B. P. Paulinus, says, the lusture and splendor was such -- (...), Lib.
10.
as made beholders amazed to behold it. And generally thus it was, wheresoever
Churches of note were repaired (which infidels had desolated) they evermore
added -- (...), Eusebius. lib. 10.
a more exquisite beauty than ever before; alleging for themselves, by way
of encouragement, The glory of the latter house, shall be greater than that of
the former; Hag. 2. and that of our Prophet, Great is the Lord, and greatly to
be praised in the City of our God, Psalm. 48.1.

But yet it must be granted, this Christian zeal for the beauty of
Holiness, was not every where alike; decency and comeliness in all the
houses of God, but -- Magnificentia Sanctitatis, this state of Holiness;
Holiness in state, was not usually seen, save in Cities and populous Places,
whither huge multitudes resorting, very ample, and capacious Receipts were
requisite, which anon by the bountiful largition of devouter Christians,
became as sumptuous as capacious: and there was no iniquity in such
inaequalitie; For the beauty of Holiness does well admit of Magis and Minus;
worship, and Holiness, and beauty, like the three Graces, should go hand in
hand; but yet so, as where more worshippers, there more holiness, and then
more beauty there, as a kind of portion and dowry of Holiness.

The Jews had their beauty of holiness more conspicuously in the Tabernacle
and the Temple; but Christians more especially in their Diocesian and mother
Churches; even ever since the Gospel and Christian Faith were well settled; And
it is strange to read how the Jews did excel in bounty, for better
preserving that eminent beauty; Exerc. page ^84.
For as Casaubon and Cuneus have faithfully collected, all, even they also of
the dispersion, P. Cun. lib. 2. cap. 12. and 23. Ex Joseph. lib. 16. cap. 10.
from all parts and quarters sent yearly Contributions to Jerusalem for the
maintenance of the Temple; Because they delighted in the stones thereof, and
had pity on the dust thereof, Psalm. 102.

And here I cannot but congratulate the present times, wherein the Beauty of
Holiness in City and Country seems to revive and flourish as never more: It
argues Religion has life in it, and that we are in love with Religion: And I
beseech you give me leave to condescend a little to particulars, and to
magnify the Lord in the words of Ezra the Priest. Blessed be the Lord God of
our fathers who has put such a thing as this in the Kings heart, to beautify
the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem, Ezra 7.27. And blessed be those
many Worthies which have strengthened the hands of the workmen, to take away
the reproach from Israel by removing the abomination of desolation. And blessed
be all that encourage the work by their cheerful beneficence, even to the
poor widow, that shall cast in her two mites; Let them prosper upon earth, and
let their names be recorded in the Book of Life. And oh how were it to be
wished, that they which were at laying the first stone, might live to behold
the consummation. That they, and all the Benefactors, and above all our most
gracious Zerubbabel, might (when all is finished) worship the Lord, in that
beauty of Holiness; Howsoever this shall be written for the generations to
come, and the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord for this
honorable onset. For what can make a more honorable testimony, or truer
evidence, of our unfeined esteem of Holiness, of our love to God, of our
zeal for his Gospel, than thus to reach out a liberal hand to the
supportation, and a bountiful hand to the exornation of that sacred edifice,
where from age to age beyond all discovery, Holiness has had her habitation?
As for Tatnai, and Shetherbosnai, and Sanballat, open or clandestine enemies to
the beauty of Holiness, Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy
name, O Lord; That we, and they, and all that lay claim to true Holiness, may
prefer the beauty of Holiness before all other beauties, and with clean
hands, and pure hearts, delight to worship the Lord, in the proper place of his
Worship, the beauty of Holiness. I have done at last with the properties of
the place, Holy, and beautiful; Now follows the Prophets entreaty which I
shall treat of in very few words, and so conclude; O worship the Lord in the
beauty of Holiness.

Take it jointly together, and it is not more a Precept than a Prayer; a very
emphaticall obsecration, full of holy importunity, and which argues in our
Princely Prophet an extraordinary love to the Place and the Service here
commended; that his chief delight was there: For, How amiable are thy
Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts, Ps. 84. And how disconsolate, when he was driven
thence? Woe is me. that I am constrained to dwell in Mesech, and to have my
habitation among the Tents of Kedar, Ps. 120. seems to envy the filly Birds;
The Sparrowes and Swallows may lay their young even by thine Altars, O Lord of
Hosts, my King and my God: nor so desirous though to be there alone, but there
with his people; I was glad when they said unto me, We will go into the House
of the Lord, Ps. 122. It joyed him to be seen, In medio Ecclesiae, in the
midst of the Congregation will I praise thee, Ps. 22. He would pay his Vows
(in an exemplarie way) in the presence of all his people, Ps. 116. And we
cannot otherwise understand him here; Come children, hearken unto me, do as
ye see me do; adorate and adorabo went together, we may be sure: And a
blessed sight it was, to see Religion countenanced, and the people religious,
not more by his Regal Precepts and Edicts, than his Presence and Practice; Now
blessed are the people that be in such a case.

Look we then to the practice of King David, what he was wont to do in Gods
House, and we shall soon discern why he is so earnest to send us thither.
Thither went David as well for resolution as devotion: and his religious
attention, was a good part of his adoration there; I will hearken what the Lord
God will say, Psalm. 85. Et quaeram in Templo ejus, and I will enquire in his
Temple, Psalm. 27. And he tells us, he could not be satisfied, till he went
into the Sanctuary of God, Psalm. 73. For the Sanctuary of old was the set place
for satisfaction in doubtful cases, even from Moses to David; -- omnis populus
qui habebat aliquam quaestionem, Exodus 33. All that had ought to say, any doubt
to be resolved, resorted thither for expedition: Prince and People, all
without exception.

And now it is a clear case, it might well import him as a King to be earnest
in this point, that his people would go and receive instruction in public,
in the place appointed, the right place; because Conventicles, and private
meetings, under color of Religion, too often serve unto dangerous practices;
Seditious opinions, and turbulent positions have been ever first invented and
vented in private. There it is, that peremptory pens, and saucy tongues are
thought conscientious, because audacious, and he commonly reputed the best
man, that is the worst subject.

Or consider him (if ye please) as a Prophet: so I am sure he could not be too
earnest for worship in public: For the only way this, to preserve Religion
and the truth untainted, to have Holiness duly taught, in the beauty of
Holiness. Your intermingling and adulterate doctrines have been still
begotten in private, and have passed by peece-meale from the Chamber to the
Chapel, and so to Church; For when or where I pray you, did the envious man
sow his tares? it was, dormientibus hominibus while men slept; in all
likelihood in some private meeting about midnight, when the watchmen of Israel
were asleep. We may not doubt, but peace and truth both depend upon it, that
we assemble to worship the Lord, in the proper place of his worship.

But David (they will say) though a King and a Prophet, was under the Law, and
is he a fit president for professors of the Gospel? Let them appeal then (if
they will) from David, to the son of David our blessed Savior. And how stood
he affected? That he was all in all for the public, most manifest it is by
the good confession which he made, Ioh. 18.20. I spoke openly to the world, I
ever taught in the Synagogue and in the Temple whither the Jews daily resort,
and in secret have I said nothing. Hear this, you that love to whisper it in a
corner; that stand so much for Privatus aliquis, a private spirit, or a private
brother, in a private place: how directly contrary are you to Christ? you for-
omnia Christ for- nihil in occulto, good Christians in the mean while.

For that our Savior could not away with this Parlour-preaching, and these
Chamber-congregations, plain it seems by that charge which he left to his
Church, Matt. 24.26. If they shall say unto you, behold he is in the desert,
go not forth: behold he is in the secret chambers, believe them not. For I
beseech you where has been the meeting place of our Anti-Canonicall
Canonists, and where have they enacted their Antisynodicall Sanctions, but, in
deserto, or in Cubiculo? there is therefore no believing them. Alas, when they
have set up once in private, the great idol of their own imaginations, and
have consulted their grand Oracle, I was saying, at the Idols table, they will
not stick to say and decree any thing. No appealing then from David to the son
of David in this case, both are for the public, for the solemn assembly
both, for the Temple and the holy place, the beauty of Holiness.

And now, represent we David to our thoughts as a King or a Prophet, we must
needs confess that this entreatie here is to singular good purpose, that it
makes very much for truth, and unity, and piety. Now the God of peace and
truth lead us into all truth, and bring us unto that peace which passes all
understandding; bring us all in mercy from the beauty of Holiness in the
kingdom of Grace, to the Holy of Holies in the kingdom of Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

