THE MAGISTRATES SCRIPTVRE.
PSALM. 82. 6. 7. I have said ye are gods, and ye all are the children of
the most highest, but you shall die like men and fall like one of the Princes.
I May call this text the Magistrates scripture, considering the state of kings
and governors, how much good they might do, and how little they perform. God
becomes a rememberancer unto them, and first shows what a high calling Princes
and rulers have: and then least they should be proud of it, and make their
magistracy a chair of ease, he turns upon them again, as though he had
another message unto them, and tells them, that though they be above other, yet
they shall die like other: and though they judge here, yet they shall be judged
hereafter, and give account of their stewardship how they have governed, as
strait as their subjects how they have obeyed. A good memorandum for all in
authority so to deal in this kingdom, that they lose not the kingdom to
come.

I have said ye are gods, etc. How can he call them gods, which calls himself
the only God, and says, there are no more gods but he? Esaias 44. 5. 45. 21. I
have made thee Pharao his God, says God to Moses, Exodus 7. 1. because he had
given him power to speak unto Pharao in his name, and to execute his
judgments upon them. Out of this name, Rulers may learn how to govern, and
subjects how to obey. As inferior Magistrates do nothing but as the superior
Magistrate prescribes: so they which rule under God, for God, must rule by the
prescript of God, and do nothing but as their conscience tells them that God
would do himself. Therefore they which use their power against God, which
bear the person of God, and execute the will of the devil: which make laws
against Gods law, and be enemies to his servants, are worse then Balaam, which
would not curse whom God blessed, and so much as in the^ lies, make God a
lier, because they cannot so well be called gods as devils; such gods go to hell.

I have said ye are gods, etc. First this name enformes us what kind of rulers
and magistrates we should choose. Those which excel all other men like gods
amongst men: for a king should be a man after Gods own heart like David, as
all those whom God set over his people in his mercy, and not in his anger, had
some note of excellency above the rest, which God chose them by, as it is the
Magistrates mark: the mildest man, Numb. 12. 3. or the wisest man, 1. Reg. 4.
31. or the iustest man, Heb. 7. 2. As though if al these had met in one, the
Inquisition should have stayed there, and all give place to him: but our
virtues are so singled that he which was called the mildest, is not called the
wisest, and he which was called the wisest is not called the iustest, as though
God found some defect in his own election, for when he chose one mild,
another wise, and another just: he showed that he would have one which is
mild, and wise, and just, like himself. Elisha thought that the single
spirit was not enough, but required that the spirit of Eliah 2. King. 2. 9.
might be doubled upon him, because he was a Prophet which should teach other.
So we should pick out the^ which have a double spirit to be Magistrates,
because they must govern other; as God picked forth Joshua in Moses his room.
He might have chosen many out of all Israel, which had the spirit of
wisdom, but he chose Joshua, of whom he says that he was full of the spirit
of wisdom, Deuteronomy. 24. 9. Showing that if one be better then another, he should
be chosen before the rest. Therefore Samuel went over all 1. Sam. 16. 5.
the sons of Ishai, to anoint a successor to Saul, and put back one after
another which thought themselves fit: yet there was but one amongst them which
pleased God, and the Prophet could scarce discern him: so necessary it is
that this choice be committed to none but the godly, because he which would
have chosen the best, yet liked another before him. Therefore there was such a
scrutenie 1. Sam. 10. 20.
amongst the tribes to find out the man whom God had chosen, as Iethro taught
Moses to cull Exodus 18. 21.
out of all the people, those which had best courage and feared God, and dealt
truly, and hated covetousness. Therefore a wicked man may not supply the place
of God, as the Scribes and Pharisees sat in Matthew. 23. 2.
Moses chair, but as it is said of Judas, let another take his place: so let
better take their place, for they which are called gods must be like God. If
all should be holy as he is holy: how much more should they be pure as he is
pure, wise as he is wise, just as he is just, which bear his name, which
supply his person, and guide the world to good or evil. If the race should be
to the swift, and the battle to the strong, then as Saul did exceed all the
men of Israel from the shoulders upward: 1. Sam. 9. 2.
so he which commands other, should exceed other in gifts of grace, that they
may know him from the rest, and say this is he that excells the rest in
virtue, as Saul did in stature: like the king of Bees, which is fairest of all
the hiue. Therefore if Pharao would let none but Joseph govern Egypt, in whom
was the spirit of God, Genesis 41. 38. much more ought Christian Princes in the
choosing of Joseph's in their common wealths. And therefore they ought not to
be like Rehoboam, which made them his counselors, whom he should have banished
the court, 1. Reg. 12. 8.

Secondly, this extolleth the calling of Magistrates, as Jacob honored
Iosephes children, when he said they should be called after his name: so God
honors the Magistrates, when he gives them his own name, calling them gods,
as though there were a kind of godhead in them. These things pertain to the
wise and they themselves do not always see it: yet he which has a spiritual
eye, and carries the pattern of God in his heart, may see another likeness of
God in Magistrates then in common persons: as the builders of the temple had a
special wisdom and spirit, which God gave them for that work which they
were chosen unto. So when Samuel had anointed David, he says that the spirit
of the Lord came upon 1. Sam. 16. 13.
David from that day forward, as though he had another spirit after, then he
had before. So there is a difference between kings and subjects: though they
be not gods, yet they are liker God then other: the Prince is like a great
image of God, the Magistrates are like little images of God, appointed to rule
for God, to make laws for God, to reward for God, to punish for God, to speak
for God, to fight for God, to reform for God: and therefore their battles 1.
Sam. 28. 26. 2. Chron. 9. 6.
are called the Lords battles, and their judgments the Lords Psalm. 2. 6.
judgments, and their throne the Lords throne, and the kings themselves, his
kings, to show that they are al to god like hands: by some he reaches mercy,
by some justice, by some peace, by some counsel, as Christ distributed the
loaves and the fishes Matthew. 14. 19.
by the hands of his disciples: this God requires of all, when he calls them
gods, to rule as he would rule, judge as he would judge, correct as he would
correct, reward as he would reward, because it is said that they are in steed
of the Lord God, to do 2. Chron. 9. 8.
as he would do. This is a good study for Magistrates in all their judgments
to consider, what God would do, because they are in steed of God. I rule for
God, I speak for God, I judge for God, I reward for God, I correct for God:
how would God do? how would he determine? And it shall be my sentence: as we
should think how Matthew. 11. 29.
Christ prayed before we pray, and how he spoke before we speak, because his
actions are our instructions: so they should think how Christ would judge
before they judge, because Gods law is appointed for their law. Such a thought
must needs level Deuteronomy. 17. 19.
the way before them, and put them in mind of a good and just, and holy
judgment, because God is good, and just, and holy.

Thirdly, they are called gods, to teach them how they should govern,
howsoever other care for the glory of God, the performance of his will, the
reformation of his church, Princes, and rulers, which are gods themselves, are
to do the business of God as their own business: because they are gods, Gods
business is their business, Gods law is their law, Gods honor is their honor.
When the king, or judge, or magistrate does seek the kingdom and glory of
God, he should think that he seeks his own kingdom and glory, and therefore
seek it and further it as earnestly and diligently as he would his own, and
rule and judge, and speak, and punish, and consult, as he would for himself:
even as David counted Gods Psalm. 139. 21.
foes his foes, and Gods friends his friends: and Moses persecuted Exodus 32. 27.
the^ which were Idolaters against Number. 16. 15.
God, as he did them which were traitors to him.

Fourthly, they are called gods to encourage them in their office, and to teach
them that they need not fear nor dread the persons of men, but as God does
that which is just and good without the iealosie of men; so they should forget
themselves to be men, which are led by the arms between favor and fear, and
think themselves gods which fear nothing. This boldness is so necessary in
them, which should judge all alike, that in Deuteronomy. 3. 28. Moses encourages
Joshua: in Joshua. 2. 18. the people encourage him: in the 9. verse, God does
encourage him, saying, that he will be with him: but here he is with him, for
hearing God call them gods, shows that God is there, nay, that they are as
God, which powers such a princelike 1. Sam. 10. 9.
spirit upon them, as he did upon Saul, so soon as he was king. So hearing
that they are gods, it should change them, and make them excel the order of
men, until they resemble God, after who^ they are named: as Solomon studied 1.
King. 3. 9.
and prayed till he was wiser then all that he governed. Then 1. King. 4. 30.
they need not blush to read this testimony, I have said ye are gods, etc. or
else it will seem a check unto them. As many sit in gods place, and yet
never knew that the scripture called them gods, nor 1. Sam. 25. 25.
why they have this name no more then Naball: so many play Nabal in their
offices, and are readier to ask who is David? who is Christ? when his cause
comes before them, then speak or do any thing for him. But the women go
before them like Abigail, as though God would shame them with the weaker
vessel. Does any man but they forget his name? Princes and rulers have many
names of honor, but this is the honorablest name in their titles, that they
are called gods: other names have been given them of men for reverence or
flattery, but no man could give them this name but God himself. Therefore
their name is a glass wherein they may see their duty, how God does honor
the^, and how they should honor him, and think what am I more then he, that
God should set me in his own chair, and give me his own name more then to
another? he has not done so to al. They which are called his children are
happy, they which are called his disciples at happy, they which are called
his servants are happy: but how happy are they whom he calls gods? It
seems that if he could have called them by a higher name then his own he
would have called them by some other name; but this word is enough to put them
in mind of all that they should do: think that ye are gods, and it will make
you ashamed to obey the devil, or the world, or the flesh in any thing.
Therefore how can that Romish Antichrist, which sits in the 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
temple of God with his kings and Magistrates, and set themselves against God
be called gods? Are they gods where Gods cause is worst heard? are they gods
which make laws against God? Are the gods persecuters of Gods children? Nay
does he notly which calls the^ noble, or sovereign, or gracious? If they
deserve not their titles, how do they deserve their places? Can they think of
their names and not be abashed? Can they sit down in Gods place and speak
against him? judge against him? decree against him? Does iniquity become gods?
does partiality become gods? do bribes become gods? They are greedy gods,
Idol gods, belly gods, and may be termed gods, because they are like 2. Cor. 4.
4.
the God of this world, which do but stay like Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4.
until their iniquities be full, that they may be cast out like beasts, a
derision to them whom they govern.

But they which regard this honorable testimony of God, as Nehemiah said, when
he was tempted Nehem. 6. 1^.
to fly, should such a man as I fly? So when they are tempted with bribes, say,
should such a man as I take bribes? Should such a man as I do wrong? Should
such a man as I be a liar? or swearer? or a scoffer? or a drunkard? or a
gamester? or an usurer? or a prophaner? upon whom all eyes are set to take
their example, and would harken sooner then unto God himself? The^ he
resolves to rule according to his name, knowing that all the souls which
might be won by him, shall be required of him, as the sins of Israel were
imputed to Jeroboam. Thus God does flatter them as it were to profit them, 2.
King. 15. 30.
and calls them gods, to teach them their duty to God. All should be godly,
but they should be like gods: that is, as I may say, more the^ godly, or the
next to God in godliness. If any come between, they loose their honor, and
should think themselves put down like a guest which is set lower, or a
Justice turned out of his office. For so God does humble them, and disgrace
them which dishonor their callings, as he did Saul when the princely spirit
departed from him, his sons and his daughters, and his subjects did favor 1.
Sam. 22. 7.
David more then him, that he 1. Sam. 19. 4. and 17. 1. Sam. 21. 17.
could do nothing with them: because God did not love him, he would not let his
servants love him: but when David came to the 1. Sam. 14. 45.
crown, because he had grace with God, he prospered in all that he went about,
and reformed what 2. Sam. 5. 10.
he would; for the Lord (as he says) subdewed the people to him, that is, made
them incline to his will: as we read of Saul, in the beginning of his reign
before he had rebelled, a band of me^ did cleave unto him: of whom it is said,
whose hearts God had touched: as though while the rulers hearts 1. Sam. 10. 26.
do stand toward God, the peoples hearts should stand toward them, and they
should carry the^ like God to all their desires: as it is said of David,
whatsoever the king did, 1. Sam. 3. 26.
pleased all the people.

Thus their name tells them how they should rule, and by consequent, teaches us
how we should obey. God calls them gods, therefore he which contemns them
contemns God: God calls them fathers, therefore we must reverence them like
fathers: God calls them Kings, Princes, Lords, judges, powers, rulers, and
governors, which are all names of honor: and shall we dishonor whom God does
honor? Our first lesson is, Fear God: the next is, Honor Prou. 14. 21.
the king, 1. Pet. 2. 17. We may not put king before God, nor any other before
the king, that is as Paul interprets, We must obey Romans 13. 5.
for conscience sake, not against conscience, for the^ we put the king before
God, which Christ says, have no power but from God, and John. 19. 11.
therefore cannot make themselves magistrates, no more the^ they can make
themselves gods. As none but God could give this name, so no man which exalts
himself can challenge this honor, no more the^ Heb. 5. 4.
Simon Magus was greater because Acts. 8. 9.
he called himself a great man; but they to who^ God says, I have called you
gods, as though he had the naming and appointing of the^. Every power is from
God, for by nature Romans 13. 7.
no man can challenge power over other, but by the word: and therefore every
soul which is subject to God, must be subject to them, for 1. Pet. 2. 23.
he which calls them kings, calls us Iere. 27. 12.
subjects: this is their patent, as the queen of Sheba said to Solomon, 2.
Chron. 9. 8.
that God has chosen the^ kings, and set them upon the throne. As he said, and
all things were made, Genesis 1.
so as he says all things should be. Therefore unless I say, that they have
their ordination from God, though they be lords, and Judges, and Magistrates,
yet are no Lords, no Judges, no Magistrates of God. And therefore the Pope and
his Cardinals, to whom God never said, Ye are Lords, or Judges, or
Magistrates, are no Lords, no Judges, no Magistrates of God: but that which the
Lord says, they are that they are, and no more, though they put on a triple
crown, and as the Lord calls them, so men should call them, if they were worthy
to be called as others were, Watch men, Pastors, Doctors, and Teachers: but
seeing they be not worthy of these titles, why should they have higher? They
which give them more then the Lord gives them, make the^ proud and insolent,
and tyrannous, more then they which are Lords and Judges, and Magistrates in
deed. But for these titles and base borne honor, which they have incroched
from men that puff them, and trouble them like Saul's armor, 1. Sam. 17. 39.
they would either intend the duty of ministers, and teach as the Apostles
did, or else forsake those offices, and be ashamed of abiding in that calling
which belongs not unto them; as Zachary speaks: Zach. 13. 4.
whereas now they are so combred and mingled, as one says of the Pope, he is
neither God nor man: so may it be said of both him and his Cardinals, that they
are neither good ministers, nor good magistrates, but linsie wolsie, a mingle
mangle between both, and like neither. Seeking a superfluous title, they have
forgotten all necessary studies: for they never preach nor write, but to
maintain their kingdom, which falls like the tower of Babel, Genesis 11.
faster then they build. Therefore as Naomi said, call me no more Naomi, which
signifies beautiful, but call me Mara which signifies Ruth. 1. 20.
bitter. So they may say, call us no more bishops, or pastors, or doctors,
which signifies preachers, but call us robbers, and sleepers, and giants, and
pharisees, whom we succeed, for they have no other reason why they should be
called bishops which do not watch, or pastors which do not feed, or doctors
which do not teach, but that the Idols were called gods, though Exodus 20. 23.
they were unlike God. If their bodies had grown as far out of square since
Christ's ascension, as their titles, and pomp, and honor, they might stand in
the maine sea and not drown, for their heads would be above the water. It
follows. But ye shall die as a man. Here he distinguishes between mortal
gods, and the immortal God. Ye have seen their glory, now behold their end,
They shall die like other. It had been a great Sessions for all other to die,
but for Magistrates, for Princes, for Kings, for Emperors to die as they die,
what a battle is this? which leaves no man alive, shall the gods die to? He
gives them their title, but he tells them their lot. Though their power, though
their wealth, though their honor, though their titles, though their tyranny,
though their train, though their friends, though their ease, though their
pleasure, though their diet, though their clothing be not like other, yet their
end shall be like other, nay their ends are like to be more fearful the^
other: for God makes them examples of great me^, as he did of Pharao, and
therefore we see so many strange and sudden deaths of Princes more then of
other. Exodus 9. 16.
Therefore he spoke with the least when he said, Ye shall die like other: for
few of them escape the sword, knife, or poison, which other never fear: but if
all your subjects were your friends, yet ye shall die like other: for are ye
not cold when winter comes? are ye not withered when age comes? are ye not
weak when sickness comes? and shall ye not go when death comes? Therefore be
not proud of thine honor, as though it would last always, for thou shall die,
and then all thine honor shall forsake thee, and another shall rise in thy
place, as great as thou, and when his glass is run, another shall follow him,
and so another till death have all. Be not cruel in thine authority, as
though it would last always, for thou shall die, and then thine authority
shall die with thee, and they which remain alive shall send curses after thee,
because thy life was a scourge. Be not secure for thy wealth, as though it
would last always, for thou shall die, and then another shall take thy riches,
and thou shall go to give account how thou came by them. How many things does
he implie when he says ye shall die? this is a bar in their arms, which
makes the proudest peacocke lay down his feathers so often as he thinks upon
it, though he prick them up again. Whereby the holy Ghost would have them
learn, that nothing will make them live, and rule, and deal so well in their
thrones, as to remember that they shall die and shortly give account for all.
Signifying that prosperity makes us forgetful of our end, and that these
mortal gods live as though they were immortal. A hard thing for Princes to
remember death, when they have no leisure to think of it, but chop in the
earth before they be ware. Like a man which walks over a field covered with
snow, sees not his way, but when he thinks to run on, suddenly falls into a
pit: even so they which have all things at will, and swim in pleasure, which as
snow covers their way and dazeleth their sight, while they think to live on
and to rejoice still, suddenly rush upon death, and make shipwreck in the calm
sea. Therefore it is good for them to hear they are gods: so it is meet to know
they shall die. Wherefore ye shall die says he in the next words, as if he would
prevent some conceit that they would take of words which he cast out before,
he cools them quickly before they swel, and deferres not to another time, but
where he calls them gods, there he calls them worms meat, lest they should
crow between the praise and the check.

I have said ye are gods, but ye shall die. But for this die many would live
a merry life, and feast, and sport, and let the world slide: but the
remembrance of death is like a dampe which puts out all the lights of pleasure,
and makes him rub, and frown, and whine which thinks upon it, as if a mote
were in his eye. O how heavy tidings is this to hear thou shall die from him
which has life and death in his own hands: when the messenger is sent to the^
which reign like gods: as if he should say, even you which glister like
Angels, whom all the world admires, and sues, and bows to: which are called
honorable, mighty and gracious Lords: I will tell you to what your honor shall
come: first ye shall wax old like other, then ye shall fall sick like other,
then ye shall die like other, then ye shall be buried like other, then ye
shall be consumed like other, then ye shall be judged like other, even like the
beggars which cry at your gate. One sickens, the other sickens: one dies, the
other dies: one rots, the other rots. Look in the grave and show me which was
Dives, and which was Lazarus. This is some comfort to the poor, that once he
shall be like the rich: one day he shall be as welthie, as mighty, as
glorious, as a king: one hour of death will make the^ al alike: they which
crowed over other, and looked down upon them like oaks, other shall walk
upon them like worms, and they shall be gone as if they had never been. Where
is Alexander that conquered all the world, and after sought for another,
because one would not satisfy him? Where is Zerxes, which could not number his
army for multitude? Where is Nemrod which built his nest in Genesis 11. 4.
the clouds? Where is Sampson which slew an army with the iaw of an ass?
Where is Constantine, Nero, Galigula, Titus, Vespatian, Domicius, thunderboltes
in their kinds? One hundred Princes of England are dead and but one alive: the
rest are gone to give account how they ruled here, when they sustained the
person of God. Who would have thought (says Jeremy) that the enemy should
have entered into Jerusalem, and spoiled that fair City? yet he brake into
it, and Jerusalem was ransackt like other. Who would have thought that Herod
which was honored like a God, should have bin devoured with worms, and savor
that none could abide him? yet while he was in his pomp, suddenly he was
stroke^, and al his glory eaten with worms. Who would have thought that Iesabel
that beautiful temptation, should have bin gnawn of dogs? yet she was cast to
dogs, and not an ear left to season the grave. What would he think that should
have seen Solomon in his roialty, and after see him in the clay? O world
unworthy to be beloved who has made this proud slaughter? Age, Sickness, and
Death: the three so^moners which have no respect of persons, made them pay the
ransom themselves, and bow to the earth whence they came: there lie the men
which were called gods. How soon the flower of this world is faded! Yesterday
the tallest Cedar in Libanus, to day like a broken stick trodden under foot:
yesterday the stateliest upon earth, to day shrouded in earth, forsaken,
forgotten, that the poorest wretch alive would not be like unto him, which
yesterday crouched and bowed to his knees. Then woe to them which had the names
of God and the sins of men, for the mighty (says Esaias) shall be mightily
tormented All their friends, and subjects, and servants forsake them, because
they go to prison, to try the mercy of hell, and take what the spirit of
darkness will heap upon them. There lie the men which were called gods, and
thus ends the pilgrimage of kings, princes, and rulers, this is our life: while
we enjoy it we loose it: like the sun which flies swifter then an arrow, and
yet no man perceiues that it moves. He which lived 900. years could not Genesis 5.
27.
hold out one hour longer, and what has he now more then the child which
lived but a year? Where are they which founded this goodly City? which
possessed these fair houses? which walked these pleasant fields? which erected
these stately temples? which kneeled in these seats? which preached out of
this place but 30. years ago? Is not earth turned to earth? and shall not our
sun set like theirs when the night comes? Yet we cannot believe that death
will deal with us. as he has dealt with them: though all men die, yet every
man dreams, I shall escape, or at least I shall live till I be old. This is
strange, men cannot think that God will do again that which he does daily,
or that he will deal with them as he deals with other. Tell us that all other
shall die, and we believe it: tell one of us that we shall die, and we believe
it sooner of all then of one: though we be sore, though we be weak, though we
be sick, though we be elder then those whom we follow to the ground. So they
thought which lie in this mould under your feet, as you do. If wisdom, or
riches, or favor could have entreated death, these which lived before us would
have kept our possessions from us: but death would take no bail, we are all
tenants at will, and we must leave this cottage whenever the landlord will put
another in our room; at a years, at a months, at a weeks, at a days, at an
hours warning or less. The cloth which we wear upon our backs, the graves
which are under our feet, the sun which sets over our heads, the meat which
goes into our mouths, do cry unto us, that we shall wear, and set, and die,
like the beasts, and souls, and fishes, which now are dead in our dishes, but
even now were living in their elements. Our fathers have sommoned us, and we
must so^mon our children to the grave. Every thing, every day suffers some
eclipse, nothing stands at a stay, but one creature calls to another, let us
leave this world. while we play our pageants upon this stage of short
continuance, every man has a part, some longer, and some shorter, and while
the actors are at it, suddenly death steps upon the stage like a haulke, which
separates one of the doves from the flight, and shootes his dart, where it
lights, there falls one of the actors dead before them, and makes all the rest
aghast. They muse and mourn, and bury him, and then to the sport again: while
they sing, and play, and dance, death comes again and strikes another: there
he lies, they mourn him and bury him, as they did the former, and play
again: so one after another till the players be vanished, like the accusers
which came before Christ, and death is the last upon the stage. So the figure
of this word passes away. Many which stand here may lie here or elsewhere
within this tweluemoneth: but thou think it is not I, and he thinks it is
not he, but he which thinks so, comes soonest to it: if we should live but
a year, we would prepare our selves to die, and do all that God would have us,
that we might live in heaven, and escape the fiery lake, where the glutton has
not a drop of water to cool the tip of his tongue. But now we know not
whether we shall live a week to an end, we will do nothing that he bids us, but
abide the venture: so one is taken after another, and because we are not
ready, therefore we go against our will like Lots wife out of Sodom. This is
our fashion to set the best last, until we cannot forsake our sins, nor hope
of mercy. Thus I have proclaimed to all Kings, Princes, Judges, Counselors,
and Magistrates, that which Esaias did to one, Set thy things in order for thou
shall die. Yet 25. years were behind, when the Prophet warned him to set all
things in order, yet I cannot promise you 25. years, for many princes do not
reign so long, for one that does. That which Esaias spoke to one, here God
pronounces of all, Ye shall die: therefore take the message which is sent
unto you, and when you think of your honor, think of your end. These two
remembrances to bear in mind, that ye are gods, and think that ye shall
die. The holy ghost thought enough to teach you how to live, and how to rule:
and for us that have not so much as the name of an immortal thing, like them
which are called gods, that we may be like God hereafter: let us prepare before
the account, for none are in heaven, but they which left the world before the
world left them.

A GODLY PRAYER TO BE SAID AT all times.
BEcause I have sinned O Lord, and done wickedly in thy sight, and provoked
thee to anger by my abominable wickedness, making my body which thou have
ordained a vessel for thine honor, an instrument to most detestable filthiness,
o Lord be merciful unto me, and pardon me this great wickedness: look not upon
me good father with the eyes of justice, neither do thou draw against me the
sword of judgment, for the^ how shall I that am but dust stand in thy
presence, when thy wrathful indignation comes forth as a whirlewind, and thy
heavy displeasure as a mighty tempest: seeing the earth trembles, the
depthes are discovered, and the very heavens are shaken when thou art angry?
Exercise not therefore thy fury against me, that am but as chafe before the
wind, and as stubble against a flaming fire: though I have sinned grieuouslie
in thy sight, preferring my wicked desire before thy holy commandment:
esteeming the pleasure of a moment before eternal and everlasting joys: nay,
which is worse, making more account of vileness and vanity, and extreme
folly, and madness, then of the glory and majesty of the most excellent,
wonderful, and blessed God, nothing dreading his displeasure whose wrath
makes the devils to quake, and burns unquenchable unto the bottomless pit
of hell: whose might is so great that by the breath of his nosthrils he is able
in the twinkling of an eye to destroy a thousand worlds: yet am I bold,
prostrating my self before the throne of thy majesty, heartely to beseech and
humbly to entreat thee, that thou will not deal with me according to my
merits, for I have deserved that thou should rain down fire and brimstone
from out of heaven upon me to devour me, or to open the earth underneath me, to
swallow me up quick unto hell: but thou art gracious and full of compassion,
and rich in mercies, therefore do men put their trust under the shadow of thy
wings. I have none in heaven to fly unto but thee, nor in earth, of whom I may
receive any comfort, but at thy favorable hands, which are stretched out day
and night to receive all that by earnest repentance turn unto thee, being
ready to ease all those that are laden with the burden of their sin, and to
refresh their distressed consiences. In the multitude of thy mercies I approach
unto thee O Lord, desiring thee to look down from the height of thy
sanctuary upon me poor and wretched sinner, and to wipe away mine offenses
and to blot out my misdeedes, especially this my ungracious, unclean, and
ungodly act, that it may not come up in remembrance with thee, nor be imputed
to me for ever, for thy sons sake O Lord, in whom thou art well pleased, in
whom thou wast fully satisfied upon the cross for my sins: grant me free
pardon and remission of that I have so foolishlie by my exceeding frailty
committed against thee in this shameful deed. But O thou my unclean and
unthankful soul! my ungodly and rebellious heart! what did I sinful wretch,
and execrable caytife, so blindly and desperately attempt? How art thou become
quite senseless, that thou wast so ready to anger thy most loving God, and to
provoke thy most mighty judge, that thou might satisfy thy filthy flesh,
suborned both by thine and Gods most malicious adversary, to grieve and vex
the spirit of the Lord, and to damn thy self for ever? Has not God of his
singular favor made the heavens of old, and placed the sun and moon in them,
two glorious lights with innumerable stars, a wonderful workmanship for thy
use and benefit? Has he not lifted up the clouds by his strong arm, and
heaped treasures of reign, hail, and snow to do thee service? Has he not in
the midst of the world laid the foundations of the earth, that thou might
have a stable habitation, and might from thence behold every way thou
look the walls of his beautiful palace. Has he not gathered the waters
into one place, and made the dry land appear, and drawn forth by his power a
pure substance of air between heaven and earth, that fishes might multiply
in the seas, fowls in great abounda^ce fly in the open face of the firmament,
tender plants, herbs, flowers, and trees in all variety, grow and fructify
upon the ground: yea creeping things, cattle and beasts increase in infinite
number, in pastures, fields, garde^s, orchards and groves; and all these to do
thee pleasure? Has he not further given thee springs and rivers, gold and
silver, pearls and jewels even plenty; of streams, stoanes, and metal, to
furnish thee with whatsoever for profit thou need, or for pleasure
desire? Has he not made thee Lord and ruler over all his creatures, even
over the huge Elephants, the Whale, the strong Lion, and Unicorn, and horse of
war? over the savage Tigars, bears and wolves? over the mighty Eagle,
Griffin, Vultur, Ostrich and haulke? Art thou not clad and defended, fed and
enriched, cheered and renowned by these his creatures, and that all the parts of
thy body, and senses of thy mind might be partakers of his goodness, and with
his sweetness refreshed, comforted and delighted in great measure? Yea above all
this, has he not breathed into thy body an immortal soul, that thou
might remain with him in glory for ever? Did he not at the first frame
thee like unto himself, that he might therefore love thee as his son? Did he
not cast into thy spirit the beams of his wisdom, that thou through thy
understanding might behold him and his glory and stirred up sparks of
goodness in thy heart, that thou might by thy affection embrace him and his
bounty, and be made perfectly blessed by his infinite happiness, who when
Adam thy ungrateful father by distrusting him that had faithfully promised,
was thoroughly able to fulfill his will, and resolutely determined exceedingly
to advance him, having given him this whole world in testimony thereof by
discontenting his mind with the excellent estate he was placed in of
unspeakable love, unless he might be as good as God himself, proudly
desiring to make dust the fellow of him who was from everlasting infinitely full
of wisdom, power, grace and majesty, and had done all this at the persuasion
of the most traitorous rebel of his right gracious king, and spiteful enemy
of his most bountiful master, even then when this most villainous conspiring
with Gods notorious adversary, had deserved immortal hatred against him and
all that pertained unto him: yea thee as yet unborn, but contained in him
whose whole mass by this impious disobedience became by just judgment a
temple of cursed estate for ever, and for ever: thou also thy self bringing
forth fruit of contempt of his Law, who is most holy, merciful and mighty:
yet even then I say, of unspeakable pity and compassion intended, nay
promised, nay labored to deliver him and thee from that dreadful vengeance
which ye had purchased by your own wicked and ungracious demerits, and to
reconcile you base abiects and vile castawayes, and yet stubborn and
spightfull haters of the great God Jehovah, who when there was no means to be
found in heaven, nor seas, nor in the earth, nor under the earth, but that he
should damn his only begotten son, the very brightness of his glory, who
never offended him, but was an eternal delight unto his soul, and rejoicing
unto his spirit, that thou might be saved, a gross lump of slime and clay,
still vexing him by thy wickedness: yet delivered his son into the full power
of Satan, to put him to a most shameful death, by the hands of most detestable
persons, and did cast him far away out of his favor, and threw him down
into the bottomless pit of his unsupportable wrath and indignation, that thou
might be placed between his own arms in the kingdom of heaven, in all
roialtie and glory, as his dear and entirely beloved son. Why therefore
wast thou o my unholy and unthankful nature so ready and prone, so violent
and headlong to commit things highly displeasant in his sight, who in a
manner, and as far as it was possible slew himself for thy saftie when he
had no creature so disobedient unto him as thee? O thou my inward soul, and
spirit of my mind awake and stand up to defend thy self, for thou art
besieged with mighty enemies, the prince of darkness, the rulers of the air,
the spiritual craftiness and policies of hell! why arisest thou not thou
sluggard? thy foes in great number are prepared with many ambushmentes, having
a huge army all maliciously bent with venomous darts to pearce through thy
heart: they are entered thy hold at all five gates of thy outward senses: yea
they have broken down thy inward doors, and have left thee but one window
toward heaven to escape by, even thy prayers whereto the spirit of God
waits thy speedy coming: make have o thou heavy with sleep, or thou art
taken by thy cruel enemies, whose hands are of iron, and their teeth of
steel to grind thy very bones to powder: harken no longer to that stinking
harlot, thy wicked appetit, which lying in thy bosom, desires nothing but thy
utter destruction; she persuades thee that thou art in no present danger,
that she may rejoice at thy miserable end. It may be thou think O thou
chief of fools and ox that art fed to the slaughter, that though thou go on
a little way in thy pleasant path, thou may return back when thou will, and
thy little wandering will not greatly be regarded. O thou unwise and sottish of
heart! when will thou understand? Has the son of God endured such pain for
the smallest of thy sins, and make thou so light account of so grievous
crimes? Does the law thunder curses, and plagues, and everlasting torments
against thy least inordinate motions, and did thou not dread to perform so
shameless a practice? Know thou not that the eyes of God and his Angels
behold the doing that thou would be ashamed to do in the presence of
ungodly men, or unclean beasts? or do thou not consider how thou did
grieve the spirit of God, who has vouchsafed of his infinite mercy to dwell
in thy body to this end, chiefly that he might mortify thy carnal lusts? Why
did thou then defile his temple which he has sanctified to be an house for
himself to dwell in? take heed thou drive not out so worthy and noble a guest,
by such swinish and fleshly behavior, who if he once depart, then shall thou
be an hold for devils, and legions of damned spirits, that they may stuff
thee full of al manner of iniquity, and then at length become pitch and
brimstone to maintain the fire of Gods scorching wrath in thy sinews,
spirits, and inward bowels, drinking out in full measure the dregs of the
wine of his rage and fury: and can thou be so blind and reachlesse, that for
the vain pleasure of sin for a little while, thou will constrain God to
torment thee everlastingly, who it may be even at this instant, if thou will
still try his patience and long sufferance, will suddenly take thy spirit
from thee, or come in judgment to recompense to all sinners by his final
sentence in the burning of the whole world, the stipend of horror, shame,
confusion and utter reprobation: and weigh with thy self that to approach to
God is the chiefest joy of the chosen, to behold his glorious countenance in
the face of his son, whereas thy sins do separate thee from him, and make
thee afraid to speak to him by prayers, which is thy chiefest and greatest
solace in this mortal life. How much more will thy ungodliness make thee wish
delay of the last judgment, the speedy and present coming whereof is a
chief prop of our fight, in the midst of so many troubles and temptations:
and withal, remember how the devil that roaring lion labors by this impure
act to make thee most filthy and loathsome in the sight of God, and rejoices
to see thy gracious father, merciful Savior, and comfortable sanctifier so
abused and withstood, and angered by thee whom he has wonderfully made,
carefully preserved, and dearly redeemed, and tenderly loved, that if it may
be thou should by utter apostasy dishonor him in the face of the world,
who has advanced thee in the presence of all his Angels: and though thou be so
sure in faith that thou can not utterly fall (the consideration whereof
should make thee more duetifull and not encourage thee in a sinful course) yet
may thou by little and little, and by often falling, bring thy self into a
better liking, both of the wicked, and of wickedness itself, whom thou ought
to hate with a perfect hatred, and then God by just judgment cast thee into a
sure sleep, that thy filthihesse may be seen of men, and thou condemned to
the grief of the righteous, and scorned to thy shame of the ungodly: and in
the mean season, by provoking Gods judgment, be spoiled of thy goodly
ornaments, of thy godly desires, of religious thoughts, of zealous affections,
of christian communication, of holy endeavors, of assured persuasions of faith,
of steadfast waitings through hope: of constant suffering by patience, and
hearty reioicings from love. In the perfect consummation of which things
because all happiness consists, beware thou careless wretch, lest suddenly
by thy abominable filthiness, thou either for a time wholly deprive thy self
of comfortable feeling of these things, or much diminish thy present graces and
blessings received of the holy spirit, to the glory of God the Father. But
why do I utter my voice, or strive to make a dead carkas move? O quicken thou
me that art the fountain of life, and call thou out of heaven thy dwelling
place, that my wandering soul may hear the voice of her shepherd, and follow
thee whither soever thou leadest: nay of thy tender compassion take me up upon
thy shoulders, and carry me gently into thy fold again: for thieves have
stolen me away, and have bound my feet so that I cannot go, and they watch for
me until thou art gone that they may carry me away quick from thy pastures: O
do thou therefore presently deliver me, and give me thy helping hand: O cast
thou down by thy spirit my raging lust, and by thy grace subdue mine untamed
affection. I am weak O Lord and unable to resist the force of my mighty
adversary: send thy help from above, and save me out of the jaws of the
cruel lion: thou have delivered me out of the mouth of hell; o let not the
gates thereof any more prevail against me: let me not any longer be occupied
in ungodliness, least mine enime triumph over me, saying in his malicious
heart, there, there, so would I have it. Let this sin be far from me o Lord,
that I should defile my self any more with this notorious wickedness: work
therefore in mine heart an utter detestation of it, that I may ever hereafter
keep my self pure and unspotted for thy kingdom. Thou that art able to make
of stones children to Abraham, mollify I pray thee my stony heart, that all
manner of son like affections may be imprinted therein: pluck up o good father
these roots of bitterness, that no unsavory fruit may come of the tree
which thou by thine own hand have planted. I desire, I look, I call, I cry,
for thy assistance, that I may co^quer this unruly motion. O blessed savior,
that have granted so many petitions upon earth to them that were careful for
the body, fulfill I pray thee this my desire, not for health, nor strength,
nor riches, nor honor, nor for food, nor apparel, but for thine heavenly
grace and inspiration: yea let me lose all those rather the^ be left to my
sinful flesh, that I should be ruled any longer thereby. Mortify good father
in me the old body of sin, and give unto me a new body, purged from these
dead works to serve the living God: renew my spirit daily, that I may cast
away these works of darkness: let it be enough o merciful Father, that my
weakness in failing heretofore, has bin made known unto me least I should be
too proud. Now let thy strength appear, in putting this mine enemy under my
feet, that thereby I may be bold to put my confidence in thee. Why should my
body made by thine hand, and my soul framed according to thine image, be
given over as a pray into the hands of Satan? Deliver me o Lord from the snare
of the hunter, and preserve me from the hand of mine enemy, who lies in wait
for my spiritual life, and labors mine everlasting destruction: so shall I
praise thee for thy great goodness, and magnify thy name for giving me conquest
over my adversary that is too strong for me. To thee I fly for succor till
this tempest be over past: hide me I pray thee under thy shield and bucker,
that none of the fiery darts of Satan take hold on me. Good Lord for the
love thou bear unto mankind, or thy sons sake, who has taken our nature
upon him, grant that I may not be tempted above my strength, and that in all
temptations I may fly unto thee, as a horn of my salvation, yielding thee
most humble and hearty thanks for that thou have given me a desire to
withstand my sinful flesh: which thy work I beseech thee for thy namesake to
perfect and fully accomplish.

VVatch and pray lest you enter into temptation: the spirit indeed is vvilling
but the flesh is vveake.

Matthew. 26. 41. Another zealous prayer.
Eternal God almighty and all merciful: we thy unworthy servants prostrate
before thy throne of grace, do yield our selves, body and soul unto thee for
all thy benefits, which thou from our birth have heaped upon us, as though we
had always done thy will: although we occupied about vain things, never
marked, never loved, never served, never thanked thee so heartelie for them, as
we esteem a mortal friend for the least courtesy. Therefore we come with
shame and sorrow to confess our sins, not small, but grievous: not a few,
but infinite: not past, but present: not secret, but presumptuous, against thy
express word and will: against our own conscience, knowledge and liking, if
any had done the^ but our selves. O Lord, if thou should require but the
least of them at our hands, Satan would challenge us for his, and we should
never see thy face again, nor the Heavens, nor the Earth, nor all the goodness
which thou have prepared for man. What shall we do then? but appeal unto thy
mercy, and humbly desire thy fatherly goodness, to extend that compassion
toward us, which thy beloved son our loving savior has purchased, so
mightily, so graciously and so dearly for us: we believe and know, that one
drop of his blood, is sufficient to heal our infirmities, pardon our
iniquities, and supply our necessities, but without thy grace, our light, our
strength, our guide, we are able to do nothing, but sin, as woeful experience
has taught us too long, and the example of them which are void thereof, whose
life is nothing else but the service of the world, the flesh and the devil.
Therefore good father as thou in special favor have appointed us to serve
thee, like as thou have ordained all other creatures to serve us: so may it
please thee to send down thy heavenly spirit into this earthly mansion, to
illuminate our minds, mollify our hearts, change our affections, subdue our
reason, regenerate our wills, and purify our nature to this duty: so shall
not thy benefits, nor thy chastismentes, nor thy word return void, but
accomplish that for the which they were sent, vutill we be renewed to the image
of thy son. Good Lord we beseech thee, look down in the multitude of thy
compassions, upon thy millitant Church, this sinful Realm, thy gracious
handmaid our dread sovereign, her honorable Counsel, the civil Magistrates,
the painful Ministers, the two. Universities, the people that sit in darkness,
and all that bear thy cross. Gather us into one communion of thy truth, and
give unto every man a spirit to his calling, that we being mindful of the
account, and that we are called Christians, may firmly resolve, speedely
begin, and continually persevere in doing and suffering thy holy will. Good Lord
bless and sanctify our meeting, that no temptation hinder me in speaking, nor
them in hearing, but that thy word may be heard and spoken as the word of (...)


