JACOBS LADDER, OR THE HIGH WAY TO HEAVEN: Being the last Sermon that Master
Henry Smith made. And now published, not (as many forged things have been in
his name) to deceive the Christian Reader, but to instruct and prepare him with
oil in his lamp, joyfully to meet the Lord Jesus in his second coming.

1. THESE. 5. 21. Try all things, but keep that which is good.



AT LONDON Printed by the widow Orwin, for Thomas Man. 1595.

Jacobs Ladder, or the way to Heaven.
1. COR. 9. 24. So run that ye may obtain.
BEcause I have but one hour to teach you all that you must learn of me, I
have chose^ a text which is like Jacobs ladder, that shows you the way to
heaven. This is all that you would know, and it may please God to open your
eyes, that you may know it before ye depart. Hear to practice, hinder not the
spirit, but let it work without resistance: record when you are gone, and you
shall see the great power of God, what he is able to do for you by one
sentence of this book, if ye digest it well. So run, etc. Then we must see
first how we should run: Secondly, what we shall obtain: Thirdly, what will
hinder us: that is, we must see the way, the lettes, and the end. Four
things mark in the way, first, begin betime, secondly, make have: thirdly,
keep the way: fourthly, continue to the end, and thou shall obtain heaven,
whither Christ by these steps, is gone before thee. When I have set you in
the way, I will point at all the lettes, stops, rubbes, and blocks which are
before you, behind you, beside you, the temptations of prosperity, the
temptations of adversity, the temptations of heresy, which stand in the
streets, like the fiery sword to stop the way to Paradise. Then I will lead
you to the mount, as God did Moses, and show you a far off the blessed land the
country above, that you may see where heaven is, what is the way to it, and
what glory and happiness is there. When I have showed you the way, the lettes,
and the end, I will commit you to the race, and end as I began: So run that
ye may obtain. So often as I have read or considered these words which you
hear, they seem (me thinks) to put us in mind that we are out of the way, and
that there is another way, (if we seek it) nearer yet to the kingdom of
heaven, then that which we take, therefore the holy Apostle does wa^^e every
man to ponder his steps, (that running) we may obtain that which we run
for, which is the worthiest price that ever, was given, and never was given,
but to him which kept this way that I will show you. The Apostle says, that
you must run. It is not an easy, nor a short journey, which a drone, a
dreamer, a snaile, or any careless man may perform, and take his ease, set
forth when he will stay at his pleasure, go again at his leisure: but he
must always run, from the first day he sets sorth, till he come to his
iorneyes end: for the glorious heaven is far from the dark earth, and much
ado to aspire the top of Mount Sto^, but much more adou to aspire the top of
Mount Heaven. The violent take it from the slothful, and the wicked run to
hell, with more pains which they take to do evil, than the righteous need to
take for heaven. The Apostle puts the word so, before run, to teach us to
look to our way before we run far: So run, etc, as if he should say,
more run than come home, as more shoot than hit the mark. The heathen
Philosophers, Plato, Socrates, Aristides, Phocion, Pericles, Solon, in their
way did run faster than we: Constancy, Temperance, Patience, justice,
humility, simplicity, integrity, contempt of death, contempt of the world,
seem to be buried with them, and hid in the grave, before this Iron age was
borne: yet because they ran without Christ, they did not obtain, but lost
their labor, like a man which makes have out of his way, takes more pains
than if he kept the way, and yet never comes whither he would. The blind
generation which know not God, in their way run faster than we: Ask the
Merchants which have seen their life and our lives, or look in histories and
they will tell you, that our Religion is not like their superstition, our
knowledge not like their ignorance, our faith not like their fear, our worship
not like their service, our christianity not like their Idolatry: yet because
they run to the creature, for the creator, and follow uncertain dreams,
before the word which came from heaven; they run in vain: for their
Religion, devotion, and service, is to them that cannot requite it. Many of our
adversaries, Papists, Anabaptists, Donatists, and the grossest heretics, in
their way run fasten than we. They watch, they pray, they fast, and
distribute more than we, yet because they run to traditions, to Angels, to
Saints, to Grosses, to Images to Relics, inste^d of Christ, and challenge
merit of all that they do, and would be canonized beside, that all
posterity might honor them as they do Saints: therefore as the Pharisees had
their reward when men praised them, so have they when one does worship
another. If many run and do not obtain, how easy is it to run in vain,
and how happy is he which obtains that, that all men wish: when so many
miss it for nothing but for this, because they run out of the way. You have
heard, read, and done much, and more would do, to obtain eternal life with
the Angels in heaven, for this ye pray and fast, and watch, and obey the laws
of God, and come together every Sabbath to hear, to pray, to praise and serve
him which gives. How many prayers, how many fastes, how many watches, how
many works, how many hours in reading the word, in hearing the word, in
receiving the sacraments, in examining your hearts, in chastising your flesh,
were spent and lost if you should run in vain? as Esau hunted for a blessing
and went without it. Therefore the holy Ghost does say nothing, but it is like a
mark in our way, to show us when we are in, and when we are out: for God would
not have us lose our labor like Laba^, which could find in his heart after
Jacob had served him twenty years to send him away empty: but he would have
you to seek and find, to ask and receive, to run and obtain, therefore
he says, so run that ye may obtain. As there is a heaven, so there is a
way to heaven: one way Adam came from Paradise, and by another way he must
return to Paradise: the passage is not so stopped, but there is a way, though a
straight way, and a door though it be a narrow door, and therefore few do
find it, only they which are like Jacob, do see a Ladder before them, as
Jacob did, he had many dreams before and did not see it, at last he dreamed,
and behold a Ladder which reached from earth to Heaven, and all the Angels
descended and ascended by it, to show that no man ascends to Heaven, but by
that Ladder: this Ladder is Christ, which says, I am the way, and therefore he
bids us to follow him. If we must follow Christ his steps, let us see how
he went to Heaven, he begun betime, for at twelve years of age he said,
I must go about my Fathers business: he made speed, for John says, That he
spoke and did more good things in three and thirty years than could be
written: he kept the right way, for when he said, who can accuse me of sin?
none would accuse him of any, though they watched him for that purpose: He
continued well, for he dyed like a Lamb, and prayed to his Father, and
forgave his enemies. Therefore we will call the steps of this Ladder, Mature,
propere, recte, constanter, that is, begin betime, make have, keep the way,
and hold to the end, and thou shall go after thy master. Touching the first,
begin betime, God requiring the first borne for his offering, and the first
fruits for his service, requires the f^^st labors of his servants, and (as I
may say) the maidenhead of every man, because the best season to seek God, is
to seek him early, and therefore Wisdom says, They which seek me early
shall find: but to them which defer she says, Pro. 8. 17.
Ye shall seek me, but ye shall not find me. We have long purposed to serve
God, and every man thinks Pro. 1. 28.
that he should be served, but we cannot accord of the time when to begin.
One says, when I am rich, another says, when I am free, another says, when I
am settled, another says, when I am old, then I shall be fit to fast and pray.
Thus because we are given to set the best last, that we may have a longer time
for our sins and pleasures, like the Jews in the first of Agge, which said
always, The time was not Agge 1. 2.
yet come, when they should build the Temple. Therefore the holy Ghost cries
so often, This is the acceptable 2. Cor. 6. 2.
time, this is the day of salvation, to day hear his voice, like Rebeccah
which taught her son the nearest way to get the blessing. So soon as man was
created, a law was given him, to show that he should live under obedience from
the day that he is borne: so soon as he is borne, he is baptized in the name
of God, to show that when we cannot run to Christ, we should creep unto him,
and serve him as we can in youth and age: so soon as he begins to pray he
says, thy name be hallowed, thy kingdom come, thy will be done, before he
ask his daily bread, to show that we should seek the will of God before the
food that we live by, much more before the sins and pleasures which we perish
by. So soon as the Lord distributed Mat. 25. 15. Luke 19. 13.
the talents, he enjoined his servants to use the^: who is so young that has
not received some talent or other? Therefore youth cannot excuse him, because
the talent requires to be used of every one that has it: so soon Genesis 1.
as God created the man and the woman, he commanded them to increase and
multiply: shall we increase and multiply in the flesh, before we increase and
multiply in the spirit? the first thing that God did after he created heaven
and earth, he did separate light from darkness, Genesis 1. 14.
showing us how we should separate our good from evil, before our good become
evil. The first lesson that John taught was, Repent for the kingdom of heaven
is at hand. The first lessons that the Disciples Mat. 3. 2.
taught was, Repent too, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. And the first
lesson that Christ taught Mat. 10.
was, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. To teach what we should
do first, Repent, was the first Mat 4. 10.
lesson to young and old. Therefore David prayed, Teach me O Lord to number my
days, not my years, Psalm. 90. 12.
nor my months, nor my weeks, but my days; showing that we shall answer for
days, as well as for years, for today as well as tomorrowe, and for our
youth, as straightly as for our age, even as the little 2 King. 2. 23.
children were devoured with Bears, for mocking the Prophet: which made David
to cry, Remember Psalm. 25. 7.
not the sins of my youth: which he would not have spoken if God did not
mark the sins of youth, as well as of age. Therefore the Fathers were
charged Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
to teach their children the same law which they had themselves. Therefore
Christ rebuked the Disciples Mat. 19. 14.
which forbad the little children to be brought unto him For, should children
honor their Father, and not honor God? it was a sweet consorte when the
children went before Christ to his Temple, and sang their Hosanna, to make
their fathers ashamed which did not know the Messiah when he came, when their
little children knew him? It is written, when Christ heard a young man answer
that he had kept the Commandments from his youth, Christ began to love him:
which shows how Christ loves these timely beginnings, when we make him our
nurse, and draw our first milk from his breasts. There is not one confession
for old men, and another for young men: In the Creed the old man says not,
I did believe in God, and the young man says not, I will believe in God, but
both say, I do believe in God: for he which is called I am, loves I am, and
cares not for Exodus 3.
I was, nor I will be. When Christ asks Peter Love Ioh. 21. 15.
thou me? he looks that he should answer him, Yea Lord I love thee, and not
drive off as Felix did Paul, I will hear thee, I will love thee when I have a
convenient Act. 24. 25.
time: nay when thou have no convenient time, for if this be the convenient
time, after this, the time convenient is past. Manna was gathered in the
morning, because when the Sun rose it did melt away: So virtue must be
gathered betime, for if we stay till business and pleasures come upon us, they
will melt it faster then we can gather it: therefore in the fourth of
Proverbs, Wisdom is called the Beginning, to teach us to seek wisdom in the
beginning, as a man takes the best first. If Eliah would be served before the
widow, when she had not enough to serve her self: will God be served after
thee? nay after the slesh, and after the devil? what can thou owe him to
morrow, which thou art not indebted to day? yea, does not God require Morning
sacrifice as well as Evening sacrifice? It is an old saying, repentance is
never too late: but it is a true saying, repentance is never too soon, for so
soon as we sin, we had need to ask forgiveness: beside, repentance is a
gift, and therefore must be taken when it is offered. For if Judas could have
repented when he listed, he would never have hanged himself. The time past is
gone, and thou can not recall that to repent in: the time to come is
uncertain, and thou can not assure that to repent in: the present time is
only thine, and thou may repent in that, but anon that will be gone too.
Therefore when Christ wept over Jerusalem he said, O if thou had known in
this thy day: calling none their day, but this day: if none can be called thy
day but this day, then this is thy day of repentance, or else thou have none at
al. Therefore one resembles the mercy of God to the Poole in Jury, where the
sick and leprous lay, for at one time of the day an Angel came and stirred
the water, and John 5. 2.
then he which stepped in first was healed of his disease, he which stepped in
first was healed, none but he which stepped in first, so he which takes time is
sure, but he which foresloweth time, oftener fails tha^ speedeth: for, when
golden opportunity is past, no time will fit for it: yet, as when Christ went
about to cast out Mat. 8. 29.
devils, they said that he tormented them before the time: so whenever thou
go about to dismiss thy sins and pleasures, though thou stay till thou
be sick and old, and ready to dye, yet they will say still that thou
dismissest them before the time: but then is the time when the devil says,
the time is not yet, for the devil is a liar, and knows that what licour our
vessels be seasoned with at the first, they will taste of the same ever after.
Therefore linger not with Lot, for if the Angel had not snatched him away, he
had perished with Sodom for his delay. They were not wise virgins, but foolish
virgins, which sought not for oil, before the Bridegroom came: Samuel began
to serve God in his minority, Timothy read the 2. Tim. 3. 15
Scriptures in his childhood, John grew in spirit, as he ripened in years:
so whether thou be old or young, thy repentance cannot be too soon, because
thy sin is gone before. If thou lackest a spur to make thee run, see how
every day runs away with thy life: youth comes upon childhood, age comes
upon youth, death comes upon age with such a swift sail, that if our minutes
were spent in mortifying our selves, yet our glass would be run out, before
we had purged half our corruptions. Thus much of the first step. The second
step in your 2. Step.
journey, is to keep the way, as God taught the Israelites a way to Canaan,
sending a fiery pillar before them, which they did follow wheresoever it went,
so when he ordained a heaven for men, he appointed a way to come unto it,
which way he that misseth shall never come to the end. As Herod sought Christ
over all Jury, but none found him but those which followed the star: so
there is something still that leads men to Christ, which we must follow or
else we cannot come where he is. There be many wrong ways, as there be many
errors, but there is but one right way, as there is but one truth. And
therefore Jacob did not see many, but one Ladder, which reached to heaven: and
John Baptist is said not to prepare the ways of the Lord, but the way:
showing that there is but one right way in this life, which Solomon
understands for the mean, and therefore he says, Turn not to the right
hand nor to the left, implying that we may err as well of the right hand as of
the left, as if he should say, some are too hot, as other are too cold; some
are too superstitious, as other are too careless; some are too fearful, as
other are too co^fide^t: there is as zeal without knowledge, a love without
singlenes, a prayer without faith, and a faith without fruits. Therefore the
Apostle does warn us to examine whether we be in the faith, not whether we
have a kind of faith, but whether we be in the faith? that is, the true faith.
Therefore Paul says, Run so: it is not enough to run, but we must know
how we run: it is not enough to hear, but we must care how to hear: it is
not enough to believe, but we must care how we believe: it is not enough to
pray, but we must care how we pray: it is not enough to work, but we must
care how we work: for we cannot do good, unless we do it well, as we may
see in this example. Cain offered, and God abhorred, because he cared not for
the manner, God cared not for his offering. Simon Magus believed, Herod
listened, Foelix feared, Saul obeyed, Iesabell fasted, the Pharisees prayed,
but because they did not believe so, hear so, fear so, obey so, fast so, and
pray so, as he which says, Learn of me: when they say that they have fasted,
and prayed, and obeyed, Christ he will answer them as he does in Matthew, I
know you not. Therefore if ye ask like the scribe, how ye shall come to heaven,
the right way to heaven is the word, which came from heaven. But here some will
say, the word indeed does contain the right way, but many cannot find that
way without a guide. Therefore I have picked out of the word that way which
God calls the right way: the way which the word does set thee in to heaven,
is to do unto other as thou would have other do unto thee, to exercise
good works, and yet believe that Christ's works shall save thee: to pray without
doubting, and yet be content that thy prayer be not granted: to keep within
thy calling, and do nothing by contention: to bring thy will unto Gods will,
and suffer for Christ, because he has suffered for thee: to repent not only
for thine open and gross faults, but for to count every sin great, to apply
all things to the glory of God, and of every thing to make some use.

Thus the word goes before us like the fiery pillar, and shows us when we
are in, and when we are out, or else the broad way would seem the best way,
and therefore all which care not for the word, go like blind men to hell for
heaven: look but to the Papists, which have the word in an unknown tongue,
some clamber to heaven with merits, some by Angels, some by penance, and some
by pardons, and every man has a way by himself, and all out of the way: As
Naaman answered Elisha when he was commanded to wash himself in Jorden, are
not Abanah and Pharpar rivers of Damascus better then Jorden? may I not wash
there and be healed? so they say, are not pardons as good as works? are not
pilgrimages as good as prayers? is not sacrifice as good as obedience? is not
reading as good as preaching? may I not go to heaven this way and that way, as
well as by the word? No, as no water but Jorden could cle^se Naamans leprosy,
so no way but the word can bring to heaven. For which cause the laws of God
are called the ways of God, and the word of God is called the word of life, to
show that there is no way to life, but the word which is called the way and
the life. Therefore now ye see the way, I conclude with Esaias, This is the way,
walk in it: Thus much of your second step to heaven, which is, keep the way.

Now when ye are in the way, it is good to make speed, therefore the next step
in your journey is, Make have. For this cause Paul says Run, which is the 1.
Step.
swiftest pace of man, as though he should go faster to heaven than to any
place else in the world. His meaning is this, that as a man does watch, and
run, and labor to be rich quickly, so he should hear, and pray, and
study, and use al means to be wise quickly. This the Apostle understands
when he bids us to add, as if he should say, when thou are in the way and
know good from evil, every day kill some vice, and every week sow some
virtue, and make thy two talents five talents, thy five talents ten talents,
and ever be doing, and at last it shall be opened, because thou have knocked.
Christ says. The kingdom of heaven is got by violence, therefore a man must
be earnest and zealous in the religion that he professes, or else it makes
no matter of what religion he is, for if he be but luke warm, God threatens
to spew him out of his mouth: every man has a kind of religion, and the
religion of most is to be like one another, as merciful as other, as humble
as other, as devout as other, but God says, Be holy as I am, not as other
are: for Christ says, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Pharisees, although they were holier than other, ye shall not enter into
heaven. That is, except ye be more than statute Protestants, which go to the
Church and hear an homily, and receive once a year, but will not offend any
person, nor leave any custom, nor bear any charge, nor suffer any trouble for
the glory of God, ye shall come to heaven, when the Pharisees come out of
hell. As love deligheth men, so zeal pleases God: for zeal is the love of
God. Therefore every sacrifice was offered with fire, to show with what zeal
they should burn, which come to offer prayer or praise, or thanks unto the
Lord. Therefore the holy Ghost descended in fire, to show the seruencie of them
upon whom the holy Ghost rests. Therefore the Cherubins were portraited with
wings before the people, to show that they should be as earnest and quick
about the Lords business, as the Cherubins. Therefore God would not take a
lame, nor a halting sacrifice, to show how he abhors slacknes in all our
duties. Therefore Saint James says, Be swift to hear: we must be swift to
pray, swift to obey, swift to do good, for he is not cursed only which does
not the Lords business, but he which does it negligently: that is, he which
does any thing before it, like him that would bid his friends fare well, and
follow Christ after. The hound which runs but for the hare, runs as fast as
possibly she can: the Hawk which slyeth but for the partridge, slyeth as fast
as possibly she can: and shall he which runs for heaven, creep more slowly
than the dyall? Who has so much faith as the Apostles? yet how often does
Christ say, O ye of little faith. Complaining that their faith was too little,
and therefore when Peter answered him that he loved him, as though he loved
him not enough; Christ asked him again, whether he loved him; and as though
he loved him not enough yet, he asked him again, Love thou me? for he
would have us love him as he loved us when his heart blood was shed for us:
therefore when he demanded his love, he measured it by the heart saying, Thou
shall love God with all thy heart, with all thy strength, with all thy mind.
Thrice he repeateth all lest we should keep any thing from him. Our Savior
says not, that his Father is glorified that we bring forth fruit, but in that
we bring forth much fruit: is it not better to be vessels of gold than vessels
of brass? Do ye not see how Christ rejected him which said he kept many
commandments, because he would not do one commandment, for one work which
he would not do, our Savior made no reckoning of all that he had done. It
was good for the Apostles that they left all and followed Christ presently, but
this should not be written but to teach us with what speed we should follow
Christ, watching the slarre so soon as it rises, and the pillar so soon as
it neinoueth. In this ^^riue and go one before another, as Peter and John
strone who should come first to the sepulcher. For if Agrippa could be saved
when he was almost a Christian, Paul would not have labored to make him
altogether a Christian. Therefore though purity be counted heresy, yet
remember that Christ says, None Matthew 5.
can see God but the pure in heart: and know, that there is no dealing with
these mockers, but to answer them as David answered Michol, when she scorned
him for his humblenes, he said, I will be more humble yet: so when they mock
thee for thy zeal, spite them with more zeal, for evil is not overcome but
with good. Thus we have passed the third step unto heaven. 4. step.
The fourth step in this happy journey is, Persevere to the end. For if you
begin betime, and go aright, and make have, and continue not unto the end,
your reward is with them of whom Paul says, Their end is worse than their
beginning. There is nothing in our life which suffers so many eclipses and
changes, as our devotion, hot and cold, in and out, of and on, not in one mood
so long as the Sparrow fittes upon the ground, but longing like the Chamelion
to the color of it which we see: if we see good, it puts us in a good thought:
if we see or hear evil, it turns us from good to evil again: thus man is
rolled upon a wheel that never stands still, but turns continually about, as
though he were giddie and treading of amaze. He is upon the side of a hill,
where it is easy to slide, and hard to get up the slesh: therefore the Apostle
moved with pity, seeing man stand upon such a slipperie ground, as it were in
a ship ready to sincke, or a house bending to fall, he cries to them that
stand surest, Take heed left ye full, that is, when thou have put on the
armor of light, and art in the spiritual field to fight the Lords battles
against the world, the flesh, and the devil: turn not back like Demas, but
remember the comfort of Elisha, that there be more with thee than against
thee, and that the tempter can overcome none but them which yield. Other
servants change their masters for better masters, but all that serve God are
like the servant which received a print in his ear, after the manner of the
Jews, in token that he would serve his master for ever, like the vestures
which bare their owners mark. Therefore the holy Ghost cries so often, Be
faithful even unto the death: Be not weary of well doing: Take heed lest ye
fall, for when thou art weary of thy goodness, God does not count thee good, but
weary of goodness: and when thou declinest from righteousness, GOD does not
count thee righteous, but revolted from righteousness: therefore Paul says,
Pray continually, as though prayer were nothing without continuance: Jacob did
not overcome God so soon as he began to wrestle with him, but when he had
wrestled with him al night. And it is said that Christ took pity of them
that stayed with him. I will not leave thee says Elisha to Eliah: so we
should not leave God: some came into the vineyard in the morning, and some at
noone, but none received any reward but they which stayde until night. As
Gods mercy indureth for ever, so our righteousness should endure for ever.
Every thought, and word, and deed of a faithful man is a step toward heaven,
in every place he meets Christ, every thing puts him in mind of God, he
seeks him to find him, and when he has found him he seeks him still, he is
not satisfied, because at every touch there comes some virtue from him. Jacob
served seven years for Rachel, and after them he served seven more, and yet
he was content to serve seven more, and when he had served so many years
they seemed unto him as nothing, because he loved: he which served so long for
Rachel, served all his life for heaven: and if he had lived till this day, he
would have served God still, and thought it nothing because be loved him: to
have the Arc but a while, does more hurt to the Philistines than benefit
them, so to serve God but a while, does more damage us then help us, for
happier is the Child which never began than Judas, whose end was worse than
his beginning. What a lamentable thing is it to hear this plainte of him which
was once the strongest in the world, Sampson has lost his strength for
Dalilah, for the love of Dalilah that does not love him: to show what a shame
it is to end worse than we begin. Christ shows what a reproach it was unto
him, which began to build and could not set up the roof, the passingers by
poynted with their fingers and said, this man began a foundation, but he
could not cover it: so they will say, this man thought to be holy, but he
could not keep promise. What shall I say says Iosnuah, when Israel turns the
back, when Israel turns the back, this astonished him, and this makes the
whole Temple shake when the pillars tremble? What an offense is it to the
Church to see Peter to deny Christ, which said even now that he would never
forsake him? To see Lot commit incest with his daughters in the mount, which
striued so to preserve them chaste in Sodom, to see Solomon worship Idols
which erected the Temple for the worship of God, to see Noah mocked of his
son for drunkenness, for whose righteousness his son escaped, as if the
stars should fall from Heaven, and light go from the sun. Wisdom is
angry with him which leaves his righteousness, to become worse, the Vine would
not forsake her grapes, Judge. 9. 9.
the Olive would not forsake his fatues, the fig tree would not leave his
sweetenes, but the bramble did, he is not the Vine, nor the Olive, nor the
Figgetree, but he was a bramble made for the fire, which leaves the joys,
let the dog turn to the vomit, and the swine to the wallowe, but you like
Abraham hold on thy sacrifice unto the evening, in the evening of thy life,
and a full measure shall be measured unto thee. This is a long sleppe, and man
is like a horse which loves short iourneyes, therefore how can he hold out so
far: when one told Socrates, that he would very feign go to Olympus, but
he feared that he should not be able to endure the pains, Socrates answered
him, I know that thou use to walk every day between thy meals, which walk
continue forward in thy way to Olympus, and within five or six days thou
shall come thither: how easy this was, and yet he saw it not, so is the way
to Heaven, if men do bend themselves as much to do good, as they beat their
brains to do evil, they might go to Heaven with less trouble than they go
to hell. Our idle hours are enough to get wisdom, and knowledge and faith,
till we were like saints among men: if thou look only to the stoppes, and
tell all the thorns which he in thy way, thou shall go fearfully, wearilie,
and unwillingly, every thing shall turn thee aside, and every snaile shall step
before thee, and take thy crown from thee: but then lift up thine eyes from
the earth and look to Christ calling, the spirit assisting, the Father
blessing, the Angels comforting, the word directing, the crown inuiting, and
thy fetters shall fall from thee, and thou shall rise like the Sun and
marvel how the thing could seem so hard, and be so easy, when ye do well
remember that ye change not for the worse, and do, as ye do then, and ye shall
continue to the end. Now I have encouraged you like soldiers, and taken away
your fear, I will bring you to the sight of your enemies, and will set them
before your face, not to weaken you, for that were want of charity, but to
make you wary, which is true love indeed. To number them surely I cannot, they
are so many: and exactlie to describe them, it is beyond my skill, they are so
subtle. Howbeit, to give you a little taste: I may say as Elisha said to his
servant, and you shall see it, if you have your eyes open: sear not, for they
that be with us are more than they that be with them, and he that is on our
side is stronger then all. But if you will hear what the holy Apostle says
touching them, I can tell you. He affirms, and that by the very spirit of
God: we wrestle not against flesh and blood only, but against principalities,
powers, worldly governors, the Princes of the darkness of this world, even
spiritual wickednesses in the high places. And S. John says, they are the
lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, let other men
think of them what they list: they that hear them thus described, and have
felt the force of them in their own souls, could not choose but confess, that
they have been many in number, mighty in power, subtle in practice, and what
not: who knows not this, that the more enemies we have, the more need we
have, both of force outwardly, and of care inwardly: as again, the more
powerful they are, and the more weak we are, the more we should seek for
help else where. In outward and bodily foes and forces, we confess the
truth of this, and do all what we can to show our selves wise, circumspecte,
and courageous: How much more had we need here, to express all these things,
where the conflict is more hard, though the conquest obtained be more glorious:
and where again our foes and their forces, be more mighty and many, though
their overthrow once performed, gives them the fools foil. But whom shall we
look to herein? Other men are as weak as our selves, if not worse, for all
men, lay them upon a balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity it
self. And if we fear and distrust our selves, how dare we, or how can we
put considence in others? specially since God says, Cursed is every one that
makes flesh and blood his arm. To look up to the holy and elected Angels,
will do us little good, because they go not but being sent, and always wait
for a word and warrant from the Lords own mouth for all their actions: besides
that, their own oil and force is little enough for their own supportation.
To God therefore, that is the God of our strength, we must needs come, yea
and to him alone, or else we are utterly overthrown and cast away. And if we
cannot say and do too as David did, Lord whom have I in heaven but thee, and I
have desired none in earthwith thee, we are in a woeful taking, and utterly
lost. For fear without, and fire within, Satan's malice also, men's mischief,
and our corruption, will carry and harrie us, as it were a violent tempest or
whirlewind. Amongst the heathen they had many odd conceits, to chase away
bodily and spiritual enemies, as those that have written their histories and
actions, have plainly set forth: sometimes fire, sometimes water, sometimes
blood, and sometimes one thing, and sometimes an other, as man's brain is a
bountiful ship to forge such devises in. The Papists differ not much from
them, who think that whippinges and scourgings, will tame and subdue the
corrupt affections of the heart, and that the casting of a little holy water
(as they call it,) or the making of a cross in the face, forehead, breast, or
any other place, will chase away Satan, and al his hellish powers. Of al which
actions and ceremonies either heathenish or popish, were they better than they
be, (but indeed they are slarke naught as they use them) we may say as the
Apostle says: Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable
unto all things. And had Satan's malice, and man's presumption stayed here, and
gone no further in gross imaginations, concerning this and other matters, it
had bin the less evil. But in our light and liberty of the Gospel, some
suppose, that the very saying of Lord have mercy upon us, and that without
says or feeling, many times, is all in all: and the pronouncing of this
petition, Lead us not into temptation, and that without sense or understanding
of it, is sufficient to sunder Satan, and our own corruption as far from us,
as the East is from the West. Upon them their spiritual enemies prevailed, by
gross ignorance, and superstitious conceits: upon us by careless presumption,
and presumptuous carelessness, neither the one of us, nor the other,
understanding rightly as we should, either our foes forces, or our own
weakness. And that is the cause why they and we in former time and of late,
joined with them, and sundred from them, have received very fearful falls
and overthrows: For all is one with Satan, so he catch and snatch men, and
have them in possession, he cateth not by what means. But will thou not escape
danger only, but overcome also? I will show thee O man, what thou shall do,
at any hand go out of thy self and other creatures whatsoever, for if thou
stick to them though never so little, thou do disadvantage thy self at the
least, if not overthrow thy self. The wicked spirits are as strong to effect
evil, as the elect are to do good: and so much the more powerful that way,
by how much they attempt it with commission from God, and find fit matter in
men to work upon. And what then? fix the eye of thy faith fast upon God in
Christ, and thou shall never miscarrie. For he that cannot lie has said it, I
will not fail thee, nor forsake thee for ever: and in the new Testament Christ
has told us, which is also a word of as sure a promise, The gates of hell
shall not prevail against this faith. Nay, I will say more in the strength and
power of this persuasion, thou shall be made more than a conqueror, through him
that has loved thee, and washed thee in his own heart blood. I know and
confess there are many lets and hindrances, to the persuasion and practice of
this truth: but hear and believe only, and I will show you yet a more
perfect and assured way, by which you shall be made to walk safe, either in
the day of death, or in the time of temptation, or in any other course or
cross, that may betide you in this life. See that you have not only the two
side posts, and the upper door posts of your houses, stricken over with the
blood of the Lamb, but your hearts purged through faith in his blood, from the
power of dead works; and then the destroyer that overthrows others, shall
pass over thee, and bring thee in good time to the full fruition of the
heavenly Canaan. But thou will say as the slothful person does in the
Proverbs, There is a lion, yea many lions in the way: I answer: reckon them
up, and bring them forth: they shall all by Gods grace be easily removed. All
sorts of afflictions are bitter, I confess it, and so are many things in
meat, drink, and physic, and yet we refuse them not, but use them rather,
because of the good we know or hope, they will effect in us. And why say we
not, as the Apostle by the spirit does: Nochastisement for the present seems
to be joyous, but grievous? Howbeit afterward it brings forth the quiet
fruit of righteousness, unto them which are thereby exercised. Death also is
dreadful: what then? but to whom I pray thee? even to the man that has his
trust in his riches, or has no hope of a better life: but to him that
believes in Christ, it is become through the power of the death and obedience
of Christ, a speedy passage to eternal life. We endure many dreadful and
dangerous things, and run through fire and water, and alfor a corruptible
crown: And why should we not with patience and prayer pass through this,
which is the very high way to heaven? Besides, hell is horrible Neither will I
deny that: but still I demand to whom it is so? surely to the devil and his
Angels, and all manner of wicked ones, for whom it has been prepared of old:
but as for the godly and elect, it cannot come nigh them. For Christ the very
way, truth, and life it self has told us, and therefore we ought to credit
it: He that hears my words, and believes in him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from
death unto life. Lastly, is not sin a shrewd and sore enemy to encounter
with? I confess it: but to whom tell me I beseech you? even to them in whose
mortal bodies it reigns, to fulfill the concupiscences thereof. To other, in
whom the ^oo^e of it is dead, it is not so, whether we respect this life, or
that which is to come: for here the relics of sin, are but as pricks in our
sides, to provoke us to better things, and to stir us up to hunger and thirst
after righteousness: and for the life to come, we shall be utterly freed from
the same, and have all tears wiped from our eyes. To bring all into a sum: I
say let all objected be as true, as any thing may be: yet all these and a
thousand more such like, are nothing to him that is in Christ. For the Apostle
says, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: and it is he
alone that has destroyed death, and became sin for us, that we in him might
be made the righteousness of God. And surely such a one may in some good
measure of comfort, joyfully say to the defiance even of death it self, and
all other ghostly enemies whatsoever: O death where is thy sting! O grave where
is they victory! The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
law: but thanks be unto GOD which has given us victory, through our Lord
Jesus Christ. Yea he may say, as the Saints and Martyrs have said in the
midst of fiery flames, I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate me
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Oh but death is
terrible still! I answer: in such a cloud of witnesses, and evidence of truth,
may I not in some sort and sense say, O faithless generation, how long shall I
be with you? how long now shall I suffer you? Is it fearful to any, but to a
natural man, and to him that has his felicity here, and in the things of
this life? Surely it is nothing terrible to him, that is made a comfortable
partaker of the fruits of the death of Christ, who dyed and rose again, to the
end he might destroy death, and him that had the power of death, even the
devil himself. But hell is horrible. True: but yet to the^, for whom it is
prepared: but thou art in Christ exempted from it. For why did he himself
suffer hellish torments both in body and soul? to leave the (...) to make it
terrible or horrible to thee? no, but to free thee and all his from the fear
of hell, and the feeling of everlasting condemnation. Oh but what shall I say
touching my sin that is great and grievous, and the peculiar wages of it, is
death eternal. That is true in the nature of sin, and the justice of God: but
with the Lord there is mercy, that he may be feared. Stand still a while, and
you shall behold the great works of God: and be not faithless but faithful,
and believe the truth of the word. What is more clear then this? where sin
has abounded, there grace has abounded much more. And though it be in a
Prophet, yet where have we a more plain, plentiful, or evangelical promise
then this? Though your sins were as crimson, they shall be made white as
show: though they were red as skarlet, they shall be as woll. If we have the hand
or writing of an honest man, we think our selves bound to give credit thereto
how much more should we believe the most true and unchangeable word of the
eternal? To which, not for any want in himself, but by reason of the weakness
of our faith, he has bin willing, the more abundantly to show unto the heirs
of promise, the stablenes of his counsel, to adioyne and bind himself with an
oath, saying, As I live, I will not the death of a sinner, yea I will be merciful
to their unrighteousness, and I will remember their sins and iniquities no
more: that so by two immutable things, that is, his inviolable oath, and
assured promise (wherein it is impossible that God should lie) we might have
strong consolation. And as for these objections, or any the like, what are they
else, but in truth and substance, the very evil reports, that the spies
brought upon the promised land? And yet there was a very true testimony, given
by Joshua and Caleb: yea the palpable proofs they had by the cluster of
grapes, and other things which they brought from thence, were irrefragate
witnesses. Will you believe then because they are many? that is flat popery:
and besides, God forbids us to cleave to a multitude to do evil. Will you
fear the^, because they are mighty? That is to distrust God, who is greater
then al: and to make them omnipotent, which is blasphemy. Will you doubt
because they double their assaults? That is no end of temptation, but this
rather, to ad an edg unto our prayers, that so through the^ we may hear in our
hearts that cofortable speech. My grace is sufficient for thee, and my strength
shall be perfected through weakness. And when we shall have all our senses
satisfied, in the contrary truth, yea so far forth, as that our eyes may
see, our ears may hear, our hands may handle the good things of God (over and
besides the faith, we have in him concerning them) it is not gross only, but
impious, not to believe. But here in this life are many pleasures and certain
delights lawful, as houses, friends, wives, children, goods, honor, and almost
infinite such like. That is very true: but with this honey, God inter^ingleth
some gall, least the souls of his servants might run not to sin. And who is he
that can be ignorant of the uncertain estate of al and every one of them? Our
friends fall away, as a fruit that is ripe before his time, or as the morning
dew. Our houses are overthrown, and are like the ruins of a defaced hold,
not one stone of them being left upon another. Our wives may be lewd in their
lips, loose in their lives, and wicked as was Jobs, and wish us to curse God
and die. Our children, not riotous only and disobedient, but unnatural also,
and rising up against us, as Absalon. The goods we possess, are not unfitly by
Solomon resembled to the Egle, that takes her to her wings, and flies aloft
into the air: as for our honor, which we make as it were some deity upon
earth, it is turned into shame, in the twinkling of an eye, or else forgotten,
as it had never been: And we, that in our own imaginations, are Lords of all,
are as the dust or chaste of the earth carried from all. And what reason is
there then, that these or any such like, should hinder us in our race toward
heaven? He that has an inheritance or land in the world, will not be hindered
from taking the possession or enjoying of it, when it falls unto him, by the
tears of his wife, the entreaty of his children, the heap of his riches, or
any such like things: And why should we suffer these simple conceits, to
steal away our hearts from the hope and having of heaven? Besides, who knows
not, that as in respect of the life to come, all these heaped up in the
greatest measure that possible can be in this world, are not so much as a
shadow of the good things that shall be revealed. Has the spirit said in
vain, that which the eye has not seen, neither the care heard, neither ever
yet entered into man's heart, has GOD prepared for them that love him? Or shall
we think it a lie? or that GOD meant to dissemble and dally with us? Oh be
it far from us to think or speak so. Is that glorious description of that
holy and heavenly Jerusalem, mentioned in the revelations, but a fiction or
forgerie? It were blasphemy for any man's heart to imagine so: we are rather
to think, that God by that which is known, and can be comprehended,
expresses that which yet is hidden from us, and shall in good measure be
comprehended of us also, we knowing then, even as we are known now. Wherefore
let us not fear all or any of our adversaries, or pulbacks, for true love
expels fear: neither let us be saint hearted in our selves, but labor
rather to lift up our hands which hang down, and to strengthen our weak
knees, for faithful is he that has promised, who will also perform it. Be
faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life. He that so
runs shall be sure to obtain, and have his portion with the Saints, in the
heavenly inheritance, of a crown that never fades nor falls away. But he
that cares not for this course, must have his portion with hypocrites, in the
lake of fire and brimstone, that burns for evermore, and be shut out of the
kingdom with the fearful, unbelieving, abominable, murderers, whoremongers,
sorcerers, idolaters and such like. Wherefore as you love life, and loath death,
run well I beseech you: yea even as our text was at the beginning, so say I
at the ending, So run that ye may obtain: which I do not only propound
unto you by exhortation, but commend and commit by supplication to God for my
self and you, that every one of us, and I my self especially, may in feeling
and faith say: I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departing is
at hand, I have fought a good fight, and have finished my course, I have kept
the faith, from hence is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous judge, shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but
unto them also that love his appearing.

FINIS.

