Merry Tales Newly Imprinted and made by Master Skeleton Poet Laureat.

Imprinted at London in Fleet streat beneath the Conduit at the sign of S.
John Evangelist, by Thomas Colwell.

G. STERVENS.


Here begins certain merye tales of Skeleton, Poet Lauriat.
How Skelten came late home to Oxford, from Abington. Tale.i.
SKelto^ was an English man borne as Skogyn was, and he was educated and
brought up in Oxfoorde: And there was he made a Poet Lauriat. And on a time
he had been at Abbington to make merry, where that he had eat salt meats and
he did com late home to Oxforde, and he did lie in an Ine named ye Tabere
which is now the Angel, and he did drink and went to bed. About midnight he
was so thyrstie or dry that he was constrained to call to the tapster for
drink, and the tapster hard him not, Then he cried to his oste and his
ostes, and to the ostler for drink and no man would ^ere him, alack said
Skeleton I shall peryshe for lack of drink, what reamedye. At the last he did
cry out and said Fire, Fire, Fire.

Then Skeleton hard every man bustled him self upward, and some of them were
naked, and some were half a sleep and a ^as^d, and Skeleton did c^ye Fire Fire
(still) that every man knew not whether to resort. Skeleton did go to bed,
and the oste and ostis and the tapster with the ostler, did ^^ne to Skeltons
chamber with candles lyghted in their hands saying where? where, where, is the
fire, here here here, said Skeleton and poynted his finger to his mouth, saying
fetch me some drink to quench the fire and the heat and the dryness in my
mouth, and so they did: wherefore, it is good for every man to help his own
self in time of need with some policy or craft, so be it there be no
deceit nor falshed used.

How Skeleton dressed the Kendall man, in the sweat time.
ON a time Skelto^ rode from Oxforde to London with a Kendalma^ and at Oxbridge
they ^eyted: the Kendall man laid his cap upon the board in the hall, and he
went to serve his horse: Skeleton took ye Kendalmans cappe, and did put
betwixt the linyng and the viter side a dishe of butter: and when the
Kendalman had dressed his horse, he did come into diner, and did put on his
cappe, (that time the sweating sycknes was in all England) at the last, when
the butter had take heat of the kendallmans head, it did begin to run over
his face and about his cheeks. Skeleton said: sir, you sweat soore: beware
yt you have not the sweating sycknesse: the Kendalman said: by the Mysse
Isewrang. I bus go till bed Skeleton said: I am skild on physic, and
specially in the sweating sycknesse, that I will warant any man, In gewd faith
says the Kendallman: do see, and Ise bay for your skott to London. Then said
Skelto^: get you a kerchiefe and I will bring you a bed, the which was done,
Skeleton caused the capp to be sod in boat ^ee, and dried it: in the morning
Skeleton and the Kendalman did ride merely to London.

How Skeleton told the man that Christ was very busye in the woods with them
that made fagots. Tale.iii.
WHen Skeleton did cum to London there were many men at the table at diner.
Amongst all other there was one said to Skelten: Be you of Oxforde, or of
Cambridge a scoler? Skeleton said: I am of Oxford. Sir said the man, I will put
you a question you do know well that after christ did rise from death to life*
it was xl. days after ere he did ascend in to heaven, and he was but certain
times with his Discyples, and when that he did appear to them, he did never
tarry long amongst them, but suddenly vanished from them, I would feign know
(says the man to Skeleton) where Christ was all these.xl. days. Where he
was, says Skeleton, God knows, he was very ^us^e in the woods among his
laborers that did make fagottes to burn heretics, and such as thou art the
which do ask such diffuse questions: but now I will tell thee more: when
he was not with his mother and his Disciples, he was in Paradyce, to comfort
the holy Patriarchs and Prophets souls, the which before he had fet out of
Hell. And at the day of his Ascencion, he took them all up with him into
heaven.

How the Welshman did desire Skeleton to aid him in his ^ute to the King, for
a Patent to sell drink. The.iiii. Tale.
Skeleton when he was in London, went to the Kings Court, where there did come
to him a Welshman, saying: Sir, it is so, that many does come up of my
country to the Kings Court, and some does get of the King by Patent, a Castle,
and some a Park, and some a Forest, and some one Fee, and some another, and
they do live like honest men, and I should live as honestly as the best if I
might have a Pasyne for good drink: Wherefore I do pray you to write a
^ewe words for me in a little Byll to give the same to the Kings hands, and
I will give you well for your labor: I am contented* said Skeleton. Sit down
then said the welshman and write. What shall I write said Skeleton? The
Welshman said, write: Drink. Now said the Welshman write, more Drink. What
now said Skeleton? Write now: a great deal of drink. Now said the Welshman:
Put to all this Drink: A littell crome of Bread, and a great deal of
Drink to it, and read once again. Skeleton did read: Drink: more Drink:
and a great deny of Drink: And a little crome of bread: and a great deal of
Drink to it. Then the Welsheman said: Put out the little crome of Bread, and
sert in: all Drink, and no bread. And if I might have this Sygned of the
King, said the Welshman, I care for no more as long as I do live (...)
Well then, said Skeleton, when you have this Signed of the King, then will I
labor for a patent to have bread that you with your Drink, and I with the
Bread may fare well, and seek our living with bag and staff.

Of Swanborne the knave, that was buried under Saint Peter's wall in Oxford.
THere was dwelli^g in Oxford a stark knave, whose name was Swanborn, and he
was such a notable knave, that if any scoler had fallen out the one with the other:
the one would call the other Swanborn, the which they did take for a worser
word then knave: His wife would diverse times in the week kimbe his head
with a.iii. footed stool: Then he would run out of the doors wepinge, and
if any man had asked him what he did aile, other while he would say he had
the megrym in his head, or else, there was a great smoke within the house, and
if the doors were shut, his wife would beat him under the bed, or into the
bench hole, and then he would look out at the cat hole, then would his wife
say, look thou out whoreso^: yea, would he say, thou shall never let me
of my manly looks: then with her distaff she would poor in at him. I kn^w him
when that he was a boy in Oxforde, he was a littell old fellow, and would
lie, as fast as a horse would tro^te. At last he dyed and was buried under
the wall of s. Peter's church,

Then Skeleton was desired to make an Epitaphe upon the Church wall, and did
write with a role, saying: Belsabub his soul save, qui iacet hic ^ee a Knave,
iamsci, mortuus est, et iacet hic he^ a Beast, Sepui tus est among the weeds:
God forgive him his misdeedes.

How Skeleton was complained on to the Bishop of Norwich. Tale.vi.
Skeleton did keep a Musket at Dys, upon the which he was complained ^n to the
Bishop of Norwye^. The Bishop sent for Skeleton. Skelto^ did take two Capo^s:
to give them for a present to the Bishop. And as soon as he had saluted the
Bishop, he said: My Lord, here I have brought you a couple of Capons. The
Bishop was blind, and said: Who be you. I am Skeleton said Skeleton. The
Bishop said: A hoare head, I will none of thy Capons: Thou keep unhappy
rule in thy house, for the which thou shall be punished.

What, said Skeleton: Is the wind at that door? And said: God be with you my
Lord: and Skeleton with his Capons went his way. The Bishop sent after Skeleton
to come again, Skeleton said. What shall I I come again to speak with a
mad man. At last he returned to the Bishop, which said to him: I would,
said the Bishop, that you should not live such a sclaunderouse life, that all
your parisshe should not wonder and complain on you as they do, I pray you
amend, and here after live honestlye, that I hear no more such words of
you: And if you will tarry dynner, you shall be welcome: and I thank you said
the Bishop for your Capons. Skeleton said: My Lord My Capons have proper
Names: The one is named Alpha, the other is named Omega. My Lord, said
Skeleton: This Capon is named Alpha, this is the first Capon that I did ever
give to you. And this Capon is named Omega, and this is the last capo^ that
ever I w^l give you and so fare you weil, said Skeleton.

How Skeleton when he came from the bishop, made a Sermon. Tale.vii.
Skeleton the next Sunday after went in to the pulpet to prech* and said:
v^s estis v^s estis, that is to say: You be^ you be. And what ^e you, said
Skeleton: I say, that you be a sort of knaves, yea, and a man might say,
worse then knaves. And why, I shall show you: you have complained of me to the
Bishop that I do keep a fair wench in my house. I do tell you: If you had
any fair wives it were some what to help me at need. I am a man as you be:
you have foul wives, and I have a fair wenche, of the which, I have begotten
a fair Boy, as I do think, and as you all shall see: Thou wife, said
Skeleton, that have my child be not afraid bring me hither my child to me: the
which was done. And he showing his child naked to all the Parish, said:
How say you neighbors all: is not this child as fair as is the best of all
yours? It has nose, eyes, hands and feet as well as any of your, It is not
like a Pygge, nor a ealfe, nor like no soul, nor no monstrous Beast. If I
had, said Skeleton, brought forth this child without arms or legs: or
that it were deformed being a monstrous thing, I would never have blamed you
to have complained to the bishop of me, but to co^plain without a cause. I say
as I said before in my Antethem. vos estis. You be, and have be, and will and
shall be knaves to complain of me without a cause reasonable. For you be
presumptuous, and do exalte your selves, and therefore you shall be made low:
as I shall show you a famylier example of a Parish Priest, the which did make
a sermon in Rome. And he did take that for his antethem the which of late days
is named a Theme, and said: Quescexaltat humilabitui, et quese humiliat
exaltabitur, that is to say: he that does exalte him self or does extol him
self shall be made meke, and he that does humble him self or ^s meke, shall be
exalted, extoulled or, elevated, or sublimated or, such like, and that I will
show you by this my cap: This cappe was first my ^oode, when that I was
Studente in Iucalico, and then it was so proud that it would not be
contented but it would slip and fall from my shoulders. I perceiving this
that he was proud, what then did I, shortly to conclude: I did make of him, a
pair of Breches to my hose, to bring him low. And when that I did see, know
or perceive that he was in that case, and all most worn clean out: what did
I then to extol him up again, You all may see that this my cap was made of
it that was my breches. Therefore said Skeleton: vos estis: Therefore you ^ce as
I did say before: if that you exalte your self, and cannot be c^ntented that
I have my we^che still, some of you stall wear horns: and therefore vos estis,
and so farewell: It is merye in the hall, when beardes wagge all.

How the Friar asked leare of Skeleton to preach at Dys, which Skeleton would not
grant tale.viii.
THere was a Fry^t ye which did come to S^elton to have license to preach at
Dys: What would you preach there said Skeleton: Do not you think, that I
am sufficient to preach there in mine own ever? Sir said the Freere: I am
the Limyter of Norwyth, and once a year one of our place does use to preach
with you, to take the devotion of the people, and if I may have your good will
so be it, or else I will come and preach against your will, by the authority
of the Byshope of Rome, for I have his Bu^les to preach in every place, and
therefore I will be there on Sundaye next^ cummyng. Came not there Freere I do
counsel thee, said Skeleton The Sundaye next followynge Skeleton laid watch for
the coming of the Friar: And as soon as Skeleton had knowledge of the Freere,
he went into the Pulpet to preach. At last, the Freere did come into the
Church with the Bishop of Romes Bulls in his hand. Skeleton then said to
all his Parish: See, see see, and poynted to thee Fryere, All the parish gased
on the friar. Then said Skeleton: Masters here is as wonderful a thing, as
ever was seen: you all do know, that it is a thing daily seen: a Bulle
does begette a Calfe, but here contrary to all nature: a Calfe has gotten a
Bulle: for this Fryere b^eynge a Calfe, has gotten a Bul^e of the Bishop of
Rome. ^he Fryere b^ynge ashamed, would never after that time presume to preach
at Dys.

How Skeleton handled the Friar that would needs lie with him in his Inn.
Tale.ix.
AS Skelto^ ryd into ye country There was a Friar that hapened in at an ale
house where as Skeleton was lodged and there the F^^re did desire to have
lodgyng. The (...) said: sir. I have but one be^^ where as master Skeleton does
lie* sir said the f^^re. I pray you that I may lie with you. Skelto^ said
^^ester Friar. I do use to have no man to lie with me. Sir said the friar I
have line with as good men as you and for my money, I do look to have
lodging as well as you. Well, said Skeleton, I do see than that you will lie
with me. Yea sir said the Friar. Skeleton did fill all the cups in the house
and whitled the Friar, that at the last, the Friar was in mine cames peason.
Then said Skeleton master Freere, get you to bed, and I will come to bed
within a while, The Friar went and did lie upright* and snorted like a sow.
Skeleton went to the chaumber, and did see that the Freere did lie so, said to
the wife: Give me a washyng be^le. Skeleton then cast down the clothes, and
the Freere did lie stark naked: then Skeleton did shite upon the Freres Nauil
and bellye. And then he did take the washyng betle, and did strike an hard
stroke upon the Nauill and bellye of the Freere, and did put out the candell,
and went out of the chaumber: the Freere felt his bellye, and smelt a foul
savor, had thought he had been gored, and cried out and said: help, help,
help, I am killed. They of the house with Skeleton went in to the chaumber and
asked what the Freere did ayle. The Freere said: I am killed, one has thrust
me in the bellye. Fo, said Skeleton: thou dronken soul, thou do lie, thou
haste be shytten thy self. Fo, said Skeleton let us go out of the chaumber
for the knave doothe stynke. The Freere was a shamed, and cried for water. Out
with the whoreson, said Skeleton, and wrap the sheets together, and put the
Freere in the hog stye, or in the Barn, The Freere said, give me some water
into the Barn, and there the Freere did wasshe him self, and did lie there
all the night long* The chaumber and the bed was dressed, and the sheets
shyfted, and then Skeleton went to bed.

How the Cardynall desired Skeleton to make an Epitaphe upon his grave. Tale.x.
THomas Wolsey Cardynall and Archbishop of York, had made a regal Tomb to
lie in after he was dead. And be desired Master Skeleton to make for his Tomb
an Epytaphe, which is a memorial to show the life with the Acts of a Noble
man. Skeleton said: If it do like your grace I can not make an Epytaphe
unless that I do se your Tomb. The Cardynall said: I do pray you to meet
with me tomorowe at the w^st Monest^^ye and there shall ^ou se tomb: A
making, the point ^ent kept And Skeleton, Seeing the sumptuous cost, more
pertaining for an Emperor or a Maxymyous King, then for such a man as he
was (although Cardynals will compare with Kings) w^ll said Skeleton: If it shall
like you^ grate to creep into this ^ombe whiles you be a live. I can make an
Epitaphe: for I am sure that when that you be dead, you shall never have it.
The which was verifyed of truth.

How the Hostler did byte Skeltons Mare under the tale, for biting him by the
arm. Tale.xi.
Skeleton used much to ride on a mare. And on a time he happened into an Inn,
where there was a folish Ostler. Skeleton said: Ostler have thou any Mares bread.
No sir, said the Ostler. I have good horsebread, but I have no mares bread.
Skeleton said: I must have Mares bread. Sir said the Ostler. There is no Mares
bred to get in all the town, Well, said Skeleton, for this once, serve my Mare
with Horse bread. In the mean time Skeleton commanded the Ostler to sadle his
Mare, and and the Hosteler did gyrde the Mare hard, and the Hostler was in his
Ierkyn, and his shirte sleues we^ above his elbowes, and in the girding of the
Mare hard the Mare bitte the Hostler by the arm, and bitte him sore. The
Hostler was angry, and did bite the Mare under the tail saying a whore, is it
good by^ing by the bare arm. Skeleton said thene Why fellow haste thou hurt
my Mare? Yea said the Hostler, ^a ^^ka thee. If she do hurt me, I will
displease her.

How the Cobbler told master Skeleton, it is good sleeping in a whole skin.
Tale.xii,
IN the Parysshe of Dys where as skeleton was Person, there dwe^^ed a cobbler,
being half a souter, which was a tall man and a great slouen, otherwise named
a slouche, The Kings Majesty having Wars byyonde the sea. Skeleton said to
this a foresaid doughtie man. Neybour, you be a tall man, and in the Kings
wars you must bear a standard. A standerd, said the cobbler, what a thing is
that. Skelto^ said: it is a great banner, such a one as thou dooest use to
bear in Rogacyon work, and a Lords, or a Knights, or a gentle man's arms
shall be upon it, and the Soldiers that be under the before said persons
fayghtynge under thy Banner: fayghtynge, said the Cobbeler: I can no skill in
faighting: no said Skeleton, thou shalt not fayght, but hold up, and advance
the ba^ner. By my fay, said the cobbler, I can no skill in the matter, Well said
Skelto^ there is no reamedie but thou shalt forth to do the Kings service
in his Wars, for in all this Country theare is not a more likelier manne to
do such as feate as thou art. Sir said the Cobbeler: I will give you a
fat Capon, that I may be at home. No, said Skeleton, I will not have none
of thy Capons: For thou shalt do the King service in his wars. Why, said the
cobbler what should I do, will you have me to go in the Kings wars and to
be killed for my labor? then I shall be well at ease, for I shall have my
mendes in my nown hands. What knave, said Skeleton, art thou a cowarde, having
so great Bones? No said the Cobbler. I am not a fearde: it is good to flepe in
a whole skin. Why said Skeleton: thou shalt be harnessed to keep away the
strokes from thy skin. By my fay, said the Cobbler, if I must needs forth,
I will see how yche shall be ordered. Skeleton did harness the doughtye
Squirell, and did put an helmet on his head, and when the helmet was on the
Cobblers head, the Cobbler said, What shall those hoales serve for. Skeleton
saydeholes to look out to see thy enemies, yea, said the Cobbler, then am I in
worser case then ever I was: for then one may come and thrust a nail into one
of the holes and prycke out mine eye. Therefore, said the Cobbler to Master
Skeleton: I will not go to War: my wife shall go in my stead, for she can
fight and play the devil with her distaffe, and with stole, staff coppe, or
candlestick: for up my fay I cham sick, I chill go home to bed, I think I
shall dye.

How Master Skeltons Miller deceived him many times, by playinge the thief,
and how he was pardoned by Master Skeleton, after the stealinge a way of a
Priest out of his bed, at midnight. Tale.xiii.
WHen Master Skeleton did dwell in the country, he was a greede with a Miller
to have his corn ground, toll free and many times when his maiden should
bake, they wanted of their mele, and complained to their Mystres that they
could not make their ^^int of bread. Mystres Skeleton being very angrye, to
de her husband of it: Then Master, Skeleton sent for his Miller and asked him
how it chansed that he deceived him of his corn: I said John miller, nay
surely I never deceived you, if that you can prove that by me do with me as
you lift, surely said Skeleton if I do find thee false any more, thou shall
he hanged up by the neck. So Skeleton appointed one of his servants ^o stand at
the mill while the corn was a grindyng, John myller being a notable these,
would fo^n have deceued him as he had dou before, but being afraid of Skeltons
servant, caused his wife to put one of her children into ye Myll dam: and to
cry help help, my child is drowned, with that John Myller and all went out of
the Myll, and Skeltons servant being dilygent to help the child thought not
of the meal, and the while the myllers boy was ready with a sack and stole
away the corn, so when they had taken up the child and all was safe, they
came in again: and so the servant having his gry^te, went home mistrustyng
nothing, and when the maids came to bake again, as they did before so they
lacked of their meal again. Master Skeleton cold for his man* and asked him
how it chanced that he was deceived, and he said that he could not tell,
for I did your commandment. And then Master Skeleton sent for the Myller, and
said, thou have not used me well for I want of my mele* why what would you
have me do said the miller, you have set your own man to watch me. Well then
said Skelto^, if thou do not tell me which way thou have played the thief
with me, thou shall be hanged. I pray you be good master unto me, and I will
tell you the trutthe: your servant would not from my myll, and when I saw none
other remedy I caused my wife to put one of my children in to the water, and
to cry that it was drowned: and vo^les we were helpyng of the child out, one
of my boys did steal your corn. Yea, said Skeleton: if thou have such
pretty fetchis, you can do more than this. And therefore, if thou dooeste not
one thing that I shall tell thee. I will follow the law on thee. What is that*
said the Myller: If that thou dooest not steal my cup of the table, when I
am set at meat, thou shall not eskape my hands. O good Master, said John
Miller, I pray you forgive me, and let me not do this, I am not able to do
it. Thou shall never be forgeuen, said Skeleton, without thou dooest it. When
the Miller saw no remedy, he went and charged one of his boys, in an euenyng
(when that Skelto^ was at supper) to set fire in one of his bogges ^^ies,
far from any house, for doing any harm.

And it chanced, that one of Skeltons servants came out, and spied the
fire, and he cryede: help, help: for all that my master has, is like to be
burnt. His master heari^g this, rose from his supper with all the company, and
went to quench the fire. And the while John Miller came in: and stole away his
cup, and went his way. The fire being quickly slaked, Skeleton came in with his
friends, and reasoned with his friends which way they thought the fire should
come, and every man made answer as they thought good. And as they were resonyng
Skeleton called for a cup of bear, and in no wise his cup which be used to
drink in, would not be found, Skeleon was very angry that his cup was
mysynge, and asked which way it should be gone. And no man could tell
him of it. At last he be thought him of the Miller, and said surely, he, that
thief has done this deed, and he is worthy to be hauged. And he sent for
the Miller: so the Miller told him all how he had done. Truly said Skeleton,
thou art a not able knave. And without thou causte do me one other seat, thou
shalt dye. O good Master, said the Miller, you promised to pardon me, and will
you now break your promise? I said Skeleton, without thou canste steal the
sheets of my bed, when my wife and I am a sleep, there: shalt ^e hanged that
all so^he knaves shall take ensample by thee. Alas, said the Miller, which way
shall I do this thing, it is impossible for me to get them while you be
there. Well, said Skeleton, with out thou do it, thou know the danger.
The Myller went his way, being very heavy, and studied which way he might do
this deed, He having a little boy. Which knew all the corners of Skeltons
house, and where he lay. Upon a night when they were all busy, the boie
crepte in under his bed, with a pot of yeste, and when Skeleton and his wife
were fast a sleep, he all to noynted the sheets with yeste, as far as he
could reac^e. At last Skeleton awaked and felt the sheets all wete, waked his
wife and said: what, have thou be shitten the bed? and she said nay, it is you
that have done it, I think, for I am sure it is not I. And so theate fell a
great strife between Skelto^ and his wife thinkyng that the bed had been be
shitten, and called for the maid to give them a clean pair of shetes. And so
they arose and the maid took the foul sheets and threw them underneath the
bed, thinking the next morning to have fetched them away. The next time the
maids should go to washing* they looked all about and could not find the
sheets* for Jack the myllers boy had stolen them away: then the Myller was
sent for again, to know where the sheets were be come: and the Myller told
master Skeleton all, how he devised to steal the sheets. How say ye, said
Skeleton to his friends: is not this a notable thief, is he not worthy to be
hanged, that can do these deeds. O good Master, quoth the Miller, now
for give me acc^rdynge to your, promise, for I have done all that you have
commanded me, and I trust now you will pardon me. Nay, quoth Skeleton thou
shall do yet one other feate, and that shall be this: Thou shalt steal
master Person out of his bed, at midnight, that he shall not know where he is
^e come, The Miller made great moan, and lamented saying: I can not tell in the
world how I shall do, for I am never able to do this feate: well* said
Skeleton, thou shall do it or else thou shall find no favor at my hands* and
therefore go thy way, The Miller being sorye, devised wi^h himself which way he
might bring this thing to pass. And.ii. or.iii. nyghtes after, gathered a
number of Sna^^es, and greed with the Sereen of the Church, to have the key of
the Church door and went into the Church between the hours of a.xi. and.xii.
in the night, and took the snayles. And lygh^^d a sort of little wax
candles* and set upon every s^ayl^ one, and the Snayles chepte about the
Church with the ^^^e candels upon their b^ches, and then he went into the
(...) put a Cope upon his (...) and stood very solemnly at the hye After
with a book in his hand, and after ward called the (...), that the Priest
^^^nge in the Church yard might hear him* the priest hearing the bell took,
starte out of his sl^pe and looked out of his window and saw such a light
in the Church* was very much amassed, and thought surely that the Church had been on fire, and went for to see what wonder it should b^* And when he came
there he found the Church door open, and went up into the quier and see the
mi^ler standing in his vestementes, and a book in his hand praying devoutly,
and all the lights in the Church, thought surely with him self it was some
Angel come down from heaven or some other great miracle, blessed him self
and said: In the name of the father the son and the holy ghost: What art
thou that stand here in this hollye place, O said the Myller: I am saint
Peter, which kept the Keys of heaven gate, and thou know that none can
enter into heaven except I let him in, and I am sent out from heaven for
thee. For me, quoth the Priest: Good saint Peter, worship may thou be,) I am
glad to hear that news,) Because thou have done good deeds laid the myller,
and served God* ^ee has sent for thee before domes day come, that thou shall
not know the troubles of ye world. O* blessed be God, said the Priest: I am
very well contented for to go: yet if it would please God to let me go home
and distrybute such things as I have to the poor, I would be very glad? No
said the Miller if thou dooest delight more in thy goods, then in the Joys of
heaven, thou art not for God, therefore preyare thy self, and go into this
bag which I have brought for thee. The miller having a great quarter sack,
the poor Priest went into it, thynkyng verylye he had gone to heaven, yet was
very sorry to part from his goods: Asked saint Peter how long it would be ere
he came there: the miller said he should be there quickly, and in he got the
Priest and tied up the sack^, and put out the lights, and laid every thing
in their place, and took the priest on his back and locked the church doors
and to go, and when he came to go over the church style, the Priest was very
heavy, and the Miller ^as^e him over the style that the priest ^^yed of. O
good s^int Peter said the Preeste, whyther go I now, O said the Myller:
These be the panges that ye must adyde before y^n come to heaven. O ^^eth the
Priest, I would I were there once. Up he got the Priest again and carried him
till he come to the top of an hye hill, a (...) from his house, and cast
him down the hill that his head had many shrewde rappes, that his neck was
almost b^^st: O good saint Peter said the Priest: where am I now: you are
almost now at heaven, and carried him with much a do, till he came to his
own house, and then the miller threw him over the thresholde. O good saint
Peter, said the Preeste: Where am I now, this is the sore^^e pange that ever
I vy^de. O said that Myller: give GOD thanks that thou haste had patience to a
bide all this pain, for now thou art^ going up into heaven, and tied a rope
a boute the sack, and drew him up to the top of the Chymnye, and there
let him hang. O good S. Peter, tell me now where I am said the Priest. Marye
said he, thou art now in the tope of John Millers chimney. A vengeance on thee
knave: said the Preeste: have thou made me believe all this while that I was
going up into heaven? Well, now I am here, and ever I come down again* I will
make thee to repent it: But John Myller was gladd that he had brought him
there. And in the morning, the Sexten rang all in to seruise, and when the
people were come to Church, the Priest was lacking, the parish asked the
sexten where the Priest was, and the sexten said, I can not tell. Then the
parrishe sent to master Skeleton, and told how their Priest was lacking to
say them service. Master Skeleton meruayled at that, and bethought him of the
^rafty dooyng of the Miller, sent for John Myller: and when the Miller was
come. Skeleton said: to the miller: can thou tell where the parish Priest is*
The Myller up and told him all together how he had done. Master Skeleton
considering the matter, said to the Miller: why thou vnreuere^t knave, have
thou hanled the poor Priest on this fashion, and put on the holy ornaments
upon a knaves back: thou shalt be hanged and it cost me all the good I have.
John miller fell upon his knees and desired Master Skeleton to pardon him, for
I did nothing said the miller, but that you said you would forgive me. Nay
not so, said Skelto^. But if thou can steal my gelding out of my stable my
two me^ watching him. I will pardon thee, and if they take thee they shall
strike of thy head: For Skeleton thought it better that such a false knave
should lose his head, the^ to live. Then John miller was very sad, and
bethought hi^ how to bring it to pass. Then he remembered that there was a man
left hangyng upon the galowes, the day before, went preuely in the night and
took him down, and cut of his head, and put it upon a pole and brake a hole
into the stable and put in a candle lighted: thrustyng in the head, a little and
a little. The men watching the stable seeing that, got them selves near to the
hole (thinkinge that it was his head, and one of them with his sword cut if
of. Then they for gladness presented it unto their master, leaving the stable
door open: then John Miller went in and stole away the ge^ding. Master Skeleton
lookyng upon the head, saw it was the thieves head that was left hangyng upon
the galawes* said: alas now often has this false knave deceived us Go quickly
to the stable again, for I think^ my geldyng is gone. His me^ going back
again found it even so. Then they came again show your grace. Say on thou hoar
^ead, said the Cardynall to Skelto^. I pray your grace to let me lie down and
wallow, for I can kneel no longer.

How the vinteners wife put water into Skeltons wine. tale.xv.
Skeleton did love well a cup of good wine. And on a day, he did make merye in a
Tavern in London: and the morrow after he sent to the same place again for a
quart of ye same wine he drunk of before, the which was clean changed and
brued again. Skelto^ perceiving this, he went to the Tavern and did sytte down
in a chair and did sygh very sore and made great lame^tacion, The wife of the
house perc^iuinge this, said to master Skelto^ how is it with you master
Skelto^: he answered and said: I did never so evil, and then he did reach an
other great syghe, saying: I am afraid that I shall never be sawed, nor cum
to heaven, why said the wife should you despair so much in Gods me^cy? Nay
said he, it is past all remedy. Then said the wife: I do pray you break
your mind unto me. O said Skeleton I would gladlye show you the cause of my
de^our if that I wist that you would keep my counsel. Sir said she, I have been made of council of greater matters then you can show me. Nay nay said
Skeleton, my matter passes all other matters, for I think I shall sink to hell
for my great offenses: for I sent this day to you for Wine to says mass with
all; and we have a strong law that every priest is bound to put into his
Chalice when he does singe or say mass, some wine and water: the which does
signifye the water and blood that did run out of Christ's side when
Longeons the blind knight did thrust a spear to Christ's heart: and this day
I did put no water into my wine, when that I did put wine into my Chalys. Then
said the Uintiners wife: Be merry master Skeleton, and keep my counsel for by
my faith I did put into the vessel of wine that I did se^^ you of to day.x.
gallandes of water. And therefore take no thought master Skelto^ for I warraunt
you. Then said Skeleton: Dame I do be shrewe thee for thy labor, for I
thought so much before: for through such uses and brewyng of wine, may men
be deceived, and be hurt by drynkinge of such evil wine: For all wines must
be strong and fair and well colored: It must have a redolent sauoure: It must
be col^e and sprinkclynge in the piece or in the glass.

Thus ends the merry Tales of Master Skeleton, very pleasant for the
recreacion of the mind.

