THPNODIA. SIVE PANDIONIVM MELOS, IN PERPETVAM SERENISSIMAE SIMVL AC
beatissimae Principis Annae nupet Anglia Reginae Memoriam.

ELEGIES AND EPITAPHS, BY W. S. LATE SERVANT and Chaplain to her Majesty.

LONDON, Imprinted by John Beale, 1619.

Illustrissimo, Eximiaeque spei, CAROLO Principi.
Next great'st, though not chief Mourner, for her sex,
It cannot be, but that your Grace should be;
Me though the meanest, so much her loss affects,
That I thus plain in mournful Elegy,
T'whom rather now, than your self should I fly?
Dayne then for her sake, that the like long since
Daynde, to protect me and my lines, fair Prince.
To the thrice high and puissant Prince, King JAMES.
With curious eye, view not these Pourtraitures;
I have (dear Liege) your loss, limm'd, shadowed thus.
Let but my love, which me of grace assures
Leave thus far forth obtain, that Zoilus
In person of Apelles judge not this:
AM I a Zeuxis, true colors not to miss?
Some polisht style, some fine and searching wits,
Living in Athens subtle temperate air,
Afford diuiner poesies, heauenlier fits.
True, Royal Lord. Rude rythmes with us are rare:
Your Highness though t'accept what Mantua offers,
Armor of proof it will be against envious scoffers.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
ELEGIA.
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
ELEGIA.
Anna sororque, parens, coniux and filia, Regum,
Non locus in titulis cassus honoretuis;
Naenimium foelix! te Mors, te vita beatam,
Anna dedit! summum Diua obeundo Diem.
Anna soror Dacum seu Gnata pijssima Regum,
Nympha Angli and Caroli Principis almaparens;
Non (credo) in terris diuinior altera Nympha,
Anna ferat titulis Quae potioratuis!
Annae equidem annosi Thalami pulcherrima proles,
Nec Dulcis Coniux soluere iusta Queant;
Non tuapro meritis serui; tuaiugiter ergo,
Anna anima, aeternum molliter ossa cubent.
ELEGIA.
A friend to all, good Queen, a foe to none,
None therefore that lament not her loss now;
Now she in Heaven with Christ her Spouse all-one,
Alone on earth leaves her King James below.
Allow on earth, whiles she aloft does reign,
Never so glorious, never so divine,
Never so gracious, great, or Sovereign,
As now she does in starry Olymph shine:
As now she does among the heavenly Quire,
Now new attired in robes of highest State,
New adorned for her Spouse, blessed, and raised higher,
Above all Queens on Earth, beyond all date.
NAENIA.
A Crown of Bays and Rosy wreathes, Queen Anne Noble and virtuous by
Descent, Does claim; Never dying virtue, and desert Has wanne Endless name,
whence shines her Immortal fame.

ELEGIA.
A Glorious and Illustrious gate, Never fading grace Adornd this Nymphe, Not to
expire; for Ay! but Late Endless time Leaves her for Olymphe.

A virtuous Queen of Albion, of Noblestrace both for Sire and Son, Now
claims in heavens high Kings aloft Eternal shrine a princely throne.

Angels do sing, Saints Heavenly Quires Not repine, but sweet Sonnets skanne:
Now she is in heaven as heart desires, Enthroned Divine Albions Queen Anne.

EPITAPHIVM.
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
EPITAPHIVM.
Here lies Entoumbde fair Englands Queen,
Whose peer, Earth now does here avow, to have bin scarce seen.
Acrostique verses on the same.
Here Lies entoumb'd fair Englands Queen, whose peer Lies Hereperhaps, but
lives not on Earth now, Entoumbd' Her least parts lie! her Dust Does here,
Fair above all faires Angels don A vow, England's Dear Paragons fair breast
to have been, Queen like all points, a worthier wight Scarce seen.

EPITAPHIVM.
Queen Anne lies here enshrined from mortal sight,
Whose Grace is seen in place, good Queen, of light most bright.
Acrosticke verses on the same.
Queen Anne, a goodly glorious Nymph, whose grace, Lies here Entoumb'd,
nathlesse her soul is seen Enshrined In Olimph towers most high in place,
From whom no good is now withheld. Good Queen, Mortal Eyes cannot bear those
gleames of Light, Sight Dazels at, where she is, those beams most bright.

To the Eternal memory of Queen Anne;
Acrostique verses thereon.
To Our Thrice Honored Ere-fam'de Englands queen,
That Een-now Raign'de in Noble Albions Land,
My muse Ere in Memory Ofher Right feine,
Yeeldes, Offers Faith, tears, Quill, heart, Vows, and hand,
Earthes Ebon bowers Now guidet' Elisian greenes,
Albions late, Now though No more Englands queen.
Other Acrosticke verses on the same.
To blaze in right Phoebean verse, Our Noble Queens praise worthy parts,
Thrice learned Sisters be her hearse Honored by your diuiner Arts, Er'efam'de
may her Fair Glory shine, Englands Queen Once Great, now divine.

That Glorious, gracious Nymph that sat, Ee'n-now by silver Thames, and there
Raignd'e in A Princely portly State, Noble Ofparts, withouten Peer, Albions
Nymphs mourn, and with her own Land Neighbor Princes join in moan.

My muse Indeed too rudet' appear, E're in All Gazers open view, Memori- zing
yet some few thoughts here, OF her dear Mistress, would renew Right feine t'her
fame sweet Maro's Lays, Yeeldes them all honor, her all praise.

Offers' Not every one (some Comfort) Faith, tears and sighs her silly
train, Quill, heart, and all, sweet Phoebus Consort, Vows and hand- fuls of
flowers, Nymphs, Swaynes! Earthes bosom, though it now prouides her, Ebon
bowers, pitchie Night, not hides her.

Now guide to Olymph, great Hermes, or Elisian Greenes this Dame, we pray,
Albions late virtuous Paramour, Now though, Lapt up in Lead and Clay; No more
We need to moan, for blessed Englands Queen, Anne does ever Rest.

EPITAPHIVM.
Here lies entoumb'd fair Englands Queen,
Whose virtues all the world admir'de,
Her presence like an Angels seen,
Which men loved, Glorious Saints desir'de:
Whose best parts hence to Heaven Resumde,
Her bodies dust here lies Entoumb'de.
Acrosticke verses on the same.
Here In this Caske of Marble stone Lies Albions Princess, Denmarkes Impe;
Entoumb'de For whom great Kings make moan, Fair Dames and many a Courtly
Nymph, Englands Fairest flowers droope to behold, Queen Anne their Mistress,
laid in mould.

Whose Inward beauties of the Soul, Virtues And Graces that did shine, All
Glorious, like those lamps that roll The Zodiac round, made her divine
World 's Wonder well we might her call, Admir'de, Lou'de, honored, Dear to
all.

Her State might Juno's mate or Flora's, Presence Like Cynthia's, modest mild,
Like Hebe's youth or fair Aurora's, An Orient Rise, since Danes-Royes child,
Angels Been now, the Graces were Seen Her train and Companions Dear.

Which Is the Glory of thy Sex, Men Praise, the husbands virtuous Crown,
Lou'de For that which thy person deckes, Glorious Grace't, Great, and good
renown, Saints Both in Heaven and those on earth, Desir'de Thy being, these
thy New Birth.

Whose House of Clay laid low in Ground, Best parts more fit for Azure sky,
Hence Rapt to Olymph, and there Crown'de, To Reign in blisse-full sort on hie,
Heaven And the Heaven of heavens above, Resum'de Her soul first sent from
Jove.

Her Children Olive plants, her late Bodies Fair form slowers fading been,
Dust Unto Dust returns, the state Here Offraile mortal Nature's seen! Lies,
Now her Corpse by fair Thames side, Entoumb'de; She a Celestial Bride.

Encomium Annae R. Elegiacum

Rege Creata, soror, Coniux, Regumque futura
Almaparens! pulchr a prole beat atua:
Scilicet in terris micuisti Nobile Sydus,
Virtutis! Thalamis Gloria casta tuis.
Iacobi quondam praeclara Marita Marito,
Juno Iovi, sponso Dulcis amica tuo.
Sponsa equidem Christi, te iam Capit aurea Olympi
Aethra, tuo Christo plurimum amat a places.
Viue Deo, Saturata bonis, Satiata benigno
Aspectu, summi Candida Nympha Dei!
Teque tuumque quasi Numen venerabor in aevum,
Regina Annatui Gloria Magna soli.
Aeternum valeas, precor, Aeternumque sedebis,
Conciueis inter Ciuis and ipsa Poli.
I
am
not
well
willing
to tell
how unmeet
my Muse to raise
In song so sweet
Trophies to her praise,
Who late as Englands Queen
Most Goddesse-like did lead
A life on earth as heaven should deem
For gracious Merit Glorious meede.
Her sire, her Son, her grandsire, brother, spouse,
Children and Nephues, Kings and Princes all.
The various wheel of time, the spacious world shows
No offspring more divine, none more Maiesticall.
Though more then this of happiness scarce mortal heart can skan,
Yet more then this of blessedness, now Crowns our good Q. Anne.
Queen Anne whose state and glories late my humble Muse did sing,
Wife, Sister, Daughter, and when fate please, Mother to a King.
Ah none of these great Names that can reprieue her now,
Her virtue, beauty, fame, that can her with us keep.
The SAINTS above may joy, we here below,
Mourn that death rocks her in earths arms asleep.
Yet joy we since she now in Joy,
In highest heavens Palace shines,
And freed from all, annoyes,
Frequenteth Olymph shrines:
Whereas Saints do sing,
And Angels Quires,
What the souls fair spring
GOD Inspires.
Whose great
Deityes
humble
Beads
man
am
I:
I
am
not
though
ABLE
to show
how divine
her Royal Graco,
In heaven does shine.
Where a Cherubs place,
Or a Seraphique height
Exceeds the thoughts of Men,
As far as heavenly towers frail sight.
And my weak cyes uneath may ken,
Those starrie battlements of JOVE,
Where she with thousand thousand Saints does sing,
Sweet Anthems, sacred songs, fitting those quiers above,
In most melodious sort, to heavens supernall King,
Where then in happiest heavenly state, my poor heart scarce can skan,
O may I live, when rapt by Fate, where Glories crown Queen Anne.
Great Gades Pillars Ne plus vltra, bore;
Defining both Europes, and Afric shores,
A brave and honorable Trophey
Of great Alcides fame,
As if the son of Jove, he
Alonely past the same.
Now good Queen sole
thou seem likewise
of virtues Goal
to bear the prize.
Sacred Muses
Therefore shall
For Venusles
Golden BALL
bring thee flowers
to Adorno
sweet thy bowers
as summers morn
fresh Garlands
Damask Roses,
dainty fine and
Fragrant posies,
shall not wither
on thy Toumbe
that thy everlasting home; and
those great queens
whose hau^t is on
Parnassus Greenes
and Helicons,
Can when they please* erect
To thy Eternal Fame
A Tower, of such respect
As envy shall not shake the same.
And we thy humble Beadsmen gracious Queeene,
Shall Glory in it to have thy Glories seen.
And sure I am, bright shall thy glories Shine
Beyond those Pillars, that both Shores define:
For not the memorable Story
Of great ALCIDES fame,
that does exceed thy glory,
and due desert, dear Dame.
Though ugly monsters
Snake and Elfe,
yet he conquers
not Himself:
Thou again
under feet^
trod'st the vain
World we see it,
Hellish powers of
sin put down:
Olymph towers afford thy Crown,
Radiant more then
Ophyrs Gold,
which before men
Saints behold.
Gracious then
and glorious Queen,
since in Heaven
thy best parts been,
alas what more
to that great height
can we thy poor
Servants endite?
Though men and Muses skill
Should strive to raise thee higher,
Thou needst not care for Homers quil:
UUhom God crowns, we his hests admire.
What can be said then, that is not said before,
But Ne plus Vltra for to please thee more?
Juno, Venus, vitrei Moderatrix Cynthia Regni,
Hanc Decorasse Deam, Donatulisse ferunt;
Sceptra Iouis Coniux, vitam dedit aurea Castan
Phoebe, inerant oculis Gratia amorque suis!
Docta Minerua etiam Doteis sat pectore dign as
Ingenuo! in terris heimihi Qualis erat,
Quanta Dea? Harpalice pharetrata vel alma Dione,
Diuatibi, titulis Cedat and ipsatuis,
Zenobia! Elisios properantein visere Campos,
Et fortunatis arua beata iuges,
Quidai hilari excipens vultu Plutonia Coniux,
Illius Insolitum regna Docebit iter?
Teque Sybilla tuam sobolem longo ordine Reges
Monstret, Troiano feeit vt ante Duci.
Scilicet in Terris Quantillas, Quamlibet amplas,
Laeticias, Laetum hinc Eia age Carpe Diem!
Siquando pulcha es, Veneres Charitesque Labellis,
I am spiras, vere Regia sceptra tenes!
Dulcis Amor Diuinus, erit tibi sponsus, Amator,
Omnia, Cui Coelum patria sancta, Deus.
Compassus, quem vulgo vocant, sieve Circulus Magnetic(...) ad fragilis vitae
nauem, varias inter Mundi procellas, polum versus dirigendam, praecipue
adornatus.


Christ Deus Cynosura tuis, Rege Dirige Cymba(...) In portum, fragilem, me
tibi Christ Deus

The Soul a Point,
Christ the North Star,
His Word the Compass is,
The World the Sea,
And Heaven the Haven,
Where we seek endless bliss:
Our bodies Ship
On Waves of Woe,
Though tossed by Wind and Tide;
True Godly tears
And Sighs sweet Gale,
Thither bring us God our Guide.
Nempe humililicet ANNA solo redis aurea Coelo, Est Lucrum Christi Mors tibi,
vita Mori.
Epiphonema.
What if a day, or a month, or a year do hap highty to crown Us.
Is this a life to be loved? who so feareles he dreads not a downfalL?
Life's but a Living death: death's thought more ugly than HydrA.
Longest days have an end: happy he whose Sun has a fair seT.
If Solomon were alive, if Sampson, if Absolon, all Die.
Age, wit nor strength, Crowns nor beauty do serve for a Safety.
Must none then die never: Christ save me in mercy for Ever.
TO THE MOST NOBLE AND ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE CHARLES.
With Zealous love, and truly loyal zeal,
I tender thus my duty to your Grace,
Long live your Grace to bless this Commonweal:
Let virtue guide you to a glorious place,
In heaven above, where Saints and Angels sing,
A Most melodious note to high heavens King.
Sweet flowing streams of sugared Eloquence,
Learnings admired labors, all the Muses
Attend upon your Gracious Excellence,
That so the Lions, Rose, Harps and Flour-de Luces
In blessed union met, graced all by thee,
ERect a more than fourfold Monarchy.
FINIS.

