A Congratulatory POEM upon the Noble FEAST Made by the Ancient and Renouned
FAMILIES of the SMITHS.
Captain JOHN SMITH sometime GOVERNOR of VIRGINIA
Great Hero* whose brave Sword in Martiaall field
Could Reap fresh Glories to Adorn his Shield
Whose Courage made ye Turkish Crescents wane
Three of their Champions by him singly slain
For which. Exploits K: Sigismund (who knew
Honor a Tribute to his Valor due*
Three Pagans Heads ins Arms gave him to bear
Just Trophies of his Conguering sword and spear


YE happy Muses, who like Banckers sit
Distributing that precious Sterling, Wit,
Credit your Poet now with such a Store,
That his plumed thoughts to that vast height may soar
Which all his Brethren never could reach before.
A more then common Stock ought to Proclaim
The Honors due to Smith's Immortal Name,
A Name whose early glorys were so hurled
About even in the Nonage of the World,
That other Families were hardly known
When this had waded far in bright Renown,
And by a Chain of Noble Actions bought
That envied Fame which others vainly sought.
Virtue and Valor, which at first alone
Could draw from dark Obscurity Renown,
In Ancient Smiths so pregnant did appear,
As if not Art but Nature placed it there;
As if she would taken a care to mould them so,
They must be famous if they would or no.
In Germany their Grandeur did appear
Long before William, Britains Conqueror,
And when that glorious Norman's Lucky Sword
Had given him all our Nation could afford,
A noble Gratitude his Soul did press
To thank one Smith for part of his Success,
Whom that great Duke was often heard to own
Among all his Captains, worthy great'st renown,
and in his private counsels held more dear
Then any other Martial Officer.
From thence if we proceed to that great Fight
Caused by the Invasion made in Eighty Eight,
Of none we read, excepting Mighty Drake,
Than Famous Smith that made more fierce attaque;
He made the haughty Spaniards feel his power,
Giving them ruin on their Native Shore.
But why on Worthies past do thou proceed?
^ond Muse, thou liv'st too long amongst the dead,
Since, should thou name them half, the sum would swell
My Pigmy sheet into a Chronicle;
And make the wondering stranger, when he came
To see so many Pages thatched with Fame,
Conclude, I write of Nations, not a Name:
'Twould be for thee more fit, for them more just,
To let them slumber in their Sacred Dust,
And (with a reverend leave) thy Theme pursue
To give the Living, well as Dead, their due.
Lift up thy long dejected head a while,
And thou shall see within this narrow Isle
Thousands of their Successors who lay claim
To their Forefathers Virtues, well as Name:
Some thou will find whom their deserving Fate
Has justly raised to sit at Helm of State:
Others whose Loyalty did bright appear
At Hogans Coast in the late Holland War:
Some there are likewise whose presaging worth,
Wanting occasion to be called forth,
Dos yet in silent Characters Proclaim
What Seas of blood they would make to wade for Fame,
Could they but face an Army which withstood
Their Monarchs welfare, or their Countries good;
And by Heroic Actions fain would tie
To their more Ancient, Modern Heraldry.
For it is not the least Trumpet dos proclaim
^mmortal honor to this deathless name,
That they like other lazy Families
Scorn on their Fathers Stocks alone to rise,
Each branch of Smith's great Stem looks sharp about
As soon as Sprung, to find new honors out,
Which like the Eagle viewing of his Prey
They fly full swoop at, and sweep clear away.
Hundreds of ancient Arms at this day Crown
This mighty Name for acts of high Renown,
Which at the first from Foreign Toyls did rise,
Blazond with ruin of their enemies.
But hold hot Muse, let us hear no more of War,
Since all the signs of joy and peace are here,
The Sermons just now done, the Brethren would
Not feast themselves, before they served their God,
When Heaven with so much Plenty men does bless,
They ought to have a Sermon for their grace.
See how in friendly pairs the Stewards Men
To the grave Stewards give their due esteem:
See how the Stewards grandeurs do dispense,
Bearing white Rods, the signs of Innocence,
Which do not only their white thoughts imply,
But have respect to all the Company.
Bless me! whose he comes here? A Mighty Lord;
Can he from all his pleasures time afford
To wast his minutes at a City Feast?
But he is a Smith, and so the wonder's ceased.
See how in goodly order next do come
Whole ranks of Knights, the Champions of the Town,
Such heretofore in Romes warm Senate sat,
When Carthaginians thundered at her Gate.
A glittering train of Esquires next arise,
Like Sunbeams, and set bounds unto my eyes,
Such who have often plowed the Liquid Main,
And ranged through Lands unknown for honest gain;
But these being past, the next my sight invades
Are worthy persons of Domestic Trades,
Hundreds of Wealthy Citizens, who buy
Their modest grandeur with their Industry;
Men who in their narrow Shops can stand
And call for all the good things in the Land,
And have 'em brought them; they can Till and Sow,
And Reap, without the help of Land or Plow,
Receive their Quarter, nay their daily Rents,
Although they own no Farms or Tenements,
And yet behold how glorious they appear
In modest Garments bringing up the Rear.
HAving in short commented on them all
My Fancy too shall dine at Drapers-Hall,
Where it would feast a King methinks to see
Splendour it self begilt with Decency.
Seav'n several sorts of Music first advance,
And put my trembling Muse into a trance.
She well might fear that so much Art-full skill
Would drown the softer Cantos of my Quill:
But when she throws her lavish eye abroad,
And sees that plenty almost Cracks each Board,
Sees flaming Goblets by each Trencher set
As convoy unto every bit they eat,
Ready, if any dainty chance to stray,
To run down after and direct its way,
She recollects her self and fears no more
But sings much louder then she did before.
Feast on, Renowned Smiths, methinks I spy
Contentment dancing in each members eye,
Nature and Appetite have now their due,
They are contented both, and so are you;
There Is not a man but does this truth assure
By his so free donation to the Poor.
The Widows thanks, and Orphans prayers discry
In quaintest Rhetoric your Charity,
Your needy names-sakes you do so prefer,
They become richer then their fathers were:
And when Maturity with age shall crown
Their greener heads, and they to Tradesmen grown,
Why may not they gain Riches and Esteem,
And do for others as you did for them:
Thus by successive Charity you will bless
Each other with a lasting happiness;
Ah! that this graceful Amity may prove
The little Emblem of great Englands love.
And you, grave Stewards who this day fulfill
A Mighty Emperors Edict and Will,
Bearing in glittering Flags those Turkish heads
Purchased by Smith of Crudwells famous deeds,
When 'twixt two Potent Armies he made fall
The strong Turbashaw, Turkys General,
And in the self same day, to crush the Pride
Of all his followers, vanquished two beside,
And brought their gasping heads besmeared with gore
To mighty Sigismund the Emperor,
Who thinking naught enough for that brave man
Who fought so stoutly for the Christian fame,
To make his royal gratitude appear,
Ordered three hundred Ducats every year
To be allowed this noble Captain, and
Charged him by all the power of his Command
Never again to enter Martial Field
Without three Turks-heads graven in his shield,
And signed a patten that the same should be
A Coat of Arms to his Posterity.
But I have been too tedious, -- yet permit
Me to declare my wishes well as wit,
May evry action of each member here
To your successors bright as his appear,
May this great feast continue still, and may
Each year increase your Number, Wealth, and Joy,
Long may you live, and when insatiate Death
Shall call your bodies to perfume the Earth,
May your Examples your young Children move
To Rival you in Charity and Love.
LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil.


